The Relics of Rome, containing all such matters of Religion, as have in
times past been brought into the Church by the Pope and his adherentes:
faithfully gathered out of the most faithful writers of Chronicles and
Histories, and now newly both diligently corrected and greatly augmented, to
the singular profit of the Readers, by Thomas Becon. 1563.

Esaias. 5. Woe be unto them, that call evil good, and good evil, which make
darkness light and light darkness, that make sour swet, and sweet sour.
Woe be unto the^, that are wise in their own sight, and think themselves to
have understanding.

Imprinted at London, by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martines.

Cum Priuilegio.

THOMAS BECONVS SACROSA^C TAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR.


Ora expressa vides, viuos imitantia vultus,
Quod potuit calimo, pictor, and art vides.
Mentis quam nullus potuit tibi reddere pictor,
Effigiem scriptis, praebuit ipse suis.
A Prophecy of Antichrist.
ANtichrist shall be, borne in great Babylon of an Harlot, that shall come of ye
tribe of Da^. He shall be replenished with ye devil in his mothers womb. He
shall be nourished with spiritual evils and mischiefs. He shall rule over the
whole world. He shall subdue all mankind unto him by four manner of ways.
First he shall bring the common people under his dominion by terror and fear:
for he shall exercise great cruelty and tyranny against the true worshippers of
god. Secondly, he shall win unto him the noble personages, and such as be in
authority, by geuyng the^ great gifts and riches, whereof he shall have great
abou^dau^ce and plenty: for all the hid money shall be open unto him. Thirdly, with
his wisdom and eloquence which shall be wonderful and incredible, he shall make
the clergy to cleave unto him: for he shall have great knowledge of al arts,
and of the scripture. Fourthly, through signs and wonders he shall deceive such
as despise the world, as monks, and such like. For he shall show wonderful
signs and tokens. He shall be thought to cause fire to come down from heaven
and to consume his adversaries before him, and to raise up the dead to give
witness of him. But he shall not raise up the dead in deed. But through his
witchcraft and forcery he shall cause the devil to enter into the body of some
damned dead person, and this shall he carry about him, and by this shall he so
speak that every man shall think him to be alive, as it is written of him:
His coming shall be by the working of Satan, with all lying power, signs and
wonders, and in all deceauablenesse of unrighteousness among the^ that perish.
The Jews and al misbeleuing persons out of all places of the world shall
flock and flow unto him. But through the preaching of Enoch and Hely, the people
shall forsake him and return unto the true and christian religion: whereof shall
ensue great persecution and manslaughter, in so much that all in a manner shall
suffer hard martyrdom. He shall rule and obtain the monarchy by the space of
three years and an half. Afterward he shall pitche his tente in the mount
Oliuet to the end that he may destroy the rightuous. But he shall not
prevail. For in the very same mount shall he be found suddenly dead. For he
shall be slain at the commandment of God with the breath of the Lords mouth,
as it is written: the Lord shall cast down Hedlong and utterly destroy in the
holy hill the stoutest gyaunt of the whole world. After these things peace
and righteousnesses shall spryng up, and the earth shall be filled full of the
knowledge of the Lord, so that the Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world. For there shall go up saviors unto the mount of Sion to judge
the hill of Esau: and the kingdom shall be the Lords.

Osey. 14. Who so is wise, shall understand this, and ^e that is right instruct
will regard it.

Math, 24. Who so reads it let him understand.

2. Timoth. 2. The Lord give the understanding in all things.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
1 Of the Pope and of his usurped power and fained authority. fol. 1. 2 Of the
Popes election. 15 3 Of Cardinals. 18 4 Of Bishops. 19 5 The oath, which the
popish Bishops use to swear, when they are consecrated. 24 6 Of Priests. 26 7
Of the single life of Priests. 32 8 Of the Marriage of Priests. 35 9 Of Uowes,
and that the vow of chastity hinders not him, or her from marriage, which
has not the gift of continency. 37 10 Of benefices and Prebendes. 39 11 Of
impropriations of benefices. 42 12 Of tithes and offerings. 45 13 Of monastical
sects. 46 14 Of heremites, and of their sundry orders. 46 15 Of anckers and
anckresses and all other recluses. 52 16 Of monks, and of the diverse sects
of the same. 54 17 Of Chanons, and of the diversity of them. 66 18 Of Friars
and of their manifold sects. 66 19 Of Nuns and of their diverse orders. 73 20
Of the Monastical apparel, and who was the first deviser thereof. 76 21 Of
temples or churches. 77 22 Of Church yardes. 79 23 Of Church goods. 80 24 Of
the ornaments of the Church. 80 25 Of Images to be had in Churches. 85 26
Certain godly laws of Emperors and kings against the having of Images in
Churches, with the advice, consent and judgment of diverse godly learned men.
88 27 Of Baptism. 95 28 Of the Lords Supper commonly called of the Papists.
The Sacrament of the altar. 97 29 Of receiving the Sacrament under both kinds
according to Christ's institution. 102 30 Of receiving the Sacrament under one
king according to the Popes tradition. 103 31 Of confirmation or Byshopping of
children. 105 32 Of Matrimony. 106 33 Of auriculer confession. 107 34 Of
annointyng or extreme unction. 108 35 Of prayeng for the dead. 108 36 Of divine
service, as they call it, Mattens, Prime, and Hours, Euensong, Complain. etc.
109 37 Of plain song. Prickesong, Discant. etc. 116 38 Of singing in the
church the judgment of diverse learned men. 117 39 Of the Mass, and of all the
parts thereof. 122 40 Of certain decrees appertaynyng unto the Mass. 138 41
Of ye massing priest. 14^ 42 Of the dignity and power of the massing priest,
and of the honor that is due unto him, be he good or bad. 148 43 Of the
ceremonies of the Popish Church. 158 44 Of holy water, and the virtue of the
same. 158 45 Of holy bread, and the power thereof. 162 46 Of Procession. 162 47
Of sensyng. Idem 48 Of cande^s bearyng on Candlemasse day. Idem 49 Of ashes
spryncklyng. 165 50 Of palms bearing. 165 51 Of Palms, ashes, candels and
halowyng. Idem 52 Of crepynge to the Cross. 166 53 Of halowyng the paschal.
Idem 54 Of Oil and Cream, and of the halowyng of the same. Idem 55 Of the
fire on Easter even and of the halowyng thereof. 167 56 Of halowyng the font on
Easter even. Idem 57 Of halowynge new fruits. Idem 58 Of Fasting. Idem 59 Of
holy days and of the feasts of Saints. 173 60 Of canonising or making of
Saints. 179 61 Of saints Relics. 183 62 Pylgrimages. 184 63 Of Pardons.
Idem 64 A rehearsal of diverse pardons granted of diverse Popes for diverse
considerations. 189 65 Of Purgatory. 197 66 Remedies devised by the Papists
against the fyrye torments of Purgatory. 202 67 Of Trentalles for souls
departed, and how they first began. 207 68 Of the virtues of the Mass. 209
69 Of Councels. 212 70 Of Heretics. 214 71 Of Excommunication. 219 72 The
manner and form of excommunication. 219 73 The manner of the reconciliation of
excommunicate persons. 223 74 Of Penance. 224 75 Of absolution. 227 76
Certain forms of absolution. 228 77 A Special note of the Papists
concerning absolucion. 231 78 The form or manner of bydding the beads on
Sondayes in Popyshe paryshe Churches. 231 79 The general Sentence or curse.
237 80 Certain fragmentes of Papistrye. 255
Finis.
The names of those Authors, whose testimonies and witnesses are recited in
this Book.
A.
ABbas vrspergensis. Achiles pyrminius. Aeneas siluius. Albertus magnus.
Albertus crantzius. Alcuinus. Ambrosius. Anselmus ryd. Antoninus. Alnoldus
bostius. Athanasius. Augustinus. Author sermonum discipuli
B.
Bartholomaeus picerius. Bartholomaeus de chaimis. Bartholomaeus charranza.
Bartholomaeus westmerus. Barnardus abbas. Blondus. Bonifacius episcopus.
C.
Catalogus sanctorum. Chrisostomus. Christianus massaeus. Chronica anglica.
Chronica chronicarum. Cronica flandrica. Chronica gallica. Chronica germanica.
Clemens pont. romans Cornelius agrippa. Cyprianus.
D.
Damascenus. Decreta iuris canonici. Decreta extrauagant.
E.
Edictum constantini Impe. Epyphanus. Epitome chronicarum. Erasmus roterodamus.
Eruditi cuiuspia^ chronicon. Euagrius. Eusebius, coesariensis Eutropius.
F.
Fasciculus temporum. Festiuale anglicum. Flores historiarum Franciscus
petrarcha.
G.
Gabriel biel Gaspar achilles. Gaspar hedio. Gratianus monachus. Gregorius
magnus. Guilielmus Caxton. Guilielmus Durandus.
H
Hartmanus scedel Nurenbergensis. Henrichus pantaleon. Henrichus primaeus.
Henrichus de vrimaria. Hermanus contractus. Hesychius. Hieronimus. Hiero.
paulus Cathalanus. Honorius. Huldricus episcop. august. Huldricus Huttenus.
I.
Iacobus de visaco. Iacobus de voragine. Iacobus manlius. Iacobus mayer. Iaco.
philippus bergome^sis Iacobus vuimpholibus. Ioannes billet. Ioannes charion.
Ioannes cuspinianus. Ioannes clythoneus. Ioannes de burgo. Ioannes laziardus.
Ioannes monachus. Ioanns nauclerus. Ioannes stella. Ioannes Tilio. Isidorus
Hispalensis. Isuardus gallus. Iustinianus imperator.
L.
Lactantius firmianus. Laurentius valla. Lex pontificia. Liber conciliorum.
Liber de miraculis R. mariae. Liber germanicus de sectis monasticis.
M.
Marcus anton. sabellicus. Martinus papae penitentiarius. Martinus polonus.
Mathaeus parisius. Mathaeus palmerius florentinus. Mathias palmerius pisamus
Michael bucchingerus.
N.
Nauclerus. Nicephorus panuinius. Nicolas de cusa.
O.
Onuprius panuinius. Origenes. Otho frisius.
P.
Paulinus nolanus. Paulus aemilius. Paulus phrigio. Paulus Vergerius. Paulus
warnefridus. Panormitanus. Paralipomena rerum memorabilium* Patronius. Petrus
Crinitus. Paulus diaconus. Petrus blesensis. Petrus cluniacensis. Petrus de
natalibus. Petrus Lombardus, Platina. Polichronicon. Polidorus vergilius.
R.
Ranulphus cartrensis. Raphael volateranus. Rationale di. officiorum. Robertus
barus anglus. Robertus caguinus.
S.
Sabellicus. Sebastianus francke. Serenus Episcopus Masciliae. Sigebertus.
Sozomeus. Speculum ecclesiasticum. Stella clericorum.
T.
Tertullianus. Theodorus bibliander. Thomas aquinas.
V.
Valentinus vannius. Vincentius. Vitas pa trum. Volateranus.
Z.
Zonoras.
FINIS.
To the right reverend Father in God, and his very good Lord John Bishop of
Norwiche: Thomas Becon wishes long life, continual health and prosperous
felicity.
COnsidering the happy state of this our most happy, age so diversely and
manifold ways blessed of the Lord our God with diverse and manifold his
bounteous benefits, yea and those not bodily only, but ghostly also, that no
part of us may seem in any point destitute of his fatherly blessings, so
richely and plentifully poured upon us according to his wonted mercies and
accustomed kindnesses: I can none otherwise than greatly marvel at the
obstinate blindness and blind obstinacy of certain our countrymen, yea and
those not the rudest and most ignorant, but the wisest and of greatest
experience, as they think themselves, and so wish to be reputed of all other:
which for the most part being nothing moved with this so great kindness of
our heavenly father, go forth to show themselves altogether unthankful, no
consideration had of so free and undeserved benefits, whether we respect the
body or the mind: 1. Cor. 1.
so truly is it said of the Apostle: Not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many of hye degree, are called: but God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and God has chosen the
weak things of the world, to confound things which are mighty: and vile
things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea
and things of no reputation, for to bring to naught things of reputation,
that no flesh should rejoice in his presence: And as the Pharisees said to
their ministers, Joan. 7.
when they r^^urned from Christ's Sermon, giving him this report to their
masters: Never man spoke, as this man does: Are ye also deceived sa^e they.
Does any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believe on him. But this common
people, which know not the law, are cursed: And as S. James writes in his
Epistle: Has not God chosen the poor of this world, Iac. 2.
such as are rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to
them that love him. But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men execute
tyranny upon you, and draw you before the judgments cates. Do not they speak
euel of that good name, which is called upon over you. For as concerning the
corporal benefits, it is so far of they show themselves tha^kful, that in
all their communicatio^ almost both public and private, they do nothing else
than find fault with the present state of this world, yelding and crying,
barckyng and gruntyng, that never such and the like penury, scarceness,
poverty and beggarye reigned on earth, as does in these our days, and
specially since we gave over the holy father of Rome, and his Catholic
religion, but specially the blessed mass, and praying for the souls departed:
being in this behalf not altogether unlike the Idolatrous and backeslidyng
Jews, which together with open mouth like band dogs, barcked against
Ieremye and his Sermons, saying: As for the words, Iere. 44.
that thou haste spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will in no wise
hear them: but whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, that we will do. We
will do sacrifice and offer oblations unto the Queen of heaven, like as we and
our forefathers, our kings and our heads have done in the cities ^f Judah, and
in the streets and fields of Jerusalem. For then had we ple^teousnesse of
vitailes: then were we in prosperity, and no misfortune came upon us. But
since we left to burn incense, and to do sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, we
have had scarceness of all things and perished with the sweard and hunger.
Last of all, when we women did sacrifice and offered to the Queen of heaven:
Did we make her cakes, and pour unto her drink offerings without our
husbands wills? And as the unfaithful* Israelites in wilderness grudged
against God and his ministers, saying: Nume. 21.
Wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt, for to die in the wilderness.
For here is neither bread nor water: and our soul lotheth this light bread.
Oh, who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the flesh, that we did eat in
Egypt for naught* Numer. 11.
and the Cuccumbers, and Melons, Leekes, Onions, and Garleeke. But now our
soul is dried away: For we ca^ see nothing else* Exodus 16.
save Manna. Would to god, we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the la^d of
Egypt when we sat by the flesh pottes, and when we did eat bread our bellies
full. etc. These adversaries of gods word, yea Eathnishe Epicures and beastly
bellygods, consider not, how in the time of Antichrist, that is to say, of the
Devil and the Pope, when all dark ignorancie, and ignorant darkness
reigned: when Papistrie and false Religion only flourished: when supersticious
hypocrites alone ruled and ruffled: there was much more scarceness, penury
and dearth of all things than is now in the blessed time of the glorious ltght
of Christ's most glorious gospel. Read we not, that even in this Realm of
England (as I may pass over with silence the stories of other nations) so
great penury, scarceness, and dearth of grain was found, that the
Inhabitants thereof were compelled to make them bread of Pease, Beans, Tares,
Fitches Acornes, Fern roots, etc? Chanced not the like thing almost in one
of the years of Queen Mary's reign now of late? Was the word of God and the
preaching thereof, cause of so great miseries? But then was there high silence
of Gods word: neither was the trompet of Christ's gospel freely blown. Was
the want of Mass occasion of it. Masses swarmed in every corner and country
with all other idle inue^tions of Antichrist. Whatsoever the devil and the
pope at any time brought to the Church, was in those days most diligently
practiced: and yet notwithstanding such and so great miseries the^ chanced, as
in the time of the gospel ye like was never found. Yea with the gospel al good
things were given unto us and to this our Realm of our most merciful father,
which we also at this present most abundau^tly do enjoy through the singular
benefit of the Lord our God, so that the adversaries of Gods word have no
just and worthy cause to complain of the scarceness of things, whereof is so
great abundaunce and plenty in this our land, that we have not only sufficient
for the sustentation of our own cou^treymen, but also of many thousands of
strangers* which likewise do inhabit this our Realm. But this from the
beginning has been the propertye always of Satan and of his ministers: if
any adversity chance to common weal, where gods word reigns: straight
ways the cause thereof is imputed and ascribed to the word of God, and to the
Preaching of the same, as we have diverse examples both in the holy Scriptures,
and also in the Ecclesiastical writters. 3. Reg. 17 Iac. 5.
When God plaged the world with great dearth and famyne for their Idolatrye and
wickedness of life, so that it reigned not upon the earth by the space of
three years and syx months: was not the occasion thereof laid to the Prophet
Helias charge, and to his Preaching. Were not these the words of king Achab
to the aforesaid Prophet and preacher of Gods word. Art not thou even he,
that troubles Israel. But the Prophet answered and said unto him: 3. Re. 18*
It is not I, that have troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in
that ye have forsaken the commmaundementes of the Lord, and have followed Baal.
Was not heresy, sedicion and treason laid to Christ's charge, when none was
so free from the^ none more pure either in doctrine or life, yea none to be
compared unto him, being in deed incomparable in all Godliness, goodness and
virtue? We have found this fellow, said his adversaries to Pilate, peruertyng
the people and forbiddynge to pay tribute to Caesar. Luc. 23. Joan. 18.
If he were not an evil doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. He
is guilty of death. To ye galowes with him: to the galowes with him. Likewise
when the bishops and hye priests were afraid of the invasions of the Romans
and of taking away their liuinges and promotions: was not all the matter laid
upon Christ and his doctrine? Joan. 11. Joan. 12.
Were not these their words. What do we. For this man does many miracles. If
we let him escape thus: all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come,
and take away both our room and the people. Perceive ye not, how we prevail
nothing? Behold, all the whole world goes after him. Mathe. 10.
Read we not also, that the Apostles of Christ were accused of like faults,
that that may be found true, which Christ said, The servant is not greater
than his Lord: nor the disciple is not above his master. It is enough for the
disciple, that he be as his Master is, and that the servant be as his Lord is.
If they have called the Lord of the house Beelzebub: how much more shall they
call them of his household so. Was not all the hurly burly, sedition,
commotion, strife, contention, debate, insurrection, etc. imputed unto them and
their doctrine. Act. 16.
Were not these the words of their adversaries, when they brought them before
the Rulers and head officers. These men trouble our city, seeing they are
Jews, and preach ordinances, which are not lawful for us to receive, seeing
we are Romans. Did not Paul's enemies thus report of him. Act. 21.
This is the man, that teaches all men every where against the people, and
the law, and this place. He has also brought Greeks into the temple, and has
polluted this holy temple. Was it not laid to Paul's charge also, that he made
an vproure, and led out into the wilderness four thousand men, that were
murderers. And as what so ever plage or mischief chanced in the Apostles
time, was ever imputed to them and to their doctrine: so likewise came it to
pass with the holy fathers and other good Christians, that succeeded them, as
we may see not only in histories, but also in other writers, as in s. Cipria*
Contra Demetrianum, and in Tertulian in Apollogi tico aduersus gentes. etc. And
therefore no marvel, though that same wickedness be showed at this day
against the word of the Lord, seeing that Satan is always one, and is no
changelyng: seeing also, that he is now of no less power and will to work the
same malice, envy, and mischief against the Religion of Christ in his
members, than he was in times paste. The adversaries of Gods truth have no
delight nor pleasure in heavenly and spiritual things, but like belly beasts
only borne to consume the good fruits of the earth, they desire and seek after
nothing but the things of this world, that their sons (as the Psalmographe
says) may grow up as the young plants, Psalm. 1^4.
and that their daughters may be as the polyshed corners of the temple: that
their garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store* that their
sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in their streets: that their
Oxen may be strong to labor: that there be no decay, no leding into
captivity, and no complaining in their streets. If all things go well and
prosperously with them, then are they merry, and diligently offer sacrifice to
to their God the belly. But if any adversity come, then knitte they the
forehead, and work their malice upon Gods word and the faithful professors
of the same. The word they call heresy, error, doctrine new and strange,
seditious, and cause of rebellion and of all other plages, wherewith the common
weal is afflicted. The professoures of this word they blaspheme, they ^aile
upon, they curse with book, bell and candle, they excommunicate, they
apprehende, they accuse, they condemn, they stock, they cheane, they manacle*
they rack, and in fine, they most cruelly with sweard, fire and halter bring
them unto an end, so far is it of, that these Epicures and bellygods do, as
they ought, render thanks to God for his corporal benefits, so richely
poured upon them and upon other his creatures.

Now as touching the spiritual benefits and heavenly gifts of the mind as
the knowledge of the holy scriptures, the understanding of the Lords blessed
will, the preaching of the Gospel, the true administration of the Sacraments,
the abolishment of all false worshippings and superstitions, etc. wherewith God
in this our age has most mercifully blessed us* far passing many other nations
that be under the heavens: as these wise wicked worldlinges knowledge not the
benefits of the body, nor yet are thanckfull to God for them: so likewise are
they altogether unthankful for the gifts of the mind, which do so far excel
the other, as gold surmou^teth coper, or silver, tynne. For like as Owls ca^
not abide the golden and glysteryng beams of the Sun nor the light of ye
day: so in like manner ca^ not these bellygods and Antichrists slaves suffer
the glorious and pleasant light of Christ's most glorious and pleasant
Gospel. They cry out with the wicked, of who^ the Prophet makes mention, on
this manner: Se not. Look not out right things for us: but speak fair words
unto us. Look out erroures. Get you out of this way: Depart out of this pathe,
and turn the holy one of Israel from us. In the trifling traditions* crooked
constitutions, idle inue^tio^s, drousy dreams deuilish decrees, false fables,
and fond fantasies of me^ is their whole delight: as for the sincere and pure
religion of God, that they utterly neglect, set at naught co^te^ne and despise.
And if for shame they seem to approve and allow any part thereof: yet they do so
ma^gle it, and bring it in captivity to the traditions of me^, that it loses
the sincere simplicity and simple sincerity, which it received of the holy
Ghost. Some of the^ are not ashamed so to diminish the authority of Gods
sacred scriptures, that they affirm the word of God to be so far the word of
God, The holy Scripture.
as the Church does allow it, meaning the pope and his spiritual shauelinges:
as though God gave us in his holy Scriptures an imperfect doctrine, and not
sufficiently authorized of him without the consent of Antichrist and of his
brood. Is not this to set God to schole, and to make him a Nouice? So should
it follow, that the word of God is grounded on the Church and not the Church
on the word of God. Is not this right Antichrist, that should turn ye roots
of trees upward? Christ says speaking of his Church: My sheep hear my voice.
Again, he that is of god, hears the words of god. Ite^, Every one that is
of ye truth, hears my voice. And the holy Apostle says: Joan. 10. Joan. 8.
Joan. 18. Ephe. 2.
speaking to the faithful congregation of God: Ye are no strangers and
forreyners, but citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the head corner stone in whom what buyldyng soever is coupled together,
it grows unto an holy temple in the Lord.
The word of God is not buylte upon men, although never so holy and perfect:
neither receaueth it any authority of man, although of never so great
excellency, wisdom and power: but such as are the congregation of God, are
built upon the word of God, and whatsoever authority they have (every one in
their degree and office) they have it altogether of Gods word, without the
which word there can be no Church, for as much as there ca^ be no faith, as the
Apostle says: Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and hearing comes by the word of God: so far is it of, that either pope
or Cardinal or any other person has any power to give authority to the
word of God, which already is authorized by the most high and supreme power,
even God himself.

Custom.
Some object old and ancient customs, affirming that this our religion, as
they term it new and strange, disse^teth in order and usage greatly from the
manner heretofore practiced in our temples. I grant: neither can the
sincerity of Gods word suffer and abide such old unsavory crooked customs,
as heretofore have been used in the popish Religion, as the coniuring of salt,
water, bread, bows, flowers fire, ashes, ca^dles, etc. creping to the cross,
worshipping of Images, calling upon dead Saints, sensing of altares and
Idols, praying in a strange tongue, offering the missall sacrifice for the
quick and for the dead, receauyng of the Sacrament under one kind, with a
thousand more errors and heresies, and other grievous abuses, which of long
usage and custom in times past have been exercised among us, and taken for
true Godliness. But who knows not* that custom ought to give place to
reason and truth: for reason and truth exclude always and put out of place
custom, be it never so old and ancient, laudable and commendable. Christ is
the truth: and therefore ought we rather to follow the truth, than the custom.
If thou lay to our charge custom, says S. Gregorye: Thou must mark what the
Lord says: Joan. 14.
I am, says he, the way, the truth, and the life. He said not, I am the
custom, but I am the truth. Custom without truth, says Saint Cyprian, is
nothing else tha^ an old error. Therefore leaving the error, let us follow the
truth. When the truth is once come to light, says Saint Austen, let custom
give place. For who doubts, that custom ought to give place to the open
truth. Let no man prefer custom before reason and truth: for reason and
truth does always put custom to silence. We must hear and do that, says
Saint Cyprian, that Christ has done, and that he has also commanded to be
done, seeing that he says in his Gospel: If ye do those things, that I
command you, Joan. 15.
I will call you no more servants, but friends. And that Christ alone ought
to he heard, the father even from heaven testifies, saying: This is my
well-beloved son, in whom I have great delight: hear ye him. Wherefore if
Christ alone is to be heard, Mathe. 17.
we ought not to atte^d mark, and take heed, what any man that has been
before us thought good to be done, but what he did, which is before al, that is
to say, Christ. Again he says: We may not follow the custom of man, but the
truth of God, seeing that God speaks by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 29. Math. 25.
and says: They worship me in vain, teaching the commandments and
doctrines of men. Does not God in his holy word co^mau^d his people the
Israelites, that they should not follow the customs neither of the Egyptians,
nor of the Cananites, but rather walk in his ordinances, and fulfill his
laws and statutes? Leuit. 18. Exodus 23. Leuit. 18
Is not this Gods precept? Follow not the multitude to do evil. Again do not
ye those things, which they have done that were before you,
neither be ye defiled in them. As the custom is not to be rejected but
received that is agreeable to the truth of Gods word: so likewise is that
custom not to be received, but rejected yt dissenteth from the veretie of Gods
pure religion. Forasmuch therefore as the greatest part of the old customs,
that be freque^ted and used in the popes Church, are wicked and ungodly, and
manifestly and directly contrary to the word of God: the objection that our
Papists make in this behalf, is nothing worth: neitheer ought it to be unto
the^ any let, to hinder them from coming unto the vndeceueable truth of Gods
word.

Doctors of the church.
Some also to defend their errors and heresies, and maintain their obstinate
blindness and blind obstinacy, allege for their defense the ancient writers
and Doctors of Christ's Church, affirming that their doctrine dissenteth
greatly from ours, and therefore worthy to be hyssed out, hated, abhorred and
detested of Gods Church. I answer: If they understand by the ancient writers
and Doctors of Christ's Church. Duns and Dorbel, Thomas and Tartaret, Biel and
Brulefer, Barnard and Bonauenture, Petrus de Palude, and Petrus de Luna,
Ioannes Capredli, and Ioannes Holkot, Albert Magnus, and Augustinus de Ancona,
with Occam, Gerson, Durande, Petrus de Alico, Ala^us, Herugus, Auredlus,
Ataxanus, Pelbertus. Car^esius, Michael Lochmeir, Iacobus de valentia, and to
many such like: then we give the^ over and consent unto the^. seeing that these
and many h^^dreds more were the popes sworn chaplaynes, making him with their
fophistrie a God, and his cou^terfaite Religion, true Godliness. But if they
mean those ancient writers and Doctors of Christ's Church, which were before
the days of Gregorius Magnus bishop of Rome, the^ we freely confess, that
whether they take the Doctors of the Greek, or Latin Church, they make very
little or nothing for the^, and for the maintenance of their popery, so
altogether unknown to the^ was the supersticion and Idolatry, which is now
commonly used in the popish Churches: although I must needs confess, that
there is none among the ancient writers, that has not his errors, his
ouersights, his faults, that y^ may be found true, which is written: God alone
is true, Psalm. 115 Romans 13.
but every man is a liar. But let it be granted, that there were found in the
old writers (as who sometime slydeth not? According to the common proverb,
Aliqua^do bonus dormitat Homeru^. That might seem at the first blush to
confirm and stablish, to prove and approve any part of the popes religious
religion: is the matter therefore cock sure? But the old writers and Catholic
Doctors require no such reverence to be showed, nor no such credit to be given
to their writings, as though they could not err, which confess themselves to
err, as their au^cestoures have done before the^, and will that nothing should
be credited as an undoubted verity, but only the sacred scriptures, whose
authority to resist, and of whose verity to doubt, they always counted a
great offense. Are not these the words of Saint Ambrose? We utterly co^de^ne
al new things that christ has not taught, for Christ is the way to the
faithful. If Christ therefore have not taught that, which we do teach:
Tract. d^ vi^gini.
even we our selves judge it. detestable and abominable. Are not these the
words also of the au^cie^t Greek writer Origene. We must needs allege the holy
Scriptures for a witness. For our understandings and expositions without
these witnesses are not to be credited, Homil. i. in Ierem. In com. ad Titum.
In Epist. ad Romans Note.
nor believed. S. Hierome calls it garrulitie or prattling, whatsoever is
taught without the authority of the holy Scriptures. Theophilacte feared not
to say, that they which bring in any thing into the Church of Christ, besides
the doctrine of the Apostles: bring in slanders and heresies, and dissensions.
Here se we in what estimation the ancient Doctors desire their writtings to be
had. Uerely so far to be credited and received, as they agree with the word
of God. If they in any point dissent from that, then not to be received, but to
be rejected, not approved, but reproved: so far is it of, that they would
have their works to be the patro^s and defenders of wicked doctrine, idolatry,
superstition, etc.

Some again pretend an excuse of their obstinacy, the forefathers, Fathers.
which lived before our days. They (say they) never received this doctrine:
never believed as we are taught, etc. And yet we doubt not, they are saved. I
answer. If they speak of the forefathers, which lived of late years in the
times of ignora^cie and blindness, in the days of Papistrie and false
Religion: I grant, that they never received so purely the doctrine of Christ's
Gospel, as we do at this present, as people seduced from the way of truth
through the subtle persuasions and craftye reasons of the fleshely hipocrites
and filthy Papists, while they wrapped them in all kind of blindness, to the
end that they might see no truth in a manner, but seek their salvation at
their hands, at their prayers, fastes, masses, etc. and by this means be made
the very slaves and captives of these spiritual Sorcerers: although I must
needs confess, that they agreed with us, and we with them in the principal
articles of the Christen Religion, albeit far out of the way from the true
understanding of the^. For they knew not the office of Christ, nor unto what
end God the father sent him into this world: and therefore went they about on
begging for their salvation to this creature and that creature, to this Saint
and that Saint, to this block and that stock, to this pardon and that pardon,
to this pilgrimage, and that pilgrimage, to this relic and that relic, to
this work and that work, without any respect had to Christ, which is the
alone Savior of the world. But now will the adversaries obiecte and say:
Why, are those our forefathers damned? I answer: I leave them to the
judgment of God, Romans 14.
as the Apostle says: What art thou that iudgest an other man's servant.
Whether he stand or fall, that pertains unto his own master.
Notwithstanding, I hope that forasmuch as they knew no better, neither was
their blindness of obstinacy, but of ignorancye, God has been favorable
unto them, and received them unto his mercy. For as God condemns obstinate
contumacie: so likewise pardons he many times simple ignorancie, as we read
of Saint Paul, which says: I was sometime a blasphemer, 1. Timo. 1.
and a persecutor, and a Tyraunte. But yet I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorauntly through unbelief. And our Savior Christ said to the obstinate
Jews and stifnecked Pharesees: If ye were blind: ye should have no sin.
Joan. 9.
But now ye say, we see* therefore your sin remains. Notwithstanding such
as are obstinatly blind, and wilfully, ignorant, and by no means, will come
unto the knowledge of the truth, but of set purpose refuse and despise it,
shall never find the like favor at the hand of God, so long as they remain
in that wicked and damnable purpose. Are not these the words of him, which is
not only true, but also the self truth? This is the condemnation: that light
is come into the world, Joan. 3.
and men loved darkness more tha^ light, because their deeds were evil. For
every one that evil does, hates the light: neither comes to the light,
least his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to ye
light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are wrought in God.

But leauyng the late and yesterday fathers, if they mean the Patriarchs and
Prophets: the Apostles and the Fathers of the primative Church* and such
Godly persons as lived in the public weal of Christianity, before that
Antichrist, the devil and the Pope bare rule, and before that enemy came, and
sowed tares among the wheat: we plainly affirm, that their doctrine and
faith is all one with ours: Math. 13.
and that we at this present do none otherwise either teach and believe, than
they in times paste have taught and believed. These forefathers we embrace:
These forefathers we follow. These forefathers we reverence. For both their
faith and our faith, both their doctrine and our doctrine is grounded on the
sure rock, which is Christ Jesus the Son of the living GOD: Math. 16.
Mathe. 7*
against the which doctrine and faith, the very gates of hell shall not
prevail. Rore devil, rage world, descend Rain, come Floudes, blow Wine,
swell Sea, etc. Yet shall all these violente tempests and tempestuous
violences, not so much as once, shake this our faith and doctrine, much less
subdue and vanquishe it. Math. 21.
Whosoever falls on this stone, says Christ, shall be broken in pieces: but
on whom soever it falls: it shall grynde him to powder. But wherefore do
they obiecte unto us Fathers? We have one Father,
whom we ought to hear before all Fathers, which is our Father in Heaven.
And he has commanded us to hear his Son Christ, and not forefathers,
saying: This is my well-beloved Son, Math. 17
for whose sake I am well pleased with man: Hear ye him. This Christ is our
Scholemaster: and if we will be his disciples, we must hear him. This Christ
is also our Shepehearde. If we will be his Sheep, Joan. 10.
we must hear his voice, as he him self says: My sheep hear my voice. Does
not our heavenly Father in many places of his blessed law, call us away from
followynge our forefathers? Are not these his words by the Prophet? zachar. 1*
Be not ye like your forefathers, unto whom the Prophets cried aforetime,
saying: Thus says the Lord God of Holies: Turn you from your evil ways, and
from. your wicked imaginations. But they would not hear, nor regard me,
says the Lord. The same Prophet also says: The Lord has been sore displeased
at your forefathers. Again he says: Walk not in the statutes of your
forefathers: Keep not their ordinances: and defile not your selves with their
idols: Ezech. 20
For I am the Lord your god. But walk in my statuts, keep my laws, Note.
and do the^, etc. All forefathers walking in Gods ordinances are most
studiously and diligently to be heard and followed: All other are to be
rejected, and refused, although outwardly glystering never so much with the
shine of holiness and virtue, and commended for straightness of life and
abundance of good works. Christ is the scope, whereunto we must direct all
our doings. If any of our forefathers disse^t him,
they shote at a wrong mark, and we must bid them farewell in the plain
fields, and have nothing to do with them, be they never so old and ancient,
as Saint Cyprian says: That Christ alone ought to be heard: Ad caecil. Lib. 2.
Epist. 3.
The father even from heaven testifies, saying: This is my well beloved son,
in whom I have great delight: Hear ye him. Wherefore if Christ alone be to be
heard, we ought not to attend, mark, and take heed, what any man that has
been before us. thought good to be done, but what he did, which is before all,
that is to say, Christ.

Moreover some flee unto Councels, persuading themselves, Councels.
those to be of such authority, that whatsoever is decreed and stablished in
the^, may by no means be resisted and against said, but obediently received,
and faithfully obeyed, yea and that so much the more, because Christ said:
Math. 18.
Whersoeuer two or three be gathered together in my name: there am I in the
mids of the^. Again, Behold, I am with you for ever, eue^ unto the very end
of the world. Math. 28.
I answer: Christ in deed has promised to be present with his holy spirit
and grace in assemblies of his holy church, which come together for to seek and
set forth the glory of God, and to edify Gods people. But such as falsely and
unjustly take upon them the name of the Church, and in all their councils seek
nothing but their own glory, and to bring the people of God into a most
miserable slavery, a thousand times worse tha^ the children of Israel suffered
in Egypt under the most cruel Tyrant king Pharao,
such, I say, are not gathered together in the name of Christ, but in the
name of Antichrist: neither is Christ in the mids of them, but the devil is
among the^. Such assemblies and conuenticles al faithful Christians ought to
flee* abhor, and deteste, more than the plage and the pestilence, yea, as the
devil, and hell fire, according to this saying of the Psalmographe: Psalm. 26.
I hate the Church of the malignaunt, and with the ungodly will I keep no
company. Against these ungodly councels, and most wicked councellers God
thundreth, and cries out by the Prophet on this manner: Esaias. 30.
Woe and everlasting damnation hangs over the heads of those disobedient and
shrincking children, which will begin a council without me. Woe* be unto the^,
that will take a secret advice, and not out of my spirit: and therefore add
they sin unto sin. Esaias. 10.
Again, Woe be unto the^* that make unrighteous laws, and devise things,
which he to hard for to keep: where through the poor are oppressed on every
side, and the innocents of my people robbed of judgment: that widows may be
their pray, and that they may rob the fatherless. All such councellers with
their councels are not to be received, but to be rejected, because they are
against the Lord, and against his anointed. Notable is the sentence of S.
Cyprian: In sermon. de lapsis.
How dare they stablish any thing without Christ: whose both whole hope, and
faith, and power, and glory is in Christ. All councels. whether they be private
or public, national or general, ought to give place to the word of God,
which is a lantern to our feet, and a light to our pathwayes. Psalm. 119. In
cap. ad Gal. cap. 5.
We ought to believe no man, says, Saint Hierome, without the word of God.
Gerso^ fears not to say, that we ought more to believe a man that is well
learned in the holy scripture,
and brings forth the Catholic authority, tha^ a general council. The
council has no authority for to stablishe any thing contrary to the word of
God. For it is not truth, but error, whatsoever is determined against the
scripture. And we ought not to take heed unto the trifles and fond imaginatio^s
of me^, but to the doctrine of the holy ghost. D^ elect. cap. Significasti.
Abbot Panormi^anus that great Lawyer says also: More faith is to be given
even to a lay man, that allegeth and brings forth the scripture, than to an
whole council. Again, In matters concerning faith: the saying of one private
person ought to be preferred before the Popes saying, if he can bring forth
better authority of the new and old Testament, than the pope can. That is the
doctrine of the holy ghost, In Gal. cap. 5.
says, s. Hierome, which is set forth in the Canonical scriptures: against the
which doctrine if the councels enacte any thing judge it wicked and unlawful.
All good me^ eue^ from the beginning have attributed such and so great
authority to the word of God, that they have preferred that before the
writtings and counsels of al men without exception, although never so wise,
never so Godly. The councels therefore of men ought to be unto the adversaries
no cloak or shadow of their disobedient obstinacy, and obstinate disobedience,
to pluck the^ away from the truth of Gods word.

Furthermore there are an other sort, The multitude.
which obiecte and bring against us the multitude and great number, saying,
that few are they, and little is the number that embrace ye doctrine of ye
Gospellers and Protestants: but innumerable are their and infinite is the
number of the^, that receive and embrace their old, ancient, Catholic, and
mother holy Churches doctrine, whereof it must needs follow, that where the
greatest number is there is the most certain truth. I answer with our savior
Christ: Enter in at the straight gate for the wide is the gate, and broad is ye
way, that leads to destruction, and many they be, which go in thereat. But
straight is the gate: and narow is the way, Math. 7. Math. 20 Romans 10
which leads unto life, and few they be that find it. Again, many are
called, few are cho^e^. The holy Apostle s. Paul says: Lord, who has believed
our preaching. If we consider either ye se^te^ces or histories of the holy
Bible: we shall easly perceive that the greatest number is always the worste, and
the most wicked. When the whole world was drowned, eight persons only except:
Did not the lesser number excel the greater in goodness and Godliness. Exodus 12.
God by his mighty hand and outstretched arm delivered out of Egypt
above.600. thousand me^, of the which.ii. only, that is to say, Joshua and
Caleb, entered into the land of promise, because they believed the promise of
God, the other were unfaithful and inconstante. In the time of wicked King
Achab, and of his most wicked wife Queen Iezabel, there were above.400. false
Prophets besides the Nobility and Comunaltie, 3. Reg. 18
which resisted the ways of the Lord: and in sight but one alone, that
stoutly defended the Lords truth against the wicked and Idolatrous multitude.
About the number of.400. false Prophets told king Achab, 3. Re. 22.
that he should prosper in his wars, and return home safe again, which
deceived him: Micheas alone told him the contrary: and so came it to pass.
When Christ was borne, few received him and embraced him, Math. 2. Luc. 2.
knowledging him to be the promised Messiah and Savior of the world, as Mary
his Mother, Joseph her husband, Zachary the priest, Elizabeth his wife, the
wise me^ that came out of the East parts, the shepeheardes, Simeon, Anna, with
few other, but innumerable thousands hated him set naught hy him, persecuted
him, and sought all means possible to murder him. When Christ took upon him
the office of preaching at the commandment of his father, who embraced his
doctrine, but a few poor people vile, and of no estimation in the sight of
the galant and wise worldlyngs? ^. Cor. 1.
As it is written: Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many of hye degree are called. And as the Pharesees said to their ministers,
when they came home from Christ's Sermon: Are ye also deceived. Joan. 7.
Does any of the Rulers or of the Pharesees believe on him? But this common
people, which know not the law, are cursed. Did not the sede (as we read in
the Gospel) that was sown, Math. 13. Leuit. 14
fall into.iiii. parts: and one part only brought forth good fruit? Did not
a certain man make a supper, and called many: and yet there came none, but a
few poor people, halte, Math. 2^ Act. 4.
lame, feeble, blind, etc. Bishop Cayphas gathered a council, where were
present a great rabble of bloody hypocrites, to condemn Christ: no man at all
taking Christ's part. Against the Apostles of Christ assembled and gathered
the^ selves together the priests, the Rulers of the temple, Congregatio
regentium and n^ Act. 7.
the Saduces, the Pharesees, the Scribes, the Lawyers, and Annas the chief
priest, and Cayphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred
of ye high priests but who rose up to take their parts, and to defend ye
innoce^cie of their cause. What a swarm of helhoundes flocked together to
condemn blessed Stephen, and to stone him unto death: no man once speaking one
word for him. What multitudes from time to time came against Paul, as we may
see in the Acts of Apostles to accuse him, and to make him out of the way: and
how few, or rather none took his part. After the Apostles time, what swarms
of tyrauntes and beastly hypocrites rose up against the poor little company
of the faithful Christians, murdering the^ without al pity or mercy. As it
is written. Psalm. 44
For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as sheep appointed
to be slain. As I may among many touch one Ecclesiastical history: What shall
I speak of the unhappy time of that most unhappy and wicked heritike Arrius.
Although the Fathers of the council Nicene did judge truly and rightly
according to the doctrine of the holy Scripture of the true and everlasting
divinity or Godhead of Christ the Son of God: Yet not long after that wicked
heresy of Arrius did so prevail and take root in the hearts of men, that it
was not received only in one realm or two, but also Pope Liberius Bishop of
Rome, with the Emperor, and all the East part of the world, admitted that
most damnable heresy, to be most sound and wholesome doctrine, persecuting
most cruelly al such, as defended the contrary, whereof was a very little
number, as Athanasius, Paulinus, Ex tripart Hist. Lib. 2. cap. 13. Did. 13.
cap Nicena. Heb. 13.
and very few other Bishops, which by no means would give place to so great
furour and madness, although most miserably entreated. In a Council also
holden at Nice, a great number of Bishops with other gathered there together,
consented to disanull and put away the marriage of Priests or spiritual
ministers, contrary to the practice of gods Church from the beginning, and
contrary to the doctrine of the holy ghost which says: Wedlock is honorable
among all men, and the bed undefiled: for what purpose I know not, nor with
what reasons persuaded, am I able to say. Notwithstanding the holy and blessed
Confessor Pahnutius, although unmarried, withstood them all, and by no means
would consent unto their entreprise and devise, but franckely and freely
confessed, that the marriage of Ministers is honorable,
and that it is chastity for a man to lie with his own wife. By this means
he persuaded the council, that they proceeded no further in this matter, but
set every man at his lyberty to marrye or not to marrye. Who sees not
now, how foolyshe a thing it is, and much unworthy a Christen man to lean
to the multitude, which for the most part is nothing else than a beast of
many heads: Seeing we have euidentlye showed, that the greater part in
matters that appertain to Christ's Religion, is always the worsest part. and
the lesser part does more earnestlye embrace the truth of Gods word. Luc.
12.
so that not without a cause Christ calls his people, a little flock* Fear
not ye little flock, says Christ, for it has pleased my father to give you
a kingdom? This therefore is a vain objection of the adversaries to say: We
have the greater number on our side: therefore have we the truth on our side.
For the devil, the world and the flesh have a greater company attendyng upon
them, than Christ has upon him, seeing that the greatest part of this world
rather embraces things present, than with joy looks for things to come.

Finallye, The difference of orders and doctrines. Christ alone is head of his
Church. Mathe. 26. 1. Cor. 11.

Public prayer in the mothe^ tongue.


some can by no means find in their heart to approve and allow that present
state of Religion, which is now received among us, because it greatly
differs, say they, from the old^ and accustomed order. It is demanded in
what points. It is answered: In these. First, The Bishop of Rome is not
knowledged and received any more to be Supreme head of the universal Church
of Christ. I answer: We know no Supreme head of the Church by the word of
God, but Christ alone and under Christ every Prince in his own Realm.
Secondly, The Sacrament is received under both kinds. I answer: So has
Christ commanded. saying: Drink of this all ye. Also the Apostle, so often as
ye shall eat of this bread and drink of the cup, etc. Thyrdly, The service
and public prayer is done in the temples no more in the latin tongue, as
heretofore, but in the common and English speech. I answer: So has the
custom been from the beginning in the Church of Christ in all places, and is so
used at this present generally, wheresoever the Bishop of Rome has no
authority. 1. Cor. ^4.
And God by his holy Apostle commands us, that in our congregations all
things should be done to edify, approving and allowing rather five words so
spoken that they may be understood than ten thousand otherwise. Fourthly,
Ceremonies.
All the laudable ceremonies are neglected and set a side, as the halowing of
salt, water, bread, candles, palms, fire, ashes, etc. I answer, All these
are the triflyng traditions of men, and have been the cause of much Idolatrye
and superstition. And it is written, They worship me in vain, Math. 25. Joan.
4. Purgatory
teaching doctrines, which are the commandments of men. Item, God is a
spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.
Fifthly, Purgatory is denied. I answer, we know none other purgatory for the
soul, but the precious blood of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, as it is
written. ^* Joan. 1* The sacrifice of the Mass no sacrifice for sin, but the
death of Christ alone. Romans 6. Heb. 9.
The blood of Jesus Christ gods son makes us clean from all sin. Sixthly,
The Sacrifice of the Mass is utterly rejected and cast away, as a pestilence
most hurtful, blasphemous, and injurious to the passion and death of Christ*
I answer: The word of God teaches us in all places, that there is no
sacrifice for sin, but the death of Christ alone. But Christ dreth no more.
Therefore is there no more sacrifice offered up for sin. With one only
oblation, says the Apostle, has Christ that everlasting Bishop made perfect
for ever them that are sanctified. Again, we are sanctified and made holy by
the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ done once for all. Invocation and
Intercession of Saints. Psalm. 50. 1. Timo. 2. 1. Joan. 1. Romans 8. Joan. 16*
Seventhly, The invocation and intercession of Saints is clean omitted and
left. I answer: God alone is to be called upon, as he himself* commands,
saying: Call on me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. We know by
the word of God no Mediator, no Intercessour, but Christ alone, as it is
written: There is one God, and one Mediator, (he says not, many Mediatoures)
between God and man, even the man Jesus Christ, which gave himself a ransom
for all men. Again, if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the father (he
says not, Advocates) Jesus Christ the righteous one. And he it is that
obtayneth mercy for our sins: not for our sins only, but also for all the
world. Item, Christ is on the right hand of God, and makes intercession for
us. He says not, Saints make intercession for us. And our savior Christ him
self says: Whatsoever ye ask the father in my name, (he says not, in the
names of the sai^tes) he will give it you. Transsubstantiation.
Eyghtly, The article of tra^ssubstantiation is rejected and cast away as an
error or heresy. I answer. The holy Scripture knows no such article:
neither have the holy old fathers ever taught or left written such doctrine
behind them. It is a new and late invention, brought in by the Pope and his
adherentes. Saint Paul calls the Sacramental bread* 1. Cor. ^*
not only bread before the consecration, but also after the consecration. And
our Savior Christ calls the Sacramental wine after consecration, the fruit
of the vine: and what other thing is that to say, Mathe. 26.
than to call it wine. Nynthly, The natural, corporal, substantial, and
real body of Christ, which he received of Marye the Uirgin, is denied to be
in the Sacrament of the altar. The sacrament.
I answer. The Sacrament is an holy sign of the body and blood of Christ:
which, whosoever receaueth worthily and according to Christ's institution,
receaueth the very body and blood of Christ, yea whole Christ through faith,
which is the mouth of ye soul, so yt he is incorporate, and made one with
Christ, Ephe. 5.
flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones. Tenthly, The marriage of Pristes is
admitted. I answer. It is in the word of God no where denied. Leuit. 21.
Ezech. 44 ^The marriage of Priests.
Gods Priests in the old law were al married men, and had wives. The Apostles
of Christ, and the Bishops and Ministers of the Primative Church, and many
hundred years after, til the Bishop of Rome played the tyrant and right
Antichrist in forbydding and condemning the marriage of Priests, were all
married men. At this present also in all the congregations of God, whersoeuer
the pope is not admitted to be supreme head,
the Bishops and Ministers of the Church do freely marye wives. Neither was
the marriage of Priests ever forbidden in any nation, till the Bishop of Rome
and his adherentes brought in that deuilyshe decree of the single life of
Priests, that this Prophecy of Saint Paul might be fulfilled: ^ Timo. 4.
The spirit speaks evidently, that in the later times some shall depart
from the faith, and shall give head unto spirits of error, and deuelyshe
doctrines of them, which speak false through hypocrisye, and have their
consciences marked with an hoate iron, forbidding to marye, and commaundyng to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with geuyng
thanks, of them which believe, and know the truth. For all the creatures of
God are good, etc. Are not these the words of the holy Apostle. 1. Cor. 7.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his own wise, and every woman her
own husband. Again, Wedlock is honorable among all persons* Heb. 13. Uowes.
Eccle. 5. Romans 14
and the bed undefiled. That God has made free* no man ought to make bond.
Eleuenthly, The vows of obedience, poverty, and chastity are broken and not
observed of the Cloisterers, Monks, Friars, Chanons, Nuns, Anckers,
Anckeresses, etc. I answer with the Preacher. A foolish and an unfaithful vow
displeases God. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, says the Apostle. But
these monastical vows are not of faith (for they have no ground in the word
of God) therefore are they sin. What Godliness can there be in the vow of
pouertye, The vow of poverty Gene. 3. The vow of obedience.
seeing that the vowers thereof cast away all labor contrary to the
commandment of God, and live idly under the pretense of long prayer, and
are fed like Epicures and bellygods of the labors of other men's hands, and
of the sweat of other men's brows. Romans 13
And what point of holiness is in their vow of obedience, seeing they vow it
to the Pope and to their Abbotes and Prioures, and utterly deny to be
obedience to the temporal Princes and Rulers to whom they owe obedience by
the word of God under pain of damnation. As touching their vow of chastity,
The vow of chastity
who knows not, that it is both foolish and presumptuous. Can there be any
greater folly or presumption in the world, than to worship God with our own
inventions, and to vow that unto him, which lies not in power to fulfill.
Our Savior Christ says: All can not away with this saying: That is, to live
unmarried, but they to whom it is given, The wise man also says: Math. 19.
Sap. 8.
I know, that I can not live chaste, except God give me the gift. To strive
against God and nature, is mere madness.

Twelfthly, The fasting days are not so religiously and with such abstine^ce
observed* Fasting days.
as heretofore they have been. I answer, the people in times yast have been
taught of their curates* on those days, which the Church, that is to say, the
Pope and the Bishops, has commanded to be fasted, that they should fast
under pain of deadly sin, abstain from flesh, and eat but one meal that
day.
To make that sin, which is not contrary to the word of God, is the
doctrine of Antichrist. ^. Timo. 4. Titus. 1
To think it more acceptable to God, for to catelfishe, than to eat flesh, is
mere madness and plain superstition, seeing that all the creatures of God are
good, and nothing is to be cast always that is received with thanks giving.
All things are pure to them that are pure. And those things, which God has
made clean, no man ought to judge unclean. Act. 10.
Notwithstanding such days of abstinence as are commanded by the Prince, and
received by public order, are still with great reverence and high devotion
religiously observed and keept: when notwithstanding we right well know,
that the true and Christen fast is to abstain from sin and to practice
virtue: Luc. 21. Justification. ^bac. 2. Romans 3. Gala. 2.
to cease to do our own will, and to accomplish the good pleasure of God: and
at all times to live temperatly and soberly, as our Savior Christ says: Take
heed to your selves least any time your hearts be overcome with surfeiting
and droncknesse, and cares of this life. Thyrtenthly, Justification is taught
by faith alone without works. I answer, The Prophet says: A ryghteous man
shall live by his own faith. And the holy Apostle says: We plainly affirm,
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. Again, we
have believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the deeds of the law: because by the deeds of the law no
flesh shall be justified.
Faith, because it alone apprehends and lays hand on the merciful
promises of God, Romans 8. Faith. Gala. 5. Love. 1. Timo. 1*
is counted alone to justify, when notwithstanding it is God alone that
justifies, as s. Paul says. It is God that justifies. This faith is no dead
and idle work of the holy Ghost in the hearts of the faithful, but lively and
mighty in operation, as Saint Paul says, Faith, which works mightily by
love. And this love which issues out of a pure heart, and out of a good
conscience, and out of a faith unfeigned, is so fervent and strong, that it
brasteth out into good works, and can no more cease to work* than fire can
cease to burn, when mete matter is ministered unto it, or the Sun cease to
shine, when the time of the clear day requires. Psalm. 1.
Therefore a faithful man is compared to a tree planted by the river side,
which brings forth her fruit in due time. For whenever occasion is offered
to a faithful man to work, he works strayghtwayes, yea and that freely and
willingly, with out any compulsion or fear.
And yet does not he these good works to be justified by the^ (for he is
already justified by faith) but to show that his faith is true and lively, and
not feigned and dead: and declare, as David speaks of himself, Psalm. 52.
Gala. 2. Math. 12*
that he is as a trutefull Olyue tree in the house of the Lord. For if
righteousness come by the law, then dyed Christ in vain. A good man, out of
the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things. And an evil man
out of evil treasure brings forth evil things. The good treasure is faith,
evil treasure is unbelief. Either make the tree good and his fruit: good, or
else make the tree evil, and his fruit evil. The man must be good before he
can bring forth good works. Fourtenthly, Auricular confession is set at naught,
Auriculare confession.
and no more used. I answer: Auricular confession is the invention of man, no
where grounded on the word of God, and has been the occasion of much
mischief in time paste. Confession of our sins to God, and to such as we
have offended, the Scripture teaches and commands: but such Auricular and
caryshe confession to be made unto a Priest with all circumstances, where,
when, how, with whom, how often, etc. as the pope commands, is no where
found in Gods book. Notwithstanding we freely permit and suffer any man
that will, to go unto a Godly, learned and discrete minister of Gods word
either for doctrine, council, or comfort, not only in the time of Lent, but at
all times of the year. Malach. 2 Satisfaction.
For it is written: The lyps of a Priest keep knowledge, and at his mouth they
shall require the law: for he is the Angel or Ambassador of the Lord of
Hosts, Fyftenthly. The name of satisfaction is abhorred, and counted unworthy
the Christen profession. I answer. To God there is satisfaction ^or sins, 1.
Joan. 2.
but the death of Christ alone, as Saint John says: he (Christ) is the
satisfaction for our sins. 2. Cor. 5*
Hereto agrees the saying of S. Paul: God made Christ to be sin (that is, a
satisfactory sacrifice) for sin, which knew no sin, that we by his means
should be that righteousness, which before God is allowed.
God requires of us repentance, faith, and amendment of life, when we have
gone astraye: but to satisfy the justice of God for those our sins we are
not able, though al righteousness of the whole world should be offered up to
God of one man for one sin that he had committed against God, in whose sight
the stars are not pure, nor the Angels of heaven free from imperfection, if
they should be compared with the pureness and perfection of God. Therefore to
make satisfaction to GOD for our sins, Christ came down, took our frail
nature upon him, dyed for our wickednesses, and rose again for our
Justification. And this his satisfaction is counted our satisfaction, if we
believe in him: Act. 13.
as it is written: Be it known unto you (ye men and brethren) that through
this man (CHRIST) is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and that by
him all that believe, are justified from all things, from the which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moses. There is an other kind of satisfaction,
that concerns our neighbor, whom we have offended either in word or in
deed. That satisfaction ought in this behalf to be made, no man that feared
God, denies. Yea we plainly affirm, that whosoever has offended his
neighbor, and seeks not to be reconciled unto him, by making due satisfaction
unto him to the uttermost of his power, Satisfac^^on to our neighbor.
whether it be in word or in deed: that person is far from the true
Christianity. If the offense be in word: sactisfactio^ must be made in word.
If it be in deed: then must the satisfaction be made in deed likewise, after
the example of Zachee, which said: If I have done any man wrong: I restore him
four fold. Sixtenthly, Free will is denied to be in us, Luc. 19. Free will.
Romans 4 Ephe. 2.
and that we have no power to do any good. I answer: Our liberty of well
willing and well doing was lost in Ada^, in who^ as all we sinned, so are al we
justly condemned. Before Ada^s fall we had freewill both to will well and to do
well: but since his fall all perished in us that good was, and all grew up
that evil and wicked was, as it is written. Gene. 6. Gene. 8.
All the imagination of man's heart is only evil every day. Again, the
imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth. Hereof does it
manifestly appear, what free will there is in us to do good, or to will good,
seeing that all our imaginations and thoughts of our hearts are evil and
wicked at al times eue^ from our very youth, Iere. 17. 2. Cor. 3 Joan. 15.
as the Prophet says: Leude is the heart of man and unsearchable. Saint
Paul also says, that of our selves we be not able so much as to think a good
thought. And our Savior Christ says: Without me ye can do nothing.
Notwithstanding this we say, that in natural and humane things we have a
certain choice of will, as to eat this or that meat, Note.
to put on this or that garment, to speak or to keep silence, etc. yea and to
sin or to abstain from the gross acts of sin, as murder, adulterye,
fornication, false witness bearyng, and such like: which notwithstanding we
must acknowledge and confess to be the gift of God, as Saint Paul says.
What have thou, 1. Cor. 4 Iac. 1.
that thou have not received. Also Saint James, Every good gift, and every
perfect gift is from above,
and come down from the father of lights. But with our whole hearts to asse^t
and consent to the holy will of God, to accomplish and perform the same with
such perfection and puritye, as the law requires: that lies not in our
power, neither can the stre^ghts of free will do any thing in this behalf,
either to will it, or to do it. For as Saint Paul says: It is God that works
in us both the will and the deed. Phil. 3.
The regenerate man in Christ has only this will and this deed, as Christ
says: If the Son make you free, Joan. 8. 1. Cor. 2.
then are you free in deed. The natural man perceaueth not those things that
belong to the spirit of God. Not they, which are borne of blood, or of the
will of the flesh, or of the will of man, but they that are borne of God, Joan.
^. 2. Cor. 3. Prayer.
have this freedom. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, says
the Apostle. Seuententhly Prayer is called lyppe labor. I answer. Outward
prayer pronounced with the lips without the affection of the heart and
consent of the mind, is not only lyppe labor, but also vain labor, not
approved but reproved of the Lord our God, Math. 1^.
as Christ him self witnesses, saying: This people draws nigh unto me with
their mouth, and honors me with their lips, howbeit their hearts are far
from me. Uerelye they worship me in vain. Joan. 14.
And to the woman of Samaria he said thus. The hour comes and now is, when
the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in truth. For
such the father also requires to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Note.
Whatsoever is song or said with the mouth, so that it brasteth out from the
affection of the mind: we affirm to be not only tolerable, but also
commendable, yea pleasant and acceptable to God, as David says: I will give
always thanks unto the Lord: Psalm. 34.
his praise shall ever be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boaste in the
Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad. O praise the Lord with me,
and let us praise his name together, etc. O be joyful in God, all ye lands:
sing praises unto the honor of his name, make his praise to be glorious. And
the Apostle says: I will sing with the breath, and I will sing with the
mind. 1. Cor. 14
I will pray with ye breath,
and I will pray with the mind. If the mouth and the mind, if the breath and
the heart, if the lips and the spirit go together either in singing or
saying: It is a most acceptable melody to God, and highly to be praised of al
good and godly me^. This kind of prayer is greatly commended of the people of
God, as contrary wise prayer without the affection of the heart is rather to
be reproved than approved, refused than received, condemned than commended.

Holy days
Eyghrenthly, The holy days and solemn feasts, which of our Elders were
observed and kept with hye devotion and great reverence, are now a days
neglected and set naught by. Mark. 2.
I answer: We are free from the observation of days.
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Therefore is the
Son of man Lord also of the Sabbath: A Christen man's Sabbath is every day,
and endures the whole time of his life: which is to rest from evil, to cease
to do his own will, and to obey the holy law and commandment of GOD. We
are no more tied and bound to the observation and keeping of the Iewyshe
Sabbothes, from the which we are made free by Christ the true light, whose
coming in the flesh expelled all the dark shadows of Moses law, as the
Apostle says: Let no man trouble your conscience about meat and drink,
Colos. 2.
or for a piece of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days,
which are shadows of things to come: but the body is in Christ. Let no man
make you shote at a wrong mark, etc. Such as yet stick and abide in the
outward observation of days, Gala. 14.
times and meats, the Apostle reproves on this manner and says: Now after
that ye have known GOD (yea rather are known of God) how is it that ye turn
again unto the weak and beggarlye ordinances, whereunto again ye desire a
fresh to be in bondage. Ye observe months and days, and times, and years.
I am in fear of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in vain. Colos. 2
Again, If ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as
though ye yet lived in the world, are ye led with traditions? Touch not,
taste not, handle not* which all perish through the very abuse, after the
commandments and doctrines of men. We grant and confess, that we have put
down, yea and that worthily, certain supersticious and Idolatrous holy days,
as the feasts of Thomas Becket that traiterous Rebel, of Dunstone that wicked
Nichromancer, of Austen that superstitious and Popish Monk, with such like:
notwithstanding the So^dayes, and all such feasts as be grounded in the word
of God, bringyng unto our remembrance the acts of Christ and of his Saints,
we not supersticiously, but freely and religiously observe and keep, according
to the liberty, which is given us in the Gospel by Christ.

Other matters there are, wherein the Papystes find great fault with the
Protestants, which may be answered as easily, as we have done these
aforesaid. For we have rehearsed the chief and principal: of what force and
strength they be, who sees not. But forasmuch as they make the simple and
ignorant people believe, that if these things be taken away, the whole
Religion of Christ falls down and utterly perishes (the people being
persuaded that they are not tryfling traditions of me^, but the grave and
weyghtie ordinances of God.) And that therefore as an other Atlas they with
their shulders hold up the old and ancient Catholyke Religion, which
otherwise would fall to ruin and utter decay: I pitieng and much lamenting the
miserable state of the simple, blind, and ignorant Christians, so wretchedly
seduced through the subtle and craftye persuasions of these most subtle and
craftye hypocrites, Math. 7. Act. 3.
which being in deed grievous and rauenyng wolves, clothe themselves with
shepes apparel, that they may the easelier make a rauine and spoil of the
Christen flock: I have thought good to declare and show out of Chronicles and
Hystories. who were the Authors and inuentours of all these tryfling
tradicions, drowsy dreams, and idle inventions, which heretofore have been
counted for true Religion and Gods service: Again, at what time or year of
our Lord, every one of their beggarly ceremonies were thruste into the
Church: that by this means such as will open their eyes, and no more be
obstinatly blind, may easily perceive and see, how wickedly the wicked and
Popish hypocrites have in times past seduced and received the simple poor
Christians, while they have made them believe, that whatsoever is done in their
Church, is divine service, and God is hyghlye pleased therewith, contrary to
this saying of Christ: Math. 15.
They worship me in vain, teaching doctrines, which are the commandments
of men: and that to leave these things undone, is deadly sin, and worthy
great punishment. A Priest to read the Gospel at Mass without candle light:
to receive the Sacramental wine, without minglyng of water, to say Mass
abroad without a Super^ltare: Again, the Lay man to come unto the Lords table
without shrifte and absolution at the Priests hand not to bear a candle on
Candlemasse day, not to take ashes in Lent, not to bear Palms on Palm
Sunday, not to crepe to the cross on good Fridaye, not to abstain from flesh
on Fridayes and other fasting days, with a thousand such like, was counted a
greater offense among the Papists than to transgress and break any of the
commandments of God. Esaias. 29. Math. 17. Mark. 7.
It may worthily be said to them, as Christ said to the Pharesees and
Scribes: Well Prophesied Esaias of you hypocrites, as it is written: This people
honors me with their lips, but their heart is far fro me. Howbeit, in
vain do they serve me, teaching the doctrines and commandments of men. For
ye lay the commandments of God a part, and observe the constitutions of men.
etc. Ye cast aside the commandment of God, to maintain your own
constitutions.

There is almost no constitutions, no decree, no ceremonye, no Papisticall
sect, nor any other tradition appertaining to Church ware, and Romish
religion, which I have not both diligently and painefully sought out of
Chronicle writers, and Historiographers, and placed in this my book, that all
men may know from whence the Popish religion springs, and has her
beginning, that this thing once known, and the triflyng traditions of men set
a part we may with one mind, serve, worship, and honor the Lord our God
according to his word as it is written: Deuteronomy. 12 Deuteronomy. 4.
That I command thee, do that only unto the Lord: put thou naught thereto, nor
take ought there from. Again, ye shall put nothing to the word, which I
command you, neither do ought therfrom, that ye may keep the commandments
of the Lord your God, which I command you. And that the readyng of this my
book may be to the Reader both the more pleasant and profitable: I have to
avoid confusion brought all things unto certain common places, yea and that
in such order, as I trust, no good and indifferent person will mislyke and
disalowe. My desire is to do good to all men, to hurt no person.

After that I had finished this my labor and travail in gathering together
these Relics of the Romish Religion, and had determined with my self to
publishe and set them abroad, that they might be seen and read of all men:
after long and deep consideration to whom I might dedicate this my work: The
causes of the dedicatio^ of this book.
Your Lordship came to my remembrance, as one right well worthy, to whom I
might offer this my travail what soever it be, yea and that for diverse
causes. First, For the right excellent knowledge that you have not only in
human letters, but also in the sacred scriptures: which is so goodly an
ornament and precious Jewel to all Christians, but specially to all such as be
Bishops and Ouersears of Christ's flock, knowledge
as nothing can more beautify and adourne the state of a Christen man, of
whatsoever degree he be. Zeal.
Secondly, For the fervent Zeal and earnest love, that you bear to the pure
and sincere religion of God, which these many years has so enflamed your
breast that for the love thereof, and for the defense of the same, you were not
only content to forsake your native country, your natural kinnesfolke, your
dear friends, your loving familiares, and whatsoever seems to this life,
most sweet, most pleasant, most comfortable, but also to lose both life and
goods, counting them most blessed and happy, that suffer persecution for
righteousness. Thyrdly, Math. 5.
For that it has pleased God of his infinite goodness and mercy to place you
Bishop and Ouersear of his people in my native country unto the glory of his
most glorious name* and unto the exceeding profit and commodity of his holy
congregatien* where you so rule and govern the Lords flock, as a most
faithful Pastor and diligent shepehearde, that your fame is not only glorious
in the ears all men, but also you are become a most worthy examplar to all the
spiritual Ministers of your ^iocesse, whether doctrine life, or hospitality
be considered on your behalf. As touching doctrine (I speak it without
flatterye) you are able by the word of God, Titus. 1 Doctrine.
and by wholesome learning, both to exhort, and also to improve them that
speak against the word of truth. And as God has given you this knowledge* so
do you most diligently bestow it upon Gods people committed unto you* that
you may not be found like to that idle and unprofitable servant, which hyd the
talent, that his Lord committed unto him, in the ground: but rather like to
that good and diligent servant, which with five talents, that his Master
delivered him, won other five. Math. 25.
and therefore heard of his Masters mouth this most sweet and comfortable
voice: Well thou good and faithful servant: Thou haste been faithful over
few things. I will make thee ruler over many things. Life.
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

As concerning your life and conversation (which I speak unto the glory of
God, from whom alone comes down every good and perfect gift) it is such,
Iac. 1.
as may right well be counted a myrrour of virtue, wherein appears nothing but
that good and Godly is, so that ye be an ensample to ye flock in righteousness,
in faith, in love, in peace, in word, in pureness, etc. According to the rule
of the Apostle: A Bishop must be blameless, 1. Pet. 5. Titus. 1 1. Timo. 3.
as the steward of God, not stubborn, not angry, not given to much wine, no
fighter, not given to filthy lucre, etc. He must also have a good report of
them which are without, least he fall into rebuke, and snare of the evil
speaker.

Hospitality
And as for your hospitality, it is such and so notable, that for the
proportion of your yearly revenues, which is much inferioure to others, it
gives place to none of your profession and degree* Poor Christ in his members
stands not at your gates to be fed at leisure with fragments and scrappes
many times to vile for dogs out of the almose basket, but he is brought into
your house, set at the table, having ministered unto him, all good things
necessary for the relief of his careful state, according to this
commandment of God: Break thy bread to the hungry: Esaias. 58. 1. Timo. 4.
Titus. 1 Malach. 3 Gala. 6. Joan. 21.
and the nedie and wayfaryng bring thou into thy house. When thou see the
naked cover him, and hyde not thy face from thy neighbor. A Bishop must be a
maintayner and keeper of hospitality, says the Apostle. And God says by the
Prophet: Bring every tithe into my barn, that there may be meat in mine
house. Therefore your Lordship is ready at all times to do good to all men, but
specially to them that are of the household of faith. And these.iii. things
requires our Savior Christ of every Godly and Christen Bishop, when he says
thrice. Pasce, Pasce, Pasce, Feed with whole some doctrine. Feed with virtuous
conversation. Feed with liberal hospitality keeping. But many do so little
pass of this latter Pasce, that they pass it clean over, and make a double
post of it, so greatly has Mammon blinded their eyes. Fourthly, Benefits
for the singular love and liberal benefits, which your Lordship heretofore
both freelye and frendlye without my deserts has most bounteouslye bestowed
upon me. And would God it were, or might be at any time in my power, if not
otherwise yet with my humble and ready service, to signify my faithful and
well wishing heart unto your Lordship, if not to the vttermoste, yet in some
part, as one, who although power shall fail, yet shall good will ever
prevail. Fyftly, and finallye (as I may once conclude) that your honor
may by a Bucklar and defense for this my labor* partelye against our
common adversaries the Papists, which without judgment furiouslye condemn,
whatsoever pleases them not, although never so true, and agreeable to the
word of GOD: Partelye against our Gross Gospellers and pratlyng
Protestants, which doing themselves nothing praise wrthye, envy, slander
and backby^e other men's fruitful labors, labourynge by this means to seem
somewhat, when in deed they are nothing, except we will number them among
such, as are borne only to consume the good fruits of the earth: Partelye,
that other seeing this my travail dedicate to your Lordeshippe, may be the
more allured and provoked unto the readyng of this treatise, and so at the
last learn to discern good from evil, sweet from sour, light from
darkness, truth from falshode. Religion from superstition, Christ from
Antichrist, God from Baal, etc. and from hence forth serve the Lord our GOD
not as blind reason fantasieth, and filthy flesh imagines, but as Gods
word pre^cribeth, Luc. 1.
that is to say, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life,
that after the short pilgrimage of this our frail life, we may attain and
come unto that blessed and immortal life, where he reygneth, which is the
true and perfect life, namelye Christ Jesus the Son of the living GOD as
concerning his Godhead, Joan. 14
and the Son of the blessed Uirgine Marye as touching his manhood, our alone
Savior and Redemer, our alone Mediatoure and Advocate, our alone Lawful
fille^ and peace maker, our alone health and eternal felicitye: in whom, and
from whom, I wish unto your honorable Lordeshippe all good things both of
body and mind. Amen.

From Cauntorbury the sixte of June. In the year of our Lord. 1563. September.
30.
The Relics of Rome.
Of the Pope, and of his usurped power and feigned authority.
POpe Boniface the third through great and earnest suit (although many good and
Godly learned men resisted him in this behalf, The beginning of the Popes
primacie.
utterly condemning this his ambition and Luciferlike pride in exalting and
lifting up himself above his fellow Bishops, and chalenging unto him yt
Supremacy and authority, which the holy Scripture in no place gives him
neither had any of his predecessors ye Bishops of Rome tofore enjoyed the same
nor once desired it, but rather both written and spoken against such usurped
power, as we may see in the writings of Pope Gregorye the first against John
Patriarch of Constantinople, Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 32.33.34. capi. 76.77.78.
which attempted the like wicked enterprise, but was resisted) to Phocas the
Emperor, at the last obtained of him, that he and his successors for ever
after should be taken for ye chief bishop and supreme head of the universal
Church of Christ throughoute the world: Pope, (...) head of the Emperors
making.
and yt the Church of Rome from that day foreward should be called, and so
admitted and received the chief and principal head Church of ye whole world:
Again, that the Church of Rome should be in subjection to none other Church,
but that al Churches universal should be obedient and in subjection unto it.
For until that time the Church of Constantinople was counted the highest and of
greatest authority because of the imperial see in that city. This thing was
brought to pass about the year of our Lord.vi.C.vii. Flatina. Christianus
Massaeus. Henricus Pantaleon. Paulus Dia^onus. Anselmus Rid. Polichronicon.
Albertus Krantz. Abbas vrsperge^sis. Hermannus Contractus. etc

Phocas the Emperor.
This Phocas (as histories make mention) was a great and cruel tyrant, and by
force and violence obtained the Empire. And that he might the more quietlye
enjoy it, he wrought not only treason against his Lord and Master, that was
Emperor before him called Mauritius a man both noble and virtuous, but he also
most shamefully and traytorously slew him, The tira^ny of Phocas.
not only him, but al his children also, yt none of his flock might live to
make any claim to the Imperial Crown after him. A Tyrant mete to set up the
tyranny of the Bishop of Rome contrary to ye word of God and the determination
of the ancient Cannons.

But this traiterous murderer received a just reward of this his tirannye.
For as he unjustly slew: so was he most justly slain. As he deposed his Lord
and Master: so was he deposed and put down. As he against al right took away
the Empire from his Lord: so was it again taken a way from him. As he suffered
none of his masters children to live: so dyed he without children, one daughter
only excepted. Look with what measure he met unto his lord and master: with
the same was he paid home again, saving that his death was more vilanous and
shameful, than the death of his master. The death of Phocas
For this tyraunte after he had reigned certain years, had first of all his
hands and his feet cut of, afterward because he had been a famous and notable
adulterer, his privy members with his head were cut of also. As for the
residue of his body was burnt to ashes, An end worthy such a tirant:
Zonaras, Paulus Vuarnefridus, Ioannes Monachus, Paulus Diaconus, Ioannes
Cuspinianus, Sebastianus Frank.

Pope Christ's vicare and Peter's successor.
Pope Benet the second obtained of the Emperor Constantine, that the Bishop of
Rome for ever after should be taken of all men for Christ's true vicar in
earth, and saint Peter's lawful successor. This Pope also brought it to pass,
that the bishop of Rome only should be called Pope, that is to say, the father
of fathers. For before that time all Bishops generallye were called Popes,
The bishop of Rome only Pope.
it may be gathered of diverse writers. In the year of our Lord si^e
hundred.lxvii. Anselmus Ryd. Achilles Perminius, Sebastianus Franck. etc.

The church of Rome head of all churches.
Pope Vigilius (as they feign) made a decree with the consent of his adherents
that the Sea of Rome should be taken for the head and maistresse of al
churches thorowout the world. In the year, etc. v. C. xxxv. according to the
doctrine of these two verses.

Dogmate papali datur, simul ac imperiali,
vt sim cunctarum matter, and caput ecclesiaru^.
That same decree also made Pope Simplicius (as they write) A famous and
notable lie.
in the year of our Lord: 471. Moreover the papists go forth and say, that
when Pope Siluester was Bishop of Rome, Constantine the Emperor did exalte and
advance the Sea of Rome, that he gave unto it not only an ecclesiastical, but
also an Imperial, power, appoynting the church of Rome to be the chief church
through out ye world, and to have authority, rule, and preeminence no less over
those four principal Churches, Antioch, Alexandria. Constantinople, and
Jerusalem, The Pope is become a plain Lucifer.
than over al other churches contained under the heavens: Again, yt the bishop
of Rome should be higher and of greter authority, than all the bishops and
priests of the whole world, and yt whatsoever should be determined concerning
matters of religion, should depend only upon the popes judgment, either to be
received, or to be rejected, He appointed also (as the papists go forth to
lie) that the pope should have fre liberty to wear the apparel either of an
emperor or of a bishop at his pleasure, and that he should have all manner
of officers to attend upon, as the Emperors majesty has. Moreover the
aforesaid Emperor Constantine gave to Pope Siluester and to his such cessors
the city of Rome and al Italye, S. Peter's patrimony.
with the provinces, places and cities of all the weast parts, to be S. Peter's
patrimony for ever: and adds furthermore these words. O terrificu^ fulmen.
If any man do infringe break, transgress, contemn and condemn this our
ordinance, everlasting damnation hang over his head: and the holy and chief
apostles, of God Peter and Paul be his enemies, and immortal foes both in this
world and in the world to come: yea perish might he in the lowest part of hell
and so be damned for ever and ever with the devil and all the wicked.

The Papists are impudent liars.
Furthermore this Emperor (as the Romanists feign) when he had made this
donation to the Church of Rome plucked of the imperial crown made of most
fine gold garnished with all kind of precious stones pearls and jewels from his
own head, and set it upon pope Siluesters pate for the reverence yt he bare to
s. Peter and caused ye Romish bishop to be set upon a costlye and richely
appareled palfrey,
and to be solemnly carried about through the city of Rome in the presence of
al ye citizens, ye Emperor himself running on foot like a lacky by the Popes
side, holding his horses bridle in his hand, as a most vile page. These
things done, ye Emperor Constantine departed from the West parts of the world
which he had now given over to Pope Siluester and to his successors for ever to
be s. Peter's patrimony, with all the privileges, emoluments, commodities and
profits of the same, and went himself into ye East parts, even unto the
city Bizantium, which being in great ruin he repared and amplified,
beautifying it with many noble and sumptuous buildings, and called it
Constantinople according to his name. He carried also with him almost all the
noble men of the Romans, and the whole order of ye Senators with their wives
and children, because the pope and his accomplices (as it may appear) should have
elboughroume enough, and as few to trouble his holiness, as might be In the
year. etc. 315. Bartolomaeus Picerius de monte arduo, Ioa^nes Laziardus, Edic.
Constant Policronicon, etc.

But how vain, false, forged, lying and counterfayte this bragging of the
papists is, concerning the donation of the emperor Constantine to the Sea of
Rome, and the supremacye of that Romish bishop above all other bishops, yea,
above Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc. diverse faithful learned and expert writers
do abundantly testify Nicolaus de causa. Note well ye property of the papists.
Laurentius Valla, Antoninus Archiep. Florent. Volateranus Hieronimus, Paulus
Cathalanus, Albertus Crantzius, Huldrichus Huttenus, etc. But this is the
properti of the papists always to father their lies, their idle inventions
their drowsye dreams, their crooked constitutions, their devilish decrees.
etc. Upon such as lived many years before, and upon such as were me^ (in
their days) of great learning and virtue, that by this means their trifeling
traditions might seem to be of the greter authority in the eyes of the simple
and unlearned people and so although plain erroures, yet at ye last through
the color of antiquity be received for most manifest verities and undoubted
truths. Richesse poisoned ye church of Rome.
Notwithstanding this must we needs confess (which thing the histories do
also testify) that after ye church of Rome was endowed with temporal
possessions, it was ever after more studiouse of ye world tha^ of god, of
secular business tha^ of spiritual excercises, of outward pomp and pride* tha^
of inward devotion and christen holiness, of making their own traditions and
degrees than of setting forth gods holy commandments and laws, of enriching
themselves than of edifyinge the flock of Christ: so that not without a cause
it is written, yt what time the Church received temporal possessions, ye old
enemy cried with a loud voice in ye air: This day is poison shed forth into
the Church of Christ.
Therefore saint Jerome in vitas patrum says: Since that holy Church
increased in possessions, it has decreased in virtues according to this common
saying: Religio peperit diuitias: Filia deuorauit matre^: yt is to say,
Religion brought forth richesse, and the daughter has devoured the Mother.
Polichron.

Moreover the Papists feign, that the aforesaid Siluester being Bishop of
Rome, the council of Nice gave this privilege to the Bishop of Rome, that he
should be above all other Bishops, as ye emperor is above al other kings: and
that he should be called Pope, An other lie of the Papists concerning the
counc^^l of Nice.
that is to say, the chief father, or the father of fathers. But this is so
false, that nothing can be more contrary to ye truth. For in the council of
Nice, which was celebrate by the commandment of Constantine the Emperor in
ye year of our Lord.iii.C.xxiiii. where also were present and gathered
together.iii.C. and xviii. Bishops and holy fathers, it was determined, that
the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antiochia, and universally all other primates
should have all the governance and pre-eminence of al ye countries that were
nere unto them, Note.
as ye bishop of Rome had in Italy, etc.

We will, say they, yt the old custom and manner shall continue in Egipte,
Libie, and Pentapali, which is, that ye Bishop of Alexandria shall have
governance and rule over all these: for tha^ there is a like custom for ye
Bishop of Rome. In like manner we will, that at Antioche, and other provinces,
every one shall have their due honor.

Moreover when Faustinus Legate to the bishop of Rome alleged in ye sixte
council Cartaginense, In the counsel of Carthage no Scripture could be
found to prove the Popes primacie.

The falsehoode of the Papists.


that the bishop of Rome ought to have the ordering of al great matters in all
places by his supreme authority, he alleged no scripture for him (for at that
time no scripture was thought to make for it) but he alleged untruly the
first general council Nicene, in which Arrius the heretyke was condemned, to
make for that purpose. Which after ye book was brought forth, and no such
article found in it, but the contrary: (yet the council at that time sent to
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioche, where ye Patriarchall Sees were, to
have the true copy of ye Council Nicene, which was sent unto them, and also
from Rome, whether they sent also for that purpose. And after they found no
such article in it, but in the first chapter thereof, the contrary, that al
causes ecclesiastical should either be determined within ye diocese or else if
any were grieved, the^ to appeal to the Council provincial, and there the
matter to take full end, so that for no such causes, men should go out of
there province,) ye whole council Cartaginense wrote to Celestine at ye time
being Bishop of Rome, that since the council Nicene had no such article in it,
as was untruly alleged by Faustinus, but the contrary: they desired him to
abstain after to make any more such demand, denouncing unto him, that they
would not suffer any cause great or small to be brought by appeal out of their
country and thereupon made a law, that no man should appeal out of the
country of Aphricke, upon pain to be denounced accursed. Wherewith the Bishop
of Rome ever after held him content and made no more business with them,
seeing he had naught to say to the contrary. In the syxte article of the said
counsel it was also determined, that in the Orient or East parts the Bishop
of Antioche should be chief: in Egypt the Bishop of Alexandria, about Rome,
the Bishop of Rome, and likewise in other countries the Metropolitanes should
have their preeminence: so that the bishop of Rome never had meddling in those
countries. And in the next article following, the bishop of Jerusalem, which
city before had been destroyed, and almost desolate, is restored to his old
prerogative, to be chief in Palestine and in ye country of Iewrye: which
Church of Jerusalem, if places should be regarded, should be the chief. For
there was accomplished ye mystery of our redemption, and Christ himself the
eternal word and Son of God there preached in his own person, and after his
ascencion, all the Apostles and Disciples, etc.

Furthermore in ye council Constantinople it was ordained, that bishops should
not be troubled out from their diocese, nor one should meddle with an others
jurisdiction, but the bishops of Alexandria should have the governance of the
oriental parties, the honor of primacie reserved to the church of Antioche,
as it was ordained in the Nicene council. And even so, that the bishops of
Asia should ouersee Asia, and order all things pertaining to Asia. Likewise,
that ye bishop of Pont should govern the diocese of Pont. And the bishops of
Thracia, their diocese: so yt this council also denies Prelacie or
Supremacy to Rome, and to the bishop thereof, reseruyng every diocese to his
own bishop. Likewise in the Council Mileuitane it was provided, that all
causes concerning one province should be determined in the same.

The Godly ancient counsels attribute no more authority to the bishop of
Rome, than to any other Bishop.
Of these counsels aforesaid it manifestlye appears, that the bishop of Rome
has no such pre-eminence, authority, supremacy and jurisdiction over al other
bishops and over their provinces and diocese, as he unjustly chalengeth, and
wickedly usurps, but that his power is only in Italy: al other bishops being
in all other points of like authority with him, every one having the same
authority and power in his own diocese that the Bishop of Rome has in
Italye. Saint Ciprian calls the Bishop of Rome in his Epystles, which he
wrote unto him, Brother, to declare that they were of like authority, and
Fellow ministers in the labor of the Gospel.

He maintains also with S. Austen, that there is none, which is Bishop of
other bishops: Tra^^ de simplicitate Prelat. Epi. lib. 4. cap. 76.78*
and that it is a great tyranny to desire to be Lord over other bishops. S.
Gregory writes expressly, that he, which would be bishop of al other bishops,
shall not have the place of Christ in earth, but of Lucifer, and shall be very
Antichrist himself. What will the papists say here to S. Gregorye.
He says moreover, that to be called the universal bishop, or head of all
other bishops is contrary to the ordinance of ye gospel, contrary to the
decrees of the Canons: yea, says he, it is a new name, and a name of
blasphemy, whereby ye honor of all priests is greatly diminished and abased:
Note well.
He adds moreover, that the name of the universal bishop for ye governor of
blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, was offered to the bishop of Rome at the
counsel Chalcedonense and yet notwtsta^ding none of all his predecessors would
ever take unto the^ that name of singularity, neither would they consent to use
it, lest while such private prerogative should be given to one man, all other
priests should be defrauded of their due honor. etc. Greg. li. 4. epi. 76.78.

And the aforesaid S. Gregorye willing to show how greatly he abhorred the name
of the universal Bishop or Supreme head of the whole Church of Christ
dispersed throughout ye world, in all his letters and Epistles called himself
the servant of Gods servants: which style and manner of writing, his
successors do also at this present use, but most falsely and unjustly being in
deed in pride Lucifer, in ambition Alexander, in tyranny Nero, and in all kind
of wickedness Antiochus.

The primacye of the Bishop of Rome, is but a new inue^tion.
Of these things aforesaid, it is plain and evident yt this supremacye and
universal power, which the Bishop of Rome chalengeth over all other Bishops,
is both forged and fained, and has no ground in the word of God, nor in the
ancient councels, but with much labor and corruption was at the last obtained
of that tyrant Phocas ye Emperor through the suttletie of Pope Boniface the
third, as we have to fore heard, not only to the great dishonor of Christ the
alone head of his church, but also to the unworthy abasemente of the
Ecclesiastical ministerye, as I may speak nothing of the loss of many
thousand souls, which being persuaded that the Popes authority is no less,
than he and his trumpetters blow and boste, have put the affiaunce of their
salvation in his pardons and ceremonies.

But let us behold more of their decrees, whereby they have stablyshed their
tirannical power.

Pope Innocent the first made a law, The sea of Rome judge of all but may be
judged of none.
that the Sea of Rome should be of greater authority, than ye Sea of any other
bishop throughout the world, and that it should be lawful for the sea of Rome
to judge of al other Seas, but that one and alone Sea of Rome to be subject to
the judgment of none other. In the year of our Lord. 408. Cause. 9. Quaest. 3.
Nemo iudicabit. Pantaleon.

Pope Julius the first in like manner made a decree, Appellations to Rome.
yt if any man did suspecte his judge, he should appeal unto ye sea of Rome,
as a place to judge al me^, but to be judged of none. In ye year, etc. 338.
Chron. Joan. Tit. 2.9.6. cap. placuit.

Pope Stephan the first decreed, The popes statutes ar of necessity to be
observed.
that whatsoever statutes ye church of Rome makes, they ought of al men
necessarily to be observed. In the year, etc. 361. Gratianus. Did. 19.
Enimuero.

The Popes laws equal with the word of God.
Pope Nicolas the first decreed, that the Popes laws and letters should be of
equal authority with the holy Scriptures. In the year of our Lord. 871.
Anselmus Rid* That same decree is also attributed, but falsely, to Pope
Anacletus, which lived, etc. 101. Chron. germ.

No man may dissent from the church of Rome.
Pope Calicte the second made a decree, that it is not lawful for any man to
dissent from the church of Rome. For, says he, as the Son came to do ye will
of the father: so must Christen men do the will of their mother, A substantial
reason and a wise.
which is the church of Rome. In the year, etc. 1120. Did. 12. Non decet.

General councels obedient to the Pope.
Pope Marcellus ordained that from that time forward a general council should
be of no authority, except the bishop of Rome do affirm and allow the same.
In the year of our Lord. 304. Lib* Council. Polyd. Vergil. Did. 17 Synodu^.
This decree also is ascribed to pope Julius the first. Joan* Laziardus.

No man may love whom the Pope hates.
Pope Clement ordained, that no man should be friendly unto such as the pope
favors not, but that he should rather eschew them as enemies, and turn away
from them as heathen persons. For seeing (says he) that the dead, (that is to
say, ye pope) abhors the^, Note this reason.
much more ye fete that is, all Princes, Kings, Rulers, and all other kind of
people ought so to do, and utterly deteste them. Joan. Laziardus. All temporal
rulers, subject to the Pope.


Pope Clement the first made a constitution, that all Emperors, kings and
princes should be subject to the church of Rome both in spiritual and
temporal matters, and acknowledge the pope to be their head. Chron. Joan.
Laziardus. Celestinus. Appellatio^ to Rome.


Pope Sixtus made a decree, that if any man were evil entreated of his
Metropolitan, it should be lawful for him to appeal unto the Sea of Rome,
mother and head of the universal church of Christ throughout al ye world. 2.
Q 6. Cap. Si quis putauerit.

Pope Fabian the first ordained, that every man might lawfully appeal unto the
sea of Rome, although sentence were pronounced against him. In ye year* etc.
242.2. Qu 6. ca. Licet. Iac. Phili. Bergo^.

Pope Leo the third made a decree, that the decrees of the bishop of Rome
should be more regarded and set by, All men's judgments must give place to the
decrees of the Pope.
than all the judgments, writings and bo^^es of the best learned. In the year,
etc. 817. Jacob. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Eugenius the fourth gathered a council at Florence, in the which were
present many great learned men both Greeks and Latins. Note well*
In this council it was required of the Greeks and of the Indians, that they
should celebrate the Lords Supper with vnleuended bread according to the decree
of Pope Alexander the first: and yt they should grant, yt there is a
purgatory to purge souls after this life: again, that they should confess
the bishop of Rome to be the true vicare of Christ, and the very successor of
Peter, and the supreme head of Christ's church thorowout ye world. But they
would not obey the Popes request, Note this answer.
but boldly answered, that they would continue in the faith and doctrine,
which their Churches from the beginning had received of the Apostles. In the
year, etc. 1433. Joan. Philip. Bergom. Chron.

Pope Boniface the eight upon a certain great and solemn feast, The Lucifer
like pride of Pope Boniface.
apparelled in his Pontificalibus was carried about the city of Rome on men's
shoulders, and gave the people large blessings with wagging his fyngers over
them on every side. The next day after he put on an imperial robe, decking
himself like an Emperor, and commanded a naked sweard to be borne before him
and he himself sitting upon his moyle gloriously, cried out with a loud voice
saying. Scripture well applied
Ecce duo gladij hic. Behold, here are two sweardes: calling himself Lord of
the whole world concerning both temporal and spiritual matters. This is that
monsture, of whom it is written: Intrauit vt Vulpes, vixit vt Leo, moritur vt
Canis. That is to say, he entered in as a fore, he lived as a lyo^, he dyed as
a dog. In the year of our Lord. 1290. Albertus. Popes fete k^ssed and
honored.
Crantzius, Fascic. Temp. Pantal.

Pope Leo the fourth so greatly esteemed both himself and his authority, that
he offered his feet unto princes to be kyssed and honored. In the year etc.
858. Volat. Plat. Pantal.

Pope Innocent the third first of all O Lucifer.
crowned Otho the Emperor, The Pope may set up and p^ucke down princes at his
pleasure.
and afterward deprived him again, saying: It lies in my power both to set up
and to pluck down emperors, kings and princes at my pleasure. For all power
is given unto me both in heaven and in earth. In the year of our Lord, 1195.
Sebast. Frank. Chron. Temton. Fasc. Temp^. Paulus. Phrig, etc.

A charitable act of so holy a father.
Pope Alexander the third did not only with martial armours resist the Godly
and noble Emperor Frederike, but at the last through the might of other
princes, subduing him, compelled y^ aforesaid Emperor, before he wuld give him
absolution, and be at one with him, to lie flat down upon the ground before
him in the sight of the people: and the pope setting his foot in the emperors
neck, cried out with a loud voice and said: Scriptu^ est: Super aspidem et
basiliscum ambulabis and conculcabis leonem and draconem. That is to say. It
is written. Upon the Adder and the Cockatrice shall thou walk and thou shall
tread down the lion and the dragon. In the year, etc. 1161. Nauclerus*
Sabel. Iaco. Phil. Joan. Char.

This pope made and compelled Jews King of France, Kings lackies and slaves
to the Pope.
and Henrye King of England to be his lackies and to run on foot by him, ye
one holding his horses bridle on the right side the other on the left side,
leading him with great pomp through the city Totiacum unto Ligris. Chroni.
Sigebertus.

Pope Hadriane the fourth was not a little angrye because the Emperor held
with his hand the left stirrope, and not the right, when he came down of his
horse, about the year, etc. 1158. Albertus. Crantz. Otho. Frisius. Pantaleon.

Pope Calixtus the second, An holy father and charitable acts
when he returned unto Rome caused pope Benet, whom the Emperor had before set
up, to be apprehended, and to be set upon an horse, and so ride before him
vilanously all the way, his face being turned unto the horses arse, and holding
the horse tail being in his hand in stead of a bridle. Afterward he threw
him into prison, where he most miserably dyed. About the year. etc. 1120.
Chron. Fasciculus temporum, etc.

Pope Celestine the third crowned the emperor Henry the fyfte, A point of
knauerye.
holding the crown between his fete. And when he had put the crown upon the
emperors head, he smote it of with his foot again: saying yt he had power to
make Emperors, and to put them down again. In the year. etc. 1195. Crantz.

No oath may be required of the Pope.
Pope Cornelius ordained, yt no oath should be required of the pope except it
were for the mayntaynaunce of holy church. In the year, etc. 255. Ranulphus.
Cestrensis. Chron.

The Pope a sower of sedition.
Pope Gregorye the seventh, for dyspleasure that he bare unto Henrye the
Emperor, wrote unto the princes and people, that lived under ye Emperors
dominion, that they should by no means obey the Emperor, but rather resist
him and his authority, and take him no more for Emperor but rather for an
usurper of the empire. The Luciferlik pride of the pope.
The emperor perceauing this malicious purpose of ye pope, wrote again unto
him on this manner: When Christ committed the sheep unto Peter, he excepted
Kings. The pope answered the Emperor in his letters on this wise: When Christ
gave ye keys unto Peter he excepted no man: by this means chale^ging power
and authority over al Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Rulers, unto whom
notwtstanding by ye word of God both pope and Bishop with all the spiritualty
(as they term them) ought to show obedience even from the very heart, Romans
xiii.
not only for conscience sake. In the year, etc. 1073. Christianus Massaeus.
Sabast. Frank. Chron.

Pope Boniface the eight wrote unto Philip King of France, Pope Lord of ye
world.
that he was Lord of all things as well temporal as spiritual thorowout ye
whole world and that he therefore ought to have received the kingdom of France
at his hand, which thing forasmuch as the king had not done, ye Pope wrote
unto him, yt he had iustlye deserved to be deprived of his kingdom: so yt
afterward this arrogant Lucifer and mo^s^ure of pride excommunicated King
Philip, and gave away his kingdom to Albert the Emperor. About the year, etc.
757. Pol. Virg. Pant.

Pope Stephan ye second was ye first Pope that was carried about upon men's
shoulders: Pope carried on men's shoulders.
which thing his successors have euersince dilige^tli practiced* put in use. In
ye year, etc. 757. Pol. Vir. Pan^.

Pope Cletus first of all used in his letters these words: Salutem and
Apostolicam benedictione^. In the year, etc. 81. Chron. Ang.

Pope Gregory the first used first of all in his letters and bulls this
title* Seruus seruorum dei, that is to say, servant of the servants of God,
which title his successors yet keep: but how truly who sees not? seeing they
labor to the vttermoste of their power to have the whole world under their
girdle, yea and to compel princes kings and emperors, not only to be their
lackies, but also to kiss even their very feet. He used this title in all
his letters to repress the arroga^cye and pride of John Patriarche of
Constantinople,
which contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel and contrary to the decrees of
the old Canons, presumed to usurp a new name to himself, and sought to be
called the universal bishop, or head over all other bishops. To show that such
a proud and ambitious name ought utterly to be detested of al spiritual
ministers, of whatsoever calling or dignity they be, the aforesaid Gregory in
all his letters ever after named himself, the servant of the servants of God.
In the year, etc. 590. Ranulphus Cestrens. Chron.

This aforesaid Gregory sent Austen ye Monk with certain other into England to
convert and turn the english nation unto the Romish Religion. Austen the Monk,
corruptoure of the Christian faith in England.
Which Austen, when through his hipocrisy and cou^terfait holiness he had won
many unto his purpose, and had obtained of king Adelbright to be Archbishop of
Canterbury and primate of al England, went into Wales, where he found many
godly and learned bishops and preachers of Gods word, which sincerely and
purelye taught the doctrine of the holy Scripture, and rightlye administered the
blessed sacraments according to Christ's institution: Note this This decre was
not evil.
whom this aforesaid Austen the Monk labored also to the uttermost of his power
to allure from the sincerity and simplicity of christ's religion, unto the
Romish and popish superstition, bosting himself to be a Legate of the most holy
father the Pope, sent from Rome: again, made and ordained the chief bishop and
primate of al england, and therefore he wylled them to obey him and his
doctrine, and to receive ye most holy father of Rome, and his catholic
Religion. But the Godly and learned Fathers boldly answered, that they were
already true Christians, and according to christ's doctrine they governed their
Churches: therefore they would neither obey him, nor submit themselves to the
authority of yt strange Romish Bishop, nor yet receive his supersticious
ceremonies, but continue, as heretofore they had done, in the simplicity of
Christ's religion. By this means this Monk Austen was compelled to depart,
his expectation not satisfied. Notwithstanding this monstrous Monk afterward
found the means (such is the charity of the bloody papists) greatly to annoy
these Godly and learned fathers, because they would not obey his wicked and
deuilishe request. For he complained to King Adelbright, Austen a bloody Monk.
that the Britains called otherwise Welshmen, would neither obey him nor any
man, but only the Archbishop of Carlion. Which thing when the King heard, he
was greatly moved, and threatened to destroy them al, writing to Elfride king of
Northumberland that he should come to him with all the power that he might make,
and that he would meet him at Leiciter and from thence they would go into
Wales and there destroy the Archbishop of Carlion and all those that had
refused to obey Austen and his doctrine.

When the Godly fathers heard of this and that the two kings with their armies
approached, to the end for to destroy them, they sent unto the kings certain
holy and virtuous me^, which went barefoote and woolwarde with all humility
and meekenes, desiring the^^t^ cease from so ungodly an enterprise. But the
kings were so stern and so wicked, yt they would not once speak to those
holy me^, but slew them straightwaies every one. They spared them no more (alas
for sorrow) than the wolf does ye sheep, but cruelly and unjustly murdered
those saints of God, so that they were all martired yt came unto them, being
in number five hundred and forty. And from thence those kings went unto
Ga^gor,
for to slay all ye Britanes that they might find. But when the Britanes heard
of it, they assembled and prepared themselves with all their power to fight
with those kings for the defense of their countreye, and for the mayntaynaunce
of Christen religion, so that in that battle king Adelbright was slain by ye
just judgment of god, and king Elfride was sore wounded and compelled most
cowardly to fly, their whole army also being utterly discomfited and well nigh
al slain. They that remained took them to their fete and fled, so that by this
means God gave his servant a glorious victory over the popyshe enemies. Ex
Chron. Angl. Such end, O Lord, give thou to all thine enemies, that of malice
and without repentance persecute thy servants for the testimony of thy
truth, that the kingdom of Antichrist and ye pope, utterly subverted, thou
may be known to be the alone Lord and thy word to be the alone verity.

Of the Popes election.
This decre agrees not with the order of the ancient Church of Christ.
POpe Nicolas the first made a decree, that if any man would thrust himself into
the sea of S. Peter, not being chosen thereunto by such as ar appointed for the
election of the pope, ye same should be judged not Apostolicus but Apostaticus.
49. Did. Cap. Si quis Apostolice sedi. Anno. 871.

Pope Hadriane the first made a law, Here ^a^^men are admitted to the election
of the pope. No Pope (...) ^ full without the admission of the Emperor. The
Emperor barred from the election or admissio^ of the Pope. The clergy and
people of Rome chosers of the Pope.
that no lay persons should presume to entermedle with the election of ye pope
63. Did. Cap* Nullus laicorum. An. 796.

Pope Boniface the second, made a decree that in the election of the pope, the
Clergy should be divided from the common people. In the year, etc. 529.
Albertus. Krempt.

Pope Leo the eight ordained, that none should be admitted pope without the
consent of the Emperor. In ye year, etc. 962.63. Did* Cap. In Synodo. Chron.

Pope Adriane the third, was of such and so lustye courage, that contrary to
the order tofore used, he made a decree, that from henceforth the Emperors
should never meddle with the election of ye pope as tofore they had done, nor
yt their authority or consent should be thought necessary in this behalf,
but yt the clergy and ye people of Rome alone might frankly and freely choose
the most holy Father. In the year of our Lord. 885. Great. d^st. 62.

Pope Martine the third made ye like decree, that the Clergy and the people of
Rome only should choose the bishop of Rome, not regarding the consent of the
Emperor. In the year, etc. 944. Christ. Massae.

Cardinals appointed for the election of the Pope.
Pope Gregory the tenth ordained, yt when the Pope is dead, the Cardinals with
all expedition should assemble themselves together for the election of a new
Pope, and that they should be shut up together in a closet, nether eating, nor
drinking, nor yet departing from thence, till they had chosen the most holy
Father, Christ's vicar and Peter's successor. In the year, etc. 1272. Christ.
Mass.

A substa^tial reason: as though Christ lived not which is yt alone and true
head of the church.
Pope Boniface the second ordained, that the Pope being dead, an other Pope
should be chosen within three days, least the faith of holy Church for lack
of an head, should decay and wax faint. In the year, etc. 529. Did. 69. cap.
Nullus. Joan. Laziard.

The Pope m^ste be an
When Pope Alexander the second was chosen Bishop of Rome, certain other
willing to place a stranger in ye See: all the Cardinals cried out with a
loud voice and said: No man ought to be chosen pope, Italian borne
except he be borne in the paradise of Italye. In the year, etc. 1063.
Ranulphus. Cest.

Pope Sergius the second being before called Os porci, Popes change their nam^
and the reasons why.
that is to say, Swines snoute, or Hogs mouth, after that he was chose^
Bishop of Rome, changed his name, and called himself Sergius. Since that time
al Popes have used to change their names, yea and that, as they report, for
three causes. One is, because that Christ, when he did chose his Apostles,
changed their names. The second is, yt as they change their names, so should
they change their ma^ners. The third is, that he which is chosen to an
excellent estate, should not be obscured and disgraced with a vile and foul
name. In the year, etc. 848. Chron. Polichron. etc.

Of the alteration of ye popes names Polidorus Vergilius writes on this
manner: The bishop of Rome has one special prerogative and privilege, which
is, that when he is once created bishop, he may alter and change his name at
his pleasure, if the name, which he has already, do displease him. As for an
example: If perchance he has been before a Malefactor, Note.
he may call his name Bonifacius, that is to say, a well doer. If he have been a
coward or fearful person, he may call himself Leo, yt is, a Lion. In stead of
this name, Rusticall: he may take unto him the name Vrbanus, yt is to say,
Civil, gentle or well mannered. For leude or wicked, he may call himself
innocent. If he have been a diffamed person, he may take unto him this name
Benedictus, that is to say, A man of good name and fame, that the bishop at
the least in name may be an ornament and beauty to the dignity of papacy.
Sergius the second is reported to have been the author of this matter, to whom
it was granted, forasmuch as he was called, Os porci, that is to say Swines
snoute, or Hogs mouth, to take unto him another name, for to avoid and
eschew his other vile and filthy name, etc. Lib. 4. Cap. 10. de inuentor.
rerum.

No Pope may chose his successor.
Pope Hilarious the first made a decre that no pope should chose or appoint his
successor, but leave it to the free election of the clergy of Rome. In the
year, etc. 465. Quaest. 8. Cap. 1. Plerique. Joan. Laziardus.

Pope John the seventh being an woman feigned her self to be a man, A woman
Pope.
and for the excellency of her learning was chosen pope. This woman pope was
afterward begotten with child of her servant and in the time of solemn
procession accompanied with a great number of cardinals, patriarchs,
archbishops, bishops, priests, deaco^s, monks, friars, chanons, Nonnes, etc,
she fell on travail and was delivered of child, and so suddenly (as they say)
died. Afterward there was a decree made among ye cardinals that for the
avoiding of such and of so great inconvenience from thenceforth whosoever
should be chosen to be Christ's vicar and Peter's successor, An holy and a
clenly decree.
he should first of al be set brechlesse and bare arsed in a certain botomlesse
chair and ye one of ye basest cardinals with al humility and reverence worthy
such and so noble a prelate, should grope with his hand, whether ye most holy
father had all his that appertain unto the court of Uenus, or not. If he had
them, that the^ the Cardinal should cry with a merry and a loud voice,
Testiculos habet. And the whole college of the Cardinals reioysyng at the
tidings, should answer Deo gratias. And so immediately ye Cardinals should
set the new chosen and approved pope in S. Peter's chair, as a man found
worthy such a most excellent dignity. In the year, etc. 860. Nauclerus. Sabel.
Platina. Pantal. Chron. Sebast Franc. Paul. Verg.

The popes consecration
Pope John the fyft ordained, that after the Bishop of Rome is elected and
chosen, he should be consecrated of the Bishop Hostuense, Portuense and
Velitern. In the year, etc. 679. Chron. Volateran. Pantaleon. Some ascribe
this ordinance to Pope Mark.

Of Cardinals.
Why Cardinals were ordained.
POpe Marcellus ordained in the city of Rome.xv. Cardinals for to baptize such
as were converted from Paganism unto Christianisme, and to burye the martirs,
which suffered death for Gods truth. In the year, etc. Christ. Massae.
Polichron.

Pope Siluester the first appointed ye College of Cardinals to beautify and to
set forth the honor and dignity of the church: Cardinals appointed to
beautify the church.
unto the which Cardinals (as the papists feign) the Emperor Constantine
gave that same authority and preeminence,
that the honorable order of the sage and prudente Senators of Rome tofore
had. The number of the Cardinals.
And Martine in his Chronicle says, that there are fiftye Cardinals of that
holy College, that is to say, seven Bishop Cardinals.xxviii. Priests Cardinals,
and.xv. Deacon Cardinals: albeit the most holy father may at all times increase
the number of those his spiritual children as he thinks most meet for the
advancement of the Apostilique see. In the year, etc. 315. Mart. in Chroni.
Ioannes Laziardus.

The aforesaid pope also made a decree, Of the co^de^nation of Cardinals.
that a Bishop Cardinal should not be condemned under.lxxii. witnesses: a
priest Cardinal, not under.lxiii. witnesses: A Deacon Carnal, not under
xxvii. witnesses. C. Praesul. 2. Qu. 4. Laziardus. Celest.

The Cardinals red hat: and what it signifies
Pope Innocent the third in a certain council holden at Lions made a decree,
that Cardinals should for ever after wear red hats upon their heads, to put
the^ in remembrance, that they ought to be redye at al times to shed their
blood for ye liberty of holy church for the Catholyke faith, and for the
safegarde of the people. In the year, etc. 1193 Joan. Laziard. Ioannes. Stella.
Christianus. Massaeus. etc.

Of Bishops.
Bishops ought to be chose^ without the consent of the Clergy and of the
common people. Bishops seats highest.
POpe Clement the first ordained, that no Bishop ought to be appointed by the
clergy, but with the consent of the common people. He commanded also, that
the bishops seat should be set in an higher and more honorable place than
the seats and places of other. In the year, etc. 92. Joan. Laziard. Chron.

Pope Boniface the third commanded that the clergy and the people of the
diocese should chose their own Bishop. A good law.
In the year of our Lord. 605 Platina. Sabell.

Pope Gregory the seventh ordained, that no priest should take a bishoprike of
any lay man. If he did that he should be excommunicate and lose his bishoprike.
In the year of our Lord. 1073. Lib. Council.

Pope Boniface the fourth made a decree, Lay men may give no byshoprykes.
that so long as the bishop lived no man should entreat of the new election of
his successor, but differ the matter unto the third day after his death. In
the year of our Lord. 106. Ranulph. Cestrensis.

Pope Sixtus the first made a decree, Bishops admitted to their bishoprykes.
of ye pope.
that if any Byshopryke were void, no man should presume to be bishop thereof,
except he were first admitted unto it by the popes letters. In the year, etc.
129. Chron. Angl. Lib. Council.

Pope Anacletus made a decree, that a bishop should be consecrated of no less
than of three bishops, The consecration of Bishops.
yea and those of the same province. For says he an example of ordring bishops
was showed unto the Christianes in James the lesser bishop of Jerusalem, which
was ordained and appointed Bishop of these three, Peter, James and John. But if
the Metropolitan shall be consecrated, the^ must all the bishops of the
province be present at his consecration. The consecration of the Metropolitan.
In the year of our Lord, 101. Did. 66 Cap. Archiepiscopus. Joan. Laziard.
Jacob. Phil. Lib. Council.

On what dai bishops shall be consecrate.
The aforesaid pope also ordained, that bishops should not be consecrated, but on
the sunday. 75. Did. Cap. Ordinationes episcoporum.

Pope Anicetus ordained yt no Archbyshops should be called primates, but such
as had special privilege granted them of the most holy father the pope:
Primates. patriarchs
and that al such so priuileged, might also be lawfully called patriarchs.
In the year, etc. 169. Did. 98. ca. Nulli. Isuar.

The Bishops servants.
Pope Lucius made an order, that a Bishop should have at al times and in all
places attending upon him.ii. priests and.iii. deacons to testifye both of his
life and of his doctrine. In the year, etc. 258. De consec. Did. 1. Cap.
Iubemus. Volat. Plat. Massaeus. D. Barns.

Pope Euaristus ordained, that seven Deacons should attend upon the Bishop and
keep him, Deacons attendyng on ye bishop preaching,
while he preached, least the enemies of Gods truth wuld accuse him wrongfully,
and say, that he erred: again, that he should be heard with the more
reverence and had in the greater honor. In the year, etc. 110. Joan. Stella.
Ranulphus. Cestrensis.

Pope Calixte the second made a decree, that the church may neither chose an
other Bishop, A scripture aptlye applied.
nor put him away, nor yet be obedient to the ordinance of any other bishop,
so long as her proper bishop is a live, seeing that the Apostle says: The wife
is bound to the law of her husband, so long as her husband lives. But when he
is once dead she is losoned from the law of her husband, so that she may marry
with who^ she will, so it be in the Lord, that is to say, says he, the
church may chose an other Bishop, so that it be done Regulariter, that is,
after ye order and appointment of our mother holy Church. In ye year, etc.
1120. Quaest. 7.5. Sicut alterius.

This decree also is ascribed to Pope Euaristus. Bishops residence.
Lib. Council.

Pope Euaristus made a law, yt without exceeding great necessitye a Bishop might
no more forsake his church, tha^ the husband his wife. Math. v.
For it is written, says he: he that sees a woman and lusts after in his
heart he has commitadultery. In the year of our Lord. 110. Lib. Council.

A decree worthy to be observed What servant bishops and priests ought to
have.
Pope Innocent, the sixth made a decree that bishops and all other ecclesiastical
persons should repair home unto their own houses and cures, maintain
hospitality for the relief of the poor and suffer no idle nor loytering
lubbers to remain in their houses, but only norishe such as are virtuously
occupied, and apply themselves diligently to the study of the holy Scripture
and to the readyng of the ancient writers, that they might afterward serve
in the church of Christ. In the year. etc. 1343 Chron. Ioannes Stella.
Physician heal thy self.


Pope Gregory the eleventh said to a certain bishop being absent from his
bishopric: Thou bishop why go thou not home to thy bishopric? The
bishop answered again with a stout courage: And thou Pope, which call thy
self father of fathers, and the chief of all bishops which ought also to
give exaumple of doing well to other Bishops, prelates and priests: why art
thou so far from Rome and art not resident upon thy bishopric at Rome? In
the year, etc. 1362. Albertus. Crant. Joan. Stella. Chron.

Pope Leo the second ordained, Archbishops paul free.
that the Archbishops should pay nothing for their paul to the bishop of Rome,
but have it freely given the. In the year, etc 607. Albertus Crant. Chron.
G^uing of orders.


Pope Anacletus made a decree, that no bishop should presume to admit any
persons unto holy orders, that dwell in an other bishops diocese. In the
year, etc. 101. Quest. 7. Cap. 1. Epis. in diocesi aliena. Al bishops bound to
obey the Metropolitan^


Pope Anicetus made a law that when an Archbishop, which is the Metropolitan,
should be consecrated: all the bishops of that province ought to be present,
even as they all are bound to obey him. In the year of our lord. 159.
Distinc. 66. Cap. ab omnibus phil. Berg.

Pope Zepherinus decreed, No bishop condemned without the donsent of the pope.
that a bishop called into judgment either of the patriarch, or of the
Primate, or of the Metropolitan, should not be condemned without the
authority license and consent of the Apostolic sea. In the year, etc. 208.
Iac. Phil. Bergom.

Lay men may not accuse Bishops.
Pope Eusebius ordained, that no profane persons whom we call lay men, should
presume to accuse or to call into judgment their Bishop. In the year, etc, 309.
Lib. Council. Jacob. Philip. Bergom. D. Barns.

Pope Innocent ye first made a decree, yt those bishops which sell prebendes,
benefices, deanryes, Abbotships, priorships, or any other ecclesiastical
dignityes, either Sacraments or sacramentals, as holy oil, chrisme, halowing
of altares, Bishops simoniakes
etc, should be adjudged Simoniakes, and be punished as persons guilty of
Simonye. In the year, etc. 408. Qu 1. Cap. 3. Si quis praebendas. Philip.
Bergom ^oan. Stella.

No secular person Bishop.
Pope Hormisda decreed, that no secular person should be chosen to be bishop but
one of the number of priests. In the year of our Lord. 514. Did. 61. Cap.
18. In sacerdotibus.

Suffraga^e
Pope Iginius made a decree, that no Archbishop should condemn his suffragane
but in the syghte and hearing of other suffraganes, A good law.
and bishops of the same province. In the year, etc. 14. Ranulphus.
Cestrensis. Polichron.

Pope Theodorus ordained, that no bishop should meddle in the diocese of any
other Bishops, but diligently look to his own cure. In the year. etc. 673.
Lib. Council. Christian. Massaeus.

Pope Siluester instituted, Bishops only must halow oil and cream and
confyrme children. Halowing of churches
yt bishops only should halowe oil and cream, and confyrme children. In the
year. etc. 315. Chron. Platina.

Pope Felix the third appointed, that bishops only should halow Churches. In
the year. etc. 486. Volat. Poli. Pantal.

Pope Liberius ordained, that no bishop or beneficed man should forsake his
flock for any persecution or trouble, though death should ensue, according to
this saying of Christ: Joan. x.
A good shepeheard gives his life for his sheep. In the year, etc. 354.
Anselmus Ryd.

Pope Antherus made a decree, A Godly decree. The translation of Bishops.
that a bishop might be removed from one bishoprike to another, if the
necessitye or profit of the congregation so require: but yet not without the
authority and license of the Bishop of Rome. In the year of our Lord. 239.
Platina. Volat. Lib. council.

The common people may not accuse their bishop. Math. x.
Pope Pius the first decreed, that the common people should not accuse their
bishop, nor the sheep their shepeheard. For says he, neither is the disciple
above his master, nor the servant above his lord. In the year of our lord.
147. lib. Con.

A decree worthy to be practiced
Pope Nicolas the first ordained, that bishops should not entangle themselves
with worldly businesses, nor apply their minds to feats of war but give
their whole mind to the study of holy Scriptures, to preaching and to prayer In
the year of our Lord. 871. Quest. 23* cap Reprehensibile.

Pope John the xxiii. decreed, that bishops should not give their minds to
hunting. Bishops no hu^ters.
In the year, etc. 1409. Did. 34. Cau. Quorundam.

Pope Eugenius the first ordained that bishops should have persons to punish
such priests as offend. Bishops prysons.
In the year of our Lord. 650. Volat. Chron. Great. Doc. Barnes.

Schools maintained in every bishops diocese.
Pope Eugenius also, commanded that bishops in their Diocese, should
diligently provide that there might be learned scholemaisters to trade up the
Christen youth in good letters and liberal arts. Ex sinodo Eugenii. Lib.
Council.

Pope Anacletus made a law, that Bishops should persevere and continue still
steadfast and diligente in setting forth the truth of Gods word, A law worthy
to be followed.
though never so great trouble follow of it. For says he, blessed are they,
that suffer persecution for righteousness. In the year of our Lord. 101.
Did. 43. Scimus.

Ioannes Hus, I. Husse. No spiritual person may have any temporal
jurisdiction.
whom the bloody papists, notwithstanding the Emperors safe conduct, most
cruelly burnt unto ashes at the council of Consta^ce (where, as some write,
were gathered together iii.M.ix.C. and xl. prelates and their Uicares) affirmed
openly and constantlye, that it is not lawful for ecclesiastical persons to
have any temporal jurisdiction. In the year of our Lord. 1415. Aeneas
Siluius. Plat. Christ. Massaeus. Bishops and priests apparel.


Pope Paschalis being Bishop of Rome, there was a Council holden at
Aquisgranum, in the which it was ordained, that no Ecclesiastical persons
should wear any sumptuous garments, nor rings or ouches upon their fingers, but
bishops only, yea and that at such times only, as they say mass, and be in
their Pontificalibus. In the year, etc. 827 Christ. Massae. Lib. Council.

A good decree.
The Council Aureliane decreed that every bishop in his diocese should to the
uttermost of his power make provision for such poor of ye same, as have not
whereof to find themselves: Again, as are sick and so weak, Provision for ye
poor
that they are not able to labor for their living. Did 82. Cau. Episcopus.

A godly act
In the Council Toletane the third, it was enacted, that at all bishops and
priests tables, there should be no idle talk, nor telling of wanton tales,
but reading, hearing and talking of the holy Scriptures. Lib. Council.

The form of the Oath, which the Popyshe Bishops use, at the time of their
consecration: as it is specifyed, in the Popes decretalles: De iuramento. C.
Ego.
How can such popish bishops be faythfull^ to their Prince, bethus sworn to
the Idol of Rome.
I. N. Bishop from this hour foreward shall be faithful to s. Peter, and to
the holy Apostolic Church of Rome and to my Lord. N. the pope, and to his
successors that enter in according to the rule of the Canons. I shall not be
neither in council nor in deed, that he should lose his life, or membre, or
otherwise be evil entreated. The council, which either by himself, or by
letters, or by any messanger he shall open unto me,
I shall declare it to no man unto his hindraunce. The papacy of the Church
of Rome, and the rules of the holy Fathers, I shall be an helper to defend and
to mayntaine (my order being safe) against al me^. Council. Popes Legate
Being called unto any Sinode or counsel, I shall come, except I have a lawful
let. The legate of the Apostolic sea, whom I shall know to be certain, I shall
honorably entertayne both at his coming and at his departure or going away.
The churches of the Apostles ( at Rome) I shall visit every year, either by my
self, or by some sure messanger, except I obtain license ( of the holy Father)
to the contrary. So God help me, and these holy Gospels of God.

After this, there was invented and received a newer form and manner of an
oath, which the Bishops at their consecration swear to the pope, both larger
and more to the purpose to stablyshe and defend the tirannye of the Romish
Bishop. In this newer and later oath are these words contained.

The papacy of Rome and the Regal or prince like honor and dominions of S.
Peter, Is any good hope to be conceived of these forsworn Bishops.
I shall be an helper to retain and to defend against all men. The laws, the
honors, the privileges and the authority of the Church of Rome, and of our
Lord the Pope and of his successoures, I shall to the vttermoste of my power
labor to conserve, to defend, to increase, and to advance. Neither shall I
be, in council, in deed, or in affairs, wherein any sinister or
prejudicial things of persons, law, honor, state and power shall be
imagined and devised against that our Lord Pope, or against that Church of
Rome, and if so be I know such things to be handled, devised, or procured
of any person or persons, I shall hinder and let it to the vttermoste of my
power, and so soon as is possible with all conueniente speed I shall sygnifye
it, and make it known to the same our Lord the Pope, or to some other, by
whom it may come to his knowledge. The rules of the holy Fathers, the
decrees, the ordinances, the sentences or judgments, the dispositions. the
preseruations, the provisions, and the Apostolic commandments. I shall
observe with all my power, and cause them also to be observed of other
heretics, Schismatikes and all such as rebel and strive against our Lord
the Pope or his successoures, I shall to the vttermoste of my power persecute
impugn and condemn, etc.

Of Priests.
POpe Anacletus ordained, Priests preachers. Priests honored. Priests
ordered.
that there should be priests set in every city, town and village, to
teach the people Gods word, and to minister the Sacraments. He ordained also,
that priests should be honored above all men, and that they should not be
vexed or toubled but borne withal, and reverenced of al me^: Again, that when
any priests were made, they should be solemnly and openly made. In ye year,
etc. 101. Lib. Council. Plat. Fascic. Temp. Jacob. Phil. D. Barns.

Slaunderers of Priests
The aforesaid Pope also made a decree, that al such as backebite or slander
any priest, should be excommunicated. For says he, he that slaundreth a
priest, slaundreth Christ. For priests without doubt are Christ's. Nolite
Ta^gere Christos meos. The degrees unto priesthode.
Lib. Council. Chroni.

Pope Gaius made a decree, yt none should be made a priest, except he were
first a dorekeper: secondlye a Reader, thirdly an Exorciste or co^iurer:
fourthly, an Acholite, a lighter and carier of candels: fifthly, a Subdeacon:
sixthly, a Deacon: and seventhly, a priest: and fynallye a bishop, if he can
come unto ye promotion. In the year, etc. 384. Chron. Plati. Fasc. Temp. D.
Barns.

Some ascribe this decree to Pope Stephen the second. Great. Joan. La.

Priestishe orders.
Pope Siricius ordained, ye priestishe orders should not be given altogether at
one time, but at sundry times. In the year, etc. 389. Sabell. Plat. Joan.
Lazia. 77. Did. Cap. In singulis.

The day for priestish orders
Pope Gelasius the first commanded ye only priestishe orders should be given
only four times in ye year, yea and yt on the Saturday. In the year, etc.
494. Volat. Isidor. D, Barns.

Pope Boniface ye first instituted, The age of priests. Luke. iii.
that no man should be made priest before he be, xxx. years old. For Christ
says he, was thirty years old before he took on him ye office of preaching.
In the year, etc. 425. Sigebert. Sabel. Chron.

Pope Zacharias notwithstanding made a decree, yt if necessitye requires,
priests should not only be made at.xxx. years old but also at.xxv. In the
year, etc. 752. Did. 79. Cap. Si triginta.

Pope Siricius, Who may not be admitted to priesthode.
of who^ we spoke before decreed, yt al those men that have been twice married,
or else have married a widow to wife, should by no means be received unto the
order of priesthode. Isidor. Plat, Albert. Krantz. Pantal.

Pope Gelasius ye first, of who^ also we spoke before, ordained likewise, The
popes dispensatio^ makes all things lawful.
yt none which were twice married, should be admitted unto ecclesiastical orders,
without the bishop of Romes dispensation Chron. Joan. Stella. D. Barns.

Pope Anastasius made a law, This seems to be borrowed out of the old law.
Leuit. ii.i
yt none which was lame or maimed, or wa^ted any of his members, should be
admitted to be a priest. In the year, etc. 404. Great. Sabel Plat, Polydor. etc.

Letters testimonial
The aforesaid pope made a decree, yt no strangers, and specially such as come
from beyond the seas, should be admitted unto ye clergy, except they brought
with them a testimonial sygned with the hands of five bishops. 37. Did. ca.
Extraneo. Joan. Laziard.

Wuld God this law were observed among us in these our days.
Pope Pelagius ordained that no man should be admitted unto the ministry, which
either of ambition, or else for worldely lucre and easy living desires to
come unto it. In the year, etc. 552. Christ. Massaeus.

Pope Hilary the first made a decree, that no man should be admitted to be a
priest, A Godly law.
except he were both well learned and well mannered. In the year of our Lord.
465. Joan. Stella. Did. 55. Cap Penitentis.

No murderer may be a priest.
Pope John the nynthe ordained, yt if any man had committed murder, the same
should never be admitted to receive holy orders. Again, if any priest were
found gyltye of that fault he should be irregulare, and never after be
received into the ministry. In the year, etc. 904. Did. 5. C. Miror. Joan
Stella.

Pope Zepherinus decreed, Both priests and Lay me^ ought to be present at the
election and admissio^ of spiritual ministers. No diffamed person* may be a
priest.

Who may not be admitted unto priesthode.


yt when a bishop should make either deaco^ or priest, both priests and lay me^
should be present. In the year, etc. 208. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Innocent the first ordained, yt no diffamed person should be admitted to
be a priest. In the year, etc, 408. Did. 50. Cap. Canones. Phil, Bergom.

Pope Zozimus ordained, that no gelded person, nor bond man should be made a
priest, except he were first made free of his Lord. In the year, etc, 424.
Fasc. Temp. Chron. But this constitution of ye bishop is evil kept of certain
men, says Ioannes Laziardus.
For now a days, (says he) not only bondme^, but also bastardes and whores
children, ar received into the ministry, and have the government of paryshes
committed unto them, and they also bestow the patrimony of Christ upon whores
at their pleasure. Priests no tauernhunters. Deacons may minister the


The aforesaid pope made also a decree, that priests should be no
tauernhunters, nor yet sell wine themselves. He ordained again yt a deaco^ should
not presume to minister the sacrament of Christ's body and blood to ye people,
if either bishop or priest were present. Communion in ye abse^ce of a priest.
Did. 93. Cap. Praesente praesbitero. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Anicetus forbad first of al, priests to have beardes, Priests beards
forbidden.
or to wear long side hear. In ye year, etc. 159. Sabell. Lib. Council. Petrus
de natal.

Some ascribe this decree to pope Anacletus. Plat. Poli. Massaeus.

Pope Anicetus also commanded, ye priests crowns should be shaven, Priests
^^^wnes commanded.
not four cornered, says he, like unto Simo^ Magus but as round as a boule
like unto Simon Petrus:
to put the priests in remembrance that they should despise this world, and
set al their minds upon the heavenly crown. Petrus de not. Christ. Massae. D.
Barns.

Pope Zacharias invented the priests apparel. Priests apparel.
In ye year, etc, 752. Chron. Achil.

Pope Benet ye third commanded, that priests should walk in an order, and wear
apparel mete for their degree. In the year, etc* 863. Fasc. Temp. Chron.

Pope Gregory the fourth in a certain council ordained, yt all the clergy both
bishops and priests should lay a side all costly apparel and by no means wear
ri^ges, precious stones, gold, silver or any such like su^ptuous ornaments, but
rather homely and sober apparel after ye example of Christ and of his apostels.
In the year. 846. Joan. Tit. in Chro. Galliae. Plat.

Pope Pelagius ye first ordained yt priests under pain of deadly sin should
say Mattens appointed for the day. Mattens of the day.
In the year, etc. 580. Did. 19. Cap. Elutherias fra. Joan. Stell.

Pope Urban the second ordained likewise ye priests should say every day our
ladies Mattens openly in the church: Matte^s of our Lady.
and that upon the satterday the whole service should be of her. In the year,
etc. 1086 Sabell. Joan. Stella. Nauclerus. Guil. Durand. Polichron.

Pope Anastasius the second made a decree, that no priest should omit the
saying of his divine service, Divine service.
except it be mass, although he be never so much out of charity, and never
so greatly stuffed full of rancor and malice against any person* In the year.
etc. 498. Ioannes Laziardus. Celestinus.

Pope Innocent the second decreed, that no man should strike a pr^est. For it
is written, A priest striker is accu^^ed. Psalm 105.
says he: Touch not my anointed. If any manne contrary to his
commandment did presume to smite the anointed priest, he pronounced him
excommunicate ipso facto and accursed, and that by no means he should be
absolved (except he stood in danger of death) but only of ye pope of Rome. In
the year of our Lord. 11^1. Causa. 17. Quest, Si quis. Joan. Stella. Chron.

Pope Euaristus enacted, that priests should not be disquieted, Priests not
disquieted* but hono^red.
nor evil entreated of the laity, but that they should be had in high reverence
and honor. In the year* etc. 110. Isidor. Tem. 3. Conc. Polid. Pantaleon.

Pope Pontianus ordained, that prists should be accused of none, Priests
accusers.
but only of priests and bishops, In the year, etc. 230. Gratian. Isidor.
polidor.

Pope Fabia^ also made a decree, yt neither priests should be admitted to accuse
the laity, Accusatio^s
nor the laity the priests. In the year of our Lord. 242. Cause. 2. Qu. 7.
Sicut.

Pope Calixt the first ordained, that in the accusation of a priest no
suspicious persons, or of evil name and fame, either any such as be
enemies to the priest, should be admitted to give evidence against him. In the
year etc. 217. Quest. 3. Cap. 5. Accusatores Joan. Laziard.

Pope Alexander the first ordained, that the Laitye should have nothing to do
with the clergy: Priests exempted from the jurisdiction of the temporal
powers.
and that the spiritualty should be utterly exe^pted from all the jurisdiction,
authority and power of the secular rulers. In the year of our Lord. 119.
Albertus. Crantz.

Pope Caius made a decree, None with in holy orders may be conuented before a
temporal Judge.
that no lay person should presume to accuse or to call into judgment
before a secular judge, either priest or any other that is within holy
orders. In the year of our Lord. 284. Jacob. Phillip. Bergom.

Pope Siluester the first commanded yt no priest should be compelled to plead
his cause before any secular person, or in any temporal court. In the year.
etc. 315. Quest. 11.1. Cap. Testimonium. and Cap. Si quis.

Pope Julius the.i. made a decre also yt a priest should not have his cause
heard or pleaded before any temporal judge only. In the year etc. 338.
Jacob. Phil. Bergom. Lib. Council.

Pope Boniface the eight in a general council, Priests free from paymentes to
the temporalitie. The liberties of priests.
ordained, that temporal Rulers should not charge the people with any kind of
payments, if they did, that the priests should pay them none, except the Pope
gave them license. In the year. etc. 1190. Polidor lib. 17. Angl. Hist.

Pope Nicolas the first ordained, that no temporal man, were he king or
emperor, should have ought to do with those things that appertain unto
priests. No paymentes for priests.
In the year, etc. 871. Anselmus Ryd.

Pope Gregory the fourth made a decree, that priests should be free from all
kind of worldly bondages, taxes. paymentes, A good and godly acts.
etc. In the year etc. 846. Sabel. Platina.

Pope Urban the second enacted notwithstanding, that the priests shouldr pay
tribute to the higher powers for the defense of their country, In the year.
etc. 1086. Qu, 23. Cap. Tributum.

Prists housen built nigh to the church and why.
Pope Leo the ninth appointed, that ye priests houses should be built nigh unto
the churches, that the pastors might always be at hand, when the parishners
should have need of them, and that the poor people, might know, where to
have succor and relief in the time of their necessity. In the year of our
Lord. 1049. Qu. 12. cap. 1. Necessaria. Nau. Joan. Stella. D. Barns.

Pope Simmachus ordained, What women may dwell in priests houses.
that a priest should keep no woman in his house, except she were his
kinswoman his mother, his sister, or his wife, who^ he ought godly to govern.
In the year etc. 499. Did. 81. cap. Volumus. Volat.

Pope Liberius made a law, A goodlaw John. x.
that no priest should forsake his cure for any persecution or trouble,
though death should ensue, according to this saying of Christ: A good
shepeherd gives his life for his sheep. In the year of our Lord.
Dispensations for no residence.
254. Anselmus Rid.

Pope John the eighte ordained that the priests, which were absente from their
benefices without a dispensation from the Pope, should be compelled to return
unto them, and there to be resident. In the year, etc. 887. Joan. Laziard.

Pope Simplicius ordained, that no clearke or priest should receive the
inuestiture of his benefice or of his office at any Laymens hand. Priests
ought to be preachers and not singers. Priests either Simonsakes or
fornicators ought to be deprived of their promotio^s.
In the year, etc 471. Ranulpus Cestrensis. Joan. Laziardus.

Pope Gregory the first made a decree in a certain council holden at Rome, that
the Ministers of the altar should give their mind to preaching and not to
singyng. For, said he, while me^ seek a sweet voice in holy service, couenable
life is set apart: and the singer with his manners hurts the people, though with
his voice he greatly delights them. In the year. etc. 590. Polichron. Lib. 5.

Pope Victor the second in a certain council holden at Florence, ordained
that all bishops and priests, which he proved giltye either of Simonye, or of
fornication, should be deprived of their Bishoprics, benefices, and all other
ecclesiastical promotions and dignities. In the year of our lord. 1053.

Pope Eleutherius made a decree yt no priest should be degraded or put from the
degree of his priesthode, The degrading of priests.
except he were first lawfully accused and convict. For says he, our Savior
knew well, that Judas was a thief, and should betray him, but forasmuch as he
was not accused, he put him not down, but all that he did in the mean time among
the Apostles for ye estate of his dignity, it was allowed, and stood fyrme and
stable. In the year, Priests talk at the table.
etc. 177. Ranulp. Cest. lib. 4.

In the council Toletane the third, it was decreed, yt at priests tables
there should be no idle talk, nor telling of wa^ton tales, but reading, hearing
and talking of the holy scriptures. Lib. council.

Of the syngle life of Priests.
POpe Calixte the first made a decree that so many as would be made priests,
Priests marriage forbidden.
should abstain from marriage. In the year, etc 217. did. 62. Cap.
presbyteris. Ioannes. Stella. Phillip. Bergom.

Pope Siricius the first forbadde not only the priests, but also the Deacons
to marry. Deacons marriage forbidden. Subdeacons marriage forbidden.
In the year. etc. 337. lib. Council. Polyd.

Pope Pelagius the second did not only prohibit priests and Deacons to marry,
but also the Subdeacons. In ye year etc. 580. Chron. lib. Con. Poly.

Pope Gregory ye i. because he thought it to much violence, The vow of
chastity.
cruelty and tyranny, to divorce such as came unto ye ministry married, from
their wives, ordained that from his time, none should be Subdeacon, unless he
vowed chastity before. In the year of our Lord. 590. Chroni. Council. Poli.

Notwithstanding the laws before made took no effect among the priests, When
the single life of priests took first place.
until the time of Gregorye the Seventh, which was the year of our Lord.
174.

This Gregory the Seventh in a ceretayne council made a decree that from that
time forward, it should no more be lawful for priests to marrye: O
Antichrist.
and again, that such as were married already should be divorced from their
wives. and if they would not forsake their wives, they should be deprived
from their ministry, O Tirau^t
and also from ecclesiastical promotio^s, so that it should not be lawful for a
christen man to take them for spiritual ministers, or to be present at their
ministratio^, by the rea, son of their continuance in mariage^ when
notwithstanding our Sauiour-Christ says: Math. xix.
That God has coupled and joined together: let no man separate and put a
sunder. i. Cor. vii.
And the holy Apostle says: To avoid fornication, let every man have his own
wife, and every woman her own husband. Again, Wedlock is honorable among all
men, Heb. xiii.
and the bed undefiled. But whoremongers and adulterers God shall judge. Of this
decree followed many and great inconveniences.
For ye priests by this means abstayning from lawful matrimonye, abstayned
not from unlawful whoredom, and from other leude parts of most detestable
uncleanness, but defiled themselves with all kind of abominable living, unto
the utter defacing both of themselves and of their ministry, in so much yt
the aforesaid pope was compelled to make a decree, that no man should hear the
mass of any whoremo^ger priest: supposyng by this means to fraye away the
priests from their whoring, The filthy generation of ye wiuelesse papists
which notwithstanding from that time unto this hour again, has grown up
unto such an hight in the kingdom of the pope, that among the very Turks,
Jews, Sarazens, and such other miscreantes, the like fornication, whoredom,
adultery, incest, sodomitrye and all wicked kind of most detestable
dissolution of leude life not to be found, as is at this present proved to be
exercised of ye unchaste generation of the popish wiuelesse priests, unto the
great infamye and slander of the christen profession.

Pope Innocent the second in ye council Remense made a decree also, ye
Subdeacons should live continentlye and without wives. In the year, etc.
1131. Did. 18. Cap. Decreuimus. Joan. Laziard. He ordained also, that not only
Subdeacons, but also Deacons and priests should profess chastitye and live
wiuelesse under pain of deprivation of their benefyces and all other
ecclesiastical promotion. Wiuelesse life under pain of deprivation.
Chron. Lib. Council. Joan. Stella.

Pope Urban the second likewise made a law, that if any man, after he was
made Deacon, did marrye: the same should be deprived of all his benefices, and
all other spiritual dignityes. In the year, etc. 186, Disti. 32. Cap. Eos
qui. Joan. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Theodore bearyng rule in the time of the Emperor Constantine the
fourth, Why marriage is freely permitted to ye priests of the east Church, and
denied to the priests of the west Church.
a council was gathered, in which it was decreed that the priests of the
Greece and of ye East church should be at liberty to marrye, and to have
their own lawful wives, because of the great heat that is in the country:
but to the priests of ye West parts marriage was utterly denied, as unto
persons, A wise reason and substantial.
which dwell in a much colder country, and therefore less needful of marriage.
In the year, etc. 936. Chron. Ang.

Pope Paschalis the second bearing rule Anselme Archbishop of Cantorbury in
the second year of the reygne of King Henry the first, Monk Anselme the popes
proctor for the simple life of priests in England.
King of England, which was in the year of our Lord. 106. gathered
together at London a Satanicall swarm of shameless shauelynges and condemned
the honest and Godly marriage of priests, forbidding al spiritual ministers
from henceforth to keep ye company of their lawful wives, The fruits of ye
single life of priests.
or after that time to have any thing to do with matrimony but to live a syngle
and wiuelesse life. The devilish decree of that Antichristian Archbishop, made
of many Godly married priests, such a mo^struous multitude of vile stinking, and
abominable Sodomites, yt the aforesaid Anselme was compelled to make a decree
also against those Sodomites, commanding that al Sodomitical priests should
openly be accursed in the churches every sunday throughout the year. And
afterward such great inconveniences grew of the publishyng of this most
detestable sin of Sodomitrye (for by this means it began to be known and to
be practiced not only among ye clergy, but also among the Laity) that he was
compelled to revoke and call back again this his wicked decree of publication,
and from henceforth no more openly to accurse those Sodomiticall monstures.
Lib. Council.

Pope Honorius the second willing perfectly to stablysh that wicked decree of
the single life of priests begone by that Antichrist Anselme in England, Note
this hystorye.
sent a certain carnal Cardinal called Ioannes Cremonensis into this realm,
which called together here at London also a great council at the which were
present two Archebyshops, xxiiii. Bishops, and forty Abbotes, besides an
innumerable multitude of the clergy. In this council, besides other things he
most grievously inueyed against the marriage of priests: and among other his
words he said: that it was a shamfull matter, and an excedyng great
abomination for a priest to rise from an whores side (for so he called the
priests lawful wives) and immediately to go and make Gods body. But
notwithstanding God willing to show, The practice of wiuelesse papists
what chaste and continent fathers these adversaries and forbidders of priests
matrimonye are, the aforesaid Cardinal even the very same day wherein he had
not only condemned the most Godly and lawful marriage of priests, A knack of
knauerye.
but also deuoutlye song mass, was taken with an whore in his bed the next
night following and so with shame enough took him to his feet, and with all
haste fled away to Rome unto his holy father, not so much as once byddyng
his friends here in England farewell. A fruit worthy such a chastity It was not
unaptly answered of King Rychard the first, to a certain priest called Fulco,
King Rychard ye first
which said to the King on this wise: King to thee I say in the name of god
almighty, that thou marrye sone thy three evil daughters, least some worse
hap thee befall. Thou lie hipocrite, quod the King: for daughter have I
none. Yes said the priest: Thou have pride, covetousness and lecherye. The^
answered the King: My pride I give to the templares and hospitalers: my
covetousness, to ye white monks, and my lechery to the prelates of the church.
In the year of our Lord 1124. Ranulp. Cestrensis. Poly. in hist. Ang. Chroni.

The marriage of priests allowed. i, Tim. i. Titus. i.
Of the marriage of Priests.
POpe Siluester the first ordained degrees in ecclesiastical orders, and
decreed, that every priest should be the husband of one wife only, according to
the doctrine of the holy Apostle. In the year of our Lord. 315. Sabel. Plat,
Joan. Phili. Bergom D. Barnes. Polydor.

Pope Gregory the first restored marriage again to the priests, which he to
fore had denied unto them, Priests marriage restored.
when he saw how many grievous inconveniences followed of that most wicked
decree of the single life of priests. In the year, etc. 590. S. Huldrichus in
epist ad Nicol. Papam.

Pope Constantine the second, whom the seditious, tirannicall and
superstitious papists did afterward violentlye depose, Marriage restored not
only to secular priests, but also to monks, friars, nuns, etc.
cruellye thruste into a monasterye, as into a prison, and most unmercifully
put out his eyes, gave liberty not only to secular priests for to marrye, but
also to Monks, Friars and Nuns, that they by this means avoiding
whooredome, might the more quietlye give their mind to the study of
Godliness. In the year of our Lord. 769. Chroni. Joan. Laziardus. Cestrensis.

Pope Gregorye the third being Bishop of Rome, the Emperor Constantine
perceauyng the great abomination and to much uncleanness of life, that
reigned among the monks and Nuns through ye vow of their unchaste chastitye,
Monks and No^nes setat liberty to marrye. Monasteryes made houses for the
service of the common weal.
set the Monks and Nonnes at liberty, commaundyng them rather to marrye
according to Gods ordinance, than so filthily and wickedly to live, and made
of their monasteryes, houses necessary for the common weal. In the year,
etc, 741. Chro. Sebast. Franck. Christ. Massaeus.

Pope Pius the second tofore called Aeneas Siluius, was wont to say, that
there are many causes, why marriage should be taken away from the priests, A
worthy and a Godly saying.
but there are many mo urgent, weightye and necessary causes, why it ought
freely to be restored to them again. In the year, etc. 1458. Chron. Joan.
Laziardus. Plat.

Pope Peter, as they write, whom Jews the Emperor made bishop of Rome, A man
first Friar. and afterward Pope had a wife living and was married.
before he was chose^ pope, made himself a gray friar without the consent of
his wife, called Joan ye daughter of Matthew de Corbario. When this Peter was
chosen and consecrated Pope, his wife claymed him to be her true and lawful
husband, and desired of the Emperor and of the Bishops that they might
live together again as manne and wife. Which thing brought into question,
judgment was given, that she ought to be restored unto him. Thus the woman
obtained again, her husband, although before first a professed Friar, and
afterward a consecrate pope. Joan Laziard.

Pope Leo, the ninth is not so grievous an enmy, Priests may lead about with
them their lawful wives. i. Cor. x.
to the marriage of priests, but that he grants that priests have power to
have wives and to lead them about with them, being moved with these words of
Saint Paul: Have not we power to lead a sister to wife, as the other
Apostles do, and the brethren of the Lord and Cephas.

Pope Innocent in his decretals, Priests married offending are worthy to be
grievously punished.
writes, that those priests which have wives of their own after the manner of
the country where they dwell, are greuouslye to be punished, if they do
break their Wedlock.

Pope Paul the second many times grievously complained of ye heavy yoke of
priests constrained chastity, and was full determined, if God had spared him
longer life, to have taken away that wicked decree of the single life of
priests, and to set marriage again at liberty as certain write. The vow of
matrimony.


More largelye of this matter thou may read in my book of Matrimony, whether
I send thee most gentle reader. Of this matter also in our English tongue very
learnedly and truly have written M. D. Barnes that constant and glorious
martyr of Christ, doctor Poinet sometime bishop of Winchester. M. George Joy,
etc.

Of the vows and that the vow of chastity hinders not him from marriage,
which has not the gift of continency.
POpe Celestinus the third gave license to the Emperor Henry the fyft if that
name, The vow of chastitye dispensed withal.
to mary and take unto wife a certain vowesse or professed Nun, called
Constantia the daughter of Rogerius king of Cecilia, In the year etc. 1188.
Mar. Polonius. Joan. Laziardus. D. Barnes.

The vow of chastity dissolueth not marriage
Pope Theodorus made a law, that if any man chanced to marry, after that he
has vowed chastity, he should not be divorced from his wife, but that his
marriage should stand in full strength, and virtue, notwythstandyng the former
vow. In the year of our Lord. 902. Disti. 27. capit. Si vir votum. Bergom.

There was an Abbote at Redyng, who^ me^ for his perfect liui^g called abbot
saint. Abbot saint married.
This man being in danger of a certain disease, by the reason he had no wife,
sent unto the Pope, desiring him to dispense with him for his vow. And the
Pope dispensed with him and gave him license to marry a wife, but under a
condition, that it should be secretly done, and not in facie ecclesie. D.
Barnes. in Libro. De coniugio sacerdotum.

Saint Cyprian being demmaunded, Epist. xi Lib. i.
what should be done with those religious persons that could not keep
their chastity, as they had vowed, answered on this manner: Thou do ask
what we do Judge of those Uirgines, which after they have decreed to live
chastlye, are afterward found in one bed with a man. Of the which thou
say, that one of them was a Deacon. We do with great sorrow see the great
ruin and fall of many persons, S. Cipria^ licenceth vowesses to marry if they
cannot continue. i. Cor. vii.
which comes by the reason of such unlawful and perilous companying
together. Wherefore if they have dedicated them selves to Christ out of faith
to live purely and chastely: then let them so remain without any fable, and
strongly and steadfastly abide the reward of Uirginitye: But if they will not
abide, or else can not abide: then is it better to mary than to fall into
the fire of concupiscence. And let them give unto the brethren and systern none
occasion of slander. etc.

Some affirm, says S. Austen, that such as marrye after they have vowed
chastity are adulterers. In lib. de bono eo^iu. Did. 17. Ca Quida^. Gregori.
27 Q ii. Ca. sunt qui.
But I say unto you that they sin grievously, that separate and put asunder
such.

There are that say, that for religion sake marriage ought to be dissolved and
broken. But we must understand, that although ma^s law has granted this yet
the law of God has forbidden it. For he that is the self truth says: Whom
God has coupled together, Math. xix.
let no man separate. He says also: It is not lawful for a man to put away his
wife, except it be for fornication. Who then may speak against the geuer of
this law?

In evil promises break thy faith, in a filthy vow change thy
determination. xxii. Q. 4. In malis.
That thou have uncircumspectly vowed, look that thou perform not. For that is
a wicked vow and promise, that is accomplished with sin.

If any man swear or promise any thing contrary to faith and charity, P.
Lomb. Sent. lib. iii
which being kept should turn into a worse end: it is rather to be changed
than to be fulfilled.

Would God says S. Bernarde, In Epist. ad Senon.
that they which cannot live chaste, would give over the single life, that
they might not burn, it were without doubt better to marry than burn and to
be saved in a low degree than to live worse in the noble state of the clergy.

Of Benefices and Prebendes.
POpe Gregory the tenth gathered a counsel at Lions six hundred bishops and a
thousand Prelates: wherein it was decreed, No man ought to have spiriall
promotion with cure, but priests only and those worthy and able.

Tithes. Multitude of benefices condemned


that no person should have any spiritual promotion with cure, except he were
first of all a Priest, and also able to discharge it. Moreover that no man
should from thenceforth pay his tithes, where he listed, as the use was
tofore, but that al tithes be paid to the mother church of every diocese.
Again: that it should not be lauful for any priest to have mo than one
benefice with cure. Item, it was decreed in that council, that all persons and
Uicares should be called for ever after, Priests, and no more Prelates. In
the year of our Lord. 1271. Ranulphus Cestrensis. Chronica. Angl.

Persons and vicars must be called priests and not prelates as tofore.
Pope Calixte the second ordained, that no lay manne under pain of the great
curse should meddle with the te^thes, oblations or houses of the Priests, nor
with the goods of any bishop that dies. In the year of our Lord. 1120 Joan.
Laziard.

This law is now out of use.
The aforesaid Pope also made a law, that that bishop or priest which leaves
his benefice, and is not reside^t upon it to do his duty, should be taken for
an adulterer. Plat. Antonin.

Pope Euaristus decreed that a bishop or priest may no more forsake his
benefice, None residences condemned.
than a married man may forsake his wife.
For says he, he that sees a woman and lusts after her in his heart, Math.
v.
has committed adultery. In the year. etc. 110. lib. Council. Chroni.

Pope Clement the fourth condemned the pluralities both of benefices and
prebendes, Pluralit^es of benefices condemned.

A worthy act of the Pope.


in so much that when he heard, that a certain Priest being his Neuew had
three prebendes, he compelled him to chose one of the three which he would, as
for two of them he should surely forgo. And when his friends did instantly
desire him, that he would not only suffer his Neuew to enjoy all those three
prebendes still but also give him other livings more and greater in
consideration that he was his kinseman: the Pope answered, that he would
rather lean unto God: Note the aunsweres of ye pope for they be good and godly.
than unto flesh and blood: addyng, he knew right well that God would have
the church goods so bestowed, that they might not only be put to good and
Godly uses, but also that many might live of them, and not one man alone to
have the liuinges of many Again he said: He is not worthy to be the
successor of Peter, which would rather follow the fond fansye of carnal
kindred, than the rules of Christ and of godliness. In the year, etc. 1265.
Ioa^ Laziardus.


Pope Victor made a decree, wherein he condemns the pluralities of benefices.
In the year, etc 198. Henricus Prim.

Pope Urban the second held a council, One priest one benefice
wherein it was decreed, that no spiritual person should have benefices in
diverse places, but that one priest should be content with one benefice In the
year, etc. 1086. Lib. Council. Christ Mass.

Pope John the xxii. ordained many good things against the pluralities of
nefices. In the year, etc. 1302. Chron. F^scicul. Temp.

Pope Gregory the 9. being Bishop of Rome William. bishop of Paris, after long
disputation had of the ambition of ye insatiable covetousness of ye priests, A
disputation against the pluralities of benefices at Paris.
concluded with the consent of many godly learned men, yt it is a deadlye syn and
a thing damnable before god for a priest to have two benefices. In the year of
our lord. 1225. Iacobus. Mayer in Chron. Fl.

Pope Urban the second, Priests ought to be resident upon their benefices.
of whom we heard before, did not only make a decre that every priest should
have but one only benefice, but also yt he should be resident continually upon
the same, diligently feding the flock of Christ with the word of God, and with
hospitality Chro. Christ. Massae.

Pope Adrian the first ordained that no priest may forsake one benefice to
take another. Permutations of benefices condemned.
In the year of our lord. 796. Plat. Volat.

Pope Boniface the third decreed, Secular persons ought not to give spiritual
promotions by the popes law.

A good decreee but not observed.

God grant that this may once take place in England.


yt priests should take no ecclesiastical promotions at a lay man's hand. In
the year, etc. 605. Quaest. 16. Cap. 7.

Pope Urban the second ordained yt no ecclesiastical promotion should either
be received or given of secular persons. Christ. Massaeus.

Pope Alexander the second made a law, that al ecclesiastical orders and
promotions should not be sold, but freely given to such as are both learned and
godly. In the year, etc, 1063. 1. Quaest. 3. Ca. Episcopus.

Pope Innocent ye sixth ordained, that ecclesiastical benefyces should not be
given, but to such priests, as are worthily commended both for their life and
doctrine: and that all prelates and so many as have benefyces should not lurk
abroad in corners, but that every man should get him home to his own benefyce
under pain of excommunication. For he said, that every shepeheard ought to
keep his own sheep, and not to commit the custodye of them to an hirelyng.
In the year of our Lord. 1343. Plati. Jacob. Phil.

A noble act, and worthy to be followed.
Pope Benet the twelfth made a law, that benefices should not be given to
unworthy persons: and he himself deprived many priests of their benefices,
because they were unlearned, and of a leude life. In the year, etc. 1317,
Joan. Laziardus. Fascic. Temp.

Pope Boniface the third decreed, yt al such as go about to obtain either
bishoprike or benefyce through favor or gifts, A common practyse.
should be excommunicated and put out of Christen men's company. In the year,
etc. 605. Chron. Plat.

Pope Boniface the nynth for the enrychment of S. Peter's treasury ordained that
every benefyced man should pay to the chamber of Rome at ye first entrye of
his benefyce, Payments for benefices to the chambers of Rome.
half the yearly revenues thereof. To this decree all obeyed except the
English nation, which would not suffer the byshoprikes only to stand bound
to this ordinance of the Pope. In the year of our Lord. 1379. Ioannes,
Stella. Ioannes Laziardus.

In the Council holde^ at Nice, it was decreed that no benefyced man either for
desire of worldly honor, or for lucres sake, ought to give over his first
benefice to take a greater and a richer. Histor. Eccles. Plat.

Of the Impropriations of benefices.
POpe Adriane the first ordained the impropriations of benefices and granted
this privilege unto the Monks, Chanons, Nuns, etc. that they might enjoy
the tenthes and fruits, which tofore ye time yt lay people paid (as right is)
to their own pastors and preachers for ye sustentation of their living, and
for the relief of the pore. And these tenthes and fruits the aforesaid pope
most unjustly and tyrantlike took away from ye true owners, and gave them to
the Cloysterers unto this end, Why benefices were impropriate to the
cloisterers.
that they might be ye more without care and thought taking for their living,
and so the more freely attend upon their religion: again that they should be
the more able to maintain hospitalitye, and to succoure the poor, In the
year of our Lord. 796. Petrus Blesensis.

Moreover the aforesaid pope granted, that whatsoever spiritual promotions or
liuinges belonging unto the ministry, The freedom of the cloysterers.
came once into the Cloysterers hands, they should not only retain and keep
them still as moytemain, but also be free from the paymente of tenthes for the
same unto any ecclesiastical person for ever after. But against this
privilege of the Pope, Petrus Blesensis, sharplye wrote unto the white Monckes
of that time on this manner.

By the testimony of the holy Scripture, tenthes ar the tributes of the nedye
souls. And what an immunitie or fredome is this that ye have against al
right, that ye should be exempted and set at liberty from the paymente of
^ythes, Note well.
whereunto the lands were bond, before they were yours: which also hitherto
have always been paid to the Churches* not by ye means making of any
persons, but because it was due to the Church in that it is land. Now if the
lands become into your possession, why should an other man therefore loose
his right? For by the common law the lands are come unto you with all manner
of charges.
Wherefore then unto the great damage, hurt, iniurye and wrong of other men
do ye procure your lands and pastures to be privileged, that by this means
ye may take away an other man's right against al equitye and justice, against
al right and conscience? Did not Abell offer to the Lord the first lynges of
his Sheep? Are ye more ryghteous than he, which was the first righteous of al
men, that ye should lift up your self against the justice of God? By his
Prophets God commands, Gene iiii. Malach iii.
that the tithes should be brought into his barn: but ye command that they
should be carried away from his barn. What will our impropriatours say to this
The ryghteous law of God commands, that the tenthes should be paid to the
Levites: whereof it necessarilye follows, that he does resist the ordinance
of God, that goes about to take way from the Ministers of the Church their
right of tithes, etc.

And a little after he says.
Whatsoever privileges be granted unto you of the church of Rome: yet do I
not think that it is expedient for you to do any thing that is against your
conscience, Note well.
or to usurp ye thing which is none of yours, what if ye had a commandment
from that see of Rome, that whersoeuer ye find Clerks, priests or monks
ryding, it should be lawful for you to unhorse the^ and to set them besides
the saddle, They that pay no ty^hes to their pastore, because their lands are
impropriate, are thieves, robbers, st^alers and co^mitters of Sacrilege. Acts,
v.
yea and to retayn the horses unto your own uses? Were it right and according
to good conscience that ye should thus do? What difference is there, whether ye
take away the horses or the tithes, but that the tenth is a spiritual matter,
and therefore it is a more grievous sin to steal away the tithes than the
horses, yea it is plain sacrilege, and an utter robbyng of god and of his
Ministers? When God commands that tithes should be paid, who can give a
dispensation contrary to his commandment? When the law of God commands
one thing, and man's madness wills the contrary: in this point we must
obey God more than men. And when there be two laws, an outward and an
inward law: verily the inward law ought to prevail and take place before
the outward law evermore: and that which a pure and clear conscience says
unto me, ought more to be regarded, than the outward commau^demente of any man,
yea it ought to put away and to make of no force all manner of indulgences,
privileges, grauntes, immunities, liberties, freedoms, etc. Whatsoever they be
that man grants. If the Children of Israel at the commandment of the Lord
for recompense of their long service, which they did to the unthankful
Egiptians, took away from them their vessels of Gold and Silver: yet is it not
mete, that you should draw this unto your purpose, except ye be able to show,
yt the Lord has commanded you thus to do, again, that you have long served
us as Egiptians. It is therefore better for you and more semely, yt you cast
away this your covetous ambition, Exo. xii.
which greatly disgraceth the titles of your holiness, and yt you cause the
people no more thus to speak evil of you, and to be offended with this your
doings for the unjust retayning of transitorye things. Woe be unto them, by
whom offense comes. Neither be ye of this opinion, Mat. xviii.
that your condition or state of living should in any point be hyndred through
the restitution of other men's goods. For if any thing be diminished by this
means of the temporal commodityes and profits, the devotion of the people,
which is now greatly decayed toward you, shall recompense all that double
and treeble.

But if in this behalf ye show your selves stubborn and froward, and will by
no menaes be blowed: A worthy godly and zealous man.
we will excommunicate and curse all them, that either shall give or sell unto
you any thing, whereof the right of tithes should come to the Ministers of Gods
word, and we will also cry unto the heavens and we will appeal unto the
throne of the hye judge, that this bond of excommunication be not losoned,
till a redress be had etc. Petrus Blesensis Ba^honiensis Archidiacouus, in
Epi. 78.

Of Tithes and offryngs.
POpe Urban the first ordained, How the church goods ought to be spent.
that the oblations of Christen men should none otherwise be spente, than in
use of holy church and in help of the nedy Christians. For they are, says
he, the vows of the christians and the price of syn. In his time the church of
Rome began first to have lands and rents, and with the profit thereof the
aforesaid Pope found Notaries and Clearkes to write the lives and acts of
the holy Saints. Before this time holy church, that is to say, Bishops and
priests lived as the Apostles did, and received only money to the use of the
poor and nedy Christians. In the year of our Lord. 222. Ranulphus
Cestrensis. The mind of Gregory concerning the bestowing of the church goods.
Chronica.

Pope Gregory the first ordained that the goods of the church should be divided
into four parts: The first, to the bishop, to find himself and his family,
and to maintain hospitality for the relief of such as are in necessity. The
ii. to the clergy. The third, to poor men. The fourth to the reparation of
the churches. In the year etc. 590. Polichron.

The law for tenthes paying.
Pope Paschalis made a decree that ye tenthes should be given to the priests.
In the year, etc. 827. Qu. 19. cap. 1. Decimas a populo.

Against te^porall men's possessions of tenthes.
Pope Gregory the Seventh made a streighte law, that no temporal man should
possess any tenthes that be due to the church. In the year, etc. 173. Qu. 5.
cap. 16. Decimas.

He pronounces all such gilty of sacrilege and in danger of everlasting
damnation, that withholde any tithes from the priests, be they either bishops
or kings, or any other persons. The tenths says he, must needs be paid
according to this saying of the prophet Malachy: See that ye bring in all your
tithe into my Barn, Mala. 3.
that there may be meat in my house.

Pope Calixte made a decree that if any Prince or other lay^man took upon him
either the disposition, A Layma^ retaining church goods is a co^mi^ter of
sacrilege.
or the rule, or yet the possession of any church goods, he should be
adjudged, and taken for a committer of sacrilege. In the year, etc. 217. Cause.
6. Q. 7. Si quis.

Pope Gregory the Seventh made a decre that the people when they come to Mass,
Hereof came the. 4 offringdais as it may seem.
should not come empty handed, but offer somewhat, and specially at principal
feasts, because it is said in the law. Thou shall not appear empty handed
before the face of the lord thy God* In the year of our lord. 173. Did 32.
Cap. praeter.

In a Council holden at Rothomage, Exodus 23. Tenthes paying.
it was enacted, that all manner of tenthes either corn or cattayle, or of
any other thing, should be duly and truly paid to the priests. If any did
withholde their tithes, after they were monished of it, once, twice, or thrice,
and will not amend: the decree is, that they shall be accused, til they have made
worthy recompense and due satisfaction. cause. 16. Q. 7. C. Omnes deci.

Of Monastical sects and first of Heremites.
The first beginning of Heremites.
POpe Syluester the first, bearyng rule, the Heremites first of all began, and
inhabited the wilderness and solitary places. The aforesaid Syluester had them
in great reverence, and confirmed their order. In the year, etc. 315. Ex libro
germanico.

Of the Heremites of Antonies order.
Antony the first Heremite.
POpe Syluester, the aforesaid being bishop of Rome, Antony a man unlearned, and
notwithstanding famous in godly conversation and notable in workyng miracles,
began a straight and solitary life in Egypt. He was the first Heremite: his
meat was only bread and water, and he used daily to fast until Sun set. He
went willingly unto the wilderness, where many resorted unto him, which made
him their Abbote. S. Hierome says that he wrote vii. epistles or letters in
the Egiptian speech, full of Spirit and mysteries, which afterward were
translated into Greek. Antonies diet and life.
Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria writes his life in a complet book. He dyed
at Thebaida, the 357. year after Christ's birth, Antonies app^rell. The life of
An^hon^ and h^^ brethren.
the 105. year of his age. The aforesaid Antony with all his brethren went in
gray clothing and did eat herbs and roots. They fled all company of men.
Some say, that they fled into the wildernesses of Egypt for the avoiding of
persecution and there lived together with great love, giving themselves to
spiritual meditations, and heavenly contemplations, that by this means they
might the better have an eye unto gods works, and so offered up to God with a
fre spirit, and a pure and perfect love, serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life.

This Antony has had, and yet has in diverse countries where the sects of
Antichrist reign, many Apes, which have labored to counterfeit him, but
notwithstanding so far from the faith, Antonies Apes.

The diversity of Antony and of our Heremites.


life, and manners of Antony, as darkness is contrary to light* and Beliall
to Christ. For where as Antonye sledde into wilderness, that he might serve
God with the more free conscience, and be the less led away with worldly
vanities, and carnal concupiscences: his Apes and cou^terfaiters run peakyng
into corners, and dwell in some out corner or hole, only to eschew labor,
and to live ydlely, not being content with herbs and roots, as Antonye was,
but faryng deliciouslye, not of their own trauayl and gettyng, but of the
labor of other men's hands. and of the sweat of other men's brows,
contrary to this commandment of GOD given by the Psalmographe: Psalm. 128.
Gene. iii.
Thou shalt eat the labors of thine own hands: Again, In the sweat of
thy face shalt you eat thy bread, till you return unto the earth. For earth
thou art, and unto earth thou shall again be turned. And whereas Antony and
his company fled the company of all men, because they would not be
corrupted with their lewd manners, Antonies Apes frequent nothing more than
the fellowship of men and women, easy to be found in field, in village, in
town in city, in noble men's houses, in poor men's cotages. They leave no
place unsought, where any thing is to be gotten. Again, whereas Antony and his
brethren went in homely gray clothing they now wear a black garmente with a
blew cross thereon. In this apparel, in their long hear and beard in their
hatte and staff, in their scrip or wallet, in their midnighte rising and few
orisons patteryng, does all their whole religion consiste. S. Antonies fire.
They have a Fraternity, wherein they manace and threate folk with saint
Antonies fire: yea they have brought the matter so far, that in some parties
they have pigs fatted for them, and given for fear of Saint Antonies fire,
and that their swyne and cattaile may the better prosper, and beecome the more
fruitful, with the which pigges these Antichristian Antonians fat their
own paunches, and make the common people their laughing stocks. Histor.
tripart. 2. cap. 21.503. 1 cap. 13. Hier. Polid. de invent. rerum. 7. cap. 1.
Pantal. Lib. germ

Of the Heremites of Paulus order.
Paul the Heremite.
THe year of our lord. 345. was one Paulus an Heremite in Egypt, a companion to
the aforesaid Antonye, which spent his life also in wilderness. They write of
him, that when he was xv. years of age, Paul the heremites life.
flyeng the promotions of Valerianus and Decius Emperors of Rome, though he
was of noble progeny, and descended of a right worthy parentage before the
world, yet left he all, and went into wilderness, where he dwelt in a
little cave by the space of 98. years (unknown to any man living) in fasting
and prayer, with water and bread, herbs and roots and such other
nourishmentes as the wilderness did minister unto him. In the book called
vitas patrum, we read that the aforesaid Paulus was well instructed and learned
both in the Greek and Egiptian tongue, He seeing the persecution of Christen men
went into a town much far from his country, and from thence into a
mountain full of rocks, at ye foot whereof was a great and marvelous pytte
covered with a stone, which he took away, and looked therein and found there a
much fair fountain. With this there was in the said mountain diverse
habitations and dwellings. Paulus then loved the place maruelously, Paul the
Heremites apparel and meat.
like as god had given it unto him. And there he led a solitarye life in
occupying devout prayers, and abstinence maruelouslye. His vesture was only of
the leaves of the palm tree, and his meat was the fruit thereof. These and
diverse other things not altogether to be dispysed, read we in the book
entitled Vitas patrum. Of this Paulus the Heremite or solitarye man, Paul the
Heremites Apes.
ar there risen and sprung up certain Apes and counterfayters, which have a
name and an order fathered upon him: and yet, to say the truth, have they no
more of this Paulus faith, prayer, abstinence, and such other Godly and
spiritual exercises, than some Christen men have of Christ, that is to say,
the surname only. For all his ghostlinesse, religion, faith, and life
consists with them only in their white garments or coules, in their cappes
and pyked staves: the color and fashion of whose apparel, we read no where that
Paulus did wear the like, so that I can not tell from whence they have their
name and profession. A comparion between Paul and his Apes.
For Paulus fasted but they are fylbellyes and Epicures. He was pore, but they
are rich. He was solitarye, but they run about. He had simple clothyng, and
a clean heart: but they have a white garment, and black hearts: so that of
this Paulus, a Godly and religious man, our Pauliane Heremites have no more
than all other orders have, I mean, only the name and title. Their rule is S.
Austens, wherein are reckened to be.xxiiii. orders. Ex Lib. Germanico, and ex
vitis patrum.

Paul the simple.
Besides this aforesaid Paulus, there was an other Heremite of that name, called
Paulus simplex, that is to say, simple Paul, or Paul the plain. This Paulus
as we reed in vitis patrum, was one of the Disciples of saint Anthonye,
and made himself an Heremite, because that his wife had given her self to an
other man, than him.
Of which thing when he was aduertysed, he was maruelouslye troubled.
Nevertheless he told it to no body, but went to the deserts. And after yt
he had long gone in the same, he put himself into the monasterye of Saint
Anthonye which among many other, Labor.
lessons taught him, how sometime he must labor, and use bodilye exercises to
refreshe his spirits, whereby he should after be more prompt and ready to pray
unto God. Godliness
Also how with all his thought and strength he ought to keep the
commandments of God: Diet.
and at even in taking his refection, he should eat and drink little, and how
he should drink but water. This Paulus was so simple,
that when s. Anthony with his brethren at a certain time talked of ye holy
scriptures, he demanded of the^ if god had been before ye prophets. But S.
Anthony beholdi^g his simplicity, bad hi^ hold his peace and he gladlye
obeyed.
The aforesaid Anthony willing to prove ye obeisance of this Paul ye plain or
simple soul, often times commanded him to do things against reason: as to
draw water out, of a deep pit all the day long and to cast it on the earth,
and sometime to vnsowe his gown, and after to sow it again: and so of many
other things. But this Paul the plain in all things was much obeysaunt and
lowly. And therefore said S. Anthony, whosoever will be perfect, he ought not
to be master, ne obey to his own will, be ye things reasonable, or
unreasonable: that are commanded him to do. For our savior says, that to
fore al things, one ought to renounce his own will. This Paulus as we read,
was a man of such virtue and holiness, Paul the plain, a worker of miracles
that he far excelled S. Anthonye in workyng miracles, in so much that they
came unto him, that were sick, out of al regions to recover their health, and
anon by his devout Orisons unto God, they were made hole. I read not, yt any
sect of Heremites, had their beginning of this Paul. The cause paraduenture
was, because he was so simple, plain, and homely a man, without al fraud gyle,
and deceate, which the monastical sects, most chiefly practyse in all
their life and conversation. Ex vitis patrum

Of the Heremites of Saint John's order.
IN the year of our lord, John the Heremite.
iii.C.lxxx was John an Heremite in Egypt of great reputation for his
holiness. He could comfort the feeble minded in God, and bring them to
perfection, as writes of him S. Hierome. He dwelt fyftye year continually
upon an hill or rock in feruente prayer and meditation to God, of whom he was
fed. He was of so pure mind, that God opened unto him, not only what was
necessary for him to know but also things for to come. He was so endued with
the gift of Prophecye, that he Prophesied not only things, that should
chance thereabout, but also the war of the Emperor Theodosius against
Maximus the tirant. When he was an hundred year old, he paid nature her
duty, whose life Hierome does discribe. John the Heremites apes.
Now he that will compare the full brethren that wear a black cloak and a
cross thereon, with this man's living (whose followers they advance
themselves to be, being called Ioannites of this John) shall find them far
unlike him, seeing their religion is their own invention, and that they live of
other men's sweat. But how can they bear his name, and challenge him to be
their patron, seeing in no point they live like him, but even plain contrary?
If they will think to be grounded upon John the Euaungelyste and Apostle, then
ought they to lead a continente life and to go about, and preach the
Gospel of Christ. But they are so far estraunged from these godly exercises,
that in no state of people any can be found more unchaste in their living,
nor greater adversaries to the true doctrine of Christ, The wickedness of ye
Ioa^nites
being in deed the patrones, defendoures and mayntayners of all superstition
and false worshippyng of God. But I should be sooner persuaded, that their
Patron was some good tankerd yeoman, whose order like good Dysciples and
brethren they have ever kept and followed. It is great pitye and shame, that
we are so perverse minded, that we do not see this mock and abomination, but
rather worship it as holiness, geuyng freely unto it both lands and goods,
and disheryte our natural children. God be merciful unto us. Ex Libro
Germanico.

Of Anckers and Ankresses, and all other Recluses.
AS concerning the monastical sect of the Recluses, and such as be shut
up within walls, there, unto the death continuallye to remain, geuyng
themselves to the mortification of carnal affectes, to the contemplation of
heavenly and spiritual things, to abstinence, to prayer, and to such other
ghostlye exercises, as men dead to the world, and having their life hidden
with Christ I have not to write: forasmuch as I cannot hitherto find probably
in any author, The beginning of the A^ckers pro^ession incerten.
whence the profession of Anckers and Anckresses had the beginning and
foundation, although in this behalf I have talked with men of that profession,
which could very little or nothing say in the matter. Notwithstanding as the
white Friars father that order of Helias the Prophet (but falsely) so likewise
do the Anckers and Anckresses make that holy and virtuous Matrone Judith their
patroness and foundresse. But how unaptly, who sees not? Their profession and
religion diffreth as far from the manners of Judith, as light from darkness
or god from the devil, as it shall manifestlye appear to them that will
diligently, confer the history of Judith with their life and conversation.
Judith. viii. A comparison between Judith and our R^cluses.
Judith made her self a privy chamber where she dwelt (says the Scripture)
being closed in with her maidens Our Recluses also close themselves within the
walls but they sufferre no man to be there with them Judith ware a smock of
ha^re* but our recluses are both softly and finely apparelled. Judith, fasted
all the days of her life, few excepted. Our Recluses eat and drink at all
times of the best, being of the number of them Qui curios simulant, and
Bacchanalia viuunt. Judith was a woman of a very good report. Our recluses are
reported to be supersticious and idolatrous persons, and such as al good men
fly their company. Judith fears the Lord greatly* and lived according to
his holy word. Our Recluses fear the pope and gladly do what his pleasure is
to command them. Judith lived of her own substance and goods, puttyng no man
to charge. Our Recluses as persons only borne to consume the fruits of the
earth, live idly of the labor of other men's hands. Judith, when time
required, came out of her closet to do good unto other. Our Recluses never
come out of their lobbeis sincke or swim the people Iudithe put her self in
ieopardy for to do good to the commune country. Our recluses are unprofitable
clods of the earth, doing good to no man. Who sees not now, how far our
Anckers and Anckresses differ from the manners and life of this virtuous and
Godly woman Judith, so that they can not justly claim her to be their
patroness?

Of some idle and superstitious Heremite borrowed they their idle and
superstitious religion. The iron grates of the Ankers
For who knows not that our recluses have grates of yro^ in their spelunckes
and dens, out of the which they look, as Owls out of an yuye todde, when
they will vouchsafe to speak with any man, at whose hand they hope for
advantage? So read we in vitis patrum, that John the Heremite so enclosed
himself in his Heremitage that no man came in unto him. To the^ that came to
visit him, The Ankers profession.
he spoke through a window only. Our Anckers and Anckresses profess nothing
but a solitary life, led in contemplation all the days of their life in their
hallowed house, wherein they are enclosed, with the vow of obedience to the
Pope, and to their Ordinary Bishop. Their apparel is indifferent, soit be
dissonant from the Laitye. No kind of meats they are forbidden to eat.

At midnighte they are bound to say certain prayers. Their profession is
counted to be among all other professions so hard and so streighte that they
may by no means be suffered to come out of their houses, except it be to
take a streighter and an harder life upon them, which is to be a bishop.

Of Monks.
POpe Siricius being bishop of Rome, The beginning of mo^kish orders
the first Monkishe order began, raised up by Basilius Magnus bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia. Their coat, cloak, coule and cappe were all white. He
prescribed them a rule mixte with many traditions and doctrines of men.
Wherefore he is called of them a father and beginner of religious people, whose
life he also prayseth, so that he obtained of the aforesaid Siricius to
confyrme the order. He called them Monachi, that is to say, solitarye, or
separate from the world, and founded in Greece the first house or cloister.
But how unaptly they be called Monachi, and men utterly divided from the
world, Why they are called Monachi
who sees not? For where do they dwell, but in the mids of famous cities and
great towns? And in what things do they more exercise themselves, tha^ in
matters of the world. In the year etc. 389. Ibidem. Ranulphus. Cestrensis.

This monstrous Monckishe order is divided into many mo^struous mockish sects,
whereof we will rehearse part.

Of the Benedictine Monks.
POpe John the first being bishop of Rome, Benet a father and a favorer also
of Monks, gathered together al strowed and scattered religious persons, and
began a peculiar order upon the Mount Cassinus, where he built a most renoumed
cloister, giving them there a rule, prescript and form of living, as though
Christ had forgotten it. Afterward the aforesaid Benet having much people
resortyng unto him built.xii. other monasteries, and sylled them also with
religious men. Of this order is reported to have been 24, Evil ^ede grows
fast.
Popes of Rome. C.lxxxii. Cardinals. M.CCCC.lxiiii. Archbishoppes and
bishops.xv.M. and lxx. renowned Abbotes, and as says Pope John the xxii.
there have been of this order.v.M.vi.C.lv. Monks canonisate and made Saints. In
the year, etc. 523.

This Benet also inverted an order for his sister Scholastica, and made her
Abbess over many Nuns. Her clothing was a black cote, The beginning of
Nuns. Nuns forbidden to read the holy scriptures.
cloak, coule, and veil. And least the Scripture should deceive her and hers:
it was commanded that none should read the holy Scripture without the
consent or permission of their superior, Here is to be seen how God is sought
in all monastical orders, which among them in his word is expelled.

Of the Cluniacensis order of Monks.
POpe Sergius the third bearyng rule, ye order of Cluniacensis was set up by a
certain Abbot called Ocion or Otho, as some call him. For when the Monks of S.
Benets rule were nerehand decayed in Godliness: this Oclon, Oclon tender of
Mo^kery.
or Otho lived so, that they were quickened again by reason of his holiness.
Their clothyng and rule was according to the appointment of Mo^k Benettes rule.
This Monkishe order was richely endowed with great substance, and yearly
rentes by a certain Duke of Aquitania, called Guillidinus. In the year of
our Lord. 913 Plat. Sabell. Libro. Germ. Polidor. Pantaleon.

Of the Camaldinensis order.
POpe Leo the fourth occupyeng the Sea of Rome, the Monkishe religion of the
Camaldinensis was devised by Romoaldus of Rauenna, in the Mount Apenninus Their
coule and cloak with all that ever they wear from top to toe is white. They
keep perpetual silence. Every wednisday and Friday they fast bread and water.
They go barefote and lie on the ground. In the year. etc. 850. Chron. Pol.
Lib. Germ.

Of the Hieronimians order.
POpe Innocentius the Seventh, being bishop of Rome, the Monkish order of the
Hieronimians, began under the name of Saint Hierom which after Christ's
birth. 490. leaving his native country, went into Jury and there not far
from Bethlehe^, builded him an house where he lived very devoutly in the latter
end of his life, These Apes and counterfaitors of S. Hierome wear their
clothes of white and a cope plaited above over their coat, gyrde with a
leather gyrdle. In the year. etc. 145. This order was endued with diverse
priueleges, fraunchises and liberties by certain bishops of Rome, as Gregory
the twelfthe Eugenius the fourth. etc. Chron. Polydor. Libro Germ.

Of the Gregorians order.
POpe Gregory the first borne of a noble stock, and very plentuouslye
endowed with goods of fortune, forsook al and became a Monk. After the decease
of his father he builded Six religious houses in Sicilia, geuyng them a form
and rule of living. He builded an other within Rome, in the name and honor of
Saint Andrew, wherein he dwelte with many Monkyshe brethren, which from time to
time keeping his rule diligently, are called Gregorians. Their habit is of a
copper colored course cloth according to their rule. In the year. etc 594.
Chron. Lib. Germ.

Of the Shadowed valley order.
POpe Gregory the Sixte bearyng rule, Ioannes Gualbertus a knight began this
order in a certain mountain called, valla vmbrosa, that is to say, a shadowie
valley, under Benets rule, with adding thereto, and chaungyng of black clothes
into gray. In the year, etc. 1038 Chron. Polyd. Lib. Germ.

Of the Grandimontensis order.
POpe Alexander the second being bishop of Rome, the sect fo^the
Grandimontensis Monks was invented by Stephen of Auernia, their order is to
lead a straight life (as Monks use to do) to give themselves to watching,
fasting and praying: to wear a cote of males upon their bare bodies, and a
black cloak thereupon. In the year, etc. 176. Chron. Pol, Lib. Germ.

Of the Cisterciensis order.
POpe Urban the second bearing rule, Roberte Abbot of Molisme in Cistercium a
wilderness or Forest in Burgundy, did institute the order of Cistercians,
albeit some ascribe this to one Ordingus a Monk, that persuaded the aforesaid
Roberte to ye same. They wear red shoes, and white rochets on a black coat,
all shoren save a little cyrkle. In the year of our Lord. 198. Ibidem. Of
this Religion was that great clearke s. Barnard.

Of the Humiliates order.
POpe Innocentius the third confirmed and allowed the order of the Humiliates,
first of all devised by certain persons, exiled by Frederichus Barbarosa:
which when they were restored to their countreye apparelled themselves all in
white, and promised to go in lowlye and simple clothyng: the men and women to
be separate each from other, and to labor every one what he was skilled in.

They had one common purse among them. They profess S. Benets rule. This order
in process of time has increased so, both in goods and persons, that it was
confyrmed and endowed with many privileges of diverse Bishops of Rome. In the
year of our lord. 1166. Ibidem. Iac. Phil. Bergo^.

Of the Celestines order.
POpe Celestinus ye fifth, willingly gave over his bishoprike, and returned
again to his solitary life, wherein he quietly lived before his papacy.
Certain supersticious persons like apes counterfayted this Bishop, taking upon
them an order under ye rule of s. Benet in a wilderness, and called themselves
Celestines after Celestine. Their orders garment, cloak, ^oule, and cappe are
blew. In the year, etc. 1297. Ibidem.

Of the Gilbertines order.
POpe Eugenius the fourth bearyng rule, in England, S. Gilbert, at Tirington
and Sempryngham began an order of monks, called after him Gilbertines. In the
year of our Lord. 1148. Chron. Polid.

Of the Justinians order.
POpe Eugenius the fourth confirmed the Religion of the Justinians, adourning
the same with many liberties and privileges. It was first of all invented by
Jews Barbus a Councelour of Uenice, and practiced in ye parties of Treuis^ in
the cloister of S. Iustine by the city Badua. They profess Monk Benets rule,
but in habit and apparel they differ. In the year of our Lord. 1412. Ibidem.

Of the Charterhouse Monks.
POpe Gregorye the seventh being bishop of Rome, Bruno.
Bruno of Colein ye Philosopher and divine, whom Barnarde calls a fair
pillar of ye church, did institute ye order of ye Charterhouse mo^ks in ye
diocese of Gracianopolis, at a place named Curtusia. Their life was outwardlye
full of painted holiness, in forbearyng flesh, in fasting bread and water
every fridaye, in wearyng hayrye clothes next their body, full of
solitariness, much silence ever pinned in, never going out, refusyng all
women's company, with other semblable ceremonies. In the year of our Lord.
1620. Ibidem.

Of the Templares orders.
POpe Gelasius the second bearing rule, the order of the Templars began at
Jerusalem, and continued nerehand two hundred years, whose beginning was
thus. After that Gotfraye Duke of Lorayne had conquered Jerusalem: certain
Knights perceauing, yt such pylgrimes as came to them of their devotion, were
robbed and murdered by the way: they made a bond among the^ to serve God in
Chiualrye. At the beginning they were but few, and gave themselves to wilful
pouertye, and their chief master was a keeper of the temple door, whereof they
were called Templarij. They dwelt together not far from Christ's Sepulcher,
lodging the pylgrimes, keeping them from mischief, and showing them much
kindness, bringing the^ from one holy city unto an other. The badge of their
order was a white cloak with a red cross. Saint Bernarde made them a rule,
according to the appointment whereof they framed their lives. Afterward they
became very rich through the gifts of great men and pilgrims. But Pope
Clement the fifte put them down and destroyed them all in one day: The
destruction of ye Te^plars.
partlye because (as they write) they renounced ye faith of Christ, and
conspired with ye turks, and partly for other notable crimes. Not withstanding
some say, yt this rooting out of them was more because of envy of their
prosperitye and royaltye, than of giltinesse. For when their gaundmaster James
Burgonion was burnt at Paris with many of his brethren, he took his death
thereon, that he was never giltye of the accusations laid to him. Thus
peryshed this order of the Templares all in one day, their lands and
possessions being distributed and given to other. In the year of our Lord.
1110.

Of the Premonstratenses order.
POpe Calixtus the second approved and allowed the monkyshe order of the
Premonstratenses, which was first of all devised by a certain man borne at
Colein called Noto hobertus a priest. They be under the rule of Benet the
monk. They be clothed in white from top to toe, to declare their unstained
virginity. In the year, etc. 1119. Chron. Pol. Lib. Germ.

Of the order of the white Monks of Mount Oliuet.
POpe Gregory the twelfth reigning, the monks of mount Oliuet spro^g up through
the device of Bernardus Ptolomeus. Their clothyng is all white. Their rule is
Benets, with some addicions unto it. In the year of our lord. 1406. Ibidem

Of the Georgian Monks.
POpe Gregory the twelfth confyrmed and stablished also the order of S. George
of Alga by Venice, which was begun by a spiritual man ye patriarch Laurence
Iustiniane, a man of an incredible straightness of life. These mo^ks are under
S. Peter's rule, and the first order, with certain ordinances joined thereto.
In the year, etc. 1407. Lib. Germ. Chron.

Of the white Monks.
POpe Urban the Second reignyng, the order of white Monks began, first
devised by one Stephen Harding, and afterward in ye year of our lord* 1135, it
was brought into England by a certain man called Walter Espek, which builte
an Abbey of the same order, called Meriuale. Ranulphus. Cestrensis.

Of the Ioannites order.
POpe Honorius bearing rule, Raymund a man of nobilitye first of all invented
the order of s. John Baptist at Jerusalem, about the year, etc. 1130. Chron.
Angl.

Of the order of scourgers, or flagellatours.
POpe Clement the sixth being Bishop of Rome, a certain pestilent sect of
false religious persons sprung up in high Almayne which called themselves
Penitentes Cruciferos, seu, Flagellatores, that is to say, Penitent cross
bearers, or scourgers of themselves. Their manner was to go from place to
place, having a banner upon the crucifixe borne before them, and never to tarry
in one place, but on the sunday. Every day also they did penance both morning
and euenyng, by scourging themselves before ye people, with a great whip
of.iii. cords full of knots, O Antichristian hipocrites.
upon their bare bodies, sharp byg nedles being put into the cords: affyrmyng
yt it was reveled unto them by an Angel from heaven, that they thus scourging
themselves, should within.xxx. days and.xii. hours through the suffryng of
those pains be made so clean and free from sin, as they were, when they
first received baptism. In the year, etc. 133. Ioannes. Laziardus. Mat.
Palmer. Christ. Mass. These martirs of the Devil were afterward destroyed by
Phlilip, king of France.

Like unto these aforesaid is there at Rome, and in other places of Italye a
sect, which so are called Flagellatores or scourgers. The true brethren of this
order go barefoote, and beat themselves upon the bare skin, till the blood
follows. They go in long white linen shirtes, having an hole on the back,
and are open upon the bare skin. Thereupon they do beat themselves with
scourges* yt are made for the purpose, yea and that so long til the blood does
ru^ out both over their shoulders and also down to their feet. These be
admitted of the bishop of Rome as penite^tiaries. They go barefoted in
procession, two and two together on good Friday, when the passion is preached.
The white linen garment which they use, has an hood sowed unto it, which they
draw over their heads, when they will not be seen. This comes over their
faces, and it has holes like a visar, where through they both see and draw
their breath. Such as force not whether they are seen or not, or have not
breath enough, they draw down the coule from their heads, and so scourge
themselves openly. Great men also and diverse other citizens use this fantasy
with them also, but specially, upon good Friday, which of great inward
devotion disguise themselves also, as the aforesaid: so that some time.iii. or
iiii. hundredth are seen of them in one procession. But the noble men and
citizens go for the most part upon slippers, and the shirtes put on above
their hoses and have a scourge in their hands, wherewith some strike
themselves, ^ome wear it only between their arms. This do they that they may
be pertakers of their pardon, do penance for their sins, and come to Gods
favor. and. Lib. Germ.

Of the order of the starred Monks.
POpe Clement the sixte bearing rule, John king of France son of Phillip the
French king, invented the sect and order of those monks, which in latin are
called Stellati, What the Star signifies.
whose manner is always to wear a star upon their breast, signifie^g hereby, that
there is nothing in them, but the light of perfection, and the clear shining
of good works, yea that they themselves are the light of the world, Math. v.
Dan. xii.
according to this saying of Christ, vos estis lux mundi, Ye are ye light of
the world. Item, that they shall rise again at the last day all shining and
glisteryng as the most clear and pleasant stars, according as it is written
by the Prophet: They that have instructed and taught other shall shine as the
glisteryng of the firmament: and they that inform many unto righteousness
shall be as the stars, world without end. In the year of our Lord. 1336.
Christ. Mass. Lib. Germ.

Of the order of the Gerardians.
POpe Boniface ye ninth reigning, a certain man called Gerardus being of great
learning and of virtuous conversation, ordained a certain fraternity or
brotherhode of learned godly me^ to teach scholars, and to bring up youth only
in good letters, but also in good manners, that by this means there might be
learned men always in store apt to bear rule in the church of Christ, and
also to govern the common weal according to the prescript and rule of gods
doctrine This Gerardus being but a Deacon, preached the word of God both purely
and fervently. Note well.
And when he was moved by his friends to be a priest, he alwais answered, that
he was unworthy to have such an high office. He was wont oftentimes to say,
that he would not have ye cure of souls, not so much as by the space of one
night, for all the gold of Arabie. In the year, etc. 3379. Chron. Christ.
Mass.

Of the order of the Jesuits.
POpe Urban the fifth greatly allowed the order of the Jesuits, and gave unto
it many great and singular priueleges, commaundyng the Monks of that order to
wear a white kyrtle and a russet coule, and that they should be called of all
men Clerici Apostolici, that is to say, the Apostels clearkes. This order of
the Jesuits was the invention of Ioannes Columbinus in Sena a city of
Hethruria, they were at the beginning no priests nor consecrated persons, but
were men of the lay sort, given and addicte willingly and freely to prayer and
to labor, getting their meat with the trauail of their hands and with ye
sweat of their brows living as it were in common after the example of Christ
and of his disciples. They are called Jesuits, because the name of Jesus
should be often in their mouth. In the year, etc. 1368. Phil. Berg. Libro. Germ.

Of the order of white dawbed Monks.
POpe Boniface bearyng rule, the order, which is called Ordo de albatorum was
invented by a certain priest in Italy, which pretended such a modesty and
gravity both in words and in countenance that every man took him for a
Saint. The professors of this order were cladde all with long white lynnen
clothes even down to the ground, having coules upon their heads like unto other
Monks. The chief point of their profession was to lament the state of mankind,
to bewail the sins of the people, and to pray for a redress of ye same at
gods hand. They never went abroad but they had a cross with the image of the
crucifyx borne before the^, which cross ye Lucenses keep at this day with
great reverence as a most precious relic, and daily make vows, and offer
diverse gifts unto it. But Pope Boniface aforesaid conceauyng that they should
do no good to his honorable estate, if they continued, forasmuch as they all
appeared before men righteous, good and Godly, and the Pope with his co^plices,
most wicked, euel and ungodly, caused the author of this order as a seditious
person to be beheaded at Viterbium. Some say that he was brent as a
superstitious hipocrite, and attaynted of some heresye. In the year of our
Lord.1400. Lib. Germ. Philip. Bergom. Polid. etc.

A monstrous multitude of mo^kish monstures.
But why do I travail to set forth the number of these Monkyshe orders seeing
they be almost innumerable, and a man in a manner may as soon number the
sands of the sea, and tell the stars of the firmament, as to prescribe a
certain number of them? For besides these that I have rehearsed, there are
diverse other monastical orders, as Ambrosians, Sarrabartes, Bernardines,
Sa^bonites, Beghartines, Apostolianes, Guilhelmites, Iosephians, Sepulchrians,
Sheerians, Swerders, Cross started, Constantinopolitanes, Wentzelaians,
Nolhartians, Iacobites, Swearde Iacobites, Helenians, Ierusalemites,
Iosophatians, Selauonians, Mary's brethren, Ioannites, Lazarites, Magdalenians,
Keyed Monks, Holy ghostes men, Specularians, Hospitalianes, Mosarabites,
Georgians. etc. Bidding all these monstrous monastical disordered orders
Adieu, I will recite some other devises of the Romish bishops concerning
Monks, and afterward fall in hand with the other Cloysterers, which are in
deed those very Locustes whereof Saint John speaks in the book of his
Revelations.

Rules concerning all orders of Monks.
POpe Gregory the seventh ordained, that no Monks should eat flesh at any
time, Monks forbidden to eat flesh.
but give themselves to thin diet, and course fare. In the year etc. 173. Joan.
Laziard. Gratianus De consec. Did. 5. cap. Carne^ cuiqua^ mona.

Pope Pelagius made a decree that no Monk should be promoted to be Abbot, The
election of Abbotes.
except he were laufully chosen, and according to the rules of the Cannon law.
In the year, etc. 552. Christ. Massae.

Pope Theodorus made a decree, that no Monk should change his place to go
unto any other cloister without license of his Abbot or Prior. Monks may not
depart out of their cloister without license. Monks admitted unto holy orders
In the year etc. 673. Chroni. Christ. Mass.

Pope Siricius first of al admitted monks unto holy orders, for before his
time they were not counted among clearkes, but taken for mere lay me^. In the
year etc. 389: Albertus Krantz.

Pope Boniface the fourth made a decree, yt Monks might use the office of
preaching, Monks spiritual ministers.
of Christening, of hearing confessions, and also of assoyling men from their
sins. In the year. etc. 606. Ranul^hus. Cestren. chron. Ang.

Pope Eugenius the first ordained first of all, that monks should be shut up
in their cloisters. Cloysterer devised.
For before that time the monks used to range and to gadde abroad, where and
whether they lysted. In the year of our Lord.650. Albert. Krants. Chron.

Pope Eusebius ordained, This decre is wicked.
yt a young man or a young woman although being assured together in the way of
marriage, may notwithstanding their promyses made, depart one from an other,
and become cloysterers. In the year, etc. 309. Quaest. 27. Cap. 2.
Dispontatam. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Eugenius the first decreed, Monks at liberty to tarry in their cloisters
or not.
that Monks should not go out of their cloister without special license of
their Superior. In the year, etc. 650. Quaest. 16. Cap. 1. Placuit.

The aforesaid Pope also commanded, yt no monk should be holde^ in the
cloister against his will. Q^^o 1. c. Signi.

Pope John ye first bearing rule, The vows of chastitye, pouertye and
obedience.
monk Benet an Italian builded an Abbey in Cassine, and assembled the monks,
that were dispersed alone in diverse places, into one couente, and ordered them
with instructions of ma^ners and rules of living. confyrmed with three vows,
that is to say, chastity, wilful pouertye and obedience, because they should
altogether mortifye their own will and lusts. In the year of our lord.
524.. Chron. Polidor.

The year of probatio^.
These threafore named vows, Basilius Bishop of Casarea did first institute
and publishe: And also assign the year of probation or trial, that religious
persons had before they were professed. In the year, etc. 183. Ibidem.

Pope Gregory the eight reygning, a certain noble man called Hugo took away
from monks and Nuns their great lordships, An act not to be dis^^aysed.
and to much wealthy yearly livings and revenues, and gave the^ so much, as
should suffyce for meat, drink and clothe. In the year, etc. 1186. Joan.
Laziard.

Monks good and godly.
Pope Boniface the fourth being Bishop of Rome, there were in the Abbey of
Bangor two thousand and two hundred Monks, which al lived by the labor of
their own hands, and by ye sweat of their own brows, according to this
commandment of God: Genesis iii.
In ye sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, etc. Again, Thou shall
eat ye labors of thy hands. Psalm. 128.
In the year, etc. 606. Ranulphus. Cestrensis.

Of Channons.
POpe Eugenius the fourth being Bishop of Rome, the order of ye regular Chanons
began in Hethruria in the parts of Luca, in the cloister Frisonaria. Of this
sect there are two opinions. For some say, ye Austen by and by after he was
created bishop, brought his Channons in this rule and form of living, wherein
they have been long trained and nouseled up: Other some brag and make their
vaunt, that it was devised of the Apostles, and of this opinion was Thomas of
Aquine. But how soever the matter go, Austen was doubtless either the
inuentour of the sect, or renuer of it, and therefore may iustlye be called
and taken for the author of that fashion. The Channons clothing by their first
foundation was a white cote, The chano^s clothyng.
and a linen roche^ under a black cope with a scapuler to cover their head
and shoulders. The aforesaid Pope Eugenius endowed this order with many
privileges and great libertyes. In the year, etc. 14, 0. Libro. Germ.
Polidorus. Chron.

Pope Gregorye the.xi. bearing rule, certain spiritual fathers of s, Austens
order in the parties of Seen in Italye, invented a sect of Chanons, called
Scopetines, or S. Saluators order. Which order the aforesaid Gregory did
approve and endue with many and diverse privileges, and numbered them among ye
Chanons regulare, or quier priests. And for a memorial of their first
foundation and spiritual state, they wear a white garment with a white
scapularye upon a white rochet. They live of their rentes and revenues. They
preach not, but they hear confessions. In the year, etc. 1367. L^^. ^erm.
^hilip. Bergom.

Of Friars, and of the diversity of that sect.
Of the Cross bearers, of Crossed Fyers order.
POpe Innocent the third being bishop of Rome, the order of the Crossed Friars
which in the year of our lord. 1215, was denied by a certain man called
Quiricus a bishop and Martyr, in the time of Helena the Mother of Constantine
the great Emperor, and afterward fell to such decay, that it was almost gone
to naught, was raised again by the aforesaid Innocent in the.xviii. year of
his papacye. The beginning of this sect was on this manner. Among the^ of
Albonia rose a pestilente heresye, which caused a great dissentio^ among them
of Rome. Wherefore the bishop of Rome sent many against the^ marked with the
Cross, which were all s^aine. These laudable and praise worthy souldioures
did he halowe therefore and make saints, and raised the or^er again with
giving of many fred^mes and privileges. Unto this order did Pope Innocent the
fourth give a rule, commaundyng yt the spirituality of this order, should always
wear a cross in their hands. There clothyng is a black cope with a cross
thereon, ye highness of an hand. Chron. Lib. Germ.

Of the Carmelites, or white Friars order.
POpe Honorius the third favored greatly the order of ye white Friars. Some
say, that this sect began in mount Carmelus after the example of Helias the
Prophet, which lived there long solitarye, and that they were first assembled
together by Almericus Bishop of Antioche, In the year of our Lord. 1170, in
the time of pope Alexander the third, and they were called our Lady Friars by
the reason of a chapel of our lady, that was in the hill Carmelus.
Nevertheless upon four hundred years after in the time of Innocent the third
they were reformed by Albertus Bishop of Jerusalem according to the rule of
Basilius, and the color of their cope was turned into white by ye Pope
Honorius the third, where before it was russet. Some write, that this order of
the Carmelites in his first clothing (which they said was of Helias or Heliseus
ye prophet) was greatly acceptable to the Soldane, The wickedness of ^hite
Friars.
and endued with many almesses of him: but after they changed their raiment,
he drove them out of his kingdom, so that of necessitye they came into
Europa. This order, says the Dutche Chronicle, is to beg, to take of every
man, and to do nothing again for it. Math. 23.
This order is to lie, to dissemble, to envy, and to begile the people with
flatteryng words under the pretense of long prayer. Lib. Germ. Polydor.

Of Dominikes order, called, black Friars or the Friars Preachers.
POpe Innocent ye third reygning Dominike Calaguritane a Spaniarde, began this
order of Friars preachers. This Dominike was first a regular chanon, and
because he could not suffer to have a superior, and was also wearye of the
Cloister, he invented a new fraternitye, named of his own name, Dominicanes.
Their order is with out all shame to beg, as the Carmelites, and forsake little
by wilful pouertye, that they may obtain much and to wax rych of other men's
labors, they themselves being idle lasye loytryng lubbers, and unprofitable
cloddes of the earth. Our Lady s. Mary (as they fain) even of love that she
bare to this holy order of sweet S. Dominicke, devised the habit, A noble,
notable lie.
which the friars of that order use at this day and delivered it to S.
Dominicke with her own hands, commaundyng him and all his brethren for ever
after to wear the like. Their cote is white their cope and coule is black The
new guise of their vestu^e made Innocent Innocentius to wonder. But pope
Honorius the third by his bull honorably admitted the black order of the
black friars, In the year of our Lord. 1220. And Gregorye the nynthe put
the matter al out of doubt, cannonised Dominicke, and by his bull under lead
allowed him for a saint. A tale of a tubbe.
Of this Dominickes mother they tell that when she was with child and had
Dominicke in her womb, she dreamed yt she had a wolf in her belly: which as
I think, signifies, that both he and al cloysterers by their profession are
none other thing than wolves, deuouryng not only the substance of me^, but also
ye souls of me^ by their hipocrisy and false doctrine according to this saying
of Christ, John. x.
a wolf teareth on pieces and scatereth the sheep abroad. This black order
began in the year of our Lord. 1220. Phi. Bergom. Mat Palm. Lib. Ger. Joan.
Laziardus. Poly. etc.

Of the barefooted Friars otherwise called Minorites or Graye Friars.
POpe Honorius the third bearyng rule Frau^ces an Italian devised the order of
the barefoted friars. He was first a merchau^t and a worldly man. Afterward he
determined to forsake all worldly things and to follow Christ, Math. x.
in so much, yt when he was well shod, and girded with a double girdle, he
remembering these words of Christ (possess neither two coats, A gross
understanding of the Scripture.
no shoes, nor yet staff, etc. and who so forsakes not all things, cannot be
my disciple) cast all thing away from him, shoes, gyrdle, etc. so that he went
barefooted, and girded himself with a cord and contine^tly began this order in
the Mount Appoeninus, in a place named commonly Lauerna, gathering unto him
many men, which took on them the same religion and are called of barefoted
Fraunces, barefooted Franciscanes. They are named also Minores, Minores.
of the humility and lowlynes of heart that they should have. Note of Fraunces.
They write, yt this Fraunces was so straight to himself, that to chastise his
flesh in winter season, he would cover his body with yse and snow. He called
poverty always his Lady, and loved rather to hear himself reviled, than
praised. He kept nothing over night, His heart desired martyrdom, whereupon he
went into Siria to the Soldane, Truth.
which received him honorablye: whereby it is to be thought, that surely he
told him not the truth. For truth is seldom welcome in courts and noble
men's houses. I will here pass over the fable, how Christ and his Saints did
mark him with the five wounds. After that he had thus chastised his flesh by
the space of eyghtene years, he dyed at Asia, and was afterward canonised and
admitted for a Saint by Pope Gregory the nynth. Lib. Germ. Polidor. Chro.

This order of Friar Fraunces is divided into many sects, rules and orders.
Some go on treen shoes or Pattyns some barefooted: some are Regulare
Fraunciscanes or Obseruauntes, some Minores or Minorites: Again, some are
called Minimi, either of the Gospel, or else of the littleness of their coule.
They all differ in many things, but in superstition and hypocrisy they all
accord.

Of the Friars obseruantes.
BArnardine the Gray friar perceauing the great enormities and wicked sins,
which Fraunces Friars without all shame committed against the rule and order
of their profession, began a new reformation of the order in many places, in
somuche that they which were reformed, be called Friars obseruantes, and are
counted of a greater perfection and more holiness, than the common sort of
Grayefryers are, which are called Minorites. The planting and ex^i^pyng of the
obseruaunt Friars in England.
The obseruaunt Friars were brought into England by king Edward the fourth, and
were greatly inhaunced by ye famous Prince king Henry the seventh, but they
withal other Monastical sects were most worthelye and iustlye expelled and
extirped with their Babilonicall houses, by that most victorious and
triumphante Prince King Henry the eight.

Here follow the seven privileges, which the Fraunciscanes feign to be given of
god to S. Fraunces for the aduaunceme^t of his order.
The Privileges of the Grayfryers.
THe first privilege is, that the more number of the Fraunciscanes or
Grayefriers be increased: the better and the more abundantly shall they be
provided for.

The second privilege is, that no man can dye evil, that departs in a
Grayfriers habit.

The third privilege is, that in the feast of Saint Fraunces all the souls
of the brethren* friends and benefactours of the same order, shall be delivered
out of the bitter pains of purgatory.

The fourth privilege, is that the order of saint Fraunces shall endure and
continue unto the day of judgment.

The fifte privilege is, that none that lives evil in that order can abide
long in it.

The sixth privilege is, that the enemies of saint Fraunces order shall never
live long, but they shall die out of hand* a most shameful death.

The seventh privilege is, that the friends and lovers of saint Fraunces order*
be they never so wicked and ungodly, shall notwithstanding at the last obtain
mercy, and dye a most blessed death.

Of the Frierly order of Mary's servants.
POpe Benet bearing yt swinge, Philip devised the order of Friars which are
called the seruau^ts of our Lady. He raised this order under the rule of Saint
Austen, with even like words and fashion, making difference of it with
certain ordinances of the Friars of our Lady which order afterward was
confirmed by three bishops of Rome, namely, Benet the xi. Boniface the eight
and Urban the sixte, and is reckned among the beggyng orders, At the the last
it was wholly sanctified and hallowed of Pope Innocentius the eighte and
delivered of the evil will, that some cloysterers did owe them. Their
garments are like our Ladies brethren. This order began in the year of our
Lord.1304. Chron. Lib. Germ.

Of the new order of the Friars of our Lady.
This order is founded under the preachers order which also call themselves
Mary's brethren They wear a white cote, and a black cloak thereon, with a
black Friars coule. Chro. Lib. Germ.

Of the Austen Friars.
POpe Innocent the third bearyng rule, one Guilihelme a Duke of Aquitania, and
county of Lictauia, invented or rather repared and renewed the order of the
Austen Friars, which had been long decayed and almost made desolate before.
This Guilihelme first dwelt in ye wilderness with his brethren, chastyeing his
flesh and subduyng it with a coat of males on his bare body, always watchyng*
praying and fasting, so that he was called a father and restorer of that order.
Afterward by the consent of Anastasius and Adrian Bishops of Rome he left
the wilderness, and built about (or as some say) within Paris, a cloister for
that beggyng order of the Austen Friars, which was confirmed by Pope
Anastasius the fourth. After that his apes and counterfayters with beggynge
built many other cloisters so that now this beggyng brood is spread over a
great part of the world unto the great hindrance both of men's purses, and
also of their salvation: and by this means is beggyng which once was
forbidden, become a Gods service. In the year of our Lord.1195. Lib. Germ.
Chron. Angl.

Rules concerning all orders of Friars.
POpe Eusebius ordained, that a young man or a young woman although being
assured together in the way of marriage, may notwithstanding their promises
made, depart one from an other, and become Cloysterers. In the year. etc.
309. Quest. 27. Cap. 2. Desponsatam. Phil. Bergom.

Silence at the table.
Pope Gregory the ninth reygnyng, a certain black Friar called Iordanes,
commanded, that silence should be kept of all his brethren at the table. This
custom was shortly after received and practiced of all other cloysterers
generally. In the year. etc. 1221. Vola. Sabell. Carranza. etc.

Pope Gregory the tenthe approved some states of the orders of beggyng Friars,
as the black and Grayfriers: and some he suffered, as the white and Austen
Friars: and some he utterly reproved, as Sack Friars, which were called
Fratres de panitentia, and Fratres de valla viridi, and such like. In the year
of our Lord.1271. Ranulphus. Cestrensis.

Pope Sixtus the fourth, when the four orders of beggyng Friars did co^tende
and strive among themselves, Contention among Friars* which of their orders is
most holy.
which of their order were most holy, most acceptable to god, and of greatest
perfection, to avoid the contention and debate of these bragging, boasting,
braulyng, begging Friars, affyrmed all their orders to be of like holiness and
perfection, and granted to them al like privileges, graces and liberties. In
the year of our Lord.1471. Ioannes. Laziardus. Chron.

Pope Alexander the fourth defended and approved ye vnshamefaced begging of the
rauenyng friars: Privileges granted to the four orders of beggars Friars.
and whereas before they dwelt in solitarye places, he gave them license to
dwell where they would, even in the mids of cities and towns: and there to
preach, to hear co^fessions, to enjoin penance, to give absolutio^, to
serve cures, etc, garnishing and confyrming their orders with many immunities,
privileges, libertyes, exemptions, indulgences, pardons, etc. In the year of
our Lord.1254. Ioannes. Stella.

Of Nuns and of the diuersitye of that sect.
POpe John the first being Bishop of Rome, Monk Benet after that he had placed
himself and his monkyshe brethren in a certain noble and famous cloister
built upon the Mount Cassinus, raised up also an order of Nuns, and made his
Sister Scholastica Abbess over the^. The beginn^nge of Nuns.
The apparel of these Nuns is a black cote, cloak, coule and veil. And
least the scripture should disceaue her and hers:
it was commanded, that none of that order should read the holy scripture
without consent or permission of their superior. In the year, etc. Chron.
Lib. Germ.

Of the Nuns of S. Clares order.
POpe Innocent the third bearing rule a certain maid called Clara, a
countreywoman and Disciple of Fraunces the Friar, assembled and gathered
together a congregation of poor women, and gave them an order of life like
unto the rule that Friar Fraunces gave his covent. Their garment is graye.
Their order admits none but woman kind, except it be for to say Mass.
This order of Clara,, both Pope Honorius the third, and Pope Gregorye the
nynth endowed with many gifts and privileges. In the year of our Lord.1225.
Lib. Germ. Volat. Polidorus.

Ioannes Laziardus in his Chronicle writes, that pope Innnocent the fourth
made the rule, which the Nuns of Saint Clares order use at this present.

Of the Nuns of S. Brigittes or Brides order.
POpe Urban the first being Bishop of Rome, a certain wydowe called Brigitta,
Princess of Suetia, began the order of Nuns called Brigittians. But it is to
be understand that this order of Brigit receaueth as well men as women, although
they dwell severally by themselves, the men divided from the women, and the
women from the men. For this holy woman Brigitte ordained, that both men and
women being of this order might well dwell together, and have their
habitation both under one roof, but yet men and women separated each from
other, so yt the one might not come to the other, except only when need
required to minister the Sacraments. The Church should be common to both:
Nevertheless ye Nuns should be closed above in a closet and the men
beneath, waiting upon the divine service: and that these should tend the
altar, and they the quere. The Abbess should have the primacye, and the
brethren to be under her, so that she should provide both for man and woman,
meat, drink and clothyng. Among the brethren should one be called Prior,
Warden, or Confessor, and be above the other. The women should be consecrated
and brought in by the Bishop. Their clothing is a gray cote with a gray cloak
thereon, and a red cross in a white circle. They may wear no linen after the
tenor of their rule. The brethren of this order hear confessions, and preach
at hye feasts. This order also admits Lay brethren (as in many places more)
to do their business abroad. They feign, that this order was confyrmed of
Pope Urban ye fyft at the commandment of Christ. In the year, etc. 1353.
Volat. Plati. Polichron. Pol, Libro. Germ. etc.

Of the Nuns of S. Katerines order of Seen.
POpe Gregorye the.xi. bearyng rule, Katerine of Seen a Dyers daughter,
refusyng the state of matrimonye, took upon her the third order of S.
Dominicke, or of the Friar Preachers. They say, that Christ should have married
her with a ryng, A tale of a tubbe.
wherein were four pearls and one diamonde, and taken her heart from her, and
given her his in stead thereof. The Nuns of this order wear garments like
to the black Friars. Their cloak and veil are black, their cote is white. In
the year of our Lord.1455. Volat. Lib. Germ. Chron.

I pass over the Nuns that be of the Justinians order, of Marye Magdalenes
orders, of Austens order, etc, which all are wrapped full of superstition and
hipocrisye, seking their salvation not in Christ through faith, but in men's
inventions by folishe and popish works. But let us hear the Popes pleasure
more at large concerning the poor Nuns.

Rules concerning all orders of Nuns.
The age of Nuns to be professed and on what day they shall be professed.
POpe Pius the first made a decree, that no maid should be admitted to be a
Nun or a religious person, before she were.xxv. years of age: and that she
should be professed and consecrated only upon the feastful day of the
Epiphanye, commonly called, Twelfday. In the year of our Lord. 147.
Ranulphus. Cestrensis. Ioannes. Stella. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Sother ordained, that a Nun should not handle the towels of the
altar, nor the Chalice, patenne, or corporasse clothe, nor yet put incense
into the senser, The Nonnes veil and wimpl^.
but that she should always wear a veil upon her head, and a wymple under
her chynne. In the year of our Lord. 168. Polichron, Chron. Ang. etc..

Pope Gregorye the first ordained, that no man should frequent the monasteries
of Nuns: No Nu^nes Godmothers.
again, he forbad, that Nuns should be Godmothers to children. In the year,
etc. 590 Chron. Joan. Stella.

Pope Leo the first made a decree, that none, should be made a Nun, except
she were found to have lived before continentlye and honestly by the space
of.xl. years. The rule not observed.
In the year, etc. 444. Phil. Bergom.

Pope Gregorye the eight made a decree, yt no man should once be so hardye as
to take a Nun out of her cloister. Nonnes ^aye not marry by the Popes law.
In the year of our Lord. 1186. Tom. 1. Council.

Of the Monastical apparel.
IN times paste when with most earneste diligence I searched for the original
and beginning of the monastical or monkish apparel, and could by no means
find any thing thereof in writing: at the last I repaired unto the paynters,
and in ye entries and porches of ye friars, where for ye most part a man may se
ye historyes of both testamentes painted and lively setforth in colors: I
sought for the matter diligently. And when in all the old testament I could not
find any of the Patriarchs, or of the priests, or of the Prophets, or of the
Levites, no, nor yet Helias himself, whom notwithstanding the Carmelites or
white friars make their Patron and first founder of their Religion, to wear
a coule, and to be clad with Monkysh apparel^ I went streyghtwayes unto the
new testament. There I found Zacharye, Simeo^, John Baptist, Iosephe, Christ,
the Apostles, the Disciples, ye Scribes, the Pharesees, the Bishops, Annas,
Cayphas, Herod, Pilate, and many other: but no where could I find or
perceive the coule, or monkysh habit. Examining once again more diligently
even from the beginning al and singular things: out of hand even at the very
beginning of the historye in a manner, the devil appeared, and showed himself
clad in a coule, eue^ ye very same devil, yt tempted Christ in ye deserte or
wilderness. I was excedi^g glad, and rejoiced beyond al measure, yt I had
found yt in picture, which I could never find before in scripture: I mean, that
the devil was the first author, inuentor, and finder, out of the coule and
Monkishe habit: of whom afterward I think verily, the other Monks and Friars
borrowed their coules and disgysed apparel set forth in diverse colors, some
white, some black, some graye, some russet, some blewe, some blouncket etc. or
else paraduenture they received and took the same as left unto them for
inheritance from the devil their father. Cornelius Agrippa de incertitudine
and vanitate scientiarum.

Of Temples or Churches.
POpe Siluester bearing rule, Constantine the Emperor built diverse Churches
for the Christians, Constantine ye Emperor.
and gave other liberty so to do, to the end, that so many as profess Christ,
might openly and without any fear come together to pray and praise God, to
hear the readyng and Preaching of the holy Scriptures, to receive the blessed
Sacraments, and to occupye themselves in such Godly and virtuous exercises,
as God requires of them in his Sacred word. The beginnynge of Christen men's
temples.
For unto that time the Christians were so extremelye persecuted of tyrauntes,
that they had no certain publyque place to repare unto, but so many as
professed Christ assembled themselves together priuatelye, and praised God in
hollow caves and dens for the fear of the unfaithful, as Laurentius Valla
says in his book de donatione Constantini. In times paste, says he, before
the days of Constantyne the great, the Christians had no Temples, but secret
and close places: holy little houses, but no great and gorgious buyldynges:
Chappelles, no Temples: Oratoryes within private walls, no publyque and open
Churches. In the year of our Lord. 315. Ranulphus. Cestrensis* Valla.
Westmerus.

^a^^wyng of churches
Pope Iginius ordained, that the Temples or Churches should be hallowed withal
solemnitye, and that no Church should be hallowed without a Mass: again,
that Churches should be made neither greater nor smaller without the consent of
the Metropolitan. In the year of our Lord. 143. De Consecr. Did. 1. Cap.
Omnes Basiliae. Eusebius. Sabell. Phil. Bergom. etc.

An admonition to the Reader.
HEre must I warn thee (most gentle Reader) of the craftye iuglynges of the
Papists, which when they have once invented of their idle brain with out the
authority of Gods word a balde and lousye ceremony, (...) of the Papists.
or a wicked and a superstitious law, streyghtwayes father the same upon some
Godly ancient and learned Bishop, that by this means it may be of the more
force and of the greater authority with men, and the more easlye disceane the
people. Of this their practyse here haste thou an evident example. They set
forth in their deuilyshe decrees and wicked writings, that this holy Bishop
Iginius commanded the halowyng of Churches, when many years after as thou
have tofore* heard, the Christians had no Churches, but secretly assembled
themselves together in corners, in private houses, in de^nes and caves of the
ground, being no where safe and sure from the cruelty of the tyraunts, which
thyrsted no less for the blood of the Christians, than the pantyng and thyrsty
heart desires the water brokes. How could they halowe, that they had not?
Except the Papists will make every cave and den in the ground the Church,
which were much against their worship. Again, where there is mention made in
this decree, that there must be a Mass at the halowyng of a Church, who
knows not, that the very name of the Mass was unknown many hundred years
after to the faithful congregation of Christ, so far is it of that the Mass
it self was in use among them, which is but a late and an yesterday bird,
hatched and brought forth of many Popes, yea and that not at one time or in
one year, but in many and sundry years. Of this I thought good to warn
thee, good reader. Notwithstanding be it true, Papists enemies of gods truth
or be it false. I will truly and faithfully recite and bring forth unto thee,
whatsoever I shall find in their hystoryes concerning their tryflyng
trumperye: use thy judgment, and know the Papists to be enemies to the truth.

Pope Felix the third made a decree, Bishops church halowers only.

The dedition feast.


ye Bishops only should halow churches, and that every city, town, or village
should yearly keep holy for ever after, that day whereon the Church was
hallowed. In the year, etc. 486. Plat. Pol. Chron. Pantaleon.

Pope Innocent the first decreed, that a Church once hallowed, should be
hallowed no more. In the year, etc. 408. Did. 68. Cap. Ecclesiis semel.
Ioa^nes Stella.

Pope Boniface the fifte made a law, that whatsoever giltye person fled into
sanctuary, that is to say, into the Church or churchyard, for succoure: the
same party should not be drawn out again, Sanctuaries.
but suffered there quietly to remain. In the year, etc. 617. Sigeb, Sabell*
Volat. Plat. etc.

The trimmyng of Churches.
Pope Martine the first made a decree, that Churches should be galantly decked,
trimmed and dressed upon the holy days and solemn feasts. In the year of
our Lord. 643. Pol. Pantal.

Women may not come into the church but with covered faces
Pope Linus made a law, that no woman should come into the Church, except her
face were covered with a veil or kerchiefe. In the year of our Lord. 70.
Chronica Chronicarum. Volat. Fasciculus. Tempo. D. Barns.

Pope Eugenius the fourth bearing rule, Walking up and down in churches at
service time forbidden.
a Council was kept at Basille, in the which it was decreed, that such as
walk up and down in the Church at service time, should be punished. In the
year of our Lord. 1430. Plat. Volat. Lib. Council.

Of Churchyardes.
Churcheyardes and halowynge of the same
POpe Calixte the first ordained first of all the Churchyards, and the halowing
of the same. In the year of our Lord. 222 Sabell. Plat. Christ. Massae. Pantal.

Pope Dionyse devised to divide the parishes with their Churches and
Churchyardes, Parishes divided.
and commanded that every Bishop should be content with the limits of his own
diocese: and every Priest with the bounds of his own parish. In the year
of our Lord. 266. Fascicu. Temp, Volat. Pol. Lib. Council.

Of Churchgoodes.
POpe Iginius appointed, that no Church stuff should be put to profane
uses. In the year of our Lord. 261 Volat. Phil. Bergom

Pope Stephen the first made a decree, that those which take away the goods of
the Church, should be condemned as me^slayers. In the year of our Lord 261.
Chron. Lib. Council.

Pope Eusebius ordained, that such as take away any thing appertaining unto
the Church, they should restore ten times as much again. In the year of our
Lord. 309. Chron. Germ.

Pope John the fourth made a decree, that if any invaded or took away the
goods of the Church, he should restore four times as much again. In the
year of our Lord. 635. Joan. Stella. Plat. Chron.

Pope Paul the second ordained, that they that did alienate or withdraw any
thing from the Church, should be excommunicated. In the year, etc. 1404.
Sabell. Chron.

A good law
Pope Gregory the fourth instituted, that every Church should have their proper
possessions, whereof the Priest may live, least yt they taking thought for their
living, should be compelled to leave their duty undone. In ye year etc. 846.
Plat. D. Barns.

Pope Urban the first, granted, that lands, goods and temporal possessions
should on this condition be given to the Church, that nothing should be
private to any man, but that all things should be common among the Priests, so
that none of them should want, but every one have, whatsoever his necessitye
requires. In the year. etc. 222. Anselmus. Rid. Volat. Chro. Plat.

Of the Orname^tes of the Church.
Fontes.
POpe Pius the first brought ye font into the Church* In the year. etc. 147.
Plat. Sabel. Chron.

Pope Boniface the second ordained the particion between the chauncell and the
Church, which we now commonly call the Roodeloft, Roodeloft.
and commanded that the people should hear the divine service, as they term
it, in a several place from the clergy. In the year, etc. 529. Albert.
Crantz. Plat^. Joan. Laziardus. D. Barns. Pantal.

Pope Sabiniane commanded, Lamps,
that Lamps should be kept continuallye burning in the Church. In the year,
etc. 603. Platina. Albertus. Crantz. D. Barnes. Pantaleon.

Pope Innocent the third bearyng rule, Light before sacrame^te of ye altar.
Eustace* Abbot of Flare came out of Normandye into England, and among his
other devises he caused that light should brenne always in the Churches
before the little Gods body. Ranulph. Cest.

Pope Zacharye devised oil for the Lamps in the Churches. Oil.
In the year, etc. 752. Plat. Pantal.

Pope Gregory the first brought into ye church, Tapers. Torches. Candles.
Belles. Ringing to service.
tapers, torches, candles, etc. In the year, etc. 590. Volat. Pantal.

Pope Sabiniane decreed first that the people should be assembled and come
together to hear their divine service at certain hours of the day by
ryngging of bells. In the year, etc. 603. Plat. Durand. D. Barns. Pantal.

The Aue bell.
Pope John the.xxii. ordained, that bells should be tolled every day thryce in
the evening, and that then every man should straight ways knele down, and
say thrice the Aue Maria in the worship of our Lady. In the year, etc. 1309.
Chron. Ioannes. Stella.

The noone bell.
Pope Calixt the third also made a decre, yt every day at, xii. of the clock
ye sexten or parish clerk should toll noone and yt so many as hear ye bells,
straight ways should say an Aue Maria in the honor of our blessed Lady.
In the year of our Lord. 1455. Phil. Bergom.

Durandus says, that bells be of such virtue, The wonderful virtue of bells.
that when they be roung, they stir men to devotion, they preserve the fruits
of the earth, they keep both the minds and the bodies of the faithful from al
danger, they put to flight the hosts of our enemies, and dispatche all the
suttelties of our evil willers they cause the boisterous hayle, ye sharp
^^ormes, the violent tempests, the terrible thundringes, the fearful
lyghtnings, and fearce winds to cease, they drive away also al wicked spirits
and devils. Ration. di. off.

Pope Vitalian brought in Organs to make the people merye. Organs*
In the year of our Lord. 653. Chronic. Volat. Platina. etc.

Pope Sixtus the second ordained first of al, Altares.
that the Supper of the Lord should be celebrated at an altar: which before was
not the use. For the holy mysteryes of the Lords body and blood until that
time was ministered upon a table according to the practyse of Christ, When
altares came first into ye Churches.
of his Apostles, and of ye primative Church. And here may all men see, from
whence the popyshe altares come, for the which the stubborn, sturdye stout
papists do so stoutly strive About the year of our Lord, (if stories be
true) two hundred three score and five, came in the altares first into the
Church. Other affirm, that they came in about the year of our lord, 294^
But I believe that altares came not in the Church before the year of our
Lord. 590. When the popish, peuyshe, private Masses began first to creep
in* Volat. Durandus. Fasci^. Temp. Mas. Pet. Aequillinus. Ioannes. Stella.

Pope Felix the first instituted the halowing of altares, Halowing of altares.
commanding yt no Mass should be song upon any altar, til it be hallowed. In
the year, etc. 272. Sabell. Pantal.

Pope Hormisda decreed, yt no altares should be set without the consent and
special license of the Metropolitan or of the Bishop of the diocese. In the
year of our Lord. 514. Chron. Joan. Stella. D, Barns.

Pope Boniface the third appointed white linen clothes to be laid upon the
altares. In the year, etc. 605. Pol.

Altar clothes.
Pope Sixtus the first ordained, that the corporasse clothe, which the priest
uses at his mass, should be made of fine white linen cloth, In the year,
etc. 129. Plat. Sabell. Great. D, Barnes. Pantal.

The same Pope also ordained, that lay men, An hye poin^ in a low house.
but specially lay women, should not once touch the ornaments of the
Church, as copes, vestments, altar clothes, etc, nor the hallowed vessel, as
Chalice, Pixe, Cross, Chrismatorye, Sensers, Candlestickes, etc. Plat. Sabell.

Pope Stephen the first made a decre, Copes* Uestme^ts.
yt a priest in his divine service, should use none other but hallowed garments
In the year, etc. 261. Sabell.

Pope Adriane the first being bishop of Rome, Surplesse.
there was a synod or council holden at Franckforde, in y^ which it was
decreed, that whosoever does any service in the Church, he should wear a
surples upon his back in service time, and no man to go in his common apparel
without a surples, no, not so much as the sexten or Belringer. In the year
of our Lord. 796. Christ. Massaeus.

Pope Siluester the first commanded, Linen Albes.
that the priest at his mass should wear no silk, nor any colored clothing,
but a white linen Albe only. For Christ, says he, was buried in a fine white
linen cloth. In the year, etc 315. Great. Plat. Joan. Stella. D. Barns.

Pope Zepherinus commanded, Chalices of Glass.
chalices of glass to be used in the ministration of the Lords Supper. In
the year, Cups of beoode
etc. 208. For before that time the sacrament of the holy sign of Christ's
blood was ministered in cups made of wood, according to ye use of Christ of
his apostles, and of ye primative church Petrus de not. Plat. Math. Pal. Pantal.

Pope Urban the first ordained afterward, that the chalices should be made
either of silver, Chalices of gold silver and tin.
or of gold, or of tin In the year of our Lord.222. Platina. Great. Pol.
Bergom.

The saying of Bishop Boniface concerning chalices and bishops, is very
notable, and answers justly to our time. Olim, inquit: Episcopi aurei
lignei^ vtebantur calicibus: nunc vero lignei Episcopi calicibus vtuntur
aureis. In times paste, says he: Golden bishops used wodden chalices, but now
wodden bishops use golden chalices.

Paxe
Pope Leo the second devised yt Paxe, In the year of our Lord. 676. Platina.
Pasc. Temp.

Pope Innocent ye third invented pixes and boxes for the reservation of the
sacramental bread. Cross*
In the year, etc. 1195. Paul. Volat. Phi. Pol. Pantal.

Pope Agapetus the first commanded the people to go on procession, on ye
Sondayes, and to follow the cross. In the year, etc. 533. Plat. Pal. D. Barns.

Pope Gregorye the first brought in banners into the church. Banners.
This was that Gregorye, Austen the monk.
which sent Austen the Monk into England to preach to the english nation
the faith and doctrine of the bishop of Rome with all his superstitious
traditions, counterfayte religions, and such other wicked abominations. This
Monkyshe Austen with, xl. Monks more, when they arrived and came on land in
the east side of Kent in ye Island of Thanet, entered in with a cross, and with
banners displayed having a crucifixe painted upon every one of them, singing
the Letanye with orate pro nobis to al angels, Archangels, Patriarchs,
Prophets, priests, Apostles, Martirs. Confessors, Uirgins, Monks, Nuns,
Heremites, and finally to all he saints and she Saints, yt they might have
good luck and well to fare in setting forth their Romyshe religion. Which
swarm of monks, when they had once through their hipocrisy and flattering,
obtained of ye King to inhabit at Canterbury, went joyfully forth on their
journey, having their crucifi^e cross and banners borne before them, and
singing Alleluia with a lustye courage and merye voice until they came to ye
city, where they practiced al kind of superstition, as beads bidding, popyshe
fasting, wiuelesse living, long laten Mattens and Masses singing, Saints
relics boastyng, etc. In the year of our Lord. 590. Chron. Ranulphus.
Cestrens.

Pope Fabiane the first devised the Chrismatories. Chrismatoryes.
In the year, etc. 242. Plat. Volat. D. Barns.

Sensers.
Pope Leo the third brought in the sensers. In the year, etc. 817. Pol. Doct.
Barns. Pantal.

Holy water buckets and sprinckles.
Pope Alexander the first (as they feign) invented the holy water with the holy
water buckets and sprinckels In the year, etc. 119. Libro. Council. Great. Pol.
Plat. Sabel.

Pope Siluester the first with ye oil brought in also the oil pots. Oylepots.
In the year, etc. 315. Sabell. Plat. Pantal.

Pope John the eight made a decree, that if any man did take away any thing
once appointed and dedicated to ye service of god either out of an holy or
unholy place, ye same man should be counted gilty of sacrilege. In the year of
our Lord. etc. 887. Quest. 17. cap. 4. Siquis. Joan. Laziard.

Of Images to be had in Churches.
PAulinus Bishop of Nola, The first procter and promoter of Images
as some write, was one of the first promoters and chief proctors to have
Images in Churches. In the year, etc. CCCCL. Pantal in Chronogra.

Pope Gregory the first ordained, Images not to be worshypp^d.
that Images should be had in Churches for to be lay men's books, but by no
means to be worshipped, nor kneled unto. In the year of our Lord. 590. Greg.
Lib. 9. Epist. 9. Chron.

Pope Gregory the second confirmed the having of Images in churches and did not
only excommunicate the Emperor for abolishing of images, A wicked act of the
Pope.
but he also most traitorously stirred up his subjects to rebel against him.
In the year. etc. 729. Blondus. Chron.

Pope Constantine gathered a council at Rome against Phillip ye Emperor,
Images confirmed.
wherein he condemned the Emperor for destroying Images, and made a decree for
the establyshement of them in churches. In the year. etc. 769. Plat. Pol.

Images worshypped.
Pope Gregory the third made a law yt Images should not only be had, in
churches, as lay men's books, but yt they also should be worshipped and had in
greater reverence, than ever they were before, and that whosoever were of a
contrary opinion, he should be condemned for an heretic. In the year. etc.
740. Sigis. Blond. Plat. Sabel.

Note.
Here may all men learn to judge with what spirit these Romish Bishops are
led, which notwithstanding call them selves most holy fathers, Christ's
vicares in earth, Peter's successors, holy Church, the spouse of Christ, that
pillare of truth, which cannot err. Pope Gregory the first (as you heard)
admitted Images into Churches as lay men's Calenders or books, but by no
means to be worshypped. Which also is more than can be proved lawful by the
word of God. Popes together by ye parts among them selves.
Notwithstanding now comes this most holy father Pope Gregory the third,
and he appoints Images not only to be in Churches, as lay men's books, but
also to be worshipped, that is to say, to kneel unto the^, to sense them, to
garnish the^ with costly vestures, to set up candles before the^ to go
pilgrimage unto the^ to pray before them and to give the^ such honor as by no
means is due either to stock or stone. The words of Pope Gregory the first
are these, concerning yt not worshipping of images, written in a certain
epistle unto Serenus Bishop of Massilia, Serenus the godly Bishop of Massilia.
which did not only take away Images out of the churches, when he see the
people worship the^, but he also brake the^ all on pieces, and bre^t the^. It
was says he, declared unto us, that thou beholdi^g certain worshippers of
images, did break and also cast away the same images out of the church.
Verily we co^me^d thy zele that thou would have no man to worship that is
made with hands,
but yet we think (Note good reader, yt this Pope does not plainly affirm by
the authority of Gods word, yt images ought not to be destroyed, but only
brings forth his own thinking.) we think says he, that thou ought not
to have broken those images. For the pycture unto this end is set up in the
churches that such as be unlearned, should at the least by seeing and beholding
those Images, read on the walls, that they are not able to read on books,
etc. Lib. 7. Epist. 109.

Both Epiphanius and S. Austen, numbreth among heretics a certain woman
called Marcella which worshipped the images of Jesus, of Paul, etc. and
offered incense unto them. Here does Pope Gregory the first with the consent of
Epiphanius and S. Austen, condemn the judgment of Pope Gregory the third
concerning the worshipping of Images. Where is now the spirit of unity
become, whereof these holy Fathers brag so greatly?

Sensing of Images.
Pope Stephen the third decreed, that Images should not only be had in
Churches, but that they also should be senced. In the year of our Lord. 772.
Sigeb. Plat. Vo^at.

Pope Leo, the third, Pope John the seventh, Pope Adrian, the first with
other, made also decrees for ye establishment of Images in Churches, as
witness Sabel, Paulus Aemilius. Sigeb. Plat. Volat. Fasci. Temp.

Pope Paul the first bearing rule, Pipine king of France caused a Council to
be assembled and called together, A Council assembled about Images.
concerning the having and worshipping of Images, where many learned men were
present: among whom there was great contencion: some according to the Popes
former decrees defending both the having and worshippyng of Images: some after
ye doctrine of gods word utterly condemning both the having and worshipping of
Images, affirming that it is directly against the word of God in the Temples
of the Christians to set up Images which should be nothing else, than stumblyng
blocks unto the rude and simple people, and great prouocations unto Idolatry,
Notwithstanding the Papists and supersticious Hipocrites did bear such a
route and rule in that Sinode that the matter was concluded on their side, so
that from henceforth it should be lawful both to have and to worship Images
not only of Christ, but also of all saints in Churches or else where, although
the express word of God and the examples of the primative Church, and the
judgment of diverse godly and learned men teach the contrary, Ioa^. Laziard.

A certain wicked woman Empress^ of Greece called Iraene, at the request of
Pope Theodorus gathered together at the City Nice a swarm of Bishops to the
number, as they write, of CCCL. In the which Council was also decreed, that
Images should be had in Churches. In tho year of our Lord. 695. Blondus.
Plat. Eutropius. Polid. Pantaleon. etc.

But this decre^ lasted not long. For the Emperor Constantine the sixth her
son, seeing the great abomination that came by Images, so sone as he came
to rule, brake that decree, and made a straight law against the ^auynge of
Images in places where Christen men come together to pray. But the wicked
woman his Mother afterward through the crafty council of the bloo^dy:
Papists found the means to apprehende her son, to depryue him of his
Empire, to put out his eyes, A wicked act.
and to cast him into prisoon, where he most miserably dyed. Oh unnatural
Mother: yea, O unnatural monsture, Afterward this dounghel of Idolatry and
superstition set up again her Idols and mahomets. But when Nicephorus came to
the Empire he did not only put her down, cast her into prison, where she by
the ryghtuous judgment of God most vilesy dyed according to this saying of
our Savior Christ, Math. 7.
With what measure ye met unto other, with the same shall it be met to you
again: but he also destroyed al her poppets, suffryng no images to remain in
the temples: which order all the Emperoures of Greece observed ever after, as
hystoryes make mention except one, Theodorus Lascaris, which at a certain
council holden at Lugdune, agreed to the Bishop of Rome in admittyng Images.
But his subjects therefore depryued him both of his Empire and dignity.
Barthol. Westmerus.

Certain godly Civil laws against the having of Images in Churches, with
the advice, consent, and judgment of diverse godly learned men.
Leo the Emperor
LEo the third, Emperor of Greece assembled together at Bizance three hundred
and thirty godly learned Bishops, which with one consent agreeable to the
word of God, Images taken out of Churches, and burn^e openly.
decreed with the assent of the Emperor and of the nobility, that al Images
should be taken out of churches, and burnt openly. Moreover the Emperor
himself at Constantinople threw out of the temples all the Images of Angels,
Martyrs, virgins, saints, yea, and of Christ, and burnt, them in the open
market and made a law, that, whosoever resisted his procedinges in this
behalf, he should suffer death. In the year of our Lord. 784 Blondus.
Eutropius. Platin. Matthew. Palme^us. etc.

Constantine the Emperor.
Constantine the Emperor kept a counsel at Constantinople, in the which were
present a great number of godly Bishops, and other learned men: where it was
likewise decreed, that Images should be cast out of Churches, and by no means
be suffered in such places, as christen men resort unto for to pray unto their
Lord God. In the year, etc. 739, Sigesb. P. Aemilus. Pantal.

The noble and Godly Emperors Valens and Theodosius made a law, Ualens and
Theodosius Emperors.
that no man should make or cause to be made any Image of our Savior
Christ, neither by paynting, nor by grauyng, nor yet by any other way, but
that wheresoever any such Image should be found, it should utterly be
taken away and destroyed. And whosoever would attempt to do contrary to
this their act, they appointed certain grievous punyshementes to be executed
upon the transgressoures and breakers thereof, as a law grounded both upon the
word of God, and upon the decrees and constitutions of the most worthy
aunciente Emperors and reverend bishops. Petrus Crinitus. Lib. 9. de honestae
disciplina.

Sabanus King of ye Bulgarians made also the like law in his Realm for ye
abolyshmente of Images out of the Churches. King Sabanus.
In the year of our Lord. 765. Sabell, Mass. Pantal.

Philip ye Emperor likewise made a Philip the Emperor
straight law for the abolishyng of Images. In the year of our Lord. 730.
Sabel. Paulus Diaconus.

Adrian the Emperor
The noble Emperor Adrian commanded, yt there should be no Images set up in
temples or Churches. Joan. Laziardus.

King Calcobertus.
Calcobertus King of England destroyed in his Realm when he received the faith
of Christ, all the Idols, poppettes, Maumettes and Images that he found or
could come by. In the year of our Lord. 640. Joan. Laziard* Vincentius.

Pope Gregory the first after that he was appointed Bishop of Rome, P. Gregory
the first.
commanded, that all the Idolles and Images of the Heathen should utterly be
defaced, their heads cut of, and their other members in all points mangled
and disgraced, and so in fine destroyed, that no occasion of Idolatry might
afterward be given. In the year of our Lord. 590. Joan. Laziard. Chronica.

Pope Constantine the second.
Pope Constantine the second, whom the seditious, tirannicall and superstitious
papists did afterward violently depose, cruelly thrust into a monastery as
into a vile and stinking prison, and most unmercifully put out his eyes,
commanded that no Christian should worship any Image either of God or of any
Saint, Joan iiii,
or invoke or call upon the Uirgine Marye, or any other saint in heaven with
their prayers, but worship God in spirit and truth, and call upon his glorious
name through Jesus Christ our alone Mediator, Advocate and Intercessoure. In
the year, etc. 769. Joan. Laziard.

The Council Agathense made a decree, that there should be no pictures in
Churches, Certain godly councels conde^ning the having of ^images in churches.
and that no thing should be painted on the walls of Churches, that is
honored and worshipped. In the year of our Lord. 440. Libro. Council. Durand.

The Council Toletane the twelfth holden in Spain, made constitutions both
against Images and against the worshippers of images. In the year, etc. 712.
Chron. Council.

The Council Elibertine likewise holden in Spain decreed, that all pictures
should be had out of churches, and that nothing that is honored or worshipped
should be painted on the church walls. In the year, etc. 345. Isidorus. Tom.
1. Council.

Epiphanius.
The holy Bishop Epiphanius coming into a church to pray, saw a veil there
ha^ging, wherein was painted ye image of Christ, or of some saint. So sone as he
saw it, he cut ye Image away, and said, that it is contrary to the
authority of the holy scriptures, to have the Image of any man in the Church
of Christ. In the year of our Lord. 565. S. Hieronymus. Chron.

This Epistle, which the aforesaid holy and godly learned Bishop Epiphanius
wrote of this matter unto John Bishop of Jerusalem in the Greek tongue, and
Saint Hierome translated into Latin, and the words are these in English
WHen we went forth together unto the holy place, which is called Bethel, yt
we should make there a collectio^ ( for the poor) according to the custom of
Christ's Church, and came unto a village, which is called Anablatha, and as I
passed by saw there a candle burning: I demanded what place it was.
And when I had learned, that it was a Church, I entered into it for to pray,
where I found a veil hanging on the door of the same church, dyed and painted,
and having an Image as it were of Christ, or of some saint. For I do not well
remember whose Image it was. Therefore when I saw this in the church of
Christ, contrary to the authority of the scriptures, that the Image of a man
did hang there, I cut it away, and gave rather counsel to the kepers of ye
same place, that they should lap and burye some poor dead man in it. But they
murmured at the matter and said: If he wuld cut it, it were convenient, that
he should give an other veil in the stead of the other. Which thing when I
heard, I promised yt I would give the^ one, and send it unto them out of hand.
But while I sought to send a good veil for ye other, I have made some delay in
the matter, For I thought I should have had one sent unto me from Cyprus. But
now have I sent such as I could get: and I pray thee, yt thou will command
the priests of the same place, to receive the veil of the bringer, yt we have
sent, and to give commandment, yt from henceforth no such vayles be hanged
up in ye church of Christ, as be contrary to our religion.

Here this most Godly bishop with manifest, plain, and evident words
pronounces and declares, It is against the word of God to have Ima^ges i^
Churches.
that it is against the holy scripture and our religion, that the Image of
Christ should be had in the temples of the Christians, so far is it of, that the
Images of any saints ought to be placed in the^, Hereof may we easily gather,
that S Hierome also and all the other godly Bishops, which were both before
and in his time did agree in this point with Epiphanius that the Images of
Christ and of the Saints are by no means to be suffered in the Churches of
the Christians. For in the time of Saint Hierome, and certain years after him,
we do not read that any Bishop being of a sound and perfect judgment could
ever abide, that images should be placed in the temples of such as profess
Christ.

The Godly learned Bishop S. Athanasius proves euidentlye against all
Imagemongers, Athanasius
that men may learn to know God better by living creatures, whether they be
reasonable or unreasonable, than by dead carved stocks and stones.
Athanasius, aduersus gentes.

The great and ancient clarke Lactantius says, Lactantius.
yt God can not be truly worshipped in that place, wherein an image is* Lib, de
orig. Erroris. 2. Cap. 19.

Again he says: If your Saints, if the holy Mother of Christ be in heaven,
why do ye not lift up your eyes unto heaven, etc. Why do ye rather look unto
walls and unto stocks, tha^ unto that place, where ye believe that they are?
What mean the temples the tabernacles, yea and to be short, what mean those
Images? Lib. 2. Cap. 2. de orig* erroris.

Austen.
Saint Austen says, that it is abomination and plain sacrilege, if any man
set in the Church an Image of God the father sittyng on his seat. Lib. De
fide et symbalo.

The Image of God the father in the temples of the Papists most blasphemous.
Hereof does it follow, that the papists are abominable and commit sacrilege.
For so do they setforth the Image of God the father most blasphemously in all
their popyshe Churches, paynting him with an old wythered face, wrinckled
forehead, hollow eyes, lean chekes, sharp nose, ha^ging down lips, enbowed
chinne, white bearde, etc, and for very faint feblenesse sitting in his chair,
like a simple, selye, syngle soul, contrary to the nature of God and the
truth of his holy word which says by the Psalmographe: Psalm. 102. Malach. 1.
A man shall wax old like a garmente, but thou art always one, and thy
years fail not. God himself says by the prophet: I am ye Lord, and am not
changed. Again the prophet Esaias says: To what thing will ye make God like?
Esaias. 40.
Or what Image will ye set up unto him? Shall the Karuer make a karued Image?
And shall the Goldsmith cover him with Gold, or cast him into a furnace of
silver plates. etc.

Eusebius writes, Eusebius.
yt the use of Images came from the Heathen unto us. Images came from the
Heathen
Eccle. Hist. Lib. 7. Cap. 14. And not without a cause. For although in the
old Testament there were many holy Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, Priests,
Prophets, No Images were made of gods saints in the old Testament
Martyrs, Matrones, Wydowes and Uirgines, which were noble and worthy
myrroures of virtue and Godliness, most worthy to be had in remembrance: yet
read we not, that there were any Images made of them, or set in places, where
the people of God came together for to pray. And ye Jews at that time were
the peculiar people of God. They remembered the manifold commandments of God
concerning the not making and not worshipping of Images, and therefore could
they not abide Images neither privately nor publicly. Again in the Primative
Church, no Images were suffered in Christen men's Temples and Oratories, as we
may see by the historye of Epiphanius, which did not only cut the Image
that hanged in the Church on pieces,
but he also affirmed, that it is contrary to the Christen religion to have the
Image of any man in the Church of Christ.

Erasmus Roterodamus.
Erasmus Roterodamus a most diligent searcher of antiquities, writes, that
unto the time of Saint Hierome there were men of an approved and sound
Religion, which could not abide any Images, in the Churches, neither painted
nor graven, nor yet wouen, no not somuche as the Image of Christ. Eras. in
catechesi. Saint Hierome lived. In the year of our Lord. 387.

Cornelius Agrippa.
Cornelius Agrippa writ of Images on this manner. The ungodliness and
foolishenesse of the Egyptians concerning Images was wonderful. And from them
came the like fondenesse unto all nations, which corrupt usage of Religion of
the Heathen, The beginning of our Images.
when they began to be converted unto the faith of Christ, infected our
Religion also, and brought in our Church Idolles and Mahomettes, with many
pompouse barren Ceremonies of ^he which those ancient and true Christians
knew nothing at all. Hereof came it to pass, that we brought into our
temples the dumme Images of our Saints and set them on Gods altares with
great solemnity, honor and worship. O abomination.
And where we think it an unseemly thing for man, which is a true Image of
God, to come up, even there place we dead Idolles, and to them we make
curtesye, to them we give kysses, to them we offer, to them we give gifts,
upon them we hang precious iewelles, to them we apply miracles, we bye
par^ons, to them we go on pylgrimage, to them we make vows, to them we give
worship, and do all the honor that can be devised. Images cause of
Idolatrye.
And yet can it not be expressed, into how great superstition, I will not
say Idolatrye, the rude and unlearned people do fall thorough Images, the
Priests winkyng at the matter, forasmuch as here of they have no small lucre
and advantage.

And here they defend themselves with the words of Gregory, The Fa^sy of
Gregory concerning Images.
which says, that images are the books of the rascal and common people, for
such to remember things by, and to read in, as have no learning, that when
they see them, they may be allured to remember and consider God.

Gods commau^deme^t forbids Images.
But these be fond fantasies of Gregory going about to excuse the matter,
although in deed that holy man allows images and not the worshypping of
the^.
But the commandment of God, which plainly forbids images, is far
otherwise. For it becomes us not to learn of the forbidden book of Images,
but of the book of God, which is the book of the Scriptures. He therefore that
desires to know God, let him not seek it of the Images of Painters and
Keruers, John v.
but as John says, let him search the Scriptures, which bear witness of
him. Romans x.
And they that can not read, let them hear the word of the Scripture. John.
x.
For Faith, John vi.
as Saint Paul says, comes by hearing. And Christ says in John: My Sheep
hear my voice. Again, if no man (as Christ says) can come to him except the
Father draws him, John. 14.
and no man can come to the Father, but by Christ alone: why take we away the
glory from God, and give it to Pictures and Images, as though they were able to
bring us unto the right knowledge of God, etc.

Of Baptism.
POpe Victor the first commanded, Baptism ministered at all times and in all
places, and of all persons, necessitye requiring. Hereof came it, that Midwiues
Baptize infants
that baptism should be ministered to al men indifferently at Easter.
Notwithstanding if any desired (necessity so requiryng) to be baptized at
other times: he ordained, that they might lawfully be baptized in all places
and at all times, yea and that with any kind of natural water, hallowed or
unhallowed either by a Layman or by a Laywoman. In the year of our Lord. 198.
Great, Fascic. Temp. Lib. Council. Poli. D. Barnes.

Pope Gelasi^s ordained, that Baptism should be openly ministered at Easter
and at Witsontyde, yea and that freely. In the year. etc. 494. Isidor Great.
The Baptism of insantes.


About that time also there was a Council holden in Spain, where it was
enacted, that young infantes (if need were) might be baptized on the same day
that they were borne. Isidor in Council. Pantal.

Pope Leo the second decreed, that Baptism might be ministered every day:
where as in the primative Church as it appears by ancient writers, the
Sacrament of baptism was not commonly ministered, A goodly custom.
but at two times in the year, that is to say, at Easter and Witsontyde: at
which times it was solemnly and with great reverence ministered in the
presence of all the congregation. In the year of our Lord. 676. Lib. Council.
Volat. Pol. Ch^on.

Monks may not baptize, nor be Godfathers.
Pope Gregorye the first made a decree, that Monks should not baptize, nor be
Godfathers to children at their baptism. In the year of our Lord* 590 Sabell.
Pantal. D. Barns.

This decree did Pope Eugenius the third renew. In the year of our Lord. 1147.
Lib. Council. Chron.

Nuns may be no Godmothers.
The aforesaid Gregorye also ordained, that Nu^nes by no means should be
Godmothers to children either at Baptism or at Confirmation. Chron. Joan.
Stella.

Pope Calixte the second pronounced all such excommunicated, Baptism and
burial free.
as took money either for baptisyng or for burying. In the year of our Lord.
1120. Joan. Tilio. Volat. Pantal.

Pope Nicolas the first ordained, Baptism ministered of a Pagane is of force.
that the sacrament of baptism should stand in effect, although it were
ministered of a Pagane and Infidel. In the year of our Lord. 871. Achilles.
Did. 4. De consecratione.

The same Pope made a decree, Baptism may not be reiterated.
that baptism should not be twyce ministered to one person. Joan. Philip.
Bergom.

Pope Iginius decreed, godfathers and godmothers. One Godfather at Baptism.
that children, which were to be Christened* should have a Godfather and
Godmother for to be witnesses that they were baptized. In the year. etc. 143.
Lib. Council* Sabell. Polidor, D. Barns.

Pope Leo the third appointed, that when the child is either christened or
bishoped, he should have but one Godfather, be it a man child or a woman
child. In the year of our Lord. 817. De consec. Did. 4. Capi. Non plures.
Guil. Durand. Joan. Stella* Phil* Bergom.

No father may be godfather to his own child.
Pope Theodore the first made a decree, that no father should be Godfather to
his own son or daughter: nor no mother Godmother to her own son or
daughter. In the year of our Lord. 936. Ioannes Laziardus.

Item, he ordained, that if any man were Godfather to another man's daughter,
Per qua^ regu^am?
his son might not afterward take her to wife. 30. Quest. 1. Cap. Non Oportet.

What ieoperdye is there in the matter.
Pope Urban the second made a decree, that a man and his wife may not be
Godfather and Godmother to one child at Baptism. 186.30. Quest. 4. Cap. Quod
autem.

A doubtful kind of baptising.
Pope Alexander the third ordained, that when it is doubtefull, whether the
child be baptized or not, he should be baptized on this manner: If thou be
baptized, I baptize thee not again, but if thou be not baptized, I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.
In the year of our Lord 1161. Guilihelmus. Durandus.

Ceremonies about Baptism.
Pope Leo, Pope Damasus, and Saint Ambrose brought in the exorcismes and
coniurations, the benedictions and blessings, with the other solemn
ceremonies. Guil. Durand.

Pope Celestine made a decree, A mad and a folyshe decree.
that neither young children, nor any other of what age soever they be, shall
be christened, before ye priests through their coniurations, breathings,
spittyngs and saltings do drive the devil out of the^. In the year, etc. 428.
Chron. Germ. Did. 4. de Cons.

Pope Clement the first put oil and cream to the baptism, Oil cream crosses.
and commanded, that all yt shall be baptized, should be anointed therewith,
and crossed in ye forehead. In the year, etc. 92. Chron. Lib. Council. Ioannes.
Laziardus.

Pope Siluester the first also ordained, that al yt were baptized, should be
anointed with oil and cream. In the year, etc. 315. Plat. Volat. Sabell.

In the Council Braccarense, it was ordained, Oil and cream tree*
that there should be no money paid for oil and cream* wherewith ye infantes
be anointed in their baptism. Lib. Council,

In the Council holden at Chartage, it was decreed, The women's baptism.
yt a woman although never so well learned, may not presume to baptize,
except necessitye compels. Council. Durand.

A good prouiso. and a profitable.
In the council Ilerdense, it was ordained, that every priest that can not
have a font of stone, may have any other convenient vessel meet for that
purpose. Provided always, that it be never after carried out of the church
Guili. Durandus.

Of the Lords Supper, commonly called of the papists, The sacrament of the
altar.
Unleauened bread.
POpe Alexander the first commanded, that only vnleuended bread should be used
at the Lords supper. In the year, etc. 119. Lib, Council. Great. Plat. Sabell.


Before that time the bread appointed for the Lords Supper was indifferent,
whether it were leuended or vnleuended. Notwithstanding the Greeks from the
Apostles time unto this day have ever used leuended bread in the ministration
of the Lords Supper, as they use also wine only in their cup, where as such
as be under the Pope customably mingle water with the wine according to Pope
Alexanders decree.

Pope Nicolas the second decreed, The carnal presence of Christ published by
pope Nicolas in the sacrament.
yt the bread and the wine, which are set upon the altar, are not only after
the conseeration, the sacraments of ye body and blood of Christ, but they are
also the very self same body and blood of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, yt
was borne of Mary the Uirgine, so that the very body of Christ is there truly
and unfeignedly handled of the priests hands, broken and torn on pieces with ye
teeth of ye faithful. In the year, etc. 1961. De consecrat. Did. 2. Ego.
Berengarius.

Pope Innocent the third assembled at Rome in the council Laterane a
wonderful Tra^substa^tiatio^ devised and co^fyrmed.
swarm of spiritual smeared shorelinges to the number of.xii. hundred and
odd, whereof.viii. hundred at the least were monks, friars, chanons, and such
other monkyshe monstures, which with one consent for ye maintenance of their
beastly idleness and idle beastliness, devised and confyrmed ye doctrine of
transubsta^tiatio^, making it an article of our faith to believe in pain of
damnation, that after the priest has whispered over ye bread and wine a few
latin words, as Hoc est enim corpus meum. Hic est enim sanguis meus etc: the
bread is turned into the natural body of Christ, flesh, blood and bone,
sinowes, guts and loins, even as he was borne of Mary the Uirgine, and
hanged on ye cross. Again the wine is turned into ye very natural blood of
Christ, which he received of Mary the Uirgine, as it was shed for our
redemption on the cross, no substance of bread and wine remaining, but the
very substance of bread and wine turned unto the natural substance of the body
and blood of Christ, only ye accidentss of bread and wine remaining, this
monsture of transubsta^tiation was hatched and brought forth by Antichrist and
his chaplaynes. In the year, etc. 1215. Decret. de summa trinitate, Cap.
Firmiter.

But as this doctrine of transubstantiation was unknown to the Church of
Christ before ye wicked and unlawful assemblye of ye venomous dragon pope
Innocent and his pestilent papists: even so likewise from ye beginning, unto
this day would ye church of the Greeks never receive it, but always have
abhorred it as a new and strange, The Greeks would never admit
tra^substantiation.
yea, a deuelysh and damnable tradition of Antichrist,
as they in like manner would never admit that wicked and exe^rable tradition
of receiving the sacrament of Christ's body and blood under one kind
contrary to the institution of Christ, nor the damnable and deuelyshe decree of
the syngle life of priests, although that Romyshe Antichrist with the
Satanicall Sectaryes have sought all means possible to bring it to pass.

Pope Honorius the third did not only command, The sacrament worshipped* and
car^ed about to the sick, etc.
yt the sacrament of the altar (as the papists term it) should be worshipped
and kneled unto of the people, but also that it should be borne unto the sick
after a most comely sort with all reverence and honor, yea and that with
candlelight also, though it be at hye noone days. In the year, etc. 1214. D.
3, Tit. 1. Cap. 10. Lib. Council. Pant.

Pope Innocent the third ordained, The sacrament reserved.
that the sacrament of the altar should be kept in ye churches continually
under lock and keye, to the intent to be in a readiness at al times, least,
says he, they that are sick, should want ye spiritual comfort in ye
troublesome time of death. In the year, Against ye reservation of the
Sacrament.
etc. Lib. Council. Chron. Pant. But in ye primative church there was no such
reservation and keeping of the sacramental bread either for the sick or for the
hole, as it is at this present. For in the Apostles time and many years
after, if any bread remained of the communion, it was not reserved and hanged
up in the Pixe to be worshipped, as the use is among the papists, brought in
by the devil and Antichrist, but it was given to the poor people to eat. And
in the time of Hesichius and of Origin (as their commentaries upon Leuiticus do
testifye) the bread that remained after the communion, was brent to ashes. And
Clement Pope of Rome made a decree, that if any of the sacramental bread
remained, after the Lords Supper was once done, the clerks should not reserve
it to be hanged up and worshipped, but consume and eat it. Li 4, ca. 3, 6
The old custom was this says Euagrius in his ecclesiastical history, that
when much of the holy parts of the undefiled body of Christ our God did
remain, that the young children, which were wont to go to schole, should
be called to eat them, And Saint Hierome witnesses also in his commentarye
upon Saint Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, that after the communion,
whatsoever they left, says he, of the sacrifices (he means the sacramental
bread and wine) they consumed it there together in the Church, In i. Cor.
cap. xi.
eating their common Supper.

Pope Julius the first appointed, that the Sacrament of the altar should not
be ministered with milk. In the year of our Lord.338. Guili. Durand.
Notwithstanding we read, that in the time of Pope Innocent the eyghte, it was
suffered, that the priests of Norduegia might sing Mass with water for lack
of wine. In the year, etc. 1484 Math. Palmer. Pantal.

Pope Innocent the third bearing rule it was ordained in the council Laterane
yt when soever the Sacrament of the altar is carried about, A vile and a
wicked decree.
there should be borne before it a bell ringing with a light to cause the
people to knele down and worship it. In the year, etc. 1195. Iacobus de visaco.

Can the mouse or any other beast eat ye body of Christ.
In the council Arelatense it was decreed, yt if any priest were negligent in
keeping the body of Christ, so yt either mouse or any other beast did eat it,
yt priest for his offense should do penance fortye days. Did. 3. De. consecrat.

Priests only must carry the sacrament to the sick.
In the counsel Remense it was enacted, yt whereas before the manner was for the
priests oftentimes to deliver ye sacrament of Christ's body and blood to Laymen
and to Laywomen, yea to children for to bear it unto the sick: the priests
from thenceforth should no more so do, but bear it themselves unto them,
saying, that it is an horrible and detestable thing for such to carye the holy
body of the Lord to ye sick: Except it be to offer.
which are forbidden to come into the Chauncel, or to approach nigh unto the
altar. De consec. Did. 2.

Lay people may not touch ye sacrament with their hands.
In a certain council holden at Rotomage, it was decreed, yt the sacrament
should be given from henceforth neither to Laymen, nor to Laywomen in their
hands any more, but yt the priest should put it in their mouths, contrary to
the use and practice of the primative church and many hundred years after.
Lib. Council.

Pope Boniface the second made a decree, A good decree.
that at the ministration of the Lords Supper the people and the Clergy should
be present, not to be gasers, but partakers of those holy mysteries. In the
year. etc. 529. Joan. Stella.

Pope Anacletus decreed, A godly law and worthy to be practiced
yt a priest, whenever he does communicate, shall have two at the least to be
partakers with him: and that such as be present, and will not communicate shall
as ungodly persons be excommunicate, and put out of the congregation. In the
year etc. 101. Great. Plat. Phil. Bergom.

In the c^u^sell Antiochen it was like wise agreed,
that such as were in the Church, and present at the common prayers, and
heard the preaching of gods word, and yet refused to receive the Lords
Sacrament, they should be taken for none of the number of the true Christians.
Lib. Council.

Pope Zepherinus appointed, that all that profess christ, or bear the names
of Christians, The age of the communicantes.
being of the age of twelve or thirtene years or upward, should at the least
once in the year (as at Easter) receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. In the year. etc. 208. Plat. Sabell. Volat. Laziard. etc.

Thrice in the year, the holy communion is to be received.
Pope Fabiane commanded, that every Christian should receive the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood thrice in the year, that is to say, at Easter, at
Witsontide, and at Christmasse. In the year of our lord.242. Eusebius, Plat.
Sabell. Volat. Joan. Stella. Pantaleon.

In the Council Agathense it was decreed, that those seculare men, which did
not receive the Communion at Christmasse, Easter and Witsontide, should not be
taken for true Catholics. Lib. Council.

A fond decree.
There is a decree, as Guilihelmus Durandus writes, that such as ought to
receive the Sacrament at Easter, must abstain ab amplexibus, that is to say,
from gyuing their wives the due benevolence, as Saint Paul calls it, three
days before, and three, or five, or vii, days after, as though the act of
Matrimonye were unclean, when notwithstanding the holy Apostle calls
Wedlock honorable, Heb. 1^.
and the bed undefiled. Rationale di. off.

Of receiving the Sacrament under both kinds according to Christ's Institution.
POpe Gelasius ordained, A good and godly law. The sacrament ought to be
received under both ki^des
that all Christians, be they spiritual or temporal, as they term them,
should receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ in both kinds
according to Christ's institution: and that if any would not so receive it, the
same should abstain from the whole. In the year of our Lord.494. did. 2. de
consecrat. cap. Comperimus.

Pope Julius the first also commanded, that the people should receive the
mysteries of Christ's body and blood according to Christ's institution, both
the bread and the cup, one several from the other, as the Apostle says: let
a man examine himself and so eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. In
the year of our Lord.338. de consecrat. did. 2. cap. Cum omne.

In a certain council holden at Basile, it was concluded, that according to
christ's institution the lay people also should receive the Sacrament in both
kinds. And this decree was not only established by the authority of the
emperor Sigismund, and the consent of the other noble and learned men, which
were there present, but it was also confirmed, approved, and allowed by Pope
Eugenius the fourth. In the year. etc 1430. Lib. Council. Chron.

Not only in the primative church, but also in the time of S. Cipriane. s.
Hierome. S. Ambrose. S. Austen. S, John Chrisost. etc. and many hundred years
after, the lay people received the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood under
both kinds, as they likewise had the Sacrame^tal bread given the^ in their
hands and not put in their mouths, as the Papists use in these our days.
Are not these the words of saint Ambrose unto the Emperor Theodosius, when
he would have received the Sacrament, coming blustering and blowyng from
sheding innocent blood? O Emperor, says he, how shall thou with such hands
take the holy body of the Lord? With what folishe hardiness shall thou receive
in thy mouth the cup of the precious blood, seeing that through the madness of
thy words so much blood is wrongfully shed? Seven thousand men, says the
historye, were slain at the commandment of the Emperor. Tripar. hist. Lib.
9. cap. 30 That this Emperor Theodosius was a lay man,
the Papists themselves will confess I doubt not. Here then learn we two
notable things, one is that in the time off. Ambrose, the lay people according
to Christ's institution, received yt Sacrament under both kinds The second is,
that the lay people also had the Sacramental bread given the^ into their hand
of the ministers, and not thrust into their mouths, as the massyng Papists
use at this day but this godly plant of Christ, has that wild bore of Rome
with his Antichristiane and filthy pigges ^oted up, subverted and destroyed.
Take eat, says Christ Drink ye all of this, says he. Matthew. 26. Mark. 14.
Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11. All says he, and not priests only.

The cup of the mystery of Christ's blood was so frelye suffered before the
tyranny of the Romish bishop prevailed, Note.
that not only it was ministered to ancient people, but also to young children,
as the monumentes of the old writers do manifestly declare. Cipr. in sermon. de
lapsis. All the east church receive the Sacrament under both kinds.


The Greeks, the Ethiopes, and the Bohems, with diverse other nations (as
histories make mention) have unto this day always observed and kept the
ancient and Apostolic manner of receuing the Sacrament under both kinds
according to the institution and ordinance of ye Lord Christ, by no means
obeying the wicked decree of ye bishop of Rome unto the contrary.

Of receiving the Sacrament under one kind after the popes invention.
When ye mystery of the Lords blud was taken away from the communion of the
Laytye.
POpe Innocent the third (as some write) did first of all forbid in the
council Laterane, that the lay people should receive the holy communion of the
body and blood of Christ under both kinds: about the year. etc 1215. Other
affirm (which I judge to be more true) that that wicked decree of taking
away the cup of the mystery of Christ's blood from the lay people contrary to
christ's institution and commandment, was first of al granted confirmed and
established in a counsel holden at Constance, John Wicliffe, John Husse,
Hieronimus de Praga.
the xiii, session, where ye most famous clerk John Wicklief our country man
was condemned for an heretic, and the two learned men John Hus and Hieronymus
de Praga were most cruelly and most unjustly murdered and brent also for
heretics of the bloody Papists, notwithstanding the Emperors safeconduct, for
deniyng the Popish article of Transubstantiation and maynteyning the receiving
of the Sacrament under both kinds. With what forhead the^ dare ye, O
unshamefast Papists, after the institucion of Christ.
In the year. etc. 1415. This is worthy to be noted, that the Papists them
selves in that their deuilish decree confess and grant, that Christ's
institution is, that the lay people should receive the Sacrament under both
kinds, and that in the primative Church all the communica^tes did not only
receive the mystery of christ's body, but also ye mystery of Christ's blood, one
several from the other, according to ye institucio^ of christ And
notwithstanding the premises, they straightly charge and commau^de, that from
that time forward, none of the Laytye shall receive the Sacrament, but only
under the kind of bread, and that they must believe certainly and by no means
doubt, that the whole body and blood of Christ is truly contained as well
under the kind of bread alone as under the kind of wine also: and that
therefore it is sufficient for the laytye to receive the Sacrament under one
kind, and that whosoever from that time fourth shall presume to receive the
Sacrament under both kinds (except he be an holy anointed) or think of this
decree otherwise than well: he shall be taken, judged, condemned and punished
like an heretic according to the appointment of the ecclesiastical laws,
that is to say, brent to ashes, as the good monk of Eye in Suffolk was in the
days of king Henry the eight, The good Monk of Eye.
O woluish and bloody Antichrists. A Christen man to be murdered for obeiyng
the commandment of Christ, yea, and that of them, which will be taken for
the heads of Christ's church, which also ought rather to shed their own
blood, than yt any jot or title of Gods word should be left undone? Gala. iii*
O tirannye incomparable. It is not lawful either to put to or take ought from
ye testament of a mortal man, if it be once allowed: and shall ye vile
donghills of the earth presume to alter and change the blessed and everlasting
Testament of ye only begotten son of god, Math. 26.
which he sealed with his most precious blood and delivered to his church to be
inuiolably kept until his return? Drink ye all of this, says Christ, and not
ye smeared shorelyngs only.

In a council holden at Basile, Priests may not receive under both kinds.
except they Mass.
it was decreed, yt not only the lay people, but the priests also, when they
themselves make not Gods body, should communicate only under one kind. In
the year, etc. 1437.

Of confyrmation or bishoppyng of Children.
POpe Clement the first (as the papists feign) first of all ordained the
confyrmation or byshopping of children, The bishopping of children.
and commanded yt
the child being once baptized, should as soon as is possible, be bishopped.
For says he, he is no perfect christian which not of necessity, but of
negligence or of set purpose leueth this thing undone. In the year, etc. 92.
Lib. Council. Fas. Temp. Pol. Pantal.

Some attribute this decree to pope Siluester the first, which lived in the
year, etc. 315. Plat. Volat. D. Barns.

The aforesaid pope also appointed, yt none should consecrate the oil and
cream, Bishops only must confirm children.
but bishops only, and yt they likewise, and none other, should confirm
children. Plat. Volat.

Pope Iginius ordained, that children should have a Godfather or Godmother,
when they were confyrmed and catechized. In the year, etc, 143. Ioannes.
Laziardus.

In the council Meldense it was ordained, yt bishops should be fasting, Bishops
must be fasting, when they confyrme children.

Rules concerning co^fyrmation.


when they confyrme children. Lib. Council. Did 5. de consecrat.

In a council holde^ at Aurelia, it was decreed, yt the sacrament as they call
it, of confirmation, should be given to such young ones as were of perfect age,
as xii, or.xv. years old, and to such as were come to man's state: and yt all
such, before they be bishopped, should be shriue^, and come fasting to their
byshoppyng. Lib. Council. Guilielmus. Durand.

Of Matrimonye.
POpe Euaristus made a law, A law not to be ^espised.
yt al priuye contracts of Matrimony, yt were made without ye consent of the
parents, should be of no force: and yt the man and the woman should be openly
married together in the church, of a priest before the congregation, or else ye
marriage to be taken as adulterous, incestuous and abominable. In the year,
etc. 110. Lib. Council. Epist. 1. ad episc. Aphrican. Polid. D. Barns.

Pope Sother decreed, yt no wife should be holden lawful, Against pr^uy
co^tracts and stolen maryages.
except she were first blessed of a Priest. Ranulphus. Cestrensis. Again, yt
al marriages should be made not secretly, but openly, and with great solemnity.
In the year, etc. 168. Grati. Volat. Sabell.

The same law also made Pope, Nicolas ye first. In the year of our Lord. 87^
Quaest. 3. Cap. 1. Nostrates. Laziard.

(...)
Pope Hormisda likewise strayghtly commanded, that the marriage of the
Christians should not be celebrated in hocker mocker, but openly in the
Church of Christ before the multitude In the year, etc. 514.30. Qu. 5. Cap.
Nullus fidelis. Joan. Stella.

Halowing of the wedding bed.
Pope Martine the first ordained, yt the man and his wife should not lie
together, before the priest had blessed the^ and hallowed their bed. In the
year, etc. 643. Chron.

Pope Theodorus did inhibite first of all, A wicked act.
yt a man might not mary ye maid, to whom his father was Godfather. In the
year of our Lord. 636. Sabell. Gratian.

Degrees of marying.
Pope Fabian made a decree, yt no man should marrye any of his kyndred with in
the fyfth degree, In the year, etc. 242. Great. Sabell. Volat. Plat.

Pope Julius the first made a law, yt no man should marrye any of his kyndred
unto the seventh degree. In the year, etc. 338. Cau, 35. q. 3. Null. Pol. Pant.

This law was afterward confyrmed by Gregory the first. But Pope Innocent
the third disalowing the decrees both of Pope Julius and of Pope Gregory, A
more reasonable decree.
renewed the decree of Pope Fabian, licensyng al men to marrye from the fourth
degree upward, as it is specifyed in a decree, that begins, Non debet. In
the year, etc. 1215. Paul. Phrig. ^olidor. Pantal.

Pope Honorius the third ordained, An homely ma^ter.
that if any woman wuld come, and declare before the ordinarye, yt her husband
is not able to give her ye due benevolence although it be three years after
they have been married, she shall be separated from her husband, In the year
of our Lord. 1214. Dec. 5. Tit. 33. Cap. 28.

Pope Nicolas ye first decreed, that no marriage ought to be solemni^ed in the
time of Lent, Marriage forbidden in Lent.
In the year, etc. 871. Great. Chron.

There is also a decree made in the council Ilerdense that from Septuagesime
unto the Octaues of Easter, When marriage may not be celebrated.
and, iii. wekes before the feast of S. John Baptist, otherwise called
Mydsomer: again, that from Aduente unto Twelf^yde after Christmasse, marriage in
no condition may be solemnised. If any presume to marrye in those forbidden
times, What if a man purchase a dispensatio^ for money? Shall it not then be
lawful. A folishe law.
the popes law is, yt they shall be separated. 3. Qu. 4. Cap, Non oportet.

Pope Gregory ordained, that ye man, which slepeth or lies with his wife, may
not enter into the church, before he has washed himself with water, and made
himself clean. Cause. 33. Quaest. 4. Vir cum propria.

Of Auricular confession.
POpe Innocent the third ordained auriculare confession in the council
Laterane, Confession of sins to the Curate
and commanded yt al men, women and children, eue^ so many as are of age, shall
at the least once in the year confess their sins to their own Curate. In
the year, etc. 1215. Paulus. Phrig. Massae. Polid.

The aforesaid pope also made a law that if any priest did utter, disclose, or
tell abroad the confession of any man, Confession may not be disclosed.
he should be thrust into a monasterye to do penance all the time of his life.
De. 5. Tit. 30. Cap. 13.

Pope Gregorye also made a law, that no confessor or ghostly father should
bewraye any man's confession either by beck, sign, token, word or by any
other means. Did. 6. de paenitentia. Ca. Sacerdos. Ansel. Ryd.

In the Greek Church there was a certain kind of auricular confession used
of such as should receive the communion, If this were put in practice here in
england: it were not amiss, namely for the youthlings sake.
more than a thousand years paste. Before they came to the Lords Supper,
their manner was to go unto ye minister, to learn of him ye right use of that
holy mystery, and how they might prepare themselves to come worthily unto that
holy and heavenly table: Again, if any thing troubled their conscience, to
declare it to a godly learned minister, and to ask his council and advise in
redress thereof, as y^ manner at this present is in diverse places of
Germanye, where the Gospel is preached. Under the cloak of this auriculare
confession, much mischief was wrought, in so much it was proved, yt a
certain Deacon did most shamefully abuse a noble citizens wife diverse times,
when she came unto ye church under this pretense, eue^ to be confessed. Which
thing when Nectarius bishop of Constantinople perceived, Nectarius.
he utterly abrogated and put away ye arricular confession, leaving the
communicants to their own consciences. In the year of our Lord. 395. Hist.
Trip. Lib. 9. Cap. 5. P. Phrig.

Of Annoilyng, or extreme unction.
The annoiling of the sick.
POpe Felix the fourth did institute yt such as were in extremes and like to
die, should be annoyled. In the year, etc. 525. Chronic. Volat. Polydor. D,
Barns. Pantal.

Pope Innocent the first ordained also, that ye sick should be a^noynted with
oil, being before consecrate of a bishop In the year, etc. 404. Lib. Council.
Petrus de natal.

Of praying for the dead.
Diriges and Mass of Requ^em.
POpe Pelagius the first ordained first of all the funeral Exequies or Diriges
with Masses of Requiem to be done for the dead. He also commanded, that the
priests at their Masses should daily pray for the dead in their second
Memento. In the year, etc. 52. Great. Plat. Pol.

Pope Gregory the third commanded, Sacrifice for the dead
that oblations and sacrifices should be offered of the Priests at their
Masses for ye dead. In the year of our Lord. 740. Nauclerus. D. Barns.

Pope Leo appointed the Mass to be a sacrifice for the dead. The mass a
sacrifice for the dead
In the year of our Lord. 444. Vol. Ansel. Ryd.

Pope Benet the third ordained, One good turn ask an other.
that the Clergy should be present at the burial of the Bishops, and sing
Dirige for their souls: and that the Bishops likewise should be present at the
burial of the Clergy, and sing Dirige also for their souls. In the year.
etc. 861. Chron. Plat.

Pope John the.xviii. at the instante desire of Oclilo the Monk, The feast of
al souls
appointed one several day in the year to pray for all Christen souls
departed: which we commonly call the feast of all souls. In the year. etc.
999. Chron.

Pope Gregory the first by prayer obtained of God (as they write) that the
soul of Traianus the Emperor, A tale of a tubbe.
which many years before had been most miserably tormented in the most bitter
pains of hell fire (where they say is no redemption) was delivered out of
hell, and brought unto the glorious kingdom of heaven. In the year of our
Lord. 590. Polichronicon.

Of divine service, as they call it: Mattens, Prime, and Hours, Euensong. etc.
Ringing of belles to service.
POpe Sabiniane decreed first, that ye people should be assembled together to
hear their divine service at certain hours of the day by ringyng of belles.
In the year of our Lord. 603. Volat. Fasci. Temp. Chron. Plat. Polid, D. Barns.

An order for service.
Pope Damasus at the instance of the Emperor Theodosius commanded* S. Hierome
to take an order for the service to be used in Churches, and to appoint what
prayers should be said on every day, that there might be an uniformity in the
service. Which thing. S. Hierome did with all diligence, in somuche that he
appointed, what prayers and how many Psalms should be said every day in the
weke. When he had finished the service, he sent it unto Damasus, which did
right well allow it, and commanded, that all Churches should use that order
and none other. For before that time every Church had such prayers
appointed, as were thought by the Elders thereof most mete for the
congregation, and served best for the present time. In the year. etc. 371.
Guil. Durandus. Chron.

Pope Gregorye the first brought in Deus in adiutorium. Deus in adiutorium.
etc. and ordained it to be said every hour at service. In the year of our
Lord. 590. Plat. Iac. Phil. Bergom. Poly.

Pope Damasus through the council of S, Hierome appointed that Gloria patri,
Gloria patri
which, as they write, was made at the council of Nice, should be said at the
end of every Psalm. In the year of our Lord. 371. Volat. Sigeb. Polidor.
Pantal.

Pope Gregory the seventh ordained, Psalms. Lessons.
that from Easter day unto the Saterdaye before the feast of the Trinity,
there should be said at Mattens, but.iii. Psalms and.iii. lessons only: at all
other times.ix. lessons. etc. In the year. etc. 1073. Some write the contrary,
and ascribe this invention to Alcuinus, which was scholemaster to Charles the
great. Guil. Durand. Chron.

Legendes.
The Legendes or lives of Saints, that be read in the quiere at service time
were made by Paulus Longobardus at the desire of Charles the great. And he
appointed conuient lessons for every feast of the Saints thoroughout the
year. Bergom.

Isuardus the French Monk at the the desire of Charles the great, made the
book, The Martiloge.
which is called, the Martiloge. Iac. Phil.

Respondes Collectes.
Pope Gregorye the first, and Pope Gelasius brought in the Respondes and
Collectes, that be said at Mattens. Guil. Durandus.

Himnes.
Pope Damasus added the Himmes: whereof he himself made part, and the residue
were made by saint Hilary, saint Ambrose, and other. Guil. Durandus.

Pope Gregorye the first devised the Anthemes, Anthemes.
and made the tune or song unto them. Guil. Durand. Joan. Laziard.

Notwithstanding some write, that in y^ time of Pope Euaristus Anthemes were
brought into the Church by Ignatius Saint John the Evangelists disciple, yea
and that by this occasion Ignatius at a time standing upon a certain mountain
heard the Angels in Heaven singing Anthemes, He being moved by their example,
ordained in like manner that Anthemes should be song in the churches, and
Psalms likewise after the Anthemes. In the year. etc. 109* Phil. Bergom.
Tripart. Hist.

Pope Damasus ordained, The order of ye quiere.
that the quier being divided in two parts: they should singe one verse of the
Psalms on the one side, and an other on the other side. Sigeb. Durand. Polid.
Pantal.

Pope Alexander the second commanded, Laus tibi.
that Alleluia should not be said nor song in the churches from Septuagesima
unto Easter even* but in the stead of that, Laus tibi domine. In the year.
etc. 1063. Nauclerus. D. Barns.

The same commandment gave Pope Telesphorus also, as Durand writteth. Rat.
di. off.

Pope Innocent the third ordained, Te deu^* etc Forbidden.
that whenever the Mary, or the holy Ghost, or saint Cross is served on the
working days, Te deum shall not be said at Mattens, nor Gloria in excelsis, and
the Creed at Mass. In the year of our Lord. 1195. Guil. Durand.

Psalms singing day and night.
Pope pontianus made a decree, that the Psalms should be song throughout all
Churches both day and night. In the year. etc. 230. Fas. Temp. Chron.

Pope Pelagius the first commanded first of al, that Priests should say daily
Mattens of the day. In the year. etc 552. Great. plat. polid. Chron.

Mattens of our Lady.
Pope Urban the second ordained likewise, that priests should say every day our
Ladies matte^s openly in ye church: and that upon the Saturday the whole
service should be of our Lady. In the year. etc. 1086. Sabel. Joan. Stella.
Nauclerus. pol. Durand. polichron.

alleluia. etc forbidden.
Pope Leo the first commanded, that in Septuagesima, and Quadragesima, and
Aduent, and Lent, Alleluya should not be song, nor Gloria in excelsis. In the
year. etc. 444. Durandus. Joan. Stella. Iac. phil. Bergom.

Te deum.
Saint Ambrose and S. Austen made Te deum, as they wait. Catalog. Sant.
Specul. Eccles. Iac. phil. Bergom.

Saints service.
Pope Leo the nynth made certain songs of the Saints. In the year. etc.
1040. Sigebertus. Chron.

Paulus Longobardus made this hymn, Vt queant laxis.
vt queant laxis, with diverse other more at the desire of charles ye great.
Bergom.

Pope Zepherinus made the Legend on Childermasse day, Legendes.
which begins, Zelus quo tendat. etc. and also the Legend of the
decollation of Saint John Baptiste. phil. Bergom.

Pope Gregory the nynthe ordained Salve regina to be song in Churches with all
devotion and with all solemnity. Salve Regina.
In the year of our Lord. 1225. Blondus Crantz. The maker of this Antheme
was one peter Bishop of Compostella. Guili. Durand.

Pope Siluester the second being Bishop of Rome, Sequente^. Hymns. Respondes
a certain king of France, called Roberte, made this sequence, Sancti
spiritus adsit nobis gratia, and this Hymn, Chorus nouae Jerusalem, with
these respondes. O Judah and Jerusalem, O Constantia martyrum. Corne^ius
Centurio. etc. In the year of our Lord. 995. Guil. Durand. Antoni. Laziardus.
phil. Bergom.

Pope Leo the fourth made these Collectes, Collectes.
Deus qui beatum petrum. etc. Deus cuius dextera. etc. In the year of our
Lord. etc. 838. Durand.

Le^t service
Pope Paul the first devised the service for Lent. In the year of our Lord 768.
Chron. The same Pope also commanded, that in the time of Lent, the divine
service should be done before the sixth hour in the morning. Ioa^. Laziard.

The long Letanie of Saints.
Pope Gregory the first ordained the great long Letany of Saints with Ora pro
nobis, which is song on Saint Marks day against the swelling and chyncough:
and commanded, that if should be song on that day thorowout all the world. A
general procession.
This Letanye is called Septuplex Litania. For Pope Gregory in this procession
begone first at Rome, did in the first place set the Clergy: in the second,
Abbotes and Monks: in the third, Abbesses with their Nu^nes: in the fourth,
children: in the fifth* Laymen: in the sixte, widows: and in the seventh,
married folk. In the year. etc. 590. Volat. Plat. Guil. Durand. D. Barns.

The Letany for gang days.
Pope Leo the first being Bishop of Rome, or as some write, Pope Hylarye
bearing rule, Mamertus Claudius Bishop of Vienna invented first of al those
iii. Rogation days, that are before the feast of Christ's ascension, and made
ye Letanies yt are song about the streets and fields on those days, against
earthquakes, and tempest of weather, and peril of wild beasts, etc. And it is
called the Less Letanye for the difference of the more and greater Letanye,
which S. Gregory ordained to be said or song on S. Marks day, whereof we have
tofore spoken. In the year, etc. 444. Plat. Christ. Massae. Pol. Pant.

Pope Liberius appointed, yt there should be continual going on processions for
war, Processio^s continual.
for famyne, for pestilence, for rain, for drought and for such other
adversities, as we be always in danger of, yt by supplications, prayers and
fastings, we may escape them. In the year, etc. 354. Guili. Durand.

Pope Agapetus appointed ye people to go processions on the Sondayes. Sunday
processions
In the year of our Lord. 533. Volat. Plat. Petrus de natal. Fas^. Temp.
Polidor. D, Barnes.

Pope Pelagius the first ordained funeral Diriges and Masses of Requiem.
exequses or Diriges with masses of Requiem to be song or said for the dead In
ye year, etc. 552. Plat. Pol. Great. Chron.

Burialles.
Pope Benet the third ordained, yt the clergy should be present at the burial of
ye Bishop, and sing Dirige for their souls and yt the bishops likewise should
be present at the burial of the Clergy and sing Dirige also for their souls.
In the year of our Lord. 863. Lib. Council. Plat. Chron.

Alcuinus the Frenchman, Scholemaster (as they say) to the Emperor Carolus
Magnus, Offices of Mass.
made at ye desire of Boniface Bishop of Miguntia diverse orisons that be said
in the mass, and also diverse offices of diverse masses, Gaudeamus omnes in
domino. Salve sancta parens. Requiem aeternam. etc. Iacobus. Phil. Bergom.

The same Alcuinus also made ye service of the Trinitye. Service of ye Trinity
Guili. Durandus. Thomas of Aquine ye Blackefryer made the service for the
feast of Corpus Christi at the commandment of pope Urban the fourth. Corpus
Christi service.
In the year, etc. 1262. Petrus de natal. Platina.

A certain man called Hermannus made these sequences, Rex omnipotens. Aue
Maria, Rex omnipotens.
etc, and the^r Anthemes. Alma redemptoris matter, Alma rede^ptoris. etc.
etc, and Simon Bariona, etc. Guilielmus. Durand.

Theodosius Bishop of Aurelia made Gloria laus: and Ludouicus ye Emperor
Carolus Magnus son commanded yt it should be song on Palm Sunday at the
end of the procession in some high and solemn place. Gloria laus
Chron. Cuil. Durand. Nauclerus.

Fulbertus a Bishop made these respondes, Stirps less, and Solemn iustitiae,
and this hymn Chorus nouae Jerusalem. Guili. Durand. Polychr. Lib, Stirps
less Sole^ iustitiae.

Charus nouae.


6. This Bishop, as they say, was so devout a man, and so dearly beloved of
our Lady the Uirgine Mary, that when he was very sore sick, and could taste
nothing, she full graciously came down from heaven,
and gave him suck out of her own breasts and by this means relyeued him,
and ^est^red him to his health. Libro de miraculis. B. Mariae

Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Quicunquae vult.
made the Creed, Quicunque vult saluus esse, etc Fasc. Temp.

Stephen Bishop of Leodia made the service of S, Lamberte, S. La^bertes
service, etc.
and of the invention of S. Stephen with the note for the^ both Fasc. Temp.
Christ. Massae.

Sanctus deus, Sanctus fortis, etc.
This responde Sanctus deus, Sanctus fortis, etc, which is song in ye church on
good friday: a certain child, as they say, made and gave commandment yt it
should be song: and it was afterward confyrmed in the council Calcedonense,
about the year, etc. 444. Fascic. Tempor. Christ. Massae.

Petronius Bishop of Bononie made ye book called Vitas patrum. Vitas patru^
Fasc. Temp.

Pope Theodorus the first being bishop of Rome, Idosirus bishop of Hispalia in
Spain, made ye office of ye mass which is commonly used in ye cathedral
church of Hispalea.
In ye church, when ye priest lifts up ye sacrament at Mass above his head:
The deacon standing by and turning himself to the people, cries out with a
loud voice, and says: Videte in quem creditis. Look upon him in who^ ye do
believe. Again, when the priest sings at mass the pater noster ye whole
quere answers at the end of every peticion in the same prayer, Amen,
contrary to the use of all other churches. Joan. Laziard. Cestrens.

Osmundus Bishop of Salisburye, which for his exercise after his grave
studyes was wont to write, The Ordinall.
to limne and to bind books, made the ordinall of the service of the Church,
and named it the Consuetudinary. Ranulph. Cestrensis.

Petrus Heremita a french man of the city of Annias, Beads.
first of al devised Beads, to say Ladies psalters on. In the year, etc.
1110. Chr. Pol.

Pope Calixt the third made ye service of the transfiguration of Christ,
Service of the transfiguration of Christ.
and commanded ye feast to be celebrated and kept holy on the syxte day of
August. Christ. Massae.

In the council Toletane and Gerundense, it was decreed, Cathedra^ churches
service.
that ye order of mass and of other divine service with the ministration of
the sacraments, yt is observed in ye cathedral Church, should be kept
likewise in all other churches of the same diocese. Lib. Council. Durand.

In the Council Gerundense, it was appointed that the Pater Noster should be
said every day, Pater nos^^^
after that Mattens and Euensong be ended. Lib. Council.

Aue Maria at noone.
Pope Calixt the third ordained, yt the great bell should be tolled every
day at noone, or at.xii. of ye clock, and yt the people hearing the sound of
the bell, should straight ways say an Aue Maria, in the worship of our Lady.
In the year, etc. 1455. Ioannes. Stella. Phil. Bergom.

Pope John the xxii. made a decree yt after euensong be done, Tolling to the
Aues.
the bell should be tolled thrice, and that then out of hand every man and
woman should streyghtwayes fall down upon their knees, and say three Aue
Mary's, in the honor of our blessed Lady Saint Marye. In the year of our
Lord, 1302. Chronic.

Pardoned Orisons.
Pope Clement the fourth at the desire of Jews King of France granted three
years of pardon toties quoties, to so many as devoutly say these Oris^ns
following.

Benedictum sit dulce nomen domini nostri Jesus Christi, and glorio sissimae
virginis Mariae matris eius in aeternu^ and vltra. AMEN Nos cum prole pia,
benedicat virgo Maria.

Which is thus englished.

Blessed be the sweet name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the most glorious
Uirgine Mary his mother for ever and a day longer. Sobeit. The Uirgine Mary
which her Godly child bless us. Sobeit. Fas. Temp.

Pope Boniface the eight made this prayer following, Pardon plentye.
and has granted to al them yt deu^utly say this prayer daily before an
Image of the cross as many days of pardon toties quoties, as there be grauel
stones in ye sea, or grasses on ye earth, or stars in ye fyrmament.

O altissima crux. O innocens sanguis. O paena magna. O Christi penuria. O
profunda vulnera. O lanccae perforatio. O sanguinis fluctio. O cordis fractio.
O dei amara mors O dei ueneranda dignitas: adiuua me in vitam aeternam. AMEN.

Which is thus englished.

O most high cross. O innocent blood. O great pain. O the penurye of
Christ. O the deep wounds. O the pearsyng through of the spear. O the flowing
of the blood. O the breakyng of ye heart. O the bitter death of God. O ye
worshipful dignity of God: help me unto everlasting life. So be it.

Of plain song, prycke song, descant, etc.
Notes.
GVido Aretinus devised first of al these six notes, vt, re, my, fa, sol la,
In the year, etc. 1204. Christi. Massaeus.

Plainsong.
Pope Gelasius, Pope Gregory ye first S. Ambrose with other, brought in first
of all ye plain song into the churches. Antoninus. Guili. Durand.

Pricksong. Descant.
Pope Vitalian being a lustye singer and fresh courageous musition himself,
brought into the church pricksong descant, and all kind of sweet and
pleasant melodye. And because nothing should want to delight the vain,
folysh and ye idle ears of fond and fantastical men, Organs.
he joined ye Organs to ye curious music. Thus was Paul's preaching and Peter's
praying turned into vain singing and childysh playing, unto ye great loss of
time, and unto ye utter undoing of Christen men's souls, which live not by
singing and pipyng, but by every word yt comes out of ye mouth of God.
Math. iiii,
, In the year, etc. 653. Plat. Volat. Chron. Polyd. D. Barns. Pant.

Of singing in the Church the judgment of diverse learned men.
FRa^ciscus: Franciscus. Petrarcha.
Petrarcha in his book De remediis vtriusque fortunae declares y^ S.
Athanasius did utterly forbid singyng to be used in the church at service
time, because (says he) he would put away all lightness and vanity, which
by the reason of singinge does oftentimes arise in the minds both of the
singers and of the hearers.

S. Hierome reproved not only ye lewd fashions of the singing me^ in his time,
S. Hierome.
but also their manner of singyng, when notwithstanding if the singing used in
his time were compared with ye minsed music that now bears chief rule in
Churches: it might seem very grave, modest, and tolerable, and ours so light,
vain, mad, fond, foolish and fantastical, that Hickscorner himself could
not devise a more wanton and trifling pastime. We ought says S. Hierome, to
sing, to make melody, and to praise the Lord rather in mind than in voice.
And this it is that is said: Singing and making melody to the Lord in your
hearts. Ephe. 5.
Let young men, says he, hear these things, yea, let them hear, whose
office it is to singe in the Church, that they must sing to god, not in the
voice but in the heart: neither must their throat be anointed after the manner
of Gameplayers with sweet ointme^ts that in the Church singyng more fit for
Gameplaces should be heard: but in fear, in work, in knowledge of the
Scriptures ought they to sing unto the Lord. Let the voice of the synger so
sing, that not the voice of him that sings, but the words that are read, may
delight. In epist. ad Ephe.

There is a godly Distichon fathered on S. Hierome, which because it pertains
to our matter, I think it convenient also in this place to allege.

No^ vox sed votu^, no^ cordula musica, sed cor:
Non clamans sed amans, cantat in aure dei.
That is to say: Not the voice, but the desire: not the Musical instrument, but
the heart: not the crier: but the lover sings in the ear of God.

S. Cipria^.
Saint Cipriane that blessed Martyr says, that God is not the hearer of the
voice, but of the heart: neither is he to be admonished with exclamations and
outcries, which sees the thoughts, as the Lord proves and says: What do
ye think wickedness in your heart: And in an other place: All congregations
shall know, that I am the searcher of the raynes and heart, that is to say,
of the inward man. Ciprian in orat. dom.

Saint Ambrose also says: Saint Ambrose.
It is with out doubt a great incredulity and unfaithfulness to think thus
of ye power of God, that thou can not be heard, except thou criest out. Let
thy work cry: let thy faith cry: let thy mind cry: let thy passions and
sufferinges cry: let thy blood, as the blood of holy Abell, cry, Gene. 4.
whereof God said to Caim: The voice of thy brothers blood cry unto me. For he
hears in secret, which makes clean in secret. We can not hear man
except he speaks unto us: but unto god, not words but thoughts do speak.
Lib. de Caim and Abel.

S. Austen would, S. Austen.
yt the Common prayer in Churches should be so distinctly and plainly set forth,
yt the people, which are present might perfectly understand them, and say
Amen. Lib. de Catechis. Rud.

In an other place he declares, that Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria in his
Church uses such manner of singing as was in a manner nothing else, than a
plain reading. Lib. confess. 10. cap. 33.

S. Gregorye.
S. Gregory did greatly disalowe certain Deacons at Rome in his time, which,
when they ought by their office to have given their mind to the preaching of
the gospel, and the provision making for the poor, The office of Deaco^s.
set all their pleasure on pleasant singing, not caryng how they lived before
god, so that with their voices they might please ye world He was therefore
compelled to make a decree, that all such as be in the holy ministry should
from thenceforth under the pain of excommunication give their minds no more to
singing, but apply themselves to the studies of the holy scriptures, and the
reading of the gospel. In Regist. part. 5. cap. 44.

Undoubtedly, says S. Gregory, true prayer c^^sisteth not in the voice of the
mouth, but in the thoughts of ye heart. For our words do not make the voices
the pithier and of ye greater force to come unto the most secret ears of God,
but our desire and affections. Math. 6.
Therefore says the Lord in the gospel. Enter into thy closette and sparre the
door. He sparreth the door and prays in his closet, which holds his
peace with his mouth, and pours out the affection of his mind in the sight
of god above. Moral. Lib. 22. cap. 18.

S. John Chrysostom also writes on this manner: Chrysostom.
It is the duty of a devout mind to pray to God, not with the voice, or with
the sound of the voice, but with the devotion of the mind, and with the faith
of the heart. Again he says, the crieng of the voice is not the work in
prayer unto god, whom we know that he beholds the secrets of the heart,
but the crieng of faith, and the devotion of a godly and pure mind Therefore the
best way to pray,
is to pray with heart mind, spirit, soul and and inward man. Ho^. 44. de
Joan. and Paul. Festo.

The Emperor Iustiniane made a law, Iustiniane the Emperor.
that all bishops and priests both in the time of divine service, and also in
the ministration of the holy sacraments should with so open and clear voice
pronounce all things in the tongue which the people understand, that they
might thereby be the better edified, and also be the more fervently stirred unto
devotion and prayinge to God. For says he, so does the holy Apostle teach in
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, saying: 1. Cor. 14.
If thou give thanks only in the spirit, that is to say, in an unknown
tongue, how shall he that occupyeth the room of the unlearned, say. Amen at
thy thanks geuinge, seeing he understands not what thou say. Thou verily
geuest thanks well, but ye other is not edified^ And again in his Epistle to
the Romans he says on this manner: Romans 10.
to believe with the heart iustifyeth, and to knowledge with the mouth, makes
a man safe. In consideration whereof, says that Godly Emperor, it is
convenient, that among other prayers those things also, which are said in
the holy oblation, that is to say, in the ministration of the Lords super, or
the hloy communion of the body and blood of Christ, be uttered and spoken with
a loud voice of the devout Bishops and priest to our Lord Jesus Christ one God
with the father and the holy ghost, willing the^ to know, that if they neglect
any of these things, they shall not only give account thereof in ye dreadeful
judgment of the great God and our savior Jesus Christ, but we also having
knowledge hereof, will not be content, nor leave the things unrevenged. In
constitut. Authen. 123.

Guilihelmus Durandus says, Durande.
that the use of singing was ordained for carnal and fleshlye men,
and not for spiritual and godly minded men. Rat. di. off.

Polidorus ^ergilius writes on this manner: Polidorus. Vergi^ius.
How greatly that ordinance of singyng brought into the Church by Pope
Damasus and Saint Ambrose, began even in those days to be profitable Saint
Austen declares euidentlye in the book of his Confessions: where he asks
forgiveness of God, because he had given more heed and better ear to the
singing, than to the weighty matter of ye holy words. But now adays says
Polidore, it appears evidently, yt it is much less profitable for our commen
wealth, Against the singing men of our time.
seeing our singers make such a chattering charm in the temples, that nothing
can be heard, but the voice: and they that are present (they are present so
many as are in the City) being content with such a noise as delight their
ears, care nothing at all for the virtue, pithe and strength of the words: so
that now it is come to this point, that with the common sort of people, all
the worshippyng of God seems to be set in these singsters, although generally
there is no kind of people more light, nor more lewd. And yet the greater
part of the people for to hear them, boing, bleating and yelling, ^locke into
the Churches as into a common gameplace. They hire them with money, they
cherishe and feed them, yea to be short, they think them alone to be the
ornaments and precious jewels of Gods house. etc.


Wherefore without doubt, it were better for religion to cast out ^f ye churches
such chatteryng and ^anglyng ^ayes, or else so to appoint them, that when they
sing, they should rather rehearse the songs after the manner of such as read,
than follow the fashion of chatteryng charmers: which thing S. Austen in his
aforesaid book does witness, that S. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria did in
his diocese, and he commends him greatly for it. Lib. 6. de invent. rerum.
Cap. 2.

Cornelius Agrippa writes of singing in churches on this manner. Cornelius
Agrippa.
Athanasius did forbid singing in his Churches, because of the vanitye thereof.
But Ambrose as one more desirous of Ceremonies and pomp, ordained the use of
singing and making melodye in Churches. Austen as a man indifferent betwixt
both, in his book de confessionibus grants, that by this means he was in a
great perplexity and doubt concerning this matter. But now a days Music
is grown to such and so great licentiousness, that even at the ministration
of ye holy Sacrament all kind of wanton and leude trifelyng songs with
pipyng of Organs have their place and course. As for the divine service and
common prayer, it is so chaunted, mynsed and mangled of our costlye hired,
curious and nise Musitions (not to instruct the audience withal, nor to
stir up men's minds unto devotion but with an whoryshe armonye to tickle
their ears) that it may justly seem not to be a noise made of men, but rather
a bleating of brute beasts, while ye children ney discant as it were a sort
of coltes: other bellowe a tenoure as it were a company of oxen: other bark a
counterpoynt as it were a number of dogs: other roar out a treble like a
sort of bulls: other grunte out a base, as it were a number of hogs, so that
a foul euel favored noise is made, but as for the words and sentences, and
the very matter it self is nothing vnderstranded at all, but the authority
and power of judgment is taken away both from the ears and from the mind
utterly. In Libro de vanitatc scientiarum.

Erasmus. Roterod.
Erasmus Roterodamus expresses his mind concerning the curious manner of
synging used in Churches, on this wise, and says. Why does the Church doubt
to follow so worthy an author ( Paul)? Yea how dare it be bold to descent
from him? What other thing is heard in Monasteryes, in Colleges, in Temples
almost generally, than a confused noise of voices? But in the time of Paul
there was no singing,
but saying only. Singing was with great difficultye received of them of the
latter time: and yet such singing, as was none other thing, than a distinct
and plain pronunciation, even such as we have yet among us, when we sound
the Lords prayer in the holy Canon: and the tongue, wherein these things were
song, the common people did then understand and answered Amen. But now what
other thing does the common people hear, than voices signifying nothing? And
such for the most part is the pronunciation, yt not so much as the words or
voices are heard: only the sound beats the ears. Erasmus Rot. in annot 1. Corinthians. Cap. 14.

Of the Mass, and of all the parts thereof.
The Introite. Iudica me deus.
POpe Celestinus the first ordained, yt the priest should say the Psalm yt
begins, Iudica me deus, etc, when he puts on his clothes and reuesteth
himself to Mass: and that when he draws nigh to the altar, he should say
this verse of ye aforesaid psalm: Et introib^ ad altar dei, etc. In ye year,
etc. 428. Plat. Poly. Fasci. Temp. Christ. Massae. D. Barns. Pant. Joan.
Functius.

Confiteor. Misereatur Absolutionem.
Pope Damasus the first decreed, yt the priest standing before the altar should
say the confiteor and make his confession to GOD, to our Lady Saints Marye,
to all Saints, et vobis, and that they that were present should say
Miseriatur vestri, etc. Again, that the priest after that, should pronounce
the absolution and say Absolutionem, and remissionem omnium peccatorum
nostrorum, etc, before he presume to go to the altar. In the year, etc. 370.
Plati. Polid. D. Barns. etc.

Some attribute this invention to Pope Pontianu: Some to Pope Vrbanus. The
office of the mass


Pope Gregorye the first instituted the Office of the Mass. In the year of
our Lord. 590. Platina. Polydor. Pantaleon.

Pope Damasus the first brought in Gloria patri to be said not only at the
end of every Psalm, Gloria patri.
but also at the office of the Mass. In the year, etc. 370. Plat. Chron.

Pope Gregory the first ordained the Kyrye, The Kyrie
and appointed that it should be song nine times openly of the Clergy only at
Mass, which before at the commandment of Pope Siluester was song of the
Clergy and people together. Durand. Plat. D. Barns. Pantale. It seems to be
borrowed out of the Greek Church, forasmuch as the words be Greek and sound
in our English tongue. Lord have mercy upon us.

Pope Telesphorus added to the Mass Gloria in excelsis. Gloria in excelsis.
In the year, etc. 130. Plat de consec. Did. 1. Cap. Nocte sacra. Albertus.
Krantzius.

Some ascribe it to Pope Symmachus Phil. Bergom

Pope Symmachus the first added to Gloria in excelsis, Laudamus^te.
etc. Laudamuste, and so forth unto the end. In the year of our Lord. 499.
Fascic. Temp. Valentinus vannius. Chron.

Pope Anacletus put to the Mass this salutation, Dominus vobiscum, Et cum
spiritu tuo
Dominus vobiscum, and commanded yt this answer should be made of them yt were
present, Et cum spiritu tuo. In the year, etc. 101. Iacobus. Manlius. Vannius.
Some ascribe it to Pope Sotherus. Gratia de consec. Did. 1. Can. Hoc quoque.

Ioannes Laziardus writes, yt Dominus vobiscum was taken out of the book of
Ruth, Ruthe. 2*
and added to the mass, I know not by who^. And for Et cum spiritu tuo, it was
brought in, says he, by the counsel Aurelianense.

The Collectes.
Pope Gelasius the first appointed yt Collectes whereof he himself made part, and
part of the^ were devised by other. In the year, etc. 494. I^idor. Great. Pol.

The Epistle.
Pope Damasus ye first bearing rule, the Epistle was added by ye council of S.
Hierome, who lived in the year of our Lord. 387. Plat. Poly. Antonin. D. Barns.

Some say, that Pope Alexander the first did first of al bring in the Epistle
and Gospel, and commanded them to be read at the ministration of the Lords
Supper. In the year, etc.. 119. Chron. Germ. But the author of ye book called
Fasciculus Temporum ascribes both the Epistle and the Gospel to Pope
Telesphorus.

Pope Gelasius the first brought in ye Grayle, The graile
commanding that the people should sing it, while the priest or Deacon was
going up into ye pulpit to read and to declare the gospel, desiring god, that
it might both be spoken and heard with fruit. Phil. Bergom. Antonin. Vannius.
Some make Pope Celestinus the author of it. Plat. Some, Pope Gregory the first,
Chron. Germ.

Pope Gregorye the first, The Alleluya.
of whom we spoke before, added the Alleluya to the Mass, and commanded that
it should be song all the whole year save only from Septuagesima unto
Easter, Plat. Antonin. D. Barns. Nauclerus. Some ascribe it to pope Gelasius.
Phil. Bergom, Some say, it was borrowed of the church of Jerusalem, and so
brought into the church of Rome in the time of pope Damasus. It sounds in
English. Praise ye the Lord.

Pope Sergius otherwise called, pope Swines snoute bearing rule, a certain
Monk Abbot of S. Gallus, The Sequences.
called Notgerus or Nocerius made the Sequences: which afterward crept into the
Mass rather by use and custom, than by any constitution of the popes. Valent.
Vannius. Iacobus. Vuimpheling. Pantal. Notwithstanding some write, that Pope
Nicolas commanded them to be song at mass. Chron. Germ. Durand. And forasmuch
as there are many and diverse Sequences, they are ascribed to many and diverse
authors. Iodocus. Clitoueus in Elucidario Ecclesiastico appoynteth many of them
to a certain Monk of Paris, called Adamus de, S. Victore. Other are ascribed
to S. Bernarde, to Thomas Aquinas, etc.

Pope Gelasius made ye Tractes, which on the feriall days are wont to be
song or said in stead of the Sequences before the Gospel. The Tractes.
Chronic. Angl. Bergom. Some ascribe them to Pope Celestinus. Joan. Laziardus.
Some to Pope Telesphorus. Some to pope Gregorye the first, which commanded
the^ to be song at Mass in place of the Sequences from Septuagesima unto
Easter. Some to S. Ambrose. Guil. Durand.

Pope Damasus the first bearing rule, The Gospel.
the Gospel was added to the Mass by the council of S. Hierome. Plat. Anto.
Polid. D. Barns.

Pope Anastasius ordained, Standing at the Gospel.
that the people should stand up at the Gospel time, both to take heed to the
doctrine thereof, and also to show themselves ready to defend the doctrine of
the Gospel eue^ unto the death. In the year. etc 404 Volat. Plat. Sabell.
polidor. etc.

Guilielmus Durandus writes on this manner:
Anastasius the Pope says he, ordained, that standing and not sitting, the
Gospel should be heard: to declare the redynesse that we have unto battle for
to keep the faith of Christ. Again, to set forth our ready and bent will in
that behalf many, says he, when the Gospel is red, cast of their uppermost
garments, to declare that all temporal and worldly things are to be forsaken
for the law of Christ and of his Gospel, according to this saying Behold, we
have forsaken al, and followed thee

Math. 19. The creed.
Pope Marcus brought in the Creed, and commanded, that the Clergy and the
people should sing it together with a loud voice for the confirmation of their
faith. In the year of our Lord. 336. Plat. Antoni. Fasc. Temp. Durandus. Some
ascribe this constitution to Pope Damasus. Iac. Philip. Bergom. The Creed that
is song at Mass, some say was made at the Council of Nice: some affirm that
it was made at a Council holden at Constantinople. Chron. Germ.

Sensing after the Gospel.
Pope Leo the third ordained sensyng. In the year. etc. 817. Plat. Pol. D.
Barns. Pantaleon. And a council holden at Rothomage commands, that the
altar should be sensed after the Gospel. Lib. Council. Durand.

The Offertorye.
Pope Gregorye the first commanded the Offertorye to be said. Polid. Pantal.
Chron. Germ. Some attribute it to Pope Eutychianus. Plat. Some affirm, that
the Author thereof is not known. Guil. Durandus. Antonin.

Suscipe sancta trinitas.
As for their solemn and superstitious, yea their abominable and blasphemous
Orison, Suscipe sancta trinitas. etc which the Popysh Massemonger says holdyng
the chalice in his hands with the round cake ^ayd upon the paten thereof after
the Offertorye: the Author thereof is not known, neither makes it any matter,
except it were better. Bernard. Abbas de officio Missae.

The Lauatorye or washing of the priests hands at Mass, The washinge of
hands.
was borrowed of the heathenyshe and Idolatrous priests, which used always to
wash their hands before they offered sacrifice to their Idols. Poli. Vergil.

Pope Leo added these words to the Mass, Orate prome Fratres and Sorores.
which the priest says after the Lauatorye, when he tourneth him to the
people. Orate pro me Fratres and Sorores. etc. In the year of our Lord. 444
Chron. Germ.

The Secrets were so secretly made, The Secrets.
that the secret Authors of those subtle secrets are hitherto secret and
unknown: except ye will father them on Pope Gregory, and Pope Gelasius, as the
Papists do all other things, whereof they can find no certain author.

Pope Gelasius ordained, Vere dignu^ and iustu^ est.
Vere dignum and iustum est. etc. to be said in the Mass before the Prefaces
and Sanctus. In the year. etc. 494. Petrus de not. D. Barns.

The prefaces*
Pope Gelasius and Pope Gregory, of whom we spoke before, are counted the authors
and makers of the Prefaces. Anto. polid. Durand. Fas. Temp.

Nine Prefaces.
Pope Pelagius the first perceauyng many and diverse Prefaces to be made of
many and diverse men, selected and chose out of so great a multitude, nine
Prefaces, which Pope Gelasius tofore had made with the note or tune, and gave
them to be song at Mass before the Canon, as autentyke and Godly. These nine
Prefaces are so^g at Christmasse, at the Epiphany of our Lord, at Lent, at the
feasts of the Cross, of the Resurrection, of the Asce^tion, of Witsontide, of
the Trinity, and of the Apostles. In the year. etc. 552. Sigisbert. petrus de
natal* poli. D. Barns. pant. etc.

The tenth preface.
Pope Urban the second made the tenth Preface in the honor of Mary the Uirgine.
In the year. etc. 1086. poli. Vergil. Valent. Vannius.

The Sanctus.
Pope Sixtus the first brought in the Sanctus. In the year. etc. 129. Anto.
Durand. Fasci. Temp. polidor. etc.

The Canon of the Mass was patched, The Cano^ of the mass
cobled and clouted together of diverse Popes, and contains many notable
blasphemies. The authors thereof are named Pope Gelasius the first, pope
Siricius, pope Clement, pope Leo the first pope Gregory the first, pope Gregory
the third, pope Alexander the first, pope Sixtus the first, pope Pelagius, pope
Sergius, and a certain man called Scholasticus, with other. Chron.

Pope Gelasius made Te igitur clementilsime pater. Te igitur.
etc. In the year. etc. 494. Durand. pos. D. Barns.

Pope Siricius added, Communicantes.
Communica^tes and memoriam venerantes, etc. In the year. etc. 389. Rat. di.
off. polid,

Pope Clement put in these words, Vna cum famulo tuo domino nostro papa. etc.
Antonius. Pro Papa.


Pope Leo the first thrust in, Hi^c igitur
Hanc igitur oblationem. etc. 444. Sigisbert. polid. D. Barns.

Pope Gregory the first devised these words, Die^que nostros.
Diesque nostras in tua pace disponas, etc. plat. Chron. Germ.

Pope Gregorye the third put these words also to the Canon, Quoru^ solemnitas.
Quorum solemnitas in conspectu tuae maiestatis. etc. 740. Naucler. Sigisb.
Plat.

But the Massemongers now leave out these w^rds, and say them no more. For
what displeasure to Pope Gregory I know not. Iodocus Clitoueus in the
exposition of the Canon, casts away these words as superfluous. And here
see we, that al Papists do not like and approve, whatsoever all Popes do.

Qui pridie.
Pope Alexander the first added these words: Qui pridie quam pateretur. etc.
unto these words, Hoc est enim corpus meum. In the year, etc. 119. Durand.
Anton. Volat. Polid. Pantal.

Noui and aeterni Testamenti. One of the Popes unwritten verities.
These words Noui and aeterni testamenti, mysterium fidei, which the Papists
use in their consecration of the mystery of Christ's blood, although, says
Antoninus, they be not found in the Evangelists, yet must we believe, that
Christ so did and spoke. For that manner of consecrating, says he, was
delivered to the Church of blessed Peter and of the other Apostles, which
were present, when Christ did consecrate, as it is specified, In decret. Extra.
de celeb. Missae. Cap. Cum Marthae.

Pope Sixtus ordained, that the Canon of the Mass should be secretly said and
Sub silentio. In the year. etc. 264. Anselmus. Ryd. Chron.

If thou will know (good Reader) why all things be done with such secretie
and silence of the Massyng Papists, when they come to the handelyng of the
mysteries of Christ's body and blood, contrary to the practice of the primative
Church, yea, and contrary to the commandment of Christ, which says: Math.
10*
That I say unto you in darkness, speak ye in the light. And yt ye hear
secretly, tell it abroad openly, even upon the house tops: contrary also to
this saying of the holy Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.
So often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of the cup, show, set forth,
preach, declare the Lords death till he come: Again, contrary to the
commandment of the godly Emperor Justinian, and finally contrary to
certain ancient decrees of the Popes own making: hear what a tale they tell.

It is reported, says Guilielmus Durandus, that when in old time the Canon
was said openly and with a loud voice, al in a manner by the reason of that
use could it by heart, and song it in streets and hie ways, so that it came
to pass, that when certain shepheardes did sing it in the field, and laid
bread upon a stone: at the pronouncing of those words of consecration, the
bread was turned into flesh. But the shepheardes by Gods judgment were
stricken unto death for their presumption through fire that came down from
heaven. Therefore the holy fathers have decreed, yt those words should be spoken
in silence, forbiddyng all men under pain of excommunication, that no man
presume to speak those words, but priests only when they are at the altar,
yea and that at Mass: again, when they have on their Massing garments.

This tale tells Guil. Durandus in his book called Rationale diuinorum
officiorum, and also Ioannes Billet in his book de, diuinis officiis, and
Honorius in his treatise, de ge^ma animae: Mark well.
whereof thou may learn two things. First, that in the primative church
and ^ong after, when Christen religion was most pure: the words of the Lords
Supper, or, as the papists term them, of consecration, were not spoken in
hocker mocker, as they be now, but plainly, openly and distinctly, that al
might hear the^, understand them, and learn them unto their great comfort*
and edifying. Secondly yt the words of consecration were at that time of so
great virtue, yt whosoever pronounced them over the bread, were he Lay or
Spiritual, priest or Ploweman, Bishop or Butcher: the bread was strayghtwayes
turned into the natural body of Christ, as we may see here by ye
shepeheardes, which were lay men and not holy anointed, which were in the
field and not in the Church, which had on their shepeheardes clokes and not
hallowed vestments, which had but a common stone to lay their bread on and no
hallowed altar.
And here may thou see, yt any lay man, if he can pronounce the words of
consecration, having bread laid on a stone, may make Christ's body as well as
ye priest. For if ye lay men by ye virtue of ye words could make Christ's body
at that time: be thou certain and well assured, yt they be able to do the
same even now also notwythstandyng the holy fathers decrees to the contrary.
For the virtue of Gods word abides always one. If the Massemonger therefore
can make him, yt made them, as their doctrine declares, then can the Lay man
likewise make their maker, and so may the Laity strive with the spiritualtye
to the uttermost in God making. Now that the popyshe priests can make God,
which made them, although I could bring forth and allege many authorities
even out of their own books: yet will I at this present content my self
with one or two sentences, which are written in a book called Stella
Clericorum. The authors words ar these, Godmakers.
I ste qui creauit me, dedit mihi creare se: qui creauit me sine me, creatur
mediante me.

That is to say in English. He that made me, gave me power to make him: and he
that made me without me, is made by the means of me. Again he says: Cum
ergo tantae dignitatis sit sacerdos, quod creator sit sui creatoris and totius
creaturae: ipsum perdere vel damnare, inconueniens est.

Which is thus Englished: Seeing then that a priest is of so great dignity,
that he is the maker of his maker and of every creature: to destroy or to
condemn him, it is not convenient.

Pope Alexander the first, Bread of small quantity.
ordained, that the bread which the priest has at his Mass, should be but
of a small quantitye, saying: This oblation the lesser it be, the better it
is. Guilielmus. Durandus.

Pope Alexander also commanded, Bread unleavened.
that the bread should be unleavened bread, which the priest uses at his
Mass. Platina. Sabelli. Lib. Council. Poly. Christ. Massaeus.

Why their singing cake is rather round than otherwise, Round cake
Antoninus makes this reason. The host, says he, is made round after the
manner of a penye, because Judas sold Christ for thirtye pens. Guilielmus
Durandus writes thus: Reasons wise and substantial
The host is formed round because the earth is the Lords, and al yt is
therein, ye round world, and all yt dwell in it, yt the outward fashion thereof
may signify him, that wants both beginning and ending.

Wine mingled with water.
Pope Alexander likewise appointed, yt the wine in ye chalice should be myngled
with water, to signifye the union and inseperable fellowship of Christ and his
church. Joan. Laziard.^ Joan. Stella. Libro. Council. Great. Sabel.

Pope Honorius the third commanded, yt the Missall bread should be heaued and
lifted up above the Priests head at the sacryng time, Sakering.
as they call it: and yt all the people should fall down and worship it. In the
year of our Lord. 1214. Extra. de celeb. Miss. Can. San^ cum olim. Gabriel.
Biel super Canone. Missae Lect. 14. et Lect. 50, Dec. 3. Tit. 1. Cap, 10.
Pantaleon.

Here may al men see, how ancient a thing this Pope holy sakeryng is, which
notwithstanding the blind and sely shepyshe simple souls think to be ye best
part of the Mass. The sakering of the Mass is but a new invention.
Uerely it is a little more than three hundred and forty years old. A
deuilishe and an Idolatrous invention is it, not altogether unlike to the
setting up of the golden calfe in the wilderness.

Pope Gregorye the ninth ordained, yt the sacryng bell should be rong, Ringing
to ye sakeryng.
when the priest lifts up the Missall bread and Chalice above his head, to
move the people to behold that new found God which is not (as the true God
ought) to be worshipped in spirit and truth, but in knockyng, knelyng, and
liftyng up of hands. In the year, etc. 1225. Anselmus. Ryd.

Pope Leo, Pope Victor, Pope Nicolas, Pope Innocent, Pope Honorius, pope Urban*
The authors of transubsta^tiation and of ye carnal presence of* Christ in ye
sacrament.
Monk Lanckfrancke, Monk Gratian. Friar Thomas, Friar Bonauenture, and such
like monstures and belly Gods, invented first of all the God of the altar, and
made of the Sacrament, or holy sign of Christ's body and blood, the true
natural, real, corporal, carnal substantial, etc, body of Christ GOD and man,
flesh, blood and bone, synowes, guts and loins, even as he was borne of
Marye the Uirgine and hanged on the Cross: no bread nor wine remaining, but
the substance of bread turned into the substance of Christ's natural body,
and the substance of wine changed into the substance of Christ's natural
blood: So that we handle him with our hands, put him in our mouth, tear
him with our teeth, eat him, digest him, etc: and partly with their
Sophistrye they persuaded, and partly with their tyranny they compelled the
people so to believe, as the cruel and bloudye papists like wise do in this
our age, where the devil and the Pope reygne: which days was not known nor
heard of in ye Church of Christ, so new is the doctrine of transubstantiation
and of their missal God: howsoever the wicked and wilye papists bewitche the
simple people, and through their subtle Sophistrye cast mistes before the eyes
of the ignorant, and so darken their senses and wits, that they can not espy
ye truth of Gods word in this behalf, which is aboundauntly setforth through
the great benefit of God in these our days by the diligente labor and
paynfull travail of many Godly learned men, both in Latin and in English and
in diverse other speeches, unto the great comfort of all faithful Christians
and unto ye confusion of Antichrist and of his kingdom. Vercellen. Council.
Florent. Council. Roman. Council. Secund. Sinod. Lateran. Extra, de summa, and
fide cathol. Cap firmiter.

Pope Pelagius the second ordained praying for the dead in the Mass. Praieng
for the dead.
In ye year, etc. 580. Plat. Pol. Great. D. Barns.

Pope Gregorye the first succedyng ye aforesaid Pelagius increased this
co^stitution concerning ye memoration and prayer for ye dead, being hereunto
allured by ye disceatfull apparitions of devils rather than of dead men's
spirits which many times appeared unto him ever craving at his hand help and
succor for their deliverance out of ye most bitter pains of purgatory
through Diriges and Masses of Requiem, and such like prayers made for the dead
greatly abusing his childish pity and light belief For he writes yt a
certain man called Paschasius being dead, appeared unto him and desired him
to pray and to say mass for him, which thing he most diligently did, so yt
afterward ye soul of Paschasius appeared again unto him, and told him, yt
when he had once so^g for him.xxx Masses he was streyghtwayes delivered out of
purgatory. Gregorius in Registro. He writes again yt a certain Monk called
Iustus, was delivered out of the fire of purgatory, through the sacrifyce of
thyrtie days, that is to say, through a trentall of Masses, Trentall Masses.
which are thyrtye in number. Gregor. in. Lib. dialog. 4. Cap. 54.

Here may thou see (good Reader) upon what foundation singing of masses for
the dead is builte. Uerely upon the delusions and disceatfull apparitions of
the devil and his aungells. Is not this the commandment of God? Deuteronomy 18,
Esaye. 8,
Thou shall not ask ( the truth) of them that be dead. Again, if they say
unto you: ask council at the Southsayers, witches, charmers and coniurers:
the^ make them this answer, Is there a people any where, yt asks not
council at his God? Should men run unto the dead for the living? If any man
want light, let him look upon the law and the testimonye, whether they
speak not after this meaning. If he do not this, he stumbleth and suffers
hunger, and if he suffer hunger, he is out of patience, and blasphemeth his
king and his God.

It had been Gregoryes duty not strayghtwayes to give credit to the wandryng
spirits, but to have considered by the holy scriptures, what the will of God
is in this behalf. Believe not every spirit, 1. Joan. 4.
says Saint John, but prove ye spirits whether they be of god. The second.
Memento.


Pope Innocent appointed, that the names of the dead should not be rehearsed in
the Mass before, but after the consecration. Durandus.

Pope Gregory the first put the Pater noster to the Mass, The Pater noster.
and commanded, that it should be so^g with a loud voice. In the year. etc.
590. Joan. Laziardus.

He also commanded, that the priest at his mass before the Lords prayer,
should sing these words Oremus praeceptis, Praeceptis salutaribus etc.
salutaribus moniti. etc. Blessed Gregory says Durandus, thought it good, that
the Lords prayer after ye Canon should be said over the host, affirming in his
register, that it is unseemly, that the prayer which Scholasticus made, should
be said over the Euchariste, and ye prayer left out, which the Lord himself
had said, and the Apostles likewise were wo^t to say. It is song, says he,
among the Greeks of al ye people together, but among us of the priests alone.
Rat. di. off.

Ioannes Nauclerus writes in his chronicle, yt the holy Apostle S. Peter, when
he celebrated the Lords supper, used none other but ye Lords prayer which we
commonly call the Pater noster. As for all other things that be now used in
the mass they have been added and brought in since that time by diverse me^ of
their own fansy and brain without the authority of gods word.

Libera nos
Pope Gregory the first added to the mass also this prayer Libera nos
quesumus. etc. and commanded, that it should be said after the Lords prayer.
Chron. Germ.

Pax domini.
Pope Innocentius the first put to the mass Pax domini sit semper vobiscum: and
commanded that the people should answer. Et cu^ spiritu tuo. In the year.
etc. 408. Chron. Germ.

Agnus dei.
Pope Sergius the first of that name invented the Agnus dei, and commanded that
it should be song of the clergy and of the people together at the communion
or mass. In the year. etc. 684. Plat. Durandus. D. Barns.

He ordained also, that while the quiere sing the Agnus, The breking of the
hooste, or singynge cake.
the priest should break the missal bread in three parts: one for the souls
of the Saints, that are in Heaven: an other for them that are in purgatory,
the third for them that are in this world living in sin. Again, that the
priest should hold still in his hands two pieces of that broken bread over the
chalice, and let the third part thereof fall down into the chalice, saying
these words: Hec commixtio corporis and sanguinis. etc.

Pope Leo the second ordained ye carrying about and kyssing of ye Paxe, The Paxe
yt the people might have somewhat to do (as it may seem) while the priest
eat up and drink up altogether alone at the altar. In the year. etc. 676.
Great. plat. Fasci. Temp. Durandus. D. Barns. Vannius.

Notwithstanding some attribute this idle inue^tion to pope Innocent the first.
De consec, did. 2. Cap. Pax igitur. Lib. Council. Michael. Bucchingerus. etc.

Pope Innocent the first made a decree, that on solemn feasts the priests at
the Agnus should kiss one an other, Priests kissing one an other.
but the common people should kiss the Paxe. In the year. etc. 408. De cons.
did. 2 cap, Pacem. Plat. Sabell. Pol. Pantal.

Masses of Requiem.
In the mass for the dead the Paxe is not given, says Durand, because the
faithful souls are no more, neither shall be in the trouble of this world,
but they rest now in the Lord, so that the kiss of peace is not necessary nor
needful for them, which is the sign of peace and concord, and therefore at
that mass this prayer is not said,
Domine Jesus Christ qui dedisti Apostolis tuis pacem. etc. Hereof also comes
it to pass, that among the monks there is no Paxe given, because they are
counted dead to the world. Rat. di. off. Polid.

The communion.
Pope Calixtus the first ordained, that so many as were present at mass, after
the consecration, should communicate together: if they would not, that they
should be excommunicate. For so says he, did the Apostles appoint, and the
holy Church of Rome keeps that order. In the year of our Lord. 217. Great. de
consec. did. 1. cap. Paracta. Item. Can. Omnes.

This aforesaid constitution is also ascribed to Pope Anacletus. De consec.
did. 1. cap. Episcopus. Lib. council.

In the primative Church, says Durande, all that were present at the
celebration of masses, that is to say, at the ministratio^ of the Lords
supper, were wont every day to communicate, that is, to receive with the
minister the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, because all the
Apostles did drink of the cup according to this saying of the Lord: Math. 26.
Drink ye all of this. etc. Again he says: Uerely the priest himself now
eats all the parts of the Host. Notwithstanding in certain Churches, he
takes one part, and distributeth the other two parts to the ministers, that
is to say, to the Deacon and Subdeacon, according unto that, whereof S. Luke
makes mention, Luke. 24.
that Jesus in Emaus took the bread and brake it upon the table: and also, as
some say, he did eat before the two Disciples, and what remained he gave it
unto them* He also afterward did eat part of the broyled fish and of the
honycombe, and the residue he gave to his Disciples. And therefore after that
the Deacon and Subdeacon have communicated; the clerks and religious persons
come also unto the communion, that they also may be partakers of the holy
Communion. Afterward the people also does communicate, because Christ did not
only eat with his Apostles, which were few in number, but also when he
should ascend into heaven he did eat with a multitude of his disciples. And
a little after he says.
The high Bishop ( the pope) receaueth one part of the host, and gives an
other part thereof to the Deacon with a kiss, and an other portion to the
Subdeacon without a kiss. etc.

Of these things aforesaid may we evidently perceive, that in times paste
before papacye bare rule in the church of Christ, the celebration of the Lords
Supper was not a private repaste of one alone, but a banquet of many, according
to this saying of the Apostle: my brethren when ye come together to eat (the
Lords Supper) tarry one for an other. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 10.
Again. All we are partakers of one bread.

Pope Gelasius the first commanded, Communion under both kinds.
that the communion should be ministered in both kinds to them that come unto
the Lords table, and that if any were otherwise affected, they should be put
away from the Lords table. For (says he) the division of one and the same
mystery can not be done with out great sacrilege. Note well
In the year. etc. 494 De cons. did. 1. cap. comperimus.

A council holden at Constance did first of all by public law forbid,
Communion under one kind.
that the lay people should receive ye Lords supper under both kinds charging
and commanding that from thence forth the layty should communicate only
under one kind, when notwithstanding the commandment of Christ is far
otherwise. Math. 26. Mark. 14. 1. Cor. x.xi.
Drink ye al of this says he.

And Saint Mark says: They all drank of it. Here is no exception of the
laytye. The holy Apostle saint Paul, also, whenever he makes any mention of
the Lords supper, joins always the bread and the cup together, not dividing
the one from the other after the doctrine of the pope. In ye year. etc. 1417.
Lib. Council. Gabr. Biel. etc.

The Postcommunio^
The Author of the postcommunion is not known says Durandus. Notwithstanding
Platina makes Gregory ye first Author of it. So likewise writes Ioannes
Stella, and Iacobus. phillippus Bergomensis.

Ite missa est Benedicamus domino. Deo gratias.
Pope Leo ye first brought in Ite missa est, and Benedicamus domino with Deo
gratias, for a final conclusion of the mass, so that now every man may go
home, as wise as they came. In the year. etc. 444. Michael. Bucchingerus.

The mass is ended three manner ways.
It is to be noted, says Durand, that ye mass is ended three manner of ways
First of all by Ite missa est: and that is in solemn feasts, when Te deum
laudamus, and Gloria in excelsis is song, And it is so much to say, Be packing
homewarde: For the wholesome sacrifice for mankind is sent or offered unto God.
Or it shows to the people, that the mass or the prayers are done.

The Massing Papists know not yet what Ite missa est signifies.
Or the meaning of Ite missa est, is this Go after christ, and follow him: for we
may not abide in this world, but by good works we must make have unto the
country of heaven: which thing we may easelye do for the sacrifice is sent
to appease God ye father, by the power whereof the helles are broken, and the
gate of paradyse is open. Ration. di. offi.

Secondly the Mass is ended by Benedicamus domino, and yt is on workyng days,
and generallye when there are no songs of gladness song before, whereby the
people should be allured and stirred up to give god thanks. Again, the mass
is concluded by Benedicamus domino on all fasting days and low feasts. Rat.
di. offi.

Thirdly, Requiesca^t in pace. AMEN.
the mass is finished by Requiescant in pace: and yt is when they sing mass
of Requiem for the dead. And then ye may not answer Deo gratias, but Amen,
that is to say, So be it. For reast is wyshed unto them, etc. Rat. di. off.

The council Aurelianense ordained, yt the people should not depart out of ye
church after ye mass be done, Blessing of the people after mass
til they be blessed of the priest. Hereof comes it to pass, yt the people
on the solemn feasts be blessed with an empty cup, after yt the priest has
drunk all up. Lib. Council. Guili. Durand.

Pope Alexander the first made a decree, that the people should be sprinkled
with holy water after Mass be done, Holy water after mass.
that they may, says he, thereby be made holy, pure and clean. In the year
of our Lord, 119. Grati. Platina. Sabellicus.

Of these things aforesaid (most gentle Reader) which I have truly and
faithfully alleged out of the popyshe Chronicle writers, may thou evidently
see, yt the Romish and popyshe mass is not so ancient and of so great
antiquitye, as the Romanistes and papists brag: but rather that it is a late
and yesterday invention. Again yt it was not instituted of Christ, nor of his
Apostles, but first of all clouted together of certain Popes, every man
bringing in his patch and at the last beautifying it with strange feathers
like unto Esopes crow. More than a thousand year was this monstrous mass in
patching, before it culd be brought unto any perfection, The^opish Mass is ye
foundation of all superstition.
if that may receive perfection, that is most of all imperfecte. Upon this
wicked, superstitious and Idolatrous mass are all monasteries, colleges,
chauntries, free chapels, fraternities, and all the sects of Antichrist yt
pope founded and builded, purgatory also and ye whole papacy is confyrmed and
stablished by the Mass. So long as ye Mass endures, so long shall papisme
continue ye Pope with his Cardinals, Monks, Friars, Chanons, Nuns, Ankers,
Ankresses, with all their superstition and Idolatrye. But if ye mass once fall,
then fall they also down to the ground. I will not say down to hell, from whence
all these their false worshipping of god first of all came and had their
beginning, according to ye Prophecye, which thou redest in the Revelation of
Saint John. Apo. 17.18*
And albeit yt the tirauntes of this world, and the hipocrites of the same,
whose God is their bellye, strive never so much for ye defense and upholding of
this their popish mass: they wc sweard, fire and haltar: these wc fained
holiness, crafty persuasions, painted eloquence, false allegatio^s of ye holy
scriptures, and ancient writers, money, bribes, gifts, supplicatio^s,
lame^tatio^s, etc. Yet shall it perish and come to naught with all the wicked
patrons, defenders and ^autors of ye same, according to this prophecy of our
savior Christ: Math. xv. ii. These. ii.
Every plant yt my heavenly fa^ther has not planted, shall be plucked up by
ye roots. And s. Paul says, yt the Lord shall slay ye Antichrist that son
of perdition with the breath of his mouth, that is to say, with his holy word.

Of certain decrees appertayning unto the Mass.
Eastward
POpe Vigilius ordained, yt priests when they sing mass, should turn their
faces to ye east. In ye year, etc. 553. Petrus de not. D. Barns.

Stretchi^g out of arms and hoi^^ng up of hands.
Pope Gelasius the first commanded, yt ye priests should stretch out their
arms and hold up their hands in their masses, but specially when they say the
secrets, the Canon, and the prefaces. In the year, etc. 498. Chron. Germ.

Pope Alexander the first made a decree, One mass in one day of one priest
yt one priest should say but one mass in one day In the year, etc. 119.
Great. Plat. Sabel. Lib. Council.

Pope Telesphorus notwithstanding commanded, yt on Christmasse day, every
priest might sing three masses, one at midnight an other at the cockcrowing
and ye third, Three masses in one day of one priest.
when it is fair day light: again, yt on all other days no priest shall sing
mass before three of ye clock in ye morning. In the year, etc. 139. Lib.
Council. Plat. Sabell. Pant.

Pope Felix the first decreed, None may mass, but priests only.
yt the priests should say mass in no place, but in yt which is hallowed. The
same pope also ordained, yt none should say mass but priests only, except
necessitye enforced to the contrary: again, ye masses should be said for the
memory of martirs. In the year, etc. 269. Plat. Phil. Bergom, Sabel. D. Barns.
Chron. Angl.

Pope Pius ye first made a decree that those priests which negligently and
without due devotion say mass, Negligent massemongers.
should be extremely punished. In the year, etc. 147. Lib. Council. Sigesbert. D.
Barns. Except it be to offer.


Pope Leo the fourth enacted that a lay man should not presume to come into
the chauncell while the priest is at Mass. In the year, etc. 858. Sigisbert
Platina. No Massing without some company.


Pope Sotherus ordained, yt a priest should not say mass, except two at ye
least were present. In ye year, etc. 168. Volat. Punctius. D. Barns.

Gloria in excelsis when it shall be song at mass.
Pope Simmachus appointed, ye Gloria in excelsis should be song at mass upon
sondayes, principal feasts, saints days, but specially in ye feasts of
martirs. In the year, etc. 499. Plat. Durand. Ranulph. Cestrens.

Pope Nicolas the first made a decree, ye Gloria in excelsis should be song
on mau^dy thursday although it be in lent. In the year, etc. 871. De cons. 1.
Cap. Gloria Joan. Laziard. Cel. And this he appointed for the solemnity of ye
institution of ye sacrament of Christ's body and blood Ioannes. Stella.

Pope Gregorye ye third ordained, yt the Christians should offer ( Dirige
Grotes and Mass Pens) for their friends souls departed and ye priests should
remember the dead in their masses, Dirige Grotes and mass pens with Memento,
domine animarum, etc
and offer sacrifice for them. In the year, etc. 740. Ioannes. Nauclerus. D.
Barns.

Pope Nicolas the first appointed, yt no man should hear the mass of any
priest, The Masses of unclean priests are not to be heard
yt is an whoremonger. In the year, etc. 871. Lib. Council. Gratian. Volat. D.
Barnes.

The same was also decreed in a certain council holden at Mantua under pope
Alexander the second. In the year, etc. 1062. Did. 32. Praeter. Et Capit. 18.
Siquis ammodo Did. 56. Capi. Apostolica. authoritate.

Pope Gregorye ye seventh, otherwise called Hyldebrand excommunicated all those
priests, Incontinent priests excommunicated.
yt were whorehunters, and made a decree, yt no man should hear the mass of
an whoremonging priest: and yt if any man contrary to his ordinance would
presume to hear ye mass of such a filthye and incontinente priest, the same
should be taken for an Idolatoure. In the year, etc. 1073. Did. 16. Quaest.
7.. Chron

Pope Vigilius commanded, yt the Canon of the Mass should be read in no
place but at ye altar, Canon of the mass.
and of no man but of a priest, yea and yt when he has on his back his
hallowed vestures: In the year, etc. 535. Chronic. Germani. Achilles.

Pope Martine the first commanded, Mass so^g with a loud voice.
that the mass should be song openly with a loud voice. In the year, etc.
643. Guili. Durand.

Pope Telesphorus ordained, y^ Alleluya should not be song in the temples from
Septuagesima unto Eas^er even, Alleluya. (...) Mass.
but yt in the stead thereof Laus tibi should be ^ong at Mat^ens, Prime and
Hours and Even song, and at Mass, a Tra^e. In the year of our Lord. 139.
Chronic. ^uili. Durand.

Pope Stephan the first decreed, yt the (...) of ye church should be put ^^ no
profane uses, (...)
and yt none should touc^ (...) but such as ar holy annoynt^d, (...) y^
vengeance and punishment y^ (...) on Balthazar King of Babylon, fall (...) the
also, that presume to touch holy (...) with their unholy hands. In the (...)
of our Lord. 261. Lib. Council. Guili* Durand.

(...) the first commanded (...), even so many as are (...) ^oly anointed,
should by no means touch ye chalice, nor the paten thereof, (...) their b^re
hand.
with their bare hands. Hereof came it to pass, yt the Lay people were not
suffered to touch the bare chalice, when they came unto the Lords table in
the (...) of papi^^rye. In the year, etc. 129. Chron. Germ. Lib. Council.

Pope Gregory the first commanded that priests should have light at their
mass, Ca^dels br^ninge at Mass.
and that there should be set upon the altar a candle bre^nyng all the Mass
time. In the year of our Lord. 590. Nauclerus. Primeus. Chron.

Pope Clement ordained, that if the altar clothes or Corteynes, or
Corpoporasse clothes be so worn, that they can no longer do service, that
the^ they shall be brent, and the ashes of the^ buried in sanctuarye. For they
are, says he, holy and precious tinhges, yea and relics. Guil. Durand.

Pope Pius the first commanded, Licky ^^ up of th* wine.
that if any of the Sacramental wine should chance to fall upon the ground,
or upon any other place, the priests should lick it up with their tongues. In
the year. etc. 147. Durand. Lib. Council.

Pope Stephen the first ordained, Hallowed garments.
that a priest in his divine service should use none other, but hallowed
garments. In the year of our Lord. 261. Sabel.

The same pope also appointed, that the priests should not wear their hallowed
garments, but only in ye time of their divine service. Fa^. Temp. Dura^dus.

A new article of our faith.
Pope Innocent the third bearing rule, it was decreed in the Council Laterane,
that men must believe, that although the words, which are recited in the Canon
of the Mass, be not rehearsed of the Evangelists in their Gospels, yet were
they spoken of Christ and delivered to his Apostles, and their successoures,
and be of equal authority with the holy scriptures. In the year. etc. ^^95.
Dec. 3. tit. 41. Cap. 6. Chron.

Gregory's s^ruice admtted: all oher rejected.
Pope Adrian the first in a Council holden at Rome, made a decree, that the
Occide^tall or weast Churches through out all Europe (al other fashions of
Matte^syng and Massyng set a part and utterly put away) should only use that
kind of service, which Pope Gregory the first had tofore ordained. In the
year of our Lord. 796. Nauclerus. Sigesbert. Durandus. Achiles.

Th popes dec^es set forte by the Emperou.
Carolus Magnus the Emperor did not a little help to bring this matter to
pass. For he did not only command by public edicts, yt the decree of ye
romish bishop (among the which Gregoryes service has not the least nor the
lasts place) should be observed and kept through out all the Empire of Rome, but
he himself also was a most diligent setter forth of the same. For he ran about
from place to place through out all the provinces of the Empire, and compelled
all the priests, whether they would or not, to receive the service which Pope
Gregory appointed, yea and yt not only with threatening and manacyng words, but
also with emprisonment. Joan. Nauclerus Guilielmus Durandus. A fond tale


Iacobus de voragine in the life of Pope Gregory the first, tells a tale
concerning this matter. In times past, says he, when the service, which
Ambrose made, was more frequented and used in Churches, than was the service,
which Gregory had appointed: Gregoryes service thrust into the Church^
violence.
the Bishop of Rome called Adrianus gathered a Council together, in the which
it was ordained, that Gregoryes service should be observed and kept
universally: which determination of the Council, Charles the Emperor did
diligently put in execution, while he ra^n about by diverse provinces, and
enforced all the Clergy, partlye with threatnyngs and partly with
punishementes, to receive that order. And as touching the books of Ambrose
service, he brent them to ashes in all places, and threw into prison many
priests that would not consent and agree to the matter.
Blessed Eugenius the Bishop coming unto the Council, found that it was
dissolved three days before his coming. Notwithstanding through his wisdom,
he so persuaded the Lord Pope, that he called again all the Prelates yt had
been present at the Council, and were now departed by the space of three days.
Therefore when the Council was gathered again together, in this all the
fathers did consent and agree, that both the ma^^ebokes of Ambrose and Gregory
should be laid upon the altar of blessed Peter the An^^le, and the Church doors
di^igen^ly shut, and most warely sealed up with the signets of many and diuer^
Bishops Again, that they should all the whole night give themselves to prayer,
that the Lord might reuele, declare, open and show unto them by some evident
sign or token, which of these. ii. services he would have used in the
temples. Thus they doing in all points, as they had determined, in the morning
opened ye church doors, and found both the Missals or massebookes open upon
the altar: or rather, as some say, they found Gregoryes massebooke utterly
plucked a sunder one piece from an other, and scattered abroad into this and
that place. As touching Ambrose book, they only found it open upon the
altar in the very same place, where they had tofor^ laid it. By this sign
they thought themselves sufficiently instructed and taught of God, that the
service, which Gregory had made, ought to be set abroad and used thorowout all
the world: and that Ambroses service should only be observed and kept in his
own Church, which is at Mediolanum, where he sometym^ was Bishop. Hereof came
it to pass, that Gregoryes service has only place now a days in the
greatest part of Europe. Iacobus de voragine in vita Gregorij primi. Guil.
Durand.

Thus have thou (most gentle Reader) how the mass was begotten, conceived and
borne even anon after the Apostles time, if all be true that the
Historiographes write. Thou have also how the mass grew up in continuance of
time, and was increased by diverse popes every one puttyng unto it their own
fantasye, till at the last it was full finished by Pope Gregory the first,
When the Mass began to take place.
about the year of our Lord. 600, even about the very time, when Mohommetes
sect began in the East part of the world, and papacye in the weste.
Notwithstanding from Pope Gregoryes days unto the time of Carolus Magnus, the
form of Gregoryes Mass was used only in the City of Rome, and in the
diocese of the same, about two hundred years. From Charles the great unto ye
time of Charles the fifth, the Mass rained, ruled, ruffled, and triu^phed, as a
most puissant and mighty Queen, not only in Italye, and Germany, in France
and England, but also in all the Churches of the weste part of the world,
about. 700. years. But in ye days of the Emperor Charles the fifth, Kind
Edward the sixte.
and in the most florishyng reygne of the most blessed and Godly Prince King
Edward the sixte King of England, France and Irelande etc, the Mass being
an old worn hagge, full of sickenesses and disseases, died, was buried and
went down into Purgatory, for the maintenau^ce whereof she was most chieflye
devised and defended, so that now neither Germamanye, nor Denmark, nor
England, nor Scotland with many other countries and kingdoms is any more
troubled with her sorceries and witchcrafts, neither are those her Chapplens the
Massemongers and Purgatory rakers any more set a work, or had in price.

And although the Mass seem yet to pant and to breathe in some places, The
fina^^ destruction of the Popish mass is at hand.
as though she would be glad to recover life, and to live yet a little longer
in this world: yet forasmuch as she is no God, but an Idol of all most
vain, she shall never so rise again, that she shall recover her old
strengths and dignities, but rather shall decay daily more and more, and suffer
those worthy and deserved plagues, which God threatens her in the revelations
of blessed. Apoc. 18.
S. John. For this prophecy of our Savior Christ shall for ever and ever
abide true: Every pla^t, that my heavenly father has not planted, Math. 15.
shall be plucked up by the roots.

Of the Massing Priest.
Gabriel Biel. in expo. Can.
Forasmuch as no man has authority and power to consecrat, make and offer the
body and blood of Christ (as the Papists teach) but he only, which is a
priest lawfully made and appointed: no, neither Angels nor Archaungels,
neither blessed Mary, nor any Saint in Heaven.

Pope Gaius the first of that name ordained, that he which should be a
Massemonger or Godmaker, that is to say, a priest, should, as it were by
degrees, ascend and come up unto the order of priesthood. Degrees of orders.
Therefore he appointed, that such one as would be a priest and say Mass,
should first of all be a doorekeper: secondelye, a Reader: thyrdelye, an
Exorciste or Coniurare: fourthlye, an Acholute a lyghter and carier of Candles:
fyftlye, a Subdeacon: sixthly, a Deacon: and seue^thly, a priest, Plat. Polid.
etc.

Pope Calixte the first appointed, yt ye aforesaid orders should be given four
times in the year, The times of orders giving.
yt is to say, at ye Embring days, whereas before they were given only in ye
month of December: so yt whosoever will be a Massing priest must diligently
attend upon those times Plat. Valent. Vannius.

Pope Boniface the first made a decree, yt no man should be made a Massyng
Priest, The age of a Massing priest.
before he were thirtye years of age. Great. Did. 78. Cap. Si quis triginta.

Pope Zacharius the first notwithstanding fearyng that Lady Mass would want
Chaplens and customers, dispenses with the former act, and granted, that a
man might be made a Massyng Priest at the age of.xxv. years, if necessitye
so required, Lib. Conc^l.

Pope Anicetus ordained, yt the Massing priest, Docked heads* Smothe chinnes.
Shaven. crowns. A bond m^^ may be no Massing priest.
should wear no long hair nor bearde, but yt he should have Aures patentes,
and yt he should have his crown shaven as round as a bowl. Gratian. Did. 23.
Cap. Prohibere fratres. Plat.

Pope Leo the first made a decree, yt no man that is bond should be admitted
to be a Massemonger. Did. 54. Cap. Episcoporum. Nullus.

A banckroute ca^ be no massemonger.
Pope Bonifacius the first commanded, yt no banckeroute, or endebted person
should be admitted unto ye Clergy. Plat. Lib. Council.

A massemo^ger must forswear marriage.
Pope Calixt ye first appointed, yt whosoever will take upon him the order of a
Massing priest, must forswear marriage, and lead a single life. Great. Did.
27. Ca. Presbyteres. Nauclerus.

A man twice married ought not to be a priest.
Pope Gregorye the first made a decree yt none yt had been twice married, should
be admitted to be a priest. Did. 33. Cap. Maritum duarum.

A person dismembered may be no priest.
Pope Gelasius the first ordained, yt no dismembered person should be admitted
unto ye order of priesthode. Great. Did. 55 Cap. Si euangelica.

Priest fasting before and after Mass.
Pope Clement the first appointed, yt the priest, after he had said Mass,
should continue fasting by the space of three hours, before he either eat or
drink. Did. 2. de consec. De tribus. Gradibus. And Gratianus witnesses, that
a priest also ought to come to Mass fasting. De cons. Did. 2, Can. Liquido.
Item. Cap. Sacramenta altaris.

Of the dignity and power of the Massing Priest, and of the honor that is due
unto him, be he good or bad.
Priests are worthy to be honored of all men, for the dignity, Math, xviii
which they have of GOD. For God has given them power to bind and to loose,
as it is written: Whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth, shall also be bound in
heaven. And whatsoever ye shall losen upon earth, The massing priest compared
to Mary ye Virgin. Note well this iugli^g
shall be losoned also in heaven. For a priest after a certain manner is like
Mary the Virgin. And this is declared by three things. First as the blessed
Virgin did conceive Jesus Christ by five words, as is it mentioned in the
Gospel of Luke. Fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum: So likewise the Priest makes
the true body of Christ, by these five words, Hoc est enim corpus meum. Luke
i. Math. xxvi.
And as whole Christ immediately after the consent of Mary, was in her womb: so
likewise immediately after ye pronunciation of ye words of consecration, the
bread is transsubsta^tiated and turned into ye true body of Christ. Secondly
as the blessed Virgin after she had brought forth Christ, did bear him in
her hands, and laid him in ye maunger: so likewise ye priest after the
consecration immediately lyfteth up the body of Christ, and lays him down
again, and bears him, and handles him in his hands. Thirdly, as ye blessed
Virgin was sa^ctifyed in ye womb, before she conceived Christ: so likewise ye
priest receaueth orders and is anointed, before he consecrateth.

For without taking orders he could consecrate nothing: and therefore a layman
although he be never so holy can do nothing in this matter, although he should
pronounce the words of consecration. In consideration whereof, we must know, A
massing priest is more excellent than an Aungel. Note.
yt the dignity of priests after a certain manner does far excel the
dignity of Angels. For power to make ye body of Christ is given to none of the
Angels, so that the baseste and most inferioure priest in the world can do
that, which the greatest and highest Angel in heaven can not do. Therefore
Barnarde says: O the worshipful dignitye of priests, in whose hands the
Son of God as in the Virgins womb is incarnate. Wherefore Austen says,
that in the consecration of the holy host all the heavenly court serves him,
that is to say, the priest: and the Lord of heaven comes down unto him.
Ambrose therefore also says writing upon Luke: Priests ar to be honored above
all Kings.
Doubt thou not, but yt the Angels are there present, when Christ is present
upon the altar: so yt priests are to be honored above all Kings,
Princes, Knights and men of Nobility. For a priest is higher than Kings,
more blessed and happy than Aungells, being the maker of his maker, and
therefore he is worthy to be honored, etc. Yea let it be granted, that the
priest be evil: yet is he to be honored for ye dignitye of priesthood, as
it is declared in the decrees. Priests although they be evil, yet ought we
to honor them for the sacraments sake. 1. Quaest. 1. Sacramenta. etc.
Sermones Discipuli in Sermon. 28. De honor.

As there are nine quiers or orders of Angels in heaven: so like wise ar there
nine dignities of priests. Nine dignityes of priests. The first dignitye of
priests. Iere.i.


First, Priests are above all Kings and Princes of the earth, as God says
by Ieremye: I have set thee this day over Nations and Kingdoms. And this to
be true, appears thus. The dignitye of the priest is such and so great, yt
it lies in his power to consecrate and make Kings: but all the Kings of the
world are not able to make one Priest. And for a proof thereof, that priests
be greater and of far more excellencye, than Kings are: it is to be noted,
yt there is no Prince so great, which does not bow down his neck in
confession to the Priest, and humble himself before the priest as before God,
being in deed Gods vicare. Therefore God out of hands exalted the Priests
above al men, and above all creatures, as a certain Doctor says, speaking of
Priests. Although by nature ye be men: yet in dignitye ye excel all men.
Again: A Priest is higher than Kings, more blessed and happy than Aungells,
and the maker of his maker.

Secondly, The second dignitye of priests.
God has honored them in temporal things. For those things, which God
reserved unto himself, that is to say, the tenthes, ye offerings, the first
fruits, and the other Patrimonyes of Christ crucified, he has freely given to
ye priests for the sustentation and mainteinaunce of their body, that they
being free from labor (when other me^ must needs work for their living) may
ye more quietly serve God in spiritual things.

Thyrdly, God has honored them in giving them such immunities, The third
dignitye of priests.
privileges, liberties, and fredomes, that no earthlye Prince has jurisdiction
over them, neither king, neither Prince, neither any other seculare man: no
neither dare any man lay violente hand upon them, no, not upon the lessest of
ye order. For whosoever does the contrary, he is excommunicate with the greater
excommunication eo facto, both in heaven and in earth. Uerely God does so
defend the^, yt none dare trouble the^ either in word or in deed, insomuche
yt whatsoever displeasure is done unto any of them he thinks it to be done to
himself, as the Lord himself says by ye Prophet Zacharye: Zacha 2.
He ye touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Psalm. 105.
Again in the Psalm he says: touch not mine anointed: so yt priests are
not to be molested so much as with a word, but they are to be honored, as
the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: I will bless them ye bless you, and curse
them that curse you. In consideration whereof, the priests and me^ of the
church are priuileged insomuche that whosoever do make, or cause to be made
or to be kept any statutes, that be against the libertyes of the priests
and men of the Clergy, they are straight ways excommunicate and accursed.
Item, no worldely Prince dare make exactions upon the Clergy: neither dare
any man ask any kind of paymentes, or take any thing of the Clergy: For if
he do, he is out of hand excommunicate, neither can he be absolved from the
aforesaid excommunication, except he make restitution at the full.

Fourthly, The fourth dignity of Priests.
God has honored the priests in that he has committed unto them the souls
of the faithful, that is to say, the holy Church of the which Chrysostom
says: The church is more honorable than heaven, and the angels, and all
other creatures. Christ has loved the Church more than himself for whose
sake he came down from heaven into this world, and served for it xxxiii.
years, and at the last suffered bitter death for it, and does now give unto
it his body for meat, and his blood for drink, and after this life he gives
himself unto it for a reward. Moreover he has committed this well-beloved
Church to priests with all the gifts, that is to say the Sacraments. For
the order of priesthood only has power to baptize, except it be in
necessity, at which time it is lawefull for every man and woman to baptize.
Also he alone has authority to minister the Sacrament of confirmation. Item,
the priest alone has power to hear confession, to give absolution, and to
enjoin penance, according to this saying of Christ: take the holy Ghost:
whose sins ye forgive they are forgeuen them: John. 20.
but whose sins ye do retain, they are retained. Ite^, he alone has power
to minister the Sacrament of extreme unction. Math. 5.
etc. In this incomprehensible dignitye God has singularely honored them
above all other men. Ye are that light of the world, says he. For as the
world should be nothing without light even so is the Church nothing without
priests.

Fifthly, God has honored the^ in this, that he has straightly charged all men
to be obedient unto them, as unto him self, of what condition or state so ever
they be, Luke. 10.
as he says: He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you,
despises me. Whatsoever is not lawefull (says Austen) it is the shepheardes
office to forbid, and the duty of the flock, to hear and to obey. Therefore all
men must obey the Priests even as Christ, when they command them to fast,
to keep holy day. etc. Therefore the Lord threatens them that are disobedient
and rebel against the commandment of Priests, saying: he that is proud,
Deuteronomy. 17.
and will not obey the commandment of the Priest, let him dye the death. An
example hereof have we in Dathan, Nume. 16.
Abiron, and Chore, which rebelled against Moses and Aaron, and therefore the
earth opened, and swalowed them up quick.

Sixthly, God has honored them by giuyng them power to bind and to loosen, The
sixte dignity of priests. Math. 18.
as it is written: Whatsoever ye shall bind upon the earth. etc. This power of
binding and losoning is understand one way of excommunication, which is the
spiritual swearde: and it is greatly to be feared. An other way this power is
to be understand of the absolution of sins. Therefore the Bishop when he
makes priests, blows and breaths upon them, saying: Take the holy Ghost.
etc.

Seventhly, John. 20.
God has honored them in that they are called angels in the scriptures. The
seventh dignitye of priests. The office of Angels*
Therefore says Gregory: All that are termed by the name of a priest, are
called Angels. But wherefore are they called angels. Verelye because they
have certain properties with the angels. First, because it is the office of
angels to minister unto God and unto men, as the Apostle says: All Angels
are ministering spirits. So likewise is it the duty of priests to serve God
day and night, Hebr. 1.
and to minister unto men, with the Sacraments. Secondly, because an angel
is pure in life: so in like manner ought every priest to be chaste and pure in
his life and conversation. To live chaste is an Aungelyke life.
For to live chaste, is an aungelike life, as Ambrose says: they that are not
married, nor do mary, are as angels in earth. Damascen says: Abstinence from
marriage is the following of angels. Thyrdly, it is the office of Angels to
inform and instruct men by good inspiration. So likewise is it the priests
duty to do by the word of god. Fourthly, it is ye duty of angels to praise god
so likewise are the priests bound under pain of deadly sin to say
eueryday, their mattens, prime, and hours, even ^ong. etc. unto the praise of
God.

The eight dignity of Priests.
Eyghtly, God has honored ye priests in this, that they are in some points
like to the most blessed virgin Mary. First, as the most blessed virgin Mary
did conceive through five words the true body of Christ, Fiat mihi secundum
verbum tuum, so likewise the priest through five words. Luke. 1. Math. 18.
Hoc est enim corpus meu^ makes the body of Christ. And as immediatlye after
the consent of Marye, whole Christ was in her womb: so likewise out of hand
after the words of consecration be pronounced by the priest, the bread is
turned into the substance of the very body of Christ, secondly, as the blessed
virgin, after she had brought forth Christ, bare him in her hands, and laid
him in the cribe and took him up again: so likewise the priest after the
consecration lifts up Christ, and lays him down again, and bears him
unto the sick, and handles him with his hands. Thirdly, as the blessed
virgin was sanctified in her womb, Psalm. 46.
before she conceived Christ, as it is written: The most high has sanctified
his tabernacle: so in like manner the priest receaueth holy orders, before he
co^secrateth: for he could not consecrate, except he were ordered. And
therefore a Lay man, be he never so holy, can do nothing in this matter,
although he pronounces the words of consecration.

The ninth dignity of priests.
Ninthly, God has honored the priests above Angels, yea, and somewhat also
above the dignity of blessed Mary the virgin.
First in the dignity of keeping. For a priest is bound to keep many souls, as
the Bishop is bound to look upon all the diocese, and the Pope the whole
world, and the Curate his parish, as Bernarde says: O how worthy kepers are
they, which so carefully watch, that they may keep the souls that are
committed unto them from everlasting death. But an Angel has but one soul
committed unto him for to keep, as Bernarde testifies: Great is the dignity
of souls, that every one of them even from the very time of their birth,
should have an aungel appointed for to keep them. Secondly, in taking and
touching the body of Christ. The angels do but see God, Math. 18. The priest
makes God, ha^dleth God, and cateth God.
as it is written: Their angels see the face of my Father, which is in
heaven. But in this is the priest greater than the Angel: for he does but see
God, but the priest handles him, yea and eats him, which was never given to
any Angel so to do, but it suffices him to behold God. Thirdly, in
consecratyng the body of Christ. And in this point the priest does not only
excel the Angels, but also after a certain manner Marye the Mother of
Christ: so that the lessest priest on earth is able to do that, which the
greatest Angel in Heaven can not do. Therefore says Barnarde: O the dignity
of priests worthy to be had in great reverence, in whose hands as in the
womb of the Virgin the Son of God is incarnate. Austen also says: In the
consecration of the holy host the whole court of Heaven does service to the
priest, yea, and the Lord of heaven comes down unto him. Likewise says
Ambrose upon Luke: Doubt thou not, but that Angels are there present when
Christ is present on the altar, and when he is offered: so yt Christ may well
say to every priest, yt which is written in Esaias: Esaias. 5.
What could I have done, more for thee, and have not done it? Furthermore we
must know, that every man is bound to honor priests, seeing ye god himself
has so many and sundry ways garnished and beautified the^ with such and so
great honor. But contrary to this do all they, that dishonor priests: and in
this they greuouslye offend God, as Henricus de vrimaria writing upon the
fourth commandment says: Woe be unto them and everlasting damnation hangs
over their heads, that do dishonor priests, speak evil of them, diffame
and backbite them: Against the backbiters of Priests.
for they crucify the Son of God again. For so often as thou backbitest or
^laundrest a religious person or priest: so often do thou put a crown of
thorn upon Christ's head: For they are the head and upper part of the Church
militante. So often as thou do any displeasure unto them: so often do thou
fasten Christ with nails to the cross. So often as thou raylest upon them: so
often do thou spit Christ in the face. And so often as thou do evil
entreat them, and find fault either in their speaking or doying: so often do
you thrust Christ unto the heart with a spear. God therefore willing to show
how greatly he detesteth that sin, has made it evident with that wonderful
punishment and unwonted pain, which Dathan, Abiron and Chore, Number. xvi^
suffered, whom the earth did swalowe up quick, because they did mysuse the
Priests. Of these things aforesaid it euidentlye appears, yt priests even
of duty ought to be honored of all men. In sermonibus discipuli. Germ. iii.
Dom. 14. Post. Festum. Trinitatis.

O ye Priests, which are the buckelars and officers of ye true Solomon, that
is to say, of Jesus Christ, and the chamberlaynes and dispensatoures or
stewardes of the mysteryes of God: Consider and mark diligently in what
degree and dignitye ye are set over all the goods of the Lord.
What could God do more for the Priests than to give them power for to make
himself, to handle him, to eat him, and to give him to other? Therefore
remember your selves, and consider well ye noble privilege of your dignitye.

Although glass be made of vile matter and stuff, A similitude to set forth
ye dignity of priests.
yet is it reproved and found to be more clear than gold and silver, so
likewise every priest, be he never so great and grievous a sinner, yet does he
far excel al other creatures, both Kings and Princes and is of greater
dignity than al ye creatures yt are. Ye are (says S. Peter speaking to
priests) a chosen generation, i. Peter. ii
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a won people, not only of a temporal
election but also of an eternal predestination.

O the worshipful dignity of priests, if ye live worthily and priestlike,
within whose hands as in the Virgins womb the son of God is incarnate and
made man. O heavenly mysterye, which ye father and ye son, and ye holy ghost
does so maruelouslye work by you, yt in one and in the same moment the same
God, which sits and rules in heaven, is a sacrifice in your hands. The
heaven wondreth at so noble a privilege: the earth marueleth: man is greatly
astonished: hell quaketh for fear the deuell trembles and shakes all yt is on
him: the Aungelike highness is in great admiration. What then shall I priest
give again unto the Lord, for all things that he has given me? As for an
example: He that has made me, has given me power to make him: yea he that
made me without me, is made by the means of me, etc. Consider therefore (O ye
Priests) the marvelous dignity of your excellencye,
that God has not only ordained you before al other people, but he has also
made you passing all other creatures which he has created unto the praise and
glory of his name, etc.

Saving ye Angels reverence whose number is infinite: I say plainly, that ye
are greater than Aungells, and do far excel their dignitye largo modo
loquendo. For to which of the Angels has God given that, which he has
given to the priest? Math, xvi
I mean. Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound also in heaven. Note:
there are two keys, that is to say, of knowledge and of power, given of the
Lord to blessed Peter and to other men: not to al me^, but to Priests alone,
and to their successoures. Of forgeuing sins
For although God alone forgive sin, yet never or very seldom does he
forgive sin without his ministers, that is to say, Priests. Which thing
may be proved by the Lepers, to whom, when the Lord had healed them, he sald:
Go: show your selves to the priests, and humbly obey them. And while they
were going, they were made clean. It may also be proved by Lazarus, whom
when the Lord had raised up; he said to his Disciples: Luke. xvi. John. xi.
Loose him and let him go. But wherefore did not the Lord himself loosen him
from yt knots of the byndings, which had losoned him from ye bonds of death?
And wherefore did he not command Mary and Martha his systers to loose him or
his kynnesfolke the Jews, which were nerer unto him by the course of nature,
than the Disciples of ye Lord? Verelye to declare manifestlye and to prove
plainly that the power to loose and to bind is given of the Lord to priests
alone. Behold, how great the goodness of God, and the worthiness of
priests, is. For the Lord himself works good sometime even by them ye are
evil: and that to this end, because the keys of the Church should not be
despised or set at naught of the faithful. For although priests sometime have
not this power ex merito: yet have they it ex officio dignitatis. And if any
priest ^e unworthy (which god forbid) yt hurts himself: it hyndreth thee
nothing at all. Behold, what great power is given to you priests, For your
tounges are made the keys of heaven. O how great dignity, Priests i^ (...)
incomparable.
says Bernard, has god given to you? How great and excellent is ye
prerogative of ye priests order? He has preferred you above the Kings of ye
earth: He has exalted this order of priests above all men: Yea as I may
speak more highly, he has preferred you before Aungells thrones and powers.
Hebr. ii.
For as he took not Angels but Abraham's sede to bring to pass redemption: so
likewise has he committed ye consecration of his body and blood, not to
Aungells, but to men, that is to say, to priests only.

Seeing then, yt a priest is of so great dignity, yt he is the maker of his
maker: him to destroy or to condemn, it is not convenient, etc.

This is a very heavenly privilege, this is an exceeding great glory, this is a
grace excelling all grace: a priest to hold God in his hands. We believe and
are thoroughly persuaded, yt the celebration of so noble a mysterye is committed
to none of the Angels, to none of the Archeaungels, nor to any other heavenly
spirits, but to your order only, etc. For on the altar through the mouth
and the hands of ye priests, the body of Christ is made, even that very
body, which is on the right hand of God, etc.

O ye priests how great a thing is this, that at the lifting up of your
hands, Kings bow down their heads, yea Kings and Queens offer gifts to
you. All the Church or congregation confesses and calls you fathers, and
desires you to pray for them, etc.

O the worshipful holiness of priests hands. O blessed and happy exercise.
O the true joy of the world, where low things ar joined to ye most high
things, The Massing priest is here called Christ. ^, Pet. ii.
when Christ handles Christ, ye priest, ye son of God. Thou have a delight
to be with the sons of men. Therefore says Peter, speaking of priests: ye
are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a won people,
etc.

O ye priests consider the excellencye of your most noble dignitye: For the
lord has enriched and beautified you before al other his creatures. Verily
priests ar worthy to be honored, seeing ye the Lord has given unto the^
passing al other, so great grace and honor in the world.

Ex lib cui titulus est. Stella Clericorum.

Of the ceremonies of the popyshe Church. Of holy water.
POpe Alexander the first (as ye papists feign) ordained water mingled with
salt to be hallowed, Holy water
and afterward sprinkled upon the people, to put away their sins, and to
make the^ holy and pure: He also commanded, yt it should be kept both in
churches and in houses to chase and drive away devils and wicked spirits, The
verts of holy water.
not only out of houses where me^dwel, but also out of ye hearts of the
faithful: as though faith and ye deuel could dwell together in one heart In the
year, etc. 110. Great. Plat. Sabel. Lib. Council. D. Barns. P^antal.

The words of pope Alexanders canon ar these. Blasphemye against the blood of
Christ.
We bless ye water mingled with salt for this purpose, that all that be
sprinkled therewith, may be made holy and pure: which thing we command all
Priests likewise to do. Leuit. xvi.
For says he, if the ashes of an heyfer sprinkled, made holy and cleansed the
people from venial sins: Much more water sprynckled with salt, and hallowed
with holy prayers, does sanctifye, make holy, and cleanse the people from
venial sins. liii. Reg. ii.


And if the salt being sprynckled by Helizeus, the barennesse of the^ water
was healed: How much more salt being hallowed with Godly prayers, takes
away the barennesse of such things as appertain to man, and sanctifyeth and
pourgeth them yt are defiled, and multiplyeth such goods as we have need of,
and turns away ye disceates of the devil, and defends men from al naughty
and wicked fancies, etc. De conse. Did. 3. Cap. Aquam sale conspersam. Lib.
Council.

Is not this good stuff? is not this worthy to be called gods service? Ought
not ye people to rise up and make curtesy to the Popyshe shauelynge, when he
sprinckleth the^ with water of so great virtue? Are not the scriptures here well
applied? Does not this ceremony make Christ Jack out of office, with all his
works and merits? God have mercy on us, and shortly confou^d Antichrist.

Guilihelmus Dura^dus says, In ^at. di. off.
yt the holy water has deserved to have of God so great virtue, that as
outwardly it washe^h the body from filthynesse: so inwardly cle^seth the souls
from sins. O blasphemye intolerable. This is ye goodly Godly Catholyke
doctrine, wherewith the ungoodly ungodly Papists infecte the minds of such
Christians, as are simple and light of belief, yea, wherewith they cast the
souls of all such, as put their confidence and trust in these pylde, begarly,
and lousy ceremonies, into everlasting damnation. And yet must they be called
laudable ceremonies, well worthy (and God will.) to be frequented and used in
the Church of Christ. And the teachers of this doctrine, and the ministers of
these ceremonies must alone be counted worthy to bear office in the Church, to
be reputed and taken for the only pyllars of our mother holy Church, to be had
in estimation above all men, and to be reverenced as Gods of all men: and so
many as be of contrary opinion,
teaching that our whole salvation comes only from God through faith in the
blood of Christ, must be adjudged seditious persons, sowers of discord,
authors of new learning, teachers of strange doctrine, How the ceremonye of
holy water came first into the church.
and heretics. But as I may by conjecture speak my mind concerning this
ceremony: I think verelye, that as the ceremony of dealing holy bread on the
Sondayes (whereof we shall hereafter speak) was ordained of ye fathers of
Christ's Church at that time, to put the people in remembrance of Christ's body
breakyng: so likewise at the same time was this ceremony of water sprinckling
brought into the Church to put the people in remembrance of Christ's blood
sheadyng on the altar of the Cross for their sins. But as the papists in
process of time lost the signification of holy bread, and of al other
ceremonies, and therefore joined unto the certain doctrines of error and false
faith, so likewise have they done in ye ceremony of holy water. They not
knowing the cause of the first instititution, have feigned the holy water, as
they call it, to be of such and so great virtue, The manifold virtues of holy
water.
might, and power, that it is able to put away sin, to give health both of
mind and body, to make so many holy and pure, as be sprinkled with it, to
give abundaunce of things, to drive away devils, to chase away all the power
of our ghostly enemy, yea and to pluck him up by the roots and utterly to
destroy him with all his Apostatike angels, to put back diseases, to expel
all corrupt and pestilente airs, to dispatche all ye guyles, subtilties,
sleyghtes and disceates of the lurkyng enemy, ^o banyshe al things that be
contratye to the health, prosperitye, and quietness of all such, as dwell in
ye houses where it is sprinkled, to give security of hope, corroboratio^ and
strengthening of faith, to bring the holy ghost, and at the last what not? Are
not all these things read in their exorcismes and coniuratio^s of their
bewitched and salted water as we have tofore heard, and in other Popish
treatyses?

Read we not these words in their Popish primare, which we are taught and
commanded to say, when we sprinckle our selves with ye water in the Church
porche, before we enter into ye Church.

Aqua benedicta sit mihi salus ^ vita. Praesta mihi domine per hanc creaturam
aspertionis aquae, sanitatem mentis, integritatem corporis, tutelam salutis,
securitatem spei, corroborationem fidei nu^c and in futuro. Which is thus
Englished.

The blessed water might be unto me health and life. Grant me, O Lord, by
this creature of the sprincklyng of water, health of mind, wholenesse of body,
defense of health, safegarde of hope, strengthnynge of faith, now and in time
to come.

And because this their dream should be of the more credit: they have fathered
those their lies, as they do many other, of an ancient Bishop of Rome, called
Alexander the first, which lived. In ye year. etc. 119. And here may thou
see, what a lying generation the Papists are, as I may speak nothing of their
pestilent and abominable doctrine.

Of Holy Bread.
THe use among the Christians was first of all, The communion daily.
yt so many as came together into the church daily for to pray, and to hear
the word of God: the same should also daily receive together the holy
communion of the body and blood of Christ. But when the multitude that
professed Christ began to increase, and waxed very great, so that that order
could not conveniently be observed and kept: the ancient fathers of Christ's
church made a decree, ye all ye Christians should communicate on the Sondayes
together, and be no more bound unto the daily communion, The communion every
Sunday.
as they to fore were. And here of comes this sentence of S. Austen: Daily to
communicate I neither commend, nor discommend: but on the So^daies to receive
ye communion, I would counsel all men. When this receauyng of the communion
every Sunday was not done with such devotion, soberness, and gravity, as it
ought to have been, but through that often coming unto it much dissolution and
lightness was showed of diverse people: the Elders of Christ's Church thought
it mete for yt present time to take away the custom of receiving the
communion every Sunday, The Communion at Easter only.
and to appoint, that the Christians should receive the communion together
thrice in the year, yt is to say, at Easter, at Witsontyde, and at the feast
of Christ's nativity. But when this order also was not duly and reverently
observed: it was judged and thought mete, that the people should commonly
receive the Lords Supper but once in the year, that is to say, at Easter: and
that in the stead thereof, because the remembrance of Christ's passion and death
should not be forgotten nor his blessed body breaking and precious blood
sheadyng fall from the remembrance of the people, How the ceremonye of holy
bread came first into ye Church.
which is preached, declared, and set forth to the faithful at the Lords
supper by breaking and eating the bread, and by pouring out and by drinkyng the
wine: The Fathers of Christ's Church instituted the ceremonies of holy bread
and holy water, to put the people in remembrance of Christ's body breakyng,
and blood sheding: y^ as they see the bread, which is distributed every
Sunday of the minister broken on many pieces: so they should set before the eyes
of their mind the breaking of Christ's body on the altar of the Cross for the
remission of their sins: again, that as they see the water sprinkled abroad:
so they should remember, that Christ's blood was shed for them on the Cross,
by the effusion and sheading whereof, they be purged, cleansed, and purified from
al filthiness of sin and iniquity, and by this means address themselves
to be thankful to God the Father for so inestimable and excedyng great
benefits given unto them in the death of his Son. The significations of the
ceremonies were taught the people in times past.
And these ceremonies of holy bread and holy water at that time were not only
ministered to ye people of the Godly Pastors, but it was also every Sunday
preached and declared unto the^, what the ceremonies signified, and wherefore
they were instituted of the rulers of Christ's church, eue^ to put the^ in
remembrance of Christ's body breakyng and blood sheadyng on ye altar of the
Cross for the remission and forgiveness of their sins. And it is not to be
doubted, but the Godly Ministers in those days did with sorrowful hearts
minister those ceremonies to the people, seeing that they for their
unthankfulness and dissolution of life, were deprived of the holy communion
of Christ's body and blood, and fed with ceremonies of man's invention: and did
likewise diligently exhort the people so to frame their lives according to the
rule of Gods word, that the Elders of Christ's Church seeing their repentance
and amendment of life, might thereby be occasioned to restore unto them the
holy and blessed communion, which is the partaking of the body and blood of
Christ. 1. Cor. 10.
Thus were the ceremonies not altogether unprofitable to the people of yt age.
But it is in these our days far otherwise. For the ceremonies in the Popish
Churches are still retained: but who knows the signification and meaning of
the^. The bread is every Sunday distributed, and the water sprinkled: but how
often is the death of Christ preached? But as touching ye ceremonye of holy
bread, whereof we now speak, it is become a vain tradition and utterly
unprofitable, yea wicked and abominable, as all other popyshe ceremonies are
likewise. The abuse of holy bread.
For where as it was instituted to put the people in remembrance of Christ's
body breakyng the priests deal it unto this end, yt the people eating
thereof, should believe to receive health and salvation both of body and soul.
For these are the words, which they use in halowing the bread, as they term
it, taking upon them by this means to make the creatures of God more holy,
than ever God made them, Benedic domine hanc creaturam panis, qui benedixisti
quinque pan^s in deserto, vt omnes gustantes ex his, recipeant tam corporis
qua^ animae sanitatem. That is to say. Bless, O Lord, this creature of bread,
which did bless five Loaves in the wilderness, that all that taste of them,
may receive health both of body and soul.

What other thing is this, than to attribute the virtue of our salvation to a
pylde and beggarly ceremony, which alone comes of ye mere mercy and
gracious goodness of God to al men, that repent and believe in Christ Jesus his
only begotten Son, and our alone Sauioure^ If we may obtain health both
of body and soul by their be witched bread: then was Christ promised, given,
conceived, borne circumcised, persecuted, and put to death for our sins in
vain: yea, then was Christ without cause made of God the Father unto us,
wisdom and righteousness, and sanctifying, and redemption, yt as it is
written. He that rejoices, should rejoice in the Lord. i. Cor. i.
We know, says the Apostle, yt man is not justified by the works of the law,
but by the faith of Jesus Christ: Gala, ii.
and we have believed in Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by ye faith
of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because no flesh shall be
justified by the works of the law. If we be not justified by the works of
that law, which God himself commanded:
shall we hope to be made ryghteous by the obseruaunces of men's triflyng
traditions, crooked constitutions, idle inventions, drousye dreams, fond
fantasyes, antichristian acts, deuilysh decrees, (...) O blasphemous Papists.

Of Procession.
POpe Agapetus the first commanded the people to go procession solemnly on
sondayes and other feastiual days. Procession
In the year, etc. 533. Platina. Polyd. D. Barnes. and.

Guilielmus Durandus writes, that when the people go a Procession, Why they
ring the bells at procession.
the Belles are ronge to this end, even to make the devils afraid, and to
chase them away. For says he, the devils are wonderfully afraid, when they
hear the trompettes of the church militaunt, I mean the Belles: even as a
Tyraunte is greatly afraid, when he hears in his own land the trompets of
some mighty King that is his enemy. Why they ring in any great tempeste.
And this is also the cause, why the church, when there is any great tempest,
ringeth the Belles, yt the devils hearing the trompets of ye everlasting King,
should be afraid, and trudge away, and cause no more tempests to arise, etc.
Rat. di. off.

Of Sensing.
Sensyng.
POpe Leo the third brought Sensing into the church. In the year, etc. 796.
Pol. D. Barns. Pantal.

Of Candles bearing on Candelmassedaye.
Candles bearyng.
POpe Sergius, otherwise called, Pope Swinesnoute, commanded, yt all the people
should go on procession upon Candelmasse day, and carry candels about with them
brenning in their hands. In the year. etc. 684. Durand. G. Achilles. How
this candle bearyng on candlemasse day came first up, The beginning of ca^dels
bearyng on ca^de^masday.
yt author of our english festiual declares on this manner. Sometime says he,
when the Romans by great might and royal power conquered all the world
(for they had great dominion) they were so proud, yt they forgot God, and made
them diverse Gods after their own lust. And so among al, they had a God yt
they called Mars, that had been to fore a notable Knight in battle. And so
they prayed to him for help: and for that they would speed yt better of this
Knight, the people prayed and did great worship to his mother, yt was called
Februa, after which woman much people have opinion, that ye month February
is called. Wherefore ye second day of this month is candlemasseday. The
Romans this night went about the city of Rome with Torches and Candles
brennyng in worship of this woman Februa, for hope to have ye more help and
succoure of her son Mars. Then was there a Pope, yt was called Sergius, and
when he saw Christen people draw to this false Maumetrye and untrue belief:
He thought to undo this foul use and custom, and turn it into Gods worship
and our Ladies, and gave commandment, yt all Christen people should come to
Church and offer up a candle brennyng in the worship yt they did to this woman
Februa, and do worship to our lady and to her son our Lord Jesus Christ. So
yt now this feast is solemnly hallowed through al Christendom. And every
Christen man and woman of couenable age is bound to come to church, and offer
up their candles as though they were bodily with our Lady, hopyng for this
reverence and worship yt they do to our Lady, to have a great reward in
heaven, and of her son our lord Jesus Christ: and so they may be syker, and it
be done in clean life and with good devotion, etc.

Of Ashes sprincklyng.
Ashes sprinkling.
POpe Gregory the first ordained, yt the people on Ash wednisday should be
sprinkled with hallowed Ashes, to put the^ in remembrance, yt they are but
earth, duste and Ashes, In the year, etc. 590. Anselmus Ryd.

Of Palms bearyng.
POpe Gregorye the first also appointed, Palms bearyng.
yt Palms should be borne about in procession on Palm Sunday. Ansel. Ryd.

Of halowing Palms, Ashes, Candles, etc.
POpe Gregorye the first in like manner devised the halowing of Palms, Palms
halowing. etc.
Ashes, Candles, etc. Durand, Antonin.

Of Crepyng to the Cross.
POpe Gregorye the first likewise brought into the Church, Cross crepyng.
the Crepyng unto the Cross. Sigesb. Antoninus.

Of the halowing of the Paschal.
POpe Zozimus ordained, The Paschal taper?
that the Paschall Taper should be hallowed on Easter even, and set up in every
paryshe church. In ye year, of our Lord. 414. Isidor. Volat. Platina. D.
Barns.

Some make Pope Theodorus author of it, which lived about the year of our
Lord. 613. Chron. Fasciculus. Temporum. Durandus.

Guilielmus Durandus says ye Saint Ambrose made the benediction or prayer,
wherewith the Paschall Taper is hallowed on Easter even. He says moreoue^r,
that Augustinus and Petrus Diaconus the Monk, made also other benedictions,
which are not in use. Rat. di. offi.

Of Oil and Cream, and of the halowing of the same.
POpe Clement the first brought first of all the Oil and Cream into the
Church. Oil and Cream,
In the year of our Lord,.92.

Some attribute this ceremonye to Pope Siluester the first. In the year, etc.
315. Chron. Lib. Council.

Halowing of Oil and Cream.
Pope Fabian ordained, yt the Oil and Cream, which are used to be kept in the
Chrismatorye for sundry purposes and uses, should be renewed every Maundye
Thursdaye, and yt the old should be brent. For says he, it is a new sacrament,
and therefore must it always be renewed, and the old brent. De conse. Did. 3.
Cap. In literis. Plat. Volat. Fascicu. Temp. Polyd..

Pope Siluester the first gave straight charge, Work for the Bishop
yt neither deaco^ nor priest should presume to halow Oil and Cream, but only
the Bishop. In the year, etc. 315. Lib Council.

Pope Anastasius the first commanded, that so soon as the Bishop has hallowed
the Oil and Cream, either the Subdeacons or the Deacons with all expedition
should carrye it unto all the Churches through out the diocese that it may be
in a readiness against Easter day. In the year of our Lord. 404. Lib.
Council. Chron.

Of the Fire on Easter even, and of the Halowing thereof.
POpe Zozimus ordained not only ye Paschall Taper to be hallowed on Easter even,
Easter eue^ fire and the halowynge thereof.
but also that a Fire should be made in every Church on that day, and
hallowed: again, that the Paschal should be lightened with the flame of that
Fire, and al other candles in the Church. In the year. etc. Chron. Germ.

Of Halowing the Font on Easter even.
POpe Pius the first brought in the halowing of ye Font. Font halowyng.
In the year etc. 147. Plat. Sabell.

Pope Leo, Pope Damasus, and S. Ambrose added the Exorcismes or coniurations,
Sole^nities about font halowinge.
and the benedictions or blessings, with the other solemnities that be used at
ye halowing of the Font, as droppyng the candle into it, the priests
breathing into it, the dividing and casting out of ye water. etc. Chron. Germ.
Guil. Durand. in. Rat. di. off.

Of halowing new Fruits.
Halowyng of new fruits.
POpe Eutichianus decreed, that all new fruits, but specially Beans and Grapes
should be blessed, consecrated and hallowed upon the altar. In the year. etc.
276. plat. polid. D. Bar^s.

Of Fasting.
Adue^t fast. Lent fast.
SAint Peter the Apostle of Christ, and first Pope of Rome, (as the Papists
feign) where he lived by the space of xxv. years and reigned the great and
high Bishop, ordained, that both Aduent and Lent should be solemnly and
devoutly fasted of all christen people in the remembrance of the first and
second coming of our Lord Jesus. In the year of our Lord. 36. Ioa^. Laziar.
Chron. Angl. Durand.

Of Lent. Note.
Guilihelmus Durandus says, that after the mind of S. Gregory de consecrat.
did. ^. Lent is counted to begin on the first Sunday in Lent, and to end
easter even: which time says he, contains xlii. days: of the which take
away the six Sondayes, and so there remain only, 36. days. Therefore that
the number of forty days, which Christ fasted, might be perfited, the
aforesaid Pope Gregory added and put to Lent four days of the week that go
before, that is to say, Wednesday, Thursdaye, Frydaye and Saterdaye. De
consecra. did. 5. Quadragesima. Durand. in Rat. di off.

Telesphorus (as other affirm: which I think to be more true) appointed
first of all, Lent to be fasted before Easter. And he moreover added an other
week to it, which is commonly called Quinquagesima. This week he commanded
the priests to fast more than the laytye: because they, which ought to be
holier than the reaste, should in this ordinarye fast show more
abstistinence than other. In the year of our Lord. 139. Lib. Council. Eusebius.
Sabell. Polid. D. Barnes.

In a certain Sinode holde^ at Nice it was ordained, that the fasting of Lent
which before endured from the sixth day of Ianuarye unto the sixtenth day of
February should begin and end, as it is now used. Chron. Ranulphus. Cest.

Lent first fasted in England.
Carcombertus king of England was the first, that commanded the inhabitants
of England to fast Lent, about the year of our Lord. 645. Sigeb. in Chron.
Pantal.

Lent thursdayes fasted.
Pope Gregory the second made a decree, that christen men should fast also on
the thursdayes in Lent, which was never used before: and that there should be
solemn massing also on those days in Churches. One Pope against an other.
But Pope Melchiades ordained, that no man should fast the Thursday, no more
than the Sunday. For says he, as the sunday was solemn because of the
resurrection of the Lord: so likewise ought thursdaye to be because on that day
Christ instituted his supper, and ascended into heaven. In the year of our
Lord. 729. Sigebertus in Chron. Guil. Durand. Pantal.

Wednesday, Fridai and saterdaye fast^^.

Reasons why we ought not to fast the So^daies and thur^dayes


Pope Siluester the first ordained, that Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday should
be fasted every week through out the year. As for Sondayes and thursdayes, he
would have them be kept merely holy with double feast (as they use to say) in
holy kitchen. For on the sunday, says he, the Lord Jesus rose up from death
to life and on the Thursday he ascended into heaven: he instituted the
Sacrament of his body, and made the holy cream. In the year of our Lord. 315.
Bergom.

Pope Gregory the seventh renewed the saturday fast and commanded, Saterdaye
fast renewed.
that there should be no flesh eaten of Christians that day. In the year.
etc. 1073. Plat. Volat. Nauclerus. Ioannes Stella de consec. did. 5. ca^. Quia
dies Sabathi.

Many attribute the Saturday fast to Pope Innocent, Reasons why we ought not to
fast the Saturday.
the first. In the year. etc. 408. Great. Sabel. Fasci. Temp. Pantal. And Pope
Innocents reason, why men should fast the saturday is this: First because on
that day Christ lay buried in the Sepulcher. Secondely, because his disciples
for very sorrow fasted that day. Lib. Council. Chron. Chronicarum. Alb.
Crantzius.

Notwithstanding Guilihelmus Durandus, Reasons why we ought not to fast on
saterdayes in Lent.
says, that Pope Innocent, made a constitution, yt the saterdaye in Lent
should not be fasted, because the Lord rested in the sepulcher on the
saturday, ^or a token of the quietness and reast, that we shall hereafter
have: wherein ^^ in the Festiualle on this manner. The doctrine on the
Festival days concerning Imbring days.
Good fre^des, this week ye shall have Imber days, that is, Wednesday,
Friday, and Saturday: the which days Calixtus the Pope ordained four times in
ye year, to all that be of conuenable age to fast for certain causes, as ye
shall hear. Our old fathers fasted four times in the year, against four
high and solemn feasts: and if we will show us good children, we must fast,
and follow the same rule that they used. And therefore we fast four times. First
in march The second at Whitsontyde. The third between harvest and seedetyme.
And the fourth before Christmasse. March is a time that dries up the moisture
that is in the earth. Wherefore we fast that time to dry the earth of our body
of the humors that be noyous to the body and to the soul. For that time the
humors of letchery tempts a man most of any time of the year. Also we do
fast at Whitsontyde, to get grace of the holy Ghost, that we may be in love and
charity to God, and to all the world* Charitas cooperit multitudinem
peccatorum Charity covers the multitude of sins. Also we must fast for to
have meekness in our hearts, and to put away all pride yt renueth within
us. i. Pe, iiii.
Also we fast between harvest and sede time for to have grace to gather fruits
of good works into the house of our conscience, and so by ensample of good
living among the people, that we be common with both rich and poor. Also we
fast in winter for to slay all stinckyng weeds of sin and of foul earth
and fleshly lusts, yt makes good Angels and good people to withdraw them
from us. For right as a nettle brenneth roses and other flowers that grow nie
him. In the same wise a vicious man or woman styrreth and sets on fire them
yt been in his company. And for these causes we fast four times in the
year, and every time three days, ye betokens three special virtues that
helps a man to grace, yt is fasting, devout praying, and alms deed doing.
Why they be called Imber days.
And by opinion of much people these days been called Imber days because yt
our elder Fathers would on these days eat no bread but cakes made under
ashes: So yt by the eating of yt they reduced into their mind that they were
but ashes, and so should turn again, and wiste not how sone: and by that
turned away from all delicious meats and drinks and took none heed, but yt
they had easy sustenaunce. This caused them to think on death, and y^ will
cause a man to desire no more tha^ him needs, and to abstain himself from al
manner of bodily lusts, and to increase in virtues, whereby we may come to
everlasting bless.

And at a council holden at Magonce it was decreed, yt when those Imberdayes
come, they should be fasted of all people, and that they should on those
days come devoutly unto church and hear Mass, and give themselves to prayer
and devotion. Libro. Council.

Apostles euens fasted
Pope Innocent the third made a decree, that all the Apostles euens should be
fasted, except the euens of Phillip and Jacob and of John the Euangeliste. In
the year, etc. 1195. Lib. 3. accretal. Gregorij. Cap. 2. de obseruatione
ieiunij. Chron. Germani.

The same pope also appointed, that the even of Mathias should also be fasted
as one of ye Apostles euens: and yt if the day of Mathias be on the monday, S
Mathias even faste^
ye even shall be fasted on the saturday, and not on the sunday. Ibidem.

Pope Urban the syxt commanded ye the euens of these feasts of our Lady, Our
ladies eue^s fasted
yt is to say, the visitation, ye assumption and natiuitye, should be fasted.
In the year, etc. 1371. Lib. Council. Chron. Germ.

Pope Boniface the first ordained, Saints euens fasted
ye saints euens should be solemnly fasted In the year. etc. 425.

The same ordinance is also ascribed to pope Gregorye ye second Chron Germa.

Pope Honorius the third made a decree, Flesh eating on Christmasse day
howsoever it falls.
yt if ye feast of ye natiuitye of Christ, chance to fall upon the Friday, yet
it shall be lawful for all men to eat flesh, on that day, except it be such
as have vowed to the contrary. In the year, etc. 1214. Lib, 3. decret.
Gregorij. de obseruatione ieiunij.

Pope Gregory the first commanded, yt neither flesh, Flesh and al white
meats forbidden ou fasting daye^
nor any thing yt has affinitye with flesh, as Chese, Milk, Eggs, etc,
should be eaten on such days, as are appointed to be fasted. In the year.
etc. 560. Great. Pol. Pantale.

Fastes commanded by ye priests ar to be observed.
Pope Eusebius made a law, yt all such feasts as are commanded of priests in
the Church to be fasted should in no condition be broken, except necessity
compel any man to the contrary. In the year, etc. 309. Lib. Council. Chron.
Germ.

What kind of people be free from the law of fasting.
In the festival we read, that these sorts of people be priuileged and
exempted from the law of fasting: that is to say, Children yt been within age.
Women yt be with child. Old people yt been myghtlesse, weak, and impotente.
And finally, labouryng people, as pilgrims, and like people, those that the
law dispenses with, upon their conscience. Dominica prima in quadragesima.

In the Council Gangrense it was decreed, yt if any person of presumption
would despise to fast such days as were commanded of holy church, he
should be excommunicate and be taken of the Christen congregation as an Ethnike
and Publicane. Libro. Council. Barthol. Carrantz.

The Popes decrees affirm plainly (as Guilielmus Durandus testifyeth) that
whosoever eats any thing before Mass be done on such days as are
appointed by holy church to be fasted, the same commits deadly sin. In
Rat. di. off, Lib. Council.

In the Council Braccarense it was agreed, yt all the Apostles euens should be
fasted, except the euens of these Apostles Phillip and Jacob and John the
Euangeliste, as we to fore heard out of the decree of Pope Innocent ye third.
For the feast of Phillip and Jacob, is between Easter and Witsontide, which is
a time of joy and gladness, and therefore is there no fasting, according to
this old rule, Inter Pen et Pa^ non est Dirige, neque fasting day. And ye feast
of ^. John the Evangelist is at Christmasse, when men must make good cheer,
and be frolyke and merry. Guilielmus. Durandus. Lib. Council.

The Council Chalcedonense made a decree, No meat til euenso^g be done on
fasting days.
yt they should be counted by no means to fast, which taste any meat or
drink, before euenyng prayer be done. Lib. Council.

Iacobus de Voragine in his book entitled Historia Longobardica, shows a
reason, Of Imbring days Note.
why the Imberdayes be rather fasted on the Wednisday, Friday, and Saterdaye,
than on the Mondaye, Tuesday and Thursday. For says he, the Lord Jesus was
betrayde of Judas on the Wednisday. And on ye Fridaye he was crucified. And on
the Saturday following, he lay in his sepulcher: and the Apostles were very
sad for the death of their Lord.

Of Holy days, and of Feasts of Saints with such like.
Easter day
POpe Pius the first ordained yt Easter day should be celebrated and kept holy
ever on the Sunday. In the year of our Lord. 147. Libro. Council. Polyd. D.
Barns, Pantal.

Pope Gregory the first approved and allowed the feast of the Trinity:
Trinity Sunday.
which Pope Alexander would by no means admit. For, says he, as there ought
to be no feast of ye Unity: no more ought there to be any feast of the
Trinity. In the year, etc. 590. Guilielmus. Durandus.

Pope Urban the fourth ordained the feast of the Sacrament of the Altar, The
feast of Corpus Christi.
otherwise called, The feast of Corpus Christi, with pardons and indulgences
great plentye, to allure the foolyshe and simple people to commit spiritual
whoredom with that Sacrament by adoryng and worshipping it as their God,
Maker and Savior: and willed it to be kept holy the Thursdaye after
Trinity Sunday. In the year, etc. 1254. Christianus. Massaeus. Joan. Stella.
Polyd. Pantal.

The beginning of this feast was this In the country of the Leodicenses there
was a certain Recluse or Anckresse called Eua, which of a vain, foolyshe,
and superstitious devotion and love toward the Sacrament of the altar, The
beginning of the feast of Corpus Christi
as they term it, procured through earneste suit of Pope Urban the fourth,
that the Sacrament of the Altar, commonly called Corpus Christi, might also
have a feast and holy day, being as well worthy as the Gallowe tree or cross
yt Christ was hanged on, which was already celebrated in the Church: and yt the
same feast of Corpus Christi might with all solemnitye be kept holy
thorowoute the whole world. Pope Urban being an holy and devout Father,
doubt ye not, considering the great devotion, earneste zeal and Godly mind
of this holy and religious woman, accomplyshed fo^le graciouslye her tender
request, and did not only ordain that this feast of Corpus Christi should be
kept holy, but he also granted plenarye Indulgence, and large pardon to so
many as either do say or hear the service belonging to yt feast which Thomas
Aquinas the Black friar made, Arnoldus Bostius. Guili. Durand. Chron.

Before that time there was no such feast known in the church of Christ. But
this is most certain that through this feast great Idolatrye and much
spiritual whoredom is daily committed with the Mass bredde in all those
places, where the true doctrine of the sacrament is not known. Pope Innocent
ye third, says Theodorus Bibliander in the Council Lateranense, placed ye
fond fansye of Monk Lanfranke concerning Transubstantiation among the
articles of the faith of the most high Trinity. In the year. etc. 1215. And
because nothing should want to the worshippynge of the new found God of bread
and wine: and that the bishop of Rome might have his God Mazin, as Aaron with
the idolatrous Israelites had the golden Calfe in the wilderness: Pope Urban
the fourth ordained the feast of Corpus Chr^sti with large pardons. Council.
sa^, dom.

Of this feast we read in the English festival on this manner. The doctrine of
the festiual concerning the feast of Corpus Christi.
Good friends, ye shall understand, that this day is an high and solemn feast
in holy church and is the feast of Corpus Christi: It is the feast of our
Lords own body the which is offered to the high father in heaven at the
altar for the remission of our sins for all Christen people yt live here in
perfect love and charity, and for the great succor and help in releuing them
that been in pains of Purgatory, there abidyng the mercy of God. Ye shall
understand, that this feast was found by a Pope, that was called Urban, the
which had great grace and devotion in the holy Sacrament of the altar,
considering the great need help and succor to man's soul and to the ^urdering
of living to all Christen people here in this present world. Therefore he did
establishe and ordain this present feast to be hallowed in the next thursday
after the feast of the holy Trinity. For all christen people that will be
saved, must have sad belief in the holy Sacrament, which is Gods own body in
form of bread, made by the virtue of Christ's words that the priest says,
and by working of the holy Ghost. Pardon be longyng to the feast of Corpus
Christi.
Then for this holy Pope thought to draw people to more devotion and better
will to this holy Sacrament, and to do the service this day: he grants to all
that be worhy (that is to say) that be very contrit and confessed of their
sins, and be in the Church at both eue^songs, at Mattens, and at mass, for
each an hundred days of pardon, and for each hour of the day. xl. days of
pardon, and every day of the Vtas an hundred days of pardon in remission of al
their sins for evermore enduring. etc In sermon. de corpore. christi.

Pope Gregorye the ninth appointed ye feast of ye Nativity of S. John Baptiste,
which we commonly call Mydsommerday, to kept holy. In the year. etc. 1225.
Chron. Germ.

Pope Siluester the first at the desire of the Emperor Co^sta^tine instituted
ye feast of La^masse, Midsommer day.
called Ad vincula Sancti Petri. In the year. etc. 315. Great. Polid.

Pope Eusebius ordained the feast of the Inue^tion of the cross. The Inue^tion
of the Cross. The exaltacion of the Cross. The transfiguration of our Lord.
In the year etc. 309. Crat. Guil. Durandus.

Pope Honorius devised the feast of the Exaltatio^ of the cross. In the year
of our Lord. 622. Plat. Pant.

Some attribute these feasts to Pope Urban the fourth* Pol. Virgil.

Pope Calixte the third invented the feast of the Transfiguration of our
Lord, and commanded, that it should be celebrated and kept holy with as
large indulgences and pardons, as the feast of Corpus Christi. In the year of
our Lord. 1455. Matthew. Palmer. Joan. Stella. Pantaleon.

This feast (as the festiual reports) is greatly priuileged in holy Church,
The doctrine of the festival.
in so much that orders be given this day through out all Christendom, and
great pardons be granted to this day in diuerses places, as in Syon plenare
remission, and all is to the weal and comfort of man, and for a purueaunce to
sanctify his soul, that in the last resurrection the said soul joined to the
body, may together be glorified and transfigured in clerenesse more brighter
tha^ is the Sun, and so ever to endure.

Thassmu^ion of our Lady.
Pope Leo the fourth instituted the Feast of the Assumption of the blessed
Uirgine Mary, and commanded that it should in all places be kept hye and holy
by the space of right days. In the year* etc. 858. Lib. Council. Sigebert.
Joan. Functius.

Michelmasse day.
Pope Innocent the fourth ordained ye Feast of the Nativity of Mary the Uirgine
with the Octaues thereof. In the year, etc. 1242. Volat. Sabel. Pant.

Dedicatio^ day or Church holy day.
Pope Felix the third appointed the Feast of the Archaungel Michaell, to be kept
holy. In the year of our Lord. 486. Lib. Council. Chron.

Pope Felix the third ordained also the Feast of the Dedicacion of the
Temple, commonly called Church holy day, and commanded yt every City, Town,
or village should yearly keep for ever y^ day, whereon ye Church was hallowed.
Volat. Plat. Polid. Albertus. Krantzius.

Pope Boniface the fourth ordained the Feast of all Saints, The feast of al
saint^
called, All Halowes. In the year of our Lord. 606. Plat. Volat, Polid.

Pope Gregory the fourth afterward willed, The feast of al souls
that the Feast of all Saints should be kept the first day of November. In
the year of our Lord. 486. Plat. Sabel. Polid. D. Barns.

Pope John the.xviii. confirmed the Feast of all souls, which was bego^n by a
certain Monk called Oclilo, and commanded that it should be kept ^oly in
every Church the day followyng the Feast of all Saints. In the year of our
Lord. 999. Petrus. Damianus. Christianus. Massaeus. Volat. Fascicu^us.
Temporum. Joan. Stella. Polid.

This Feast, as they write, took the beginning on this manner. The beginning of
the feast of all Souls.
A certain Monk named Oclilo provincial of the Monks of Clun^acensis order,
upon an occasion that he heard about Etna the mountain of Sicilie oftentimes
great weping, lamenting, and crying, which he supposed to be the yellynge of
evil spirits that wailed because the souls of dead men were taken out of
Purgatory from the^ by the peticio^s, prayers, suffrages, and sacrifices of
well disposed Christen people, persuaded his Covent to make a general Obite
for all souls the day next after the feast of all Saints, and desired Pope
John the xviii. to set it forth by his authority, and to command it to be
observed generally as a godly Institution full of loving, tender, and pitiful
charity. Which thing Pope John did with all expedition: so that of this
Monks foolish supposition, there has sprung up much vain superstition.
Volat. Polid. Joan. Laziard.

The co^ceptio^ and presentatio^ of mary, with the feasts of Aun^, Joseph, and
Fraunces. The visitacion of Marye.
Pope Sixtus the fourth ordained the feasts of the Conception, and presentation
of Marye the Uirgine: and the Feasts of Anne her Mother, and of Joseph her
husband, and also of Fraunces. In the year. etc. 1469. Decret. Extravagant.
Joan. Laziard.

Pope Urban the sixth made the visitation of Mary holyday. In the year. etc.
1390. Christ. Mass. Chron. Germ.

Pope Sergius, otherwise called Popes Swinesnoute, Candelmasseday
confirmed the feast of the Purification of Mary, commonly called
Candelmassedaye, which before was instituted at Constantinople, Pope Vigilius
being Bishop of Rome. In the year of our Lord. 684. Sigeb. Pantal. And he
commanded that all the people should on that day go procession, and carry
brennyng candels about with them in their hands. Chron. Germ. Guil. Durand.

Pope Boniface the eight ordained that the feasts of the four Evangelists,
The feasts of the four Evangelists and of the four Doctors. Sunday.
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John: again, that the feasts of the four Doctors,
Ambrose, Hierome, Austen, and Gregorye should be double feasts in holy
Church. In the year of our Lord. 1286. Fasciculus Temp. Christ. Massaeus.
Joan. Stella.

Pope Leo the first commanded, A godly law and worthy to be observed
that the Sunday should be kept holy, and that all Christians should behave
themselves Godly and virtuously all the day long, in praying, in hearing and
readyng the word of God, in visityng the sick and poor, and in comforting
the comfortless. In the year of our Lord. 444. Volat. Sabel. Pantal.

This godly decree is s^lenderly observed in England.
Pope Leo the third bearyng rule, a Counsel was holden at Magontia in Germany,
where it was decreed, that al So^dayes should be kept holy with all reverence,
and that all men on those days should abstain from al service, work and
worldly business: and that there should be no Markets, no Faires, no bying
nor selling on the Sunday: Again, that no man on that day should be judged
either unto death, or unto any pain. In the year. etc. 817. Lib. Council.
Barth. Carranza.

A general rule for holy days.
Pope Innocent ye fourth bearing rule, it was agreed in a certain council holde^
at Lions, what holidays should specially be observed and kept: where it was
decreed that the Sondayes should be kept holy from Saturday at noone, till
Sunday at night. Item, the feasts following should also be hallowed and kept
holy, that is to say: the feasts of the Nativity of Christ, of S. Stephen of
S. Ihon the Euangeliste, of the Innocents, of S. Siluester, of the
Circumcision, of ye Epiphanye, of Easter, with the whole weeks yt go before
and after, of the Rogation days, of the Ascension of Christ, of Whitsontide
with the two days following, of S. John Baptiste, of the xxii. Apostles, of S.
Laurence, of blessed Marye, of S. Michaell of the Dedication of the Temple, of
al Saints, of S. Martine, and to be short, all such feasts of Canonised
Saints as every Bishop in his diocese with ye consent of the Clergy and the
people, have determined to keep holy. As for all other feasts yt are in the
year: the people ought neither to be compelled to keep them holy day nor yet
to be forbidden, but every man to do according to his devotion. In the year of
our lord. 1242. Libro. Council. Polydor. Guilielmus. Durandus.

This decree also was made in a counsel holden at Maguntia. Bartholom.
Carrantz.

A council holden at Basille confyrmed the feast of the Conception of Mary the
Uirgine: The co^ceptio^ of mary
and granted to so many as deuoutlye keep it holy day, and be present at
the service, an hundred and fyftye days of pardon. Lib Council.

The Annunciation of Mary.
In ye council Toletane it was decreed, yt the feast of the Annunciation of Mary
should be kept holy the fyftene day of the Calendes of Ianuarye, and that the
feast of the Natiuitye of her son, that is to say, Christmasse, should be
celebrated and kept holy the eyghts day of the Calendes of Ianuarye. Lib.
Council.

The visitatio^ of mary
Item in a council holden at Basille the feast of the visitation of Mary was
confyrmed, and an hundred days of pardon granted to all them, ye with good
devotion be present at the service of ye day. Lib. Council.

Of Canonysing and making of Saints.
The beginning of saints making
POpe Leo the nynthe holdyng a council at Vercellis, made Gerardus Bishop
sometime of the Le^corians, a saint. And this pope was the first (as some write)
ye ever presumed and took upon him to make saints. In the year, etc. 1049.
Christ. Massae.

Pope Gregorye the nynth made friar Dominike, and friar Fraunces, and friar
Anthony de Padua, and Elizabeth daughter to the King of Hungary, Dominik^
Fraunces. Anthonye de padua. Friars, and Elizabeth* Saints. Clara, Peter
Marter, Stanislaus, Saints. Jews bishop of Colossa. T^of. Aquine. Thomas
bishop of Hereforde, Saints.
Saints. In the year. etc. 1225. Plat. Albert. Krantz. Joan Stella. Pantal.

Pope Alexander the fourth made Clara the Nun, Peter Martyr the Blackfryer,
and Stanslaus Bishop of Cracouia, saints. In the year, etc. 1248. Chronic.
Volat. Pantal,

Pope John the.xxii. made Jews Bishop of Tolossa, and son to Charles, King
of France, a Saint. He sainted also Thomas of Aquine, the blackefrier, and
Thomas Bishop of Hereforde. In the year. 1308. Plat. Volat. Pant.

Pope Nicolas the fyft among a greaterable of others, made Bernardine the
Grayfryer, Bernardine the Grayfrier sainted.
a Saint. In the year, etc. 1447. Matthew. Palmer. Platina. Chronic. Germani.

Pope Calixt the third made Vincent the blackefryer, and Edmunde King of
England, Uincent Edmunde^ Osmunde saints.
Saints. He also canonysed Osmunde sometime Bishop of Salisburye, and caused
him to be counted in the number of saints. In the year of our Lord, 1455.
Volat. Matthe. Palm. Pisamus. Ranulph. Cest. Pantal.

Katerine sainted.
Pope Pius the second made Katerine a Saint. In the year. etc. 1458. Volat.
Chron.

Iuo a saint
Pope Clement the sixte made Iuo the priest a saint. In the year, etc. 1336.
Volat Christ. Massae.

Bonauenture a saint
Pope Sixtus the fourth made Bonauenture the Grayfryer a saint. In the year,
etc. 1471. Chron. Chronica.

Pope Alexander the third made Barnarde the Monk a saint. Bernarde a saint.
In the year, etc. 1161. Iacobus. Meyer.

Heliopolde a saint.
Pope Innocent the eight made Heliopolde sometime Duke of Austria, a Saint. In
the year, etc. 1484. Chroni. Ioannes. Stella.

Pope Innocent the third made Hughe of Lincoln, Hughe of Lincoln a saint.
a saint. In the year. etc. 1195 Fasciculus. Temporum.

Hedwigis a saint.
Pope Clement the fourth made Hedwigis, sometime Duchess of Polonia, a saint.
In the year, etc. 1165. Ioannes. Laziardus. Fasciculus. Temporum. Ioannes.
Stella.

Brigit a saint.
Pope Boniface the nynth made Brigite the Nun, a saint. In the year. etc. 1379
Joan. Laziardus. Chron.

Pope Leo the nynth made Vuolfgange Bishop of Ratisbone, Vuolfgang a saint.
a saint. In the year, etc. 1049. Chron.

Pope Gregory the seventh made John Gaulbert the Monk, John Gaulbert a saint
a saint. In the year, 1073. Chron.

Pope Innocent the second made Hughe the Charterhouse Monk, Hughe the Monk a
saint.
a saint. In the year, etc, 113*. Chron.

Pope Boniface the eight made Jews King of France, Jews King of France, a
saint.
a saint. In the year, 1290. Joan. Laziard. Chron.

Pope Innocent the fourth made Edmunde Archbishop of Cantorburye, Edmund and
Peter de verona sainted.
a saint, and Peter de verona the Blackfryer he canonised also for a saint, and
willed him to be taken for a confessor saint. In the year, etc. 1242. Sabell.
Joan. Stella. Joan. LaZiard. Chron.

Pope Eugenius the fourth made Nicolas de Toleto an Austen friar, Nicolas de
Toleto a saint.
a saint. In the year, etc. 1430. Joan. Stella. Chron.

Pope Clement the fyfte made Pope Celestine a saint under the name of Peter.
Pope Celestine a saint.
In the year, etc. 1304. Joan. Laziard.

Pope Paschalis made Charles ye great a Saint. Charles ye great sainted.
In the year, etc. 1164. Christi. Massaeus.

Pope Leo the tenthe made Fraunces the Heremite, Fraunces a saint.
a saint. In the year. 1507* Christ. Massae.

Pope Alexander the third (which I had almost forgotten) made Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Cantorbury, Thomas Becket sainted.
a saint. In the year, etc. 1161. Plat. D. Barns.

Pope Alexander, (says the English Festival, Of Beckettes translation. Note.
) sent letters, into England to the Archbishop Stephen, and to other Abbottes
and Prelates, commanding them to take up Thomas Beckettes bones, and to lay
them in a shryne, and to set it where it might be worshipped of all Christen
people. A new idol set up.
Then the Bishop ordained a day, when yt should be done. So over even, while
they might have space: he took with him the Bishop of Salisburye, and other
monks and Clerks many, and went to the place, where Thomas had layen fyftye
years. Then they kneled al on ye earth, praying to Thomas devoutly of help.
Then four took up the tomb, with great dread and quakyng, and there they
found a little writing, which was this. Here lies and rests Thomas
Archebyshop of Cantorburye, Primate of England, Becket the popes martyr and
saint.
and the Popes Legate, slain for the right of holy Church the fyfte day of
Christmasse. Then for great devotion that they had of the syghte, all cried:
Saint Thomas, Saint Thomas. And then they took the head to the Archebyshop to
kiss, and so they kyssed it al. And then they beheld his wounds, and said:
They were ungracious that wounded thee thus. And so laid him in a shryne, and
covered it with clothe of gold, and set torches about it brennyng, and the
people to watch it all night. Then on the morrow came all the states of this
land, and bare the shryne to the place there as it is now, with all reverence
and worship that they could.

The author of the festival says, A lousye saint, and an uncleanly.
yt this Thomas did wear hard hair next his body, and a breche of ye same:
the which was so full of vermyn, yt it was an horrible sight to see. And yet
he changed but once in fortye days.

The same author also writes, Beckets penance very homely.
that the aforesaid Thomas Beckette made his Confessoure every Wednisdaye and
Friday to beat him with a rod upon his bare body, as a child is beaten in
the Schole (that is to say,) on the arsse, that he might suffer worthy
penance.

Ranulphus Cestrensis in his Chronicle writes, that when Thomas Becket was
translated, Stephen Archbishop of Cantorburye, during the said solemnity,
found hay and prouender to all men that would ask it in the way between
London and Cantorbury. Also in the day of the Translation he made wine to run
in pypes continuallye in diverse places of the City: and so ye cost that
Stephen made in this solemnity, his fourth successor Bonifacius hardly paid
it. In Polichron. Lib. 7. Cap. 34.

Pope Alexander the third ordained yt none should be taken for a saint,
except he were first canonised and admitted to be a saint by ye bishop of Romes
bull. None saints but such as the pope admi.
In the year, 1161. Dec. 3. Tit. 46. Ca Reliquijs. Polydor. Pantaleon.

From the time that the Popes began first to canonyse and to make saints unto
the reygne of Pope John the.xxii. Swarms of saints.
there are found to be canonysed five thousand, five hundred, fyftye, and
five Saints, yt the Popes have made, as writteth the author of the Chronicle,
entitled. Fasciculus Temporum.

Isuardus the French Monk diligently searching out the number of saints,
found, that every day in the year there are more than CCC. The popes Saints.
Saints to be served: such a multitude of new saints have the Popes of Rome
brought into the Church of their own authority, whom they have sainted
partly for favor, partly for money, partly of a blind zeal, and partly for the
satisfying of other men's corrupt affections. And these must we take for
saints, worship, pray unto, call upon, make our Intercessours, Mediators, and
Advocates: and yet know we not for all the popes canonisation, whether they be
saints in heaven, or devils in hell. It is much to be feared, least this
common saying be found true in a great number of our Popish saints: The
bodies of many are worshipped on earth,
whose souls are tormented in hell fire.

Of the Relics of Saints.
Relics set out to sale.
POpe Paschalis the first devised first of al, the glorious setting out to sale
of saints Relics. In the year. etc. 820. Fasci^. Temp. Chron. Germ.

Relics honored.
Pope Clement the first commanded, that the Relics of Saints should be
reverently kept, and had in great honor. In ye year. etc. 1300. Clement.
Lib. 3. Tit. 16. Capi. 1. Volat. Pantal.

Pope Gregory ye fourth made a decree, ye mass should be said over the bodies
of the Martyrs. In ye year. etc. 831. Pol.

Saints bones honored with Masses. Hands of.
Pope Boniface the fifth decreed, that such as were but Benet and Colet should
not touch the Relics of Saints, but they only, which are Subdeacons,
Deacons and Priests. In the year of our Lord. 617. Onuphrius Panuimus. ^ac.
Phil. Bergom.

Shrines.
Pope Sergius ye first devised the gorgious shrines of saints, to keep Relics
in. In the year. etc. 684. Fas^. Te^p.

A good and godly act, but not profitable for the Popes market.
Pope Constantine the second, whom the seditious tyrannical and superstitious
Papists did afterward violently depose, cruelly thrust into a monastery as
into a prison, and most unmercifully put out his eyes, commanded, that all
such should be deprived of their patrimony, as reserve and keep by the^ the
Relics of any saints. In the year. etc. 769. Joan. Laziard. Celestinus.

Of Pilgrimages.
POpe Cletus allowed, The anau^ce^ of Pilgrimages.
and greatly praised Pilgrimages unto saints but specially unto the Apostles
Peter and Paul, and said, That it is more auayleable and profitable for soul
health once to visit the aforesaid Apostles at Rome: than to fast by the
space of two whole years. In the year of our Lord. 81. Ranulphus. Cestrensis.
Lib. 4. Fasciculus Temporum*

Pope Anacletus excommunicated, Pilgrimages ma^e not be hindered.
cursed, and pronounced all such gilty of sacrilege, as hinder any man to go on
pilgrimage, or to visit the Sepulchers of saints. In the year of our Lord.
101 Lib. Council* Folid.

Pope Calixte the second ordained, Pilgrims may not be evil entreated.
that whosoever spoyleth, robs, or hurts any such as go on pilgrimage to
Rome, or to any other holy places of saints: the same should be excommunicated
and accursed Ipso facto. In the year. ^^. 1120. Quest. 24. cap. 3. Si quis.

Of Pardons.
WHo was the first Author and Inue^tour of the Popish pardons, I have not
hither to readde in any writer, except Pope Gregory the first be he, Gregorye
the first a great promoter of pardons.
which greatly corrupted the Church of Christ with his idle inventions,
trifeling traditions, childish ceremonies. etc. To allure the people of his
time unto y^ chief and principal temples of the City and unto the often
visitation of the^: he promised them that repared thither at solemn feasts,
clean remission of sins by his pardon. And he named the pompouse sacrifices*
Stations, because they were celebrated on certain days limited and prescribed
by statute. This sede sown by Gregory, grew to a ripe harvest in his
successors afterward: Popes pardons nets for money, and allurements unto vice.
so yt where as in Gregoryes time they may seem to be invented for allurementes
unto devotion in the^ that succeeded him those pardons may right well be counted
to be nothing else tha^ very nets for money, and prouocations unto al kind of
vice, while all the world see how innumerable sins be forgeuen of the
Bishops of Rome for a slender portion of money.

Pope Boniface the eight appointed the year of Iubile or grace to be kept
every hundred year, The ye^^^ of Iubile.
and granted to all them that would come to Rome, and visit the temples of
the Apostles Peter and Paul in the year of Iubile or grace, clean remission
of al their sins A paena and culpa. In the year, etc. 1290. Ranulphus
Cestrensis. Polid.

This Pope was arrogant, proud and Luciferlike, that he shamed not to bost,
that he was Lord of all the world Tam in temporalibus quam spiritualibus and y^
all Emperors, kings and princes owe obedience to him. Of this monsture of
pride Pope Celestinus his predecessor prophesied on this manner: Thou came
in as a Fox: A prophecye.
thou shall reign as a Lion and die as a Dog. Fisciculus Temporum. Bartho.
Carranza. Alb. Krantzius.

Pope Clement the six bringing the year of Iubile from an hundred year
(which was tofore appointed by pope Boniface theight) unto fifty, The year of
Iubile altered.
granted to all manner of persons, that would come on Pilgrimage at y^ time
unto Rome, and visit the Church of S. Peter, plenariam indulgentiam, that is
to say full remission of all their sins A paena and culpa toties quoties. In
the year. etc. 1336. ^oan. Laziard. Polid. Chron.

Pope Sixtus the fourth brought the year of grace, from fifty to. xxv. year,
confirmyng the old accustomed pardons. In the year of our Lord. 1471. Polyd.
Carran. Chron.

Pope Alexander the sixth assigned the Iubile and Stations to be had in sundry
provinces and countries,
to the intent that less thronge of people, and more thrift of money might
come to Rome* and so the people should only loose their money and save their
labor. In the year of our Lord. 1492. Polyd. Virgil. Chron.

Stations.
Pope Gregory the first ordained Stacions for every day in Lent through out
all the Churches in the City of Rome, yea and that for the remission and
forgiveness of sins: commaundynge the people to frequent and use them with
all hearty devotion, and grauntyng to all the^ that walk those stations, great
indulgences and larg^ pardons. A paena and culpa, toties quoties. In the year
of our Lord. 590. Joan. Laeziard. Chr. Massaeus. Polid. Virgil. Chron.

Diverse Pardons granted of diverse Popes for diverse considerations, gathered
out of diverse books, writtinges and papers.
POpe Innocent the eight has granted to every man and woman that bears the
length upon him of Christ's nails wherewith he was fastened to the cross,
Christ's natles worshipped.
(the just length of every one of them was nine inches) and worshyppeth them
daily with five Pater nosters and five Aues, Great gifts for so little labor.
and a Creed, that he shall have granted him these seven great gifts that
follow. The first is, he shall never dye sudden death, nor evil death. The
second is, he shall never be slain with sweard, nor other weapon. The third
is, his ennemies shall never overcome him. The fourth is, poison nor false
witness shall never grieve him. The fifte is, he shall have sufficient goods and
honest living. The sixte is* he shall not dye without the sacraments of the
Church. The seventh is, he shall be delivered and defended from all wicked
spirits, pestilence, fevers, and all other maladies.

Pardon beads.
To all good christen people disposed to say our Ladies psaulter within this
Church or churchyard on any of these beads, the which been pardoned at ye
holy place of Shene, shall have ten thousand years of pardon. Stringing of
beads.
Also for every word in the Pater noster, Aue and Credo xxiii. days of
pardon Totiens quotiens. Also they are pardoned at Sio^, and by that ye shall
have for every Pater noster Aue, Note these scholepoi^ts The five Pardons
beads.
and Credo said on them, three hundred days of pardon. Also unto al those that
the beads do string, or cause to be stringed in time of necessitye: there is
granted by.ii. Bishops.lxxx. days of pardon, and gods blessing and theyrs.
Also ye must say first on the five beads, five Pater nosters, five Aue Mary's,
and a Creed in the worship of the five wounds of our Savior Christ. And then
after every Creed, say on the first white bead of the five ( Jesus for thy holy
name) and then on the red beade ( and for thy bitter passion) then on the first
black beade ( save us from sin and shame) then on the second black beade (
and endless damnation) and then on the last white beade ( bring us to the
bliss, that never shall mysse, sweet Jesus Amen. The pardon whereof, remembryng
ye wounds great and small of our Savior Christ, is five.M.iiii.C.lxxv. years
of these five beads. The whole sum of pardon granted of both monasteries for
every saulter saying on these beads, is xxvi.M.vi.C. years and fyftye days,
totiens quotiens. The pardon that belong to ye ^eads.
Therefore let no man nor woman presume to carye away or to conueye the
aforesaid beads, but hang them again, where ye find the^. For if they do,
they are accursed four times in the year in the general sentence. And at
every saulters and pray^ for all Christen souls.

Pope Clement the seventh (...) other holy fathers popes of Rome his
predecessoures of their paternall holiness and abundaunt graces, have granted
to all the brethren and sisterne of the said gylde, Bosto^ pardon
that now be, and to all other ye will be, full power and authority to choose
the^ any able priest to their confessoure, seculare or religious, Ghostly
father.
which may hear their confessions, and give unto them once in their life and
in the article of death, plenary and full remission of al their sins,
excesses, offenses, and trespasses, how grievous and enorme so ever they be, A
paena and culpa, etc. Also every Priest chosen by the said brother or sister
to be his confessoure, Uowes changed.
may release al manner of oaths so yt it be not prejudicial to any other man's
right, may change all manner vows in to other good and virtuous deeds of
mercy totiens quotiens, Service neglected pardoned.
the visiting of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in the Church of Rome, S. James
in Compostell, the vow of religion and chastitye only except. He may also
dispense with all spiritual men and women being brethren and sisterne of the
said gylde, totiens quotiens, for ye forgetting of divine services, as hours
canonicalls or penance enjoined whether it happen by debilitye or feblenesse
of body, negligence or oblivion, or for defaute of books. An ante di^
Again, the brethren and sisterne of the aforesaid gylde, may say, or cause to
be said, masses and al other divine services before day light incontinent
after three of the clock after mydnight, not only in hallowed places, but also
in unhallowed places though they be suspensed or interdited by ordinarye
authority. Also every brother and sister yt will say any Wednisday, Friday, or
Saterday^ one Pater Noster one Aue Maria and a Credo in any church or chapel
where they do dwell, and put to their helping hand to the sustentation and
maintenance of the charges of the said gilde* as often as they shall so do,
shall have clean remission A paena and culpa, and the same remission, The
chapel of Scal^ caeli.
as if they had visited the chapel of Scala caeli of Rome, and ye church of
S. John Lateranense, when the stations there be celebrated for qu^ck and dead.
The aforesaid brethren and sisterne also causing mass to be said either on the
Wednisday, Purgato^^
Friday, or Saturday in church or chapel for ye dead, shall deliver what
souls they will, and as often as they will out of purgatory, provided always, so
yt they give somewhat to the aforesaid gilde. Again, they saying deuoutlye one
Pater Noster and one Aue Maria at these feasts following, yt is to say,
Easterday, Witsontyde, Corpus Christi, day, Mihelmas day, the first sunday in
clean lent, and eight days following every of ye said feasts, as often as they
shall so do, shall have clean remission of al their sins. White meats.
They may also lawfullye in time of Lent and other times of the year in ye
which white meats be prohibit and forbidden, eat Eggs, Cheese, Milk,
Butter, and al other white meats freely and without scrupulositie or grudge of
conscience: and if they be sick they also may eat flesh with council of
their gostly father and their Physician. Flesh.
And whosoever shall procure any man or woman to be brother or sister of the
aforesaid gylde, shall have for his Godly travail.v.C. years of pardon. Also
every brother and sister with their fathers and mothers departed shall be made
partakers of all Masses, Mattenses, Prayers, Suffrages, alms deed, holy
liuinges, pilgrims, and all other good deeds and works, of pity and
charity, yt which be done, and shall be done throughout ye whole universal
church Militant, and all the members of the same for ever.

Again, they may be buried in time of interdiction in Christen buryall,
Burial.
of whatsoever death it shall happen them to dye, yea in places interdited by
ordinarye authority also. And furthermore our said holy father has granted
to all Christen people being truly^ penitent and confessed or having purposed
to be confessed at such times as the law has determined, and there devoutly
do visit the chapel of our lady in Boston, Large promises.
and also do visit three times.vii. altares there assigned in the paryshe
church at the feasts of the glorious assumption, Natiuitye, and al other
feasts of ye same our blessed lady, or with in, viii. days following after
every of ye same feasts, or any day of the said Vtas, putting to their helping
hands to ye maintenance of ye charges of the same gild, shall have and enjoy al
and singular indulgences and remissions of their sins, as if they had
personallye visited the church of the holy Apost^es Peter and Paul at Rome and
other the, vii principal churches there in the year of Iubile and Grace and
also shall have all the same indulgences and remissions of their sins, as
they should have if they had personally visited the Church of S. James in
Compos^el in Spain, They al at ^ow by the word of god brought to naught,
according to (...) prophecy of christ. Every pla^t that my heavenly ^ather has
not planted shall be plucked up by the roots.
and had done or caused to be done ^here any other thing for the obtaining of
the indulgences of the said year of Iubile at Rome and Compostell. Also our
holy father has declared and decreed, yt these said remissions, faculties,
indulgences, and dispensations, shall never be revoked, suspended, nor
denulled, but ever to stand in full strength and virtue from henceforth
notwithstanding ye year of grace or Iubile at Rome or any other manner of
cause, whatsoever shall happen in time to come. And every man or woman may be
made a brother and sister of Boston gilde, and enjoy all remissions,
privileges, liberties, etc, if they will pay every one of them at their
entering, vi. shillings, viii ^ens, and every year after during his or her
life.viii. pens. or else.xiii. shillinges, The price of ye pardon
iiii, pens for the whole for every singular person toward ye mainteining
and sustentation of priests, clerks and poor beadmen, which daily be found
with the charges of the same gilde.

Pope Clement the fifte granted to so many as give ought to the sustentation
of the order of Saint Trinity of Houndeslowe, The pardon of s, Trinitye of
hou^deslowe.
his blessing for ever, and twelve years, clx. days of pardon, with
relaxations of the third part of their penance, and of ye pain due for
their sins. Pope Alexander the fourth to all the brethren and sisterne of
the aforesaid order, that gives some good portion of their goods yearly to
the brethren or Massengers of the said order, or in their will and testament do
give and bequeth some honest portion of substance for the relief of the said
brethren, has licensed and granted, to choose unto them any apt and meet
priest to be their Confessor or ghostly Father, and to absolve them from all
their sins toties quoties, and also be buried in Christen burial, of what
so ever death he deceased, if he were not excommunicate by name. Pope
Innocent the third dispenses with the Brethren and Sisterne of the aforesaid
order concerning all vows of abstinence and of pylgrimage going, except only
the vow of pilgrimage unto Peter and Paul at Rome and S. James at Compostell,
so yt it shall be lawful for the^ to change those vows of abstinence and
pilgrimage unto other works of mercy and charity: and this has he done of
his special grace and mere motion to all them yt give somewhat to the said
order of S. Trinity. Pardons innumerable and good cheap*
Pope Gregorye the nynth has granted to al brethren and sisterne of the
aforesaid order, and to all their parents and friends, whether they be alive
or dead, al those Indulgences and pardons (which are innumerable and may justly
be compared with ye Stars of the Sky and the sands of the Sea) that they
have, which go on pilgrimage either unto Rome, or unto the holy land. Pope
Pius the second has granted and given to the aforesaid brethren and
sisterne, once in their life plenary remission, and full forgiveness of all
their sins, yea, and that in all such cases as are reserved to the
Apostolic Sea.

Pope Innocent the eight has confirmed all thaforesayd privileges, Graciously
considered.
indulgences, pardons, etc. and of his special grace has doubled them al for
the salvation of the brethren and sisterne of the order of Saint Trinity.

The absolution, wherewith the Brethren and Sisterne of Saint Trinities order
are absoluted from their sins*
AVtoritate dei patris omnipotentis, and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum
eius, ac auctoritate apostolica mihi in hac part co^missa: Ego absoluo te ab
omnibus peccatis tuis mihi per te vere confessis and co^tritis, and de quibus
confiteri velles, si tuae occurrerent memoriae. Plenariam absolutionem omnium
peccatorum tuorum, in quantum claues ecclesiae se extendunt in hac part,
auctoritate istarum literarum Apostolicarum tibi do and concedo, ita vt sis
absolutus ante tribunal domini nostri Jesus Christi, habeasque vitam aeternam,
and viuas in secula seculorum. Amen. Which is thus in English.

By the auctoritye of God the father almightye, and of his blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and by the Apostolic authority committed unto me in this
behalf: I absolve thee from all thy sins, by thee to me truly confessed and
contrite, and of which thou would have been confessed, if they had come
unto thy remembrance. Moreover I give and grant unto thee full absolution and
remission of all thy sins, so far as the keys of the Church do extend
in this behalf by the authority of these Apostolic letters, so that thou ^e
absolved before the iudgyng seat of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have
everlasting life worlds without end. Amen.

Pardon of the Austen Friars.
Pope John the xxiii. granted to so many as be brothers and sisters and
benefactoures of the friars heremites of Saint Austen, that they shall be
partakers of all the Prayers, Sacrifices, Preachynges, Contemplacions,
Fastyngs, Watchynges, Pilgrimages, Uowes, Obedience, Chastity, Pouertye,
Patience, Mercy, Almosse, and of all other spiritual Labors, Travails,
Pains, Excercises, etc, that be done either of the friars of the aforesaid
order, or of any other devout and religious people through out the world,
with remission and forgiveness of al their sins A paena and culpa toties
quoties.

The like pardon was granted of diverse Popes to the fraternitye of Burton
Lazare, Burton Lazare*
with dispe^satio^ of vows, and relaxation of some part of penance, with
plenary remission of al their sins

The absolution of this fraternity.
AVtoritate dei patris omnipotentis, Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and totius
matris ecclesiae, a^ virtute huius bullae and Papalis indulgenciae, ego absoluo
te ab omnibus peccatis tuis. etc. That is to say. By the authority of God the
Father almighty* of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all the mother Church,
and by ye virtue of this bulle and of the Popes pardon, I absolve thee from al
thy sins. etc.

To the^ that gave any thing to the hospital of Saint Marye of Runciuall nigh
unto charing cross without the walls of London, The pardon of Sainet Mary of
^unciuall.
Pope Clement the fourth granted that they should be partakers of all the
Masses, Prayers, Fastinges, Watchinges, Pilgrimage goings unto the holy land
consecrate with the blood of Christ or unto the city of Rome priuileged with
the authority of the blessed martirs and Apostles Peter and Paul^.
And if they be priests or religious persons either men or women, and have
failed to say their divine service, either through negligence, or defaut of
books, or sickness of body: the aforesaid holy father does mercifully absolve
them from al such offenses, and release them from the pain and punishment due
unto such offenders. Pope Clement the sixte also of his special grace has
given and granted to all them that give some part of their substance, Give
and it shall be given to you. Give money: and the smoke of Rome shall be given
to you.
being confessed and contrite, release of the third part enjoined them by their
ghostly father and three years of pardon, we an hundred days mo of pardon,
with free burial in places although interdict, and of whatsoever kind of
death they chance to dye, with a thousand lentes. lxv. years of pardon. etc.

The form of the absolution appertainyng unto this Fraternity.
AVtoritate dei omnipote^tis, and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum eius, ac
autoritate apostolica mihi in hac part commissaEgo absoluo te ab omnibus
peccatis tuis and paenis tibi in Purgatorio debitis propter culpas and
offensas, quas contra deum and anima^tuam commisisti. Et in quantum mihi
committitur, restituo te illi innocentiae, in qua eras quando baptizatus
fuisti, exceptis punctis hijs reseruatis Domino Papae, vt animae tua viuat cum
Christo in secula seculorum. Amen. Which is thus in English.

By the authority of God almighty and of his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul,
and by the Apostolic author^tie committed unto me in this behalf I absolve
thee from all thy sins and pains due unto thee in Purgatory for the faults
and offenses, which thou have committed against God and thine own soul. And
as much as lies in my power, I restore thee unto that innocencye, wherein thou
were, when thou waste baptized: those points only excepted, which are
reserved to the Lord Pope, yt thy soul may live with Christ worlds without
end. Amen.

The pardon of Saint John of Beuerlay.
Pope Alexander the third has granted to all them that give ought to the
mayntenaunce of the Collegiat Church of Saint John of Beuerlaye an hundred
days of pardon, and relaxation from the seventh part of their penance. And
Pope Innocent the fourth has granted to all the brethren of the same.
Faternitie, pardon of all sins forgotten, and of all vows broken, except the
vow unto the holy land, and at their latter and, remission and forgiveness of
all their sins A paena and culpa: so that to every brother and sister of that
Fraternity being confessed and absolved, their confessor may well say on this
manner, as it is specified in the printed pardon*

John or Joan* as free I make thee:
As heart may think, or eye may see.

Of this pardon it is also thus written, Omnibus in annis qui turba^t iura
Ioannis:
Ter execrantur, damnati iure probantur.


THe pardon granted to the Fraternity of s. Cornelis at Westminster for such
as give any thing unto it, The pard^^ of Saint Cornelis at We^^minster.
comes in ye year to.MM vii. C. and. ix. days for ever to endure, granted
by the holy father in god Thomas of the title of S Cecily, Cardinal, priest of
Rome and Legate, Archebyshop of York, and Chauncelour of England, etc. and of
diverse other Cardinals and Bishops.

Certain Popes of Rome have committed and given authority and power to
Priests having cure and charge of souls to absolve their ghostly children and
parishioners, the which be brethren or sistern to ye holy Fraternity of the
sepulcher of our Lord Jesus Christ, of all sins and crimes either confessed or
forgotten, and of penance not well done. Also of vsurye, rapine, polling and
pyllyng, The sepulcher pardon^.
extortion or other good evil gotten (except they know to whom they ought to
make restitution) they are absolved. And of all manner of offenses done to
father and mother, if they were not done we laying hands on the^ with
violence. Also the sentence of cursyng done vnknowingly: also of of vows
broken, the vow of Jerusalem signed with the cross in the body, and the vow
of Religion with solemnitye professed, only excepted. Also priests and
Clerks that have made any offense in saying their service. Also the aforesaid
holy Fathers have granted to the brethren and sistern of the said place, the
Stations of Rome, and the indulgences of the pilgrimages of the holy land,
which su^me of indulgence is. lxxx. M. years of pardon. Also our holy father
Urban the fourth of that name has given and granted to all brethern and
sisterne of the said Fraternity at the translation of Saint Swithein and at
the Octaues of the same, and at the Natiuitye of our Lord and the Octaues of
the same, and upon good Friday, and upon Easter day with the Octaues of the
same, to be released of the seventh part of their penance, and four years,
and four Lentes of pardon. Our said holy father wills also that they that be
brethern and sisterne of the said Fraternity, have ecclesiastical sepulture
without denial (of whatsoever death they chance to die) except they be openly
and by name excommunicate.

To the Fraternity or brothehoode of S. Erasmus, S. Erasmus pardon.
beside ye deliverance of many souls out of ye bitter pains of purgatory,
with innumerable indulgences and pardons for them yt be alive, are granted
five special gifts and singular benefits, First, he shall have reasonable
goods to his lives end. Secondly, his enemies shall have no power on him. Five
special gifts.
Thirdly, what lawful peticion he asks of God, shall be granted him.
Fourthly, he shall be unbound of his tribulation and disease. Fyftly, at his
last end he shall receive the blessed body of our Savior Christ Jesus in
form of bread to his salvation by the gracious prayer and peticion of this
blessed Martyr S. Erasmus. Al these pardons, indulgences, privileges, gifts
and benefits shall al they have, yt give any part or portion of their goods to
ye upholding and maintaining of the holy place of S. Erasmus.

Many other raggemans roules could I here have placed, which contain also
innumerable pardons, infinite indulgences, great gifts, singular privileges,
wonderful liberties, marvelous deliverances and spedy remedies of souls out
of purgatory, etc, but these may seem to suffice at this present. For hereof
may you euidentlye perceive, what relics we have received from Rome, and
what good stuff the popyshe pardoners have brought us in times paste from ye
most holy father, or rather from ye romish Antichrist, and al for money. Do
what thou will: live as you will: if money come, you art out of hand made
clean, and absolved from all thy sins A paena and culpa, toties quoties, and
art made as pure and faultlesse as you were in time of thy baptism, Money is
the Merchant in all the popes affairs.
so yt now by the virtue of these pardons thou may boldelye stand before y^
judging place of Christ, and be free from ye sentence of damnation, and in
fine, be made fellow heir with Christ, of everlasting salvation.

What is to be done, that we may have true pardon.
But if thou will have the true pardon and remission of thy sins, and be
delivered A paena and culpa, toties quoties, take this order. First, repent
thee of thy former life. Secondly flee unto God the Father in the name of his
derely beloved Son Christ Jesus our alone Savior and Redemer, crauyng at his
hands with strong faith, mercy and forgiveness of thy sins. Thyrdelye,
take a new life unto thee, ever desyring strength from above to walk daily
more and more in the holy ways of Gods most holy law. If thou do this,
doubt thou not, but yt thou shall have abundauntly unto the great consolation
and comfort of thy soul, remission of all thy sins, quietness of
conscience, the gift of the holy Ghost, Gods favor, grace, and mercy, and
after this transitorye life, everlasting life with all heavenly joy and
vnoutspeakeable felicity, yea and that without these Antichristians pardons,
which are nothing else, What the popes pardons are.
than nets for money, deceauings of ye people, defacyng of Christ's death,
obscuryngs of Gods free grace, very spurs unto all lewdness of life, and a
right patheway unto everlasting damnation. Esaias. lv.
Hear what god says by ye prophet: Come to the waters al ye yt be thirstye,
and ye yt have no money. Come bye, yt ye may have to eat. Come, bye wine and
milk without any money, or money worth. Wherefore do you lay out your money,
for the thing ye fedeth you not, and spend your labor about the thing ye
satisfyeth you not? But harken, harke^ rather unto me, and ye shall eat of the
best, and your soul shall have her pleasure in plenteousnesse. Enclyne your
ears, and come unto me: take heed (I say) and your souls shall live, etc. Are
not these the words of our Savior Christ? Come unto me al ye that labor and
are laden, Math. xi. Apoc. xxii.
and I shall ease you. Again, Let him that is a thyrst come. And let who
soever will, take of the water of life, freely and without any money. Of the^
that will seek remission of their sins and pardon of their wicked life, or any
other spiritual and heavenly gift: but only at his hand by faith in Christ:
God complayneth grievously on this manner and says: Be astonyshed (O ye
heavens) be afraid, Iere. ii,
and abashed at such a thing, says the Lord. For my people has done two
evils. They have forsaken me the well of ye water of life, and have dygged
them pyttes, yea vile and broken pittes, ye can hold no water. Blessed is the
man, says the Psalmographe, Psalm. xi.
whose hope the name of the Lord is, and has not turned unto vanities, nor
unto such as go about with lies.

Of Purgatory.
Who was the first inuentour, deviser, The inuetour of the popes purgatory is
not known.
and fynder out of the Popes false fained, fyrie purgatory: I can not find by
any historyes or monumentes, that I have red unto this day. But after it was
found and devised by some subtle head through the subtle suggestion of most
subtle Satan, The study of Satan.
which seeks all means possible to obscure the price of Christ's death, and
to sow erroures and heresies in the hearts of painted Hipocrites, yea of all
people, so much as lies in his power unto ye destruction and condemnation of
their souls: there wanted not specially of the company of Sophisters, and
Monks, espiing that there would rise no small advantage to their purses of
this goodly new and late invention: which set a good face on the matter,
countenauncing it out with the authorityes of the holy Scripture addyng
thereunto their false, pestilent, and lying gloses, wherewith they bleared the
eyes of the simple, and cast such mystes before their syghte, that these
certain hundred years they could never see the true purgatory of the soul,
which is the precious blood of our Savior Christ, but believed verelye, that
there was a place of purging after this life (as though the blood of Christ
were not a sufficient purgatory for their souls) from the which they must be
delivered either by sufferyng intolerable pains themselves in that firye
furnace, The true purgatory is ye blood of Christ.
till they have made sufficient satisfaction for their sins, or else by the
Suffrages and sacrifices of the Mass or by almosse deeds done for them of
their executours and friends, etc.

The popes purgatory diuersely maintained
This dream of purgatory and praying for the dead has been maintained from
time to time not only by the writings of diverse men, but also by the
decrees and Councelles of diverse and sundry Popes and of their adherentes, as
a mighty and strange defense of the Catholyke Church and her devout
Chaplens, without the which a great part of the Popes Churches buildings is
like out of hand to fall unto miserable ruin, and utter decay.

Where this place of Purgatory is: none of our purgatory rakers or
proctoures thereof is able to declare. Where purgatory is.
Diverse of them have diverse opinions in this behalf: as it is an hard thing
for liars and taleforgers to agree, in all points among themselves, so alone is
the truth perfect and constant, and without verities or discord. Some of
them affirm and say, that it is in a certain place even next unto hell
under ye earth. Some hold yt it is not nie unto hell, (for then might it seem
yt such as are in Purgatory, should never ascend and come unto heaven,) for
as much (as we read in ye Gospel of Luke) Luke. xv.
that there is so great a space between them that are above and them that are
beneath, yt they which are above, can not come down to them ye are beneath:
neither can they that are beneath, come up to them yt ar above.) But above in
the air, yea and that in torrida zona, because that after they be
sufficiently purged, The varietye of papists in placing of purgatory
they may be nighe and go strayghtwayes unto heaven. Some other say, yt they
be neither beneath near unto Hell, nor yet above nighe unto Heaven, but
according to the dispensation and appointment of god, diverse souls are
diversely placed, some here, some there, some in this place, some in that place:
some beneath some above, some in the midst, according to their deserts, but
all suffering pains either more or less, till sufficient satisfaction be made
for their sins either by themselves in pains sufferyng, or else by other in
Massesingyng, in almosse giving, in watching, in praying, in pilgrimage going,
in the popes pardons bying, etc. The tales and lies, which the papists have
invented concerning the places of souls after their departure, is to much
wonderful and marvelous. In Longobardica historia: in Legenda aurea, in vitis
patrum, in the Festiual, etc. shall thou find examples plentifully: which
books in times paste were better known and more preached to the simple
people, than the true and pure word of God.

And as they do not agree among themselves where pyckpursse Purgatory is: The
torments of Purgatory
so likewise do they disse^t both in the tormentours and in the torments of
the souls. Some teach, ye the souls in purgatory are punished of the good
angels at gods appointment: some say, that they be wicked Spirits of hell yt
punish them. Some again hold, that the souls in purgatory are tormented with
fire only, according to this sentence of Saint Paul: 1. Cor. iii.
Vniuscuiusque opus quale sit, ignis probabit: some contrariwise affirm, yt
they are punished both with fire and water, Psalm. 66.
according to this saying of the Psalmographe. Transiuimus per ignem and aquam,
and reduxisti nos in refrigerium. But howsoever the sely simple souls be
punished, the Papists with one voice affirm, that they are most paynefully
afflicted and tormented, yea and that with such pains and torments, as be
incomparable: the pains and torments of hell only excepted. Of those most
intolerable pains of purgatory, thus read we in the Popes decrees. He must
first be purged with the fire of purgatory, Did. 7. cap. Nullus
that has differred the fruit of conversion unto an other world. And this
fire, although it be not everlasting, is notwithstanding a wonderful grievous
fire.
For it excedeth and passes all pain, which any man at any time has
suffered in this life. In the flesh there was never so great pain found,
although the Martyrs did suffer marvelous torments etc. Sermon. 41. de animabus.
And in the book entytled, Sermones discipuli, we read on this manner. The
souls which are in purgatory, are in most grievous pains. For if all the
burning coals in the world were gathered together and poured upon an heap,
What most grievous pains there are in Purgatory
and a man should stand in the mids of them, yet should he not suffer so
great heat and burning, as the souls do in Purgatory. No temporal pain
may be compared with the pains of Purgatory. The pains is so great, that a
little short time seems to be very long and great time. Example.
Therefore we read, that a certain Religious man burned in Purgatory only,
while one Mass was a saying: and he appeared to his fellow, and said, that he
had burned in Purgatory a great number of year.

And some souls are punished there a long space: How is this proved
some, thyrtie years, some an hundred: some, a thousand, more or less: some,
unto the end of the world. Again in the treatise called in Latin, Stella
Clericorum, we find this written: The fire, and other pains that are in
Purgatory, are more grievous and more bitter, than all the pains of the
Martyrs, and all kinds of torments, that could be imagyned and invented of
the Tyrauntes in this world. And the souls of them that are thus punished, do
far excel the multitude of all them that live in this world. The infinite
multitude of souls in Purgatory.
And therefore says Austen: He knows not, what he asks, which desires
Purgatory. O God how sweet a thing shall it be to make satisfaction in this
world?
I say, yt it is more grievous to be in Purgatory one twyncklyng of an eye, than
all ye pain, which blessed Laurence had upon the Gredyron. Therefore one tear
issuing out of a pure heart does purge more, tha^ ten years in Purgatory: and
yet between two evils the lessest is to be chosen. And therefore the souls that
are in Purgatory, Job. xix.
cry with Job on this manner, and say: Miseremini mei, Miseremini mei, saltem
vos amici mei: Quia manus domini tetigit me. That is to say: Have pity on me,
have pity on me, at the least ye that are my friends: for the hand of the
Lord has touched me.

After that the Papists had thus fained Purgatory and the most horrible and
dredeful pains thereof: they thought it also good to devise some thing to
relieve these pains and to ease the bitter torments which the sely souls
suffer in that most grievous fire of purgatory: by this their devise nothing
doubting but that no small advantage should rise unto them, Remedies devised
by the papists against the torme^^s of Purgatory
which in deed has had hitherto fortunate success. Diverse invented diverse
remedies against these fyry torments: Which thing has been brought to pass by
ye co^stitutions and ordinances of men partly, as we may see in ye Councils
Florentine and Constantiense: and partly by the books and writings of the
Sophistical Papists: Some of their deuyses here to recite, I think it not
unfitting nor out of the way.

The author of the book entitled, Stella Clericorum, The churches. Church
militant.
says, that there are iii. Churches. The first is in this world and that is
called, Ecclesia Militans, that is, ye Militant or warrefayring church, The
second is in heaven: and it is called, Ecclesia Triumphans: that is to say. The
Triumphant Church. Church trinu^phant. Church expectant.
The third is in Purgatory: and it is called, Ecclesia Expectans: that is, The
Church Expectant, and that looks for and abides deliverance. This latter
Church is in great pains, from the which they may be delivered, says he,
four manner of ways. Vnde Versus.

Missa, preces, dona, ieiunia, quatuor ista Absoluu^t animas, quas purga^s
detinet ignis

That is to say, Mass, Prayers, Gifts, Fastings: These four things set at
liberty ye souls that are in Purgatory. And a little after he says. The
device to pray for them that are dead, is holy and wholesome. It is holy by
the compassion of the dear friends. It is wholesome, Prayer for souls in
Purgatory
through geuyng of almosse, and the prayer of the faithful, and specially of
the Priests, to whom the souls are committed.
For almosse is the meat of souls and prayer is the drink. Prayer, almosse,
Fasting, pilgrimage, pardons, and Masses, deliver souls out of Purgatory.
Fastings also of the faithful is a great refection and ba^ket for the souls
and pilgrimage going of friends is the dispatche and deliverance of pains. As
for pardons, they also profit the souls in purgatory even so far, as they
deserved, while they lived in this world. But before al remedies, wherewith ye
soul being in Purgatory may be helped: the mass far excels. Therefore
says Gregory: The profit of every Mass.
Oh how great and lively gift of God is this? For the divine mysteries are
never celebrated ( He means that the mass is never song or said) but that
two virtuous works do concur, and are brought to pass: that is to say, the
conversion of one sinner and the deliuerau^ce of one soul at the lest out of
Purgatory.

The like doctrine does the author of the festival teach on this manner. The
doctrine of the festival concerning souls in Porgatory.

Of prayer for souls.


Ye shall understand, that there been four things, that greatly helped
souls that been in Purgatory and that been these. Fidelium amicorum oration
eleemosynarum largitio: salutaris hostia, and ieiuniorum obseruatio. That is:
prayers of friends devoutly said, and almosse deed doying, and masses singing,
and abstinence in fasting. That prayers help much a soul that is in
Purgatory: the author proves for lack of the testimonies of holy scripture,
with this narracion or tale that follows. We find written says he, A
narratio^
in Legenda aureae, how there was a man, yt had his house fast by a churchyard
side and yt his door opened to the Church. And he used by custom as often as
he went or came, to say every time, De profu^dis, for all christian souls. The^
it happened so on a time, that he was pursued with enemies as he went
homewards. But when he came into the churchyard, he kneled down and thought
to say, A strange sight.
De profundis. But his ennemies came after. Anon the dead bodies rose every
chone with instruments as they wrought with by their lives and anon they drove
away his enemies. Well proved and substauncially
But when they saw that, they cried God mercy and this man, and ever after
prayde and did almosse deeds for them that were in pain. Thus I may well
prove, says he, that devout prayers helpen many a soul that been in
Purgatory.

Also alms deeds helpen many a soul. of Almosse deeds for souls.
Sicut aqua extinguit ignem: ita eleemosyna extinguit peccatum.

Right as water quenches fire: so alms deed quenches the fire yt brenneth
them that been in Purgatory: if they been in good life and in perfect charity
that done it, etc.

Now to prove, that alms deeds done for souls in Purgatory, A narratio^
profit the^ greatly, he brings in this narratio^ or tale. We read, (says
he) yt in old time, good people would on all hollowen day, bake bread and
deal it for all christian souls. And yet there ben some, but all to few. We
read In Legenda aurea of a knight that should go to a battle, and had a cosen
that he loved passing well, and said to him thus. If he were slain in the
battle, he should sell his horse, and deal the value to poor people in
alms, to pray for all christian souls. So it happened, yt he was slain, and
his cousin loved well ye horse, and took him to his own use. Then soon after,
this Knight appeared to his cousin, and said thus to him. These eight days for
my horse thou have made me to burn in purgatory, and therefore God will take
vengeance on thee. Forsooth quod he, this day thy soul shall be in hell with ye
fend. Ego purgatus vado in regnum dei. And I am purged, and go to the kingdom
of heaven. And anon an horrible noise was heard in the air of fendes, which
caught this man and bare him away.

The third thing, y^ helps souls in purgatory, Of Masses for souls*
is the Mass, For when any soul appears to any man to have any help: he
desires masses, and prays to have masses songen for him. Right as meat and
drink comfort a man when he is feeble:
so the sacrament of ye altar comforts ye souls ye masses been done for. A
narratio^.
It is written in Legenda aurea how a Bishop suspended a priest because he
could say none other mass, but of Requiem, which he song every day devoutly
after his co^ning. Then on a day as the bishop went toward mattens it seemed to
him, ye dead bodies rose and came about him and said: Thou haste said no mass
for us. And moreover thou haste taken our priest away from us. Look yt this be
amended, or else God will in short time take vengeance on thee for our sake.
Then was ye bishop greatly afeard, and anon he ^ad the priest sing mass of
Requiem, as he did tofore. And so he did as often as he might.

Also we find ye fyshers set their nets in harvest, An other narration
prodicious and wonderful
and they took up a great piece of Ise, and yt was the coldeste Ise that ever
they felt, and it would not melte for the Sun. And so brought they ye Ise
to ye Bishop. For he had a great brennyng heat in his foot, and it was the
coldest yt ever he felt. Then spoke there a voice to him out of the Ise, and
said: I am a soul ye suffers my penance here in this Ise. For I have no
friends, yt will do masses for me. I shall be delivered of my penance and you
shall be whole of thy sickness if thou will say mass for me. And he said, he
would sing for him, and bad tell him his name. And ever while he was at mass,
The great virtue of the mass.
he laid the Ise under his foot and ever as he said mass, the Ise melted
away. And so within a while yt Ise was molten, and ye soul was delivered from
pain, and ye bishop was whole of his sickness. Then the soul appeared to him
with much joy, and said: With ye masses singing I am brought out of pain into
everlasting bless.

The like fables many and diverse, are told of Gregorius Magnus, of Petrus
Cluniacensis, of Iacobus de Voragine, etc.

But ye author of ye book entitled, Ten remedies to deliver souls out of
purgatory,
Sermones discipuli, rehearses ten manner of things, wherewith ye souls yt are
in purgatory, may be delivered out of their pains. The first is, the
setting up of candles at massetime before ye sacrament, or before Images, in ye
honor and praise of God and of his Saints.

The second is, Candles. Sensing of the altar.
Sensyng of the Altar when Mass of Requiem is songen for the souls departed,
with this inward desire, that God will deliver ye soul from the stenche of
purgatory, where it is now punyshed.

Sprinckeling of holy water.
The third is, sprinckling of holy water upon the Sepulchers or graves, and upon
ye bones of the dead. And here must they desire, yt as the heat of this
present fire is cooled by ye sprinckling of water: so likewise the heat of ye
fire of purgatory may be tempered and cooled for ye soul yt we pray for,
through the deaw of the heavenly grace and mercy.

The fourth is, Prayer for the dead. And here must we direct our prayers unto
saints in heaven for the souls yt are in purgatory, Prayer for the dead.
yt they may make intercession for the^ unto God: for they may do much with
God. And for this cause we send ye saints unto ye heavenly king as massengers,
yt they may obtain of that King, indulgence, pardon and favor for those
souls. Therefore must we in this behalf devoutly pray to s. Mary, to S. Peter.
etc.

The fyft is, oblations and offeryngs for ye souls departed, Oblations for ye
souls departed.
yt they may be delivered from the dets, which they owe unto God*

The sixth is, fastings, watchings, afflictions and knelings for ye souls
departed, Fastinges* watchings. etc.

Q. xiii. c. ii, Animae:


as it is specifyed in the popes decrees: Ieiunia viuentium sunt auxilia
defunctorum. The fasting of yt living ar ye helps of the dead.

The seventh is, Paying the dets of the dead.
paying of ye dets of the dead. This profits ye souls yt are in purgatory
beyond al measure. For while ye dettes are unpaid, ye souls are grievously
punyshed in purgatory.

The eight is, Offering up of bread and wine.
offering up of bread and wine, yt it may please God likewise to feed ye
hungry soul, and to give drink to ye thirstye soul yt is in purgatory.
Likewise ye exercisyng of the works of mercy for the souls departed, as in
giving meat to ye hungry, drink to the thirstye, lodging to the harbourlesse,
clothes to the naked, etc.

The nynth is, when a man accomplisheth and fulfilleth ye penance for the
souls departed, Fulfilling of ye deades penance.
which ye souls themselves were bound to do in this world when they were yet
living. For the more any man does for them in this world: the less have they
to suffer in the pains of purgatory.

The tenth is, the celebratio^ of masses. And this is the greatest and most
principal remedy and help that can be devised for the deliverance of
souls out of Purgatory. The celebration of masses.
For we read, A narratio^. Monstri simili.
yt a certain soul was appointed of God to ligh in Purgatory xv. years:
which notwithstanding through one Mass was delivered out of all those pains.
Missa, whereof it is derived.
For this word Missa which we in English call Mass, is derived a Mittendo,
yt is, of sendyng. For in the Mass grace is sent to a sinner being in sin,
and to ye souls a plain deliverance from all pain. Therefore says Austen,
The virtues of the mass.
yt there is no mass celebrated, but ye two virtuous works do concur and ar
brought to pass. The one is, a conversion of a sinner from his sin. The
other is, a deliverance of a soul out of purgatory, But some man
peradventure will here demand,
how it comes to pass, yt the souls which are in purgatory, do know the
suffrages, which are here done for the? I answer: A fond fansye of the
papists.
the Angels, which do here abide and tarry with us, do many times visit ye
souls in purgatory, and declare unto the^ ye suffrages, which we do for the^,
here and so comfort the^. O how joyful a thing is this to them? Sermon. 41. de
anim.

Besides these remedies aforesaid against the troublous torments of painful
purgatory, which the selye simple souls suffer for ye satisfaction of Gods
justice, as the papists teach: there is an other remedy, which I of late
found in ye latter end of an old written book. And this is of so great virtue,
yt whosoever devoutly practices it shall without doubt (as it is there
specifyed) deliver one soul out of purgatory at the least yea and that
within.ix. days. Probatum est.

First on the sunday, Spedy deliverance of souls out of purgatory.
cause a mass to be song or said in ye worship of ye Trinity. Set also.iii.
candles burning before ye sacrament al ye mass time. Feed also three poor
men, or give three almesses to the nedye.

Secondly on ye monday, cause a mass to be song or said in ye worship of all
Angels. Light also.ix. candles in the honor of the *ix. orders of Aungells.
Feed.ix. pore me^, or give.ix. almosses.

Thirdly, on y^ twesday cause a mass to be song or said in the honor of S.
Spirit: and lighten.vii. candles in the worship of the.vii. gifts which he
gives. Feed also.vii. poor men, or give.vii. almosses.

Fourthly, on the Wednisday cause a mass to be song or said in the worship of
S. Ihon Baptiste and of all the patriarchs. Light four candles, and feed
four poor me^, or give four almosses

Fiftlye, on the Thursdaye cause a Mass to be song or said of S. Peter and of
the.xii. Apostles. Lighten.xii. candles, and feed.xii. poor men, or give xii.
almosses.

Sixthly, on the Friday cause a mass to be song or said in the worship of S.
Cross. Lighten.v. candles. Feed.v. poor men, or give, v. almosses.

Seventhly and finally, on the Saturday cause a mass to be song or said in
the honor of our lady and al virgins Lighten, v. candles. Feed.v. poor me^,
or give v. almosses. He yt thus does: trust to it verelye: for he shall
deliver shortly, any soul that he will out of purgatory. Ita est. Probatum
est. Amen. Fiat. Fiat. Jesus mercy. Lady help.

Of Trentales for souls departed, and how they first began.
THere was sometime at Rome a certain Pope called Gregory, Note this tale.
which had a mother, whom he loved above all things, and chiefly for her
goodness and virtue. It chanced through misfortune that the aforesaid woman
was big with child, which for fear of her son and shame of the people, when
the time of her labor drew nigh, killed the child. So like did she at an other
time also no man knowing of it: After ward ^t so chanced, that the aforesaid
woman fell sick and died. All is not gold, that glistereth.
The Pope and all the people did greatly rejoice of her, for they thought her to
be a good woman and to be saved. But afterward when the aforesaid Pope song
mass, he saw just by him a certain darkness, so that it seemed rather night
than day: and in the same darkness he beheld a certain most miserable
creature, to whom he said: O thou creature, I conjure thee in Gods behalf,
that thou declare unto me, what thou art. She au^swered. O most derely beloved
son, I am thy Mother. The Pope maruellyng greatly at the matter: said unto
her: We hoped that thou had been a good woman, and placed in the kingdom
of Heaven. How comes it to pass, that thou art now in such pain? She
opened unto him all things, that she had done in this world: and told him yt
therefore she suffered such pains, yt the very flames of fire came out of the
mouth of her. The Pope being moved with sorrow and pain of his mother, said
unto her, O mine own mother, ca^ any thing in the world deliver thee out of
this pain? She said: If any man would sing a trentall of masses for me, I
should be delivered out of all my pains, A trentall of Masses, and what they
are.
and be saved. He said: What masses should they be? She answered: Three masses
of ye Nativity of our lord. Three masses of ye Epiphanie of our lord Three of
the Purification of our Lady. Trinities of Masses.
Three of the Annu^ciation of our Lady. Three of the Resurrection of our Lord.
Three of the ascensio^ of our Lord. Three of Penthecost. Three of the Trinity.
Three of the Assu^ption of our Lady: and three of her Nativity: so yt these
masses be celebrated within ye Octaues of ye said feasts, as on the first day,
with the same Kirie eleyson. Gloria in excelsis, and Credo: and also the same
Seque^ce and Preface, with Communicantes. Hane igitur: Sanctus, and Agnus, as
it is contained in ye Canon of the Mass: also with these prayers following, so
that the prayers that follow be said with the collecte of the Feast under one
Oremus, and under one Per dominum. There must also be said every day
thorowout the year, Placebo, and Dirige, with ix. Psalms, and ix. lessons,
and ix. Anthemes, except it be at the time of Easter, when it shall be said
daily with three lessons only. The comme^dation also must be said as often, so
that both at Placebo, and at Dirige the first collect or prayer shall be Deus
summaspes, etc. and also at the comme^dacio^. Again, at the mass of the day,
ye aforesaid prayer shall be said of him, that celebrateth the mass thorowout
the whole year. The Collecte shall be always, Deus summaspes. The secrets.
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus. The post Communion, Deus cuius misericordia. etc.
If any man will do thus much for me, quod she, I shall be delivered from my
pain. And ye son said, that he would gladly do that for his mother. And he
commanded her, that she should come again unto him at the very same time the
year following. All these things, that she desired, were done. When the time
drew nighe that ye Pope appointed of her return, the Pope himself song
mass, and saw a great light, and in it two Angels coming down, and a most
goodly, fair, and beautiful Lady between them. He being afraid thought her
to be the Queen of Heaven, and fell down at the feet of her* saying: O
Regina coeli, miserere animae matris meae. O Queen of Heaven have mercy on my
mothers soul. But she answered: O my most dear son, I am thy mother.
Blessed be the hour yt I bare thee. For of such one, as thou did se me in
times paste, has God made me, as thou now see, through thy masses and
prayers. And all they, for whom the aforesaid Masses shall be long, shall be
likewise saved, even as I am. Ex missali manuscripto. Anno domini. 1354.

Of the virtues of the Mass.
THe mass has xii. virtues, The.xii. virtues of the mass.
as it is specified in a certain book called The signification of the Mass,
imprinted in the English tongue by Robert Wier, Cum priuilegio regali ad
imprimendum solum.

The first virtue or fruit of the mass is, as some doctors do write, yt a man
does merit more whiles that he does bear mass devoutly, than if he should
give for gods sake as much ground and land, as he could pass and go over
ye space of ye same mass, O what may be then deserve, which does hear every
day.iii. or.iiii. masses? And what does he lose, and what compte shall he make
before God at the day of judgment, which has not so great business, but
that he may hear one mass at the least every day? O what shall it grieve you,
that ye have lost so much? This ye shall understand according to ye dignity
and excelle^tnesse of the mass.

The second virtue is, Psalm. 9^
that the holy angels be glad to be nighe unto ye person in keeping him, when
he has heard mass as David says, god did co^mau^d his Angels to keep and
preserve you in all your ways and business.

The third virtue is, yt the man beholding with devotion and reverence ye holy
Sacrament in the mass as S. Austen ^aith, god does give him ye fame day al
things necessary for his body. Item vain words and unadvised oaths be for
given and pardoned, and he is preserved from sudden death. A man does lose no
time, while that he does hear mass. All the steps in coming and in going be
compted of the holy Angel. And if the man dye the same day that he has herd
mass without receyuyng the Sacrament, God shall count it as spiritually
received.

The fourth virtue is, that a person being in sin, oftetimes in the Mass
time by the presence of the holy Sacrament, Luke. xxiii Luke. vii.
does receive a good inspiration, so that from thenceforth he does convert him
from his sins: as the good thief upon the cross, Mary Magedalene before the
feet of our Lord. If they had not been present with our Lord peradventure
they should not have had pardon of their sins.

The fifte virtue or fruit is, that a man hearing mass devoutly, receaueth
spiritually the Sacrament, so that he desire it deuoutlye. And so it may
chance, that a man hearing mass deuoutlye, shall obtain more grace* than the
priest which does it. For the priest is not always equally well disposed. And
so may a man every day receive the holy Sacrament spiritually*

The sixte virtue is, that the man hearing Mass, and being in the state of
grace, is partaker of all the masses done thorowout all the world. And that is
more or less, after as the man is in the love and favor of God. For it is one
of the Articles of the holy Catholic faith, as in the Communion of the holy
Church.

The seventh virtue is, that the prayer of them which do hear Mass^ is sooner
heard and accepted of God in the mass time, than at any other time. For then
the priest and the holy Angels, which beabout the altar, do help you to
pray.

The eight virtue is, that the souls being in Purgatory, whiles y^ the man
does hear Mass, and does pray for the^ have a singular absolution, during the
same Mass. For there is nothing that does bring them so shortly out of the
pains of purgatory, as to cause to say or to hear devoutly Mass for them.


The ninth virtue is, that it is better to hear one mass in our life time,
tha^ to cause an hundred to be said or heard for us after our death. And ye it
is better that a man cause a mass to be said for him in his life, than an
hundred after his death: the reason is this. For a man may now deserve and
merit much with a Mass, but not after his death. For then he does only find
ye, which he has deserved in his life. And hundred thousand masses now done,
ca^ not augment one moment of glory and joy after this time. But by a mass,
which I do hear, I may obtain that I shall not come in Purgatory. But after
our death, the mass delivers only from Purgatory. Is it not better then,
not to come in purgatory, than when a man is there, to tarry and look for aid
and help to be delivered.

The tenth virtue is, ye a woman hearing mass devoutly, if it chance, that
she do labor of child the same day, she shall be delivered without fault
ye more easily and with less pain.
For the holy Angels be very busye and diligent about her. Therefore al women
being with child (if it be possible) shall hear mass every day. For by the
virtue of the mass, ye fruit or child is preserved. And they shall put their
trust in the sacrament, and in our blessed Lady the Mother of God, and in
none other thing.

The eleventh virtue is, yt al thing that a man does enterprise after he has
heard mass, shall prosper and come to good end: again, ye which the man does
eat and drink after he has heard mass, shall profyt more to the necessitye
of nature.

The twelfth virtue is, yt if the man die the same day yt he has heard mass
God shall give him a singular grace, which otherwise he should not have had,
that is to say, that God himself or his Aungells at the last hour of his
death, shall help and comfort him as the man has served God at ye mass. For
it is written in the holy Gospel: With what measure ye have measured: Math. vii.
with the same also I will measure you everlastingly. AMEN.

The virtues of the mass out of y^ Festiual.
In the Festival also we read thus concerning this matter. S. Austen says,
yt it profits greatly all Christen people for to hear mass, and specially
for nine causes, and says in this manner of wise.

Quia illo die quo audierit missam, necessaria cibaria conceduntur. For that
day ye he hears a mass, he shall fail no bodily food or sus^enaunce, nor
no necessary thing yt shall be belonging or appertayning unto him, nor no let ne
impediment shall he have in his journey that he has to go or ride, whersoeuer
he trauayleth.

The second cause is, al venial sins be forgeuen him by the virtue of the
mass, and idle words.

The third is, yt if a man die: it shall stand him for his housell.

The fourth, he shall not yt day l^se his sight.

The fifte, al idle oaths that day shall be forgeuen him.

The sixth, yt nay he shall die no sudden death.

The seventh, as long as he hears mass, he shall not wax old.

The eight, al his steps toward and fro^ward the holy church, his good
Aungel reckeneth to his salvation.

The nynth, all the while yt he beholds the blessed sacrament, all wicked
spirits flee from him, and have no power over him, be he never so great a
sinner.

In Stella Clericorum concerning the virtue of ye Mass, The virtue of the
mass out of Stella Clericorum,
we find these words: Before al remedies, wherewith the souls being in
purgatory may be helped: the Mass far excels. Therefore says Gregorye:
Oh, how great and lively gift of God is this? For mass is never song or
said, but that two virtuous works do concur, and are brought to pass: that
is to say, the conversion of one sinner, and the deliverance of one soul at
the least out of purgatory.

Of Counsels.
POpe Marcellus the first made a decree, No counsel of force without ye
consent of the Pope.
yt no council might be lawfully assembled and gathered together, whether it be
general or national, without the bishop of Romes consent and assente. In the
year of our Lord. 304. Dift. 17. ( ap. Synodum. Polydor. Bartholo. Carrantza.
Libro. Council.

Pope Julius, Pope Damasus, and Pope Gregory, ratifyed the same decree
afterward. Council. Polyd.

Pope Felix the second ordained, yt al bishops should come to ye general
counsel, Al bishops must be at a general council.
or else signifye to ye popes holiness. Why they can not come. In the year,
etc. 370. Did. 18. Cap. Non oportet. Lib. Council. Joan. Laziard.

This decree was afterward renewed in a council holden at Chartage.

A good an^ necessary device.
In a Synod holde^ at Constantia, it was decreed, yt from henceforth general
counsels should be holden from ten year to ten year, to this end, yt the
Lords field might be purged from al briars, thystles, thorns, heresies,
erroures, schisms, etc. Notwithstanding reseruyng this authority and power to
ye pope, yt he may not only every.x. year, but at all other times also appoint
a general counsel, when his pleasure is. Joan. Laziard, Cest.

It was decreed at ye council of Nice, Seen twice in the year.
yt every bishop should twice yearelye have a Synod or Seen general within
his diocese, to correct and reform such things as were out of order. But
now ye matter is so handled,
yt Senes be only Courts to gather Senage and Proxye, no correction of manners
or erroures, or of any other absurdityes had in those assemblyes. Libro,
Council. Polydor.

Pope Pelagius the first, made a law, that the Council, No counsel lauful
with out the consent of the Pope.
which is celebrated without the mind and consent of the Romyshe Bishop,
should be called not Concilium, but Conuenticulum, or Conciliabulum: and that
whatsoever is enacted or agreed upon in such a Council, should be frustrate,
void, and of none effect. In the year of our Lord. 552. Did. 17. Capit.
Multis denuo. Libro. Council.

The same Pope also enacted, that al such matters of doubt and question, as
could not be quietly divided and brought unto perfect agreemente in the lesser
Sinodes or councels, What is to be done, if matters cannot be quietly composed
in ye lesser Sinodes
should be referred unto a greater See: if they ca^ not there be determined
justly and truly, yt then they shall be brought unto the Apostolic See.
Ibidem.

In the council Agathense it was decreed, Appear, or elsaccursed
yt such as were accited to come unto the council, and refused so to do,
should be accursed. Did. 18. Capit. Siquis. Si Episcopus.

Pope Agatho made a decree, yt all the co^stitutions and ordinances of ye
church of Rome, The authority of the popes decrees.
should be received and taken, as things establyshed and confyrmed with the
very divine and Godly voice of Peter himself. In the year, etc. 673. Did. 19.
Cap. Sic omnes.

Popes decrees equal with the word of God.
Pope Stephen the first ordained, yt whatsoever the church of Rome does decree
and appoint, it should for ever and without breach be observed of al men. In
the year of our Lord. 261. Did. 19. Cap. Enimuero.

All things ar subject to the pope.
Pope Antberius ordained, yt whatsoever was decreed of other Bishops, might be
dissolved of the bishop of Rome, as one yt has power to judge of al churches.
In the year, etc. 239 Cau. 9. Qu. 3. Cap. Cuncta.

Pope Innocent made a law, Popeiudge of al* judged of none
yt no man should presume to judge ye Bishop of Rome. For he being judge of all
men, ought to be judged neither of ye Emperor, nor of all ye clergyc, nor of
Kings, nor of the common people. Cause. 9. Qu. 3. Cap. Nemo indicabit. The same
decree made also pope Nicolas, Pope Gelasius, Pope Anastasius, etc.

A certain council holden of diverse, wise, learned and Godly men, at
Constantia, objected against Pope John the xxiii. of ye name (being there
present) diverse borrible faults:
of the which he was openly convict, to ye number of more tha^ forty, yea and
those most grievous sins. The pope secretly fleing, was apprehended, deposed,
and cast into prison.

Afterward in ye council it was decreed, A lawful general counsel is about the
pope.
that a general council lawfully gathered together, is above the pope, and has
authority immediately of Christ, which alone is the head of the Church, Christ.
Massoe. in Chron.

This act of ye council seems to be contrary unto that, The preeminence of
the pope.
which says, yt the pope and his See are not bound to be subject, to the
councels and determinations of other. Cap. Significasti: de elect. And yt the
pope has in his heart al manner of laws: Again, yt he is not bound to purge
and clear of himself such crimes and faults, as are objected against him. etc.

Of Heretykes.
Heretics banished.
POpe Siritius ordained, yt Heretics should be banyshed and yt no Christians
should communicate or keep company with the^: again, if any of them did revoke
their errors and heresies, that they should be thrust into Monasteries as into
prisons perpetually, there unto death to remain, geuyng themselves to fasting
and prayer. In the year, etc. 389. Ioannes. Stella. Lib. Council.

Heretics put to death by the secular power.
Pope Pelagius the first not content with this former punyshement, made a
decree, that all heretics and Schismatikes, with all such as be contumaciter
disobediente to holy Churches ordinances should be put to death by the
seculare power. Provided always, that the Popish bloody butcherlyke Bishops
with their woluishe wicked officers and Antichristian adhere^tes do first of
all persecute the^, emprison the^, accite them Coram nobis, The temporal
offices the ^opyshe Bishops butchers.
accuse them, condemn them, and afterward according to their deuilishe decrees
commit them to the secular power and temporal magistrates, as unto their
butchers and ha^g men to dispatche them out of the way either by fire,
swearde, or halter. For these holy and charitable Fathers cry out with their
forefathers and Popelike predecessors: Joan. viii.
Non licet nobis interficere quenquam. It is not lawful for us to put any man
to death. In the year of our Lord. 552.24. q. cap. 5. Relegentes. Angl. Chron.
Joan. Laziard.

Pope John the.xxii. made a decree, yt whosoever did affirm, that Christ and
his Apostles had no possessions neither in proper nor in common,
ye same should be taken for an heretic. Again, that whosoever did hold this
opinion, that it was not lawful for Christ and his Apostles to enjoy those
things, which the Scripture testifies that they had, nor to give them, nor by
the occupying of the^ to get and win more for ye maintenance of their
living: he likewise should be adjudged an heretic. Of this it followed,
Fraunces Martyrs.
that many Friars and Nuns of Frau^ces order were brent as heretics in
diverse places of the world in resisting this decree of ye Pope for the
maintenance of their monastical and wilful poverty. In the year of our
Lord. 958. Math. Palmer, Joan. Laziard.

Of the state of the faithful after this life
Pope Benet the twelfth after a certain disputation had among learned men,
whether the souls of the faithful have the fruition of Gods Majesty in heaven
before the day of judgment or no: made this resolute determination, that the
souls of the faithful Christians, after their departure have nothing in them
worthy to be purged, but all pure, clean, and without sin: and yt therefore
so sone as they depart hence, they go straightwaies unto Heaven, and behold
the face of God. Thaforesayde Pope also commanded, that no man should either
teach or believe the contrary under pain of the great curse. If any man did,
he should be reputed and taken for an heretic. In the year of our Lord.
1317. Joan. Laziard.

Pope Caius ordained, that no heretic, nor heathen man should accuse a
Christian before any Judge. In the year of our Lord. 284.2. Q. Cap. 7. Pagani.
Christ. Massaeus.

Pope Liberius being bishop of Rome about the year of our Lord. 364. It was
decreed in the Council Laodicen, that heretics, Heretics expelled out of the
Church.
which remain in their heresy, should not be suffered to come into the
temples of the Christians. Lib. Conc. cap. 6. In the same council it was also
enacted, A good law
that no Christen man should give his child to be married unto an heretic, or
schismatike. cap. 10.31. Again, that whosoever did forsake true Martyrs of
Christ, Note well.
and followed the false Martyrs, which are heretics and schismatikes, should
be accursed. Lib. council. cap. 34. Barthol. Carranza.

Pope Fabian made a good and Godly decree, The company of Heretics is to be
eschued and avoided.
yt the true Christians should above al things avoid the company of heheretikes
and schismatikes, and of al such as maintain an other faith and doctrine than
the Apostles of Christ and their successors have received and taught, lest by
keeping company with them, they should fall into the snare of Satan. Lib.
Council. Barth. Carranza. In the year of our Lord. 241.

The great council. Laterane.
Pope Innocent the third bearing rule In the year. etc. 1215. the Council
Laterane was celebrated, where were present two Patriarchs, one of Jerusalem,
an other of Constantinople.lxx. Archbishops Metropolitanes.iiii.C. Bishops,
xii. Abbottes.viii.C. Co^uentual Prioures: the Legates of the Greek and Roman
Empire, besides the Orators and Ambassadors of the kings of Jerusalem, of
France, of Spain, of England, and of Cyprus. In this Council it was decreed,
Heretics condemned to be committed to the seculer powers and so put to death.
that all heretics and so many as did in any point resist the Catholic
faith, should be condemned as Schismatikes, and delivered to the secular power,
or their Bayliffes or Shierifs, to be punished accordingly: and that if they
were priests or of the Clergy, Priests degraded.
they should f^rst of al be regraded from their orders, and afterward committed
to the temporal officers. Prieste^ goods. Lay men^ goods.
As for their goods the Laytie shall not meddle with them, but they shall be
applied to the use of those Churches, of whom they received their stipendes or
wages. But if they be lay men, to give them over streightwaies to the seculare
power to be punished accordingly, and their goods confiscate.

In the same Council it was also determined, Suspect of heresy.
that if any persons were found only suspecte of heresy, except that they be
able thoroughly to purge and to clear themselves, should be accursed: and that if
they so continue by the space of one whole year, that they should be condemned
as heretics.

Moreover in that Council it was also decreed, The temporal rulers sworn to
root out heretics.
that the secular powers, of whatsoever office or degree they be, should be
admonished and charged, yea and if need be, enforced and compelled by the
ecclesiastical censure (if they will be reputed and taken for faithful men)
openly to swear for the defense of the faith, that they shall to the uttermost
of their power faithfully and diligently root out and destroy in all their
kingdoms, dominions and lands, all such persons, Note.
as the Catholic Church has condemned for heretics: so that every person
receauyng any office, dignity, or promotion either Ecclesiastical or
temporal, shall be bound to observe this decree, concerning this dispatche of
heretics. But if so be, that any temporal lord or ruler, being required and
admonished of the church so to do, shall neglect to purge his land of those
heretics: that then every such person or persons so offendyng, shall be
excommunicate by the Metropolitan and other Bishops of that province. It was
further determined in the aforesaid Council, that if that Lord or Rular do
refuse by the space of one hole year to satisfy and to accomplish the
decrees of the aforesaid Council, that then signication should be made
thereof to the highest bishop, yt is to say, to the Pope, that he may denounce,
O tyranny
that from ye time forward that Princes subjects are absolved and utterly
delivered from showing or owing any fidelity or obedience toward him: Again,
that the Pope may give that la^d to be occupied and enjoyed of the Catholics,
to possess it (all heretics being rooted out) quietly and without any
contradiction. etc. Lib. Council. Barthol. Carranza.

Pope Nicolas the first made a decree, A new kind of Heresy.
that whosoever goes about to take any privilege away from the Church of
Rome, or denies that to be the head of all Churches, falls into heresye, and
is in deed a plain heretic, Ipso facto. In the year of our Lord. 871. Did.
22. cap. Omnes.

Pope Gelasius the first decreed, that as no man ought to keep company with
heretics: so likewise ought no man to dispute and to confer with them. In
the year. etc. 494. Cause. 24. Quest. 3. cap. cum quibus.

Pope Urban the first pronounced, yt he which defends heretics is not only
an heretic himself, Heresiarch*
but he is also a captain of heretics. In the year. etc. 222. Causa. 24.
Quest. 3. cap. Qui aliorum.

In the Council Aphricane it was determined, that if any Bishop made any
heretic his Executor, giving him his goods, Dead men excommunicate.
although he were his nigh kinsema^, ye same Bishop should be excommunicate, yea
though he were dead: and that his name should by no means be recited among
the priests of God. In decret. Gregorii noni. De hereticis. Tit. 7. Lib.
Council. The company of heretics is to be eschued.


In the Council Laterane it was forbidden, that any man should receive in to
his house, or into his dominions, heretics, or cherishe them, or by and sell
with them: and that if any man did contrary to this decree, he should enjoy no
ecclesiastical privilege, nor be buried among other Christians.

Understa^d by heretics, all such as in any point resist the pope, or his
decrees
In a certain general Council it was decreed, that those Catholics, which
would take upon them the sign of the Cross, and ma^fully fight against the
heretics unto the utter destruction and rooting out of the^, yt they may no
more trouble our mother holy Church nor her devout Children: should enjoy
that pardon, and those holy privileges which are granted to them, that go to
fight for the holy land, or give any thing thereunto. Lib. 5. de heret. tit. 7.

Of excommunication.
POpe Calixtus the first made a decree yt no Christen man should communicate or
be familiar with him yt is excommunicate, No company with excommunicate
persons. Joan. Ep. ii.
either in prayer, or in eating and drinckyng, or in any other point of amitye,
no, nor yet bydde him once God speed, according to the doctrine of the
Apostle. Again, if any man, presumed to do the contrary wittingly and of a
set purpose yt the same person should also be excommunicate. In the year of our
Lord. 217. Lib. Council. Bartholom. Carrantza. Mich. Buccingerus.

The same decree made Pope Fabian also. In the year of our lord. 242. Lib.
Council. Carrantza.

Pope Lucius the first decreed, Spoylers of ye church excommunicate.
yt all such as spoil, rob and take away the church goods, or in any case
vex or trouble the churches, or any appertaynyng unto them, should be
excommunicate and accursed. In the year, etc. 258 In epist. 1. Ad episcopos
Galliae et Hispaniae Lib. Council.

Pope Gregorye the first commanded, A good and a godly law.
yt no bishop should excommunicate any man for private injuries, wrongs, and
displeasures done against himself, (which says he,
ought either patiently to be suffered, or else utterly to be dissembled) but
only for such sins as ar committed against God or against our neighbor to
the slander of the faith and doctrine, which we profess. In the year of our
Lord. 590. Cause. 2. Qu. 4. Cap. Inter querelas.

The names of excommunicate persons published.
Pope Honorius the first made a decree, yt the names of such as were
excommunicate, should be published to al Bishops, Curates and Churches yt be
nighe: again, that their names with the excommunication should be set in
places, where most resort of people is, yt by this means al men may eschew
them, and forbid them to come into their companyes. In the year of our Lord.
622. Lib. Council. Cause. 11. Quaest. 3. Cap. Curae sit.

One excommunicate person may not excommunicate an other.
Pope Alexander the second ordained, yt he which is already excommunicate,
should not presume to excommunicate an other. In the year, etc. 1063. Cause.
14. Quaest. 1. Cap. Audiuimus.

Pope Calixt the first decreed, that all such as either hinder, let, or
trouble those persons yt go to Rome on pilgrimage to visit the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, Hinderers of pilgrimages or spoylers of pilgrims accursed.
or else any other where to seek and visit ye Oratoryes of other Saints:
either spoil or take away any of their things, yt they carye with them,
shall be excommunicate, and so remain til they have made full and perfect
satisfaction. In the year of our Lord. 217. Cause. 24. Quaest. 3. Cap. Si
quis Romipetas.

Pope Gregory the first made a decree, yt whosoever strikes Bishop or priest
or spoyleth or sets on fire churches: Smiters of bishops or priests*
spoylers or burners of churches, accursed.
the same shall be excommunicate: his goods confiscate, and he himself
enclosed in a monasterye and there do penance all the days of his life. For,
says he, such a person has committed most grievous sacrilege. In the year
of our Lord. 590. Lib. Council. Cause. 24. Qu. 3. Cap. Quisquis.

Pope Nicolas the first pronounced al them accursed, Spoylers of pilgrims
Chaplens* Clerks, monks, etc* accursed.
that spoil pilgrims or Orators of any Saint, or Clerks, or Monks, or
women, or poor people yt bear no weapon, or else take away their goods,
or do them any other kind of harm. In the year, etc. 871, Cause. 24. Qu. 3.
Cap. Illi qui.

Pope Urban the first proclaimed also al the^ excommunicate, yt trouble the
Curates of any churches, or Clerks, or Monks, or the Conuerses, Nouices, that
appertain unto the^. In the year, etc. 222. Lib. Council.

Pope Urban the second made a decree, yt no man ought to keep company nor to
eat and drink with such, as ye Bishop has excommunicated. In the year of
our lord. 1086. Cause. 11. Quaest. 3. Cap. Quibus.

Pope Clement the first made a law, yt if the priests and other of the
Clergy, Disobedient to bishops, accursed.
yea and all Princes and Rulers, whether they be of hye or low degree with all
ye common people, do refuse to obey the bishops: al such should not only loose
their good name but also be banyshed out of the kingdom of God, and put out
of the company of the faithful, yea and utterly estraunged from al doings with
the holy church of God. In the year, etc. 92. Cause. 11. Qu. 3. Cap. Si aeutem
vobis Episcopis.

Pope Gregory the seventh decreed, yt although his predecessors the popes
according to the rigor of the ecclesiastical censure did forbid generallye
al men to keep company, This pope mitigateth y^ rigor of ye ecclesiastical
censure.
to pray, to eat, drink, bye, sell, etc, with such as be excommunicate and
accursed: yet from henceforth it shall be lawful for wives to keep company,
to eat and drink, etc, with their husbands: children with their parents:
servants and hand maids with their masters and mastresses, etc, although
they be excommunicate. He also exempteth the^ by the Apostolyke authority from
the bond of excommunication, which ignorantlye communicate with them yt are
excommunicate. In the year of our lord. 1073. Cause. 11. Quaest. 3. Cap.
Quoniam multos.

Pope Zacharye the first determined, A friendly decree.
yt although men keep company, eat and drink with them that are
excommunicate, yet if they do it not of an evil purpose, nor inwardly
consent to their iniquity, they receive no damage thereby, neither are they
excommunicate. In the year, etc. 752. Cause. 11. Qu. 3. Cap. Quod precessor.

Pope Urban the second made a law, ye subjects are not bound to keep their
oaths made unto their princes, This is wicked.
if they be excommunicate either of the pope, or of any Bishop. In the year,
etc. 1086. 15. Quaest. 6. Cap. Iuratos.

Neither ba^^el, better her ring
Pope Gregorye ye eight likewise by his Apostolic authority, absolved al the^
from their fidelitye, oath, and promise, which they have made and owe to their
heads, rulers and governors, being now excommunicate, streyghtly charging to
show the^ no obedience or loyaltye, till they have made satisfaction. In the
year, etc. 1186. Ibidem. Cap. Nos sanctorum.

Pope Zacharias (as Pope Gelasius writes to Anastasius the Emperor) did
depose from his kingdom the King of France, The pope deposes Princes.
not so greatly for his evil behavior, as yt he was unprofitable to so great
a power: and placed in his room Pipine father of Charles ye Emperor: and
absolved and made free all the Frenchmen from the oath of their fidelity unto
the king: which thing holy Church many times does of her authority, as in
deliueryng the Souldioures from the bond of their oath, which they have made
to their Emperor and Captain. This thing also holy Church practices of
those bishops, Practice*
which by the Apostolyke authority are deposed and put down from their
pontifical degree. Ibide^. cap. Alius.

In the Council ^halcedonense it was decreed, Destroyers of Abbeies,
excommunicate.
yt whosoever attempteth to spoil, to rob, to destroy, to dissolve, etc,
any monasterye or Abbay: the same should be excommunicate and utterly banyshed
from ye Kingdom of God, so yt no goodness either of Faith, or of works shall
profyt him unto salvation, forasmuch as he has destroyed the way of so noble
and wholesome a life, Lib. Council. Carrantza.

In the council Laterane it was determined, Preachers not authorized by the
Pope or some bishop accursed.
yt al they, which being either forbidden, or not sent, presume and take upon
the^ either publicly or privately ye office of preaching without ye authority
of ye pope, or of some Catholic bishop, should be excommunicate: and if
notwithstanding they go forth, and will not cease, that then some other
punishmente agreeable to their disobedience shall be exercised upon them. Lib.
Council.

In the council Toletane it was agreed, yt if any noble man do spoil a priest,
or any poor man, or religious person, and ye Bishop shall command him to come
unto him, yt the cause may be heard, and he refuse to come: letters shall be
sent through out al bishops one to another, which shall declare to al ye
countries round about, yt that man is excommunicated and is so to be reputed
and taken, til he has showed his obedience to the ordinary, and made
restitution. Cause. 24* Quaest. 3. Capit. Si quis de polentibus.

In a council holden at Paris, it was ordained yt no priest should
excommunicate any man, No man ought to be excommunicate before his matter be
known. Payment of tithes.
before ye cause be evidently proved, and openly known. Ibidem. Cap. de
illicita.

In the council Rothomagense, it was decreed, yt all manner of tithes should
be paid to the Priests, both corn, Hay, Fruit, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, etc.
(For all tithes are sanctified to the Lord.) And forasmuch as many are
stubborn and disobedient, and will not truly and faithfully pay their tithes,
as they ought to do: it was ordained in that Council, that all such as will
not pay them, should be admonished once, twice or thrice according to the
commandment of the Lord. If they will not then amend, that they shall then
be excommunicate and accursed, till they have made due satisfaction and
sufficient recompense. Cause. 16. q. 7. cap. Omnes decimae.

The manner and form of Excommunication.
Twelve Priests must stand about the Bishop, and hold burning candles in
their hands: which candles at the latter end of the curse or excommunication
they must throw down upon the ground, and tread them under their feet.
Afterward letters must be sent round about unto Parishes, containing the names
of them that are excommunicate, and also the cause of their excommunication.
Cause. 11* quaest. 3. cap. Debent.

In concilio Arausicano we read these words: we following the canonical
ordinances, and examples of the holy fathers, do utterly sequester and banish
by the authority of God and the judgment of the holy Ghost, al violatours,
disturbers, hinderers, and destroyers of Gods churches, from the lap of holy
mother Church, and from the company and fellowship of al christianity, until
they repent, amend and satisfy the Church of God. Ibidem. cap. Canonica.

The manner of reconciliation of them that were excommunicate.
WHen any man yt is accursed or excommunicate,
is penitent and sorry for his sin, and desires forgiveness, and promises
to amend: the Bishop yt did excommunicate him, shall come before the church
door, and xii. priests with him, shall stand round about him on every side.
And if the person yt is excommunicate, fall flat down on the ground, and
asks forgiveness, promising amendment: the^ shall the Bishop take him by
the right hand, and lead him into the Church and restore him to the christen
congregation, Afterward they shall sing the seven penitential Psalms, with
these prayers, Kirie eleyson and Pater noster, and Saluum fa^ seruum. etc. With
this collecte: Praesta quesumus domine huic famulo tuo dignum paenitentiae
fructum: vt ecclesiae tuae sanctae, a cuius integritate deni^ ^erat peccando:
admissorum veniam consequendo, reddatur innoxius. Per Christum dominum nostrum.
Amen.

Which is thus Englished* Grant we beseech thee O Lord to this thy servant,
the worthy fruit of repentance that be obtaynyng forgiveness of his sins,
may be restored pure and faultlesse to thy holy Church, from the integritye
and pureness whereof through sin* he had wandered and gone astray. By Christ
our Lord. So be it. Causa. 11. Quest. 3. cap. Cum aliquis.

Of penance.
POpe Nicolas the first appointed that this should be the penance of him yt
has slain his mother. The penance of him that has slain his mother
First by ye space of an whole year he shall not be suffered to come into the
Church, but he shall stand before the church door praying and beseching god
continually to forgive him so heinous and horrible a sin. Secondlye, when the
one year is ended, he shall have license to come into the Church, and to stand
among ye hearers, but he by no means shall be suffered to come unto the communion
or Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Thirdly, when the third year is
once past, he shall be admitted unto the holy communion. etc. All this time he
may eat no flesh, nor presume to drink wine, except it be on solemn
feasts and sondayes, and from Easter unto Whitsontyde, And whenever he will
take any journey, he may not ride, but go on foot. He may not go unto the
wars, except it be to fight against the paganes.

He must also every week fast three days, and eat no meat till it be
night. etc. In the year. etc. 8711. Cause. 33. tract. de paenitentia. cap.
Latorem praesentium.

What opinion of marriage had this Pope, think ye.
Pope Siricius made a decree, that those, which are penitents may not in the
time of their penance, mary, nor exercise ye work of marriage lest they
should be counted as dogs returnyng unto their vomit, or as sowes, which
being clean washed walowe and tomble them selves again in the miry puddels. In
the year of our Lord. 389. Cause. 23. quaest. 2. Cap. De his vero.

Pope Leo the first notwithstanding, A Pope more reasonable.
of his great favor and singular goodness, grants to al such as are already
married, that they even in the time of their penance, may lawfully enjoy the
liberty of matrimony, lest peradventure while they abstain from yt which is
lawful, they shall fall into the danger of that which is unlawful. In the
year. etc. 444. Ibidem. G. Audiuimus.

The same decree also Pope Leo the third made, declaryng that it is more
tolerable, and may better be suffered, that a young man even in the time of
his penance to avoid the danger of incontinency, do join unto him a wife,
than he should incur and fall into the sin of fornication. Note how loath the
Popes are to go from their old. Mumsimus.
In doing this, says he, it seems that the matter which he has done, is
venial and pardonable, so that he know none other, besides his own wife.
Notwithstanding, says he, in speaking thus we make no law, but we show, what
is more tolerable. In ye year. etc. 817. Ibidem. cap. In adolescentia.

A foolish divine of so wise a head 1. Cor. vii.
Pope Gregorye the first ordained this to be the penance of the married man,
that he shall not enter into the Church before he has purified and washed
himself with water, if he have had the knowledge of his wives body, and given
her (as the Apostle says) the due benevolence. In the year of our Lord. 590.
Cause. 33. Quaest. 4. cap. Vir cum propria vxore.

The penance of them, that are negligent about the Sacrament of the Altar.
Pope Pius the first made a decree, that if through the negligence of the
priest any of the blood (he means the Sacrament of Christ's blood, as the
expositour does declare in the same place) do drop down upon the ground, the
Priest shall lycke it up with his tongue, etc. and he shall do penance for
that fault fortye days, etc. In the year of our Lord. 147. De consec. did.
2. cap. Si per negligentiam.

Behold his curiositye.
In the Cautels of the Mass, we read thus: If through negligence there drop
down any thing of the blood upon a board that sticks to the earth: let it be
lyckt up by the Priest with his tongue and the place of the board scraped, and
the scrapyng brent in the fire: and let the ashes be laid up beside the altar
with the relics, and let him to whom that happened, do.xl. days penance. If
the chalice drop upon the altar, let the drop be supte up, and let him have
iii. days penance But if the drop came through upon a linen cloth unto an
other thing: let him have.iiii. days penance. If it come through to the
third thing: let him have.ix. days penance. In a drop of the blood come
through to the fourth thing? let him do penance, twentye days. And as for
the linen gear, that the drop has touched: let the priest or deacon wash
them, the chalice being set under, and let the washing be kept with ye
relics. Ite^, if a man by any chance of glotony,
do spue out ye sament: the same spuyng must be brent: and the ashes ought to
be laid up byside the altar. And if he be a clarke, a Religious man, Priest
or a deacon: let him do forty days penance. A Bishop lxx. days, a lay
man.xxx. days. But if he did spue by reason of infirmity, let him do
penance.v. days. Who so does not keep the Sacrament, so yt a mouse or an other
beast eats it, let him have. xl. days penance. But who so loses it, or if
a part of it fall, and be not found: let him do penance.xxx. days. The same
penance seems the Priest to be worthy of* by whose negligence the consecrated
hosts do putrify. Upon the said days must the penitent fast and abstain
from the communion and from celebration.

The penance of the Clergy co^uicte of great fauts
Pope Innocent the third decreed, that they which are of the clergy, being
found gilty of theft or of any other great faults, should on this manner be
punished. First, they shall be degraded. Secondly, they shall be deprived of all
their ecclesiastical promocions. Thirdly, they shall be strayghtly kept in
some monastery, there to do penance al their life time. Lib. Council. Decret.
Gregorii, de paenis. tit. 36 cap. Tuae discretionis.

Penance dispensed with.
In the Council Triburiense it was ordained, that if any were enjoined penance
to eat nothing but bread certain days and could get no bread to eat: it
should be lawful for them to eat fish, leekes, or any such kind of meat,
seeing the necessity does so require. Provided always, yt they eat not those
meats for pleasure sake, but for the sustentation of their hungrye bodies.
Decret. Gregorij. 9. Libro. 5. de penet, et remiss. Tit. 18. Cap. Licet.

In a certain general council it was decreed, yt at the least once in the year
every person both of mankind and woman kind being of reasonable age and
sufficient discretion, Penance enjoined of the ghostly Father.
should privately confess his sins to his own Curate, and to the uttermost of
his power fulfill all such penance, as his Ghostly father has enjoined him.
Ibidem. Capit. Omnis vtriusque sexus. Libro. Council.

In the eight Synod it was agreed, A rule for penance.
yt such penance should be enjoined of ye ghostly father to his ghostly
child as is agreeable to the quality and qua^titye of sin. Cause. 26. Quaest.
7. Capit. Proqualitate.

In the same Synod it was also determined, yt the priests should have
authority and power, A great privilege.
to enjoin what penance they wuld, and for how long a time, and after what
sort. Ibidem. Ca. Hoc sit positum.

Of Absolution.
A reasonable order.
POpe Gelasius the first ordained yt if a man were unjustly excommunicate and
accursed, he should not regard it, nor yet go about to seek absolution from
ye sentence or censure, which was unjustly laid upon him. In the year, etc.
494. Cause. 11. Quaest. 3. Cap. Cui est.

Note this well.
Pope Gregorye the first affyrmeth, yt the priest can absolve no man, except
God has absolved him first: alleging the historye of Lazarus, whom the Lord
raised up unto life, before he commanded his Disciples to losen him, Joan. xi.
and to set him at liberty. In the year of our Lord. 590. Ibidem. Cap. Tunc
vera est absolutio.

Pope Nicolas the first ordained, yt the Bishop of Rome might absolve men
from their lawful oath, promise, and fidelity made to princes, Sed perqua^
^egulam.
seeing yt it lies also in his power to deprive kings and Emperors of their
kingdoms and dignities. In the year, etc. 871. Cause. 15. Q. 7. Cap.
Autoritatem. The same read thou also in ye Cano^ following, which begins.
Alius item.

Pope Gregorye the first made a decree, yt no Prelate should lightly forgive and
absolve men from those sins, A decree not to be despised.
yt they have committed against God. The offenses committed against us, says
he, we may easily forgive: but the sins which are done against God, we may
not release without great discretion, and penance doing. In the year, etc.
590. Cause. 23. Quaest. 4. Cap. Si is qui.

In the council Carthaginense, Absolution must be received knelyng.
it was decreed yt the person which should be absolved, should mekely and
reverently knele down to take the absolution: and yt the Priest should lay
his hand upon his ghostly childs head, when he absolueth him. Cause. 26.
Quaest. 7. Capit. Sacerdos. Libro. Council. Martinus. frater.

Certain fourmes of Absolution.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ, which has full power to absolve, he moughte absolve
thee, And I by the authority of him, and of ye holy Apostles Peter and Paul,
and of our Mother holy Church, and by the authority yt is committed unto me
in this behalf, as much as I can, and am bound to absolve thee, do first of
al absolve thee from the bond of ye lesser excommunication, if thou be failen
into it. I absolve thee also from ye fault of company keeping with
excommunicate persons, if thou have need: and by the same authority I absolve
thee from all thy sins, mortal, criminal, and venial, being confessed unto
me. I absolve thee also from all other sins forgotten, confessed, committed,
and neglected, as much as I can, and so far as my duty is, in ye virtue of
our Lord Jesus Christ's passion, and in ye blessing of the father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. AMEN. And the very passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the merits of all he Saints and she Saints, and all the
passions of ye holy Martyrs, and the suffrages of ye church Militante, and the
remissions of the same, and also the pardons, prayers, and pilgrimages, and
whatsoever good deeds besides all other faithful Christians have wrought:
Again, the fastings, almosse deeds, and the works of mercy which thou
haste done, or shall do, or entendest to do: moreover whatsoever tribulation
thou haste patiently suffered: all this I give unto thee for the satisfaction
of this penance that I have enjoined thee: and unto the furtheraunce and help
of the remission and forgiveness of al thy sins, and unto the deliverance
from the pains of hell and purgatory, which thou haste deserved for thy
sins: and unto ye obtaining of grace in this present world, and everlasting
life in the world to come. Amen.

An other form of Absolution.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ, which created and redeemed thee, might absolve thee.
And I by the authority, which I have of him, as much as lies in my power
according to my duty, I do absolve thee from all bonds of the lesser
excommunication, if thou be bound: and I restore thee to the holy Sacraments
of the church, if thou have need. Again, I absolve thee from all thy sins
confessed and forgotten, mortal and venial, with all their circumstaunces. The
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the good deeds that thou have done,
or shalt do: and all the aduersityes and troubles, which thou haste
suffered, or shall suffer, might be unto thee for penance and remission of thy
sins, and for the increase of Gods grace. In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen. Ex Speculo confessorum Fratris
Bartholomaei de Chaimis.

An other form of Absolution.
BY the authority of God, and of ye blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by
ye authority of the Church of Rome committed unto me, and granted unto thee,
I absolve thee from all sentence either of the greater or lesser curse, and
from all suspension and interdiction, if thou be bound with any of them. And I
restore thee to the unity of the faithful, and to ye holy Sacraments of ye
church: and by the same authority committed unto me: I absolve the from all
thy sins confessed, contrite, and forgotten. Item, by the authority of God
and of ye blessed Apostles Peter and Paul and of ye Church of Rome, yea; and
also by the authority of our Lord the Popethe high Bishop committed unto me
in this behalf, and so much as I am bound and able to do: (if thou dye at
this time) I absolve thee from all the pains due unto thee in purgatory for
ye faults and offenses, which you haste committed against God: and by all ye
authority yt I have, I restore thee to the innocence, wherein thou were, when
thou were baptized. But if you do not dye at this time, I reserve the full
pardon granted to thee of our Lord the Pope, till thou dye. In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. AMEN Ibidem.

An other form of Absolution.
ALmightye God have mercy on thee, and forgive thee al thy sins, and bring
thee unto everlasting life AMEN

The almighty and merciful Lord give unto thee indulgence and absolution of al
thy sins. AMEN.

The almightye father, ye Godly and merciful Lord might give unto thee,
indulgence, absolution, and remission of al this sins. AMEN.

Most dear brother. The greatest and highest penance is, to be sorye for the
sins committed, and to repent, and to beware and to take heed that thou
sin no more. For the wholesome penance at this present, thou shall say, iii.
Pater nosters.iii. Aues, and a Creed: or thou shall say the Psalm of mercy
called Miserere meideus, knelyng upon thy knees before ye blessed sacrament
of the altar, or you shalt cause ye Mass of the five wounds of our Lord
Jesus Christ to be song or said for thee, or thou shall go this or yt
pilgrimage, gyld this or ye Image, etc. This penance and the merit of the
passion of Jesus Christ, and all the good deeds yt thou have done, or here after
shalt do, might profit thee, and stand thee instead for the remission of al
thy sins And our Lord Jesus Christ by his holy and most pitiefull mercy
might absolve thee. And I absolve thee from ye sentence of the lesser
excommunication or curse, if thou be fallen into it, and also from all thy
sins. In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost.
Amen. Ex instructione seu Alphabeto sacerdotum.

A special note of the Papists concerning Absolution.
ABout Absolution is to be considered the due or proper and perfect form. In
that note, yt as every Sacrament has his proper form: so in like manner has
the Sacrament of penance, which is this: Ego te absoluo. That is to say. I give
thee, and bestow upon thee, the Sacrament or ministry of Absolutio^. It does
not importe, as some falsely report: Ego te absoluo: id est, absolutum te
oste^do. I absolve thee, that is, I declare unto thee, that thou art absolved.
For so should it follow, that in the Sacraments of the new law, there
should be nothing but a showing or signification: which is false, because yt
the Sacraments of the new law do not only figure and signify, as the
Sacraments of the the law, but they also confer and give truly and
effectually the thing, which they figure and represente. Ex speculo confess.
Bartholo. de Caimis.

The form or manner of byddyng the beads on the Sunday in the Popish parish
Churches, taken out of the English Festival.
Pope.
YE shall knele down on your knees, and lift up your hearts, making your prayers
unto almighty god, for the good state and peace of al holy church, yt god
maintain, save, and keep it. For our holy father the Pope with all his true
college of Cardinals, The college of Cardinals.
that God for his mercy them maintain and keep in the right believe, and it
hold and increase, and al misbeleue and heresy he less and destroy. Also ye
shall pray for the holy la^d, and for the holy cross, Holy land Holy cross
yt Jesus died on for the redemption of ma^s soul, yt it come into the power of
Christen men the more to be honored for our prayers. Also ye shall pray for all
Archbishops and Bishops, Bishops.
and in especial for the Archbishop of Cauntorburye our Metropolitan, and
for the Bishop of N. our Diocesan, that God of his mercy give the^ grace,
Abbot^, pr^ours, mo^ks Chanons, Friars, nu^nes. etc. Curates* Persons, Uicares,
Priests, Clarks. etc.
so to govern and rule holy Church, yt it may be to the honor and worship of
him, and salvation of our souls. Ye shall also pray for Abbotes, Priors,
Monckes, Chanons, Friars, and for all men and women of religion, in what order,
estate, or degree yt they stand in, from the highest estat unto the lowest
degree. Ye shall also pray for all them that have charge and cure of Christian
men's souls, as curates, persons, vicares, priests, and clerks, and in
especial for the person and the Curate of this Church, and for all ye Priests
and Ministers that seruen therein, or have served therein. And for all them that
have taken any order, that GOD give them grace well to keep and observe it,
to the honor of God, and health of their souls. Ye shall also pray for the
unity and peace of all Christen realms: and in especial for the good state,
peace, and tranquillity of this Realm of England. For our liege Lord the
King, that God for his grace and mercy send him grace so to govern, and rule
this realm, that God be pleased and worshipped, The king, Queen. etc.
and to the profit and salvation of this land. Also ye shall pray for our
liege Lady the Queen, my Lord the Prince, and all the noble progeny of them:
for all Dukes, Duke, Earls, Barons. etc
Earls, Barons, Knights, and Squiers, and of other Lords of the Kings
Council, which have any rule and governance in this land, yt God give them
grace so to council, rule, and govern, that God be pleased, the land
defended, and to the profit and salvation of all the realm. Also ye shall pray
for the peace both on the land, and on the water, that God grant love and
charity among al Christen people. Ye shall also pray for all our Parisheners
whether they be, Parisheners.
on land, or on water, that God save them from all manner of perils: and for
all the good me^ of this parish, for their wives, children, and meiney, that
God them maintain, True tithers. Tillers.
save and keep. Ye shall also pray for all true Tithers, that God multiply
their goods and increase. For all true Tillers that labor for our
sustenau^ce, that tille the earth: and also for all the grains and fruits,
that been sown, set, or done on the earth, or shall be done, yt God send
wedering, yt they may grow increase and multiply to the help and profit of
all mankind. Ye shall pray for all true Shipmen, Shipmen. Marcha^ts
and Merchants, where yt ever they be, on land, or on water, that God keep
them from all perilles, and bring them home in safety with their goods,
ships, and merchandise, to the help, comfort, and profit of this realm. Ye
shall also pray for them that find any light in this Church, Benefactors of
the Church.
or give any bequeste, Bell, Chalice, or Uestime^t, Surplesse, Altar cloth, or
Towel, Lands, Rentes, Lamp, or Light, or any other adornimente, whereby Gods
service is the better served, sustained, and maintained in reading and singing:
And for all them, that thereto have councelled, that God reward and yield the^
at their most need. Also ye shall pray for all true pilgrims and Palmers,
Pilgrims and Palmers.
yt have taken their way to Rome, to Jerusalem, to S. Caterine, or to S.
James, or to any other holy place, ye God of his grace give them time and space
well for to go and to come to the profit of their lives and souls. Sick
persons.
Ye shall also pray for all them that been sick or diseased of this parish,
that God send to the^ health, the rather for our prayers. For the women that
been in our Ladies bands and with child in this parish, Women in our Ladies
bonds.
or in any other, that God send to the^ fair deliverance, to their children,
right shape, name, and christendom, and to the mothers, purification: and for all them that would be here, and may not, for sickness, for travail, or any
other leful occupation, that they may have part of all the good deeds, that
shall be done in this place, or in any other. Also ye shall pray for the^ that
been in good life, The holy bread giver
that God them hold long therein: and for the^ that been in debt or deadly syn,
that Jesus Christ bring the^ out thereof the rather for our prayers. Also ye
shall pray for him or her, that this day gave the holy bread: for the^ that
first began, and longest hold on, that God reward it the^ at the day of dumme:
and for all them that do well, or say you good, that God yield it the^ at their
need: and for the^ that other would, that Jesus Christ amend them. For all
these, and for all Christian me^ and women, ye shall say a Pater noster, and an
Aue. Deus misereatur nostri. etc. Gloria patri. Sicut erat. Kirie eleyson.
Christ eleyson Kirie cleyson. Pater noster. Pater noster. Et ne nos. Sed
libera nos. Ostende nobis domine. Sacerdotes tui induantur. Domine saluu^ fac
regem. Saluos fac seruos. Saluum fac populum. Domine fiat pax. Domine exaudi.
Dominus vobiscum. Oremus. Ecclesiae tuae quaesumus domine. Deus in cuius manu*
Deus a quo sancta. etc.

While the Priest is saying the aforesaid Orysons, he shall stand with his
face Eastward, and look unto the high altar. When he has once done, he shall
turn him again to the people, and speak unto them on this manner.
FUrthermore ye shall pray for all Christen souls: Prayeng for souls departed.
for Archbishops and bishops souls: and especially for all that have been
Bishops in this diocese. And for all Curates, Persons, and Uicares souls,
and in especial for them yt have been Curates of this Church: and for the
souls that have served in this church. Also ye shall pray for the souls of
all Christen Kings, and Queens, and in especial for the souls of them, that
have been Kings of this Realm of England: And for all souls, that to this
Church have given, book, bell, chalice or vestime^t, or any other thing, by
the which the service of God is the better done, and holy Church worshipped.
Ye shall also pray for your fathers souls, for your mothers souls, for your
Godfathers souls, for your Godmothers souls, for your brethren and sisters
souls, for your children souls, for your kindred souls, and for your friends
souls, and for all the souls, whose bones rest in this Church or churchyard
or in any other holy place, and for all the souls that we been bound to pray
for. But specially ye shall pray for ye souls that been in the pains of
Purgatory, there abiding the mercy of almightye God: and in special for them
that have most need and least help, that God for his endless mercy, less and
minishe their pains by the mean of our prayers, and bring them into his
everlasting bless in heaven. And also for the soul of. N. or of them yt on
such a day in this weke we shall have the anniuersarye. For these, and for all
Christen souls, ye shall deuoutlye of your charity, and with a good heart say
a Pater noster, and an Aue.

Now shall the priest again turn eastward, and say, De profundis clamaui, etc,
with this collecte.

ORemus. Absolve quesumus domine animas famuloru^ tuorum, Pontificum, Regum,
Sacerdotum, Parentum, Parochianorum, Amicorum, Benefactorum nostrorum, and
omnium fidelium defunctorum ad omni vinculo delictorum, vt in resurrectionis
gloria inter sanctos and electos tuos resuscitati, respirent, Per Christum
dominum nostrum. AMEN.

Which is thus Englished.

LEt us pray. Absolve, we beseech thee O Lord, ye souls of thy servants,
our Bishops, Kings, Priests, Fathers and Mothers, Parishoners, Friends,
Benefactours, and of all the faithful yt are departed, from every bond of
sin, that they being resuscitate or raised up in ye glory of the
resurrection, may live among ye saints and chosen people. Through Christ our
Lord. So be it.

A shorter form or manner of bidding the beads.
MAsters and friends, as for holy days and fasting days ye shall have none
this weke, but yt ye may do all manner of good works, yt shall be to the
honor of God, and ye profyt of your own souls. And therefore after a
laudable consuetude, and a lawful custom of our mother holy Church, ye shall
knele down mouyng your hearts unto almightye God, and making your special
prayers for the.iii. estates concerning all Christen people: The three estates
of holy church.
that is to say, for the Spiritualtye, the Temporaltie, and ye souls being in
the pains of purgatory. First for our holy father the Pope with all his
Cardinals: for all Archebyshops and Bishops, and in especial for my Lord
Archbishop of Cantorburye your Metropolitan: and also my Lord Bishop of this
diocese. N. and in general for all persons, vicares, and parish priests
having cure of man's soul, with the ministers of Christ's church, as well
religious, as not religious. Secondly, ye shall pray for ye unity and peace of
al Christen Realms, and specially for the noble Realm of England, for our
sovereign Lord ye King, for the Prince, for my Lady ye Kings Mother, with
all their progenye: and for all ye Lords of ye council and al other of the
nobility, which dwell in the countries having protection and governance of
ye same, yt almighty God may send them grace so to govern and rule the
land, yt it may be pleasing unto almightye God, wealth and profit to the
land, and salvation to their souls.

Also ye shall pray for all those that have honored the church with light,
Lamp, Uestmente, or Bell, or with any ornaments, by the which the service of
almightye God is the better maintained and kept. Furthermore ye shall pray
for all true trauailers, and tillers of the earth, yt truly and duelye done
their duty to God and holy church, as they be bound to do. Also ye shall pray
for all manner of fruits, yt be done upon the ground, or shall be, yt almightye
God of his great pitye and mercy may send such wederynges, yt they may
come to the sustenaunce of man. Ye shall pray also for all those yt be in debt
or deadly sin yt almightye GOD may give them grace to come out thereof, and
the sooner by our prayer. Also ye shall pray for all those, yt be sick or
diseased, either in body or in soul, y^ almyghtye God may send them ye
thing which is most profitable, as well bodilye as ghostly. Also ye shall pray
for all pilgrims and Palmers, yt have taken the way to Rome, to S. James or
Jerusalem, or to any other place, yt almightye God may give them grace to go
safe, and come safe, and give us grace to have part of their prayers, and they
part of ours. Also ye shall pray for ye holy Cross, yt is in the possession
and hands of vnryghtful people, ye almightye God may send it into ye
possession of Christen people, when it pleases him. Furthermore I commit unto
your devout prayers, all women yt be in our ladies bonds, yt almighty God may
send the^ grace, ye child to receive ye sacrament of baptism, and ye mother
purification. Also ye shall pray for the good man or woman, yt this day
gives bread to make the holy lofe: and for all those yt first began it, and
them ye longest continue. For these and for all true Christen people, every man
and woman say, a Pater noster, and an Aue. Deu^ misereatur nostri, etc, cum
Gloria patri, etc.

Thirdly, ye shall pray for your friends souls, as your fathers soul, your
mothers soul, your brethrens soul, your sisters soul, your Godfathers soul,
your Godmothers soul, and for all those souls, whose bones rest in this
church, or Churchyard or in any other holy place, and for all ye souls being
in pains of purgatory: but specially, and above al, for those souls, whose
names be accustomed to be rehearsed in ye beadrolle as I shall rehearse them
unto you by ye grace of God, etc. For these in special, and for all other in
general, that it is needful to pray for: for every man and woman say a
Pater Noster and an Aue. De profu^dis, etc, cum Oremus: and Absolve quesumus,
etc.

The general sentence taken out of the English Festival.
GOod men and women I do you to understand, The general sentence red four
times in the year.
yt we that have cure of your souls, be commanded of our ordinaryes, and by
the constitutions and laws of holy church, to show to you four times in the
year, in each quarter of ye year once, when the people is most plenarye in
the church, the articles of the sentence: So yt not for our default, no man,
nor woman fall therein. And if any be therein fallen, he may through the help of
God almightye, and al holy church, with shrifte and penance, making good for
his sin, vprise, and him amend* What cursing is.
Wherefore I do you to understand, yt cursing is such a vengeance taking
that it departs a man from the bliss of heaven, from housel, shrifte, and
all the Sacraments of holy Church, and betaketh him to the devil, and to
the pains of hell without end, but if he have grace of him to amend. But
therefore see, yt no man, nor woman say, that I curse them: For it longs not
to me, but to show the points and ye articles of the sentence of cursyng. For
I do you well to wite: who so does against any of ye points, yt I shall show
you: he is accursed in the deed doing of the Pope, Archebyshop, Bishop, and of
al holy Church. And yt god almighty give you grace, to keep you out of cursing:
listen and hear, and I shall through ye help of God the father almighty, to
you the^ tell and show.

By the authority of God, ye Son and the holy Ghost, Enemies to holy church
are first accursed, as most grievous offenders*
and his glorious Mother and maiden our Lady Saint Marye, and the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, and all Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and virgins,
and the halowes of God: I denounce and show for accursed all thoe that
frau^ches of holy Church break or distrouble, or been against the state of
holy church, or thereto assente with deed or council. And also all thoe that
deprive holy Church of any right, or make of holy church, any Lay fee, yt
is hallowed or sanctified. And all thoe yt withholde the rites of holy church yt
is for to say, offringes, tithes, rents, or fredome of holy Church let, or
distrouble, or break: that is to say, if any man flee to the Church or
Churchyard: Who so him out draws, and al thoe yt thereto procure or assente.
And all thoe ye purchasen letters of any Lords court, ye process of right
may not be determined, nor ended. And all thoe yt the peace of ye land
distrouble. And al thoe ye blood draw of man or woman in violence, or in
vilonye, or make to be drawn in Church, or Churchyard, wherefore the Church,
or Churchyard is interdicted or suspended: and thoe yt be against right of our
Lord the King: and al thoe that war sustain against the King wrongfullye.
And all thoe yt be common robbers, rouers, or manslayers, but it be themself
defendyng And thoe that been against the great Charter of the King that is
confyrmed of the Court of Rome. And all thoe ye false witness bear wronglye,
namely in cause of Matrimonye, in what court so it be,
or out of court. And all that false witness bring forth in right of
Matrimonye for to destroy man or woman, or for to disherite any man of land or
tenement, or any other cattle. And all false advocates, that for mede put
forth any false exceptions or quarrels, through the which right of Matrimony, is
fordone, or any other manner of right in stead of judgment: and al thoe yt
for mede, or favor, or for any other encheson maliciously man or woman bring
out of their good fame into wicked, or make them for to leese their worldly
goods or honor: or them put wrongfully to their purgation, of the which was
none before. And al thoe ye maliciously distrouble or letten the right
presentement of holy Church, there the very Patron should present and all
that thereto procure with word or deed, or with false enquest, or with other
power. And all that maliciously despisen the mau^dement of the king to take a
cursed man fro the time, yt he has lain in cursyng. lx. days, and no remedy
will seek. And all those yt their liueraunce purchase against the right of
holy Church. And that mede take for to distrouble peace, there love should be,
or charity: or strife maintain with word or deed: and till they have yielded
again their mede that they took of them, they may never be assoiled. And al
those that hold houses, ma^ners, gronges of parsons, vicares, or any other man
of holy Church against their will, or their attorneys will. And al thoe that
any manner good moveable or immovable away bear with strength, or wrongfully
away draw, or waste: of the which cursing they may not be assoiled, til they
have made satisfaction, to whom the wrong is done. And al thoe that any manner
of goods with violence or malice bear out of holy Church, stead or Abbeye, or
house of Religion, which that therein is laid or done for warrandise or
succoure, or for to be kept. And all thoe that thereto procure or assent and
all thoe that them maintain or sustain: and all thoe that have laid hand on
priest or clarke with malice, but it be himself defending. And all thoe, that
Sarrazens Cou^ce^ or help against Christendom. And all thoe that their
children wrongfully father wittingly, or their children witte^ any other man
with malice. And al thoe yt wearry or slay their generations, or their children
destroy with drinks, or with any other craft. And al thoe, that false money,
clippe or sheere them to advantage, to disceaue any man with. And all thoe
that false the Popes Bull, or counterfaite the Kings seal. And al thoe, that
bye or sell with false measures, or false waights, that is to say, to bye with
one, and sell with an other. And all thoe, that false the kings standard,
themself witing. And all thoe, that any testament distrouble, or thereto
procure with word, or with deed, wherefore the deades will is not fulfilled.
And all thoe that forswear them upon the holydome willing or witing for mede,
or for hate for to do any man or woman to lose their worldly goods or honor.
And all robbers, or rouers openly or privily by day or by night: or any man's
good steal, wherefore they were worthy to have judgment. And all thoe, yt
withhold any ma^s good, that have been spered and axed for thrice in holy
church, themself weting. And all those that distrouble the peace of holy
Church, or of the land: and all fellons, and thoe that them maintain. And all
false conspiratoures, and al false forswearers in assizes, or in any other
court. And al those yt any false plaints put forth against the fraunchise of
holy Church, or of the king, or of the realm. And all those that offringes,
that been offered in holy Church, or in any other sted within the province of
Canterbury, witholden and put away in any other place against the will of the
parson, or vicare, or their attorney, in the parish, yt it is offered in. And
al those that their goods away give for dread of death, in fraud of holy
Church or to forbear their debts paying: and al those that such gifts take
or thereto help, or Council, And all those that let or hinder prelates, or
Ordinaries for to hold consistory Session, or chapiters, for to enquire of
sins, and of excess, in good amendment of man's soul. And all witches,
and all that on them believe: and al heretics, that believe not in the
Sacrament of the altar, that it is gods own body in flesh and blood in form
of bread: and al other Sacraments that touchen health of man's soul. And all
iuglars, vsurars, that is to say, yt if any man or woman lend their cattle
unto man or woman for any advantage to take by covenant more tha^ their own,
and if there be any such found in town or city, the city or the town should
be enterdited by the old law, and nouther done their Mass, nor Sacrament used,
til he were out thereof. And al thoe, yt withhold tithes or withdraw their
tithes witingly, or maliciouslye to the harm of holy Church, or tithes letten
to be given of the goods, which yt been commanded to be given by the law of
holy Church, yt is to say of al fruits of yardes, corns, herbs that wax,
fruits of trees, of all manner beasts yt be newing: of wolle, lamb: and
these in time of year: of swannes, gees, dowes, duckes: of bees, honey, wax:
of hay also as often as it neweth: of flax and hemp: of windmils, and of all
manner mils: of all manner of marchaundise of chaffaryng men, and of men of
craft. And all those that maliciously or wittingly any other withhold, the
which ought to be given to holy church, and thoe, that thereto procure in word
or in deed.

Modus fulminandi sententiam.

PRaelatus Alba indutus cum ceteris sacerdotibus in ecclesia existentibus,
cruce erecta, candelis accensis, stans in pulpito, pronuncient verba quae
sequu^tur.

Which is thus in English.

The manner of thundering the sentence.

THe Prelate having on his Albe with the other Priests, that are in the
Church, the Cross being lift up, and the candels light, standing in the
pulpit, let them pronoun^e the words that follow.

EX authoritate dei, patris omnipotentis, and beatae Mariae Virginis, and
omnium sanctorum, excommunicamus, anathematizamus, and diabolo commendamus
omnes supradictos malefactores, Excommunicati sint, anathematizati. and diabolo
commendati. Maledicti sunt in villis, in campis, in vijs, in semitis, in
domibus, extra domos and in omnibus alijs locis, stando, iacendo, surgendo,
ambulando, currendo, vigilando, dormiendo, comedendo, bibendo, and aliud opus
faciendo, and illos a luminibus and omnibus bonis ecclesie sequestramus, and
diabolo damnamus: and in paenis inferni animas eorum extinguamus, sicut
extinguitur ista candela: nisi resipiscant, and ad satisfactionem veniant.

That is to say. By the authority of God ye father almyghtie, and of the
blessed Uirgyne Marye, and of all Saints, we excommunicate, we curse, and
commit to the Devil, all the aforesaid malefectoures and evil doers.
Excommunicate might they be, curssed and given over to the Devil. Cursed be
they in Towns, in Fields, in Ways, in Paths, in Houses, out of Houses, and
in all other places, Standing, Lighyng, Rysyng, Walkyng, Runnyng, Watchyng,
Sleaping, Eating, Drinkyng, and whatsoever thing they do besides. We
sequester them from the thresholdes and all the goods of the Church and we
give them over to the Devil. And let us quench their souls in the pains of
hell, as this candle is now quenched and put out, except they amend, and come
unto satisfaction.

Finita sententia extinguat lumen ad terror^, pulsatis ca^panis. That is to say.

When the sentence is ended, let him put out the candle to make the people the
more afraid, and ring the belles.

In an old written book I find thus written. The Articles of the general
sentence must be read four times in the year openly in the Church before all
the people, In Popish Churches all things are in Latib besides surfyng.
yea and that in the mother tongue: that is to say, the first sunday of Aduent,
and the first sunday of Lent, and Trinity sunday, and on the sunday, which
is within the Octaues of the Assumption of the blessed virgin Mary. And when
the Priest has read the Articles of ye general sentence, let him with all have
put out the candle, which he holds in his hand, and with great violence cast
it away from him, saying: Auctoritate dei patris omnipotentis,
and filij, and Spiritus sancti, and sanctae Mariae Matris domini nostri Jesus
Christi, and sanctoru^ Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and omnium Sanctorum, and
sanctorum Canonum, and nostri Ministerij, excommunicamus, anathematizamus, and
a Sacramentis sanctae ecclesiae, and a co^munione corporis and sanguinis domini
nostri Jesus Christi sequestramus omnes illos, vel illas, qui praenominati sunt.
Et sicut extinguitur haec lucerna hominum: ita extinguatur lumen eorum in
secula seculorum, nisi ad emendationem and satisfactionem venerint. Fiat, fiat.
Amen.

That is to say.

By the authority of God the father almightye, and the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, and of S. Marye the Mo- of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of ye holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, and of al Saints, and of the holy Canons, and of our
ministry, we excommunicate, we curse, and we sequester from the sacraments
of holy church, and from ye communion of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, al those men or women, that are to fore named. And as this candle,
which me^ use, is quenched and put out, so let their light be quenched and put
out worlds without end, except they amend, and make satisfaction. So be
it. So be it. AMEN.

The priest must take heed, says the old written book, that he read not on
the foresaid sondayes the general sentence at mass time after ye Gospel, as
certain indiscreet priests do, by this means interrupting the mass: A Caveat,
but he shall read it either immediately after the aspersion or sprinckling of ye
holy water, or else after the procession.

Hereafter follows a treatise of the articles of the general greater curse:
found among other old books at Cantorbury in the parish church of S, Paul, In
the year, etc, 1562.
GOod men and women, it is ordained by the council of al holy church, first of
our holy father the pope of Rome, and his Cardinals, and by all his council:
and sithen of al Archbyshops and Bishops, and by all the Clergy of holy
church, yt every man of holy church, yt has cure of man's soul, that is to
say, persons, vicares, and paryshe priests, should show among his parishoners
four times of the year, the articles that been written in the general
sentence, that is to say, the points that longen to the great curse. The one
day is the first sunday of Aduente. The second day is the first Sunday in
clean lenton. The third day is the sunday next after Whitsontide. And the
fourth day is the next sunday after the Assumption of our Lady. And the
points must openly be taught and showed to the people, or leude men, yt they
may know the great mischief and disease thereof, yt no man or woman should
be perished for defaulte of learning, ne have matter to excuse hem by. What
this word curs^ signifies.
Wherefore ye shoullen understand at the beginning, yt this word Curse, is
thus much to say, as departing fro god and al good works. Two manner of curses.
Of two manner of cursing holy church tells. The one is cleped the less
curse. The lesser curse.
The other is cleped the more curse. That we clepen the less curse, is of this
strength, yt every man and woman yt falls therein: it departs him froe all the Sacraments yt been in holy Church,
yt they may none of hem receive, till they be assoyled, for right as a
swearde departs ye head or ye life from ye body: right so as to say
ghostlich, Curse departs man's soul fro god, The more curse.
and fro al good works. The more curse is much worse, and is of this strength,
for to depart a man fro God, and fro all holy church, and also fro ye company
of all Christen folk, never to be saved by ye passion of Christ ne to be
helped by the Sacraments that been done in holy Church, ne to have part with
any Christen man.^ Clerks sayen, that a child before that he is christened:
it has a wicked spirit dwelling within him in his soul: the which wicked
spirit is halsed or coniured, or cast out of him through the prayer of the
priest before the church door, when it shall be christened. The which
sacrament of baptism is grounded in holy writ, and is beginning of al other
sacraments, and was veriliche betokened in the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ by water that ran out of his side from his heart, when al his blood
was agone and shed for our sakes. And so by sacrament of Christening he is full
made Christ's child, and he receaueth there part of the passion of Christ,
and part of all the Sacraments and prayers that been done in holy church.
Also he receaueth part of all good deeds, yt been done among all Christen
people. And if he hold mekely the covenant, yt he makes there to god: he may
be sure for to have a dwelling place for ever in ye bliss of heaven. But what
time yt he trespasseth so against the law of God, yt he falls into curse by
sin, or yt he is worthy to be cursed of holy church: then he is departed
from God, and al good works, till he come to amendment. And he is than
delivered again to ye fend of hell for to put him for his sin into the pain
of hell withouten end, but he him amend and thereof be assoyled or he hence
pass. And therefore there is nothing in all this world, yt a Christen man or
woman ought so griselich to dread, as for to fall into sin, yt brings him
into the sentence of curse: the which departs him from God yt is his father,
and from holy church that is his mother. Also as holy scripture or the law
bears witness, Cursing is cleped the sweard of holy church. For right as we
seen, yt the stroke of the sweard it sleaeth and departs the life fro the
body: right so ye stroke of this ghostly sweard, Cursing, departs and does
away our Lord God from man and woman, which is accursed: the which Lord God is
life of her souls, Note.
and withouten him all her works been dead evermore after, but they have
special grace of God for to amend hem here, ere they pass out of this world.
For as many Clerks preuen, at ye day of dumme, would our lady S. Marye, and S.
John Baptiste, and al saints yt been in heaven knele down at once before ye
blessed face of almightye God: they shoullen not in yt time through the prayer
of them all deliver the soul of man or woman, yt dies in deadly sin: For
trulich it were expresselich against the holy Gospel, where Christ says
thus: that he shall trulich give to every man and woman, their right there, as
he has deserved here. And if the day of dumme shall be so hard to all thoe
yt dyen in any deadly sin: by all reason full myche harder shall it be at ye
time with all these, yt be founden openly cursed of God and of holy Church.
In this perilous way of dampnation been all thylke men and women, that I
shall speak of. And therefore I beseech you, and charge you for the love of
god almighty and for the salvation of your souls, that ye understand well al
these points. And if any of you feel him giltye in any of all, yt he amend him
by sorrow of heart, shrifte, and penance, and that betimes.

First and formest we denouncen accursed all that holy Church falsely depriuen
of any right or profyt, that it falls to have either by law written, or
else by good custom, which that has been holden and used of old time. And
in this point fallen three manner of folk. First all thoe yt stelen any
Churchegoodes, in what place so that they be done to keep, or else that stelen
unhallowed thing out of holy place, or things that been hallowed out of
place unhallowed. And all thoe yt wittingly breaken or destroyen any point of
freedom that longs to holy Church. And this is not alonely understand of
the fredomes yt longen generally to all holy Church, but also of other
special freedoms, which yt some church has more tha^ an other, temporal or
spiritual whether so it be. The third point is, yt al thoe been accursed, that
purchasen writtes or letters of any leude court for to let the process of the
law of holy church of causes yt longen skilfully unto Christian court, the
which should not be demed by none other law. All thoe also that breaken or
distroublen the fraunches and the fredome of holy church. And al yt been
against the peace and ye right state of holy church, or thereto assenten with
word, deed, or counsel. And al yt maliciouslye biriuen holy church of her
right, or maken holy church Layfee, yt is hallowed and blessed. And all thoe
that letten Archebyshop or Bishop, or any other yt has jurisdiction and power
by the law of holy Church that they may not visit her sugettes, or dare not
use her law for to amend the souls of hem yt they have to keep. And all thoe
that falsely fleen away from one place to an other, that holy church may not
chastyse them, ne rule the^ as she should. Also god and holy church accursen al
thoe, yt lay hand in malice on priest or clerk, on man or woman learned or
leude wtin church or churchyard, or man or woman of Religion, but it be
hemself defendaunt, so yt they may not else save hemself: or else that it be in
certain points, that the law gives license: and all that thereto procuren or
mainteinen such deeds by counsel or strength. Also all yilke been accursed
that drawn out any man or woman in violence out of holy Church to have succor
and help, or else out of any holy place that is hallowed, but and it be in
certain points, as the law gives leave, or letten them to have sustenaunce
the while they been there. And also all thoe, that for malice or wrath of
person, vicare, or priest, or of any other, or for wrongful couetise of
himself withholden rightful tithes and offerings, rentes, or mortuaries from
her own parish Church, and by way of couetyse falselyche again taking to
God the worsse, and to himself the better, or else turn him into an other use,
than him owes, or done him in other place after their own will, so yt they be
not done to the same place that they should be: or let by word or by deed
any man or woman for to do her good will and her devotion to god and to holy
church. For all Christen me^ and women ben hard bound upon pain of deadly sin,
not onlich by the ordinance of man, but both in the old law, and also in the
new law, for to pay truliche to God and holy church, the tithe part of al
manner increase that they winne^ trulich by the grace of god, both with her
travel, and also with her crafts, what so they be truliche gotten. Also the
tith part of al manner fishes, and fowls, and beasts both wild and tame And al
manner of fruits that grown out of the earth. Also all that wittingly or
wilfully tithen falsely, that is to say, that given not to god and to holy
church the tenth part of every winning lefully wonnen in merchaundise, or in
any other crafts. withdrawn only the expense and the costage that nedefully
must be made about the thing, whereof the winning is getten, not tithing the
winning of one marchaundise with the loss of another And al tho, that of the
fruits of ye earth, or of beast, or any thing that neweth in the year, given
not ye tith wholly withouten any costage. Al those that falsely tythen, taken to
God the worse, and holden the better to her own profit against the
ordinance of Boniface sometime the Archebyshop of Cantorburye: by the which
ordinance through out the province of Cantorburye should be one manner axing
of tithes in this manner wise. Of all manner of fruits, of earbis of gardins
wtouten any manner of cost abating: of hay where ever it grows, in great
medes or in small, as often as it neweth. Of newing, of all manner of beastial,
of calfe, or of lamb fro seven upward in the tenthe: and fro six downewarde
for euerich of hem an half penye, but if the person or vicarye will abide till
another year, and tell thilke that leven, and take the other beast that
follows. Of wulle yt is woxen: of fellis fro purification of our Lady. Of
milk all the while yt it dureth, as well in winter as in so^mer, but if they
will do gree therefore to the person or to the vicary for the profit of holy
Church. Of fyshing, of fouling, of veneson, of been, of all other good
ryghtfully wonnen, y^ newen by ye year. Of profyt of milles, and weris of
fyshing no cost abate, but to ye very value shall the tithe be paid. Of
lesewys, communis, seuerelis, shall the tithe trulich be paid, after the
number of the beescis or the days, as it is most profit to holy Church. All
werckmen and chapmen that wynnen on her crafts and on her marchaundise shulen
trulyche pay her tithe to God, and to holy Church. Also Carpe^ters and
smithes, weyuers, and al other craftysmen, and all other hired men and wimmen
shulen tythen of ye they getten, but if they wulle give any certain therefore
to holy Church at the persons or vicaries will. Also of fowls, of calves, of
pigges, of gees, of hens, of flax, of hemp, of corn, and of all yt neweth
by the year. Also of shriding of trees, and of al manner of vnderwoode woxing
or hewed. Also men of holy church mowen curse by name hem that wolen not pay
her tithes, as it is written in many places of the law of holy Church.

Also all thoe been accursed by all holy Church, that breaken or disturben the
peace and the unity first of the king, and afterward of the realm, by power
or by counsel, by word, or by deed, or else by any other manner to cast, or
imagine his death, or any other traitorie to him, or to the realm. And al tho,
that falsely withholden his heritage, or any other right, that him owes
lawfully to have. Also all thoe that given mede, or else taken any manner gifts
for to let or distrouble the pees, for to procure and make strife and debate
among Christen people, where love and charity should be in any degree either
more or less.

Also all thoe that falsen or counterfeyten the Popes Bulls, or his sealis, or
any other seal autentike. And all ye wittingly vsen such false letters
purchased or cou^terfeted. And al thoe yt falsen and counterfeten the kings
seal, or the kings money, or clippen it, or maken it less, or thereto asse^t
because of winning Also all ye falsen the kings standard, or vsen any false
weights, or false yardes or elnes, or any false measures, yt is to say, to bye
with one and sell with an other for to deceive the common people. And al false
conspirators, and beginners of false quarelis, and helpers thereto. And al ye
falslishe forsweren the^ upon the holydom, and yet known well that it is
false, when they begin to swear, namelishe in questes, or in assisies, or in
any other false causes. And all thilke that hiren such men, or maken to be
hired, or procuren, or mainteinen thereto, or teachen hem thereto by word or
by deed, for to make a man lose his good. And all that letten true cause or
lawful matrimonye, or heritage, or any testamente, to be discussed and
ordained. And all thoe, that for hate or for winning maken men lesen her
cattle maliciously before any domesman in willing of vengeance. And all that
purchasen writtes to outlawe any man unwittingly in another shire than he
wonith in, all that pursuen such writs, or procuren thereto, or given counseile,
consent, help, or favor, or else have firm or stable such writtes in her
name purchased. In self doing or co^senting, they fallen into the great
curse. Also all false advocates, that allegen any false exceptions or quarells
in cause of matrimonye: and al yt letten rightly Matrimony. And al thilke
procuratours or advocates, or other men of law of holy church, ye which in
plee of Matrimony, or any other cause maken exception or delays wittingly, with
aduisement, for to destroy, let or tarry a true cause, yt it may not be help,
discussed, and ended after the right process and course of law. And all that
maken priuilich wedolck in church or in chapel withouten banes axing
lawfullich and solempnlich agaenst forbidding of holy church. And all thoe,
that for winning of friendship, or for kindred, or for love, entermedle with
such pretty wedlock. And all thoe, that for wrath, or hate, or mede, or any
other encheson falsely do slaunderen, or diffamen any man or woman, so yt they
been brought out of her good fame into wicked name: or make hem to lose her
worldly goods, wherefore they han need to purge hem by yt law. And al thoe, yt
stelen, or distreine, or falselich withholde^ charteries or testamentes yt
longen to other men, wherefore they lesen her heritage, or any right, yt they
shoulden have by law. And all thoe, that letten or distroublen a testamente or
the last will of man or woman lawfully made, although they be dead, of the
things yt were their own, and yt they might rightfulliche make a testament
of, and skilfulliche biqueth: and all that letten the fulfilling of any
rightful testament and all that withholden the goods, so that the deades will
skilfully may not be performed. And all thoe, yt been sworn and charged by
executorye, and fulfyllen not the deades will, as her charge axeth. And all yt
letten ye kings writ, clepyd a Significauit, yt is to maken hem that been
accursed after fortye days to do hem to prison, and thoe that procuren her
deliuerau^ce vnrightfulliche, before they be buxum to holy church. Also leude
men that entermedle with offeryngs in churches or chapels agenst the will and
the leave of him yt it longs to. And all secular justices or judges yt been in
offices, and han the law to keep, when they be proved and required to do her
office in helping of the people yt han suffered wrongs and harm, but if they
do rightfulnesse and truth by her coming, be they learned me^ or leude: else
they ben accursed. And al thoe, yt ben wedded together against the law of God
and of holy church in degrees that been forbidden, as in consanguinitie, or in
affinity, or gossibred. And all that been professed in any religion, and broken
out of her order, and become wedded men or women. Also priests yt been within
holy orders, and forsaken her order, and be comen wedded, and al yt procuren,
helpen, or assenten thereto. And all that known in matrimonye, when it shall be
made, any great defaulte or letting, but if they by some way do holy church
to know it. And when any church or chapel is suspended or interdited by
law, they been accursed openly that constreynen any priest for to sing therein,
or by ringing of bells, or by any other way maken hem to hear mass, that
been openliche accursed by name. And also when any man of holy church by
commission does out of holy Church, or curses any man or woman, and names
him by name on holy church behalf, that he go out of the Church while mass
and gods service is in doing: but if he do his bidding, he is accursed. And
also al yt maynteynen hem, or bidden hem, hold them still in the church: and
none of them may be assoyled but by ye court of Rome. And al yt her goods given
in dread of death in fraud of holy church, or to forbarre her dettes: and al
thoe also y^ such gifts taken, or cou^celen, or helpen thereto, been accursed.
Also al thoe yt letten Prelates or Ordinaries, or Chapter, for to enquire of
sin there need is for help or health of man's soul. And al thoe, yt against
ye law of holy church byen or sellen any benefice of holy church, And all yt
byen or sellen holy orders, or falsely stelen (...) thoe been accursed, yt
maken any ^ate or plee in ye patronage, wherethorowe the very patron is let of
his right. And al yt breken any point of the Kings great Charter, or else any
point of the Charter of the forest, in which been written the fredomes of this
land, ye diverse Kings han granted both to learned and to leude. In the great
Charter been contained.xxxv. points: and ye Charter of the forest
comprehends xv. points, vt in tractatu vocato, Pars oculi in prima part, et
in tract, vocat, Regimen animarum, in prima sui part before continetur. Also
al men and women, yt which in peril of death been assoyled, or in any other
perils, of him yt has not power by law out of peril of death to assoyle hem
as soon as they be recovered, but they take absolution of him that has power to
assoyle hem: they turne^ again, and been in the same curse as they were before,
and worse for^ vnbuxumnesse. Al yt been open lechouris, open aduouteris, common
women, and all thoe yt wittingly and quietly defend them, yt they be not
punished by the law after monishing upon pain of cursing, yt no man let them
house to hire, ne receive hem into her house, after the time that they be
known. Also all that comynen with hem that been accursed in eating, drinking,
in receiving, in helping, in favoring, but only in hope to bring hem to
amendment. And all Okereris, and vsureris, that is to say, if man or woman
lend good or cattle to her neighbor for to take aduau^tage for her lending:
and thoe yt it maintain, and assenten to such giving or taking or filling ye
derer therefore. And if there were such one in a city, ye city should be
interdited, and no mass, ne sacrament done therein, till he were out of the
city. And all thoe ye maken, when vsurye is taken, that it be not restored
again. And all that beleuen on witchecraftes, or vsen it. And all that wilfully
sleen hemselfe, or else any man, woman, or child: and all witches, and all yt
on witchecrafte beleuen, maynteinen, or vsen, Also all that heresye maynteinen
or sustaynen, and all heretics that beleuen not in the sacrament of the alter,
the which is Christ's own body, his flesh and blood in form of bread: and
in other Sacraments of holy Church yt touchen health of soul. And all thoe
women that distroyen her own children, or any other woman's children with
drinks, or with any other witchcraft, either wercke vnleefull. And all ye
fadren her children wrongfulliche on any man for malice or couetesie. And all
yt her children wilfulliche sleen or caste^ away, or leyen at churches or
Church doors, or at hospitalls, or in fields, or in high ways, or leaven her
children christened or unchristened and goen away from hem, and forsaken hem.
And all thor, that offeringes that been offered in holy Church, or in chapels,
or in oratories, or in any other stead within a paryshe, with holden or putten
away into other places against the will of ye person, vicarye, or curate, but
if they be priuileged. Also John Stratford sometime Archbishop of Cantorburye,
having regard to much harm of man's soul, Wakings.
and default of devotion through vilanye and sin yt weren used and done about
dead bodies ligging up, and yet is used about in many places, or the body be
borne to church: there yt sometime weren used and ordained about a corse for
holy prayers for the soul: now it is forbidden by constitution upon pain of
ye great curse, that no man vndirsong or take any folk into his house, where
the dead bodies been watched, to make any manner plays, but pray for ye soul.
And al yt there ought else done, or thither comen, than to bid for the soul
they mowen dread of ye same curse. And al ye vsen simonye, or given, or
vndersongen in way of simonie. Al sacrilegiers, yt is to say, al ye
wrongfulliche done away any thing hallowed, or given to holy church ligging to
be kept, where (...) it be: or that any thing with violence bear out of holy
church and al yt this procuren or assente^. Also al thoe, y^ done in holy
church, or in holy place any foul sin, wherefore it has need to be newly
hallowed or reconciled. Also all thoe yt withholden any man's good unjustly
wetingly, that has been axed openly in holy church three times. And all that in
violence lien hand or drawn blood on father or mother: and yt is to understand
both of bodilich and ghostlich, but it be himself defenda^t. And al yt helpe^
the Sarazens against Christian me^ in war of arms, or in any other thing.
Also al thoe that letters purchase^ in any lords court, that no process of
right may be determined, ne judged in holy church court. Also al thoe ye
blood drawn of any man or woman in violence, or in any other vilonye in
church or in the churchyard, where through ye church or churchyard is
interdited, polluted, or suspended. And all robbers and rouers by day or by
night, that any ma^s good stelen, for the which goods a man or woman were
worthy to hear judgment. And al those that out of houses of holy church,
graunges, personages, or vicaries, or any maneries of men's of holy church
against her will or her kepers will any manner of goods with violence beren out
of holy place, church, or abbey, or any house of religion, which weren left
there for sikernesse or succor for to keep, and all that thereto assenten. Also
al thoe that withholde^ a wydow her right, or her dowry after her husbands
death, or taken her good wrongfully. All that procuren or given leave or
commandment any other to flea, or to maime, or to beat, or by any other way
a grieve any Ordinarye or judge of ye law in body or in goods. Al these
aforesaid, been accursed with the greater curse. Et cetera. Many other points
also longen unto this great sentence: but I trow to God, it be no need to
rehearse here no mo.

Et sic finitur. BUt through authority of our Lord God almightye, and our
Lady S. Marye, and all Saints of heaven, of all Aungells, or Archeaungells,
Patriarchs and Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and
Virgins, also by ye power of all holy church, yt our Lord Jesus Christ gave to
S. Peter: We denounce all thoe accursed yt we have thus reckned to you: And all
thoe ye maintain hem in her sins, or given hem thereto either help or
council, so that they be departed from God and all holy church, and that
they have no part of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, ne of no Sacraments
that been in holy Church, ne no part of the prayers among Christen folk,
but ye they be accursed of God and of holy church fro the sole of their foot
unto the crown of her head, sleapyng and wakyng, sitting and standing, and in
all her words, and in all her works: and but if they have grace of GOD for to
amend hem here in this life, for to dwell in the pain of hell for ever
withouten end. Fiat. Fiat. Do to the book. Quench the candle. Ring the bell.
AMEN. AMEN.

Here follow certain Fragmentes of papistrye.
WE have tofore heard, where we entreated of the Lords supper, how ye Pope
Innocent the third ordained, that the mysterye of Christ's body, otherwise
called the sacramental bread, should be kept in churches continuallye under
lock and keye, to the intent to be in a readiness at all times: least,
says he, they that are sick, should want ye spiritual comfort in the
troublesome time of death. Reasons why the sacramental wine is not reserved in
churches, as ye sacramental bread is.
Some curious fellow peradventure will here demand why the sacramental wine
is not also reserved, and hanged up as well as y^ bread, seeing Christ gave this
general commandment, and said: Drink ye all of this. To this question
answers Guilielmus Durandus, saying: The blood of Christ is not reserved and
kept for diverse causes. The first is, because wine, which is liquide, may
easily through negligence be spilt. The second is, because yt by the chalice,
which is on Maundye thursdaye received, the end of the old law is
understood. The third is, because ye body yt is reserved is not without
blood. The fourth is, that in ye the blood is not reserved: it is declared, ye
the old sacrifice ought to cease. For the bread signifies the new testament:
but the wine signifies ye old testament. To make evident pr^se of this matter,
the Lord, when he ha^ drunk said: Consumatum est. It is finished. Therefore
the chalice is received, and the bread is reserved: because the law has now
his end, and the Gospel has his beginning. The fifth cause is, because Christ
at the Lords supper said: Uerely I say unto you, I will not from henceforth
drink any more of this fruit of the Uine, til I drink that new in the
kingdom of my father. He spoke not of the body, or of eating. Yea we find,
that afterward he did eat part of the broyled fyshe, and also of the honey
comb: but we do not find that he ever drunk after, Durandus, in Rat. di.
off. Lib. 6. Cap. 79.

No body or Corpse ought to be buried in the Church, Burial.
or nigh unto the place, where the body and blood of the Lord is made, but the
bodies of holy fathers, which are called Patroni, that is to say, defenders,
which through their worthy and noble acts defend all the countreye: Again,
Bishops, and Abbottes, and worthy Priests, and lay men which be of most
high holiness. As for all other, they ought to be buried about the church,
as in the yard, or in the porch, or in ye voltes and such like places as are
nigh unto the Church. Durandus. in Ratio. di. off. Lib. 1.

When any Church is to be hallowed: The order of halowing churches.
this order must be observed. First all the people must depart out of the
Church, and the Deacon must remain there only, having all the doors shut
fast unto him. The Bishop with the Clergy shall stand without before the
Church door, and make holy water mingled with salt. In the mean season
within the church there must be set up.xii. candles brennyng before xii.
crosses, that are appointed upon the church walls. Afterward the bishop
accompanied with the Clergy and people, shall go thrice about the church
without, and the bishop having in his hand a staff with a bunche of Ysope on
the end, shall with the same cast holy water upon ye church walls: and at
every time the bishop shall come unto ye church door and strike ye threshold
thereof with his Crossierstaffe and say. Tollite portas Principes vestras, et
eleuami^i portae aeternales, et introibit Rex gloriae. That is, Lift up your
gates, O ye Princes, and be ye lift up O ye everlasting gates, and the King of
glory shall enter in. Then shall the Deacon or minister that is within, say:
Quis est iste Rex gloriae? That is: Who is this king of glory? To whom the
Bishop shall answer, and say: Dominus fortis et potens: Dominus potens in
praelio. That is: It is the Lord strong and mighty, eue^ ye Lord mighty in
battle. At ye third time the Deacon shall open the church door, and the
Bishop shall enter into the church accompanied with a few ministers, the
clergy and the people abiding still without. Entering into the church, the
Bishop shall say: Pax hui^ domui. That is: Peace be unto this house. And
afterward the Bishop with them yt are in the church shall say the Letanye.
These things done, there must be made in the pauemente of the church a cross
of ashes and sand, wherein ye whole Alphabete or Christ's cross shall be written
in Greek and Latin letters. After these things the Bishop must halow an other
water with salt, and ashes, and wine: and consecrate ye altar. Afterward the
twelve crosses yt are painted upon the church walls, the Bishop must annoint
them with chrisme, commonly called, Cream. These things once done, the
clergy and the people may freely come into the church, ring the bells for joy,
etc. Ibidem.

Holy water proprely even of her own virtue has power and strength to expel
and put out devils. The virtue of holy water.
And therefore it is said in the coniuration thereof: That it may be made a
coniured and be witched water to chase away all the power of thee nemye, yea
to pluck up that same enemy even by the very roots, etc. Ibidem.

The manner and order of consecrating or halowing altars, The order of halowing
altares.
is this. First the bishop must begin, Deus in adiutorium meum intend.
Secondly, he shall make holy water, Thyrdly at ye four corners of ye altar he
shall make four crosses with holy water. Fourthly, the Bishop shall go seven
times about the altar: and seven times he shall wash the table of the
altar, or altar stone with holy water, having ye holy water sprinckle made of
Ysope. The church also shall be sprinkled again with holy water: and
whatsoever holy water does afterward remain, shall be poured out beneath at
the altar. Fiftlye in the four corners of the Sepulcher, wherein ye Relics
are laid, the Bishop shall make four crosses with ye cream: and ye Relics
shall be laid up in a bag with three grains of Franckencense, and put
again in the Sepulcher. Then shall there be made in the mids of the
Sepulcher, a table with the sign of the cross. Sixthly, the stone, which is
called the table, shall be made mete, and laid upon the altar: and being so
made mete, the Bishop shall annoint it with oil in five places: and likewise
shall he afterward do with the Cream, as it is said of ye oil. The Bishop also
shall confyrme the altar in the forehead or forefronte with a cross of cream:
and shall burn franckensence upon the altar in five places. Afteral these
things be done, ye altar shall be covered with fair clothes: And the priest
may now lawfully sing mass upon it, when he will. Ibidem.

The Apostolic See, as Anacletus the Pope says, The popes power.
is the head and the hanggell ( Cardo) of all other Sees. For as the door is
governed by the hanggell: so are all churches governed and ruled by the
authority of that See. And therefore they are called Cardinals, because yt by
the^ the whole church is governed, sicut ostium per cardinem, as ye door by
the hanggel. The prelate of ye see is called Papa, yt is, father of fathers,
namely, the universal bishop: for he is the prince, lord and ruler of the
whole church universal. And he is called Apostolicus, because he occupies ye
room of the prince of ye Apostle. (Peter). He is also called Summus Pontifex
ye highest bishop, because he is ye head of al bishops, from who^ they, as
members from the head, descend: and al receive of his fullness, even so many as
he calls in partem solicitudinis, non in plenitudinem potestatis into part of
the careful travail, but not into the fullness of power. He is ye
Melchizedech, whose priesthood far excels al other. The pope is
Melchizedech.
Guili. Durand. In R at. di. off. Lib. 2.

In the administration of the Sacraments, some, spiritual sanctification is
given, through the blessing or consecration of the garments, of the water, and
such like. Ibidem.

Priests when they are ordered, take of ye bishops hand a chalice with wine in
it, and a paften with the host, or singing cake, yt by these instruments they
may know, yt they have received power to offer up unto God propiciatorye
sacrifices, even the body and blood of Christ. In consideration whereof, when
the bishop gives these things unto them, he says: Take power to offer
sacrifice unto God and to singmasse both for the quick and the dead in the
name of our Lord.

There is great difference between bishops and priests. For albeit there are
six things, which commonly pertain unto all priests, yt is to say, to
catechize or teach, or baptize, to preach, to make gods body, to losen and to
bind: yet belong there specially unto the bishop nine things: yt is to say, to
order clerks to bless virgins, to consecrate bishops to lay on hands, to
halowe churches, to put down them yt ar to be degraded, to celebrate sinodes,
to make crisme, to halowe vestmentes or vessels. There are other things also,
which appertain unto ye office of a bishop, as to co^fyrme children, to give
the solemn blessing before the Paxe, and such like. Ibidem.

When the priest pronounces these words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum. Hic
est sanguis meus. This is my body. This is blood: the bread and wine are
converted and turned into flesh and blood, with ye power of the word wherewith
ye word was made flesh, Joan, i, Psa, cxlviii* Gene, xix, Exodus vii, Joan, ii*
and dwelled among us: wherewith he spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and
they were made: wherewith he changed a woman into a pillar of salt, and turned a
rod into a serpent: wherewith he changed the fountains into blood, and turned
ye water into wine For if the word of Helias could bring down fire from
heaven: shall not the word of Christ the^ be able to change bread into flesh?
Uerely it is a greater thing of nothing to make yt is not, tha^ to change yt,
which already is, into an other thing. Yea it is a greater thing without al
comparison, yt God is made man, and yet continues still God, tha^ the bread is
so made flesh yt it cease to be bread. That was once done by incarnation:
but this is continually done by consecration. At ye pronou^cing therefore of
the words of ye bread is by the mighty power of god transsubstantiated and
changed into ye substance of flesh. The divine and material substance of this
sacrifice is ye word, which joined unto ye element, makes a sacrament, as ye
word united to flesh makes christ man. Miracles. This man for lack of
scripture to prove his popysh tra^substantiation, flees to carnal reasons and
fleshly similitudes, as al other papists do.
For it is to be noted, yt in the body of christ (he speaks of the sacrament)
xi. miracles are considered, of ye which no euidente reason can be rendered and
showed, although reasons made by similitudes may serve for this purpose. The
first is, ye bread and wine are turned into the substance into ye body and
blood of Christ: whereof we already showed certain reasons. An other reason also
serves for this purpose. For both corporal meat and drink is made flesh
and blood by the means of nature, It follows therefore much more stronglye,
yt the self nature, yt is to say, God is able immediately to make, ye bread
should be turned into his body, and ye wine into his blood. A wise reason and
a cupstantial.
The second miracle is, yt the bread is daily transsubstantiated into the body
of God, and yet there is no augmentation or increasing in God. Reason proves
this thing to be true. For all though I know any secret matter, which I publish
to many: although al they through my declaration know it: yet in me alone or in
my mind there is never the more augmentation for all this. The third miracle
is, yt the body of God is daily received and eaten, and yet is there made no
dimunicion or lesing thereof. The reason. If a thousand candles be lighted at my
candle, yet is there never the less light in my candle The widow of Sarepta
also did eat and yet was there never the less meal in her pot nor oil in
her pytcher. 4, Reg. iiii.
The fourth miracle is, yt the thing which is indivisible and can not be
divided, is notwithstanding divided and remains whole and perfect in every
part of ye sacrament. This is proved by reason. In a glass, wherein any thing
is represented and showed, although it be divided by parts, yet in every one of
the^ is ye same thing represented. The fifth miracle is, yt the body of God
taken and received of the wicked, is not defiled. The reason is this. For
neither is the sun shining upon fylthy places defiled, or made any thing yt
worse. The sixth miracle is, yt the body of Christ, which is the meat of life,
brings death to sinners. Reason proves this to be true. For those meats,
which are good and wholesome, as capons and good wine are hurtful to the^ yt
are sick and feeble in body. The seventh miracle is, yt the body of Christ
being received of the priest, or of any other, y^ mouth of the receauer being
shut, is taken up into heaven. Reason proves this For Christ came out of the
body of the virgin vncorrupt. He rose also out of the grave being shut. Again,
he came into the house, where ye Disciples were gathered, the doors being shut.
The eight miracle is, yt although the body of Christ be in comprehensible, and
cannot be measured, yet it is contained in so little an host. This may be
proved by this reason. Theapple of ye eye, which is very little, comprehends
a great thing. The ninthe miracle is, yt one and the self same whole body is
in diverse places, The ^biqu^^ty of christ's body.
and is received of diverse at one time. The reason. For the word of man also
once uttered and spoken according to the nature of the voice, is al whole
together in ye ears of diverse. Moreover he yt made the body and the place,
makes both to be in the one, as he wills. Again, the Moon and the Sun,
and the light are in diverse places, and are seen of diverse. The tenth
miracle is, yt the bread being transubsta^tiated and turned into the substance
of ye body of Christ, ye accidents of the bread do remain, The monstrous and
unreasonable doctrine of transubstantiation. Fabula sin^ capite,
yt is to say, the weight, ye color and the savor. To show a reason in this
behalf by any similitude we can not. The leuenth miracle is, yt under the
kind of bread both is, and is received the body and blood of Christ, yea whole
Christ. Likewise under the kind of wine is received both the body and blood of
Christ. The reason is this, Although at one dinner I eat both before I drink,
and after yet am I not counted to dine twice Durand in Rat.

If it be demanded, what it is yt the mouse eats when she knaweth and
byteth the sacrament: or what is consumed to ashes, when the sacrament is
burnt. Pope Innocent the third answers and says: even as the substance of
bread is miraculously turned and converted into the body of our Lord, An homely
shifte and a soul.
when it begins to be under ye sacrament: so likewise after a certain manner
miraculously it retourneth and comes again, when the same body cease to be
there not yt that substance of bread comes again, which was turned into the
flesh of Christ, but in the stead thereof an other thing miraculouslye is
made, although such accidents might be without a subject and so eaten.
Guilielmus Durandus. In. Rat. di. offi. Libro. 4.

Both the good and the evil eat the body of Christ: Corin. xii.
but the good unto salvation, the evil unto condemnation. For except the
evil also did eat the body of Christ, the Apostle would not have said: He yt
eats unworthily, eats his own damnation, because he makes no difference
of the Lords body. Ibidem.

But what becomes of the body of Christ, when it is received and eaten? It
may be answered: That if the corporal presence be sought, it must be
sought in heaven, where Christ is sitting on the right hand of God.
Notwithstanding for a time he did exhibit his corporal presence, yt he might
provoke and allure the Communicantes unto the spiritual presence. Therefore
when ye sacrament is holde^, tasted, and eaten: Christ is corporally present in
sight, in touching, in savor. And so long as ye corporal sense is affected,
the corporal presence is not taken away. But after y^ the corporal sense in
receiving fails: the corporal presence is no more to be sought, but ye
spiritual presence is to be retained. For when ye dispensation is ended,
Christ goes from ye mouth to the heart. For it is better that he goes forth
unto the mind, than that he should go down unto the bellye. For he is not
the meat of the flesh, but of the soul. He comes to be eaten, not to be
consumed: to be tasted, not to be incorporated. He is eaten with the mouth, but
he is not digested in the stomach: he refreshes the mind, but he goes not
out into the draught. Ibidem.

The host is lifted up of the priest at mass, Why ye host is lifted up above
the priests head Phil, ii, Rom, x,
that the people not coming before the consecration, but by this knowing that
it is done, may fall prostrate upon the ground and worship Christ, which is come
down upon the altar, according to this saying of ye Apostle: In ye name of
Jesus let every knee bow. etc. Again, that they should honor him with heart and
mouth, as the apostle says, with the heart it is believed unto righteousness,
but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Ibidem.

Although under the kind of bread, ye blood is received with the body and under
the kind of wine, the body is taken with the blood: Amo^strous kind of doctrine.
yet after ye mind of pope Innocent the third, neither the blood under the
kind of bread, nor the body under the kind of wine, is dronken, or eaten. For
as neither the blood is eaten, nor the body dronken: so is neither of the^
under the kind of bread dronke^, or under ye kind of wine eaten, although it
may seem a matter to be granted, yt the body in drinking, and the blood in
eating, is received. Ibidem

One and the same, Chebbiquity of christ^^ body.
both the^ and now, both here and there is sacrificed of all. He is whole in
heaven, he is whole on ye altar also. He both sits on the ryghts hand of
the father, and remains under the kind of the sacrament. Ibidem.

These consecrations are made with the sign of the cross. The sign of the
cross helps forward transubsta^tiatio^
For through the virtue of the cross and of the words, transsubstantiation of
the natures (of bread and wine) is made,

As water can not be consecrated without wine, so likewise ca^ not wine with
out water be transsubstantiated, and turned into ye substance of Christ's
blood. For out of Christ's side flowed both blood and water. Ibidem.

This is to be noted, What is to be done if gods blood be frosen in the chalice,
ye if the wine be frosen in the chalice, the priest must so long breath upon
it, til it be molten, and the Use disolued. If it can not be done so, let him
put fire unto it.

He yt has communicated if he may conveniently and without hurting of nature,
An h^e point in a low house. i. Corin. ii. Titus, i.
he ought to abstain from spitting. Notwithstanding after a convenient time he
may spit, so yt he spit there, where ye spittle may not be trode^ upon. For a
spiritual man judges al things, and he is judged of no man. And al things are
clean to them yt are clean.

Sacraments iustifye after the doctrine of the papists.
This is the difference between ye sacraments of the law and of the Gospel, yt
the sacraments of the law, signified only: but the sacraments of the Gospel do
both signifye and iustifye. Ibidem.

How the sacrament is to be eaten.
The sacrament may not be chawed as other meat is, but it must be torn with
the former teeth and made soft, with ye tongue discretly, moderatly and
softlye, yt no percell thereof clean to ye teeth, which paraduenture
afterward it might chance to be cast out by spitting or hemmyng. Ibidem.

It is to be noted, yt whosoever will receive the body of Christ, he must be
^asting from al corporal meats. For seeing yt the souls ar spiritual and
immortal, they ought first of all to receive the nourishments of everlasting
life. Ibidem.

The oblations of the Mass because of ye excellency of so great a sacrament,
The mass excels al praises done to god
which is made in it, is above all other praises, and it is a praise by it
self, neither is it comprehended under the number of other prayers. Durand. In.
Rat. di off. Lib. 5.

That blessed Uirgine is the very Lodestarre. Mary ledeth to heaven.
For if we, which are in this world, will praise her worthily, she will led us
unto the heaven of salvation. The blessed Uirgin also is to be praised and
prayed, Prayer unto Marye the Uirgin
yt she will make us that are cold, warm in charity through the Son
Christ whom she brought forth.

In the church nothing is to be song or red, but yt is canonised, autorized,
approved, and expressly set forth, or at ye least suffered of the holy
Church of Rome.

So long as we live in this world, we are set in a slipperye place, Suffrages
of saints.
and are impugned of devils. Therefore have we always need of the Suffrages,
helps, intercessions and meditations of Saints.

To eat before the hour of eating and before mass be ended and done in
Fasting.
appointed and necessary fastes: the holy Canons do affirm yt it is deadly
sin. Rat. di off. Lib. 6.

Cross.
The cross, which is made on our forehead, is our banner, wherewith we
overcome the devil. For there is none other sign made, but the cross, that
in this sign alone, ye devil knowing yt he is overcome, may shake for fear
and flee.

Although a simple priest may minister unctions or annoylinges, Confirmation or
smering of the infantes forehead,
yet this annoynting of the children in the forehead, when they be bishopped,
none may give, but the hie priest, yt is to say, the Bishop* For it is read
of the Apostles alone, whose vicares the bishops are, yt they by the imposition
of hands gave the holy ghost.

The great virtue of confirmation.
In the confyrmation or bishopping of children, the fullness of the mysterye of
the whole Christen religion is made perfect. In baptism remission of sins is
given by the holy ghost. But here ye holy ghost is called upon to come, yt he
may vouchesafe to come down and inhabit ye house, which he has sanctified.
And the holy ghost is poured upon ye child at ye invocation of ye bishop.
Therefore says Pope Urban. By the imposition or laying on of the bishops
hand, the holy ghost is given, whereby a faithful heart is made wide and open
to receive wisdom and constancye, yt a man may be a full and a perfect
Christian.

The bishop in bishopping children does two things. First he annoynteth the
young child in ye forehead. Secondly, he strikes him on the face. The
annoynting signifies the increase of grace, Note.
yt he should be bold to take those things in hand, which pertayne unto the
faith. He strikes him on the face, to put him in remembrance y^ he should not
from henceforth be ashamed or afraid to confess the name of Christ. As
though the Bishop should say to ye person confyrmed: Be so strong, valiant,
courageous and stout in the faith of Christ, and in the confession of ye same,
yt whosoever shall thus strike thee, or any otherwise seek to displease or hurt
thee, because thou confessest the faith of Christ, thou notwithstanding be not
abashed at all these things. For they y^ are stricken, are wont to be abashed.
Rat. di. off. Lib. 6.

Among all the saints, the glorious Mother of God, Mary our intercessour
Mary ye perpetual Uirgin is the chief and principal. We ought at al times to
have her in remembrance, which without ceasing makes intercession for us
sinners unto her Son. Durand. in Rat. di, off. Lib. 7.

There be.iii. degrees of the souls departed: some are Valde bonae,
maruelously good. Three degrees of souls.
Some ar Valde malae, maruelously evil. Some are Mediocriter bonae, meanly
good. Now note yt the suffrages, which are made in the churches for the dead,
yt are maruelously good, ar thanks geuings: Souls maruelouslye good.
For those ^oules yt are perfectlye good when they depart from their bodies,
fly streyghtwaies unto heaven, neither have they any need of our help. For
the souls yt are maruelouslye evil there are also done certain consolations
after a sort. Souls maruelously evil,
For our helps do not profit them: because their souls go streyghtwayes down
unto hell. For the souls yt ar meanly good, which are in purgatory, there are
expiatorye sacrifices, Souls meanly evil.
wherewith they may be releued and helped. For the souls yt are meanly evil,
which are in hell, there are also propitiations or mitigations of their
pains. For after the mind of Austen, whom our prayers and good deeds profyt,
either they profytte them yt they may have full remission of their sins, or
else yt their damnation may be the more tolerable. Ibidem.

The dead, Souls in purgatory know what is done for the^ in this world.
which are in purgatory, know the suffrages that are done for them.iiii.
manner of ways. First, by divine revelations: that is to say, when God does
show it unto them. Secondly, by the manifestation or showing of the good
Aungells. For the Aungells, which are here always with us, and consider all our
acts and deeds may as a man would say in a trise go down unto them, and tell
them out of hand. Thirdly by ye declaration of the souls, which depart hence.
Fourthly, by experience, as when they seal yt they are delivered from their
pains. Moreover we must know, that the dead, which are maruelously evil,
know not, what is done of them yt live, but even so much as is permitted and
suffered unto them for to know. Likewise they that are meanly good, remaining
yet in the fire of purgatory, which have not yet the fruition and sight of
God, know not, but even so much as is permitted unto them to know by any of
the aforesaid ways But the dead, that are maruelouslye good, Souls in heaven
know what is done here
which already enjoy the sight of Gods Majesty, know cetaynely what is here
done, according to this saying of S. Gregory. Quid est quod nesciant, qui
videntem omnia vident* That is to say. What is it yt they know not, which set
him that sees al things. Ibidem.

Give the glory to God alone.

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate beneath saint
Martins. September. 30.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per septennium.


