MARIE MAGDALENS LAMENTATIONS FOR THE LOSS OF HER MASTER JESUS.

Disce mori mundo vivere disce Deo. LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for Edward
White, and are to be sold at his shop, dwelling at the little North door of
Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1601.

Yea soul confounding sin so far has crept,
Repentant sighs are reckoned for toies,
And Mary's tears contemned, long have slept,
As jems unpriz'd, which corrupt age destroies:
Save that her Lord, because they still should last,
In surest caske has them invessel'd fast.
For wretched souls let loose to liberty,
So wanton like are weaned to each wrong,
So licensed to work impiety,
And free to fleshly wills have lived so long:
That those fresh springs, whence penitent tears should flow,
Presumption has so stopped, that none will know.
And senseless hearts, obdurat to all good,
Have so perverted their perfixed end,
That now (O grief) their sighs and dearest blood,
To feed fond fancy they do vainly spend:
But for their sins one tear for to let fall,
They have (alas) nor eye nor heart at all.
Ah could they see what sin from sense has shut,
How sweet it were to summon deeds misdone,
To have their lives in equal balance put,
To weigh each work ere that the judge do come:
Ah then their tears would trickle like the rain,
And their eye-flouds would help to fill the maine.
They would with Marie send forth bitter cries,
To get the ioies of their soule-saving love,
They would gush forth fresh fountains from their eyes,
To win his favor, and his mercy prove:
Eyes, heart, and tongue, should pour, breath out, and send,
Tears, sighs, and plaints, until their love they find.
No idle hours ill spent in fond delight,
No tears distilled for momentarie losses,
No sighs for missing absent lovers sight,
No care contrived of common worldly crosses,
Should then be used; but all consumed in this,
To beg amendment and bewail their miss.
Yea all too little to an humble soul
(That inly sees her ill misgovern'd life)
Would it appear, to spend whole years in dole,
Yea many ages to declare her strife
Would pass as minutes, wishing time would stand,
While she with fear her endless faults had scand.
But far from this lives sinners (too secure)
Who giving bridle to their selfe-desires,
Cannot alas one scanted hour endure
In sacred service, but their mind aspires
In following pleasures height, whose froward will
In doing good, does make them careless still.
Which seen with pity on our graceless minds,
This blessed sinner, whose so precious tears,
Once bathed his feet, that heaven and earth in binds,
And made a towell of her trayling hairs,
To wipe the drops, which for her sins were shed,
Now deignes to tell how our souls should be fed.
And Marie shows to maids and matrones both,
How they should weep and deck their rose-like cheeks
With showers of grief, whereto hard hearts are loath,
And who it is her matchless mourning seeks:
And when we ought to send our reeking sighs,
To thick the passage of the purest lights.
And Marie shows us when we ought to beat
Our brazen breasts, and let our robes be rent,
How prostrating, to creep unto the seat
Of that sweet lamb, whose blood for us was spent:
And that we should give way unto our woes,
When the excess no fault or error shows.
If you will deigne with favor to peruse
Mary's memorial of her sad lament,
Exciting Collin in his graver Muse,
To tell the manner of her hearts repent:
My gain is great, my guerdon granted is,
Let Mary's plaints plead pardon for amiss.
Marie Magdalens first Lamentation
At the Tomb of Jesus.
WHat climat will affourd a mournful mate,
All wo-begon, that vollies out her groans,
Whose griefs do equallize my sad-grown state,
Whose heart poures forth a sea of helpelesse mones?
If to my care, companion such there be,
I Will help her mourn, if she will mourn with me.
But sure, no such associat there is,
My Muse may tell a grief without compare,
A black rehearse of metamorphos'd blis,
And sad memorial of untimely care,
Lugubre Carmen fitteth best my use,
In vvaining state best fits a wailing Muse.
The deepest passion of true burning love
That ever any love-sicke heart possessed,
(Drowned in distress) I silly woman prove,
Whose ardent zeal is nurse of mine unrest,
But even to death (O hapless death) alone
I ru'd his death when other friends were gone.
I did behold my loves too cruel death,
With these sad eyes, made red with brinish tears:
My soul did sorrow for his loss of breath,
By whose sweet life, my life was free from fears.
Oh had I died, when he died on the cross,
I needed no complaint to vvaile my loss.
But that (too sweet a favor) was deny'de,
I might not I, consort my lover dying,
My course of life does sorrow still betyde,
Which moves my soul to such a ceaselesse crying:
Oh hapless soul, so clogged with care and grief,
For loss of him that was thy comfort chief.
My Lord is dead, to whom my soul did live,
He died for me, I wretch am left alive,
Now to the dead I lasting praise must give,
Since light is lost, which did my life revive,
And all in darkness I desire to dwell,
In deaths dread shade my saddest griefs to tell.
My Jesus Tomb my mansion is become,
My vvearie soul has there made choice to inn,
Upon his coarse my comfort shall consume,
And ioies shall end where ioies did first begin.
Oh eyes gush forth your fast distilling force
Of Ocean tears, upon his Tomb and corse.
Oh life-containing Tomb of my dead Lord,
From thee no chance shall hale me hence away,
I Will linger here while death does life affourd,
And being dead, my twining arms shall stay,
And cleave unto thee; nor alive or dead
Will I be drawn from where my Lord is laid.
Thou art the Altar of all mercy meek,
The Temple of all truth, the Grave of death,
The Sanctuary which lost souls do seek,
The Cradle of eternal living breath.
Oh sweetest heaven of my ecclipsed Son,
Receive this silly star, whose light is done.
Oh Whale, that my dear Jonas swallowed have,
Come swallow me (more meet to be thy prey)
It Was I, not he, that should in right have past
This bloody tempest; I was cause I say,
Unequal doomer, what have thou misdone,
To rob the earth of her celestial Son.
Oh Cesterne of my Ios^ph innocent,
Let thy dry bottom take me prisoner,
Since I, not he (Oh wretch most impudent)
Gave cause that so enraged my brethren were.
What pitch clouds darken our translucent way,
And on what shore does Truths sweet preacher stay?
Aye me accursed, why did I not before
Think upon this, which now I ask too late?
Why did I leave him when I had him sure?
To rue his loss, and moan my ruthlesse state.
Oh had I vvatched, as I vvaile him now,
None could have taken him without me too.
But being too precise to keep the Law,
The laws sweet maker I have thereby lost,
And bearing to his ceremonies too much awe,
I miss his sweetest self, of far more cost,
Since rather with the Truth I should have been,
Than vvorking that, which but a Tipe was seen.
The Sabbath day so strickt solemnized,
The standing by his Coarse had not profaned;
By which, prophanest things are sanctified,
And that made pure, which erst was foulely stained;
Whose touch does not defile the thing that is clean,
But most defiled, makes fair again.
But when I should have staid, I went away,
And when it was too late, I came again,
In time of help (Ah then) my help did stay,
Now I repent my folly (but in vain.)
My careless heed has brought a heap of care,
And careful I, must ceaselesse tears prepare.
Ah let my heart into sad sighs dissolve,
Let eyes consume their floods in brinish tears,
Let soul (cares captive) in dislikes resolve,
To languish still (sunk with despair and fears.)
Let all I have endure deserved pain,
That penance due, sins losses may regaine.
But ah my sweetest Jesus (my dear heart)
Thou art not now, where thou were but of late;
And yet, alas, I know not where thou art,
(Oh vvretched case, oh lamentable state:)
Such hapless state, unhappie I live in,
To better it, I cannot yet begin.
Alas my joy, my hope, my chief desire,
How have thou left me vvavering thus in doubt?
In mazed moodinesse my thoughts to tire,
Wandering in vvoe, and cannot find way out.
If I stay here, I cannot find thee so,
To seek elsewhere, I know not where to go.
To leave the Tomb, is for to gain unrest,
To stand still helpelesse, is a curelesse pain,
So all my comfort in this plot does rest,
Helpelesse to stay, or going, hope in vain.
And to this choice poor soul I am left free,
Which is to say, with what death I will die.
And yet (even this) too happy a choice would be
For me, so vile, so base, unhappie wretch:
For if to choose my death it lay in me,
How soon should I that execution catch?
How vvilling would I be to stop lives breath,
If I might point the manner of my death?
I would be nailed to the selfsame cross,
With those same nails, and in the selfsame place,
Where bloody Jews did butcher up my loss:
His spear should vvound my heart, his thorns my face,
His whips my body, I would taste all smart,
To tread his steps in an embrued heart.
But oh ambitious thoughts, gaze not so hie,
Upon so sweet divine felicity,
Think not with such a glorious death to die,
Whose life is privy to such infamy:
Death I deserved, not one, but many a death,
But not so sweet a mean to stop my breath.
So sweet a death seasoned with such deep joy,
The instruments whereof, dead corpse would raise,
And most impurest souls from sin destroy,
And make it pure, to yield thee pure due praise:
A scourge too much (ah where alas) too small
For my offenses to be beat vvithall.
And therefore am I left, more deaths to taste
Than I live hours, and far more vvoes to shun
Than I have thoughts for my lost joy to vvast,
Which are in number more then motes in Sun.
Unhappy me, whose vveake estate must bear
The violence of such confused care.
But since I cannot as he died, die,
Nor yet can live where he now lives dead,
To end my dying life, I here will lie,
Fast by his grave, and lean my vvearie head
Upon his tomb, on whose most sweet repose
I Will leave to live, and death my eyes shall close.
Better it is after his bodies loss,
(His sacred body which all creatures ioy'de)
To keep his sepulcher from farther cross,
Than loosing one, to let both be destroy'de.
Though I have lost the Saint of clearest shine,
I will at least have care to keep the shrine.
And to this shrine I Will sacrifice my heart,
Though it be spoiled of the sovereign host,
It shall the altar be and sacred part,
Where I my tears will offer with the most,
My tears destilled from my hearts deep pain,
Which going out, my sighs shall blow again.
Here in this place (oh happy place) I Will lead,
Yea, lead and end my woeful loathed life,
That at the least my cold grave may be made
Near to this tomb, where I have told my grief.
Near this stone-couch, my eyes their light shall lose,
Which my Lord made the place of sweet repose.
It may be so, this Sindon lying here,
Thus empty left and serving to no use,
This tomb being open without any there,
May pierce some piteous heart for to peruse
My naked bones, whose rights for to prefer,
This shroud may wrap, and this sweet tomb interre.
But oh too fortunat a lot to crave,
For her that is a wretch so unfortunate,
No, no, I seek not such a bliss to have,
Alas, I dare not beg so good estate:
But yet if such a sin may pass unblam'd,
I would forgive by whom it first was framed.
And if to vvish, no more presumption were
In me alive, than to permit it dead,
If I knew him that first should pass me here,
My tears should vvoo to have my corpse so laid,
And with my prayers I that man would hire,
To bless me with this bliss which I desire.
And though I dare not vvish that any do it,
Yet this without offense to all I say,
This Sindon has my love so ty'de unto it,
Above all clothes I love to it will pay.
And this same Tomb my heart more dear does deem,
Than any Princes Hearse of most esteem.
Yea, and I think that coarse is favored much,
That shall my Lord in this same Tomb succeed:
And for my part (as my resolve is such)
Upon this plot to meet Deaths fatal deed;
So do I vvish, that in the readiest grave,
My breathless bones the right of burial have.
But this is all, and I dare say no more,
My body I will leave to what befalls,
And in this paradise all joy will store
For my poor soul, which flesh and blood inthrals,
Which from this brittle case shall pass even than,
Into the glorious Tomb of God and Man.
Marie Magdalens second Lamentation
For the loss of the body, which she came to anoint.
But stay my Muse, I fear my masters love
(The only portion that my fortune left me)
Would languish in my breast, and chillish prove,
Since warmth to cherish it, was quite bereft me.
His words, his presence gone, which fed my flame,
And not the ashes left to rake the same.
My spice and ointments shall be then prepared,
To pay last tribute of external duty,
Though others have thereto devoutly cared,
And brought the best in vvorth, in work, in beauty:
Yet such desire my duty does inherit,
That I must yield my love my latest merit.
My love each quantity too little deemed,
Unless that mine were added thereunto,
Best quantity too mean and not esteemed,
Except with mine it somewhat have to do:
No diligence enough for to apply,
Unless my service be employed by.
Nor do I thus sharp censure others deeds,
But 'cause love makes me covetous of doing,
Though Joseph's work no reprehension needs,
Though to my wish his baulme he was bestowing:
Yet all he did cannot my love suffice,
But I must actor be to please mine eyes.
Such is the force of true affecting love,
To be as eagre in effects t'appeare,
As it is zealous, fervently to move
Affections firm, to what it holds dear
This love devout sets my poor heart on fire,
To show some deed of my most deep desire.
And to embaulme his breathless corpse I came,
As once before I did anoint his feet,
And to preserve the relics of the same,
The only remnant that my bliss did meet:
To weep afresh for him in deapth of dole,
That lately wept to him for mine own soul.
But lo alas, I find the grave vvide open,
The body gone, the empty Sindon left,
The hollow Tomb I every where do grope,
To be assured of what I am sure bereft,
The labor of embaulming is prevented,
But cause of endless weeping is augmented.
He vvanting is unto my obsequies,
That was not vvanting to my ceaselesse tears,
I find a cause to move my miseries,
To ease my vvoe, no wished for joy appears.
Thus though I miss, whom to anoint I meant,
Yet have I found a matter to lament.
I having settled all my sole desires
On Christ my love, who all my love possessed,
In whose rare goodness, my affection fires,
Whom to enjoy, I other ioies suppressed,
Whose peerless vvorth unmatcht of all that live,
Being had (all joy) and lost (all sorrows) give.
The life of lives thus murdering in his death,
Does leave behind him, lasting to endure,
A general death to each thing having breath,
And his decease our nature has made pure:
Yet am poor I of ornament bereft,
And all the world without perfection left.
What marvel then if my hearts hot desire,
And vehement love to such a lovely Lord,
To see life's vvracke, with scalding sighs aspire,
And for his bodies loss such vvoe afford,
And feel like taste of sorrow in his miss,
As in his presence I enioied bliss.
And though my tears, destil'd from moistened eyes,
Are rather oil than water to my flame,
More apt to nourish sorrow in such wise,
Than to deminish or abate the same;
Yet silly soul I plunged in deapth of pain,
Do yield my self a captive to complain.
Most true it is that Peter came and John,
With me unto the Tomb to try report,
They came in have, and hastily were gone,
They (having searched) dare make no more resort,
And what gained I, two witness of my loss,
Dismaiers of my hope, cause of more cross.
Love made them come, but love was quickly quail'd,
With such a fear as called them soon away,
I (poor I) hoping, in despair assailed,
Without all fear persevering still to stay,
Because I thought, no cause of fear was left,
Since whom I feared, was from my sight bereft.
For I (poor soul) have lost my master dear,
To whom my thoughts devoutly were combined,
The total of my love my cheifest cheer,
The height of hope in whom my glory shined,
My final fear, and therefore him excepted,
No other hope, nor love, nor loss respected.
Worse fear behind, was death, which I desired
And feared not, (my souls life being gone)
Without which I no other life required,
And in which death had been delight alone:
And thus (ah thus) I live a dying life,
Yet neither death nor life can end my strife.
Yet now me thinks it is better die than live,
For happily dying, I my love may find,
Whom while I live, no hope at all can give,
And he not had, to live I have no mind:
For nothing in my self, but Christ I loved,
And nothing ioies, my Jesus so removed.
If any thing alive to keep me, strived,
It is his image, cause it should not die
With me, whose likeness love in me contrived,
And treasured up in sweetest memory:
From which my love by no way can depart,
Unless I rip the center of my heart.
Which had been done, but that I feared to burst
The worthless Trunck which my dear Lord enclosed
In which the relics of lost joy was trust,
And all the remnant of my life imposed:
Else grief had changed my heart to bleeding tears,
And fatal end had past from pittious ears.
Yet pittious I, in so unperfit sort
Do seem to draw my undesired breath,
That true I prove this often-heard report,
Love is more strong than life-destroying death:
For what more could pale death in me have done,
Than in my life, performed plain is shown.
My wits destraught, and all my sense amazed,
My thoughts let loose and fled I know not where,
Of understanding robbed, I stand agaz'd,
Not able to conceit what I do hear:
That in the end, finding I did not know,
And seeing, could not well discern the show.
I am not where I am, but with my love,
And where he is, poor soul I cannot tell,
Yet from his sight nothing my heart can move,
I more in him than in my self do dwell:
And missing whom I look for, with sad seeking,
Poor vvo-worn woman, at the Tomb stay weeping.
Marie Magdalens third Lamentation
In finding the Angels, and missing whom she sought.
But hope-beguiling fortune, now to ch^ere
My long-sad spirits with a shade of joy,
With Angels presents does present me here,
Gra^ting a mome^ts mirth to increase annoy.
For looking him, though for him I find twain,
To think on him, redoubleth still my pain.
Yet for a time I will revive my soul,
With this good hope, which may my hopes exceed,
Comfort, sweet comfort shall my cares control,
Relief may hatch, where grief did lately breed:
I seek for one, and now have found out twain,
A body dead, yet two alive again.
My woeful weeping, all was for a Man,
And now my tears have Angels bright obtained:
I will suppress my sigh-swolne sadness than,
And glad my heart with this good fortune gained:
These Heaven attendants to a parle envite me,
I Will hear what they will say, it may delight me.
For I assure my self, if that the corse
By fraud or malice had removed bin,
The linen had not found so much remorse,
But had been carried too away with him:
Nor could the Angels look so chearefully,
But of some happier chance to vvarrant me.
And for to free me from all fears (even now)
They thus encounter, these their speeches were,
And thus they spoke, Woman why vveepest thou?
As if they bad me weeping to forbear:
For ill it fits a mortal eye should weep,
Where heavenly Angels such reioicing keep.
Erewhile they said, Thou camst with manly courage,
Arming thy feet, through greatest thorns to run,
Thy body to endure all tyrants rage,
Thy soul no violent tortures for to shun:
And art thou now so much a woman made,
Thou can not bid thine eyes from tears be staide.
If that thou had a true Disciples name,
So many certain proofs would thee persuade,
But incredulity so blots the same,
Thou of that title art unvvorthie made:
And therefore woman (too much woman now)
Tell us (O woman) wherefore vveepest thou.
If there were any coarse here lying by,
We then would think for it thou shedst thy tears,
That sorrow for the dead inforst thee cry:
But now this place, a place of joy appears,
Thou findst no dead, but living to be here,
Oh then why weepest thou with mournful cheer?
What, is our presence so discomfortable,
That seeing us, thou art inforst to weep,
Think thou if tears were so availeable,
That we our selves from flowing streams could keep
Or is thy kindness in this course extended,
That we with tears should thus be entertained.
If they be tears of love to show good will,
As love is known, so let them be suppressed;
If tears of wrath, denouncing anger still,
To shed them here, thou should not have addressed
Here where all anger lately buried was,
But none deserved, ah none deserved alas.
If they be tears of sorrow, dead men's duties,
(The dead revived) they are spent in vain;
If tears of joy, destilled from the booties
Of happy fortune (flowers of joyful gain)
It better were that fewer had been spent,
And fitter tokens might express content.
And Angels semblance visible, presents
The will invisible of his dread Lord,
Whose shapes are shaddowed after the intents
And drift of him, that rules him by his word:
They brandish swords when God begins to frown,
They sheath in scabbards when his wrath is down.
When he would fight, they armed come to field,
When he would terrify, their form afright,
When he would comfort, they their countenance yield
To smiling looks, and signs of sweet delight:
Mirth in their eyes, and mildness in their words,
All favor, grace, and comeliness affourds.
Why weepest thou Marie then when we rejoice,
Think not our nature can degenerat
Or fail in duty (which we hold so choice)
Ours is no changing or sin-working state:
Do thou more love, or more his secrets know,
Than we that at his Throne our service show.
Oh deem not Marie, deem not then amiss
Against so plain apparent evidence,
At our request forbear, and leave of this,
Leave weeping Marie, and with tears dispense:
Exchange thy sorrow for our offered joy,
Accept sweet comfort, and forsake annoy.
No, no, you Saints of glory ever shining,
Persuade not me to harbor joyful glee,
But think to whom my sorrow is enclining,
And bear with my poor love-bound misery:
Alas I weep for this one only loss,
For whom all joy does but infer new cross.
For while he lived, I made my Paradise
In every place, where I his presence found,
A special bliss was every exercise,
Wherein I showed my service to him bound:
Each season wherein I inioyd my king,
Did seem to me a never dying Spring.
Marie Magdalens fourth Lamentation.
Marie bewailes the loss of that part which Christ promised her when he said,
Marie has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from her.
IT comforts me to send forth dryrie plaints,
To fill the air with my uncessant cries,
To volley forth a sea of sad laments,
With liquid tears to moisten still mine eyes:
Yet neither plaints, nor cries, laments, nor tears,
Can serve, can ease, can salve, can show my fears.
For all inioin'd to do their best avail,
To help the mourn of my greefe-burthened soul,
Persuade me still it is my best to vvaile,
And spend the day in pittie-pleading dole:
Since whom I chose, the comfort of my heart,
Is now bereft (oh care-increasing smart.)
That I did choose the best and precious part,
It is no doubt, since Christ I only chose,
My Lord, the sovereign of my zealous heart,
Whom to possess, I wish my life to lose:
But how I have it now, I cannot say,
Since he that was that part, is taken away.
Ah could I still have kept him with me here,
I would not thus have lost him from my sight,
No, I would not have parted from my dear,
If to my will I had obtained might:
And might I now with tears his presence buy,
Rather than lose it, I all chance would try.
Since then I nothing seek, but what I chose,
And loss of choice is all my combats cause,
Either vouchsafe this part I do not lose,
Or I see not how to aver this clause:
Or how (poor wretch) I now may truly say,
I chose best part, which is not taken away.
But happily, his heavenly meaning was,
That it should not be taken from my heart,
Though from mine eyes thou suffered it to pass,
Thy inward presence should supply this part:
And yet I think if thou within me were,
I should thee feel (and felt) not seek thee here.
Thou art too hot a fire to heat my breast,
And not to burn me with thy scorching flame;
Thy glorious light would not leave me to rest
In this blind darkness, if I had the same:
For if thy glory in me duly shined,
It would rejoice and cheer my dying mind.
No, no, if that I had the Virgins boy,
My innocent heart (which never yet has known
To counterfeit an outside of hid joy)
Could not complain and make such greevous moan:
Nor should my thoughts feed on a dead ma^s grave,
If they at home so sweet a feast might have.
My love would not retain a thought to spare,
Nor have an idle minute for to spend,
In any other action for to care,
But in the sweet amplecting of my friend:
Ah nothing could withdraw my mind from this,
To abridge least part in me from such a bliss.
My starving thirst for his lost sight is such,
The sea of my still flowing ioies again
So able is to let me drink as much
As may suffice to fill my longing pain:
That though each part, whole tides of joy should drink,
Yet all too few my greedy drought would think.
In true loves hearts each part is made an eye,
And every thought prefixed for a look,
Then I so sweet an object soon would spy,
That among so many eyes should darkness brook:
So clear a shine, so bright, so clear a light,
Could not be hidden from a lovers sight.
Yea doubtless had the Lord in me a seat,
I would not envy at the fortunes sweet
Of mightiest prince (or empress never so great)
Yea I would more (if so he thought me meet)
Rejoice in earth, to be his Tomb or shrine,
Than be in heaven, a Throne or Saints fair shine.
But peradventure now it is with my mind,
As erst it was with his Apostles eyes,
Who on the sea thought they a ghost did find,
When there he walked in miraculous wise:
And I knowing more his bodies shape than might,
Take him but for a fancy in hearts sight.
But oh (s^d soul) it seems too strange that he,
He whom I seek, and he for whom I weep,
Should to my plainings thus estranged be,
And leave me to these fits which sorrovv keep:
If that in me a cause he did not see,
For which he will not yet be seen of me.
For hence it comes that vvater-vvasted eyes,
Command a fresh incessant showers of tears,
And drive my breast, which under burden cries,
Unto a nevv-made storm of sighs and fears:
And last my soul (oh soul with vvoe oppressed)
Is made a prisoner to my own unrest.
My heart shall never cease to tire my tongue,
My tongue shall never rest to tell my smart,
My smart shall cause me still to vvaile my vvrong,
My vvrong (bereaving me of my best part:)
So heart, so tongue, so smart, shall all accord,
To sigh, tell, show, my greefes for my dead Lord.
I silly soul, since I my mirth have lost,
For my part will make much of hearty sorrow,
And since my joy with such deep vvoe is crossed,
In bitter tears all comfort I will borrow:
Which I presume I lawfully may sheed,
Fetching my vvarrant from his latest deed.
Alas, what need had my sweet Lord to weep
Upon the cross, but for our learnings sake;
Which cannot sure be ill for me to keep,
That he thought good to give, it is good to take:
My weeping cannot prejudice my bliss,
A world of tears cannot bewail my miss
I still will dravv to my distressed mind
All sad conceits, all heavy pensive musing,
My heart to daily languor I will bind,
Where it may pin^ in withered ca^e perusing:
Taking no comfort for my vvoes redress,
But in consenting to be comfortless.
Oh would to God I were as privy made
Unto his blessed bodies sweet remove,
To know where that pure vessel now is laid,
As he is vvitting of my faithful love:
Oh thou my Lord and owner of my soul,
That knows my heart, and can conceive my dole.
If skies bright Sun to show his beams did shame,
When light of lights was darkened with disgrace,
If heavens their beauty did with louring stain,
Suting their colors to their makers case,
If Natures frame did (melting) shake to see
Natures fair Author used unnaturally:
Why should not I, whose over-burthening smart
Has equal cause to vvaile his heavy case,
Help in this ^^d consort to bear a part?
Especially since in this little space,
His bodies loss has mourners number lessened,
And yet the cause of weeping is increased:
The Apostles all are fled, his friends afraid,
And I alone to weep for all am staid.
Marie Magdalens fifth Lamentation.
Mary's perseverance at the Tomb, and the apring of Christ in the likeness of
a Gardener.
OH my dear Lord, thy grief the greatest was
That evv^r was in man or manly heart,
And my grief is as great a grief alas
As ever came to woman for her part:
For out of thine my love has carved me,
A part not small, and yet too small for thee.
Thy loss my torment has redoubled,
And all sad souls pay me what they did borrow,
I bear the grief, which the^ too much has troubled,
Yea I am made Vicegerent of all sorrow:
Sorrow, ah sorrow thou O Tomb with me,
And thaw to tears you stones that hardest be.
The time is come (now is the very time)
That leave it had and license for to cry,
To tell the Pharisees their sinful crime,
Now for the Lord, the breach of silence try:
Who said, if his disciples held their peace,
The very stones would cry for sins increace.
Since then their lips be locked up with fear,
And sadness makes them mute, and not a word,
Oh cry you stones, and no exclaimes forbear,
Cry out against the murderers of my Lord:
The robbers of his sacred coarse bewray,
Bring them to light that stole my Lord away.
For sure it was some Pharisees fell spite
Or bloody Scribe (not sated with the pain
His body felt) but blood their hearts envite
To practice some worse cruelty again:
And now to glut their brutish mind vvithall,
Have stolen his coarse to use unnatural.
Oh rocks and stones, if ever you must cry,
Now is high time to pour your loud exclaimes,
Now let your clamours to the vvelkin fly,
Since light is darkened, dead the flame of flames,
The worlds great Monarch foulely massacred,
The life of lives outrageously misused.
Does not his tongue (whose truth infallible is)
Whose word omnipotent rules sea and vvind,
Whom creatures (most insensible) do kiss
With awed obedience, which his power does bind:
Promise the whole world shall defend the just,
Against those senseless souls, which self power trust.
And who more just than he, of Justice king?
Who than his barbarous murderers, senseless more?
Whose innocent blood could not a staunching bring
Unto their greedy thirst, slaughtered before;
Unless they to this impious act proceed
To work (his body dead) some hellish deed.
Why do not then all creatures them apply
To be revenged in a cause so just,
Upon the Jews uncivile tyranny,
Bereft of sense and blinded in mistrust,
Their hearts made inhumane, of reason barrain,
Void of good feeling both to God and Man?
But sure it cannot be in humane might
To steal the body of my Lord away,
No bloody thief, nor any mortal vvight
Had sufferance to bear so wicked sway:
It can not be that any sinful soul
Would undertake a deed of such deep dole.
No, no, he was no booty for a ^heefe,
Nor for a cruel Pharisee a pray,
Nor were the Angels slack to attend him chief,
As my suspicion does presume to say:
If this thing cannot change my mind from fear,
Yet looking on the clothes, my doubts may clear.
Would any thief have so religious been,
To steal the body, and the clothes not take?
Would any thief so venterous have been seen,
To stay, so many fear delays to make,
As to unshroud the coarse, order the sheets,
And fold the napkins with such seemly pleets?
I know that Mirrhe makes linen cleave as fast
As pitch or glue, well tempered or made;
And could a theefes stolen leisure so long last,
As to dissolve the Mirrhe, and ba^e the dead,
Break up the seals, open the Tomb and all?
Where was the vvatch when these things did befall?
If all this yet cannot persuade my mind,
Yet might my own experience make me see,
When at the cross they stripped him, unkind,
I saw his garment would not parted be
From goa^ie back, but tare his tender skin,
Much more if it with Mirrhe had nointed bin.
I Will look into the sheet, if there remain
Any one parcel of his mangled flesh,
Or any hair plucked from his heads soft vain,
If none, that shall my vvearie vvoe refresh:
I Will think a better chance betides my love,
Than my misdeeming fear will let me prove.
A guilty conscience doubts want of time,
And leaud attempts are still dispatched in have,
Offenders doubt least light make known their crime,
And in nights sable weed commit their vvast:
With dread and horror acting fearfully,
And cannot mark when things well ordered be.
But to unvvrap a body mangled so,
Out of Mirrhe clothes, and not the flesh to tear,
Leaving them thus so cleanely vvip'd in show,
It is a thing most mavelous to hear,
And most impossible for man to do,
Unless they had light, help, and time thereto.
But oh the great effects of rarest love,
If love a languor be, how then live I?
If life, how do I then such dead fits prove?
If it bereaveth sense, how did I see
The Angels then? if it revive the same,
Why did I not know Jesus when he came?
And do I in such zeal thus seek for one,
Whom when I have found out, I do not know,
Or if I know him that of late was gone,
Now having him, why do I seek him so?
Behold my Christ is come, he whom I sought,
Does talk with me, and I my self know naught.
Why do I not then wipe my dazzled eyes?
Ah has my Lord in this world lived so long,
Di'de with such pain, shed shours of tears with cries,
Labored so much, and suffered so much vvrong,
And has thereby no more preferment cought,
But for to be a silly Gardener thought?
And has my kindness so much cost bestowed
Upon the ointment which I did prepare,
Have I in anguish pined and so long sorrowed,
Shead all these tears, and had such heedlesse care:
And was all done for one, and one no better
Than is a silly simple Gardener?
Alas, and is a silly garden plot
The best freehold that my love can afford,
Is this the highest office he has got,
To be a Gardener now that was my Lord:
He better might have lived and owned me,
Than with his death to have bought so small a fee.
Marie Magdalens sixth Lamentation.
Jesus said unto her (Marie:) she turned and said unto him Rabb^ni.
OH loving Lord, thou only did defer
My consolation to increase it more,
That thy delightful presence might prefer
The better vvelcome, being wished so sore,
In that thy absence little hope had left.
Unto my heart, so long of bliss bereft.
It may be that I knew not former bliss,
Till I a time was from the sweetness vvean'd:
Nor what it was such treasures rich to miss,
Which in thy presence I of late attained;
Until my poverty had made it clear,
Of what inestimable rate they were.
But now thou shewst me by a proof most sweet,
That though I paid thee with my dearest love,
With water of my tears to vvash thy feet,
With my best breath, which all desire could move:
Yet small the price was that I did bestow,
Waying the vvorth, which now thou letst me know.
I sought thee dead, pind in a stony gaile,
But find thee living and at liberty:
Shrin'd in a shroud, thy visage won and pale,
Left as the model of all misery:
But now invest in glorious robes I find thee,
And as the president of bliss I mind thee.
As all this while I sought but could not find,
Wept without comfort, called unanswered to:
So now thy coming satisfies my mind,
Thy triumphs please my tears, which long did vvo;
And all my cries are hushed with this one word,
(Marie) cause sweetly spoken from my Lord.
For when I heard thee call in wonted sort,
And with thy usual voice, my only Name,
Issuing from that thy heavenly mouths report;
So strange an alteration it did frame,
As if I had been wholy made anew,
Being only named by thee (whose voice I knew.)
Whereas before my grief benumbed me so,
My body seemed the hearse of my dead heart,
My heart (souls coffin) killed with care and vvo,
And my whole self did seem in every part
A double funeral presented plain,
Of thee and of my self together slain.
But now this one word has my sense restored,
Lightened my mind, and quickened my heart,
And in my soul a living spirit poured,
Yea, with sweet comfort strengthened every part:
For well this word a spirit dead may raise,
Which only word made Heaven, World, and Seas.
Marie I was when sin possessed me whole,
Marie I am, being now in state of grace,
Marie did work the ill that damned her soul,
Marie did good in giving ill place:
And now I show both what I was and am,
This word alone displaies my joy and shame.
For by his virtues that did speak the same,
An Epitome of all his mercies sweet,
A Repetition of my miseries came,
And all good haps I did together meet:
Which so my senses ravished with joy,
I soon forgot my sorrows and annoy.
And thus my heart a troop of ioies did lead,
Mustered in ranks, to mutiny they fell,
Conspiring which might worthiest be made,
With them my own unworthies do rebel:
And long in doubtful issue they contend,
Till view of highest bliss the strife did end.
He was my Sun, whose going down did leave,
A dumpish night with fearful fancies filled,
And did each star of glistering shines bereave,
And all the world with mystie horror hill'd:
And every planet reigning erst so bright,
Were changed to dismal signs in this dark night.
Yet now the clearenesse of his lovely face,
His words authority which all obey,
This foggie darkness clean away does chase,
And brings a calm and bright well tempered day:
And does disperse clouds of melancholy,
Awakes my sense, and cures my lethargy.
Rapt with his voice, impatient of delay,
Out of his mouth his talk I greedily take,
And to this first and only word I say,
And with one other word this answer make,
Rabboni: then my joy, my speech did choke,
I could no more proceed, nor more hear spoke.
Love would have spoke, but fear concealed the clause,
Hope framed words, but doubt their passage stays,
When I should speak, I then stood in a pause,
My sudden joy my inward thoughts quite slaies:
My voice does tremble, and my tongue does falter,
My breath does fail, and all my senses alter.
Lastly, in lieu of words, issue my tears,
Deep sighs in stead of sentences are spent,
Their mothers want they fill with sighs and fears,
And from the heart half uttered breath they sent:
Which so in passions conflict disagree,
To sounds perceived, they cannot sorted be.
So fares the heart that's sick for sudden joy,
Attaining that for which it long did fire:
For even as fear is loves still servile boy,
And hope an usher unto hot desire,
So love is hard, a firm belief in gaining,
And credulous conjectures entertaining.
And though desire be apt for to admit
Of wished for comfort any smallest shade,
The hotter yet it burns in having it,
The more it cares to have it perfect made:
And while least hope is vvanting which is sought,
The best assurances avantage naught.
And even as hope does still the best presume,
Inviting joy to vvelcome good success,
So fear suspects true bliss can hardly come,
And calls up sorrow, making it seem less:
With grief bewailing the uncertainetie
Of that which should be sole felicity.
And while as these do mutually contend,
Fear sometime falls into deep despair,
Hope rising up, his fiery darts does send
Of wrath, repining to the empty air:
Making a doubtful skirmish, dead they stand,
Till evidence of proof the strife have skand.
For though (poor I) so suddenly repli'de
Upon the notice of his voice well known,
Yet for because so rare a chance I spi'de,
His person chaung'd, himself unlookt for shown:
The sight my thoughts into sedition drew,
Then were they purged from doubts by stricter view.
And then though speeches would have issued feign,
And my poor heart to his have duty sent,
Yet every thought for utterance taking pain,
Which first might be received, so hastily went,
That I was forced (indifferent judge to all)
To act by signs, and let my speeches fall.
And running to the haunt of my delight,
My cheifest bliss, I straight fall at his feet,
And kindly offer in my Saviors sight,
To bath them now with tears of joy most sweet:
To sanctify my lips with kissing his,
Once greevous, but now glorious vvounds of blis.
To hear more words I listed not to stay,
Being with the word it self now happy made,
But deem a greater bliss for to assay,
To have at once my vvishes full apaide
In honoring and kissing of his feet,
Than in the hearing of his speech, less sweet.
For even as love, in nature coveteth
To be united, yea transformed whole
Out of it self into the thing it loves:
So what unites, love most affects sole,
And still prefers least conjunction ever,
Before best ioies, which distance seems to sever.
To see him therefore, does not me suffice,
To hear him does not quiet whole my mind,
To speak with him in so familiar wise,
Is not enough my loose let soul to bind:
No, nothing can my vehement love appease;
Least by his touch my vvo-worne heart I please.
Marie Magdalens seventh Lamentation.
Her falling at Christ's feet to kiss them, his forbidding her: saying, Do not
touch me, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.
OH loving Lord, what mystery is this;
Being dead in sin, I touched thy mortal feet
That were to die for me, now may not kiss
Thy glorious feet, yet thou have thought it meet
They should as well for my good now revive,
As for my good they died, being late alive?
Thou did admit me once to anoint thy head,
And am I now unmeet thy feet to touch?
Thou wonted was for to commend the deed,
Which now thou do command me from as much:
O Lord, since I and others shall them feel,
Why do thou now forbid me so to kneel.
What meanest thou good Lord, that thou restrainst
My heart of such a duty so desired,
Since thou among all thy friends, to me have deigned
The first of thy self (of all required:)
With thy first words my ears sole happy be,
And may I not be blessed with touching thee?
If tears have vvoon such favor from mine eyes,
If longing earnes a recompense so sweet,
Why do thou Lord my feeling hands despise,
And bar my mouth from kissing thy sweet feet:
Since lips (with plaints) and hands (with will to serve)
Do seem as great reward for to deserve.
But notwithstanding, thus thou do prevent
My tender offer, which I would effect,
Forbidding me to touch (as if thou meant)
I should the difference of thy state respect:
Being now a glorious, not a mortal body,
A life eternal, and not momentarie.
For since the bodies immortality,
The glory of the soul together knit,
Are both of them indowments heavenly
For such as in sweet Paradise do sit:
Rights of another world well may thou deem
This favor, than nothing of small esteem.
Though to my Father I have not ascended,
I shortly shall, let thy demeanure then
Not by the place where I am, be intended,
But by that place which is my due: and when
With reverence thou far off would fall,
I will consent that thou me handle shall.
If thou my former promises believe,
My present words may be a constant proof,
Do not thy eyes and ears true witness give,
Must hands and face most feel for hearts behoof:
If eyes and ears deceived be by me,
As well may hands and face deluded be.
Yet if thou fear least I so sudden part,
That if thou take not leave now of my feet,
With hamble kiss, with tears fetched from thy heart,
Thou never shall so fit a season meet:
License that doubt, for all these loves of thine,
There will be found a more convenient time.
But go about what now more have requires,
Run to my brethren, tell them what I say,
That I to satisfy their souls desires,
For them in Gallilee will go stay:
And there before them shortly will I be,
Where they my sacred heavenly face shall see.
And I pr^ferring fore my vvish his will,
Even like a hungry child departed from him,
Pulled from a tear, which soo^e of milk does fill,
Or like a thirsty Heart, from brooks exiled:
Sorry that I by carrying joyful news,
Should leave my Lord, whom I did rather choose.
Alas then (said I) cannot others be
Made happy, but by my unhappie cross,
Cannot their gain come in by none but me,
And not by me, but by my heavy loss:
Must dawning of their day my evening be,
And to enrich themselves, must they rob me?
Alas go seek to better thee (dear heart)
And ease thy vvoe in some more happy breast,
Since I unworthie creature for my part,
Am nothing freed from my late unrest:
But in the taste of high felicity,
The want whereof does work more misery.
Thus lead by duty, and held back by love,
I paced forward, but my thoughts go back,
Ready eftsoons a sounding fit to prove,
But that firm faith supported me from wrack:
And toward the Tomb in breathing often I turned,
As it that air with new refreshing burned.
Sometimes poor soul my self I do forget,
Love in a sweet distraction leading me,
Makes me imagine I my love have met,
And seems as though his words were feeding me:
I deem his feet are folded in my arms,
And that his comfort my chill spirit vvarmes.
But when my wits are all again awake,
And this a mere illusion is found,
My heart half dead, it wonted vvoe does take,
And greater grief my sick soul does confound,
That I (alas) the thing it self must miss,
Whose only thought so much delightful is.
And as I passed where my Lord has been,
Oh stones (said I) more happier far than I,
Most vvretched caitife, I alas have seen
When unto you my Lord did not deny
The touch of his for ever blessed feet,
Whereof my ill deserts makes me unmeet.
Alas, what crime have I of late commit,
That cancels me out of his good conceit?
Or does my Lord his wonted love forget,
May I no more his wonted love await?
Had I for term of life his love in lease,
And did my right expire in his decease?
Oh in his feet with tears at first I writ
My supplication for his mercy sweet,
With sobs and sighe (poor soul) I pointed it,
My hair did cho^^ely ^old it, being wet,
My lips impression humbly sealed the same,
With reverent (...), which from my sick soul came.
They were the doors that (...) first did give
Into his favor, and by them (...)
By kind ac^^p^^nce in his (...),
By them I did my (...)
Unto his head (...)
In man, a (...) of (...) b^go^nesse plain.
(...) alas I must contented be (...)
(...) bea^e a lower sail, and (...) to ^une,
(...) down my (...) that sores so high,
To meaner hopes, and leave aloft to c^ime:
Si^h ^o^mer favors now are ma^kes too high,
Either ^o level at, or to come nigh.
But oh ambitious ^ies for so vveake sight,
He is too bright a Sun your looks are ty'de,
And now are limited to meaner light,
And rather like a Bart, than Eagle ey'de:
You must your selves t'in^eriour looks submit,
For him to see, such substance is unfit.
No, no, since (...) his feet rejected,
How can I think, but that my want of faith
Is cause I am so slenderly respected,
An^ that his heart to yield me love gainesaith:
Yea, that I am from all possession thrown,
Of his kind favor, which were erst mine own.
Yet why should I stoop to a fear so base,
When want of faith with sin was worse agreeved:
He did vouchsafe to gr^^nt me of his grace,
And shall I now, cause faintly I believed,
Think that my Lord so rigorously will deal,
As to abridge me of this wished weal?
Is the sincerity of my pure Love,
(Wherein he has no partener at all)
In no respect availeable to move,
Or in account is it so light and small,
As that it may not hope some spark to find
Of wonted mercy, and his gra^^ so kind.
I will not vvrong him with so ^^iust a thought,
Since his appearing does approve the same,
His words overthrow that such suspicion wrought,
His countenance does te^l I am to blame:
Why then should I from such a vain surmise,
Suck so much sorrow in such foolish wise?
Thus as I travailed in this journey short,
My fantasies long voiages did make,
And healed my mind in such a vvavering sort,
Hope could not vvin, nor fear would not forsake:
But twixt them both my vision made me glad,
And grief of my denial made me sad.
But as I was in this perplexed wise,
Rising and falling in uncertainetie,
The other holy women I epsy
That first with me came to the grave to see,
To whom the Angels had made demonstration
Of Christ my Lord and masters resurrection.
The Conclusion.
Jesus met them, saying, All Hail.
OH how profound are all thy judgments Lord,
How do thou take my sorrow to thy heart,
How does thy eyes such bleeding drops afford,
To see my vvounded love and greevous smart:
That thy refusal late required is
With such a grant so free and full of blis.
Full of content, the baulme of troubled mind,
That took no pleasure where thy presence vvanted.
But oh how grace has graced me to find
The love, vvherevvith my soul is chief acquainted:
His love's my life, by his love my life lives,
For to my soul his love the life breath gives.
Now are the doleful, dark, and pitcht-fac'd clouds
Dispearst and driven from my comforts face,
Those melancholy, moist, and vvat'rie shrouds,
That did the brightness of my ioies displace,
Wrapping me up, as in eternal night,
Vanished they are, seeing my hearts delight.
Delight in him, to whom all love is debt,
Sealed with the heart, the soul, and all the might,
A payment that admits no vvorldly let,
To linger or defraud a heavenly right:
Which if I cannot pay as due requires,
Accept (O Lord) thy debtors true desires.
Let me thy everlasting prisoner be,
Chained in the linkes of an eternal love,
My want and will is only known to thee,
A vvilling debtour I will ever prove:
And what I have, I freely do bestow,
Take all my vvorth, for part of that I owe.
Oh Christian soul take Marie to thy mirror,
And if thou vvilt the like effects obtain,
Then follow her in like affections fervor,
And so with her, like mercy shall thou gain:
Learn sinful man of this once sinful woman,
That sinners may find Christ, which sin abandon.
That love recovereth him, that sin did lose,
That firm belief recalleth that again
Which fainting faith did quite forsake to chose;
That what nor force nor favor can obtain,
Nor policy by mortal means bring in,
Continued tears of constant love can vvin.
Learn then of her for Christ no force to fear,
And out of Christ no comfort to desire
With Christ his love, all love (though never so dear)
To overruled, to quench fond fancies fire:
Rise early soul, in thy good motions morn,
Sleep not in sloth, when diligence may perform.
Run with repentance to thy sinful heart,
Which should the Temple undefiled have bin,
But through thy fault, deserves no better part
Than be the Tomb for Christ to bury in:
For vvanting life to taste this heavenly bread,
He seemed to thee as if he had been dead.
Remove the loads that press thee down in sin,
The stone of former hardness roll away,
Look to thy soul, if Christ be lodged therein,
And if thou find that there he do not stay,
Then weep without, in other creatures mind him,
Since had in all, in any thou may find him.
Make faith thine eye, hope guide, and love thy light,
Seek him, not his, for himself, not his meeds:
If faith have found him in a cloudie night,
Let hope seek for him when the day spring breeds:
If hope to see him, have thee luckly led,
Let love seek further, in him to be fed.
If Sorrow knock, Remorse is Mercies porter,
And ever opens to let Dolor in,
Unto that door be thou a quick resorter,
It Is much to save the loss that comes by sin:
He that of Sorrow is true mournful taster,
Does feel sins smart, and find sins salving plaster.
Strive with thy thoughts, being all prepared together,
To rise out of mortalities foul mire,
Which has no standing, nor firm footing neither,
Prevent the danger, and in time retire:
Crave to be clean of that same filth sin urged,
For who is pure, that Jesus has not purged?
He can the ruins of thy soul repair,
He yet destributeth his mercies treasure,
The door stands open yet, thy suite prepare,
Let not repentance stay old ages leisure:
When the Meridian of thy Sun's once past,
The night of Nature hies upon thee fast.
Awake therefore, vvatch th'evils hourly nie,
Provide before thou be surpised of breath,
Upon the pale horse heedfull cast thine eye,
Note him that sits thereon, whose name is Death:
Be ready for the stroke he is to give,
For fear thou die, ere thou begin to live.
Oh mild Physician, how well did thou know
Thy corosive so sharp did greeve my vvound,
Which did by ignorance, not error grow,
Therefore no sooner felt, but help was found:
Thy linative appli'de, did ease my pain,
For though thou did forbid, it was no restrain.
And now to show that thy denial late,
Was but a cheek to my unsettled faith,
And no rejecting of my fault with hate;
Thou letst me vvash thy feet in my tear bath:
I kiss them too, the seals of our redemption,
My love renewed with endless consolation.
Thus have thou Lord full finished my tears,
Assured my hopes, contented my desire^
Repai'd my love ^^extirped (...) my fea^es,
Perfected ioies with all that heart requires:
And made the period of expiring greefes,
The preamble to ever fresh releefes.
How merciful a father art thou Lord
To poor forsaken Orphans in distress,
How soft a judge, that judgment does afford
With mildest grace, to sinners comfortless?
How sure a friend unto a sincere lover,
Whose pure and faithful love does alter never?
Thou then that art with diligence prepared,
Going with speed, standing with hopes lift hie,
Humbling thy heart, thy haughty will impar'd,
If thou with Marie none but Christ would see,
Himself will to thy tears an answer give,
And his own words assure thee he does live:
That sweetly he, unto thee being shown,
To others thou may run, and make him known.
FINIS.

