THE LOVE OF THE SOVLE

Made by G. M.

christogram IHS

Printed at Roane 1578.

TO MY LOVING AND best beloved Sisters.
DEAR SISTERS my care, my love, and of all worldly things (next to my good
MOTHER) my greatest comfort and joy. Unless you did think that I do most
heartily love you, you could not always heretofore have declared your
exceedinge great love so plentifullye toward me, for the which Almighty
God reward you. This my love because it is not a natural affection only, but
sincere and true Charity forces me to wish unto you my loving SISTERS, not
only many worldly commodities, which (God be thanked) you lack not: but much
more, all Spiritual treasure and Heavenly riches, whereof you cannot have
great store, because you dwell not where it grows.

I know good SISTERS, that you mean well, and most willing are you to do that
which might please God: but in good sooth you are out of the way, and therefore
the further you hold on, the further you are from your iorneis end, and the
further from Heaven. The wise man says: Proverbs. 14. There is away which
seems to a man right but the end thereof leads to destruction. Bear with
me if I write bouldly, and tell you the truth plainly. I am your Brother, I
love you as nature binds me, not only in wordly respect, but much more
toward God. Your souls are dear unto me: my heart always mourns to think
upon your dangerous state wherein you stand. O good SISTERS, the pain, of Hell
exceeds all torments, and that fire shall burn for ever. Happy are they
that keep them selves by GOD his great goodness within the Catholic Church,
for out of it there is no hope of salvation: And most happy are they that
having been out of this Church by the wicked persuasions of false Preachers,
when that it pleases God to send them true teachers: will not remain
obstinate: but follow good exhortations, and good wholesome doctrine, and so
return again as obedient Children to Christ their father, and to the Church
their Mother, who are always ready to receive them: remembering that which a
most ancient and learned Father writes. S. Austin in the 88. Psalm. He can
never account God to be his Father, who will not have the Church to be his
mother.

If you ask me what this Church is, that is called Catholic, and how you may
know it, behold the true and certain marks thereof, and your self judge
whether you be within it or no. This Church is a Congregation of all true
Christians, which began in Christ and his Disciples at Jerusalem, and from
thence, grew and multiplied throughout the wholle world, according as it is
said in the Psalm: their sound (speaking of the Apostles) is gone out into
the whole world, and their words into the ends of the earth. Psa. 18. ve. 5
The first mark of the church is to be vsible
So that the first mark of the true Church is, that it must grow and
multiply, be seen, and appear always as a light in the world: and therefore
Christ calls it A City builded upon a hill, which cannot be hid. And the
blessed Martyr S. Cip. says: The Church being lightened with the brightness of
our Lord, does reach forth her beams throghout the whole world And S. Aust.
besides many other places to this purpose, co^pareth Christ and his Church, to
that stone which was cut out of a hill without men's hands, and after grew to be
a mighty mou^tain, so that it filled the whole earth. For undoubtedly this
stone whereof the Prophet speaks in CHRIST, who was borne of a Virgin
without the help of man, and is now grown from a few Apostles and Disciples
to an infinite number of Christian people in all countries confessing one
Faith, and one Belief: and this is the Catholic Church, whereof your CREED
tells, and teaches you to say. I believe the Catholic Church.

Let us see now whether this mark does agree to your brethren in England, who
call them selves Protestants: or to us who^ it pleases them to call Papists.
First, they call themselves in their books the English Church, that is to say,
of that faith which is professed in England: but we are of the Catholic
Church, that is, of such a faith as is professed in France, in Spain, in
Flanders, Brabant, Zeland, etc. In a great part of Germany, in all Italy, and
beyond, whersoeuer there be Christians, and is preached in the Indians, that
never heard of Christ before, and increases wonderfullye. And within these
forty years, in England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, and Germany, there was
no other faith openly professed but ours. And now also in all these countries,
how many are there think you of secret Catholics that wish for the old
religion again with all their heart, and follow the new only for fear? Nay
how many are there especially in England that do yet openly profess the
Catholic faith?

Ask good Sisters ask, and you shall learn that all the prisons not only of
London, but of England are full of them, because they will not yield to these
new proceedings, nor co^taminate their souls with this new service, and leave
the old true and Catholic faith: besides a number of sundry degrees, which
are dead in prison: namely twenty three Bishops, all deprived of their living
these twenty three years, and now but two of them alive: I omit Doctors,
Deanes, Archdeacons Knights, Squires, partly in prison, partly departed the
realm and forsaking all, rather then they will forsake God, and his most true
and undoubted Religion. This is true (good Sisters) as knows God, you seldom
hear of these things, and therefore you think either there is no other
Religion but that cold service without all comfort and devotion which you see
in your parish Church, or you think that must needs, be the best, because
you are not taught any other: whereas you see (if you believe me) that all
Christendom almost is of another Religion. And therefore this is the
Catholic Church, and yours is worthily called by your own ministers, the
Church of England. The second mark is succession.
But this shall better appear if I give you an other mark of the true and
Catholic Church, which is, that it may continue for ever, and from the first
beginning, which was in Christ and his Apostles, never to fail, but to appear
and be seen still as a City up on a hill, or a light in the world: For Christ
said. I will be with you unto the end of the world. Mat. 28 And again: I will
send you another comforter, the spirit of truth who shall roman with you for
ever And unto Peter. upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not preuiale against it. Mat. 16. That is to say, the Devil and all
his Ministers, shall never so prevail against this Church, but that it will
still appear and profess one and the same faith: So that there shall be no
time wherein this faith and this Church is not. Now mark good Sisters I pray
you heartily, whether your Church and your English religion has been always in
the world since Christ his time. I will speak unto you as before God, and as I
shall answer before him at the latter day, and therefore I request you to mark
well my words, and to consider of them. A whole thousand and five hundred
years after Christ, your English religion was not heard of in any part of the
world, but I told you before, that the true Church must continue for ever,
and appear always, unless you think CHRIST is false of his promise. When
began your religion them Forsooth about fifty veeres agone, by one Martin
Luther in Germany a Friar: who as well for other ungodly respects, as also
because he would needs marrye, and break his vow which he had made of
chastity, began to preach against the Pope, and against the Catholic
Church, and because he taught great liberty, as that Princes ought not to
reverence the Pope, that all Priests might marry, that no man need to fast,
and such like: he found many Disciples in Germany, and has unto this day
carnal and fleshly men that love their own pleasure more then the will of God,
and his holy Church.

But will you know what manner of man this was? Forsooth being examined by
learned me^ concerning his doctrine, he was so pressed and so angered with the
force of truth, that he said in a great rage. This quarrel was never begun
for Gods sake, neither for his sake shall it be ended. Will you know further
that he wrote against the Pope for malice and not for conscience? him self in
his letter to ARgentmenses says: I neither can deny, neither will I, that if
Carolstadius or any other man cold five years agon have persuaded me, that in
the Sacrament is nothing but bread and wine, he might have deserved of me great
thanks: for I labored in that matter very carefully, knowing right well that
by that means, I might much have hindered the Popes authority. Mark that this
man would gladly have found some what against the blessed Sacrament, but a long
time he could not, till at length the Devil had taught him to write against
the Mass, as him self witnesses in his books, de Missa angulari. where he
tells what talk he and the Devil had together. Much more could I tell you
of this man: but of this little you may judge whether you may adventure to build
your faith upon this man, who lived within these fifty years, and to forsake
the ancient faith of all Christendom: continued from Christ until this day:
for it is most certain that from this man came your new Religion into
England, but not immediately at the first when he began to preach, Majesty's
Father wrote a learned Book against Luther for the Pope. Afterward he forsook
him not upon religion or conscience but upon displeasure.
for King Henry the eight, wrote a learned book very earnestly against The
Queens him, which is common to be seen, but long after, partly when the King
began to take displeasure against the Pope, because he might not be married and
unmarried as he list, partlye and especially, when King Edward being in the
beginning of his reign, but a very Child, was ouerruled by wicked Cou^sellers
to maintain such a Religion, as might best agree to their carnal appetite.
This was the beginning of your Religion, the beginning I say, for as for King
Henry, he went nothing so far as they are now come: but whereas for his
pleasure he had put away the Popes authority, and for his profit had plucked
down Abbeies, he let all other points in manner remain as before, and for
this repented before he died as it is known, if not? woe be to him that ever
he was bornes for there in the next world, good Sisters, Kings and Queens
come to their accountes, as well as you and we poor folks.

I could here tell you of many learned and virtuous men that were then put to
death, because they would not yield to the King in his unlawful dooinges:
knowing right well that it was all contrary to the law of God. Amongst who^
were these two: the Bishop of Rochester the most virtuous and best learned of
all the clargie, as appears by his books. And Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chauncel
or of England a Layman, who for his virtue, wisdom and learning passed all
temporal men that ever were in that realm, as appears by his learned works
written in the English tongue, but now not suffered to be read: because they
teach the Catholic faith: some man will tell you, that they were beheaded for
treason: but believe him not, unless it be treason to obey God rather then
Princes, surely other treason they committed none. The.3. mark is unity.
One mark more I will show you to discern the true church, and that in few
words: but so plain that your self will confess it. To know the Catholic
Church this is a certain and an infallible mark, if it be in unity and
concord if it have an agreement and consent of hearts and opinions: that is to
say, if it have but one faith and religion: For of the true Church it is said,
The whole multitude of beleuers had one heart and one mind. Act. 5. And saint
Paul says. One God, one faith, one Baptism. Ephesians. 4. And again. God is not a
God of dissentio^, but of peace and unity. 1. Cor. 14. Look now and consider
the state of your Protestants in England only, are they all of one religion?
Have you not among them some Lutherans, some Caluinists, some Puritanes, all
agreeing against the Pope, and each disagreeing one from the other? Do not
your Lutherans preach yea before the Queen, not without great thanks for
their labor, that the Body of Christ is really present in the Sacrament? And
do not your Caluerusts preach clean contrary, that there is only bread and
wine? And as for your Puritanes do not they preach and write so far contrary
from the other two, that they are now forbidden to preach and cast into prison,
and put from all livings? Yea the communion book it self, does it not now say
clean contrary to that which it said in the latter end of King Henry his time?
Then you were expressly commanded to believe that under each kind, of bread, and
wine, are contained the body and blood of Christ, now it is a petty treason to
say so: I speak not here of Denmark, of Geneua, of other cities in Germany,
who are all Protestants, and are differing among them selves and from you. I
have only declared how great diversity and disagreing there is among your
Protestants at home within one little Island: which is so evident, and so far
from good Christianity, that it may be unto you a very certain and sure
token, that the true faith can not be among them, which hitherto can not agree
in one faith, each condemning the others opinion.

Thus (dearly beloved, and my very loving Sisters) I have given you certain
general marks to learn the true Church: To write all were infinite, because
all books are full of our religion, I trust hereafter to instruct you in every
point as you would desire, and I pray GOD give you grace, that you may desire
it: All at once would be too tedious: in the mean time remember these two
things: When your religion began, and by whom, and how it came at length into
England. This is the year of Christ, a thousand five hundred eighty and
three. Luther begane to preach within these fifty years: If he preached the
truth, and all before him were deceived, where was the Church of Christ in all
the world for a thousand and five hundred years before? and how is Christ true
of his promise, that said: I will remain with you for ever, and the holy Ghost
shall teach you all truth and the gates of hell shall not preuail against it. But
for our Church, that is to say, the Catholic Church, we can show how it is
grown, and continued from the Apostles until this day, and never failed: we
can reckon you from time to time, Councels, Bishops Doctors, infinite numbers
of good Christians of all ages that were all of our faith, and of our Church.
Can your Ministers deny but that Saint Chrysostom allows praying to Saints?
Or that S. Jerome calls the Bishop of Rome, Supreme head of the whole Church
under Christ? Or that S. Austin prayed for his mother being dead? Or that he
honored the Relics of S. Steue^. Or that S. Gregory said Mass? Or that S.
Ambrose says, before the words of consecration it is bread and wine, but
after the words are spoken by the Priest, it is the very body and blood of
Christ? or that all Christians in S. Austins time? did worship the blessed
Sacrament? Or that the second Council of Nice, did many hundred years, allow
the use of Images, for the memory and representation of Christ and his
Saints, condemning Image breakers. Or that Saint Bernard was an Abbot and had
Monks under him, as in Catholic Countries now a days? can they deny but
that all this is true? and dare they deny these virtuous Fathers, and Doctors
of the Church to be now Saints in heaven?

O my good Sisters, that you could understand their books and their writings
that you might your selves see what they say, and what wonderful men they
were, endued with the spirit of God exceedingly above other, even good men,
much more then your licentious leaders, I doubt not but you would suspect your
new Doctors, and follow these: you should perceive they had the Scriptures at
their fingers ends, they knew right well the meaning and sense thereof, night
and day by fasting and prayer, and chaste life, beseeching God that they might
understand and truly expound his word. O what a difference is there between
them and these new preachers? Sisters, I appeal to your consciences, whether
will you, or ought you to trust in the expoundinge of Scripture, your young
unlearned and fleshly ministers, or these ancient, most skillful, and most
virtuous Fathers.

When Christ said: Take eat, this is my Body. All these Fathers say and
agree, that it was his Body in very deed: your ministers tell you it was but
Bread and Wine. When Christ said to Peter: Thou art Peter, that is a rock,
and on this rock will I build my Church. Mat. 16. These Fathers say that Peter
was made head of the Church, and after him all his successors in the Sea of
Room where Peter was the first Bishop. Your Ministers tell you that Peter had
no more pre-eminence then the other Apostles, and therefore the Bishop of
Room has no more authority then an other Bishop has. When Christ said to
his Apostles: Receive ye the Holy Ghost what soever ye do loose in earth,
shall be loosed in heaven, and what soever ye do bind in earth shall be bound
in heaven. These Fathers say that Christ gave to his Church authority to remitt
sin by the ministry of the Priest, to all such as do truly repent, and
therefore will have the people go to confession: your ministers have taken that
comfortable Sacrament of Penance away altogether. When Raphael the Angel
says in the twelfth chapter of Tobias: That he did offer up Tobi as prayer to
Almighty God. And when in the second book of Macchabes the 15. chap. Onias
the Priest says of Jeremy being dead. This is he that prays much for his
people, and for the holy City: these Fathers say, that the Angels and Saints
do pray for us, and that we may pray to them: your ministers do not stick to
say, that these books of Toby and the Machabees are scant good Scripture.

Many other things like unto these, I could reckon, but I should be too long,
fearing least I should weary you: these few are sufficient to give you to taste
of such marks as may show you the Catholic Church. These and many other
great reasons do keep all good Christians within the church. These things
make so many Catholics, partly to have suffered death: partly to have died in
prison: partly to continue in prison so many years: partly to forsake their
pleasant country, their dear friends, and to live to their conscience among
strangers, being thought of many worldly men to be very fools for so doing:
but they knowright well that the wisdom of this world is foolishnes before GOD.
And Christ says, He that loves father and mother, sister and brother, better
than me, is not worthy of me. Mat. 10.

Sisters give me leave to tell you somewhat of my self, not for any brag,
but the more to move you and to give God all the praise for his great goodness
toward me. It pleased my Parents to bring me up in learning as you know, as I
was not the best, so I was at all times not counted the worst amongst my
fellows and companions: some small estimation I had in Oxford above my desert,
more afterward when it pleased the Duke to make me though unworthy, Tutor to
the Earl his son: as long as his grace did prosper, I lived in his house to
my conscience without trouble: when he was in the Tower, and other men ruled
his house, I was willed to receive the Communion, or to depart: if I would
have yielded, I had very large offers which I need not tell. It pleased God to
stay me so with his grace, that I chose rather to forsake all then to do
against my belief, against my knowledge, against my conscience, against the
law of Almighty God: For a time I lay secretly in England, afterward I
came beyond the Seas into these Catholic countries, out of schism and
heresy: for the which I do thank Almighty GOD much more, then for all the
estimation that I had, or might have had in England. Whatsoever my estate is
here, I do more esteem it, then all the riches of England as it now stands.

And were I so mad think you to forsake all preferment, all livings, all
estimation, to live from my good mother, from you my loving sisters, and your
husbands, from other my dear friends and companions, out of mine own most
pleasant country, would I do this think you, but that my learning and my
conscience, tells me, that to follow your Religion is present danger of body
and soul, and to be in the Catholic Church is the only way to salvation?
Fie upon all worldly riches, when the soul is in danger, nothing is so
precious as the soul: first seek for the Kingdom of heaven, and for other
things as it pleases God. O that I might understand once that you were of my
mind, and of the Catholic religion: O my heart would leap for joy, to
consider that although we cannot live together upon earth, yet we may
hereafter meet in heaven: which is impossible as long as we disagree in faith.
S. Paul says. There is one God, one Faith, one Baptism. S. Austin says,
speaking of one Emeritus, He cannot be saved but in the Catholic Church.

Do you think it sufficient to believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost? Harken what S. Austine says in the 88. Psalm. What does it profit
thee, if thou confess the Lord? If thou honor God? if thou prech and praise
him? if thou acknowledge his Son? if thou co^fess that he sits at the right
hand of his Father? what does this profit thee, if thou blaspheme his Church?
S. Athanasius in his Creed says: Whosoever will be saved it is necessary that
he hold the Catholic Faith, which Faith unless a man believe in all points,
and every article, without doubt (says he) he shall perish everlastingly. One
point is (good Sisters) that Christ gave us at his last Supper, his own
blessed body and blood to feed upon in the remembrance of his bitter death: he
that says it is not so, does he believe in Christ? Does he not in effect say
that Christ was not able to do it, and by that reason that he was not
omnipote^t? For when the three Evangelists report it so plainly, and S. Paul
after them: Take, eat, this is my Body that shall be delivered for you: this
is my blood that shall be shed for you: Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke. 22.1. Cor. 11.
What makes a man to doubt but that it is so in deed O you will say, I see
nothing but bread and wine. If you should see his body: no god a mercy if you
did believe it: But Christ said to Thomas: Thou Thomas do believe because
thou have seen: but happy are they that believe when they see not. Ioh. 20.
Mat. 2.

I pray you when the three wise men came from the East to worship Christ, what
did they see in him? forsooth a young Infant, not able to help him self
sucking his mother a poor carpenters wife, and that in an Ox staule: yet they
fell down and worshipped him as God: Is it not as easy to believe the body of
Christ is under the form of bread, as that Almighty God him self was then
under the shape of a seely weak Infant? O good Sisters, unless you believe, you
shall never understand: believe once Christ his words, and that he is
almighty, and that he is able to do whatsoever he says, and you will think
that all is easy: return to the Catholic Church, and be content to learn
that which you know not, of them that will not for all the world deceive you,
and you shall find exceeding comfort.

When Christ shall say at the latter day, as it were in this manner. Was it not
of my great kindness that I left unto you mine own Body and Blood? and was
it not of my exceeding goodness and wisdom to leave it, not in the form of
flesh and blood, least your nature should abhor it, but of bread and wine
which can be loathsome to no man? and you make me this gay recompense, saying
that it was nothing but bread and wine, because you could taste nothing else in
your mouth, and because your new Preachers told you so, whom I sent not? were
not you christened in an other Faith? Did not my Church which is my spouse,
Apoc. 21. and the pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3. always teach otherways. What
have you to say for your self, but that you have most unkindly abused that
blessed Sacrament and heavenly mystery, and make me a liar, and deny my
omnipotency, and therefore deserve eternal damnation with all such as have
deceived you?

When Christ shall say this, will it not be a heavy case? when Cyprian,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Jerome, Gregory, Bernard, all the old
Fathers, now Saints in heaven, shall come and bear witness against you, and
say that they taught other-wise? When your Bishops that are now partly dead,
and partly in prison for the defending of this cause, shall condemn you
because you did not follow their good example? When your own Doctors and
Teachers shall not be able to answer for them selves, will it not be a
pitiful case? But I hope better of you (good Sisters) I can not mistrust your
good natures, but thar you will be glad to learn the truth which: Almighty
God grant unto you for his dear Sons sake, who died for us: and that I may
hear some comfortable news from you.

Do but fignifie unto me that you are content, if any thing be amiss to be
better instructed. Prove me what I can say for any thing that troubles your
consciences: It shall be far better news unto me, to receive two lines from
you to such a purpose, then to understand that your husbands were made Lords,
and you Ladies. He is rich that is in the Catholic Church, and he is
honorable that is in the favor of God. Sisters if I might do you good to
Godward, I would not stick to adventure this body of mine to save your
souls, to come and talk with you: my body is not more precious unto me then
your souls: how you are disposed, and what you would have me to do for your
sakes let me understand by the next. Deal wisely I pray you and warily, both
for our own sake, and for our good friend this bearer: It is not reason that
for his good will, he should incur any danger: God forbid, my trust is in
your wisdom, that you will keep this very close tell herafter, by reason of
the great persecution.

The matter is weighty, and conserneth both you and this bearer very much: be
wise and trusty, and deceive not your Brother that loves you as him self,
and therefore wishes by all means to do you good. Saint Paul says: 1.
Timothy. 5. He that has not regard of his own kindred, has denied the faith
and is worse then an Infidel. Saint Chrysostom upon the same place writes
thus.

If a man instruct strangers in the Faith, and suffer his own kin to
continue in there error with whom he were likely to prevail most, because
they make most account of him, were it not a most cruel and barbarous man?
For this cause I write unto you, and wish you all grace, al goodness, al
heavenly comfort: last of all and least of all, to prosper in this world, and
yet I wish you that with all my heart at the pleasure of God.

Other good thing I have none to send you but this, I will remain in your debt
for your gentle tokens. Commend me to your selves, your loving husbands, and
your little ones, and when you have learned to believe right your selves, bring
them up accordingly and teach them to fear God. Make much of this bearer I
pray you, and save him harmeles by your wise and discreet dealings. Almighty
God preserve you, and by his Holy spiritte lead you into all truth. Amen.

FINIS.

