STATVTES COMPYLED FOR THE BETTER OBSERVATION OF THE HOLY RVLE OF THE MOST
GLORIOUS FATHER AND PATRIARCH S. BENEDICT

Confirmed by the ordinary Authority of the right honorable and Reuer. Father
in Chr. the Lo. MATTHIAS HOVIVS Archbishop of Macklin and Primate of the
Netherlands etc. as also by authority from the Pope his Holiness delegated to
him, and by him delivered to the English Religious Women of the Monastery of
our blessed Lady the perpetual Virgin Mary in Bruxelles and to all their
Successors;

Quis est homo qui timet Dominum; legem statuet ei in via quam elegit. Psalm. 24.

What a kind of person is that, who fears our lord he will constitute him
a law, for that State of life where of he has made choice.

Printed at Gant by IOOS DOOMS.

THE FIRST PART OF THE STATVTES OF THOSE THINGS THAT Appertain to common
Disciplyne AND ARE TO BE OBSERVED OF ALL
CHAPTER 1.
Of Piety.
1. WHERE as the chiefest scope and end of Every Religious Order is to advance
the Professors there of to the Salvation and spiritual perfection of their
Souls, therefore all that enter this Congregation, must dilligently apply
themselves, that by meet and convenient, means, they may attain to the
proposed end of their Vocation: the chief means where of are, the exercises
of true piety, and devotion, as often prayer, meditation, confession of their
Sins, the holy Communion, and the Mortification of themselves;

2. Besides the time appointed for the accompl^shing of the deuyne Office, and
reading of spiritual books, every one shall each day employ one whole hour
in mental prayer* the which time that they may fruytefully spend, to the
comfort of their Souls; the Abbess shall endeavor that thy may be
instructed by such spirituallmen, as are well experienced in that godly
exercise that they may not only stir up in themselves, such affections as
may further them to virtue, but that they may also the better discover the
illusions of the Ghostly Enemy and know how to avoid them;

3. If any of the Religious be found un apt for this kind of exercise, let
her bestow the afforesayd time, either in vocal prayer, or in some other
devout employment, according to the Judgment of the Ghostly Father;

4. They shall confess and Communicate once every week, the which they shall
do also upon the cheifeste Feasts of the Church, and the Order; except the
ghostly Father shall judge some times otherwise, for some in particular, and
more then this they may be permitted; as the Abbess with the approbation of
the Ghostly Father shall think good;

5. When they have made their vows and profession, for three days they shall
receive the holy Eucharist; that they considering the greatness of the
benefitt which they have received* they may become more grateful to the king
of heaven to whom they are espowsed.

6. Out of the time of Confession none shall speak with her ghostly Father
upon any pretense whatsoever, but in such manner and time as to the Abbess,
and Superior shall seem meetest, and then leave shall be granted to conferr
with him so often, as the Abbess or Superior shall perceive that it will be
for her good, that requesteth license: which license the Prioresse, Mistress of
the nouices, and Cellarier may grante to those that are under their several
Charges: so that first they know the ghostly Father his opinion whether, and
in what manner he shall think it profitable for them;

7. The Lady Abbess must set down a certain time for their confessions, and
she must see that all go to one ghostly Father (whom the Bishopp shall
appoynte them for that purpose) if the number will permit it, otherwise she
with her Convent shall choose another approved by the Ordinary, unto whom that
part of the Convent shall confess, which the Abbess shall think good to
appoynte;

8. None of the Religious shall presume to censure her Confessor, either in the
way of praising or discommending him before others, neither by Comparison to
prefer the one above the other, or to manifest their defects, but only to the
Abbess; and if he have given Counsel or advise to any of them, let her not
discover it in any such sort, that any hurt or detrime^t may en^ue thereof;

9. They shall all confess to their Ordinary Ghostly Father, and to noe other,
except the Abbess give them leave, and all shall confess twice or thrice
every year to that Priest that the most Reverend lord Bishopp in special
manner for that purpose shall appoynte; also the Lady Abbess shall provide
some three or four Priests (according to the number of the Covent) unto whom,
by her leave they may confess, as often as she shall deem fitting for their
spiritual good, having notwithstanding still good regard, that she disturb
not the good order of her Monastery hereby; And this conformable to the decree
of Clement the VIII. made for Superiors of Monasteryes in the year of our
lord 1594.

10. Let the Abbess appoynte them a certain time for the daily examination of
their Consciences, that thereby they may the better Consider of the state of
their Souls, and what fruit they reap by their holy Exercises;

11. If the Abbess perceive that some do not so much attend to their
spiritual proffitt, as they should, and thereby give her less satisfaction,
let her in a mother like manner exhort them to use more diligence for the time
to come, and therefore it will much proffitt them, that at lest once a year
all the Religious live retired from the rest (but not all at one time) that
they may the better Recollect and confirm themselves in Spirit, but this
wilbee most expedient for them, that make less progress and advancement in
virtue and Religious life;

12. None shall seek for any spiritual advise or receive any such directions,
but from those which the Abbess shall approve neither shall she receive any
Instructions for that purpose without the express consent of her said
Superior;

13. Let the Abbess have especial care that noe books that savor not of a
Religious Spirit, or which do not help there unto, be at any time brought
into the Monastery; And let the Catoloque of all the books of the Monastery
be examined of some learned discreet man, who may discern whether they are
profitable for Religious Spirits or not* and let her allow but some few for
every one, commanding the rest to be kept by one of the Religious, to be
communicated unto others as need shall require;

14. None without the leave of the Superior shall use upon herself any
Corporal austeritie, over and above that which the rule and Statutes do
appoynte, or which the ghostly Father shall not approve; yet the Lady Abbess
may not only permit, but also enjoin some austeritie to her Religious
Subjects, when she shall Judge it meet for their spiritual good;

15. If the Abbess see any one of her Religious given to more austeritie then
the rest, and to be more fervent in her good Exercises, she must endeavor to
advance and help her in her good desires, yet so that all be done with in
the limitts, of prudence and discretion; And all the Religious of this
Congregation are to understand that there is nothing appointed in any other
Religious Order, which may help for the increase of Gods holy Spirit, which
shall not also be most willingly permitted to them of this holy Congregation,
if so be it shall be thought expedient for them;

16. They that are permitted to v^e upon thems^lues any bodyly affliction, or
mortification, must so endeavor to conceal the same, that (as far as lies
in them) it may not be known to the rest, except the Abbess for some other
good respects shall otherwise appoynte

17 Once every week each one shall make a disciplyne for so long a time as
the Abbess shall think good, and it is to be^ done on Friday at night, except
the Abbess some time s^all appoynte some other day;

18. Although the Abbess may apply the prayers and devotions of her Religious,
for the obtaining of gods assistance and grace* or for some other benefitt from
his divine goodness, yet shall she bring in noe new obligations, but with
great moderation* or with very great Consideration;

19. They shall say or sing their hours, and the deuyne office, according to
the Roman use, they shall say the little Office of our blessed lady, the Office
of the dead, the Graduall Psalms, the seven penetentiall Psalms, and
Litanies, in such sort as is appointed in the breuiary of Rome;

20. They shall sing the Mattines, lauds and the rest of the hours upon the
principallest Feasts of the year, kept either by the precept of the Church; or
upon Custom, upon the Feasts of their Patrones; and Patronesses, both of
their Order and of their particular Churches* and of the Feast of the
dedication of the same, also they a^e to sing every day their conuentuall
Mass, except the Abbess for just causes for a time ordain otherwise, both
in these latter, as also in the former Solemnities; Once every week a Mass
of the holy Ghost is to be sung, or said, and as often as the Office of ^he
blessed Virgin is said on the Saturdayes, so often a Mass is to be
celebrated of our blessed Lady, for this end that the Convent may obtain of
our lord spiritual progress and advancement

22. While they sing, or say the deuyne Office, let them observe due gravity
and Modesty, and decent composition of their carriage, neither may they post
our their service* but they must pronounce each word with moderate leisure,
distinctly, and truly, and with so loud a voice, that they may be well herd
and understood by those that are out of the Quire;

23. None may entreat or labor to have leave to intone or read any thing,
but as it shall be appointed her, neither may she any wise refuse any thing
that she is willed to sing or read, except she first make know her
impediment to the Superior; to whose Commandment she is wholly to submitt
her self;

24. They may some times use Music in the deuyne office, yet it must be with
great Modera^ion, together with the good edification of the hearers, and only
such Songs they are to sing as are truly grave and modest;

25. If upon just hindrance any shall be absent from the other Canonical
hours, yett all must be present at Complyne, except some urgent Cause shall
excuse them, or that the Abbess shall judge some other business to be more
necessary and important;

CHAPTER 2.
Of Poverty;
1. ALL such as make their profession of Religion in this Congregation, must
understand that they can have nothing in propriety, even as the Rule has
enacted; what soever therefore is given them by there friends and kinsfolks* is
to be applied to the use of the Convent and Community; But if the Abbess
will permit any to have any thing of small price as a memory of their Friends,
it may not be any thing that is made of gould or Silver, and much less of
precious stones, set either in gould or Silver;

2. Goulden or Silver Vessels may not be used in this Congregation, except
for the Church or Infirmary, and for this latter in mean and small quantity
and number; Neither may the Abbess use such Vessel in her Cell, or in the
Refectory, but this may be permitted for the intertaynment of Guestes, (when
it shall be thought expedient to use any such entertaynment) yet with this
moderation, that in them all vanity and secular pomp is to be eschewed;

3. They must avoid all notable singularity and curiosity in their apparel,
Images, and all other Furniture of their Cells, and they are to have only those
things, which befitt religious decency, and are for their health, and they must
willingly embrace what soever appertains to their diett and Apparel
according to true Religious poverty;

4. There woolen or linen apparel may not be made of any fine Costly Cloth,
yea though itt be given them, or be by their parents bestowed upon them, but
they are to wear those things, that are of a moderate price, and are lasting;

5. They shall not give or receive one of another any thing, without the lady
Abbess o^ the Superiors license, ye^ the Prioresse, Mistress of the Nouices,
and Celarier may some time give leave to those that are under their charge, to
give or take one of another, some matter of little moment or value;

6. Let none beg any thing of her friends or Parents, for her proper use, but
if her friends or Parents will give any thing, let it be so done that it may
be applied to the Community, or left to the will and disposition of the
Abbess, that she may bestow it upon them as she shall think good;

7. It may not be lawful to lend or grant any thing appertayning to the
Monastery to any abroad, without leave from the Abbess;

8. Each Religious shall once every year (to wit before the first Sunday in
lent) go to the lady Abbess and with due humility and reverence declare unto
her, that what soever they have, they willingly offer it unto her, leaving it
to her Will, whether she will suffer them to retain, restore, or otherwise
dispose there of in the best sort, as in our lord, she shall think most meet,
and if the Abbess will take a view of each thing in particular, they shall
bring them all unto her, in all Fidelity, neither may they have any thing
locked up in Chestes or Coffers, without the leave and knowledge of the
Abbess;

9. And to the end every one may stricktly and carefully keep their vow of
poverty, it is enacted, that if any after her death (which God forbidd) should
be found a Proprietary and to have any thing of notable value for her use, or
in the Custody of any other, without the Abbesses knowledge, sh^e shall be
infallably deprived of Christian Burial;

CHAPTER 3.
Of Chastity;
IT is very fit the Spouses of Christ imitate all Angelical purity, which
may conserve in them the integrity of their bodies and minds; therefore they
must fly all such things which may any ways cause any impression in their
minds, contrary to purity

2. They shall conceal noe greiueous temptation, which they shall not manifest
to their ghostly Father yea and to their immediate Superior, or to the
Abbess, if they think they may receive from them any comfort or help; let
them show all modesty and humility in their words, Countenances, gestures,
and Actions, and let them behave them selves each to others wi^h due respect,
and Religious gravity, and every one is to behold as it were Christ himself
in ^er Sister;

CHAPTER 4.
Of Obedience;
1. AS the Religious have vowed to God and to their Superiors them selves, and
what soever else they have, so must they suffer themselves to be guyded and
governed by their Abbess, and Superior, as the Interpretours of Gods holy
will; therefore let them wholly give themselves to perfect holy obedience, and
let them labor to be excellent in the same, not only willingly and promptly,
performing those things that are enjoined them, but fullfilling them in such
sort and fashion, as they think to be most conformable to the Superiors
Will;

2. Every one must be ready to undergo all base Offices and exercises, what
soever the Abbess shall think good to impose upon them, neither may they
think themselves exempt from this by any office, degree or Quality, nor may
they expect any privilege, but in case of Necessity only, but every one is
to know that all are to live equally under one and the self same Rule of
Obedience, without exception of any persons or person;

3. When the Superior commands any thing, that may be hurtful to their
health, or an hindrance, of a greater good, or that it cannot be performed
within the time allotted them, then let them so manifest the difficulty to
her, that yet withal, they leave all to her Judgment and discretion, and so
obey, if it may be done without manifest Sin;

4. If any should request any thing of her Superior which she thinks
needful for the health of her body or Soul, or for the performance of any
duty and charge enjoined her, let her first commend the matter to God, and
with a resigned mind let her open the case to the Superior, and after it
has been some two or three times denied her, let her never mention the
matter more, except she verily think, her Superior has for got it, and
that she will take it well, that she be put in mind there of;

5. They shall not only obey the lady Abbess, but also all others of the
Convent, whether they be of the Quire or Converse) who from her receive power
and Authori^ie* otherwise none may command, or reprehend another, without
express leave from the Abbess, and of her ^hee is to understand how far sh^e
may proceed in commanding, or in her reprehension.

6. If any be commanded any thing by the subordinate Superior, which is
different from that which the chief Superior or Abbess did command or
apoynte, let the Inferior manifest to the Subordinate her Superiors Will, and
Order, and let her without further Contradiction reverently obey, if she see
her persist and con^inew in her command, but let the subordinate afterward
inform her Superior of the Case if any error or fault happen thereby.

7. If at any time happyly the subordinate Superiors, command diversely any
one, in things appertayning to their charges, let them represent their
difficulties, each one to the other, without all contention: and if the case
so require it, with external and mutual show of Reverence, let ^h^m remitt
it to the arbitrament of the Abb^sse, or Superior laying barely open the Case
without further dispute, and so let them think that to be best which the
Abbess or Superior, sufficiently informed, shall judge to be so;

8. What soever is denied by any subordinate S^periour, she may not ask the
same of the Abbess, except also she declar^ unto her, that the Subordinate
Superior did deny it, together ^ith the reason of her said denial, so far
as she knows or can guess;

9. They are to obey her that commands anything in the lady Abbesses name,
although in very deed she have noe such authority so to command, and
ordinaryly in their Commandments, they are rather to use the Abbesses name,
then their own, except only the mother Prioresse, Mistress of the Nouices,
and Cellarier, toward those of their charge;

CHAPTER 5.
Of the Enclosure;
1. THey must have a special care of keeping their Enclosure, so much
commended and (with vehement ^words expressing the necessity thereof)
commanded by the sacred Counsel of Trent: moreover seeing they have bound
themselves by vow to the observation thereof, they must hold it necessary to
be kept;

2. Their Enclosure must be enuyroned with high Walls, which may contain that
part of the Church, to wit the Quyre allotted to their proper use, together
with the Cloister dormitory Refectory, and all the Offices and buyldings, which
are appertayning to the proper use of the professed Religious; together with
the Gardens, Orchards, and such like, so that none from abroad may enter into
this Enclosure, by any Stayres, or Gates, but only by one door or Gate, if it
may be any wise so contrived commodiously;

3. Noe professed Religious may go out of this Enclosure* but upon
constrayn^e of Fire, extreme famyne, War, ruin of the buyldings, and such
like greueous dangerous cases, and for other Cases approved upon urgent
necessity, or commanded by the lord Bishopp, or the Visitor; yet when the
Scholars of Religion are to receive their Religious habitt, or the Nouices are
to make their Profession, the Abbess with some few of her Religious, may go
out of the Quier, and enter into the outward part of the Church, that they may
assist them in that solemn Action; which is also permittted to the Abbess
newly chosen* that with a decent Company of her Religious, she may also enter
the same, to receive the Bishopps Benediction: for which, and for some other
necessary Causes and uses, there may be a Convenient passage betwixt the Quier
and the outward Church.

4. All that are not Religious or not of the Conuen^ of what sex, age, or
Condition soever they be, may not enter into the Enclosure but upon necessary
Causes, approved and licenced by the Bishopp in writing, without which license
according to the decree of the Counsel of Trent, both the person that
entreath, and the person that admits him, incurreth the pain of
Excommunication;

5. Other Religious weomen of the same Orderliuing under these Statutes, being
sent by their Superiors to some other place, may in their passage be received
in to any Monastery of this Congregation, and therein they may stay for two or
three days, or longer, as according to prudence and Charity it shall be
thought convenient;

6. The Visitours accompanied with certain modest and grave Clergy men may
enter in, to perform their Visitation, or for any other necessary business;

7. When the ghostly Father enters into the Monastery to visit the sick, or
for some other necessary matter, one or two Religious appointed by the Abbess
for that purpose shall always be present with him, and if any Religious be
to be buried, so many from abroad may be present at that Office, as shall be
thought needful.

8. The Physician, Surgeon, Workmen, Gardiners, Porters, Carters, Masons, and
all such as have any necessary employments within the Monastery may be suffered
to enter; they must keep account in what number they ent^r, that in the same
number they may depart, and those that enter must be accompanied by two or
three of the Religious to those places where they are to be ymployed, none of
the Religious may approach to those that are entered without the express
license of the Abbess, the which not withstanding she may not grant to any
one alone.

9. When the people from abroad have leave to speak with the Religious, let
it be done at a Grate when need shall require* within the Grate let a
Curtayne hang which may so hang shutt, or be drawn to let the Religious be
seen, or not to be seen, as the Abbess shall think best expedient.

10. In the place where the Religious make their Confessions, let a Gloth be
so drawn and fastened, that the penitent may not see the Ghostly Father, nor
yet be seen by him; All that the Religious are to receive into the Enclosure,
let them receive it by a Turn, except it be of that kind, that by the Turn
they cannot receive it; the Turn with in must be locked and made fast, in
such sort that it may not be turned about, but at such times as any thing is
to be received in thereby;

CHAPTER 6.
Of Silence;
1. IN such place^ and times as sovereign silence is to be kept; (to wit, in
the dormitory, Re^ectory, Chapter house, Quier, and Cloister, and in the hours
assigned for silence, as are to be seen afterward in the twelueth Chapter,
and in the 7. 8. and 9. Numbers, and after Complyne until Prime ended, none
may speak but upon urgent necessity, and that by noe other means she can
express her meaning, and make her self understood, for then she may speak,
but yett with a low voice and with all brevity;

2. At what time they work together in the Common work house they may
speak, but yett only of things necessary and with a low voice;

3. If any should seek for another, let her go and seek her, but without
noise, and she may not call her with a loud voice, and if she find her with
others, let her deliver unto her the Superiors commandment, that others may
not understand it, and she that is called for to another place, let her give
notice thereof to the Superior of that place to the end she may know whether
she goes;

4. So often as they speak together, they must have good care that they may
not be heard out of the place where they are at that present; In their
Recreations (when they are permitted them) let them be so myndefull of
modesty and Religious decency, that one push and thrust not another, noe nor
so much as touch her, so far as lies in her; In their speeches and
Conversation let them avoid and fly all show of contempt and little esteem of
others, all kind of mocking, and scoffings, and all other things what soever,
whereby either through their words or actions, any kind of occasion of
brabble or displeasure may arise;

5. And for as much as here mention is made of the Recreations of the
Religious; it is prohibited that within the Enclosure any kind of beasts be
kept or fedd, but for the use of the Community, and not for the private
Recreation of any one alone, neither upon any coulor or pretext what soever
may they permit any dwarfes, ^diotes, or young Infants to be nourished or
brought up within the Enclosure.

6. Their mutual conversation must be used for their health, and Conservation
of Charity, and therefore it must be used in public, and not in Corners, or
in their Cells ne^^her may the Religious use any speech of such matters, which
they have heard o^ secular people abroad, except they ^^e of such, which may
yeald Edification, and spiritual Comfort and proffitt to the hearers.

7. In their Conversation let the^ so show love and Charity to every one,
they withal they take good regard that they show not themselves mare
singularely affected to one then to another, and let them do ^euerence to
every one, according as their State shall require, neither may they shunn the
speech and Conversation of any who soever.

8. They must be very careful that they talk not of their Stock, and
Nobility of their kindred, nor of plightes, Controversies and debates, among
their Parents, kindred, and Families, or dispute of them, yea they may not
admit any talk among themselves (but with great warynesse) of the Iarrs or
enmities that one Province or Country has with another.

9. None may speak of the imperfection of any other, but only to the Abbess,
or Superior, or to those from whom they may expect help and redress; and if
any damage or hindrance by any ones defect, may be thought to fall unto the
Monastery, and that by noe other way it can be remedied, all shall be bound to
inform the Abbess there of, that in good time both the hurt that may be fall
unto any person in particular, or the mischeife that may happen to the whole
Convent in general may be hindered.

10. None shall hear any thing of any Religious upon Bond of secrecy, and
upon that Condition that the Abbess may not know it, yea rather they ought to
hold it a thing right grateful and pleasing to them, that she should be
informed of all matters that may any ways advance, and set forward the good
government of the Monastery.

11. None may enter into the Office or Cell of another, without leave, or upon
commandment of the Superior, and nether may they then enter, before they
have given a sign by knocking at the doare and have received an answer to
enter, let the door stand open so long, as they talk and be together
within, except the Superior do expressly appoynte it otherwise;

12. While they speak one to another, or of another, they may not call them by
their bare names, but the Abbess, Prioresse, Mistress of the Nouices, and
Celarier shall call their Subjects Sisters, the professed of the Quier shall
call also the Converse, Sisters; but the professed of the Quier, must call
them dames speaking of others that are professed of the Quier, the Prioresse
must be called of all Mother; the Mistrisse, of her Nouices must be called
Mistrisse, the Cellarier is also to be called Mother of those that are under
her charge; But the Abbess of all is to be named lady: that by these names
due honor and Reverence may be yealded each one in that Vocation, and degree
in which she is placed by our lord and Savior Christ;

13. As they meet one with another let them do Reverence each one to the
other by an Inclination and bending of their bodies, and let each one
endeavor to prevent the other with honor according to due Religious modesty;
and all though the Iuniour professed ought principally to use this prevention
to her elders, and more Ancient in Religion by honoring and Reuerencing them*
yet none but Superiors may exact it of them;

14. Inspeaking let none unmannerly interrupt another speech, or in twight
her Sister of Errors: but in there Conversation let them be myndfull to use
all due modesty, and decent carriage, with all Civility avoiding both in their
Words and behavior, all Rudeness, sowernesse, or lightness, as also all
secular vanity and affectation: which noe ways stands with the gravity,
which appertains, unto Religious persons; let also their speech be very
sparing, and for the most part let it be about spiritual matters, or at
lestwise about such matters as may savor of spirit, and nourish the same;

15. In their going and shutting of the doors, let them make noe noise, as
much as lies in the^, but this they must beware of in time of sovereign
Silence, and when the Religious are at their reading and meditaion;

16. When any (having obtained leave) visitt the Sick, let her so behave
herself, that she may recreate and ease them; and to the end she may not be
trouble some unto them, she must first learn of the Infirmare by what meanes^
he may best Comfort them, and avoid to be greiuousto the^

17. When secular people come, and (by the Superiors permission) speak with
the Religious at the Grate, let them signify unto the Abbess eit^er by
themselves* or by such as are appointed to accompa^y them, those things whereof
they had talk as the matter shall require; And then let them avoid long
conference, if it may be done without offense, or except the matter be of
that moment and consequence, that longer speech may be permitted.

18. While they speak with secular people, and those that come unto them from
abroad; if the Prefect of the Turn, or her Companion cannot be present, let
them have another appointed by the Superior, who may hear and see all that is
spoken and done, who may never depart or leave them alone till the speech be
fully ended.

19. Although nothing ordinarely ought to be said which ^hey would not have
herd and understood, yet when the case requires Secrecy, and that the
Religious cannot go commodiously to the Abbess, let her request leave by the
Thourere to speak insecrett, and by her let her deliver the causes for which
she requires such secrett conference, and of her she is to expect an
answer how she must proceed.

20. If any Religious be not permitted to speak with any at the Great, none
may tell her that she was called for any abroad, and that she was denied to
speak with them.

21. None may speak with people abroad of the domestical affairs of the
Monastery, except they be such matters as every one may well understand them,
or which they know the Superior will not be unwilling they should be made
known unto them: and if any Externe should request the assistance of any of
the Religious in any affayre, yet let her not take upon her to do or write
any thing without the license the Abbess;

22. While the Religious are in the speaking place, let them speak with so
lowavoyce, that they may be only heard of their Companions, and of the
persons with who^ they speak; More over let them endeavor to behave them
selves there with all edification, and to apply some part at lest of their
talk to a spiritual end, neither let them show that in such Conversation
they seek for their omne private solace and Comfort, but rather for the
Comfort of those that come to Visitt them, finally let them so bestow that
time upon others, that at the first peale they depart to the Quiar, from which
none may be absent, without the express license of the Abbess or Superior;

23. In lent and in time of Aduent this access of externes may not be
permitted, as neither upon the days of Confession and Communion, and then the
Religious may not be seen of them, if upon any occasion they be permitted
to speak with them except some important great reason shall require the
contrary;

CHAPTER 7.
Of the Fasts, and the Common diett;
1. IN Aduent they must fast except the Sundays, on which they observe
abstinence, and from Quinquagesima Sunday, included until Easter (excepting all
Sundays) they shall Fast, and abstain from white meats; except the approved
Custom of the Country, and the dearth of lenten meats do persuade otherwise;

2. From Septuagesima included until Quinquagesima they shall abstain from
all flesh, in which time upon Mundayes, Vednesdayes and fridays they shall
fast, except some double Feasts fall on those days; Also from the Feast of the
Ascension of our lord ex^cluded, until the Vigill of Penticost they shall
keep Abstinence;

3. From the Feasts of the Nativity of our blessed lady excluded, until Easter
they shall Fast every wednesday and from the Kalends of Nou^mber excluded, they
shall fast also Mundayes, except upon those ferias (out of lent) a double
Feast be celebrated;

4. From the Feast of the Resurrection of our Savior Christ, till the Feast of
the Nativity of our blessed Virgin Mary included they may receive twoe
Refections every day excepting Notwithstanding Fridayes, on which they shall
observe the approved Custom of the Province where in they live, or else they
shall fast;

5. They must appoynte the hours of their Meals according to the Differences
of the times of the year, or according to the divine Service, and the holy
Office of the Mass, as is set down in the Roman Missal

6. In the Fasts and abstinences of the Rule and Statutes, the Abbess may
dispense with such as are weak, and aged, and whe^soeue^ any particular reason
may persuade he^ there unto, so that Flesh be not eaten in the Refectory,
Vnlett a^t a table part.
and that the grant pass not into a custom: but upon those days that are
(...) bidden by the Church, their approbatio^ (...) to be required who ^aue
authority (...), according to the Custom of each (...);

7. Upon due Consideration of the pains and labors that are to be sustained
in this Congregation, as also of the Sex, but especially of the weak
Complextions, and educations of very many which are admitted into this order
those things that appertain to their dyett, are so to be moderated and
tempered, that the Religious may with more strength go forward in the
performance of the divine Services, and burdens of their Institute, and with
more alacrity persevere and continue in the same; therefore ordinaryly upon
Sundays, Tuesdayes, and Thursdays through out the year, as also upon
Chrismasse day falling upon a friday, or Saturday, they may ear flesh,
excepting hereafter according to the Rule they shall altogether abstain from
flesh.

8. The measure of their meat and ^^inke shall depend upon ^he Judgment of
(...) Abbess, and as she is not to permit (...) any superfluyty in their
dyett, so is (...) also to have care that nothing be ^^^^ting according to
Religious decency, (...) ^^ch persons necessity, as on the co^^ra^y (...) have
a special regard, that whilst sh^^^ (...) ^^auoreth to priuide for every one
in^ (...) ^^^^essaryes, she permit not superfl^^^ (...) and take place
amongst them yet ordinarely when they eat flesh, she may give to each one an
Antipast, or sallet, a pittance of flesh of half a pound, and a post past in
fruit, or some what else in sleade of fruit, when thy fast, besides the
afforesayde (if they may be had) let her endeavor or give unto the Convent
what may be gotten, or may well serve for their necessity, If besides this
the Physician think any thing more, and above to be given to any or that
their necessity or infirmity do require any thing in particular, let her
endeavor to perform it toward them, with all pity, charity, and alacrity,
so that it be not done in the Common Refectory, but either at the Superiors
or infirm table or in the Infirmary;

9. Out of times of Refection they may not eat or drink any thing, without
the leave of the Superior, neither may they refuse those things that are
appointed them by their Superior for their health and comfort, yet in these
things the Prioresse, Mistress of the Nouices, and Cellareir may give leave
unto those that are under their several Charges;

10. If by experience it be found, that the Common dyett is not whole some for
some let that be made known to the Abbess, who shall provide therefore, as
in our lord she shall think good, and she shall every year declare unto the
Visitor what form and manner she observes in these things and withal let
her not suffer any to keep any sweet meats, conserues, or Confections in
their Cells, except the Phi^ition think that they must have often use thereof;

CHAPTER 8.
Of the Apparel of the Religious and of those things that appertain to their
bedding;
1. FOR their apparel they may use that which the Abbess (having regard of
times and places) shall approve;

2. Besides the upper or great habitt they may have two under Coats whereof
the one or both in Winter may be lyned with Furr;

3. The great habitt must be longer then their other Garments, which must
reach to the ground, yet it may not be so long that it may hinder them in
going, or be dragged on the ground, and so worn; and so it must be made,
that the sleeves must be three foot large, and what soever covers the body
must be loo^e;

4. This great habitt must be black, and so must the Scapular, and inward
coat next to the Scapulare, if they use any other coats or garments, it shall
little importe of what color they be, so they be either white, or blake or
some other brownish or dark Color;

5. Their Clothes which are under their scapulare must be open from the
shoulders down to the gird le and so clasped, and for their sleeves they must
not be two wide, nor yet so straight that they may not put their hands eas^ly
into each sleeue, neither in any of their garments, may they use any buttons or
any silk;

6. They must not have or wear any linne^ next their bodies, without leave
from the Abbess or Superior, or except their necessity, or health should
otherwise require;

7. The habitts of the Converse Sisters must be like that of the Quiar:
excepting only that the sleeves of their great habitt must be straighter by
the half and when they wear their great habitt they must gird them to their
bodies;

8. All must put on their great habitt when they go to the Quier, Refectory,
Chapter house* and speaking place, in such sort and so often as in their
Ceremonies is expressed

9. Every one must have a note of all their Clothes, where of the Guardroabe
must have a Copy, that they may be able to render an account of them, when it
shallbee demanded; they may not set any letters of their names on their
Vayles of Garments which they are to wear, but rather certain numbers or
other Carecters, they must not be two careful of having new Clothes, but
let them permit themselves to be provided for herein, by the Abbess, as in
other matters;

10. At what time soever they shall chance to have a new Garment, they must give
up their old, neither must they be desirous to have more then may be
serviceable for their health, and necessity and what soever clothes they
receive, let them have regard to keep them carefully, and clenly as those
things that appertain to the poor of Christ;

11. In the night they are to take their rest in their Clothes, having on
their Scapulars, and stokens that they may be the readyer to rise unto
mattins; The professed must wear their white and blake Veyles, but the Nouices
must sleep in their white: yet when the heates are great, or when they are
sick, they may leave of their Clothes and stokens and lay their Scapulars on
their bedds, yet may they not then be without their Veyles, and they are
dilligently to keep, and observe all other things what soever is appointed and
set down in the holy Rule;

12. Every one must sleep apart upon a straw and a Woollen Matrice: for their
Couerle^ts and Curtaynes they must stand there into the Judgment of the Abbess
in what sort they are to have them: they mustly in Woollen, except through the
Indisposition of their Corporal health, the Abbess shall think otherwise;

13. Those that are in health may not have the use of Feathers but in their
pillowes, which may be covered with linen Pillow beeres, and they may admit
nothing in their Clothing or bedding, which has any show of singularity: but
only they may have such things as are af a mean price, and best indureth!

CHAPTER 9.
Of letters and Messages.
1. NOe Religious may receive any letters writings or tokens, either for her
self or for any other, for that is the Office only of the keeper of the
Parlow; what soever is delivered, the Abbess or by her permission the
Prioresse shall see* and they shall deliver or retain it as they shall think
good: neither may any tell that such letters or tokens were brought to any,
except the Abbess or Prioresse (by the consent of the Abbess) shall judge
otherwise!

2* When they write to their friends, let them study to write those things
which be seem their state and profession, and let them do it discreetly and
prudently, that that i^ friends may receive Edification, and spiritual proffitt
from them.

3. They must not be very easy to write often to their friends, or parents,
except upon necessity, or for some spiritual good that may seem to ensue
thereof, yea a Religious person ought to be very sparing in that kind, as
benig one dead to the world, and that desires only to live to Christ alone.

4* They may not write to their friends or parents before they have leave,
neither may they prepare for them any tokens, without the knowledge of the
Abbess, and without her consent; It is also forbidden all of them, to bestow
any Newyeares gift upon any; yet the Abbess may send somewhat to the Common
Friends of the Monastery or bestow somewhatt upon others inway of gratitude!

5. What writings letters, or Tokens soever they are to send let them deliver
to the Abbess and let them leave it to her judgment, whether she wll send
them or not; neither afterward may they curiousty inquire in what sort she
disposed of them!

6. None may carry any Messages or Salutatio^s from people abroad to any of
the Monastery wthout the Abbess command them soto do!

CHAPTER 10.
Of the Chapter;
1. The Chapters were instituted and appointed for the exercise of humility,
Conservation of Monastical disciplyne, and for the advancement of the Common
good of the Convent: There fore very great heed must be taken that the peace
tranquillity, and due subordination (whereby increase of spirit, and due
order is wont to be gotten and conserved) may not thereby be disturbed!

2. Once every week Chapter is to be kept, and that upon friday, except some
solemn Feast fall upon that day, for then it must be kept upon Manday, or
Wednesday not hindered with the like Feast except some of the ensuing Vigils
come that week, or some other just occasion hinder it;

3. They are to meet in Chapter upon the Vigils of Christmasse, and Easter
and the Assention of our lord, and on the Vigiles of Penticost of the
Assumption of our blessed lady, and of the Patron of their Order, and of their
Church, and so often like wise as the Abbess shall think good wherein they
are to perform the things that are set down in their Ceremonies, both for
the manifesting of their defects, and for the Correction thereof, as also for
the ordering businesses, and affairs as may occurr!

4. In the Chapter the Religious are to accuse themselves of the breach of
their Rule, or Statuts, or of their negligenc^s or defects, which when they
do, let them do it in such ^orte, that those that hear and see them, may
be edefyed by the Exemple of their humility! if it may be doubted whether
they may be rather offended then edifyed, let them not accuse themselves in
publik thereof, until they have consulted with the Superior about the same!

5. Ordinarely they are to accuse themselves of those things that they
committed in ^ublike, or which they think in time will ^ome to the notice of
others; therefore let them no publish their secrett faults, and defects,
except the matter be of small moment, or for their greater mortification, or
which they think may prove of great edification unto others, which
notwithstanding they shall first declare unto the Superior, that from her they
may have leave to do the same!

6. It properly appertains to the Prioresse, Mistress of the Nouices, and
Cellarier to inform the Abbess of those persons that are subject unto them,
and to accuse them in the Chapter, although others of the Religious also may,
and must in form the Abbess about them, when they see any tking committed
domageable for the spiritual good of any or contrary to the common good, or
reputation of the Convent, or that they perceive that these things are not
marked by others, or to be neglected by them!

7. If any be commanded to accuse another let her do it with due modesty,
moderation laying aside all bitterness of mind, and exageration of Words,
but rather see they do it with great show of Charity, and benevolence!

8. In the Chapter none may be accused of any fault, which is only known to
the accuser her self, or which cannot be pro^ed by the Testimony of two at
the least, yet all may tell the Abbess or Superior of the Faults of any,
though never so secrett, except perhapps private admonition, may more proffitt
the offenders, and there fore may well suffice, whereby it may be Judged to be
preferred and first to be used! yea every one is to know that it is most
severely prohibited them to accuse any, or blame them to the Superious, without
sufficient ground and knowledge of the matter!

9. None may either by word or deed tax any Sister, or gird at them for any
fault, or defect, whereof they have been admonished by the Abbess, or
Superior or for which they conjecture or suspect that they have been
reprehended, or punished! for they are to think that that admonition,
reprehension, or Correction proceeded of Charity, together with an intention
to uphold good discipline and Order; and that it was also received of the
party offendent, with full purpose to amend and reform her self thereof, for
the time to come!

10. The Sister accused may not refute the saying of her that accuses her,
except the Superior command her to declare the State of the matter; neither
may they contend, or pre^ume after wards to brabble amongst the^ selves under
punishment of a great Penance, which the Superior is to impose on them; which
thing is also to be observed, when any may c^ance to be accused out of the
Chapter, As the faults whereof they are accused, some are greater, then other
some; in like manner for the better avoiding and redressing of them, greater
and smaler penances are to be enioined, which is left for the most part to
the Discretion of the Superior, to enjoin such penances for every offense
which may be thought convenient who is to have regard she seek notto
afflictor trouble any but rather to endeavor their amendment, for the greater
honor of God, and her Charges proffitt, None must think them selves exempt
from these Penances, but as all are tied to the same Rule and Statutes, so
must they think them selves subject to the same Penances, for their
negligences in observation of disciplyne, or exerciseing virtue: and there fore
the Abbess may not in these things be more indulgent or fa^oureable to one,
then to another, but she is to bear an even hand over all, seeking for the
spiritual good and proffitt of all!

12. For as much as Penances are not oneby to be given for the correction of
faults, but for the exercise of Virtues, and mortifition of their Passions (as
has been said) there fore whoeseouer shall be reprehended at any time by the
Abbess or Superior, or shall by them receive any Penance for any Fault, for
which the Rule or Statutes have set down nothing expressly, let her give
noe show of impatience, so far ^ort as lies in her, nether let her frame
answeares, or excuses for her self except perhapps the reasons of those things
for which she is reprehe^ded and punished; be demanded of her, or that
somewhat be to be revealed which was not known, but let her endure all
without murmuration, and with as great peace of mind as she may much less it
may be lawful for any to excuse her that is reprehended, and (espe^ially in
her presence) seek to extenuate her fault, although she may after wards
certify the Abbess of all that has passed; if so be that it may seem so
expedient; And to the end all occasion of murmuring may be taken away none may
complain to any of the Religious, or to any other person, but only to her
from whomshee may expect redress, and if any feel any disgust for any matter,
let her make her recourse to the lady Abbess, or to the Superior, who shall
with Compassion give ear to her Playntes, and perform that toward her which
shall be judged to be according to Justice!

13. If she that is penanced, or any other for her at some time, will not
confer about her with the Superior or Abbess, for that they may think that
they cannot deal with them in such free manner as were necessary, then may
they go to the Assistants, or to some one of them, and make known to them
those things, whereof they would have their Abbess or Superior to be informed

14. For smaller faults such penances as these following may be enjoined by
the Abbess or Superior unto the offenders as the said Superiors shall think
good: to wit certain prayers, kneeling on the ground, and eating on the same,
to serve in the Refectory or Kitchen, to abstain from some part of their
meat, and such like And if any committ often any error, or through Custom or
contempt fall into greater trespasses, she may be punisted with fasting, with
public or private disciplynes, and with other such like Chastisements yet noe
Religious may give a discipline to an other, but the offender is to inflict it
upon her self, except the Abbess for some great cause do otherwise appoynte^

15. For most greweous faults let those things be done, which are appointed in
another place for the correction of such faults, without exception or regard
had to any degree, or Office what ^oeuer, although we hope that (through the
grace of God) this Congregation wilbee always clear and free from all such
faults!

16. When in the Chapter they are to conferr about the affairs of the
Monastery* let every one deliver their opinions with all Religious simplicie
and sincerity, as god shall put in their minds, and she that has once
finished her speech, may not speak aga^^e except she have new leave granted
her, neither may any presume to argueor dispute against the saying of any other
Sisters!

17. The professed of the Quier have voices in the Chapter, and their they sit
each one according to the order of their Professions, except the lady Abbess,
the mother Prioresse, the deames, and the Mistress of the No^ices, who take
their places, both here and in all places where the Convent meets, in that
order as here they have been named; for the most part the Iuniors or younger
professed speak first, that with greater liberty they may utter their opinions
concerning those affairs, that are then in deliberation;

18. In matters of great moment the Abbess shall fore warn the Chapter of
them some two or three days before, if the matter will suffer so long delay;
But in those matters where in the Religious may confer among them selves, they
may take their light and information only from the Abbess, Prioresse,
Assistents, or the Officers, if the matters to be deliberated upon,
appertain to their Charges and Jurisdictions;

19. what by the Chapter is approved or denied, the same the Abbess is to
approve or deny, except in some cases hereafter specified;

20. That both the Abbess, and also the whole Convent may proceed in their
Consultations, and determinations with more sweetness, light* and
assuredness; it is expedient that they have some one prudent and vertuo^s man,
but especialy well practiced in regular life and discipline, with whom they may
conferr and consult in matters of greater difficulty and wight; And this
Manmust be such an one; as may be according to the liking and Judgment of the
Religious, and by their suffrages he is to be elected;

21. If it so happen that the Religious disagree in their opinions about some
matter; let the said difficulty be propounded either in Word or writing to
the chosen person in the presence of the Abbess* of the Assistents, and of
some other two of the Chapter, unto whom the say Chapter shall committ this
affayre, and all shall be bound to follow that Order and Resolution, which he
he shall judge expedient, until the right Reverend lord Bishopp or the Visitor
shall other ways ordain; But he shall deliver in writing to the Convent his
said Judgment, that afterward to the Bishopp or Visitor it may better appear
howand in what terms the whole business passed;

22. If the Abbess would appoynte any thing which the Convent does not like
of, or would not do that which the Convent would have done, and if she would
proceed in some cases contrary to the Iugdment of all her Assiste^ts, or will
not assemble the^ together (for some secrett Cause which she thinks good
not to communicate with them) if the matter be of great momente she must
co^sult with the before said hosen person, and she may proceed according to
his Counsel delivered her in writing;

23. Out of Chapter none may seek to disprove the saying of any uttered in
Chapter, neither may any manifest unto any that was abse^t from the Chapter,
that which was said or done by her self, or any other, which may any ways
touch her or any other who soever; They are to be absent from the Chapter,
about whom there is any question to be propounded in Chapter, or any thing to
be handled about them: as all those (if the Chapter think it meet) who are
near in blood or kindred to them; and the Superiors are to warn and
command such persons, as are to be so absent, that curiousty they do not
enquire what was any way handled concerning them selves;

CHAPTER 11.
Of the sick and infirm Sisters.
1. When any feels her self more greiued in her bodily health then
accustomed, let her warn the Superior and Governor of the the Infirmary
thereof, and when she has fully informed her of her State, with due humility
and quietness of mind, let her suffer her self to be disposed of by them,
as they shall think good;

2. Let none refuse any thing ordained them by the Physicians, but having made
known her difficulty to the Abbess, she must leave it to her what she will
determyne of her case, and so she must be obedient to her, with all patience
and show of religious resignation;

3. See that she be not grievous to the Infirmere and others that have care
of her, neither may she be over importune in craving of those things which by
the^ she shall understand not to be expedient for her;

While she uses corporal remedies for the recovery of her health, let her
not forgett her spiritual good, which always is to be more prised; there
fore she must have regard to arm and shengthen her self inwardly with the
holy Sacraments of Confession, and of the blessed Eucharist; and if she
perceive, that the force of her Disease with peril to grow upon her let her
endeavor to call for the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, and for the holy
Viaticum, according as the Abbess, and Confessarius shall th^^ke best for her;

5. She must take noe medicine which the Physician or Superior shall not
approve, nether may any of the Religious Council her to receive any medicine,
nor may the sick her self ask the Counsel or advise of any other, without
the Superiors knowledge; yea noe Religious may be so presumptuous, as to
find fault with the usage of the sick person* in her hearing.

6. As it is expedient that the sick use such dispensations as by the
Superior are granted them while they are infirm and weak, yet they must
beware that they be not over care full of them selves; yet all may use a
discreet and prudent liberty, until they be sufficiently recovered, and
restored to their former strength, and such as are in their Recovery (if they
be many) must sit together with mod^sty at one Table* and in the beginning
of their meals some spiritual thing must be read unto them;

CHAPTER 12.
Of the distribution of their Time and hours;
1. TO the end they may proceed in the Service of God with greater alacritye,
and that their spiritual Exercises do not ouerpasse their bodily strength and
health, it is thought meet and convenient, that every one have granted her
seven whole hours to take her rest, and sleep, and that from eight of the
Cloak at night, until three in the morning or from ten till five except
hereafter it be thought more fit and expedient, that thy rise to Mattins at
midnight;

2. There fore they shall rise to Mattins at three, unless the said over
night, and when they have ended the said Mattins with the land every one must
repair to their Celles in good and fit time (and as the Abbess shall
^^poynte) they shall bestow an hour in Meditation or mental prayer, after
which hour ended they must continue in their Celles v^till nen in sovereign
silence.

3. At seven of the Clock they begin Prime after which hour ended ordinaryly
they keep Chapter when it is to be kept, al though the Abbess may call a
Chapter at any other hour, when need shall require.

4. After Prime* or the Third, a Mass is to be said, at which all are to be
present, except some Officer upon necessity be excused.

5. After nine of the Clock (when they do not fast) they must recite their
third: after their Third, their Conuentuall Mass is to be sung, or said;
after Mass the Sixth is sung or said: after that hour is ended they go to the
Refectory; But when they Fast according to their Rule, or according to the
Commaundment of the Church the Prime, or the Third being sung, or said after
seven of the Clock a Mass is to be celebrated, if there be a Priest to
celebrate at that time; after ten of the Clock they must sing or say their
Sixth, their Conuentuall Mass and Nynth; In lent after their Sixth, Nynth and
Conuentuall Mass, the C^ensong is to be song or said.

6. Let them so end their Mass and hours before noone, that when they fast
not, they may din^ at the half hour before a eleven; but when they fast
according to the Rule, they may dine at a eleven; but when it is a fast of the
Church according to the Custom of the Country, they dine at the half hour
before twelve: but in lent they are to dine at twelve: and While they are at
the Table their must be always reading; Therefore at the first Table whether
it be at dinner or Supper, the Benediction, and afterward Grace, must be
always sunge or said; But at the second Table every Religious shall perform
this by her self; But the reading both at the first and second Tables must be
performed after the same manner and altogether with the same observation of
silence and then they are to read whom the lady Abbess, or Superior, or she
who shall have the Charge shall appoynte.

7. After dinner an hour is permitted the^ for Recreation, and afterward at
Noone or somewhat after, they sing or say the Nynth, but so that upon those
days in which they fast not, they may be all in silence about one of the
Clock after Noone, that their for the space of an hour they may recollect
themselves* or occupy themselves in prayer, or in the reading of some
spiritual books: But upon fasting days this hour of silence is put of
until four of the Clock.

8. Out of lent they are to sing or say their Euensong at three of the Clock
after noone, which ended they may spend the rest of their time till supper or
Collation according to their discretion, or devotion; yet always in silence
except the Abbess shall think good to use their helps and assistance in some
business or Office: but if they fast then they keep their silence from four
till five, as has been said.

9. When it is not fasting day they go to Supper half an hour before five,
but when it is a Fast they receive their Colation at five which being ended an
hour of recreation is permitted them; half an hour after six they must all
go ^o Complyne, from which time they are to keep sovereign silence until
the end of Prime the next day; as also the said silence is to be kept, from
the first Peale to all the hours and Eue^song until they be ended* except
for some very great reasons the contrary be thought some times requisite.

10. They are to have allowed them a quartir of an hour after Complyne for the
examination of their Consciences, ymmediately after they are to read or hear
the matter of their meditation for the next day. When they have ended that they
must forthwith depart to their dormitory un less they say ma^ins.
and so apply the Remnant of their time in their necessary affairs, as at
eight the may be in bid.

11. We have thus briefly comprised these matters in this place which are more
amply and perticulerly set down in their Ceremonies, what time soever shall
be Vacant and free from the divine Office, from Silence, and from their other
affore said Obseruances, the Religious must employ in such labors and Works
as by the Abbess and Superior shall be appointed so that they work
noecurious, vain, and seculer things for wordly uses, as are purses, Bands
handchercheifes and the like.

12. When they come to the Work house the Mother Prioresse, or the more
ancient deane in her absence begins the Prayer Actiones nostras etc. after
which follows some short Lesson or reading in some Spiritual book, from the
hearing where of none may be absent without leave This ended every one is to
be dismissed or licenced to their works, labors, or Offices as it shall be
appointed them, all they must indeauor to accomplish with due silence, except
perhapps need require that they speak some what breifely, and by the way of
such matters as appartayne to their Offices and businesses, Finally when they
leave of their work the prayer Suscipe Clemen^issime Deus, being said, they
are in all peace to depart to their other Obediences.

CHAPTER 13.
Of such prayers as by Obligation are to be said for the living and the dead.
1. ONce every Month a Mass is to be sung or said for your Benefactors that
are alive, and so often every Religious shall say for them one Rosary, or the
third part of the Psalter of our blessed Lady, containing five Pater nosters
and fifety Aues with a Greede.

2. When the Abbess has rendered her Soul to her Creator, every Religious in
fit time when they shall have opportunity shall say fifeteene Rosaryes in
manner before specified, and the Convent shall take care to procure that therty
Masses be said for her.

3. Thirely in their Church after the whole Office of the dead a solemn Mass
must be sung for the Abbess deceased: like wise a solemn Mass (without the
Office of the dead) is to be sung on the third, seventh, and thirtith days
after her decease, or upon some other days more fit.

4. Also every year upon the Friday of the first week of Aduent, not
hindered with a Feast, other wise upon some other day in like manner not
hindered, they shall sing the Euensong and the Nocturne, with the Lauds, and a
solemn Mass for all the Abbess of there monastery departed this life.

5. When any professed Religious dies, in her Monastery, at the first
opportunity the whole Office of the dead, and a solemn Mass is to be sung,
and the like is to be performed for her upon the Third, Seventh, and Thirtith
days (but without the Office of the dead) or so many Masses shall be sung for
her upon some other days more fit for the performance there of, and other
seven Masses are to be said for the some, Moreover every one of the Convent
shall say five Rosaryes for her, and every day after Ma^tines and Euensong for
the space of a month they shall say de profundis with the Prayer Absolve, both
for the Abbess as also for the Souls of their Sisters deceased.

6. Upon the Friday after the first Sunday in Lent, not hindered with a double
Feast, otherwise upon another fit day next following, a solemn Mass shall be
sung for them that have dyed in the Monastery as also the Euensong of the dead
with one Nocturne and the Lauds shall be sung or said for them, the which may
be performed the day before the afforesayd solemn Mass be celebrated.

7. One solemn Mass, with the whole Office of the dead, shall be sung for
those Nouices, who in their Nouishipp shall depart out of this life, after they
have received the habitt of holy Religion.

6. Such Scollers as have entered in to the Monastery with intention to go
forward in Religion, shall have granted them after the Euensong and whole
Office of the dead, a solemn Mass to be offered and celebrated for them.

9. Once every year in Aduent after the Mass celebrated for the Abbesses (as
has been said) another shall be sung in due time for the Souls departed, of
such Religious of other Monasteryes as are of your Congregation, and live under
the same Rule and Statutes with you.

10. For the founder departed this life, all those things are to be performed
which are appointed for an Abbess deceased, and for a perpetual memory they
shall ^ing his Anniuersary Office with a solemn Mass and both alive and dead
^ee is made pertaker of all the Merritts of the whole Congregation.

11. When the Father or Mother of any professed Religious depar^eth this life,
a Mass must be sung for every one of them.

12. For the right Reverend Bishopp in whose diocese they reside they shall
sing the whole Office of the dead, and upon the Third, Seventh, and Thirtith
days, or some other three more fit days* they shall sing three other Masses,
and every one shall say a Rosary for his Soul: all which must be performed
for their Ghostly Father, who has much labored and taken pains in advancing
the good of the Monastery, and he may be made pertaker of the mirritts of the
Convent, if so to the Convent it shall seem expedient. Other Benefactors and
friends when they die, besides this Offices and Masses which the Convent may
grant them in particular they shall al so be made pertakers of all those
Masses which (according to the Missall of Rome) are said or sung every Monday
by your Chaplain.

13. If any thing be thought expedient to be further granted to any of the
afforesayd, let it be done upon devotion, and according to their deserts,
with this prouiso, tha^ noe burden be imposed upon the Convent for any long
space.

14. The Abbess and Convent shall found noe Mass for any person in
particular: yet they may maintain a Chaplain who may say Mass for such
persons deceased, as appertain to the Monastery, yet so, that the Fundation
may not be thought to be made for any one in particular.

15. Let a Register be made, where in the names of all the Benefactors both
living and dead who have notably advanced the temporal good of the Monastery
may be set down, In the same al so are to be set down all the names of
such Religious as in the Monastery departed this life, and in the same also is
to be written if any thing of noate happened to them, either in their life or at
their death that it may serve for an Example to Posterity, and let these
things be read the day before their years yndes, or Annyuersaryes, that
peculiar care and memory may be had of them.

16. And for as much as after holy devout Prayers, Alms deeds do much help
for the extinguishing of the Pains in Purgatory, it is here ordained that in
that monastery, where in any of the professed Religious passes out of this
^life, all such meat and drink as is given to the rest of the Religious, be
daily set on the Ta^le in the Refectory, in the same place where the fore said
Religious was wont to sit, as if she ware yet living; all which or as much as
the Lady Abbess or Superior shall appoynte, afterward is to be given in
Alms to some one poor person or to diverse, for the space of thirty days and
that for the benefitt of the Soul departed, Neither may any other sit in that
place, but it being left void, let a little Cross be placed on the Table
covered with a black Cloth, and another black Cloth be made fast to the
Wall in the vacant place in Remembrance of the dead Religious Sister, that the
rest may be moved to due Compunction by the memory of death, and be the more
excited to pray with greater fervor for her that is dead, and finally may
there by be stirred up to lead their lives more carefully and perfectly for
the time to come*

THE SECOND PART OF THE STATVTES* OF THE OFFICERS OF the Convent, and of
certain other persons belonging to the Monastery.

AT GANT.

Printed by IOOS DOOMS. 1632.

CHAP: THE FIRST.
Of the chousing of the Abbess.
1. ALL Order of good disciplyne, and almost the whole good and Conservation of
the Monastery depends upon the prudent government of the Abbess, therefore
it appertains to every one, for the good desire they bear to the good
aduanceme^t of the Convent, to be very careful in this point, that they
chouse such an one for the Gouernesse of all, who is likest to provide for the
peace and tranquillity of all, and especially for the setting forth of God his
honor in all things; Therefore such Religious as are professed for the Quier,
(for such only have active and passive Voices in the choosing of the Abbess,
and chiefest Officers) shall be bound as in a matter of so great moment and
weight, to make election of her whom in their Consciences they think most fit
for that Office.

2. None may be chosen for Abbess that is under forty years of age, and who
has not lived laudably for eight years, after their express Profession, as
the holy Council of Trent has decreed; except in Case such a one cannot be
found in the Monastery, then by grant of the same Counsel, another fit person
may be chosen who is above thirty years old, and that has been professed
for the space of five years, and has all requisitt Conditions for this
dignity, so that with all the Bishopp do yeald his consent there unto.

3. They shall observe that Order in delivering their Voices that is set down
in that Counsel, which is, that they are to deliver them at the Grate, and
moreover the Elect must have two parts of three of the Voices, according to the
Bull of Gregory the 13. set forth the 7. of April* in the year of our Lord
1574.

4. The Abesse (be sides those Conditions where of mention is made in the
second, and sixty four Chapters of the Rule) must be such a one, as of whom
their has been had noe sinister opinion, either since her coming to the
Convent, or before while she hiued in the World, that she be endewed with
the Gifts of body and mind as may best retain Authority, that she be in
especial manner free from all inordinate Passions, and finally that she be
such a one, that she may be ^udged fit and able to govern, and administer
well the Temporalities and Spiritualities of her Monastery.

5. Albeit it may so fall out that she which is unlawfully be gotten, may be
admitted into this Congregation; yet is not expedient to promote any such to
the government of the Manastery; Wherefore she shall not have passive Voice
to this dignity, except very great Reasons do urge the contrary: and when it
shall seen requisite to proceed otherwise, she must have for her election,
three parts of all the Voices of the Choosers, as in like manner that
Religious who is within three degrees of Con^anguinitie to the next precedent
Abbess, must have the same number of suffrages for her Eliction.

6. Noe particular Religious may have a double Voice for the Election of the
Abbess, or of any other Officer of the Monastery, as neither she that is
absent out of the monastery has any Voice to chouse al though the said absent
Religious may have passive Voice. But the Religious that is so sick that she
cannot be present at the Scrutiny must deliver up her Suffrage and Voice by
those Scrutatrices, that for that time shall be chosen by the Convent.

7. None of what dignity, Nobility, or degree soever besides the Religious of
the same Monastery professed for the Quier may have any Voice to elect. If
therefore any other person either by word or writing shall commend any one to
be elected by the Convent they must all take good ^eede that they deliver not
their Voices in regard of that Commendation: as also she may not succeed the
deceased Abbess, for whom the said Abbess did in her life time solicit the
Convent, except ^hee be chosen in such sort as before has been declared.

8. The Prioresse when the Abbess is wanting must govern the Monastery,
until an other Abbess be elected. She shall certify the right Reverend
Lord Bishopp of the death of her Superior, whom she shall dilligently hasten
to the election of her that is to succeed, the which ought to be done with in
a Month, at the most, if the Bishopp cann be present or conveniently appoynte
an other, who in his place may assist as the Election.

9. The Prioresse shall certify the Convent what answer she has received
from the right Reverend the Lord Bishopp, and if she receive from him any
letters let her carefully see they be read to the Convent, as also all such
Statutes concerning the Election, neither may any ask any Counsel of any
person for he Election of any but only of the ghostly Father, to the End she
may be the better directed in her Conscience yet so that the Religious
consult not one with another about the promoting or putting down of any, if
they shall do otherwise, they shall not only ever be deprived of actiu^ and
passive Voice, but she shall endure all whatsoever other Censures the
Prioresse and Convent shall in flict upon her.

10. It shall not be lawful for the Prioresse or any other Religious to
speak with Externes except some most important cause persuade the Contrary;
and how often soever they are then to speak with them two of the Deanes
shall be present who together with the Prioresse shall hear, and see
whatsoever is said or done; and what soever of special moment happens after
the Abbesses decease, she shall diligently declare to the Bishopp or to his
Vicegerent.

11. For as much as they incurr privation of Active and passive Voice, as also
other penalties who have solicited to get the Voice of another to the
promotion of any, so all shall be obliged to reveal all such practices under
the same penaltye; and it shall belong to the Bishopp to discern and determyne
what words and procedings are to be held for direct or indirect soliciting.

12. Although they may have an Eye to the Nobility, and honor of the kindred
of any that is to be elected, yet the Convent must be very careful, that
they do not neglect the spiritual good of their Monastery, while they regard
the temporal commodity.

13. To the End the election may the better proceed, and that they may procu^e
for them selves God his holy assistance in that which so much makes for their
common^ good, after the Funerals of the deceased Abbess the Convent shall
apply all their prayers* and Exercises for this End.

14. When they are to deliure their suffrages they shall abstain from mutual
Conversation for the space of three days, neither shall they come to geather
but to the celebrating of divine service, to the reading, and to the Refectory;
and upon the very day of the election, after they have song a Mass of the
holy Ghost, they shall retire themselves to their Cells, until they be called
to give their Voices.

15. To the end noe Error happen in delivering their Suffrages, the Prioresse
shall deliver the names of all the professed in writing that have any Voices,
either to the Bishopp or to him who supplyeth his place and in the said
writing she shall set down there age, the years and time of their
proffession, together with all such Exceptions or Canonical impediments, as
the Statutes have set down against their Election.

16. Two or three mature grave and Religious men are to be chosen by the
Chap^er, who for the more honor of that Action may be present with the Lord
Bishopp at ^he Election, and the Bishopp or he, who (at the Bishopps
appoyntement) shall pre^ide at the Election having observed all that ^s set
down in the Statutes, shall declare ^t the Grate the person elected; But if in
it ^he first two Scrutinyes sufficient suffrages ^oe not agree, then let those
three which ^ad the most suffrages in the last Scrutiny ^ee proposed to the
Convent, and in the ^^ird she that by balloting or by Boules shall have
sufficient Voices, is to be held for Elect. And if again in all the said
three Scrutinyes they have equal, or not ^ufficient suffrages* then the more
Ancient proffessed among them is to be preferred and to be denounced Abbess.

17. The election ended, and declared by him that presided, all the Religious
are to retire themselves into the Chapter: where (after the Elect has
according to the manner accused herself in general of all her defects) she
must according and to the tenor and form of that writing that is set down in
the book of Ceremonies, promise that she will never suffer any further
liberty to be brought into the Congregation, then the holy Rule and Statuts
do permit; but that she will endeavor together with the grace and
assistance of God that the Congregation be conserved in Spirritt, and advanced
in the same, and if she shall espy that it fails in any thing other wise
then it ought, that she will labor (calling those to counsel by whose
prudence and authority she may best work reformation) to reduce and restore
it to the former good estate, and to all this she is ^o sign and subscribe,
After this protestation made, let the Rules and Statutes be read which
concern the Abbess, and then by the Prioresse, or (if the Prioresse be
thosen) by the ancientest deane let her be placed in her Sea^e, and
aftherwards ^^ath one in particular shall do her that Reverence* and in such
manner as is declared in the book of Ceremonies, and from that time ever
afterward, shall yeald dutiful Obedience to all her Commandments; and all
the Officers shall in public resign to her their Offices, leaving it to her
Freedom, either to confirm them in their Officers, or according to the
Statutes by suffrages to appoynte new Officers, even as in our Lord she shall
think most expedient.

18. The Elect is absolutely forbid and prohibited to inquire of any whether
she gave her suffrage for her Election, neither may she either directly or
indirectly sifte what passed by her Subjects in the matter of her Election,
neither may any tell to any of the Religious, or to the Abbess, or to any
other, either directly or indirectly upon whom she bestowed her Voice; If the
Abbess shall offend herein, she is to understand that there by she has lost
all Jurisdiction, but if others signify so much either to the Abbess or to
any others, in so doing they loose both active and passive Voice for ever;

19. The Elect, before her benediction, for the space of some days shall live
separate from the rest* that well and dilligently she may examyne her own
defects and that she may employ that time in Contemplation of spiritual
matters, where by being illuminated by thy spirit of Gods light, she may the
better employ her self in those things that appertain to her Office: and
principally to obtain of him the gift of Wisdom, and humility, and a
fervent and burning zeal of his divine honor, and that she may endeavor to
Correct and reform her own defects, or any such particular abuses, as she
shall note to have crept into the Congregation.

20. In fit time (when the Lord Bishopp shall be at leisure) let the
accustomed Benedictio^ be parformed, either in the Church of her own
Monastery, or in some other as he shall appointe: at which some four
professed Religious (at the lest) elected by the Convent shall be present, and
those Expenses (by consent of the Chapter with regard had of Religious poverty)
are to be made, as may seem fit and seemly for such an Action.

21. The Abbess of this Congregation must be perpetual, except through age,
notable Infirmity, or (which god forbied) for some greuious Fault, (as here
after is set down) she shall be judged by the Voices of two parts of three of
the Convent, together with the Verdict of the Ordinary to be unfit for
government.

22. It may not be lawful for the Abbess or Elect (that is accused of any
^ault for which she may be brought into danger of deposition (either by her
self or others, to seek out who gave their Voices against her. If she shall
do otherwise even thereby she shall be deprived of her dignity, and they who
either directly or indirectly discovered what others have done there in
conceruing her, shall loose both active and passive Voice for ever after.

23. If the Abbess would resign her Office because she finds her self
much broken in age, and in her strenght, or that she might the better attend
to her own spiritual good, she may not obtain leave to do it, except two
of three parts of the Convent, together with the consent of the Ordinary do
yeald there unto.

24. If the Abbess shall obtain leave to resign, she shall make her said
Resignation in the presence of the right Reverend Lord Bishopp, or of him whom
he shall substitute in his place* And because it is presumed, that she has
done this for the common good of the Covent, the Abbess tha^ shall succeed,
must use her as aperpetuall Assistant about her, and to be subject to none but
to her self only; and in her die^^ all such allowance must be given to her
as is accustomed to the other Abbess, and the rest are to use the said
Reuerences to her, as they are accustomed to their other Abbesses, and when
she dies she is to enjoy all those privileges, which they enjoy that die in
their Offices, and she is to have a double Voice in the Election of her
Successor, (but for her own Resignation she shall have noe voice) as also
she must have a double Voice in the election of all the other Officers, which
by the Conuents Voices are to be chosen.

25. If the Abbess espy any Error committed by her predecessor, let her so
handle the matter, that she seek still to conserve her Reputation, and as
often as she makes mention of her deceased Predecessor, she must never name
her but in honorable manner, as she must likewise hau^ care that all her
Subjects do the same.

THE II. CHAPTER.
Of the chosing of the other Officers.
1. NOe Religious may have passive Voice for the principal Officers, except
^hee have lived laudably four years at the least in Religion, after her
Profession; and be five and twenty years old complete, except urgent
necessity be to the contrary.

2. The principal Officers, to wit the Prioresse, deanes Mistress of the
Nouices, Assistants, depositary Cellarier, Sacristane, Chantresse, Portresse,
Thourier, Infirmare, and Guardrobe, must be chosen by more then half the
Voices of the Convent, their Voices must be set down in writing, and the
said writings must be perused by the Abbess, and the Scrutatrices, and they
are to be publicly read in the hearing of all either by the Abbess or by
one of the Scruta^rices, whom she will appoynte, and the said writings are all
to be burned before they depart out of the Chapter.

3. If any difficulty arise about the delivering of their Suffrages, and that
it happen that sufficient Voices do not ^agree, let that Order be taken as
before was set down in the Election of the Abbess, when the like case does
fall out.

4. She that shall endeavor to procure for her self, or for any other, by
any means the Voice of any for any of the afforesayd Offices, she shall be
deprived of all active and passive Voice while she lives; which punishment
she shall also incurr, that by un just persuasions and complayntes shall
labor to hinder any from any Office, except she make her complaynts only to
the Lady Abbess.

5. These before named Officers are to be chosen every third year, and
therefore at a time for this appointed (to wit upon the first Monday in Lent
not hindered by a Feast, otherwise upon the next day following) they shall all
resign their Offices in the Chapter house, and the Convent must chouse others
in their places; Yet it is permitted that the Convent may only once confirm
the self same person in her Office; where in notwithstanding she shall not
continue more then for fix years; But if any one is able to fulfill and well
accomplish diverse Offices, it is left to the Conuents liberty to constitute
fewer.

6. The term of three years is limited only for those Officers as have well
performed their Offices: but if any be found not sufficiently fit for her
Office, she may be discharged of her Office, whenever the Abbess and
Convent think fit.

7. The Sister of the Lady Abbess may not be chosen for Prioresse, deane,
Assistant, depositary; Cellarier, Thourier, or Portresse, while the Abbess
lives, except she has the third part, of four of the Voices of the Convent.

8. The Inferior Officers, who are not set down^ among the afforenamed
principal Officers, and are appointed for diverse Functions in the Convent, may
be chosen for such offices by the Abbess her self alone, and whereas they
may be often changed, as the rest, yet if any have laudably behaved her self
in her charge she may the longer be continued in the same, yet so, that this
be done rather upon necessity, then upon any private and particular
affection.

9. None may confer with any about the ^etting up or taking away of any
Office, but with the Abbess alone* or in public Chapter, and if she proceed
otherwise, she is to be punished at the discretion of the Abbess and Convent.

10. All the Officers are to read or hear once every month all such Rules,
directions, and Statutes as appertain to their Offices: and the Inferior
Officers are to have them written, and set up in some place in their Offices.

THE III. CHAPTER.
Of the Office of the Abbess.
1. FOr as much as the Abbess is by almighty God appointed Gouernesse over the
Spowses of Jesus Christ, to direct and confirm them in the way of his holy
Commandments and of a perfect Religious life, there fore she ought to excel
all her Subjects in Charity, Faith, Chastity, Wisdom, and notable humility,
that she may advance and set them forwards to the due keeping and observance
of their holy Rule and Constitutions and to the topp of all perfection noe
less by her exemplar life, and behavior then by the authority and dignity
of her Office, Where upon she must carry to all a motherly heart and
affection, and endeavor to make them familier and tied in love toward her
self, that with greater confidence they may make their recourse unto her, as
to their common mother and there by submitt themselves to all her
Commandments, and Counsels, and perform all things, drawn rather by the
spirit of love, then by fear and force of Constraynt;

2. Every day in particular manner she ought to employ some time where in she
may seriousty consider with her self, by what manner and means, she may best
set forward the Common good and proffitt of her charge. And she ought to
endeavor (so far forth as the sundry burdens and businessesfo the Monastery
will permit) to assist with the rest and be present in the Quier and other
places of Obseruances, and to observe all those things unto which the rest are
tied.

3. She must have a care of the spiritual and Corporal good of all, yea and
of every one in particular, she must suffer each of them to have a free
access unto her, so often as they shall request it, or as she shall know or
understand it wilbee profitable unto them, and that she her self may well and
fittly attend thereunto.

4. She must receive and intertayne suc^ as come unto her with all suauity and
gentleness; and she must be very wary that by her Countenance, or vehemence
of her words, or manner of carriage and proceeding she do not at any time
fear them, that with freedom and Confidence they may not discover and lay
open their difficulties unto her.

5. Let her show a motherly affection to such as any way offend, that they may
see that heir fault and not their person is displeasing to her, and let her
carry her self, that she may not be noted to be disgusted with any one;
finally in giving of Penances let her have an Eye to the spiritual good of
every one, and that noe ways she seek their trouble and vexation, always
diligently and maturely thinking and casting with her self, by what means the
pennances which she enioyneth may help to advance their spiritual good.

6. In such things as touch the Common disciplyne, let her show her self
firm and constante, and let her not at any time suffer any thing to be
violated and infringed; where unto they are bound by Rule or Statute. But in
those things that are heldlesse essential let her not be to hard, and
difficill in dispensing, and so let her maintain good Order and disciplyne,
that she may discretely and prudently apply her pensations to the solace of
her Subjects, and the more service of almighty God.

7. Let her often enquire of the Prioresse and conferr with her, concerning
the State of the Convent, and also of the Mistress of the Nouices,
depositayre, and Cellarier, concerning all such matters as belong to their
Charge; and she must command them to repair to her so often as need shall
require.

8. She shall once every month, either by her self or by some others, whom
she shall appoynte, (especially the deanes) visit all the Offices of the
Monastery, but especially of the depo^itayre, Cellarier, Sacristane,
Guarderoabe and In^irmair; also once every month she shall visitt by her
self, or by her said assigns the Cells of all the Religions, and the peculi^r
offices of all under Officers, that she may see how in a^l things Religious
d^cency, cleanlynesse, and order be kept, and observed;

9. Let her b^e vigilant that all the Officers execute and perform their
Offices with great sweetness, Charity and humility, and let such be put from
their Offices, that behave them selves trouble somely therein; and are found
harsh and greuious to other; yet let her not give casy ear to Inferiors
against their Superiors, and what she hears let her maturely and
dilligently wayghe and examyne, and without very reasonnable cause Inferiors
are not to have access unto her, for those matters, which the subordinate
Officers can sufficiently per form by them selves, and would do so if the
said Inferiors would come unto them.

10. Although she ought much to confide upon her Officers, yett let her
beware that nothing be permitted to their inordinate Passions, and if at any
time any Contention or dispute should happen among them, whereby auersion of
mynds and indignation may be feared, let her carefully seek to hinder this
Inconvenience, by making peace among them, and by procureing that they always
show such signs of humility, and Charity each to other, as may nourish and
increase religious affection, and love among them.

11. She must have a special care of such as are sick and infirm, and those
she must often visitt, and endeavor to confort, and in all things (as much as
lies in her power) let her have care of peruerty, but yett so that Religious
decency be still mayntained.

12. Let her frequent the common Refectory with the rest, so often as by her
health, or her other great aff^yres she may and at Table let her have some
meat above, and different from the rest, whereof she may imparte to those
whom she shall think to be most infirm and weak, and when she is absent
from the Refectory* let her by turns inuit such Religious, as by this way
she shall think their weakness and infirmity may be helped or conforted.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
Of the Office of the Prioresse.
1. THE Prioresse is chosen to ^ase the Abbes^e of a great part of her
burden, she, in her speech especially, and in her conversation, ought to
study how to edify every one, who as she is a guide to others, so much she
be a Rule of all good Virtuous life and behauio^r, not making any show of
affected Superiority or permitting the same to any other, that the Inferiors
being conjoined with Elders and Superiors may serve each other in sincere
humility; and therefore albeit she be the mother of the rest, yet according
to her Office is she to labor to serve the rest;

2. When the Abbess by reason of her other hindrances cannot execute those
things that appertain to her Office, then it belongs to the Prioresse, to
do all those things which the Abbess her self should have done, if she had
been present, as to give the Benedictions in the Quiar, to grant leave to
speak with Externes, to receive and give presents, and such like; where of
afterward she is to certify the Abbess in sit time, yea commonly she may
do all those things, which in these Statutes are said, and set down, that
by the Superior they may be done, especially then when they cannot have
access to the Abbess her self.

3. In the Absence of the Abbess she is to command according as matters
occurr in the Quiar, Chapter house, Refectory, dorture, and Work house, yea
and in all other places, where the Convent is in any time assembled; In these
places she is always to be present with the Convent, or if she cannot be
present, she shall have care that some one of the deanes may supply her place

4. In her Words and external behavior let her demean her self with all
sweetness, and let her take diligent care that in the Chapter house (where
in the absence of the Abbess she is to reside as has been said) nothing be^
done either by her self or others, that may give just occasion of offense, but
let her endeavor to induce her Sisters with all suauitie, and external show
of love to the accomplishing of those things which are expedient, and let her
offer her self ready to yeald them all comfort and satisfaction, making
herself familiar unto them yet retayning her due gravity, that by those
means all may reverence her and with their dutiful carriage acknowledge her
for their Superior.

5. Once every month she shall go to the Abbess to acquainte her with those
things, which shall be thought requisitt she should understand.

6. Let her not thrust her self in to meddle whith those Offices, whose care
and Charge, are by the Abbess and Convent committed to others, neither let
her offer to dispose of the Converse Sisters.

7. She must not suffer such as have Offices to dispose of themselves without
her knowledge, yet may she not hinder them in their Functions, and Offices;
that so all matters may be performed in the best Order, and without Confusion.

8. She must not permit that any thing be infringed or innouated, and when
she perceaueth or fears any great inconvenience to ensue, let her acquaint
the Abbess therewith, that according to her appoyntement some remedy may be
provided for the same.

9. Although she may reprehend and correct her Subjects for lesser faults, as
the Mistress of the Nouices may the Nouices and Scholars, and the Cellarier
the Converse Sisters, yet if any faults be doubtful or more greiueous then
ordinary, or of that Consideration that they may seen worthy of more severe
Chastisement. then she (as also those two others) shall make them known to
the Abbess, that it may be provided for according to her Judgment, and by
her authority.

10. Let her dilligently put in Execution what soever is appointed and
ordained b^ the Abbess, and in her proceedings an^ Actions let her wholly
submitt her Iudg^^ment and opinion to hers, persuading al^ others to do the
same, not contradictin^ or improuing her Ordinances; if she do^^ other wise,
besides due Correction (unto which she is subject) she must understand that
she may be deposed from her Office as unworthy thereof.

11. Let her not permit any to be in the Cloister, or Garden without leave,
nor in the Garden without a Companion; in time of Recreation let her have care
that all meet together, that she may see what soever passes; finally at
night when they go to bed, either by her self or by some other, she is to
visitt all their Cells.

12. She shall be exempt from serving in the kitchen, and Refectory, except the
Abbess for the increase of her humility, shall otherwise ordain or permit.

THE V. CHAPTER.
Of the Deanes.
1. THE Deanes have noe other Office in the Monastery, then prudently to
observe, if there happen any thing in the behavior, or procedings of the
professed Religious, that may need correction or amendment, yet may they
reprehend none, but that which belongs to their Office, is this, to help all
by their Counsel, and their mature Judgment if so be that they may think
they be able to help them with their friendly admonition; but if by that way
they find that they do them little or not good, then let them make it known
to the Abbess, or Prioresse, or Cellarier that they may apply more forcible
and necessary Remedies to the spiritual disease.

2. Also of these deanes the Assistentes are chosen, and if all the deanes
cannot be Assistentes (because the number of the deanes may be greater then
the number of the Assistents, which may be but four) then they that are the
more ancient professed, mnst be preferred before the rest. If the deanes are
fewer then the Assistants, then those Religious who have noe other Office in
the Monastery may be elected to make up the number of the Assistants.

The lady Abbess is to appoynte ten Religious, or thereabouts to the ca^^ of
these deanes: so that all the professed (only the lady Abbess and Prioresse
excepted) must be under their charge; every one of the professed unto these
deanes (as all the Religious to the lady Abbess, and Prioresse: and the
Converse Sisters to the Cellarier; and the No^ices to their Mistress) must do
that Reverence and show that respect, which the holy Rule in the seventy one
Chapter commands to be done to their Ancients, and in that case, these only
are to be esteemed their Ancients.

4. The deanes in the absence of the Lady Abbess and Prioresse, are to preside
in all places of obseruances, and to bear the place of their Superior, which
every one of them are to perform, according to the antiquity of her
profession; as also in the absence of the deanes the more ancient professed
must bear the same Office, except the Abbess or Prioresse shall appoynte
otherwise.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
Of the Mistress of the Nouices.
1. ALL singular show of Virtue, together with a great Zeal, and sesire of
perfection must appear, and brightly shine, in the life and behavior of the
Mistress of the Nouices, that by her good Example she may the better excite
and stir up those, that are under her charge, unto all those things which
their State of life requires of them; In her carriage let her always give
show of sweetness, and love* and in her words, let her have a special care
to avoid all bitter contumelious, and disgraceful language, and let her
accommodate her commandments to times, persons, and places, well considering
with her self what every one is able to do, and not only what they ought, or
should do, seeing they come to Religion, that desire to be there in perfected,
and are not as yet perfect.

2. As every one comes to the Monastery, let her so dispose of her as the
Abbess shall appoynte, and she shall have care that such as have entered do
examyne and discuss their life past very dilligently and so make their
general Confession, as soon as they can possibly.

3. Whatsoever they that come bring with them, let her receive it of them, to
be delivered to the depositary, and what soever she receaueth or delivers,
let her setr down in writing, which writing every one that enters shall
subscribe with their own hand, of all which things they must dispose a little
be fore they make their profession.

4. She must have care that the Nouices and Scholars have a good method in
meditating delivered unto them, and she must see they be taught how they may
use vocal prayer fruytefully, she is to teath them the Ca^echisme and
Christian doctrine, and the manner how to examyne their Consciences and the way
how to root out all Vices and to overcome all evil habittes and Customs, and
finally to morti^y their Passions that together with the contempt of
themselves, they may increase in the love of God.

5. After they are entered, she shall declare unto them, what they are to
undergo, and what the Congregation expects at their hands, she shall often
read unto them those Rules and Statutes which appertain to them and belong to
common disciplyne; then shall they deliberate with themselves (weying duly the
forces of their bodies and minds) what is most expedient for them, and if they
continue in their former purpose, then they are by holy meditations to prepare
and arm themselves for those things, which they are to take upon them, in the
holy State of Religion.

6. Moreover the Mistrisse of the Nouices must teach those that are under her
government a Religious manner of carriage touching their standing, going,
looking, speaking, eating, and all other such Actions; that they show therein a
Religious decency and comeliness; to wit, that in their gate they be not two
hasty, except urgent necessity force them that in talking they use noe gestures
with their hands, especially while they speak to their Superiors, and to
Externes, but either they are to hold them under their Scap^lare, or within
the Sleeves of their great habbitt, that they altogether fly and avoid all
affected speath, and whatsoever may savor of secularitie, or Courtly Vanity
and Curiosity, which also in their outward be hauiour they must dilligently
eschew* that they cast or fasten not their eyes upon the Countenances of their
Sup^riours, or of Externes, neither houlding them to much upward, or downward,
that they speak not to loud, or burst out into to much intemperate laughter,
especially when at the Grates they speak with Externes, the which liberty they
mu^t understand is seldom to be granted or permitted them, that they eat,
not two fast, to slowly, or to greedily, or that they look not about them
while they eat, that whyl they drink they hold their cupp with both their
hands, that they seek to prevent every one in doing them honor, and Reverence
that they carry themselves with gravity, and staydnesse, that they have ^ care
to keep cleanelynesse in their Cells and Garments, and that in their
Countenances they show mirth and Alacrity, that w^yle they turn, they turn
their body as well as their head; and finally that they c^rry themselves
gratefully and lovingly to all; and if their be any thing unhandsome in their
natures, Customs, or Education, let the Mistrisse endeavor to reform it,
and bring them to a better fashion, and let her have a care to instruct them
exactly, in the holy Ceremonies of the deuyne Service, and in all the
Obseruances of their Religious State.

7. If she see any to be Drawn to do their duty upon fear, she is to
understand that such are not very fit for Reliligion, although a moderate
fear (especially of God) does not a little healpe and conduce thereunto.

8. She must labor to encourage such as are dejected, and pusilaminous, yet
if she see any to be of sufficient Spirit and Courage, she must not for all
that urge them to much; let her be wary and Circumspect in all her
proceedings towars them, and let her persuade them to discover their
difficulties to their Ghostly Father, that they may the better be grounded in
their Vocation, and consequently be the more securely guyded and Directed in
the Scope and end which they ought to aim at.

9. The Nouices and Scholars must be tried in base and humble Exercises, so
often as may be thought expedient, yet they shall not be sent to the places
appertayning to the charge of other Officers, except the said Officers consent
thereunto; and let the said Scholars and Nouices be warned, that the Convent
ought and will seek to be informed of their humility, Obedience, and desire
of the Contempt of themselves.

10. Let her not persuade or oblige any of them to any kind of austeritie,
but by the Counsel of the Abbess.

11. She must beware that they be not overthrown and carried away with their
first fervor, while therein they pass the limitts of discretion, and
therefore she shall admonish the Ghostly Father hereof, if their happen any
i^^t cause therein.

12. To the end all may be the better in formed of the natures and
dispositions of the Scholars and Nouices, and that they that enter for such may
better know the unity Charity, modesty, and Religious manner of life which
the Religious embrace and lead, the Mistr^^^^ (by Commandment from the lady
Abbess) shall make choice of such to converse and conferr with her Nouices^
and Scholars, who either by their behavior, experience, or good example, are
best able to edify instruct and help them.

13. The Mistress is to be subject in all things for domestical disciplyne to
the Prioresse, so far forth as she be not hindered from the Execution and
accomplishing of her Office, where by she is obliged to teach her Scollers,
and Nouices, to sing, read, pronounce a right, and the like; So also the
Nouices and Scholars in the Quier, Chapter house, Resectory, and in all such
places, where the whole Convent must be subject to the said Prioresse,
wherefore the Mistress may not command them there in any matter, that there
by she may yeald the more Reverence and respect to the Superior, and if any
difficulty or inconvenience happen here by or that the Mistrisse be hindered
from the due Execution of her Office, let her seek to the Lady Abbess, for
the Remedy there of.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
Of the Assistans.
1. LET such Assistants be chosen, as upon whose prudence, and Counsel the
Abbess may very well rely, in such difficulties as may occurr: whose also may
well Guide and direct such Religious as come unto them at any time for comfort,
or would inform them of matters occurring according to the Statutes. Therefore
they must be very discreet and circumspect, noe ways headdy, free from all
inordinate Passions, Zealous of the common good of the Convent, which they
ought to set fo^ward according to their best skill, and they ought to be very
care full mayntayners of what soever makes for the peace and good disciplyne
thereof.

2. For as much as the Prioresse is wont to be admitted to the Cons^ltations,
four Assistants wilbee sufficient, and they are not to exceed the number of
four, and the younger professed among them, must first in Order deliver her
opinion, before the Abbess declare her mind, or what she would have
concluded; let them all well and maturely ponder the matter propounded, and if
so be that the matter may suffer delay, and be of great Consequence, let
them have longer time to discuss and consider it with themselves, that thereby
it may be the better determined.

3. Once every week or at least twice every Month, they must be called to
Consultation at that hour which the Abbess shall appoynte, where she her
self must also preside, and be present; and one of these Consulters and
Assistants must every week have access to the Abbess, to know of her when
the Assistants are to be called to Consultation. Before the Consultation
begin, Veni Creator Spiritus etc. with the prayer. Deus qui corda fidelium etc.
is to be said, and the Consultation being ended; Suscipe clementissime Deus
etc.

4. The things that are handled in Consultation most commonly are these, The
Causes and Remedies of disciplyne broken or neglected; the defects of Officers
in their Offices; the trouble or disgust of any one conceived against any
Officer; want of health in any through indiscretion; dissentions, secretts
meetings, and whisperings; what manner is to be observed in enioyning of
Penances; the Receiving or delivering of Messages or writings to Externes; the
deposing of Officers; or appointment of new Officers; the Measure of their
diett, to greather with the defect or excess committed in the same; what
persons are to be propounded to the Convent, and such like.

5. Let them permit nothing that may weaken disciplyne, and if they consult
about the enioyning of any Penance, after the thing has been maturely
determined, let them not afterward interpose themselves for any moderation.
But if upon better Information they find the Case, to stand other wise then
when they consulted about-it, and that thereby they fear any hurt or
inconvenience may ensue, they must make it known to the Abbess, and so
committ it wholly to her discretion.

6. Of those things that are propounded unto them they may not debate among
themselves out of the place of Consultion, and then noe otherwise then in the
presence of the Abbess; and so in like manner of those things about which
they have had Consultation. If they shall offend in the contrary, they must
endure the same penance, that ^he other professed should incurr, if they
offended in the like Case, much less may they communicate unto others, either
within, or without the Convent, what has passed in Consultation, or which may
any wise touch any person of the Convent; and if any should understand that
Consultation has been had about her self, yet none shall tell her what
resolution has been taken about her, but they shall remitt it to the Relation
of the Abbess her self, except the Abbess does otherwise ordain.

7. In their Judgments let them conform themselves to the Commandment of
the Abbess neither may they contend among themselves, or stand to st^bbornely
in their own opinions, they must answer each other with meaknesse, and
propose their reasons with all humility, yet also with Religious freedom and
liberty. Where upon the lady Abbess must be willing to hear their aduises,
and must permit them to have their necessary liberty in speaking their mynds;
yea moreover she must inuit, rnd encourage them, that herein they carefully
do their Office, and duty, and if any thing chance to be spoken by any of
them, that may be distasteful to her, let her rather wink thereat, then that
the Assistants be made afraid to deliver with fredome their opinions, as they
are obliged to do in matters appertayning to the common good: neither ought
the Abbess to depart from that they all Counsel her, but upon sufficient
ground and reason.

8. If nothing occurr whereof they should consult yet the Abbess ought to call
them together to see if her ^onsulters have any thing to propound unto her,
and if nothing of worth do occurr they may be dismissed.

9. When the Religious will declare to the Assistants their mynds concerning
those things which they are not willing to declare to the Abbess her self,
whereby s^ee may be the better informed, let the Assistants, (naming none)
perform this with all charity, and sincerity, and bring them an answer and
resolution as the Case requires.

10. Every one must know that they may not deal about any matter with the
Assistants, but upon this Condition, that what they declare unto them, should
be made known unto the Abbess, neither may they give ^are to any thing under
Condition that it be kept secrett and unknown to the Abbess.

11. After the Assistants leave their Offices, yet they may not discover to
others in any sort those things that have been done or uttered in their
Consultations, except only such matters as by the Abbess were made common be
fore and imparted to others, and if they shall be found faulty here in, there by
they shall be disinabled t^ have this Office again for eu^r after; and to the
end the assistants may be more free in delivering their opinions, by the
Statutes it is for bidden, that the Abbess do manifest unto others, what was
said or counsayled her by any of the assistants, but only (as the Case may
require) she may tell the Convent what was counsayled her, yet so that she
discover not unto them, the name of her that gave her Counsel or aduese there
in.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Of the despositayre.
1. THE Office of the depositayre is to keep all such things as belong to the
necessary provision of the monastery, as Woolen, linen, money, and the like:
and she is to render an exact account of all Receipts and expenses to the
Abbess, whom she is to certify of all such things of moment which she
receaueth, or spends* and there in she is to follow her order and and
appointment.

2. She must have a Chest with two locks, one of the keys the Abbess must
keep, and she the other, so that it may not be opened witho^t them both. In
this Chest all the money of the house must be kept, and from thence it must
be taken as need requires, except the Abbess will keep by her some small
sum, for such uses as some times may occurr.

3. She must have the keeping of the great Seal of the Convent, and therewith
she may Seal nothing without the Consent of the Convent, she also must
keep all Originalls and other writings, and Evidences in a Coffer with a
double lock, where of the Abbess must have one key and she another.

4. Once every year the depositor together with the Guardroabe must see what
every one has, and what they want, they must set all down in writing, that
afterward they may consult with the Abbess, how they may provide for the
necessity of ea^h one, and let them labor to carry an even hand to all* And
to the end all Confusion may be a^oyded, a certain hour must be appointed,
at which time ^^ery day all the Officers and the Religious ^ust repair to the
depository for their Ne^essities.

5. When she delivers by appointment ^f the Abbess any thing to the
Cellarier, ^^ardroabe, or Cater, let her demand a writing of the person that
receaueth it, where in the Receipt is contained, and let her show her self
prompt and easy to execute those things, unto which she is bound by her
Office, and in noe wise must she show her self wrangling or contentious; yet
if in her opinion, she thinks that any thing may be better done, or that
she espyeth, that any thing is more spent then ought to be, let her make
Relation there of to the Abbess.

6. Let her take care that all Provisions be made in their due times; for
which cause she must some times conferr with the Abbess, and Procurator of
the Monastery, as also with the Cellarier, conceruing those things which are
under her charge, and which she is to use.

7. She must gather together all old things of the Monastery, as the old
locks old Iron and such like, also she must keep an account of all the
Revenues, and sommes of all the particular debts, and of such things as are
owing to any; or by any to the Monastery, and what time the said payments are
to be made.

8. Once every year she shall render a^^ exact account of all her Receips and
Expenses, where of she is to deliver a Copy to the Abbess, who shall also
writ it down in her book, and she must seek to have the Abbess subfigne
to her yearly Reckonings, whereby it may appear that she has approved all,
and that all things have passed according to her Order and well liking.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
Of the Cellarier.
1. THE Cellarier must often conferr with the Abbess about those things which
appertain to her Office, and she must perform that both for quantity and
quality of the meat, which she shall appoynte; she must see that all things
be well keept in the Spence and Buttery, that nothing be negligently spent or
wasted in meat drink or any other thing committed to her charge, and with a
special care she must endeavor that what soever belongs to her O^^ice* be
kept clean and hand some.

2. In the manner of dressing and seaso^ing her meat, she must look to that
which is most whole some, and let her ^^oyde all Curiosity and excess in all
things ^^ll beeseeming a Religious estate; yea if any thing be superfluons
let her keep it care fully, to be spent, and used in due time and Season.

3. Let her foresee what is to be provided for the day following, and let
her certify the Cater thereof, and that by writing* so likewise let her
inquire in good time of the Cook* what she wants, that in due time
Provision may be made thereof; and if the depositair shallbee wanting to her
in any thing, she shall only signify it to the Abbess.

4. If at any time any of the Professed of the Quier be sent unto her for any
thing, she is to deliver unto them that which they have need of with all due
Charity and sweetness as her ability will permit her.

5. She must so dispose all her businesses that she may be still present at
the divine Office, so far forth as she can possible.

6. The Converse Sisters both Scholars, Nouices as also the professed, and all
the S^ruantes of the house are under her char^ge, and she must be very
watchful t^ keep them all in peace and Concord, dir^^cting them with all
meakenesse and gentle^nesse, taking care that they be not tw^ much over
charged with their labor, an^ that nothing be wanting to their spiritual^
proffitt and good; but especially of her Conu^rse Sisters.

7. Sh^^ must instruct her Converse Sisters in the Catec^isme, and Chri^tian
doctrine, and how to pray and make their Confession, and to (...) to the
sacreed Communion with (...) and proffitt.

^. L^tt her s^^ that such Converse Sisters ^s ^re appaynted for sundry Offices
have their directions written in their several Offices, which she must take
care that once every Month they be read unto them, she must also have an
Inuentory of all such things, as eueryone under her charge does use, and she
must often visitt them all, that she may see that nothing be brok^^ or ned^
rep^^^tion.

9. Let her not behave her self contentionsly ^r distastfully to others, but
rather endeavor to maintain both her self and all her charge in ^^ward
peace, and let her seek by her Religious outward temp^rate go^ernment,
moderation, and man^^r of speech to give edification to others, by the example
of her virtuous and true religious life.

THE X. CHAPTER.
Of the Portresse.
^. IT is the Office of the Portresse to keep the key of the Gate often the
Mona^^^^y, the lock where of must have two ^eyes, so that it may not be
opened wit^out them both. One of these keys must be kept by the Abbess, and
when soever ^^y person is to enter into the monastery, or any thing is to be
brought in, someone Religious is to be sent by the Abbess who may bring with
her, her key, and there with open and shutt the said Gate, and so carry it
back to the Abbess again.

2. If any are to enter into the Monastery from abroad, the Portresse
together with her Companion whom the Abbess or the Superior shall appoynte
(for fewer then (...) shall never accompany them) must bring them to the place
whether they are to go^, and none may speak unto those persons but in a word
or two, and as it wear, Obiter, or by the way, neither may the Portresse
permit every one to open the Gate, or deliver her key to any, but to her whom
the Superior shall appoynte.

3. If there shall be more Gates to the Monastery then one, every one of them
must always have two keys, where of the Abbesse^ must have one, and the
Por^resse another; and the Portresse must be very careful to see they be
always well shutt; and that whosoever are let into the Monastery, do
always enter and depart at full day light, except some most urgent Causes of
necessity do exact the contrary, and after Complyne she is to give up her
keys to the Custody and keeping of the Lady Abbess.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
Of the Thourier, or the Prefect of the speaking place.
1. THIS Officer must have a Cell near unto the speaking place* that she may
be the readyer to answer ^uch as come, and to deliver such messages as are
requisitt.

2. She must demand the names of such persons as come to the speaking place
(if she know them not) and she must endeavor to inform the Lady Abbess, or
Prioresse of the quality of such persons, as require to speak with any one.

3. She shall call noe Religious to speak with Externes at the Grate without
the the license of the Prioresse at the least, and what soever she receaueth
of Externes, she must deliver it to the Abbess or to the Prioresse so soon
as well she may.

4. When the Religious are called to speak with Externes she must notify unto
them the quality of the persons, that if they be persons of quality they may
go unto them in their great habitt, and when she calls any to the Parloy or
speaking place, let her ^ignify unto her what Companion she is to have,
according as the Abbess or Prioresse shall appointe; and if the Conversation
seem to be unprofitable or inconvenient let either her Companion or the
Prefect of the place prudently and discreetely call her thence.

5. If any Externe be denied to speak with any, let her in good Religious
manner seek to give the person due satisfaction, by her yealding those reasons
that are for that purpose, and in her speeches, or answeares, let her have
care of edisication, and religious Civility, and being by the Bell called to
the Parloyre, let her make have to go thither, and make answer to the
person that called, and see that there she use noe other talk, then that
which is necessary and convenient.

6. She may not suffer any to execute her Office, but only that Religious
whom the Superior shall appoynte.

7. She may receive noe writing or message to be sent to any, except the
Abbess, Prioresse, or Convent be acquaynted there with, except it be to be
sent and addressed to the Bishopp, or Visitours, as hereafter in the third
part, and first Chapter shall be declared.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
Of the Chantresse.
1. ALL the books that appertain to the Quiar must be in the Cu^^ody of the
Chauntresse, who must have care that in their singing and reading, the hearers
may be edifyed, and every week upon Wednesday she shall set up a Paper,
wherein there names are to be written, that in the week following must sing,
or read any thing in the Quiar, She must make choice of the more skillfull
according to the solemnity of the Feasts, and in all things let her take that
Course and method in her proceedings, that she be not over greiueous or
troublesome to any.

2. Every week upon Saturday let her set up in writing the Order of the
Office for the weak following, and withal the extraordinary obligations, both
for the living and the dead; for which cause she must ^^ue the keeping of that
book wherein the said Obligations are contained.

3. Let her be very wary and Circum^spect before she begin to sing, or
intone^^ any thing, and let her use the same warrynesse in every thing else,
that if any erro^ happen she may seek to amend it wit^ Zeal, yet without any
sign of impatience, so far as she can possibly.

4. If they shall sing any thing in Music in the Church, those are to be
appointed by her (or by some other who perhapps may be fitter for this Office)
that must sing, neither may any other presume to sing, but such, as by her are
appointed.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Of the Sacristane.
1. THE Sacristane must be very dilligent to see that what soever belongs to
the Church, Cloister, Chapter house, and Sacristy be kept very carefully and
han somely.

2. Let her carefully provide that the wine which must seru^ for the most holy
Sacrifice, be good and pure and drawn the same day; that the Chalices,
Purificatoryes, Corporalls, Cruetts, Water, Towells and all the furniture and
appurtenances of the Church, be whole and very clean, she must carry
holywater to the Cells, and the accustomed places of the Monastery* where every
week she must put it into Vessels, that there are appointed to contain the
same.

3. Let her appoynte the time when every one is to go to Confession, by the advice of the Abbess, and let her see that all the Masses be said in fit
times, if they have sundry Prists to celebratt. Let her make the hosts as
fair as she can possibly, which she must provide may be sufficient for the
Masses, and the Communicants, and she must see that she always have them in
readynesse, as need may require.

4. She must keep the kyes of the Turn, and Grate of the Church, or Sacristy,
neither may she receive or deliver any thing by them, but only such things as
appertain to the Altar, the holy Sacrifices, or Church, let her see that
this grate or Turn be all ways well shutt and locked, except in times of
Communion, or when any thing is to be delivered, or receaned by the same.

5. She must not speak or talk with any at the Grate, but only about those
things that necessaryly appertain to her Office and if any Externe demand any
thing of her which concerns not immediately the Church, let her send him to
the Tourier, and when she speaks with any at her Turn or Grate, let her
do it with a low voice, and let her be still ready to deliver those things,
which belong to the Service of the Church.

6. She must deliver every Evening to the Abbess, the keys of her Office,
and in the morning let her demand them of her at a competent time.

7. See that with due care and Dilligences he write down in some book all
such donations, as have been made to the Church, together with the names of
the giuers, and she must take an Inuentory of all such things as are committed
to her charge.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
Of the Infirmaire.
1. THE Infirmayre must assist the sick with singular Charity, and seek to
procure their confort accordingly, wherefore she must endeavor to perform
all those things, that may tend to the ease and comfort of the diseased, with
very great alacrity.

2. About the sick all things must be neat, and decent, and the Infirmaire
must have an Inuentory of all such things, as belong to her Office.

3. She must have all medicinable things and what soever else are neceessary
for the sick in some convenient place, and she must often visitt them, to see
that nothing be corrupted, and to procure by Order from the Superior that new
be had in due time.

4. If the disease so require it, let her send for the Physician, yet with
the consent of the Abbess, and let her punctually observe his prescriptions,
and ordinations, concerning the diett and Physic of the Patient, She must
also have certain common Rules and instructions* according to which she may
proceed, when the disease seems not to require the presence or advise of the
Physician.

5. If the disease increase let the Abbess be c^rtifyed there of, that other
Physicians be sent for in due time, if it seem needful, or if the disease
be infectiue, that others be for bidden to have access to the diseased, or
to converse with her.

6. If the Sick be in any danger she must provide that in fit time they be
armed with the holy Sacraments, and assisted whith the devout prayers of the
Religious and withal may be excited with holy admonitions to endure patiently
the grief of their disease, and willingly to embrace the will of almighty God
in all things.

7. Some holy Pictures and Images must be had in the Infirmary, and she must
see that a Table be decently adorned and prepared when the most blessed
Sacrament is to be brought thither, and she is to make it ready and to
prepare all other necessaryes for the Communion of the sick, so often as the
ghostly Father shall think it expedient, that they communicate.

8. She may not change or omit any thing that the Physician has appointed,
except some evident reason move her to the contrary, and let her have a book
where in all must be set down that he prescribes.

9. Whenever the Physician or Surgeon comes to the Monastery, by some sign
the Convent shall be advertised of their coming, that if any have need of
their help, by the Superiors license they may come unto them.

10. When the Ghostly Father, the Physician, or Surgeon enter the Infi^^ary,
she or some other, with a Companion, must be present, who shall never depart
out of the place, till they be thence departed.

11. She must not dismiss those that are on their Recovery, till she see
the^ strong and able to undergo their accustomed labor.

12. She must have a Care that they observe due modesty, while they are under
her charge, lest that while they seek to restore their corporal strenght,
they loose their Zeal and Spirit, yet they shall not so much employ
themselves in their meditations and devotions as before, until that they may
be able to return to their former Exercises, in perfect health, and without
any inconvenience.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
Of the Guarderobe.
1. THE Guarderobe must keep all such Clothes as the Religious do not use:
^s also all linen, and woollen which are applied to their bedding or to any
other Monastical uses, the which she must dilligently look unto, as to those
things which are belonging to the poor.

2, She must keep an account of all such things that are under her charge, as
of all those things whereof the Religious have the use, and if she be to make
provision for any, either in linen or in Woollen, let her acquainte the Lady
Abbess therewith, neither may she deliver to any a new garment, or any thing
else that is new, without the consent of the Lady Abbess.

3. Let her have great care of cleanelynesse, and handsomeness, and she must
have commodious places, to lay up those things that appertain to her custody,
the which she must look unto, that by noe means they be spoiled.

4. When she delivers out any thing to be washed, or which is already
washed, she must deliver them by account, and by account she must receive
them back again; also all such things as are deputed, for the use either of
the Refectory or of the kitchen, and when she delivers any linen or Woollen
to the Religious, she^ must deliver them on Saturday, and she shall keep
written what and when, and to whom, any thing is delivered, that every one may
receive their necessaryes in due season.

5. Let her separate and keep a part that which is new, from that which is
old, and put every thing in their several places, and distinguish by certain
figures or numbers, what soever is granted for the particular use of each
Religious. But if any thing cannot be accommodated for the use of the
Religious, let her make the Abbess know thereof, that she may dispose
thereof accordingly.

6. She shall have care to see that the Garments be mended, and she shall at
the appointment of the Superiors deliver them to be mended by those whom the
Superior shall please to name.

7. She must have care of all their Shoes* and she must see that they be
mended in due time, and new must be given to every one, according to their
necessity and as the Superior shall appoynte.

8. In her Office let her carry her self meek and gentle, neither must she
suffer any to endure any Want in Clothing and Garments.

9. She must eschew and avoid all novelty, secularitie, and Curiosity in
all things and therefore a certain Pattern of their habbits, Vayles, and
other garments, must be made and prescribed, the which she must keep in her
Office of the Gua^droabe, she and all the rest shall be bound and obliged to
observe this fashion, neither may any be so bold, as to presume to make, or
fashion, or have any thing but according to the said Pattern, according unto
which every thing must be praecisely made and accommodated.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Of the Converse Sisters.
1. THE Conuers^ Sisters are admitted into this Congregation, that by their
pious labors they may serve their God and Creator, and that they may assist
those, who have dedicated themselves to his holy Service, and so serve with
them the self same sovereign Lord, under the self same Statutes, Rules and
Sacred Vows; therefore they must endeavor to draw that spiritual proffitt
and commodity from their said Labors, in such sort that they may fully
accomplish all their ymployments to the glory of almighty God, and to the
Salvation of their omne Souls.

2. The Converse Sisters (being noe less Religious then are those of the
Quier) must in like sort be provided for in all things that appertain to there
spiritual and Corporal good: as both alive and dead they enjoy all those
Graces, and prouiledges which the others enjoy, only those excepted, which
special and particular exception is made in the Sta^utes, whereof, by reason
of their sundry employments, businesses, and impediments that are incident to
their estate, they cannot be capable.

3. They must know that all such Statutes, that any wise touch the Religious of
the Quiar* do also appertain unto them, so far forth as by their State
they may be accommodated unto them.

4. They unto whom any particular Offices are enjoined must receive their
special directions from their Superior in writing, the which they must have
set up in the places of their Offices.

5. Every day they must attend to mental and vocal prayer, for so long a
time as the Superior shall appoynte them, which may be longer or shorter as
their Labors, and businesses will permit them, If they shall perceive that
they are not so apt for mental prayer as they might wish, let them acquaint
their ghostly Father therewith that they may employ the time of prayer in some
other exercise of devotion.

6. Let them pay to our Lord God a daily task and oblation of their Prayers,
to wit for their Nocturnes and Mattins, they shall say thirty Pater Nost^rs,
and so many Aue Marias; for their Prime, Third, Sixth, None, and Compline^ for
each of these seven Pater Nosters, and seven Aue Marias; and they shall recite
the said Pater n^sters and Aue Marias twlue times over, in stead of their
Euensong; But they that are able, and can find leisure may say the Office of
our blessed Lady, or of the dead, or the seven penitential Palms, with the
Litanies, instead of those Pater nosters and Aue Marias prescribed.

7. They that are admitted for Converse Sisters, after they have made their
Profession, may never pass to the State of the Professed of the Quier, and
therefore they may not learn to sing, read or write, nor yet may they be
taught to do the some.

8. They may use all religious freedom with their Superiors, for which cause
they may confidently repair unto them if they want any thing, or in their
labors find them selves ouercharged above there strengthes, and both Superior
as also all the rest must love them as their most dear Sisters, and carry
them selves toward them in all Charity, benevolence, and true loving
affection.

9. If at any time the Nouices be sent by their Mistress, or the Professed of
the Quiar by the Superior to serve in the kitching or such like places, the
Converse must so seek to direct them in their labors, that withal they
carry them selves toward them with all religious gentleness humility and
discretion, neither may they take more upon them then is meet in their
proceedings or speeckes, but they must with sweetness teach them, when they
see any rhing worthy to be amended in them, but in those things which!
appertain not to their Offices, let them in form their Superiors of them.

10. Let them avoid all bitterness among them selves, but rather let them
seek to nourish that mutual charity, which be seems them, let them
behave themselves with all obedience toward their Superiors, whom they must
reverence in most humble manner, the Religious of the Quier they must honor
and respect each one according to that Estate where in she is.

11. They must be very dilligent and warry that there happen noe danger by
their Fire or Candle in the places of their Offices, they must see that all
things be neat and cleanely, they must have a noate of all such things as are
delivered to their use and Custody, that they may make a due account and
reckoning of all things when it shall be required of them.

12. They must be very careful and dilligent that nothing be unprofitably
wasted or spoiled in their Offices, they must also be very great lovers of
Poverty, and in all the places of their labors they must speak very
sparingly, and for the most part of things necessary, and then they must
speak with a submissiue and low Voice.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Of those that are admi^ted in to the Monastery to receive the Habitt, and to
make holy Vows, and Profession of Religion.
1. AS the Conditions and dispositions of those are, that are admitted into
this Congregation, such also will the whole Congregation be, therefore with
great choice must they admit such as offer themselves to the Congregation,
lest by admitting such that are unfit their spiritual progress and vigor of
disciplyne fall and decay:

2. Therefore they are especially to be admitted into this Congregation, who
have given some show or proof of their Virtuous life, in the places of their
education and former Conversation, and whose reputation was always held for
good, while they lived in the World.

3. They that are notably defective either in body or mind may not be
admitted, nor they that are in danger of continual sickness, the Abbess and
the Convent must be Judges whether they be in these things defective: but yet
where there may be any doubt or question, they must seek for the Counsel of
those, whose Judgment and experience may assist them in these matters.

4. Widows, Sisters, or such as are near of blood, may not be received
without great^ Cause, nor they very easily who have had government over others
in the world, and were subordinate to none, because such are not governed but
with great difficulty.

5. They that are entered into the lawful bond of Matrimony, although they have
not consummated the same; may not obtain admittance without very great
warynesse and deliberation, nor they who have been suspected to take upon
them this State of life, by the hard and unkind usage and dealing of their
Friends, wherefore if any such shall enter, and shall conceal^ these things,
they must know that they cannot continue in the Monastery, if these things do
afterward come to light; but if the Convent shall see any somewhat constrained
here unto, and proceed afterward (...) to a true and an assured spirit of
Religion, she may be admitted, after (...) has yealded due proof and
experimente of her sincere Vocation.

6. She that is unlawfully begotten or is held for such, ought not to be
admitted, except some reason of especial moment may be alleged for her,
which reason must be aproued by the most Voices of the Religious, before she
be permitted to enter in.

7. She that is in debt or in Process, may not enter, until the debt be
paid, and the Process ended.

8. She that has received the Habitt of another Religious Order, or has
lived in any Monastery of this Order, that observe not these Statutes and has
there received the Habitt of Religion may not be taken into this Congregation,
except upon most important Reasons.

9. None may easily be received that are above seven and twenty years old,
yet if they be such that are expert in reading and song, and are known to be
of strong and healthy bodies, they may be admitted, although they be thirty
years old.

10. For as much as the impediments of those that see^e to enter among you may
be often very secrett, and hard to be known, let her that offers her
self to this Congregation be demanded, if she have any such impediments,
whether she be able to pass with the common dyett, whether she be often or
seldom sick, and what sickness that may be, of what health or strenght she
finds her self for the present, whether their parents had any disease, which
may be feared to be hereditary unto her, whether she be subject to any
Obligation upon any contract whatsoever, whether she has publicly
celebrated any spowsales, or plighted her promise of marriage to any man, of all
which the Congregation must be planely and perticulerly informed.

11. Further more she must be demanded what it was that induced her to have
this desire, why she rather desires to be in this Convent then of another.
If perhaps, for that she has here of her kindred, or some Sister, or Cozens
in the Congregation, who might much inclyne her here unto, or for the place,
Country, or Education, moreover it must Be inquired of her whether she be
content to be ymployed in the baser sort of labors, and to be perpet^ally
exercised there in according to her State and degree* whether she be resolved
to endure those things which may help to bring her to humility, patience, and
contempt of her self, what qualities she has, what difficulties she has
suffered in making her Resolution* finally what she has to dispose of, and
what satisfaction she has given to her Friends, out of all which, if the
Abbess and Prioresse (who are both severally to examine those that would
enter) can draw any thing that may seem worthy of great deliberation, they
shall remitt it to the Judgment of the whole Convent.

12. They that after their entrance give little hope of their good proceeding in
Spirritt, must be dismissed in good time, but with great Charity, but they
that yeald some hope, and yet not so certain and assured as may be wished,
their clothing may be so long deferred until the Convent be sufficiently
satisfied, yet the Convent is not bound upon Charity to retain, and
maintain such among them who may rather be a burden unto them then that
they are like to make that proffitt in spirit which they should.

13. Acertayne number of Religious as also of the whole family must be
appointed, according to their certain temporal means and Revenues, neither
may they admi^t more then their Ordinary Revenues or Alms are able well to
entertayne and nourish.

14. None may be admitted to be either of the Quier, or a Converse, upon
indiscreete pity and Compassion; as neither that person ought to be admitted
to be of the Convent, who has not a mind to undergo, and end^r^ what
soever is according to Religion.

15. The Scholars must have a Veil delivered them, before they can be
permitted to come to the Quiar, or Refectory as also a certain kind of
habitt convenient (...) the state and Vocation.

16. Such as are admitted must ordinarely have a whole year before they
receive the holy Habitt of Religion, if it happen otherwise that this time be
either prevented or prolonged, let the Convent approve the Cause and Reason,
that afterw^res it may not happen to be turned in to a Custom.

17. She that is admitted may not urge, or be to ernest to receive the
Habitt, but let her only show her propension, and good desire to proceed in
her holy course, and leave the rest to the disposition of the Convent.

18. They shall admit none to receive the holy habitt of Religion, before she
be twelve years old, nor may they permit her to make her Profession before
she be sixteen years old full complete according to that which is decreed
in the holy Counsel of Trent, in the twenty fifth Session and in the fourth
Chapter; and ordinarily let none be received, that after two years cannot
make her Profession.

19. The Scholars and Nouices must live in silence separated from the rest, at
lest for the space of eight days before their Clothing and Profession that
they may seriously and maturely consider of the greatness of the matter they
are to take in hand; again after three days are expired after their
clothing, they must return to their former silence, for at lest eight days
more, that they may well ponder and cast with them, by what means they may
best with fruit use that benefitt of god his holy Grace and favor which he
has bestowed upon them and how they may Zealousty accomplish those things,
which to the honor and service of God they had before purposed and de^^rmyned
with themselves.

20. The place of Recreation for the Scholars and Nouices must be different
from that of the professed; neither yet may they converse with those, who
although they live in the Monastery, yet are not there with intention and
p^rpose to be Religious, except for sometime the Abbess ordain otherwise.

21. They must not ordinaryly be admitted to make their Profession before they
be eighteen years old, although reason may sometime persuade the contrary;
as when their Iugdments and forwardness may supply the defect of their years,
and she that after the year of her Probation i^ found unfit must be
dismissed.

22. All the Religious must receive from the Mistress of the Nouices
information, concerning the dispositions, Virtues, and aptness, of the
Scholars, and Nouices, especially when otherwise they cannot have sufficient
notice and knowledge thereof; But as touching the Converse Sisters, they must
inquire of the Celarier, concerning what soever may occur touching them.

23. When the Religious deliberate among themselves in Chapter concerning the
admission of any either to the habiti or profession the Sister or kinsewoman of
the party within the third degree (yea although it be the Abbess her self)
may not be present, as neither the Mistress of the Nouices, or Cellarier, while
the Religious do there debate among themselves concerning those that are under
their several charges, yet they must be present when by balloting they all
are to deliver their suffrages and Voices. The Suffrages of the Religious for
those that are to be admitted for clothing or Profession, must not be
delivered by writing, but by Bowls, and they that are to be admitted must
have more than half the Voices of the Co^uent, and the Co^uent must give these
their Voices some six Weeks before their Clothing and Profession, but
especially before the Profession, that the Lord Bishopp or his deputy may be
certifyed in fit time of those that are to be admitted, that he may examyne
the^ according to that which is decreed in the fife and twenty Sessio^ of the
holy Counsel of Trent.

24. They must dispose of al things that any wise appertain unto them, before
the day of their Profession, and if they shall not be found fit, all what
soever was any ways bestowed upon the Monastery must be rendered to them
back again, as in the holy Counsel of Trent, in the 25. Session and 16.
Chapter is enacted.

25. After the Profession the Mistress shall inform the Prioresse of their
natures and dispositions, so far forth as it is convenient for her to know
them, and after their Nouitiate she shall ordinarely leave them to the
Prioresse to dispose of them and to be subject unto her in all things, in such
sort as the rest of the Profested for the Quier are.

26. If at any time young Children be received into the Monastery for their
education, let that be done with great choice and in regard of a greater good,
and whose good education (in regard of those things which pass in Religion)
may prove to advance them to a greater good: they may not be received before
they are seven years old, and they may not be retained in the Monastery after
they are past fifteen, they may not be admitted with any burden to the
Monastery, excepted it be otherwise sufficiently provided for.

27. While these Children live in the Monastery they may not be curiousty
clothed or adorned, but the Habitt which they are to use must be decent, and
fitly beeseeming the place; they may not converse with the Scholars, Nouices,
or Professed, but as the Lady Abbess and Prioresse shall give them leave,
neither may they speak or have any Conversation with such as come unto them
from abroad, and when this latter shall be permitted them, let them do it at
a certain Grate, that must be peculiarely appointed for them, and they must
always have there some grave Religious ordinarely to accompany them, and to
be present with them.

THE THIRD PART. OF THOSE MATTERS that are more extrinsecally and externally
appertayning to the Congregation, and Monastery, and are belonging to the
Temporalities of the same.

AT GANT.

Printed by IOOS DOOMS. 16^2.

THE FIRST. CHAP:
Of the Visitor, and Visitation of the Monastery.
1. THE Abbess with her Convent shall propose to the Bishopp, that he would
vouchsafe to appoynte and constitute some one Visitor of the Monastery, whose
authority shall wholly in all things depend of the Bishopp; and the place of
his ordinary residence must be at the most but one days Journey from the
Monastery, and he must yearly make a visitation of the monastery and that must
be within the Feasts of S. John Baptist, and of the Assumption of the blessed
Virgin Mary, if it can possibly be so.

2. If at any time the Visitation cannot be made at the ordinary appointed
times, the Abbess shall certify the Convent of the hindrance, and when the
time of the Visitation approaches; she must v^e that form of writing to the
Visitour, which is set down in the book of Ceremonies.

3. The Convent must chouse one that is skillfull in the practice of Religion,
and is a Religious man, who may assist at the Visitation. And because the
Abbess is likelyest best to know who may be most fit for this purpose, after
she has deliberated of the matter with her Assistants, she shall propose two
or three to the Convent, leaving free unto them to choose one of them or some
other, as may seem meetest to them.

4. During the Visitation all must yeald their accustomed obedience to the
Abbess, and other Superiors, in those things that appertain to ordinary
disciplyne, neither may they require of the Visitor leave to do any thing
before they have first warned the Abbess thereof.

5. The Abbess must deliver a noate of all the names of her Religious and
Family to the Bishopp or Visitor, when he comes to visitt, and she must
write down what Office, every one bears in the Monastery.

6. To the end that every one with better advise may declare to the Visitor
their mynds, and difficulties, they shall deliver unto him in writing what they
would say unto him. And all must have free access to the Visitor, that in any
sort appertain to the Monastery. But they that cannot write, may explicate to
him their minds by word of Mouth.

7. They shall avoid and fly all kind of exagerations in those things that
they write and propounde, and they shall only make a naked Relation of the
matter, and they must maturely ponder with themselves, whether their Superiors
could not have sufficiently of themselves amended and reformed those things
which they declare unto the Visitor or whether at leastwise the Superiors
understood the case, that they might thereby have provided some remedy for it.

8. Those things that are to be conferred about whith the Visitor (besides
that which of himself he may enquire or examen) may be reduced to these
heads. The defects of good observation of the Rule, or Statutes, those things
that belong to Chastity, Poverty, Obedience, and Clausure^ to much
Conversation with seculer people, danger of scandale, occasion eithe^r offered
or permitted of breach of peace, and disunion of minds, want of necessaryes
for their life and dyett, coming from those who of duty should have mad due
provision, unprofitable expenses and excess in anything: notable defectes in
the Abbess, ghostly Father, Chaplaynes, or in the rest of the Superiors,
Officers, and whatsoever else may seem to be greatly hurtful to the good of
the Monastery.

9. The books of accomptes, and the some of the Provision they have made, must
be showed to the Visitor, as unto him also must be declared, what is let,
and in what manner and by whose aid and assistance, more over he must see the
Orders left them by former Visitours, and especially those of the last
Visitation (if any thing were left in writing) all which their Orders and
Ordinations are to be committed to writing, but yet they may not be joined to
the Statutes, because they are to be thought only such things, as are only
accommodated to certain times and persons.

10. If any would deliver her Complaynte to the Visitor, let her see that she
do it upon a good ground, freing her mind from all Passion, and she must
only mention those things that are of moment. If any thing be found to be
devised, or to discover in them any notable Passion, the offender must expect a
good Penance (which the Visitour is to impose) according to her deserts.

11. If any Complaynte should be delivered up against the Abbess, or any of
the Superiors, or of the Religious* the accused may neither directly or
indirectly, go about to find out the Authors of the said Complaynte; neither
may she show any sign of any grief or disgust against any, if by any
circumstances she may think that she have discovered the Author thereof.

12. When the Visitor enters in to the Enclosure the Abbess; Prioresse, and
Assistants shall always accompany him, while there he remains, neither may
they conceal any thing from him, which he ought to see, or wherewith he
ought to be acquainted.

13. None may tell unto any other any thing that the Visitor inquired of her;
or where of he examined, neither shall she signify her suspicion of any thing
that was said, or done with the Visitor, and if by any means the sayings, or
doings of others shall happen to come to her knowledge, she may not bewray it
to any other, except the Vi^itor give her leave, under pain of being disabled
to all offices afterward and of other punishment which the Visitor shall
please to enjoin.

14. What soever shall be suggested or ordained by the Visitour the Abbess
and Convent must receive with due reverence: neither may they directly or
indirectly make their recourse to any other seculer or ecclesiastical person,
but to him self or his Assistant (before named) or to the Bishopp, or his
Superior; and if at any time any shall dare to seek for remedy of those
things, that belong to the O^^ice of the Visitour and Bishopp, by seeking to
any seculer or Ecclesiastical Princes, or Magistrates, the Abbess and Convent
shall judge and condemn such for vnquiett persons, for as much as they trouble
the common peace of the Convent, and so punish them by separating and
debarring them from the Conversation of the rest.

15. If any of the Professed would at any time write to the Bishopp or
Visitour, she shall have free liberty to do the same, and she may deliver
her letters to the Thourier, who may not (under pain of loss of acti^e and
passive Voice for ever, and of other punishments which by the Chapter may be
enjoined her) discover to any, that ever she received any such letters to be
addressed unto them, except the Religious that delivered them unto her, do
leave it in her freedom and discretion; what she received to be sent unto
them, she must see that she delivers to a faith full Messenger, or to him
who is esteemed such an one, so that it will not be likely that the sending
of such letters will ever come to the notice of the Superiors, or of others by
his means.

16. Neither may the Abbess or any other Superiors either Directly, by any
ways, signs or outward show of Countenances, hinder the free writing of their
Religious to their Superiors (to wit the Bishopp or Visitour) under pain of
suspention from their Offices, and other greater penalties to be inflicted on
them by the Bishopp.

THE II. CHAPTER.
Of the Family of the Monastery and of such as liu^ out of the Enclosure.
1. THE Monastery must have for their Ghostly Fathers such as are modest,
prudent, and learned, and first the Convent must be well informed of their
sufficiency, Virtue, and honesty before they are to be admitted; also their
Chaplaynes, Physicians, and Chirurgions, must be of modest life and good fame.

2. The Convent must entertayne noe servant that is not modest, or is noted for
any particular crime, or in his apparel and outward carriage is lighter then
reason would.

3. All these Servants must go to Confession and the holy Communion once every
Month, and they must observe all such Ordinances, as they shall receive from
the Abbess, Visitor, or the Cellarier.

4. Noe woman of what soever State, dignity or Condition she may be, can be
permitted to live or dwell with those of the family: that all occasion of ill
suspi^ion and badd toungs may be wholly taken away.

5. He that is chosen for the Steward or Procurator of the Monastery by the
Convent, must be such a one, as is grave, godly, prudent, and he must not be
charged with wi^e, or Children, he must dilligently attend to the Affairs of
the Monastery, procuring still the proffitt thereof* with the good edification
of such abroad as he deals with all and the Abbess and the Convent must
be assured of his honesty, and fidelity, in those things that are committed
to his care and disposition.

6. He must be obedient in all things to those Officers that have authority
from the Abbess to command him, and he must have some certain hours,
where in he must repair unto them, but especially to the depositair, and
Cellarier, unto whom the care of the daily prouisiones do principally belong.

7. He must have a book where in he is to set down all his receipts and
^xpences, and once a week he must ^words^ of the depositair, that which shall
suffice for the necessary provisions of that week; and when he receaueth any
money, he must deliver her a Bill where in he shall acknowledge the receipt
and for what use he received it.

8. He is to understand that he can take nothing upon creditt, without the
leave of the Abbess delivered him in writing^ except for some matter of little
moment, and he shall incontinently pay for what he receaueth, or take care
that it be paid, neither may he ever be debtor for above twenty Florens,
except the Abbess and dispositayre be consenting there unto.

9. If he shall receive any money due to the Monastery, upon what title
soever, he must deliver it up presently to the depositayre and of her receive
an Acquittan^ce for the receipt there of.

10. He may not undertake noe Process or call any into law without the
knowledge of the Abbess and Convent; and if at any time he shall undertake
any such matter, he must demand the Counsel of such as are skillfull, whose
advise he may follow, and before any Suytes be commenced (having first
acquainted the Superior there with) let him offer to put the matter to
agreement, and Compremise.

11. He must often render an account to the Abbess of those things, where in
he deals, and he must like a good and faithful Servant in form her of all
such things, as he thinks wilbee profitable for the Monastery, and he must
suggest unto her at what times all Provisions are to be made, that by these
means, Costs and Charges may be moderated; and let him see that what he
buyeth be good and profitable for the Monastery.

12. He shall certify the Abbess of whatsoever he finds to want need of
reparation; and if he shall think any thing fit to be sold, or otherwise
to be employed, let him not attempt any such thing without her knowledge, or
in lesser matters, without at least the knowledge of the depositayre.

13. Let none be admitted to eat with the Chaplaynes or Servants without the
Consent of the Abbess, who must not grant easily hospitality to seculer
people (except some singular obligation require the same) and then let it be
done in some place without the Bowndes and Circuit of the Monastery, where
notwithstanding due regard and care must be hadd of religious Frugalitie.

14. The Steward must not permit that any thing be unprofitably spent and
consumed, and if any thing be overplus, let him take care that it be brought
back again, to be kept for those uses the Superiors shall approve; and he
must have care of all the Servants, and must dilligently see that every one do
their duty and that they live not idly.

15. At what time soever he requires of the depositayre any Original
Writings, Registers, Charters, or other Instruments, let him set down in
writing that he received them from her, upon such a day, which writing she
must deliver again unto him, when he has restored the afforesayd things.

THE III. CHAPTER.
Of bestowing and letting the Goods of the Monastery.
1. Whatsoever is given to the Monasteryes use, through the pious liberality
of good people, is to be esteemed as applied to Christ our Lord, or to the
Religious as his poor members, that there by being freed from all care of
temporal matte^s, they may the better attend to the Service of his divine
Majesty; and therefore they must interprett that whatsoever temporal goods
they have, or receive, they must employ in such sort as may best stand with the
honor of God, and may seem to be most agreeable to the In^ention of the
giuers.

2. If the Rents of the Monastery, and donations of good people should grow to
that greatenesse, that, (the number of the persons living in the Monastery, and
the difficulties which may happen well considered) they may seem superfluo^s
or not necessary, nor decent for a Religious State; then the Abbess with the
consent of the Convent may apply them to some pious uses, as to the
sustentation of poor families, bringing up of poor Scholars in learning and
all such like godly works, as may best advance the good of Religion and
service of God.

3. The Abbess her self and by her own authority, may dispose of those
things that are of lesser value, or give some things in way of gratitude, yet
shall she set down in a book, what, to whom, and to what end, she has
given any thing, that it may be showed to the Visitor if it should seem
necessary.

4. The Abbess may not give upon color and praetext of Service done, more
then Justice beeseeming a Religious State may exact. And if at any time any
peculier Consideration be to be had of some particular person, and that some
notable thing is to be added to his wages, let that be done by the consent
of ^he Convent.

5. The Abbess must have in her keeping a Register of all the Lord ships,
lands, and possessions of the Monastery, and of the yearly Reuenew which she
draws from every one of them, what was received when they were last let,
whether any possession be let for term of years, together with the names of
such persons as occupy them.

6. The Abbess may not let any possessions of the Monastery, without the
consent of the Convent, whom she must in form how much they yeald yearly,
and what the opinion of those that are most practical in such affairs is here
in, and let such men be herd by the Abbess, Prioresse, and depositary, who
are skillfull and of good Judgment in such affairs, that the Convent may be
the more fully informed, and so may the better judge there of, and let the
Convent use such persons, whom none may suspect that they will draw any thing
to their own private lucre, and gain, or to the benefitt of their Friends.

7. They must understand that noe Ecclesiastical goods can be let above the
term of nine years, without the observation of such solemnities, as according
to law are required, in the alienation of the Church goods, neither may any
letting be renewed during the time of the former lease, more then for one year
for the Tithes, and at most for three years in respect of other proffitts,
before the end of the Rent that ^^^neth, neither may they take more then (...)
Florens for an earnest penny, for re^^wing of the said Rent.

^. If any lettings of such goods should (...) made by anticipating the Rent
before (...)* they may noe ways bind^ there Successo^rs, as is d^creed in the
11. Chap* of the 2^. Session of the Counsel of ^rent. Therefore (...) the
Monastery will let forth their possessions for any long time, or bind
themsel^es for any money received; it must be done by them who according to
law are ^ble to grant it.

9. In the Monastery nothing may be made by the Religious to be ^ould* except
t^er poverty want or necessity drive the thereto.

10. If their Original writings, Registers, Instruments, and monuments should
happen through ouldnesse, Rottenness, or evil keeping to be spoiled or
corrupted, the Abbess and depositay^e must take Care to have them
authentically coppyed out, and well kept, and if it happen that the said
writings are to be communicated or showed to any let him testify under his
hand and writting what he has received; neither may the Abbess and
depositayre deliver to any the said public Instruments whithout the Convent
be also assenting there unto.

1^. Those that are to per ^vse* their w^i^ings must be very faith full* of
whose h^nesty and fidelity there may be noe doubt^* and the Convent must have
certain trusty Friends whom they may use in this matt^r* neither is it
convenient tha^ they committ^ their affayre^ and State, only to hyrelings.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
Of the translation of the Religious from one Monastery to another.
1. THE translation or change of the Religious from one Monastery to another
may* not be made, except very great reasons persuade the same; and the said
reasons must be allowed by the Bishopp and by the Convent, from which they are
sent, as also by that Convent whether they are to go, and it must be very
profitable for the peace and quiett, or at lestwise for the spiritual good of
both.

2. None may deal either directly or indirectly: with any person about her
own^ translation; but only with her Superiors, and that, only by proposing
the matter unto them, but noe ways urging there unto, that so they may leave
it in their full liberty to determyne therein, what they shall think good.

3. When any new Monastery is to be begunn, it shall^ly in the power of the
Abbess and Convent to make choice of those persons that are to be sent to the
beginning there of.

4. When any of the Religious are sent to supply the want of another Monastery,
it must be done with the consent of the Bishopp, Abbess, and Convent, from
whence they are taken, and when but one is granted, she shall have an other
Religious to accompany her thither, and with her some grave matrone, with whom
the said Religious may return back again, if she be to return back
again.

5. When they are to go from one Monastery to another, they must receive in
writing from the Bishopp, or the Visitor by what way they are to pass, neither
may they go out of that way, and they must always repair to the Rellgious
houses especially of their own Order and Congregation, if conveniently they
may.

6. The Religious that is sent from one Monastery to another of the same Order
and Congregation, shall make her Vou of Obedience in Chapter to the Bishopp and
Abbess where she shall reside, and there ^hee shall observe all the laudable
Customs of the same place.

7. She that is sent shall have her place in the Convent according to the time
of her Pro^ession, and she shall participate of all the privileges of the
Monastery to which she is sent; and if the day of her Profession, fall upon
the same in which some of the Monastery were professed, the, professed of that
Monastery shall preside and have the Prioritie.

8. She that is translated to another Monastery may not speak of any of the
defects of any of that Convent from which she was translated, neither may she
extol the Religious of one Convent, that she may seem there by to detract or
diminish any thing from the Creditt of the other, and if she perceive any
thing to be in use and observation in the other Monastery, which is not
observed in the Monastery where she dwells, she may propose it to the
Visitor, Abbess, or Superior but she may neither directly or indirectly
speak there of to the other Religious except from the affore said Superiors
she have license to do the same.

9. She that for her greater peace and more perfection is sent to another
Monastery, if she trouble the peace and quiett of that Monastery* and carry
her self in ^rouble some manner, she must be sent back again to her former
Convent, that there the Superiors may so dispose of her as in our Lord they
shall think best for her own good, as also for the good of the Convent.

THE V. CHAPTER.
Of the union and Combination of the Monasteryes of this Cougregation amongst
themselves.
1. A Combination and union of diverse Monasteryes living under the same Rules
and Statutes does make very much for the increase of Religion* good discipline,
and true Charity amongst those that live in them; Therefore the Superiors of
the several Monasteryes of this Congregation must endeavor to nourish among
themselves by their often mutual correspondence, writing, and letters this
pious Conjunction and charitable affec^ion, whereby it will come to pass that
where as the several Conuents of this Congregation will make one body among
themselves by means of this Combination so will they also be made partakers
of all those privileges, graces and such like holy meri^orious works, which
the rest either jointly or severally do enjoy or exercise.

2. Therefore these Monasteries living under the same Rule and Statutes* shall
healpe and assist each the other, when they suffer any necessity; as may
happen through plagge, fire, unjust persecution, and the like; yet that must
be performed herein by each Monastery, which by the Judgment of the right
reverend Lord Bishopp* and Visitor shall be appointed and de^ermyned.

3. When soever any Monastery of this Congregation shall chance to be v^iustly
wronged or oppressed, the rest shall be obliged ioyntely to defend their right*
and in the^ their common good; and they must dilgently labor that* what soever
may appertain to the spiritual or temporal good there of, they may by any
good manner deliver from the unjust assaults and oppressions of others.

4. The Religious by those Conuents with whom they have this Society, must be
intertayned in their Monasteries* and they shall be subject to the Abbess* or
Sup^rior, so long as they remain therein.

5. If any Religious in this sort intertayned in any Monastery, should chance
there to and her life, let that be there performed concerning her burial,
which is accustomed to be performed to those, that are resident in the same
Monastery; But the Monastery from whence she came, must fulfill those Masses,
and suffrages for her Soul, which it does for others.

6. When in any Monastery of the Congregation an Abbess is to be chosen, the
other Monastaries who shall have notice of this election, shall sing o^ cause
to be said a Mass of the holy Ghost for the same; and ^he Superiors shall
write one to the other of the decease of such Religious as depart this life in
their several Monasteryes, that there by they may be made partakers of the
merits, and deuoute^ prayers of their fellow Sisters.

7. Who soever is chosen Abbess of any Monastery must with all convenient
expedition write to the other Abbesses of this Congregation; and shall offer
them her assistance in all those things* that may any ways concern the
spiritual and temporal common good of the wh^le Congregation.

8. (...) first proceeded, or to which they were co^ioyned by the admission of
the same Statutes; so that they must deferr the prioritie to the same, and
they shall bear it a peculier respect, and whatsoever (concerning Religious
perfection) is done there in, the rest must follow and perfo^me the same,
framing and forming themselves to the imi^ation and government there of.

9. If any Monastery by not observing fully the Statutes shall be notably al^red,
and changed from the first, and so from the rest* It shall be depri^ed and
loose all those privileges* which is enjoyed by reason of this Union, recept
it recall and reform it self.

10. If the first Monastery should notably fail in disciplyne and Spirrit
(which God for di^d) it shall be deprived of the privilege of priority over the
rest, and the prior^^ie shall be transferred to the second, and if that should
in like sort prove defective then it must go to the Third, and thus in all the
rest; otherwise the prioritie must stand according to the antiquity of the
Monasteryes, and of their union and Combina^ion with the rest.

11. These ^re the Statutes and Constitutio^^ (...) for the more perfect and
better observation and keepeing of the most holy Rule of the most glorious
Father and Pa^riarch Saint BENEDICT, which all though they ought to be of
high esteeme^ and authority with the Religious, and Child^en of this
Sodalitie, and consequen^ly to be pr^cisely kept by them, so far forth as
their diverse and sundry regular employments may require, or occasion may be
offered, yet they impose not further obligation upon their Consciences, then
the very nature of the things, and reason it self shall require or in force,
yet they are greatly obliged in Conscience to observe those things that are
appointed touching the Election and deposition of the Abbess as also those
things that concern the Correction of most greueous faults, where by any may
deserve to be separated from the Company o^ the rest; moreover every one is
obliged never to require or to permit that more liberty be admitted, then the
Rule and the Statutes will yeald unto: but if any thing be brough^ in, or
practiced, which is not s^tt down in the Rule or Statutes, that must be to
greater perfection and austeritie; and it shall only belong to the right
Reverend the Lord Bishopp, or Visitor, to explicate the sense and meaning of
the words and Clauses contained there in, if there may happen any doubt or
Controversy there in; to whose Verdict and Judgment every one must stand in
this matter; therefore for as much as all the professed Religious in this
Congregation ought to observe all the Statutes according to that sense and me
aning* which the Bishopp or Visitor shall admit (as has been said) none may
be suffered to make their profession among you, who shall not first promise
in the Chapter house (according to a certain form of writing ^eet down in
the book of Ceremonies) that they will accept of any reformation, proceeding
from the Bishopp conformable and agreeable to the Rule and Statutes, and that
they will not admit any greater liberty, then the Rule and Statutes will
permit* and this their purpose set down in writting they shall confirm with
their own hand, and deliver it to be kept in the place of their other
principal writings and monuments.

The End of the Statutes.
THE CONFIRMATION O^ THE STATVTES.
MATHIAS by the grace of God, and of the holy Sea Apostolic Arch Bishopp of
Machlin (...) welbe loved Daughters in Christ (...) Abbess^ and Convent of ^he
^lessed (...) Mary of ^he Order of St. B^nedict ^e^^ding in the City of
Brux^lles subject to us by ordinary right he^lth in our Lord. Although the Rule
^f the holy Father Saint Benedict which you profess be written, and (...)
(...), so that it truly deser^^th, and ought to be esteemed (...) of it self
to be an absolute and perfect g^ide (...) directory of good life, to such as
foll^w the same; Yet for as much as di^ers praecepts there of are some what
general, and therefore are diversely understood, and observed by diverse,
according to the di^ersitie of their nat^res, and Countrayes, your piety and
^eale of perfection was such, that (...) s^pplication to the (...) Father the
So^eraigne Bishopp of (...), that by us you (...) Stat^tes and Constit^tions,
in (...) the said Rule, to be by us (...) to yo^, confir^ed for you, and by
o^r (...) to be imposed vpp^^ (...) that (as by the motion of (...) desire)
yo^ ^ay by the^ be directed to the exact and vnifor^e observation of the said
R^le; (...) we knowing right well our own ^^perfection, would not tr^st only
to o^r sel^es in this ^atter, b^t we would use the help (...) Co^nsayle of
di^ers men well seen and experienced in Monastical manner of life, for the
best compiling of these Statutes, yea and when they were so compiled, we
would not so hastily command you to keep them except that first you had
fully tried for more then the space of a whole year, whethere your h^^ane and
natural infirmity could observe them; after which your trial, when you had
declared and made known to us your promptitude and willing minds, we thought
good to confirm them by the authority of the said holy Fater delegated unto
us for (...)

(...)
NOTE that the words interliued in a diverse Carecter are only observed by
this monastery of Gand, by grant of his lordshipp who at lest for the present
judged it fitter. For us to singe our office over night and keep only one
refectory though some for health are ordained to eat flesh when the comunity
eats fish.


