The Principles of Christian Religion, necessary to be known of all the
faithful: set forth to the great profit in trayning up of all youth, by Tho.
Becon.

John. xiij. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. Imprinted
at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

AN. 1569.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per Decennium.

THOMAS BECONVS SACROSAC TAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR.



Ora expressa vides, viuos imitantia vultus,
Quod potuit calimo, pictor, and art vides:
Mentis qua^ nullus potuit tibi reddere pictor,
Effigiem scriptis, (...) ipse suis.
The Contents of this Book.
Of faith.
WHat faith is. What benefits we receive of God through^ faith. The Articles
of the Christian faith, with confirmations of the same out of the holy
Scriptures.
Of prayer.
What prayer is. What benefits we receive of God by prayer. The Lords Prayer
called the Pater noster, with confirmations of every peticion out of the holy
Scripture.
Of the law.
What the law is. To what use the law was given. The x. commandments of God,
with confirmations of every commandment out of the holy Scripture.
Of Repentance.
What repentance is. Of the fruits of repentance declared by the word of
God.
Of Baptism.
What Baptism is. For what use Baptism was ordained.
Of the Lords Supper.
What the Lords Supper is. To what use Christ did institute it. The duty of
all estates and degrees, according to the doctrine of Gods holy word. The duty
of the hye powers and of the other temporal Magistrates. The duty of
Subjects toward the hi^ powers. The duty of Bishops and Ministers of Gods
word. The duty of Parishioners unto the Ministers of Gods word. The duty of
Husbands unto their wives. The duty of Wives unto their Husbands. The
duty of Fathers and Mothers unto their children. The duty of Children
toward their Fathers and Mothers. The duty of Masters to their Servants.
The duty of Servants to their Masters. The duty of Widows. The duty
of Old men. The duty of Old women. The duty of Young folk. The duty of
all degrees and estates generally, both toward God and their neighbor.
FINIS.
To the most gentle and godly disposed child, M. Thomas Cecill, son to the
right honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, and Secretary to the Kings
Majesty, Thomas Becon wishes the favor of God, with the increase of virtue
and learning.
II of holy letters we be not sleepie nor vain readers, but diligently mark
what we read, we shall easily perceive that among other commandments of
God, this is not the last nor the least, which he gives concerning the
bringing up of youth in y^ knowledge of his blessed will. For y^ godly wisdom
knows right well, that except the younglinges of a common weal be virtuously
brought up, and faithfully framed, according to the right rule of Gods holy
appointment, it can not come to pass, but that his glory (the good parents
being once deceased) must needs be obscured in this world, the invocation of
his name cease, and all godly religion decay: yea the men them selves (if they
be worthy that name) must needs become brutelike, and be carried about with
every strange doctrine, contemn all laudable laws, break all good orders,
follow their fleshly appetites like unreasonable beasts, and so at last bring
both themselves and their realms unto utter destruction.

Therefore as God in his holy law requires of parents nothing more earnestly
the^ to bring up their children virtuously, and according to his word: so
likewise all godly fathers and mothers, have ever from the beginning done their
uttermost endeavor to train up their younglinges, even from the very cradells,
in the nurture, fear, and doctrine of the Lord, supposing them selves then
best to please God, and most to do the true office of godly and natural
parents, when they study how to garnish, not their childrens bodies with gay
and sumptuous vestures, but their minds with noble and precious virtues, not
bow to lift them up to transitory dignities and worldly honors, which as daily
experience teaches, are more brittle then glass, and fade away like the
grass, but how to make them honorable and praise worthy in the sight of good
me^, and profitable to the common weal, through virtue, learning, wisdom,
and counsel. And the more the parents them selves did excel other in
knowledge, wisdom, and learning, the greater desire had they to bring their
children unto the like perfection, bearing heavily, that theirs should in any
point degenerate from their fathers virtues, and not orderly answer to the
godly qualities of their noble parents. Histories both godly and Ethnicke, do
minister unto us examples abundantly in this behalf, which I would here
gladly recite, if I had not attempted the like enterprise already in my preface
to the Governance of Virtue. Again, if I were not fully persuaded, that you
have heretofore both red and also heard of your teacher the same, or else the
like histories.

Your right honorable and most worthy father, knowing the good pleasure of God
in this behalf, has also after the example of all other noble and godly
parents, painfully travailed, both by him self and by learned teachers, to
bring you up, even from your cradell, in the knowledge of Gods will, and of
good letters, that you might, as in age, so likewise in virtue and learning,
grow and increase unto his comfort, unto your own commendation, and unto the
profit of the common weal hereafter. And as your father is learned, and has
a breast stuffed with all godly virtues, so is his desire to have you both
learned and virtuous, that when he shall give over to nature (God so disposing)
he may leave behind him his own image, yea, as I may so speak, him self,
not only in lineamentes of body, but also in virtue, in godliness, in wisdom,
in knowledge, and by this means be counted of his posterity, a worthy member
of the common weal, both in him self and (...) his son. It is your duty
therefore to satisfy the good desire of so natural a father, and to answer
the expectation of many, which look to find in you hereafter, that virtue,
learning, wisdom, and gravity, that is evidently perceived in your most
worthy father. This shall be brought to pass, if according to your beginning
ye go forth diligently to call on the name of God, to apply your mind to good
letters, to give ear to the wholesome admonicions of your most dear father,
and to take heed to the daily exhortations of your teacher, ever framyng your
life according to your knowledge. And that ye may do this the more
conveniently, I give you this little treatise, which shall aboundauntly
instruct you in those points of Christian Religion, which at this present do
most of all become your age. In it are contained the principles of our
profession, which I have so opened with the conference of the other scriptures,
that they may worthily seem to strive with large Commentaries: I have also set
forth the duties of all estates and degrees, as they be ^aught in Gods word,
that all ages, and all kinds of people, may here learn to know their duty,
both toward God and his neighbor. Neither is any thing taught in this
treatise, that is not sufficiently fortressed with the authorities of the holy
scriptures: so that I doubt not, but the godly learned which love to hear the
voice of their shepherd Christ, will not disallow this my diligence. Let other
entreat of hie mysteries, and clime up to the hiest heaven, I shall be content
to write of things according to my knowledge, and your capacity, and to
creep upon the ground. Let other talk of the unknown secrets of the blessed
trinity, of predestination, of the state of the souls departed. etc. I will
speak of the Articles of the Christian ^ayth, of the Lords prayer, of the x.
Commandments, of the Sacraments of Christ's church. etc. Let other be
counted y^ flowers of learning, for opening, I know not how secret mysteries,
I force not to be called unlearned, so y^ I may know Christ crucified, and in
teaching him, either by my writings or sermons, win some unto God. But to
end, embrace virtue, love learning, garnish your breast with the fruits of Gods
spirit, be not idle, fly vain and too much childishe pastimes, spend your
time fruitfully, exercise your self in reading gods word: so shall God bless
you, multiply your years on earth, and give you joyful days, unto the great
comfort of your self, and the singular joy of your honorable parents, who^
with you I wish always prosperously to do.

Fare ye well.
The Principles of Christian Religion.
Of Faith.
What faith is.
FAith is a sure persuasion and an undoubted belief of ye heart, in the
merciful promises of God made to all faithful penitent sinners in Christ's
blood, and freely performed of God the father for Christ's sake.

What benefits we receive of God through faith.
By faith, Ephesians. ij.
we which before by nature were the children of wrath, are made the sons and
children of God.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

As many as received him, John. j.
to the^ gave he power to be made y^ sons of God, even the^ y^ believed on his
name, which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of y^ flesh, nor yet of
the will of man, but of God.

All ye are y^ sons of God, Gal. iij.
because ye have believed on Christ Jesus.

By faith we which before were sinners, Romans iiij.
are justified and counted righteous in the sight of God for Christ's sake.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

We plainly affirm, Romans iij.
that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.

We being justified by faith, Romans v.
have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

We know that a man is not justified by the deeds of the law, Gal. ij.
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, and we have believed on Jesus Christ, that we
might be ^ustified by the faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law,
because by the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be justified.

As many of you as are justified by the law, Gal. v.
are fallen from grace. We look and hope for, in the spirit to be justified
through faith. For in Ies^ Christ, neither is circumcision any thing worth,
neither yet uncircumcision, but faith, which works by love.

By faith we are married unto Christ.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

I will mary thee unto my self in faith, Ose. ij.
and thou shall know the Lord.

Faith is the wedding garment wherewith we be married unto Christ, Math. xij.
according to the parable which we read in the Gospel.

By faith our prayers are accepted and heard of God.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

All things whatsoever ye ask in prayer (if ye believe) ye shall receive them.
Mat. xxj.


Let him that prays ask in faith, Jacob. j.
and doubt not. For he that doubts, is like a wave of the sea, which is tossed
with the winds and carried with violence. Neither let that man think, that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord.

By faith Christ's fulfilling of the law, is counted our fulfilling.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

Christ is the fulfilling of the law to justify all that believe. Romans ^.


Christ has delivered us (he speaks of the faithful) from the curse of the
law, Gal. iij.
in as much as he was made accursed for our sakes.

Be it known unto you, Act. xiij.
ye men and brethren, yt through this man (Christ) is preached unto you the
forgeuenes of sins, and that by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from the which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.

By faith our works are allowed before God for Christ's sake.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

Whatsoever is not of faith, Romans ^^*
is sin.

Thine eyes (O Lord) look upon ^ayth. Iere. v.


Abells sacrifice was allowed of God, Gene. iiij.
because it was done in faith. And so likewise were all the sacrifices, which
the holy Patriarchs and other godly men offered in the old law.

By faith, everlasting life is given unto us for Christ's sake.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.

As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, John. iij.
so must the son of man be lifted up, that every one that believes on him,
may not peris^e, but have everlasting life. For God has so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten son, that every one that believes in him,
may not perish, but have everlasting life.

He that believes on the son, John. v.
has everlasting life. But he yt believes not on y^ son, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him.

He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into damnation, but is escaped from death unto life.

This is the will of him that sent me, John. vj.
that every one which sees the son, and believes in him, has everlasting
life.

The xij. Articles of the Christian fayth^ with confirmations of the same out
of the holy scripture.
The first Article.
I Believe in one God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

The confirmations.
I believe.
Without faith it can not be that any man should please God. Heb. xj.
For he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him.

In one God.
Hear, Deuteronomy. vj.
O Israel, the Lord our God is the Lord only.

I am God, Deuteronomy. 32.
Esa. xiv.
and there is none but I.

I am y^ Lord, and there is else none.

I am the Lord, besides whom there is none other God. A true God, and such as
saves, there is none but I alone.

I am he, Esa. xliij.
before whom there was never any God, neither shall there be any after me. I
am, yea, I am Lord alone, and besides me there is no Savior.

I am the first and last, Esa. xliiij.
and besides me there is no God.

We are sure, j. Cor. viij.
that there is none other God but one.

The Father.
Thou (O Lord) art our father and redemer. Esa. lxiij.
Thy name is from everlasting.

Have not we all one father? Mal. ij.
Has not one God created us? Why then does every one of us despise his own
brother, and so break the covenant of our fathers?

Call no man your father upon the earth, Mat. 24.
for one is your father which is in heaven.

We have but one God, j. Cor. viij.
even the father, of whom all things are.

One Lord, Ephesians. iiij.
one faith, one baptism, one God, and one father of all, which is above al,
and through all, and in you all.

Almighty.
I am the almighty God, Genesis xv^*
walk before me, and be thou perfect.

Thou (O Lord) art the great and mighty God, whose name is the Lord of
Hosts, great in counsel, and excellent in work.

Behold, Iere. 32.
I am the Lord God of all flesh, is there any thing to hard for me? Shall any
thing be impossible in my sight, says y^ Lord of Hosts?

With God al things are possible. Mat. xix*
O Lord God almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

Maker of heaven and earth.
In the beginning God made heaven and earth. Gene. j.


The heavens (O Lord) are th^^^, Psa. 89.
the earth also is thine, thou have laid the foundation of the round world,
and all that therein is.

The Lord made the heavens, Esa. xlij.
and spread them abroad, and set forth the earth with her increase, which
gives breath unto the people that is in it, and spirit to them that dwell
therein.

O Lord God, Iere. 32.
it is thou that have made haven and earth with thy great power and hie arm*
and there is nothing hid from thee.

O Lord; Act. iiij.
thou art God, which have made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them
is.

God made all things through Jesus Christ. Ephe. iij.


The second Article.
ANd in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord.

The confirmations.
And in Jesus Christ.
He that believes on the son, John. ii^*
has everlasting life. But he that believes not on the son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.

This is the work of God, John. vj.
y^ ye believe on him whom he has sent.

If ye believe not that I am he, Io^. vii*
ye shall die in your sins.

Christ said to y^ blind man, whom he had made to see: do thou bele^^a on
the Soon of God? He answered and soyd: who is it Lord, that I might believe on
him: Jesus said unto him: Thou have seen him, and he it is that talks with
thee. And he said: Lord, I believe: and he worshipped him.

Christ said unto Martha: John. xj.
He that believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live. And
whosoever lives and believes on me, shall never die. Beleuest thou this? She
said unto him: yea Lord, I believe that thou art Christ the ^onne of God, which
should come into the world.

Ye believe in God; John. xiiij.
believe also in me.

This is God the fathers commandment, j John. iij.
that we believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ. He that beleveth on the
son of God, j. John. v.
has the witness in him self. He y^ believes not God, has made him a lier,
because he believed not the record that God gave of his son. And this is
that record, how that God has gaue^ unto us eternal life, and this life is in
his son.

He that has the son, has life and he that has not y^ son, has not life.

His only begotten Son.
The Lord said unto me, Psalm. ij.
y^ art mine son, this day have I begotten thee.

This is my well-beloved son, Math. iij.
in whom I am well pleased.

Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Math. xv.


God has so loved y^ world, John. iij.
that he gave his only begotten son, that every one y^ believes on him, may
not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the
world to condemn the world, but that y^ world should be saved by him.

He that believes on him, John. iij.
is not condemned: but he that believes not, is already condemned, because he
has not believed on the name of the only begotten son of God.

In this appears y^ love of God toward us, j. Ioh. iiij.
because y^ God sent his only begotten son into y^ world, that we might live
through him.

Our Lord.
I am the Lord, Esa. xlij.
and this is my name. My glory will I give to none other, neither mine honor
to graven Images.

God is faithful, j. Cor. j.
by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord.

There is but one Lord, eue^ Jesus Christ, j. Cor. viij.
by who^ are all things, and we by him.

Ye call me Master and Lord, John. xiij.
and ye say well, for so am I in deed.

The third Article.
WHich was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

The confirmations.
Which was conceived by the holy Ghost.
Joseph y^ son of David, Math. j.
fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife. For that which is conceived in her,
comes of the holy ghost.

The holy ghost shall come upon thee, Luke. j.
and the power of y^ ^iert shall ouershadow thee. Therefore, that holy thing
which shall be borne, shall be called the son of God.

Borne of the Virgin Mary.
Behold, Esa. vij.
a Uirgin shall conceive and (...) are a some, and thou shall call his name
Emanuell.

Unto us is a child borne, Esa. ix.
and unto us a son is given.

There shall come a rod forth of the kindred of I say, Esa. xj.
and a blossom shall florishe out of his root.

Jacob beg at Joseph y^ husband of Mary, Math. j.
of whom Jesus was borne, which is called Christ.

She shall bring forth a son, and y^ shall call his name Jesus. For he shall
save his people from their sins.

Behold, Luke. ij.
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Jesus.

When the time was full come, Gala. iiij.
God sent his son made of a woman and made bond unto the law.

The fourth Article.
HE suffered under Ponce Pilate, was cruci^^ed, dead and buried. He descended
into hell.

The confirmations.
He suffered under Ponce Pilate.
The kings of the earth stood up, Psalm. ij.
and the rulers took counsel together against the Lord, and against his
anointed.

Of a truth (O Lord) against thy holy child Jesus (whom thou have anointed)
both Herod and also Ponce Pilate, Act. iiij.
with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, gathered them selves together in
this city, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to
be done.

I give thee the charge in y^ sight of God, Tim. vj.
which quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ (which under Ponce Pilate,
witnessed a good witnessing) that thou keep the commandment, and be without
spot. etc.

Was crucified.
They pearsed my hands and my feet. Psalm. xxij.


He was wounded for our offenses, Esa. liij.
and smitten for our wickedness.

They shall look upon me whom they have pearsed. Zach. xij.


As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: John. iij.
so must the son of man be lifted up, that every one which believes on him,
may not perish, but have everlasting life.

Ye seek Jesus yt was crucified. Math. 28.


We preach Christ crucified. j. Cor. j.


Christ his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, j. Pet. ij.
that we being delivered from sin, should live unto righteousness. By whose
stripes ye were healed.

Dead.
After this ixij. don. ix.
weeks shall Christ be flame, and they shall have no pleasure in him.

When we were yet ^^u^ers; Christ dyed for us. Romans v.


Christ died for our sins, j. Cor. xv.
according to the Scriptures.

Buried.
His grace was given him with the condeumed. Esa. liij.


First of all I delivered unto you, j. Cor. xv.
that which I received: how that Christ dyed for our sins, agreing to the
Scripture, and that he was buried.

Joseph and Nicodemus took Jesus body, Ioh. xix.
and buried it in a new grave.

He descended into hell.
Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, Psalm. xvj.
neither shall thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

Thou through the blood of thy covenant, Zaeh. ix.
shall let the prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.

O death, ^se. xiij.
I will be thy death: O hell, I will be thy destruction.

Christ has once suffered for sins, j. Pet. iij.
the just for the unjust, to bring us to God, and was killed as pertaynyng to
the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went,
and preached unto the spirits that were in prison.

The fifth Article.
THe third day he rose again from the dead.

The confirmations.
I laid me down and slept, Psalm. iij.
and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me.

After two days shall he quicken us, Ose. vj.
and in the third day shall he raise us up, so that we shall live in his sight.

Ye slew the author of life, Act. iij.
whom God has raised up from the dead.

Jesus Christ our Lord rose again from the dead. Romans j.


Christ died for our sins, Romans iilj.
and rose again for our justification.

Jesus Christ rose again y^ third day, j. Cor. xv.
according to the Scriptures.

Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David, ij. Tim. ij.
rose again from death, according to my Gospel.

The sixth Article.
HE ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
almighty.

The confirmations.
He ascended into heaven.
God is gone up with a merry noise, Psalm. lvj.
and the Lord with y^ sound of the trumpe.

Thou art gone up on hie, Psa. lxviij
thou have led captivity captive, and received gifts for men.

It came to pass as he blessed them, Luke. 24.
he departed from them, and was carried up into heaven.

Jesus was taken up on hie, Act. j.
and a cloud received him up out of their sight. And while they looked
steadfastly up toward heaven, as he went, behold, two men stood by them in
white apparel, which also said: ye me^ of Galile, why stand ye gasing up into
heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come,
as ye have seen him go into heaven.

When he went on hie, Ephe. iiij.
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. That he ascended: what
means it? but that he also descended first into the lowest parts of the
earth? He y^ descended, is even the same also y^ ascended up above all heavens,
to fulfill all things.

And sits on the right hand of God the father almighty.

The confirmations.
The Lord said unto my Lord: Psalm. cx.
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy fotestoole.

When the Lord had spoken unto them, Mar. xvj.
he was received into heaven, and is sitting on y^ right hand of God.

Christ is on y^ right hand of God, Romans viij.
and makes intercession for us.

If ye be risen again with Christ, Coloss. iij.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God.

Christ has by his own person purged our sins, Heb. j.
and sits on the right hand of the majesty on hie.

The seventh Article.
FRom thence he shall come to judge the quick and dead.

The confirmations.
The Lord shall judge y^ world with righteousness, Psa. xcviij
and the people with equity.

Read the xxv. chapt. of S. Mathewes Gospel.

The father has committed all judgment unto the son, John. v.
because that all me^ should honor the son, as they honor the father.

Christ was ordained of God to be judge of quick and dead. Act. x.


We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, ij. Cor. v.
that every man may receive the works of his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.

Our conversation is in heaven, Phil. iij.
from whence we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
change our vile body, that he may make it like unto his glorious body,
according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto him
self.

The Lord Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing in
his kingdom. ij. Tim. iiij.


God is ready to judge y^ quick and the dead. j. Pet. iiij.


The eight Article.
I believe in the holy Ghost.

The confirmations.
The spirit of God moved upon Gene. j.
the face of the waters.

Take not thy holy spirit from me. Psalm. lj.


When Christ was baptized, Math. iij.
the holy ghost came down upon hy^ in the likeness of a dove.

Christ commanded his disciples to baptize in the name of the father, Mat. 28.
and of the son, and of the holy ghost.

The holy ghost shall reprove the world of sin. John. xvj.


There are three which give witness in heaven, j. Ioh. v.
y^ father, the son, and the holy ghost, and they three are one.

The ninth Article.
I Believe the holy universal congregation: which is the fellowship of Saints.

The confirmations.
If he will not hear the congregation, Mat. xviij
let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and as a Publicane.

Christ loved the congregation, Ephesians. v.
and gave him self for it, to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the fountain of
water through y^ word, to make it unto him self a glorious congregation,
without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, that it should be holy, and
without blame.

I write these things unto thee, j. Tim. iij.
that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of
God, which is the congregation of the living God, the pillar and ground of the
truth.

All that believed kept themselves together, Acts. ij.
and had all things common, and sold their possessions and goods, and parted
them to all me^, as every man had need. And they continued daily with one
accord in the temple, and brake bread from house to house, and did eat their
meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart, praising God.

The multitude of them that believed, Act. iiij.
were of one heart, and of one soul. Neither said any of them, that ought of
the things which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things common.
And great grace was with them all. Neither was there any among them that
lacked. For as many as were possessors of lands or houses, sold them, and
brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet. And distribution was made unto every man according as he had
need.

The tenth Article.
I Believe in the forgeuenes of sins.

The confirmations.
I am he, Psalm. xliiij
yea, I am he, which put away thine iniquities, and that for mine own sake,
and will remember them no more.

The Lord shall put down our wickednesses, Mich. vij.
and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.

Look how wide the east is from Psalm. ciij.
the west, so far has he set our sins from us.

Yea, Esa. liij.
like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful unto
all them that fear him. For he knows perfectly whereof we be made, he
reme^breth that we are but dust.

Christ has taken upon him our infirmities, Mat. viij.
and borne our diseases.

The son of man came to seek and save that was lost. Luke xix.


All that believe in Christ, John. iij.
shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

This is a true saying, j. Tim. j.
and worthy to be noted, that Christ Jesus came into y^ world to save sinners.

The blood of Jesus Christ makes us clean from all sin. j. John j.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
But if we confess our sins, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our
sins, and to make us clean from all iniquity.

The xj. Article.
I Believe the resurrection of the body.

The confirmations.
I believe that my redemer lives, Ioh. xix.
and that I shall rise out of y^ earth in the latter day: and that I shall be
clothed again with this skin, and see God my Savior in my flesh. Yea, I my
self shall behold him, not with other eyes, but with these same eyes. This
hope is steadfastly set in my heart.

Thy dead men shall live, Psa. xxvj.
even with my body shall they rise again. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the
duste. For thy dew is even as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out
them that be under her.

O ye dry bones, Ezech. 37.
he are the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God unto these bones:
behold, I will put breath unto you, that ye may live: I will give you sinews,
and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you over with skin: and so give you
breath, that ye may live, and know that I am the Lord.

Behold, I will open your graves (O my people) and take you out of your
Sepulchers.

The hour shall come, John. v.
in y^ which all that are in y^ graves, shall hear the voice of the son of
God, and shall come forth: they yt have done good, unto the resurrection of
life: and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.

If Christ be preached how that he rose from the dead, j. Cor. xv.
how say some among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? If there be
no rising again of the dead, then is Christ not risen again? If Christ be
not risen again, then is our preaching in vain, and your faith also is in
vain.

Read the whole Chapter.

We know that he which raised ij. Cor. iij.
up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by the means of Jesus.

If we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even them also which sleep by
Jesus, will God bring again with him.

Read y^ latter end of the chapter.

The xij. Article.
I Believe everlasting life.

The confirmations.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, Dan. xij.
shall awake: some to everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe.
The wise (such as have taught (...) her) shall glister (...) the shining of
heaven: and those that have instructed the multitude unto godliness, shall be as
y^ stars, world without end.

Read the. 2. Chapter of the 4. book of E^^ras.

The righteous shall go into everlasting life. Mat. xxv.


My sheep hear my voice, John. x.
and I know the^, and they follow me, and I give them everlasting life.

This is everlasting life, Ioh. x^^.
even to know thee yt alone true God, and who^ thou have sent Jesus Christ.

O Father, these that thou have given me, I will that where I am, there also
they be with me, that they may see my glory, which thou have given me.

The eye has not seen, j. Cor. ij.
and the ear has not heard, neither have the things entered into the heart of
man, which God has prepared for them that love him.

We know that if our earthly ma^sion of this dwelling were destroyed, ij. Cor.
v.
we have a building of God, an habitation not made with hands, but everlasting
in heaven. Amen.

All these Articles aforesaid, I with my whole heart believe, and with my mouth
unfeignedly confess to be true and agreeable to Gods holy word.

The Prayer of the Apostles.
Lord increase our faith.

Of Prayer.
What Prayer is.
PRayer is a lifting up of a pure mind unto God, wherein we ask somewhat of
God that is agreeable to his holy will.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
We know not what we should desire and pray for as we ought, Romans viij.
nevertheles the spirit it self makes intercession mightily for us, with
unspeakable gronings. Howbeit, he that searches the heart, knows what the
mind of the spirit is: for he makes intercession for the saints,
according to ye pleasure of God.

The time comes, John. iiij.
and is now already, that the true worshippers shall worship in spirit and
truth. For y^ father will have such to worship him. God is a spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.

We are the circumcision, Phil. iij.
even we that serve God in spirit.

I will that all men pray in all places, j. Tim. ij.
lifting up pure hands without wrath and strife.

This people honors me with their lips, Math. ^j.
but their hearts is far from me, verily they worship me in vain.

Ask and it shall be given you: Math. vij.
Seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto you. For
whosoever asks, receaueth: and he that seeks, finds: and to him y^
knocks, it shall be opened.

This is the trust that we have in God, j. Job. v.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we
know that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the peticious
that we desire of him.

What benefits we receive of God by prayer.
By prayer we are delivered out of trouble.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
When I was in trouble, Psalm. ^xx.
I called upon the Lord, and he graciously heard me.

Call on me in the day of trouble, Psalm. l.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall honor me.

He shall call upon me, Psalm. xcj.
and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and
bring him to honor.

When any man in his trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel, 2. Chro.
15
and sought him, he was found of him.

By prayer we are preserved from our enemies.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
I will call upon the Lord which Psalm. xix.
is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe from mine enemies.

King Ezechias by prayer was delivered from the proud wicked tyrant
Senacherib, 4. Reg. 19.
both he and all his.

So likewise was Joseph, Daniell, Susanna, Peter. etc.

By prayer we get the victory of our enemies in battle.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
The people of Israel got the victory over the Amalechites, Exodus xvij.
so long as Moses prayed for them.

When the black Mores came out to fight against Asa King of Judah, 2. Chro. 14
Asa prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord gave him the victory, so that all his
enemies were destroyed in battle. Read ye chapter.

Judas Machabeus after he had called on the name of the Lord, 1. Match. 4.
got a noble victory of Gorgias and his company.

By prayer we obtain health of body.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
The miracles which Christ wrought upon the^ that were diseased, and fled unto
him for help with faithful prayer, prove this true.

By prayer we obtain all things necessary for the body.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Moses by prayer obtained Ma^na from heaven for the Israelites. Exodus xvj


Helias by prayer obtained rain of God to water the earth. 3. Reg. 18.


By prayer our sins are forgeuen us.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, Psa. xxxij
and thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin. For this shall every one that is
godly, make his prayer to thee, in a time when thou may be found.

I forgave thee all that det, Mat. xvij.
when thou desiredst me.

The sinful Publicaue praying Luk xviij
for remission of his sins, went home more righteous in the sight of God,
then the proud Pharisey.

If any be diseased among you, Jacob. v.
let him call for the elders of the congregation, and let them pray over him,
and anoint him with oil in the name of ye Lord, and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he be in sins,
they shall be forgeuen him.

By prayer we overcome the devil, and all our ghostly enemies.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
This kind of devils is not cast out but by prayer and fasting. Mat. viij.


Watch and pray, Mat. 26.
that ye fall not into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is
weak.

By prayer we obtain God the holy Ghost.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
If ye which are evil, Luke. xj.
can give your children good gifts, how much more shall your father which is
in heaven, give the holy ghost to them that desire it of him.

As the disciples of Christ were gathered together in one place, Act. j. ij.
and continued in prayer, they were all filled with the holy ghost.

By prayer we obtain all good things, both for the body and soul.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
What things soever ye desire when ye pray, Mark. xj.
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

The harvest is much, Math. ix.
but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of ye harvest, that he
will send laborers into his harvest.

If any of you lack wisdom, Jacob. j.
let him ask of him that gives it, even God which gives to all men
indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth, and it shall be given him. But
let him ask in faith. etc.

The Lord is even at hand. Phil. iiij.
Be careful for nothing: but in all prayer and supplication, let your
peticions be known unto God with thank esgeuing.

Many other benefits receive we of God through prayer, which here to rehearse,
were to long. Read diligently my book, called the Pathway unto Prayer, and
that shall sufficiently instruct thee in all thing^s concerning prayer.

The Lords prayer called the Pater noster, with confirmations of every
Peticion, out of the holy Scripture.
The Disciples said unto Christ: Luke. xj.
Lord teach us to pray. And he said unto them: when ye pray, say: Our Father
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. etc.

The Preface of the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven.

The confirmations.
Our Father.
Is not the Lord God the father and thine honor? Es^. lxiij.
Has he not made thee and ordained thee? Thou O Lord God, art our father and
redemer.

Have we not all one father? Malac. 2.
Has not God made us? no ^hy does every one of us then despise his own
brother?

Should not a son honor his father, Malac. j.
and a servant his master? If I be now a Father, where is mine honor? If I
be a Lord, where is my fear?

Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, Romans viij.
but ye have received y^ spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba (that is to
say) father. The same spirit certifieth our spirit, that we are the sons of
God. If we be sons, then are we also heirs, the heirs I mean of God, and
fellow heirs annexed with Christ.

Which art in Heaven.
Heaven is my seat* Esa. lxvj.
and the earth is my footestoole.

The Lord has prepared his seat in heaven. Psalm. cij.


Our God is in heaven, Psalm. ^xv.
he does whatsoever pleases him.

Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, Psalm. ciij.
which dwell in the heavens.

Call no man father upon earth, Mat. xxi^.
for one is your father, which is in heaven.

The first Peticion.
HAllowed be thy name.

The confirmations.
I will make the name of my holiness to be known among my people of Israel,
Ezech. 39.
and I will not let my holy name to be evil spoken of any more, but y^ very
heathen also shall know that I am the Lord, the holy one of Israel.

The time shall come, Ioell. 2.
that who soever calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

From the rising up of the Sun, Malac. j.
unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentries, yea,
and that in all places.

The Lord gave, Job. j.
and the Lord has taken away. Now blessed be the name of the Lord.

Sing unto the Lord, Psalm. ix.
and praise his name. Be telling of his salvation from day to day. Declare his
honor among the Heathen and his wonders among all people.

I will declare thy name unto my brethren. Psalm. xxj.
In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.

The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, Pro. xviij
the righteous flies unto it, and shall be saved.

By Christ do we offer the sacrifice of prayer always unto God, Heb. xiij.
that is to say, ye fruit of those lips which confess his name.

The second Peticion.
THy Kingdom come.

The confirmations.
Seek first the kingdom of God, Math. vj.
and the righteousness thereof, and all things shall be ministered unto you.

The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Mat. xj.
and the violent pluck it unto them.

Who soever receaueth not the kingdom of God as a child, Luke xvi^^
he shall not enter into it.

Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, John. iij.
he can not enter into the kingdom of God.

The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans xiiij
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy ghost.

The kingdom of God is not in words, j. Cor. iiij.
but in power.

The third Peticion.
THy will be done, as in heaven, so likewise in earth.

The confirmations.
Teach me (O Lord) to do thy will, Psalm. cxlij.
for thou art my God.

Not every one that says unto me, Math. viij.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the
will of my father which is in heaven.

Whosoever does the will of my father which is in heaven, Mat. xij.
he is my brother, sister, and mother.

This is the will of him that sent me, John. vj.
that whosoever sees y^ son, and believes on him, has everlasting life.

Fashion not your selves like unto this world, Romans xij.
but be ye changed through the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove, what
thing that good and acceptable and perfect will of God is.

This is the will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
even your sanctifying, that ye abstain from whoredom, that every one of you
know how to keep his vessel in hol^^es and honor, and not in the lust of
concupiscence, as the heathen do which know not God.

For as much as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, j. Pet. iiij^.
arm ye your selves likewise with ye same mind. For he which suffers in the
flesh, cease from sin, that he from hence forth should live (as long time
as he remains in the flesh) not after the lusts of men, but after the will
of God. For it is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time that is past
of the life, after the will of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
excess of drinking, and abominable idolatry.

The fourth Peticion.
Give us this day our daily bread.

The confirmations.
I have been young and now am old, Psalm. 37.
and yet saw I never ye righteous forsaken, nor his sede begging their bread.
He is ever mercif^^^ and lends, and yet have his children Gods plenty and
enough.

The eyes of all wait upon thee (O Lord) and thou geuest them their meat in
due season. Esa. cxlv.
Thou openest thy hand, and fillest every living creature with thy blessing.

The Lord will not let the soul of ye righteous suffer hunger: Prou. x.
but he takes away ye riches of ye ungodly.

The blessing of the Lord makes men rich: as for careful travail, it does
nothing thereto.

Two things have I required of thee, Pro^. xxx.
that thou will not deny me before I dye. Remove from me vanity and lies. Give
me neither poverty nor riches, only grant me a necessary living, least if I
be too full, I deny thee, and say: who is the Lord? And least I being
constrained through poverty, fall unto stealing, and forswear y^ name of my
God.

Be not careful for your life, Mat. vj.
what ye shall eat or drink, nor yet for your body, what raiment ye shall
wear. Is not the life more worth then meat? and the body more of value then
raiment? Read forth the chapter.

Cast all your care on God, j. Pet. v.
for he cares for you.

The fifth Peticion.
ANd forgive us our debtes, as we forgive our debtors.

The confirmations.
And forgive us.
I am he, Esa. xlv.
yea, I am he, which put away thine iniquities, and that for mine own sake,
and will remember thy sins no more.

As for thine offenses, Esa. xliiij.
I drive the^ away like the clouds, and thy sins as the miste. Turn thee
again unto me, and I will deliver thee.

God is the king which forgeueth his servant the ten thousand talentes. Mat.
xviij


No man can forgive sin but God alone. Mark. ij.


God is the most loving father, Luke. v. and.xv.
which joyfully receaueth home again his lost son, when he repents and
conuerteth.

Our debtes.
They are all gone out of ye way, Psalm. xiiij.
they are altogether abominable, there is none that does good, no not one.

Who can tell, Psalm. xix.
how often he offends? Oh cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

Who can say, Prou. xx.
my heart is clean, I am free from sin.

There is not one righteous man in all the earth, Eccle. vij.
that does good, and sins not.

Behold, Job. iiij. xv. xxv.
God has found unfaithfulness among his own Saints, Yea, y^ very heavens is
unclean in his sight. How much more then abominable and vile is man, which
drincketh wickedness like water.

All the children of men are wicked, 3. Esa. 4.
and all their works are naught, neither is there any truth in them.

All are hypocrites and wicked. Esa ix.


We are all become unclean, Esa. ^xiiij.
and all our righteousnesses are as a cloth polluted with menstrue.

We are all unprofitable servants. Luk xvij.


All have sinned, Romans iij.
and want the glory of God.

If we say we have no sin, j. John. j.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. But if we confess our
sins, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to make us
clean from all iniquity.

As we forgive our debtors.
He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance of ye Lord, Eecle. 28.
which shall surely keep him his sins. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that
he has done thee, and so shall thy sins be forgeuen thee also, when thou
prayest. A man that bears hatred against an other, how dare he desire
forgeuenes of God? He that shows no mercy to a man which is like him self,
how dare he ask forgeuenes of his sins? If he that is but flesh, bears
hatred and keeps it, who will entreat for his sins? Remember the end, and
let emnitie pass.

If ye forgive other men their trespasses, Mat. vj.
the heavenly Father shall forgive you. But if ye will not forgive men their
trespasses, no more shall your Father forgive you your trespasses.

When ye stand and pray, Mark. xj.
forgive if ye have ought against any man, that your father also which is in
heaven, may forgive you your trespasses.

Forgive, Luke. vj.
and it shall be forgeuen unto you.

Forbear one an other, Coloss. iij.
and forgive one an other. If any man have a quarrel against an other, like as
Christ has forgeuen you, even so do ye likewise.

Christ forgave his persecutors, Luke xxiij
and prayed for them saying: father forgive them, for they know not what they
do.

S. Stephen forgave his enemies, Act. vij.
and prayed for them on this manner: O Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

The sixth Peticion.
ANd lead us not into temptation.

The confirmations.
My Son, Eccle ij.
if thou will come into the service of God, stand fast in righteousness and
fear, and arm thy soul to temptation. etc.

Watch and pray that ye fall not Mat. xxvj
into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Blessed is the man that stands fast in temptation. Jacob. j.
For when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him.

Let no man say when he is tempted that he is tempted of God: For as God cannot
be tempted with evil, so neither he himself tempts any man unto evil. But
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away, and entised of his own
concupiscence. Then when lust has conceived, she brings forth sin, and
sin when it is done in deed brings forth death.

The seventh Peticion.
But deliver us from evil.

The confirmations.
Satan has desired after you, Luke xxij.
y^ he might sift you even as wheat. But I have prayed for thee, O Simon, yt
thy faith may not fail: And when thou art converted, strength thy brethren.

God is faithful, j. Cor. ij.
which will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength: but shall in the
midst of the temptation, make a way to come out, that ye may be able to
bear it.

Be sober and watch, j. Pet. v.
for your adversary the devil walks about like a roaring Lion seeking who^
he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of the temptation. ij. Pet. ij.


We know that whosoever is borne of God, j. Ioh. v.
sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked
touches him not.

The conclusion of the Lords Prayer.
FOr thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever.

The confirmations.
Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel our father for ever and ever. 1. Chro. 29.
Thine (O Lord) is might, power, glory, victory, and praise: for all that is in
heaven and in earth, is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou
excellest above all, even as the head of all. Thine are the riches, treasures,
honor and dominion over all, and in thy hands is the virtue, might, power,
excellency, empire, and rule upon and above all things. Wherefore now (O our
God) we give laud, praise, and glory to thy most noble name.

Of him, Romans xj.
and through him, and in him, are all things. To him be praise for ever.

To God, Romans xvj.
which alone is wife, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever.

Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, Ephe. iij.
according to the power yt works in us, be praise in the congregation by
Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end.

Unto God, king everlasting, j. Tim. j.
immortal, invisible, alone wise, be honor, and glory, for ever and ever.

Thou art worthy (O Lord) to receive glory, Apoc. iiij.
and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy wills
sake, they were and are created.

Blessing, Apoc. v.
honor, glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the seat, and unto
the Lamb for ever more, Amen.

All these Peticions, I undoubtedly believe that I shall inioye, when soever I
ask them in faith of God my heavenly father, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Of the Law.
What the Law is.
THe Law of God is a doctrine prescribing unto us what we ought to do, L^^d.
x^^.
and what to eschew, both toward God and our neighbor.

The confirmations.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.

Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord God in vain.

Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Thou shall not kill.

Thou shall not steal.

To what use the law was given.
First, that it should declare unto us the will of God, how we ought to live,
and what works we ought to do, that we may please the Lord our God.

The confirmations.
The law of the Lord is an undefiled Psalm. xix.
law, co^uerting souls. The testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom
to ye simple. The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart. The
commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light to the eyes.

Thy word is a lantern to my feet, Psalm. cxi^. and. exlvij.
and a light to my pathwaies. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
ordinances unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation, neither have
the heathen knowledge of his laws.

Secondly, that it should reveal and open unto us, our sin and wickedness,
while we consider how unable we be of our selves to do that, which the holy,
righteous, and good law of God requires of us to be done.

The confirmations.
By the law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans iij.


The law entered in, Romans v.
that sin should increase.

What shall we say? Romans vij.
is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I knew not what sin meant, but by the
law: for I had not known what lust had meant, except the law had said: Thou
shall not lust. But sin took an occasion by the means of the commandment,
and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin was
dead. I once lived without ye law: but when the commandment came, sin
(...), and I was dead. And ye very same commandment, which was ordained unto
life, was found to be unto me an occasion of death. For sin took occasion by
y^ means of the commandment, and so deceived me, and by the same
commandment s^ue me.

The sti^ge of death is sin: j. Cor. xv.
and the strength of sin is the law.

The letter, ij. Cor. iij.
that is to say, the law kills.

The law is the ministering of condemnation. John. vij.


Moses (says Christ) gave you a law, and yet none of you fulfilleth the law
in deed.

Thirdly, after we have learned our weakness, our wretchedness, our sin, our
wickedness, by comparing our strength and life with the law of God, which
proves us all sinners, and worthy of eternal damnation, least we should fall
into desperation, and so be damned, the law was given of God, to be a
Scholemaister unto us to lead us unto Christ, the alone end and perfect
fulfiller of all the laws of God, that we through faith, taking upon us his
righteousness, and his fulfilling of the law, might be found blameles through
him, in the sight of God, and to be made inheritours of everlasting glory.

The confirmations.
The law was our Scholemaister unto Christ, Gala. iij.
that we should be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are
no longer under the Scholemaister. For ye are all the children of God, because
ye believe in Christ Jesus.

The law brought nothyug to perfection, Heb. vij.
but was an introduction to a better hope, by the which we drawnie unto God.

Be it known unto you (ye men and brethren) that through this man Christ,
Act. xiij.
is preached unto you the forgeuenes of sins, and that by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from the which ye could not he justified by
the law of Moses.

Why tempt ye God, Act. xv.
to put on the Disciples necks ye yoke, which neither our fathers nor we were
able to bear. But we believe, that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we
shall be saved.

Christ is the fulfilling of the law, Romans x.
to justify all that believe.

Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, Gala. iij.
in as much as he was made accursed for us.

The x. Commandments of God, with confirmations of every Commandment out
of the holy scripture.
The first Table of the Law, containing four Commandments, wherein is
declared our duty to God.

The first Commandment.
I Am the Lord thy God, Exodus x^.
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. Thou shall have no strange Gods before me.

The confirmations.
The Lord he is God, Deuteronomy. iiij.
and there is none but he alone.

Understand and think it in thy heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven
above, and upon the earth beneath: neither is there any other.

Hear O Israel: Deuteronomy. vj.
The Lord our God is God alone. Thou shall love y^ Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him alone.

If thou forget the Lord thy God, and Deuteronomy. viij.
walk after strange Gods, and serve them and worship them: I testify unto
you, that ye shall surely perish.

Now O Israel, Deuteronomy. x.
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou should fear the
Lord thy God and walk in his ways, and love him, and serve the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and keep the commandments of the
Lord?

If thine heart turn away from God, Deuteronomy. xxx
so that thou will not hear his word, but go astray, and worship strange
Gods, and serve them: I pronounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely
perish, and not live long on the earth.

See now how that I, Deuteronomy. 32.
yea, that I am God, and there is none but I.

I will assure thee (O Israel) if thou will ^arken unto me: Psalm. 81.
There shall no strange God be in thee, neither shall thou worship any other
God. I am the Lord thy God.

Besides me there was never any God, Esa. xliij.
neither shall there be after me. I am, yea, I am the Lord alone, and besides me
there is no Savior.

There is none other God but I. Esa. xlv.
A true God, and such a one as saves, there is none but I alone.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Mat. xxij.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
greatest commandment.

This is everlasting life, Ioh. xvij.
even to know thee y^ alone true God, and who^ thou have sent Jesus Christ.

There is none other God but one. j. Cor. viij.
And although there be yt are called Gods, whether in heaven, or in earth (as
there be many Gods, and many Lords) yet unto us there is but one God.

There is one God, ^. Tim. iiij.
and one Mediator.

The second Commandment.
THou shall not make to thy self any graven image, Exodus xx.
nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, nor in the earth
beneath, nor in the waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them,
nor worship them: For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the
sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation
of the^ that hate me: and show mercy unto thousands to them that love me, and
keep my Commandments.

The confirmations.
Ye shall not turn unto Idols, Leuit. xix
nor make you Gods of metal.

Take heed unto your selves, Deuteronomy. iiij.
that ye forget not the appointment of the Lord your God, which he made with
you, and that ye make you no graven image, nor any picture that the Lord thy
God has forbidden thee. For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, and a
jealous God. If ye do wickedly, and make any manner of graven image, and work
evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger, I call heaven
and earth to record against you this day, that ye shall shortly perish.

Ye shall overthrow the altars of the Idols, Deuteronomy. vij.
and break down their pillars, cut down their groves, and burn their graven
images with fire. For thou art an holy nation unto the Lord thy God.

Cursed be the man that makes any carved or molten image (an abomination unto
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 27.
the work of the hands of the craftesman) and puts it in a secret place:
and all the people shall answer, and say, Amen.

Confounded be all they y^ worship carved images, Psa. xcvij
and that delight in vain Gods.

I am the Lord, Esa. xlij.
and this is my name. My glory will I give to none other, neither mine honor
to graven Images.

Read the 44. and 46. chapters of Esaias.

Be converted and forsake your Idols. Ezecb. 14.


The seeking out of Idols is the beginning of whoredom, Sap. xiiij.
and the bringing up of them, is the destruction of life. For they were not
from the beginning, neither shall they continue unto the end. The wealthy
idleness of men has found the^ out upon the earth, therefore shall they come
shortly to an end. The honoring of abominable images, is the cause, the
beginning, and the end of all evil.

Read the 13. 14. 15. and 16. chapters of Wisdom. Read also the 6. chapter of
the Prophet Baruck.

We preach unto you, Act. xiiij.
that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made
heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein.

My sentence is, Act. xv.
yt we trouble not the^, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God, but
yt we write unto them, that they abstain the^ selves from the filthiness of
Images.

They are not Gods, Act. xix.
which are made with hands.

Be not worshippers of Images. j. Cor. x.


No worshippers of images shall inherit the kingdom of God. j. Cor. vj.


Babes, j. Io^. v.
keep your selves from Images.

The third Commandment.
THou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: Exodus xx.
for the Lord will not hold him giltles that takes his name in vain.

The confirmations.
Ye shall not swear by my name in vain: Leuit. xix.
neither shall thou defile the name of thy God. I am the Lord.

He y^ has not sworn to deceive his neighbor: Psa. xxii^^
he shall receive blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his Savior.

He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, Leuit. 24.
let him be slain, and all the multitude shall stone him to death.

Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in truth, Iere. iiij.
in equity, and righteousness.

My curse and vengeance (says the Lord) shall fall upon his house, Zacb. v.
that falsely swears by my name: and shall remain in his house, and consume
it, with the timber and stones thereof.

Ye have heard how it was said to them of old time: Mat. v.
thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord those
things that thou swearest. But I say unto you, swear not at all: neither by
the heaven, for it is Gods seat: neither by the earth, for it is his
footestoole: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king:
neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hear
white or black. But your communication shall be yea, yea, and nay, nay. For
what soever is added more then these, it comes of evil.

Above all things, Jacob. v.
my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, neither any other
oath: but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into hypocrisy.

Let not thy mouth be accustomed with swearing, Eccle. ^^.
for in it there are many falls.

A man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague
shall never go from his house. And if he swear in vain, he shall not be
found righteous, for his house shall be full of plagues.

The words of y^ swearer bring death (God grant that it be not found in the
house of Jacob) but they that fear God, esehue al such, and lie not weltring
in (...).

O praise the Lord with me, Psalm. 35.
and let us magnify his (...) together.

All our glory is in God all the day long, Psa. xliiij.
and we will praise thy name for ever.

Call on me in the day of trouble, Psalm. l.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall honor me.

Because he has trusted in me, Psalm. xcj.
I will deliver him: yea, I will defend him, because he has known my name. He
shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble: I will
deliver him, and bring him to honor. With long life will I satisfy him, and
show him my salvation.

The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, Prs. xviij
the righteous flies unto it, and shall be ^aued.

The time shall come, Ioell. 2.
that who soever calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

The fourth Commandment.
REmember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Exodus xx.
Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seueth
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of
work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manseruaunt, nor thy
maydseruaunt, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. For
in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
^allowed it.

The confirmations.
In any wise see that ye keep my Sabbaothes: Exodus 31.
for it is a sign between me and you, in your generations, for to know, that I
the Lord am he, that does sanctify you.

The man that was found gathering sticks on the Sabbath day, Number. xv.
was stoned to death, at the commandment of God.

Blessed is the man that takes Esa. lvj.
heed, that he vnhalloweth not the Sabbath (that is to say) keeps him self
so, that he do no evil. All they which keep them selves that they unhallow
not the Sabbath, I mean, that they fulfill my covenant: them will I bring to
my holy mountain, and make the^ joyful in my house of prayer.

If thou on the Sabbath day turn thy feet, Esa. lviij.
so that thou do not the thing which pleases thy self in my holy day, but
geuest God the honor, so that thou do not after thine own imagination,
neither seek thine own will, nor speak thine own words: then shall thou
have thy pleasure in the Lord, and I will carry thee hie above y^ earth, and
feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the Lords own mouth
has so promised.

There shall be a new Sabbath for the other old Sabbath, Esa. lxvi.
and all (...) shall come to worship before me, says the Lord.

There remains yet a rest to the people of God. Heb. iiij.
For he y^ is entered into his rest, ^ath ceased also from his own works, as
God did from his. Let us study therefore, to enter into that rest, least any man
fall after the same ensample of unbelief.

What it is to keep holy the Sabbath day.
To keep holy y^ Sabbath day, (...) from bodily labor, that thou should
the more licenciously give thy mind to the wearing of gallant apparel, to
ba^cketting, to idle talk, to vain pastime, and such other filthy pleasures
of the flesh, but that thou setting aside all worldly business, should the
more freely apply thy self to read, hear, and learn the wo^d of God, to pray
in the temple with the congregation, to be thankful to God for his benefits,
to be present at the ministration of y^ holy Sacraments, to be partaker of y^
mysteries of the Lords body and blood, to give some good thing to the relief
of the poor, to visit and comfort the sick, and them that are in prison, and
casting away the works of the flesh, wholly to exercise thy self in the
fruits of the spirit.

The second Table of the Law, co^tayning ^ixe Commandments, wherein is
dec^ared our duty toward our neighbor.

The fifth Commandment.
Honor thy father and thy mother, Exodus xx.
that thy days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God g^^eth thee.

The confirmations.
Ye shall reverence every man his father and his mother. Leuit. xix


Whosoever he be that curses his father or his mother, Leuit. xx.
let him die: for he y^ has cursed his father and mother, his blood be upon
him.

He that smites his father or mother, Exodus xxj.
let him be slain for it.

If any man have a son that is stubborn and disobedient, Deuteronomy.xxj.
that he will not harken unto y^ voice of his father, nor y^ voice of his
mother, and they have chastened him, and he will not obey them: then shall his
father and his mother take him, and bring him out unto y^ elders of that city,
and to the gates of that same place, and say unto the elders of the city: this
our son is stubborn and disobedient, and will not harken unto our voice: he
is a riotour, and a drunkard. And all the men of that city shall stone him
with stones unto death.

Cursed be he that curses his father and mother: Deuteronomy. 27.
and all the people shall say, Amen.

My son, Pro. j.
hear thy fathers doctrine, and forsake not the law of thy mother: For that
shall bring grace to thy head, and shall be as a chain about thy neck.

A good child will harken to his fathers warning: Pro. xiij.
but he that is scornful, will not hear when h^ is reproved.

He yt hurts his father, Prou. xix.
or (...) teth out his mother, is a shameful and an unworthy son.

Who so robs his father and mother, Pro. 28.
and faith it is no (...), the (...) is like unto a destroyer.

Who so laugheth his father to sc^rne, Pro. xxx.
and sets his mothers commandment at ^ ought, the ravens pick out his
eyes in the valley, and devoured be he of young ^gles.

The Lord will have the father honored of the children: and look what a
mother commands her children, Eccle. iij.
he will have it kep^.

Who so h^noureth his father, shall have a ^ye of his own children: and when
he makes his prayer, he shall be heard.

He that honors his father, shall have a longlife: and he that is obedient
for the Lords sake, his mother shall have joy of him.

He that fears the Lord, honors his father and mother, and does them
service, as it were unto the Lord him self.

Honor thy father in deed, in word, and in all patience, yt thou may have
Gods blessing, and his blessing shall abide with thee at ye last.

The blessing of the father builds up the houses of the children, but the
mothers curse rooteth out the foundations.

Rejoice not when thy father is reproved, for it is not honor unto thee, but a
shame. For y^ worship of a man's father, is his own worship, and where the
father is without honor, it is the dishonestie of y^ some.

My son, make much of thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he
lives. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him
not in thy strength. For the good deed yt thou show to thy father, shall
not be forgotten, and when thou thy self want, it shall be rewarded thee
(and for thy mothers offense, thou shall be recompensed with good, yea, it
shall be founded for thee in righteousness) and in the day of trouble thou shall
be remembered: thy sins also shall melt way, like as the Ise in the air and
warm weather. He that forsakes his father, shall come to shame: and he that
despises his mother, is cursed of God.

Children obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord: Ephe. vj.
for that is right. Honor thy father and mother, (the same is the first
commandment in y^ promise) that thou may^st prosper, and live long on earth.

The sixth Commandment.
THou shall not kill. Exodus xx.


The confirmations.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, Gene. ix.
by man shall his blood be shed: For in y^ image of God, did God make man.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart. etc. Leuit. xix


Thou shall not avenge thy self, nor be mindful of wrong against the children
of my people, but shall love thy neighbor as thy self. I am the Lord.

He that kills any man, Leuit. 24.
let him dye the death.

Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly: Deuteronomy. 27.
and all y^ people shall say, Amen.

Ye have heard, Mat. v.
that it was said to the^ of the old time: Thou shall not kill: for who soever
kills, shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you, that who soever
is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of judgment. etc.

Ye have heard, that it was said: thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy. But I say unto you: love your enemies. Bless the^ that curse you. Do
good to the^ that hate you. Pray for the^ which hurt you, and persecute you,
that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven: for he makes
his (...) to arise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on y^
righteous, and on the unrighteous.

Be ye merciful, L^ke. v^.
as your father is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged. Condemn
not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgeuen. Give,
and (...) other men mete to you again.

Recompense to no man evil for evil. Romans xij.


If it be possible (as much as is in you) live peaceably with all men. Dearly
beloved, avenge not your seluest, but rather give place unto wrath. Deuteronomy. 32.
For it is written: Uengeance is mine, and I will reward, says the Lord.
Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink: for
in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not o^^rcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

Be angry and sin not: Ephe. iiij.
let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place unto the
backbiter.

Let all bitterness, and fearcenes, and wrath, and roaring, and cursed speaking,
be put away from you, (...). Be ye (...) an other, merciful, (...) even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

He that hates his brother, i. Io^. iij.
is a manflayer. And ye know, that every manflayer has not everlasting life
dwelling in him.

This commandment have we of God: j. John. iiij.
that he which loves God, should also love his brother.

The seventh Commandment.
THou shall not committee adultery. Exodus xx.


The confirmations.
Thou shall not lie with thy neighbors wife, Leuit. 18.
to defile her with sede.

Thou shall not make thy daughter common, Leuit. xix
that thou would cause her to be an whore, least the land also fall to
whoredom, and be full of wickedness.

It a man be found lying with a woman y^ has a wedded husband, Deuteronomy. xxij
they shall die both of them: both the man that lay with that wife, and also
the wife: and so shall thou put away evil from Israel.

There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, Deuteronomy. 23.
nor whorekeeper of the sons of Israel.

Cursed be he that lies with his neighbors wife: Deuteronomy. 27.
and all the people shall say, Amen.

The lips of an harlot are a dropping honey comb, Pro^. v.
and her throat is more glistring then oil. But at the last she is as bitter
as wormwood, and her tongue as sharp as a two edged sword. Her feet go down
unto death, and her steps pearse through unto hell.

Be glad with the wife of thy youth. Loving is y^ Hind, and friendly is y^ Roe.
Let her breasts always satisfy thee, and hold thee ever content with her love.
O my son, why will thou have pleasure in an harlot, and embrace y^ bosom of
an other woman? Every man's ways are open in the sight of y^ Lord, and he (...)
of the ungodly shall (...) himself, and with the (...) of his own sins, shall
he be trapped.

Keep thee from the evil woman, (...).
and from the (...) tongue of the harlot, that thou lust not after her beauty
in thy heart, and least thou be taken with her fair looks. An harlot will make
a man to beg his bread: but an honest woman will seek about to get her living.
May a man carry fire in his bosom, and in his clothes, and not be burnt? or can
one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be hurt? Even so, who soever goes
into his neighbors wife, and tou^heth her, can not be unguilty.

Who so commits adultry with a woman, he is a ^oole, and bringth his life to
destruction. He gets him self also shame and dishonor, such as shall never
be put out. (...)

An whore is a deep grave, Pr^. xxi^j.
and (...) like a thee^e, and brings unto her such men as be full of vice.

He that keeps company with harlots, (...).
shall come to beggary.

Read the (...) Chap of (...).

My son, Tob. iiij.
keep the well from all whoredom, and (beside thy wife) see y^ no fault be
known by thee.

If my heart has lusted after my neighbors wife, Job. xxxj.
or if I have laid wait at his door? Oh then let my wife be an other man's
whore, and let other men lie with her. For this i^ a wickedness and ^inne, that
is worthy to be punished: yea, a (...) that should utterly consume and root
out all my substance.

Whoredom, Ose. iiij.
wine, and drunkenness, take the heart away.

Ye have heard, Mat. ^.
that it was said to them of old time: thou shall not commit adultry. But I say
unto you, that who soever looks on an other man's wife, to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart.

If any that is called a brother be a fornicatour, j. Cor. v.
with him that is such, see that ye eat not.

Neither fornicators, j. Cov. vj.
neither adultrers, neither weaklings, neither abusers of the^ selves with
mankind, shall inherit y^ kingdom of God.

Let us not be def^^ed with fornication, j. Cor. x.
as some of them were defiled with fornication, and fell in one day xxiij.
thousand.

As for fornication and all uncleanness, Ephe. v.
let it not be once named among you, as it becomes saints, or filthiness, or
folishe talking, or jesting, which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks.
For this ye know, y^ no whoremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritance
in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

This is the will of God, j. These. iiij
even your holiness, yt ye should abstain from fornication, and that every one
of you should know how to keep his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in
y^ lust of concupiscence, as do the heathen which know not God.

Wedlock is honorable among all men, Heb. xiij.
and the bed undefiled. As for whoremongers and adultrers, God shall judge them.

Whoremongers have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.
Apoc. xxj.


The eight Commandment.
THou shall not steal. Exodus xx.


The confirmations.
Ye shall not steal, Leuit. xix
neither lie, neither deal falsely one with an other.

Thou shall not do thy neighbor wrong, neither rob him violently, neither
shall thy workmans labor abide with thee till the morning.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in metyard, in weight, or in
measure. True balances, and true weight shall ye have. I am the Lord.

If thou sellest ought unto thy neighbor, Leuit. 25.
or byest of thy neighbors hand, ye shall not deceive one an other. If thy
brother be (...) poor, and fallen into decay with thee, thou shall relieve
him, that he may live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money upon (...),
nor lend him thy corn for increase. Thou shall not take usury of him, or
vauntage.

If one of thy brethren among you, (...)
be poor within any of thy gates in thy land which the Lord God gives thee,
thou shall not ha^den thy heart, nor shut thy^e (...) from thy poor brother,
but ^pen thine hand unto him, (...)

The land shall never be without poor, and therefore I command thee saying:
Thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother that is needy and poor in thy
land.

Who so keeps company with a thief, Pro. xxi^.
hates his own soul.

Woe be to thee y^ spoylest, Esa. 33.
for thou thy self shall be spoiled.

Break thy bread to the hungry, Esa. lviij.
and bring the poor waudring, into thine house. When thou see a naked man
^ouer him, and so shall thou not despise thy flesh.

The thief is cursed of God, Zach. v.
and all that he has, shall come to naught.

Shame and sorrow goes over the thief. Eccle. v.


Anna old Tobies wife, Tob. ij.
went daily to the weauing work, and look what living she could get with
the labor of her hands, she brought it home. And it happened that she took a
kid, and brought it home: and when her husband heard it cry, he said: look
that it be not stolen, if it be, restore it again to the owners: for it is
not lawful for us to eat or touch any thing that is stolen.

Give alms of thy goods, Tob. iiij.
and turn never thy fare from the poor: so shall it come to pass, that the
face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee. Be merciful after thy
power. If thou have much, give plentiously: if thou have little, do thy
diligence, gladly to give of that little. For so gatherest thou thy self a
good reward in the day of necessity. For mercy delivers from all sin, and
from death, and suffers not the soul to come in darkness.

Behold Lord, Luke. xix.
said Zacheus, the half of my goods do I give to the poor: and if I have done
any man wrong, I restore him four fold.

Neither thieves, j. Cor. vj.
neither pillars, shall inherit ye kingdom of God.

Let him yt stole, Ephe. iiij.
steal no more, but let him rather labor with his hands ye thing which is
good, that he may give unto him that needs.

The ninth Commandment.
THou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Exodus xx.


The confirmations.
Thou shall not accept a vain tale: Exodus 23.
neither shall thou put thy hand to the wicked, to be an unrighteous witness.

If any unrighteous witness rise up against a man, Deuteronomy. xix.
to accuse him of trespass: then both the men which strive together, shall
stand before the Lord, before the priests, and the judges which shall be in
those days, and the judges shall make diligent inquisition. And if the witness
be found false, and that he has given false witness against his brother, then
shall you do to him, as he had thought to do to his brother: and thou shall put
away evil from thee.

Cursed be he yt takes a reward to stay the soul of innocent blood: Deuteronomy. 27.
and all the people shall say, Amen.

The Lord hates a false witness that brings up lies. Prou. vj.


A false witness shall not remain unpunished: Prou. xix.
and he that speaks lies, shall perish.

A false witness shall perish: Pro. xxj.
but he that is a true man, boldly speaks that he has heard.

Who so bears false witness against his neighbor, Pro. xxv.
he is a very club, a sword, and a sharp arrow.

The mouth that lies, Sap. j.
slays the soul.

Thou O Lord, Psalm. v.
wilt destroy all them that speak lies.

In no wise speak against the word of truth, Eccle iiij.
but be ashamed of thy lying.

Use not to make any manner of lie, Eccle. vij.
for y^ custom thereof is not good.

A thief is better, Eccle. xx.
then a man that is accustomed to lie: but they both shall have destruction to
heritage.

The two elders that bare witness against Susanna, Dani. xiij.
were stoned to death.

Out of the heart come false witnesses, Mat. xv.
and those defile a man.

Evil speakers shall not inherit the kingdom of God. j. Cor. vj.


Put away lying, Ephe. iiij.
and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, for as much as we are members
one of an other.

All liars shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone. Ap^^. xxj.


The tenth Commandment.
THou shall not covet thy neighbors house, Exodus xx.
thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor
his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.

The confirmations.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, Pro. iiij.
for thereupon hangs life.

God hates an heart that goes about with wicked imaginations. Prou. vj.


Take heed that thou lust not in thy heart after the beauty of a strange
woman.

Evil thoughts are abomination to the Lord. Pro. xv.


Who soever looks on an other man's wife, Mat. v.
lusting after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Mat. xv.
and those defile a man.

The cares of this world, Mark. iiij.
and the deceitfulnes of riches, and the lusts of other things, choke the
word, and make it unfruitful.

Take heed to your selves, Luke. xxj.
least at any time your hearts be overcome with the cares of this life.

I had not known what lust had meant, Romans vij.
except the law had said: thou shall not lust.

Make not provision for the flesh, Romans xiij.
to fulfill the lusts of it.

Mortify your earthy members, Coloss. iij.
fornication, uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence. etc.

Godliness is great riches, j. Tim. vj.
if a man be content with that he has. For we brought nothing into the world,
neither can we carry any thing out. But when we have food and raiment, let us
be content therewith. They that have a mind to be rich, fall into temptation
and snares of the devil, and into many folishe and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction. For covetousness is the root of all
evil: which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and tangled
them selves with many sorrows. But thou man of God, fly such things. Follow
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekenes. etc. Heb. xiij.


Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have already.

Love not the world, Ioh. ij.
nor those things that are in the world. For all that is in the world, as the
concupiscence of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
is not of the father, but of the world. And the world passes away, and the
lusts thereof: but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.

The sum of these x. Commandments, and all other laws of God.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Mat. xxij.
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all ye uttermost of thy
power. This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like
unto it. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two
commandments, are contained the whole law and the Prophets.

Owe nothing to any man, ^^. xiij.
but that ye love one an other: for he that loves an other, has fulfilled the
law. For these commandments: Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall
not kill: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall bear no false witness: Thou shall
not lust, and all other commandments, are briefly comprehended in these
words: Love thy neighbor as thy self.

The end of the law, j. Tim. j.
is love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of a faith not
feigned.

What soever ye would that men should do unto you, Mat. vij.
do ye even the same to them also: for this is the law and the Prophets.

Of Repentance.
What Repentance is.
Repentance is an inward sorrow of the mind, wrought by the holy ghost, for the
sumes tofore committed against God, joined both with a perfect faith to be
forgeuen for Christ's sake, and also with a full determined purpose from
henceforth to amend, and to lead a new life.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
I now rejoice, ^. Cor. vij.
not that ye were sorry, but y^ ye so sorrowed, that ye repented. For ye
sorrowed godly: so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. For the sor^ow ye is
wrought by God, causes repentance unto salvation, not (...) be repented of:
contrariwise, worldly sorrow causes death.

The serua^nt of God must in^ourme them that resist the truth, ^j. Tim. ij.
if that God at any time will give them repentance for to know the truth, and
that they may come to them selves again out of the snare of the devil, which
are holden of him captive at his will.

(...) me, lere. 31.
O Lord, and I shall be converted: for thou art my Lord God. ^ea, as soon as
thou turnedst me, I repented, and as soon as thou shewedst my sins unto me,
I smote my thigh: yea, I was confounded, and right greatly ashamed.

O Lord, Lament. v.
turn thou us unto thee, and so shall we be tur^ed.

I will pour clean water upon you, Ezech. 36.
and ye shall be clean: yea, from all your uncleanness, and from all your Idols
shall I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I
put into you. As for that ^^ony heart, I will take it out of your body, and give
you a fleshy heart. I will give my spirit among you, and cause you to walk in
my commandments, to keep my laws, and to fulfill them. And ye shall be my
people, and I will be your God.

O thou God of Hosts, Psa. lxxx.
turn thou us, and show us the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

Of the fruits of repentance declared by the word of God.
Seek the Lord while he may be found: Esa. lv.
and call upon him while he is nie. Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways,
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, so
shall he be merciful unto him: and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive.

O Israel, Iere. iiij.
if thou will turn thee, then turn unto me, says the Lord. And if thou will
put away thine abominations out of my sight, thou shall not be moved.

Be circumcised in the Lord, and cut away y^ foreskin of your hearts, that my
indignation break not forth like fire, and kindle, so that no man may quench
it, because of the wickedness of your imaginations.

If the ungodly will turn away Ezecb. 18.
from all his sins that he has done, and keep all my commandments, and
do the thing that is equal and right, doubtless he shall live and not die. As
for all his sumes that he did before, they shall not be thought upon: but in
his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. For have I any pleasure in
y^ death of a sinner (says the Lord God) but rather that he convert and live?

Be converted, and turn you clean from all your wickedness, so shall there no
sin do you harm. Cast away from you all your ungodliness that ye have done.
Make you new hearts, and a new spirit. Wherefore will ye die (O ye house of
Israel)? seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies (says the
Lord God). Turn ye then, and ye shall live.

As truly as I live (says y^ Lord God) I have no pleasure in the Ezecb. 33.
death of the wicked, but much rather that the wicked turn from his way and
live. Turn you, turn you from your ungodly ways, O ye house of Israel. Oh
wherefore will ye die.

The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him, when soever he conuerteth from
his ungodliness.

Turn you unto me (says the Lord of Hosts) and I will turn me unto you.
Zach. j.


Turn you unto me with all your hearts, Ioell. ij.
with fasting, weeping, and mourning. Rent your hearts, and not your clothes.
Turn you unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, long
suffering, and of great compassion, and ready to pardon wickedness.

Repent of the life that is past, Mat. iij.
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Bring forth the fruits that belongs unto repentance. Mat. xj.
For even now is the axe put unto the root of the tree: so that every tree
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

I am not come to call the righteo^s, Math. ix.
but sinners to repentance.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, Mat. xj.
and I will ease you.

Repent and believe the Gospel. Mar. j.


I say unto you, Luke. xv.
that joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repe^teth, more then over
ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance.

The son of man is come to ^eke, Luke. xix.
and to save that which was lost.

Repent and convert, Act. iij.
that your sins may be done away.

As ye have given your members servants to uncleanness, Romans vj.
and to iniquity (from one iniquity to an other) even so now give over your
members servants unto righteousness, that ye may be sanctified.

Put of that old man, Ephe. iiij.
which is corrupt according to the deceaueable lusts, and be ye renewed in the
spirit of your mind, putting on that new man, which after God is shapen in
righteousness and true holiness.

Mortifi^ your earthy members, Coloss. iij.
fornication, uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is worshipping of Idols. For which things sake, the wrath
of God uses to come on the disobedient children, among whom ye walked
sometime, when ye lived in them. But now put ye also away from you all such
things, wrath, fearcenes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthy communication.
Lie not one to an other, seeing that ye have put of the old man with his
works, and have put on the new man, which is renewed into the knowledge and
image of him that made him. Therefore as the elect of God, holy, and beloved,
put on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekenes, long suffering,
forbearing one an other, and forgeuing one an other, if any man have a quarrel
against an other: as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. Above all these
things, put on love; which is the bond of perfection. And what soever ye do,
in word, or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thank^^ to God
the father by him.

Of Baptism.
What Baptism is.
Baptism is the ordinance of Christ, Titus. (...)
to wash every believing Christian with water, in the name of the father, and
of the son, and of the holy ghost.

S. Paul calls Baptism, the fountain of the new birth, and renewing of the
holy ghost.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
All power is given unto me in heaven, Math. 28.
and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost: teaching the^ to
observe all things, what soever I have commanded you.

Go ye into all the world, Mar. xvj.
and preach y^ Gospel to every creature. He that believes, and is haptised,
shall be saved: But he that believes not, shall be damned.

Except a man be borne from above, John. iij.
he can not see y^ kingdom of God.

Uerily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne of water, and of y^
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is borne of the
flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of y^ spirit, is spirit.

To what use Baptism was used.
First, to be a sure seal and an evident testimony unto us, that God the
father, for his son Jesus Christ's sake, has freely forgeuen us all our
sins, received us into his favor, and given us the holy ghost, by who^ we
are borne a new, not of mortal, but of immortal seed, by whom also we are
made the sons and heirs of God, and through says, reckened pure and holy in
his godly sight.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
He that believes, Mar. xvj.
and is baptized, shall be saved.

Repent you of your sins, Act. ij.
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

Christ loved the congregation, Ephe. v.
and gave him self for it, to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the fountain of
water through the word, to make it unto him self a glorious congregation,
without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, that it should be holy and without
blame.

Not by the deeds of righteousness, Titus. iij.
which we wrought, but according to his mercy has he saved us by ye fountain
of the new birth, and renewing of ye holy ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, that w^ justified by his grace, should be
made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

Baptism saves us, j. Pet. iij.
not by the putting away of the filth of y^ flesh, but in that a good
conscience consents to God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, which is on
the right hand of God, and is gone into heaven.

Secondly, to put us in remembrance, that for as much as we are become the
soldiers of Christ, we ought so long as we live, valiauntly to fight against
the devil, the world, and the flesh, to mortify all unclean lusts, to die
unto sin, and to rise again new me^, bearing the image of Christ, and
fashioning our conversation and manners after his example, that we may learn
the Lord our God in such holiness and righteousness, as is allowed before him all
the days of our life.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
know ye not, Romans vj.
that all we which are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized to die with
him? We are buried then with him by baptism, for to dye, that likewise as
Christ was raised from death by the glory of the father, even so we also should
walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like unto him: even so shall
we partakers of the resurrection, knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him also, that the body of sin might utterly be destroyed, yt hence
forth we should not be servants unto sin. For he that is dead, is
justified from sin. Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him.

All ye that are baptized, Gal^. iij.
have put on Christ.

Ye are buried with Christ through baptism, Coloss. ij.
in whom ye are also risen again through faith, that is wrought by the
operation of God, which raised him from death.

If ye then be risen again with Christ, Coloss. iij.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God. Set your affection on heavenly things, and not on earthly things. For ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When soever Christ, which is
your life, shall show him self, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

Of the Lords Supper.
What the Lords Supper is.
THe Lords Supper is an holy and heavenly bancket, in the which the faithful
Christians, besides the corporal eating of the bread, and the outward drinking
of the wine, do spiritually through faith, both eat the body of Christ, and
drink his blood, unto the confirmation of their faith, the comfort of their
conscience, and the salvation of their souls.

To what use Christ did institute his holy Supper.
First, to put us in remembrance that his body was broken, and his blood shed
for our redemption.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
The Lord Jesus the same night, j. Cor. xj.
in the which he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying: Take ye, and eat: this is my
body, which is broken for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. After the
same manner also he took y^ cup, when supper was done, saying: This cup is the
new testament in my blood. This do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall
show the Lords death till he come.

When they were eating, Math. ^6.
Jesus took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to
his disciples, and said: Take, eat: this is my body. And he took the cup, and
thanked, and gave it them, saying: drink ye all of this. For this is my blood
(which is of the new testament) that is shed for many, for the remission of
sins.

As they did eat, Mar. xiiij.
Jesus took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to
them, and said: Take, eat: this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he
had given thanks, he took it to the^, and they all drank of it, and he said
unto them: This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many.

He took bread, Luke xxi^^
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, saying: This
is my body, which is given for you: This do in the remembrance of me. Likewise
also when he had supped, he took the cup, saying: This cup is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

Secondly, to stir us up unto thankesgeuing, while we consider how precious,
great, and inestimable benefits we have received of God the father, by the
death of his son, as deliverance from Satan, freedom from the curse of the
law, forgeuenes of sins, the favor and good will of God, quietness of
conscience, the holy ghost, righteousness, victory against sin, death, and
hell, salvation: and finally, everlasting life. That we should not be
unthankful, but rather joyfully burst out into all kind of spiritual
praises, lauding, and magnifying God the father for these his most hie and
singular free gifts, the Lord Christ did institute this holy supper: Therefore
it is called of the ancient Doctors, Sacramentum Eucharistiae. i. the
Sacrament of thankesgeuing.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
All that believed, Act. ij.
continued daily with one accord in y^ temple, and brake bread from house to
house, and did eat their meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart,
praising God.

Is not the cup of thankesgeuing, j. Cor. x.
for y^ which we give thanks, partaking of the blood of Christ? Is not y^
bread which we break, partaking of the body of Christ?

Thirdly, to put us in remembrance, that as the bread, which we eat at the
Lords table, is made of many grains one loaf, and the wine pressed together
of sundry grapes, is made one wine: so we being many, are one body, whereof
Christ is the head. And because we all are one body, we ought all to be
beneficial one to an other, one to love an other, one to bear with an other,
one to wish well unto an other, and one to do for an other, what soever we be
able, even to the uttermost of our power, as our head Christ for our health,
and for our salvation, disdained not to bestow his very life, and to suffer
death, even the death of the cross for our redemption. And as we presently at
the receiving of the holy mysteries of Christ's body and blood, do enjoy
through faith in Gods promises, all the benefits which Christ obtained for us
by his blessed death and glorious passion: so likewise ought they that be
partakers of the Lords table, every one according to his ability at that
present, to be beneficial to the poor members of Christ, and somewhat to give
that may relieve the^, and ever after also (when occasion is given) gladly to
distribute unto the needy, some portion of their goods, wherewith God has
endued them. That this was the custom in the Apostles time, and in the
Primative Church, yea, and long after, till the Popish Mass had driven out of
the Church the right use of the Lords supper, it is evident enough by diverse
testimonies, both of the holy Scriptures, and of ancient historyes.

That we are all one body.
Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
As we have many members in one body, Romans xij.
and all members have not one office: so we being many, are one body in Christ,
and every man among our selves, one an others member.

We (though we be many) yet are one bread, ^. Cor. x.
and one body, in as much as we all are partakers of one bread.

As the body is one, Cor. xj.
and has many members, and all the members of one body, though they be many,
yet are but one body, even so is Christ. For by one spirit are we all baptized
to make one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
free, and have all drunk of one spirit. For the body is not one member, but
many. etc. Therefore if one member suffer, all suffer with him. If one member
be had in honor, all members be glad also. Ye are the body of Christ, and
members one of an other.

Of the distribution to the needy.
All that believed, ^cte. ij.
kept the^ selves together, and had all things common, and sold their
possessions and goods, and parted them to all me^, as every man had need.

Great grace was there with all them that believed. Act. iiij.
Neither was there any among the^ that lacked. For as many as were possessours
of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the price of the things that were
sold, and laid it down at the Apostles feet. And distribution was made unto
every man according as he had need.

Distribute unto the necessity of the Saints. Romans xij.
Be ready to harbor.

As concerning the gathering for the Saints, ^. Cor. xv^
let every one of you, upon some Sabbath day, put aside and lay up what soever
is meet. etc.

It is not my mind, ij. Cor. v^
that other be set at ease, and ye brought into combrance, but that there be
equalnes now at this time: and that your abundance may succor their lack, and
that their abundaunce may supply your lack, that there may be equality,
agreing to that which is written: Exodus xvj
He that had much, had not the more abundaunce: and he yt had little, had never
the less. etc. Read the Chapter.

Of the ministering to yt Saints, ^. Cor. ix.
it is but superfluous for me to write unto you: for I know the readiness of
your mind. etc. Yet this I say: he that sows little, shall reap little, and
he yt sows (in giving) largely and freely, shall reap plentiously. And let
every man do according as he has purposed in his heart, not grudgingly, or of
necessity. For God loves a cheerful geuer. God is able to make you rich in
all grace, that ye in all things having sufficient unto the uttermost, may be
rich unto all manner of good works, as it is written: He has sparsed abroad,
^sal. cxij.
and has given to the poor: and his righteousness remains for ever.

The office of this ministration, ij. Cor. ix.
not only supplyeth the need of the saints, but also is abundant herein, yt
for this laudable ministering, thanks might be given to God of many (which
praise God for yt obedience of your consenting to y^ Gospel of Christ, and for
your singlenes in distributing to them, and to all me^) and in their prayers
for you, which long after you, for the abundaunt grace of God in you. Thanks
be unto God for his unspeakable gift.

The duty of all estates and degrees.
The duty of the hie powers, and of the other temporal Magistrates.
THe duty of the high powers, and of the other temporal rulers, is to be
learned in the law of God, to maintain pure and Christian Religion, to
nourishe and defend the preachers and studientes of Gods word, to banishe all
false religion and idolatry, to punish, yea, and if they will not turn, to
kill the preachers and maintainers of false doctrine, to judge equally and
indifferently, without parcialitie, to take no bribes, nor to oppress the
common people, but to care for the^, as a father for his children, to defend
the good, to correct the evil, to auaunce virtue, and to punish vice.

That they ought to be learned in the laws of God.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
The king shall not multiply horses to him self: Deuteronomy. xvij
neither ought he to multiply wives unto him self, least his heart turn away:
neither shall he gather him silver and gold to much. And when he is set upon
the seat of his kingdom, he shall write him out a copy of this law in a
book. And it shall be with him, and he ought to read therein all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the
words of this law, and these ordinances, for to do them, and that his heart
arise not above his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment, to
the right hand or to the left, but that he may prolong his days in his
kingdom.

Let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, Iosu^. j.
but record therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according
to all that is written: For then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then
shall thou do wisely.

Get ye understanding now, Psalm. ij.
O ye kings: be learned ye that judge the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence. Kiss the son least he be angry, and so ye
perish from the right way.

If your delight be in royal seats and scepters (O ye kings of ye people)
set your lust upon wisdom, Sap. vj.
that ye may reign for evermore. O love the light of wisdom, all ye that be
rulers of the people.

Read the ix. Chapter of the book of Wisdom.

That they ought to maintain pure and Christian Religion.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
How greatly king David advanced Gods religion, j. Paral. xxiij. xxiiij. xxvi.
and xxviij.
and sought his glory, the holy Scriptures make mention.

Asa king of Judah did that was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God:
2. Par. 14.
For he took away strange altars, and hill altars, and brake down the
images, and cut down the groves, and commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of
their fathers, and to do according to the law and commandment.

Yea, 2. Par. 15.
he put away ye abominable Idols that his father had made. And he put down
Maacha his mother from bearing rule, because she had made images in groves. And
Asa destroyed her images, and burnt the^ by the broke Cedron. The Lord God
therefore gave him and all his land rest and quietness.

Iehosaphat king of Judah sent to his Lords, 2. Par. 17.
that they should teach in the cities of Judah, and with them he sent Levites,
and priests. And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of God
with them, and went about through out all the cities of Judah, and taught the
people. And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
yt were round about Judah, and they fought not against Iehosaphat. And the Lord
stablished the kingdom in his hand, and all they that were in Judah, brought
king Iehosaphat presents, so that he had abundance of riches and honor.

King Hezekia put away the hill altars, 4. Reg. 18.
and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and all to brake the brazen
serpent that Moses had made. He renewed the feast of the Passover.

He ordained Priests and Levites to serve the Lord God, 2. Par. 31.
and provided honest liuinges for them, that they might substantially apply
the^ selves to the law of the Lord. And the Lord was with him, so that he
prospered in all things which he took in hand.

The good king Josias, 2. Par. 34.
beside the purging of Judah and Jerusalem from hill altars, groves, carved
images, and images of metal, and such other kinds of idolatry, he repaired
the house of the Lord his God, renewed the feast of the Passover, red in the
ears of all the people the words of the law of the Lord, and made a
faithful promise unto the Lord, that he and all his people should walk
according to the statutes of that book. And they turned not aside from the
Lord God of their fathers, so long as he lived. The Lord God therefore
deferred his plague yt he had threatened to Judah, suffered Josias to live in
much honor, and brought him to his grave in peace, so that his eyes did not
see the mischief that the Lord God afterward brought immediately upon
Jerusalem, and upon the inhabitors of the same.

Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, Esa. xlix.
and Queens shall be thy nursing mothers.

That they ought to punish, yea, and if they will not turn, to kill the
preachers and maintainers of false doctrine.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
If there rise among you a prophet, Deuteronomy. xiij.
or a dreamer of dreams, and give thee a sign or wonder, and that sign or
wonder which he has said, come to pass, and then say: let us go after
strange Gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them: harken not
thou unto the words of that prophet, or dreamer of dreams: For the Lord thy
God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul. Ye shall walk after y^ Lord your God, and
fear him, and keep his commandment, and harken unto his voice, serve him,
and cleave unto him. And that prophet, or dreamer of dreams, shall die,
because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God.

The Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, Deuteronomy. 18.
which I have not commanded him to speak, or that he speaks in the name of
strange Gods, the same Prophet shall die.

Iehu king of Israel, 4. Reg. 10
caused all the priests of Baal to be slain, and all the images to be fet
out of the temple of Baal, and to be burnt. He caused also his captains and
men of war, to break the image of Baal, and to destroy the house of Baal, so
yt Baals house was made a draft house unto this day. And because Iehu thus
sought the glory of God, and destroyed idolatry, with the maintainers thereof,
he lived quietly in his kingdom unto his dying day, and his children unto the
fourth generation, sat on the seat of Israel.

King Josias put down the ministers of Baal, 4. Reg. 23
whom the kings of Judah had founded to burn incense in the hill altars and
cities of Judah, that were round about Jerusalem, and also them that burnt
incense unto Baal, to the Sun, to the Moon, to the Planets, and to all the
Host of heaven.

That they ought to judge equally.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment. Leuit. xix
Thou shall not favor ye poor, nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness
shall thou judge thy neighbor.

Moses said to y^ Judges: Deuteronomy. j.
hear the cause of your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and
his brother, and the stranger that is with him. See that ye know no faces in
judgment: but hear the small as well as the great, and be afraid of no man:
for the judgment is Gods.

King Iehosaphat said also to the Judges: ^. Par. 19.
Take heed what ye do: for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of God,
which is with you in judgment. Wherefore, now let the fear of the Lord be
upon you, and take heed, and be doing the thing that pleases him. For there
is no unrighteousness with y^ Lord our God, that should have any respect of
persons, or take rewards.

A king that sits in the throne of judgment, Pro. xx.
and looks well about him, drives away all evil.

He that says to y^ ungodly: Pro. xxii^j
thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, yea, the comminaltie shall
abhor him. But they that rebuke the ungodly, in them does God delight, and a
rich blessing shall come upon them.

Judge the thing that is right, Psalm. 58.
O ye sons of men.

O love righteousness, Sap j.
ye that are the Judges of the earth.

That they ought to take no bribes.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Thou shall take no gifts: Exodus 23.
for gifts blind the fight, and pervert the words of the righteous.

Wrest not thou y^ law, Deuteronomy. xvj
nor know any person, neither take any reward: for gifts blind the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous. That which is just and right, shall thou
follow, that thou may live and enjoy the land, which the Lord gives thee.

Thou shall seek out among all the people, Exodus 18.
men of actiuitie, and such as fear God, true men, hating covetousness: and
make them heads over the people.

The fire shall consume y^ houses of such as are gredie to receive gifts. Job.
xv.


Woe be to them y^ give sentence with y^ ungodly for rewards, Esa. v.
but condemn the just cause of the righteous. Therefore, like as fire licketh
up the straw, and as the flame consumes y^ stubble: eue^ so their root shall
be as corruption, and their blossom shall vanish away like dust.

He that keeps his hand that he touch no reward, Esa. 33.
and he which stops his ears that he hear no counsel against the
innocent blood: he it is that shall dwell on hie.

That they ought not to oppress the common people.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
The increase and prosperity of the commons, Pro. xiiiij.
is y^ kings honor: but the decay of the people, is the confusion of the
prince.

Like as a roaring Lion, Pro. 28.
and as an hungry Bear, even so is an ungodly prince over the poor people.

Where the prince is without understanding, there is great oppression and
wrong: but if he be such a one as hates covetousness, he shall long reign.

When the righteous have the ouerhand, Pro. xxix.
the people are in prosperity: but when the ungodly bear rule, then that
people mourn.

With true judgment y^ king sets up the land: but if he be a man y^
oppresses the people with gatheringes, he turns it vpside down.

O hear this word, Amo^. iiij.
ye that do poor me^ wrong, and oppress the needy: ye that say to your
Lords, bring hither, let us drink. Therefore the Lord has sworn by his
holiness: The days shall come upon you, that the enemies shall carry you away.
etc.

O woe be to the proud wealthy, Amos. vj.
to such as think the^ selves so sure, which hold them selves for the best of
the world, and rule the house of Israel, even as they list. Ye are taken out
for the evil day, even ye that sit in the stool of wilfulnes. Ye that lie
upon beds of Iuory, and use your wantonness upon your couches: ye that eat the
best lambs of the flock, and the fattest calves of the drove: ye that sing at
the lute, and in playing of instruments, compare your selves to David: ye that
drink wine out of goblets, and annoint your selves with the best oil: but as
for Iosephes hurt, none of you all are sorry for it. Therefore, now shall ye be
the first of them that shall be led away captive, and the lusty cheer of the
wilful shall come to an end. etc. The Lord is minded to smite the great
houses. For ye have turned true judgment unto bitterness, and the fruit of
righteousness into wormewoode.

O ye that oppress the poor, Amos. vi^j.
and destroy the needy in the land, shall not your destruction come upon you,
as a water stream? etc.

O ye heads of the house of Jacob, Mich. i^^.
and ye leaders of the house of Israel: should not ye know what were lawful
and right? But ye hate the good, and love the evil. Ye pluck of men skins,
and the flesh from their bones. Ye eat the flesh of my people, and f^ay of
their skin: ye break their bones: ye chop them in pieces as it were into a
Caldrone, and as flesh into a pot. Now the time shall come, that when they
call unto the Lord, he shall not hear them, but hide his face from them,
because that through their own imaginations, they have dealt so wickedly. etc.

Behold, ^. Reg. xij.
here am I (said Samuel to the children of Israel): bear record of me
before y^ Lord, and before his anointed. Whose ox have I taken? or whose Ass
have I taken? whom have I done wrong to? whom have I hurt? or of whose hand
have I received any bribe, to blind my eyes therewith, and I will restore it you
again? They said: thou have done us no wrong, nor hurt us, neither have thou
taken ought of any man's hand. He said unto them again: the Lord is witness
against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have no evil in my
hands.

What chanced to Rehoboam king Salomons son, iij. Reg. xij
for the ungentle entreating of his commons, the holy histories do testify.
Read iij. Regum.xij. Chapt.

That they ought to care for the commo^^, as a father for his children.

The confirmations.
Mercy and faythfulnes preserve the king: Pro. xx.
and with loving kindness his seat is holden up.

If thou be made a ruler, Eccle. 32.
pride not thy self therein, but be thou as one of the people. Take diligent
care for them, and look well thereto: and when thou have done all thy duty,
set thee down, that thou may be merry with the^, and receive a crown of
glory.

With how fatherly a care Moses, Samuel, David, and diverse other noble princes
governed their people, the holy Scriptures do evidently declare.

That they ought to defend the good, and to correct the evil, to advance
virtue, and to punish vice.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Learn to do right, Esa. j.
apply your selves to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles to
his right, let the widows complaint come before you.

Thus the Lord commands: Iere. xxij.
keep equity and righteousness: deliver the oppressed from the power of the
violent: do not grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherles, nor the
widow, and shed no innocent blood.

Execute true judgment: Zach. vij.
show mercy and loving kindness every man to his brother. Do the widow, the
fatherles, the stranger, and poor, no wrong: and let no man imagine evil
against his brother in his heart.

Deliver him y^ suffers wrong, Eccle. iiij.
from the hand of the oppressor, and be not faint hearted when thou sit in
judgment. Be merciful unto the fatherles as a father, and be instead of an
husband unto their mother: so shall thou be as an obedient son of the hiest:
and he shall love thee more then thy mother does.

My song shall be of mercy and judgment: Psalm. ^^*
unto thee (O Lord) will I sing.

O let me have understanding in the way of godliness: when will thou come unto
me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

I will take no wicked thing in hand: I hate the sins of unfaithfulness: there
shall no such cleave unto me.

A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

Who so privily slaundreth his neighbor, him will I destroy: who so has also a
proud look, and an hie stomach, I will not suffer him.

Mine eyes look unto such as be faithful in the land, that they may dwell with
me: who so leads a godly life, he shall be my servant.

There shall no deceitefull person dwell in my house: he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight.

I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land, that I may root
out all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

Rulers are not fearful to them that do good, Romans xiij.
but to the^ y^ do evil. Will thou be without fear of the power? Do well
then: and so shall thou be praised of y^ same. For he is the minister of God
for thy wealth. But and if thou do that which is evil, then fear: for he
bears not the sword for naught: for he is the minister of God, to take
vengeance on him that does evil.

The duteie of Subjects unto the high powers.
THe duty of Subjects unto the hie powers is, honorably to speak of them,
heartily to love and reverence them, hum^bly to obey them for conscience sake in
all things that fight not with Gods word, fervently to pray for them, and
willingly to pay such charges unto them, as they reasonably require, either for
the mainteinance of their princelike estate, or else for the sauegarde of the
common wealth.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures. Exodus 22.

Thou shall not rail upon the Gods (that is to say, the temporal
Magistrates, which execute that office of God) neither blaspheme the ruler of
thy people.

Wish the king no evil in thy thought, Eccle. x.
and speak no hurt of the rich in thy privy chamber: for a bird of the air
shall betray thy voice, and with her feathers shall she bewray thy words.

Let every soul submit him self unto the hier powers. Romans xiij.
For there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Who
soever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. But they
that resist, shall receive to them selves damnation. For rulers are not
fearful to them that do good, but to them that do evil. Will thou be
without fear of the power? Do well then: and so shall thou be praised of the
same. For he is ye minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do that which is
evil, then fear: for he bears not the sword for naught: for he is the
minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore, ye must
needs obey, not only for fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake.
And for this cause pay ye tribute. For they are Gods ministers, serving for the
same purpose. Give to every man therefore his duty: tribute, to who^ tribute
belongs: custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to who^ fear belongs:
honor, to who^ honor pertains.

I exhort therefore, j. Tim. ij.
that above all things, prayers, supplications, intercessions, and giving of
thanks, be had for all men, for kings, and for all that are in authority,
that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, with all godliness and honesty.
For that is good and acceptable in the ^^ght of God our Savior.

Warn the subjects that they submit the^ selves to rule and power, Titus. iij.
that they obey y^ officers, that they be ready unto every good work, that
they speak evil of no man, that they be no fighters, but gentle, showing
meekenes unto all men.

Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man, j. Pet. ij.
for y^ Lords sake, whether it be unto the king, as unto the chief head,
either unto rulers, as unto them that are sent of him, for y^ punishment of
evil doers, but for the praise of the^ that do well. etc.

Fear God: Honor the king.

The duty of Bishops and Ministers of Gods word.
THe duty of Bishops and Ministers of Gods word is, first to feed Christ's
flock with y^ sweet bread of Christ's Gospel, without mingling of the
Phariseis leaven. Secondly, to lead a life agreeable to their doctrine, y^ they
may teach both with word and work. Thirdly, to relieve y^ poor and nedie with
such goods as they receive of y^ Church, either by maintaining hospitality, or
else by some other godly means.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Of Doctrine.
Go up unto y^ hie hill, Esa. xl.
thou that bring good tidinges: lift up thy voice with power, O thou
preacher: lift it up, and be not afraid.

Cry now as loud as y^ can: Esa. lviij.
leave not of: lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
offenses, and y^ house of Jacob their sins.

I have set watchmen upon thy walls (O Jerusalem) which shall never cease day
nor night to preach the Lord. Esa. lxij.


Behold, Iere. j.
I put my words in thy mouth: and behold, this day do I set thee over y^
people and kingdoms, that thou may root out, break of, destroy, and make
waste, and that thou may build up and plant.

Thou son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel:
Ezech. iij.
therefore take good heed to the words of my mouth, and give them warning at
my commandment. If I say unto thee concerning the ungodly man, that (without
doubt) he must die, and thou geuest him not warning, nor speak unto him y^
he may turn from his evil way, and so to live, then shall the same ungodly
man die in his own unrighteousness: but his blood will I require of thy hand.
Nevertheless, if thou give wa^ning unto the wicked, and he yet forsake not his
ungodliness, then shall he die in his own wickedness: but thou have discharged
thy soul.

If thou love me, ^ohn. xxj.
feed my sheep. Woe unto me, ^. Cor. ix.
if I preach not the Gospel.

We preach not our selves, ij. Cor. iiij.
but Jesus Christ our Lord.

We are not as the most part are, ij. Cor. ij.
which chop and change with the word of God: but out of pureness, and by the
power of God, in y^ sight of God, so speak we in Christ.

Though we our selves, Gala. j.
or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

A Bishop must be apt to teach. j. Tim. iij.


Give attendance to reading, j. Tim. iiij.
to exhortation, to doctrine.

Preach thou y^ word: ij. Tim. iiij
be ^eruent in season, and out of season: improve, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine.

Of life and conversation.
God said to the ungodly: Psalm. l.
Why do thou preach my laws, and take my testament in thy mouth: Seeing
thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee?

When as y^ saw a thief, thou co^sentedst unto him: and have been partaker
with the adulterers.

Who soever does and teaches, Mat. v.
the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

Be unto them that believe, j. Tim. iiij.
an ensample, in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, in
pureness.

Keep thy self pure. j. Tim. v.


Study to show thy self laudable unto God, ij. Tim. ij.
a workma^ that needs not to be ashamed, distributing the word of truth
justly.

In all things show thy self an ensample of good works in y^ doctrine,
Titus. ij.
with honesty, gravity, and with the wholesome word, which can not be
rebuked, that he which withstandeth, may be ashamed, having no evil thing to
say of you.

Feed ye Christ's flock, j. Pet. ^.
as much as lies in you, taking ye oversight of them, not as compelled thereto,
but willingly: not for ye desire of filthy luker, but of a good mind: not as
though ye were Lords over ye parishes, but that ye be an ensample to the
flock. And when ye chief shepeheard shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of glory.

Of Hospitality.
Distribute unto y^ necessity of the Saints. Romans xij.
Be ready to harbor.

A Bishop must be a maintayner of hospitality. j. Tim. iij.


Forget not hospitality: Heb. xiij.
for thereby have diverse me^ lodged Angels unawares.

The duty of Parishioners unto the Ministers of Gods word.
THe duty of Parishioners unto the Ministers of Gods word is, outwardly to
honor and reverence them, to receive them as the Angels and Ambassadors of
God, to regard the^ as the ministers and stewardes of Gods mysteries, and
liberally to give unto the^ what soever is necessary for the mainteinaunce of
their degree and estate, that they may quietly give their minds to ye study
of godly letters, to prayer, to the preaching of Gods word, and to the
ministration of the Sacraments.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Fear ye Lord with all thy soul, Eccle. vij.
and honor his ministers. Love thy maker with all thy strength, and forsake
not his ministers. Honor God with all thy soul, and reverence his priests.
Give the^ their portion of the first fruits and increase of the earth, like as
it is commanded thee.

The priests that rule well, ^. Tim. v.
are worthy of double honor, most specially they which labor in ye word and
teaching. For ye scripture says: Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn. Deuteronomy. xx^ j. Cor. ix. Math. x.
And the labourer is worthy of his reward.

We beseech you brethren, ^. Thessalonians. s.
that ye know them which labor among you, and have the oversight of you in the
Lord, and give you exhortation, that ye have them in hie reputation through
love, for their works sake, and be at peace with them.

Obey them that have the oversight of you, Heb. xi^^.
and submit your selves unto them: for they watch for your souls, even as they
that must give accomptes, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief.

In the priests lips should be sure knowledge, Mala ^. ^.
that me^ may seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of
Hosts.

Ye despised me not, Gal. ii^^.
neither did ye abhor me: but ye received me as an Angel of God, yea, even
as Christ Jesus. For I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye
would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given the^ unto me.

He that receaueth you, (...). x.
receaueth me: and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me.

He that hears you, Luke. x.
hears me: he that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

Let a man this wise esteem us, j. Cor. iiij.
even as ye Ministers of Christ, and stewardes of the mysteries of God.

Bring every tith into my barn, Malac. iij.
yt there may be meat in my house.

The workman is worthy of his meat. Math. x.


If the Gentiles be made partakers of their spiritual things, Romans xv.
their duty is to minister unto them in bodily things.

Who goes a warfare at any time at his own cost? j. Cor. ix.
who pla^teth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of yt milk of the flock? For it is written in the law
of Moses: Thou shall not mosell ye mouth of the Ox y^ treads out the corn.
Does God take thought for oxen? Says he it not all together for our sakes? For
our sakes no doubt this is written: that he which eareth, should ear in hope:
and he which threasheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we sow unto
you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your bodily things? Do
ye not know how yt they which minister about holy things, li^e of the
Sacrifice? They which wait of the temple, are partakers of the temple? Even so
also did the Lord ordain, yt they which preach the Gospel, should live of y^
Gospel.

Let him that is taught in the word, Gal. vj.
minister unto him that teaches him in all good things. Be not deceived: God
is not mocked.

The duty of husbands unto their wives.
THe duty of a faithful husband unto his wife is, to forsake all other for
her sake, to cleave only to his wife, to love her as Christ loved the
congregation, to cherish her as he would cherishe his own body, to provide for
her, to teach her the law of God, to dwell with her according to knowledge,
and to give honor unto her, although y^ weaker vessel, as to one that is
fellow heir with him of the grace of life.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
This is now bone of my bones, Gene. ij.
and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called woman, because she was taken out
of man. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be
joined with his wife: and they shall become one flesh.

Be glad with the wife of thy youth. Pro. v.
Let her breasts always satisfy thee, and hold thee ever content with her
love. My son, why will thou have pleasure in an harlotte, and embrace the
bosom of an other woman.

Ye husbands, Ephe. v.
love your wives, even as Christ also loved the congregation, and gave him self
for it, to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the fountain of water through y^
word, to make it unto him self a glorious congregation, without spot or
wrinkle, or any thing: but yt it should be holy and without blame. So ought me^
to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that loves his wife, loves him
self: For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes
it, even as the Lord does the congregation. etc.

Ye husbands, love your wives, Coloss. i^j.
and be not bitter to them.

Ye me^, j. Pet. iij.
dwell with your wives according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as
unto the weaker vessel, and as unto them that are heirs also of the grace of
life.

The duty of wives unto their husbands.
THe duty of an honest faithful woman unto her husband is, to knowledge her
husband to be her head, to be subject unto him, to reverence him, to obey
him, quietly to learn of him, to lead a blameles life, to use much silence,
peaceably and circumspectly to look unto her household, and to tier her self
with such apparel as becomes a sober Christian woman.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Ye women, Ephe. v.
submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For y^ husband
is y^ wives head, even as Christ is the head of the congregation, and the same
is he yt ministers salvation to the body. Therefore as the congregation is in
subjection to Christ, even so let the wives be in subjection to their husbands
in all things.

Ye wives, Coloss. iij.
submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is comely in the Lord.

I will that women array them selves in comely apparel, j. Tim. ij.
with shamefastnes and discrete behauour, not with broydered hear, either
gold, or pearls, or costly array, but as it becomes women yt profess
godliness through good works. Let the woman learn in silence with all
subjection. But I suffer not a woman to teach, neither to usurp authority
over y^ man, but to be in silence.

Ye wives, j. Pet. iij.
be in subjection to your husbands, yt even they which obey not y^ word, may
without y^ word be won by y^ conversation of the wives, while they behold
your ^hast conversation coupled with fear. Who^e apparel shall not be
outward with broydered hear, and hanging on of gold, either in putting on of
gorgious apparel: but let the hid man, which is in y^ heart, be without all
corruption, so that the spirit be at rest and quiet: which spirit before God
is a thing much set by. For after this manner in the old time did y^ holy
women, which trusted in God, tier the^ selves, and were obedient to their
husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord: whose daughters ye
are, so long as ye do well.

The duty of fathers and mothers unto their children.
THe duty of fathers and mothers unto their children is, to train them up in
the law of God, to teach the^ to know God and his holy word, even from their
cradles, to bring the^ up in good learning and necessary arts, to bridle them
from the folishe and noisome lusts of youth, and to garnishe their life with
sober and grave manners.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify unto you this day, Deuteronomy.
vj.
and ye shall command them unto your children, yt they may observe and do all
y^ words of this law.

If thou have sons, Eccle. vij.
bring them up in nurture and learning, and hold them in awe from their youth
up. If thou have daughters, keep their body, and show not thy face cheerful
toward the^. Mary thy daughter, and so shall thou perform a weighty matter:
but give her to a man of understanding.

He y^ teaches his son, Eccl. xxx.
shall have joy in him, and need not to be ashamed of him among his aquaintance.

He that spares the rod, Pro. xi^j.
hates the son: but who so loves him, chasteneth him betimes.

Ye fathers, Ephe. vj.
move not your children to wrath: but bring them up through the doctrine and
information of the Lord.

How godly Solomon, young Toby, Susa^na, Philip y^ Evangelists daughters,
Timothe, and such like were brought up of their parents, the holy scriptures
bear witness.

The duty of children toward their fathers and mothers.
THe duty of children toward their parents is, in their mind to love them,
outwardly to reverence and honor them, to obey them in all things that are
agreeable to Gods will, and if they chance to fall into poverty, to help
the^, and to give them whereof to live.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Honor thy father from thy whole heart, Eccle. vij.
and forget not the sorrowful travel yt thy mother had with thee. Remember
that thou wast borne through them, and how can thou recompense them the
things that they have done for thee?

Children, Ephe. vj.
obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord: for yt is right. Honor thy father
and mother (the same is the first commandment in the promise) that thou
may prosper, and live long on earth.

Read the confirmations of the fifth commandment.

The duty of Masters to their Servants.
THe duty of Masters to their Servants is, to entreat the^ gently, to give
them their couenauntes, and to help the^, that they may afterward be able to
live.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Where as thy servant works truly, Eccle. vij.
entreat him not evil, nor yt hireling y^ is faithful unto thee. Love a
discrete servant as thine own soul, defraude him not of his liberty,
neither leave him a poor man.

Ye masters, Caloss. iiij.
do unto your servants that which is just and equal, putting away
threatninges, knowing that ye also have a master in heaven. Neither is there
any respect of persons with God.

The duty of Servants to their Masters.
THe duty of servants to their masters is, willingly and with a free
courage to serve the^ for conscience sake, not with y^ eye, but with the heart,
to obey the^, to honor the^, gently to answer the^, not to pick or steal
away their goods, but to be faithful unto the^ in all things.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Ye servants, Ephe. vj.
obey the^ yt are your bodily masters, with fear and trembling, eue^ with y^
singlenes of your heart, as unto Christ, not doing service unto the eye, as they
yt go about to please men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart with good will, serving the Lord and not me^. Knowing this,
that what soever good deed any man does, y^ same shall he receive again of
God, whether he be bond or free.

Let as many servants as are under the yoke, j. Tim. vj.
count their masters worthy of all honor, that y^ name of God, and his
doctrine, be not evil spoken of.

Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, Titus. ij.
and to please them in all things, not aunswering again, neither to be
pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness, that they may do worship to
the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

The duty of Widows.
THe duty of true ancient widows (besides the looking to their own household,
and provision making for their living) is, to put their trust in God, to give
the^ selves to the exercise of y^ spirit, to frequent the temple, to be
present at y^ sermons, to visit the sick, to relieve y^ nedy, to be rich in
good works, and to continue in ^upplications and prayers both day and night.
But as touching the you^ger widows, least they should wax wanton against
Christ, and follow Satan, breakyng their first faith and promise that they
made to God at their baptism (which is to abstain from all uncleanness both of
body and mind, and to lead a pure and honest life) and so cast the^ selves
into danger of everlasting damnation, it is convenient that they mary again,
bring forth children, guide their house virtuously, and so live in the holy
estate of matrimony, that no man may have occasion to speak evil of them.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
She that is a true widow and frendles, j. Tim. v.
puts her trust in God, and continues in supplications and prayers day and
night.

Judith yt virtuous widow, Iudit. viij
in the hier parts of her house, made her self a privy chamber, where she
dwelt being closed in with her maids. She ware a smock of hear, and fasted
all y^ days of her life, except the Sabbaothes, and new Moons, and the
solemn days yt the people of Israel kept. She was a woman of a very good
report with every one, for she feared y^ Lord greatly, and there was no body
that spoke an evil word of her.

The godly ancient widow Anna, Luke. ij.
departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night
and day.

Of the younger widows.
THe younger widows refuse. j. Tim. v.
For when they have begun to wax wa^ton against Christ, they will mary, having
damnation, because they have cast away their first faith. And also they learn
to go from house to house idle: yea, not idle only, but also tatlers and busy
bodies, speaking things which are not comely. I will therefore, yt the younger
women mary, to bear children, to guide the house, and give none occasion to
the adversary to speak evil.

The duty of old men.
THe duty of old me^ is, to avoid all lightness, both in word, deed, and
countenance, to talk of wisdom and grave matters, to be sober, sage, and
discrete, and to lead a pure and undefiled life, yt they may be an ensample of
true godliness to y^ you^ger folk.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
God hates an old body that doteth, Eccle. xxv
and is unchaste.

Age is an honorable thing: Sap. iiij.
nevertheless, it stands not only in the length of time, nor in the multitude
of years, but a man's wisdom is the gray hear, and an undefiled life is the
old age.

Exhort the elder men to be sober, Tit ^^. ^j.
sage, discrete, sound in the faith, in love, in patience.

The duty of old women.
THe duty of old women is, as in age, so in manners, to be sober, sage, and
ancient, to wear no light apparel, but such raiment as become their age and
profession, to be no tatlers, but to order their tounges discretely, to be no
tavern hu^ters, nor given to drunckennes, but to lead a sober life, to provoke
no young women unto le^udnes and dishonestie, but rather to show the^ selves
lively glasses and natural myrrours of all godliness and honesty.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Exhort y^ elder women that they (...)
be in such rayme^t as becomes holiness, not being false accusers, not given
to much wine, but that they teach honest things, to make the young women
sober minded, to love their husbands, to love their children, to be discrete,
chaste, huswifely, good, obedient to their husbands, that the word of God be
not evil spoken of.

The duty of young folk.
THe duty of young folk is, not to be proud, but humble, lowly, and gentle,
gladly to hear the discrete talk of their elders, and to be ordered by them,
not to be rash, but sober minded in all their doings.

Probations out of the holy Scriptures.
Ye you^ger folk, j. Peth v.
submit your selves unto y^ elders: submit your selves every man, one to an
other: knit your selves together in lowlines of mind: For God resists ye
proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Thou young man, Eccle. vj.
keep company with the multitude of such elders as have understanding, and
consent unto their wisdom with thine heart: that thou may hear all godly
sermons, and that the worthy sentences escape thee not.

If you be among me^ of higher authority, Eccl. 3^.
desire not to compare thy self unto the^: and when an elder speaks, make not
thou many words.

Exhort the young me^ that they be sober minded. Tit^^. ij.


The duty of all degrees and estates generally, both toward God and their
neighbor.
THe duty of all degrees and estates generally, both toward God and their
neighbor is, to believe in God, to fear God, and to keep his commandments,
to love god above al things, and our neighbor as our self, and to do none
otherwise unto other, then we wish to be done unto our selves.

Probations out of the holy.

He bele^^^ God, Job. xiiij.
believe also in me (says Christ).

Fears God, Eccle. xij.
and keep his commandments for that be lo^geth unto all me^^

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with ^ll thy heart, Mat. xxij.
with all thy soul, and (...) all thy mind. This is the first (...) est
commanndement. And the second is like unto it. Thou sh^^ love thy neighbor as
thy self *In these two co^m^undementes, are contained the whole law and the
Prophetees.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, Mat. vij.
do you even the same to them also. For this is the law and the Prophets.

Give the glory to God alone.

