A Short report of the honorable Journey into Brabant, by his Excellency
Grave Mauris, Governor and Lord General of the united Netherlandish
Provinces: From the 26. day of June, to the 19. day of July, 1602.

Together with the taking of Helmont, and of his marching to the strong Town
of Grave.

Translated out of the Dutch Copy Printed at Vtricht.

LONDON Printed by T. C. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cornhill near the Exchange, at the Sign of the Cat and Parrots. 1602.

A SHORT REport of the Honorable Journey into Brabant, by his Excellency Grave
Mauris, Governor and Lord General of the united Netherlandish Provinces. From
the 26. day of June, to the 19. day of July. 1602.
AFter that his Princely Excellency, with the honorable Lords the States,
had in the fear of God concluded by the most commodious and fittest means to
succor and prevent the necessity and tedious siege of Ostende, with intent
once wholly to free the Netherla^dish Provinces from the bloody yoke of the
Tyrannical Spaniards and hipocriticall murtherous Jesuits, which daily
practice to trouble, not only the welfare of the Netherlandish Provinces,
generally, (but also to suppress and murder all good, godly, blessed, and
peaceable Kings, Princes, and Potentates) that so in time they might with more
ease incorporate the said Netherlandish Provinces. To the end therefore that
the said Honorable Lords the States with his princely Excellency, might once
wholly shake off those common enemies from the neck of those Provinces
generally, and establish a firm and an assured peace, they have thought it
convenient to raise and bring into the fields a strong and honorable Camp, as
well for the relief of Ostend, as also to deliver the rest of the
Netherlandish Provinces from the yoke of the tyrannous Spaniards and bloody
Edicts, to which end has been assembled many outlandish soldiers, both
horsemen and footmen, with great numbers of wagons, as well out of Brabant and
Vtricht, as from Holland and other places, whereof many were covered, and some
curiously painted with ye Arms of nobles and gentlemen for their ease and rest
in the night, which had their rendes-vous near the toll-house beyond Nimmeghen.

Now when the greatest number were assembled at the said place, they attended
his Excellencies coming, who departed from the Grauen-baeghe the eight day of
June in the morning, to take muster of his Royal Camp, which he accomplished
upon the Eltenberge heath, and (finding the same to be between 5. and 6.
thousand horsemen, 28. thousand footmen, and near about 4. thousand wagons,
well, and in good order mounted and furnished) he with the honorable Lords the
States, passed through the whole army, demanding as well of the Cauallery, as
of the Infantery, if there were any one amongst them that found himself
agreeued with the pay of the States, and if any such were, they should speak:
but none having cause to complain, they demanded farther, if they were
resolved to hazard their lives with them in this most honorable action, to the
glory of God, and welfare of their father Land, whereunto the soldiers
generally applauded, desiring nothing more then yt they might be brought to the
sight of their enemies, against whom they might with their weapons, rather then
with words, show how greatly they were affected to manifest their courages, and
once again to drive those common enemies of Christendom out of the fields, and
to make them run before them as sheep.

Hereupon his Excellency caused certain bridges to be laid over the Maze, and
the 26. day of June began to set forward in so good order, that it seemed no
less wonderful, then pleasant and glorious to behold so rare an army of the
honorable Lords the States, marching in most warlike order, and divided into
three troops or companies, every one flancked with wagons for their defense as
they marched, with many field pieces, and other necessaries thereunto
belonging: The first troop or company was led by his Excellency: The second
by Grave William, and the third by Grave Erust or Ernestus, in very good order:
Notwithstanding the misdemeanour of some selfe-willed soldiers, as in the
beginning appeared by one, who forced a woman, and was therefore presently
hanged. After that two Scottish soldiers fell together by the ears, the one
(having wounded the other to the death) were forthwith by Martial discipline
harquebushed.

Thus keeping their course along by the side of the Maze, on the left hand of
the said River by Venlo, Ruremonde, and other places near about Mastricke,
they lay still five days, furnishing themselves with Beer, Bread, and other
victuals, for they had brought with them many Ouens to bake their Bread. After
sufficient provision made, they marched forward toward Tongheren, and so
upwards to Truyen, within some half league of Lew, forcing all the Villages
thereabouts to bring in their contributions, which amounted to an incredible
sum of money.

As they lay quietly at this place, it happened that some of our soldiers
raunged a little too far, and were by the Moors entrapped and slain. In
revenge whereof certain Horsemen were sent out, who not forgetting their
arrant, slew diverse Moors, and Horsemen, and brought with them to the Camp,
eighteen Horsemen prisoners, and two gray Friars.

After that his Princely Excellency had remained at this place a few days,
and put his people into Battle order, he sent a Trumpetter unto the Admiral
of Arragon, General for the Archduke (who had entrenched himself very
strongly near unto the Town of Tien) signifying unto him, that he was now
ready to give him Battle, and that therefore he should now perform his
proud words heretofore uttered when he was prisoner if he had the courage. But
he answered he had no Commission from the Archduke to fight, and so preserved
his honor and reputation as he thought.

After this, his Excellency as a valiant Prince marched toward the enemy with
certain horse and foot, even to his Trenches, but the enemy kept himself
close. His Excellency perceiving that the Admiral durst not show himself in
the field notwithstanding that he was come so far to seek him, he suddenly
turned back, and coming near unto Helmont, summoned the same, but after
refusal made, his Excellency planted six pieces of Ordenance against the
walls, and after some shot made, at the last upon the 18. day of this Month
of July they yielded the Town, and then his Excellency marched to the Town
of Grave, environed and besieged the same, and took the Castle of Batenborgh,
which stands on the other side of the Maze. Our people do fortify Helmont
and Eyndouen, serving as Bulwarks or Forts unto our Camp.

The everliving, Almighty, and potentiall God, vouchsafe to bless and keep
his Excellency, and to further all his godly proceedings: and grant happy
and prosperous effect to his attempts, for the general peace and quietness of
all the Low Countries. Amen.

As touching Ostend, the Town is (God be praised) in very good terms,
although many of late have died by sickness, which lately is ceased, and the
enemy continues his siege, though more coldly then heretofore, and his Forces
without the Town is not above 3000. men, and the same so vexed with sickness
and the plague, that many die daily. They have no want in the Town, for
although the enemy practices daily whatsoever means man's brain is able to
invent, to restrain the coming in of ships, with men, munition, and other
provisions necessary, yet God and the seas do so frustrate their dessignes,
that the enemy without all doubt remains void of all hope by any force to
win the same: But if any demand the reason why he then so obstinately
continues his siege, the reason is the haughtiness of his mind, ashamed that
it should be published to the world, that the States should be able to defend
so baggage a Town against all his forces, and to make good the defense thereof
against so many his policies, practices, and devises, thinking the same in time
to come, might redound to his perpetual disgrace, and contrariwise encourage
and animate the States his enemies, as well as other Princes to despise his
Forces, and conteme the valor of his Italians and Spaniards, on whose virtue
and manhood, the Archduke so much stands (as his predecessors, and other
Spanish Governors have done before him) that he thinks no Nation comparable
unto them, nor able to compare with them in martial affairs, not calling to
remembrance how often they have been foiled, and put to the worst, since these
wars first began, both by Sea and Land, not only by the native people of
the Low Countries, but also by foreign Soldiers of sundry Nations. It is
not then greatly to be marvelled at, that the Archduke continues his siege
before Ostende, (though more coldly and sparingly then at the first, as is
before said) seeing he leedeth himself with two vain expectations, for
(says he) Omne tempus habet, supposing that the States weary of so infinite
a charge, may in time forget to supply she wants of the Town, or else that it
may so fall out, that with Spanish Pistolets, he may corrupt some such in the
Town, that he may at last attain to his wished desire: for without all doubt,
he neither has, nor can have any other hope to obtain the Town, although he
lie before it these seven years, for all such as come out of Brabant or
Flaunders, confirm this to be most true, and to be the opinion of the Duke
himself, and of all his Spaniards and Spanish affected.

God grant they may never have better hope in any of their bloody attempts.
But if any will here say that there remains yet an other hope to the
Archduke, namely that the Sea may waste and eat up the town, so as the States
Forces may be forced to abandon the same, etc.

I will not say, but if it so please God, both the Town and all the Country
may be swallowed up with the sea, but if the old Town be in some danger, yet
the new Town is not so: but if both should happen to be in danger, no doubt
the States are so provident of their defense and maintenance of their Trade
(which otherwise without all doubt would be greatly hindered, by Gallyes and
other shipping which might there have convenient harbor) that they would there
build some convenient Forte, which should no less annoy the enemy then the
Town of Ostend it self does or has done, for the keeping of that place
does most highly concern all Hollande and Zealande, and all other Nations
which are accustomed to trafficque too and from those Countries.

It is written from Rome, to be most certain, that upon Wednesday last being
the 20. day of this Month of July, the Marshall Byron was beheaded at Paris,
not openly, but in the Tower there, called the Bastill, God grant all Traitors
may receive the like reward. It is said that very many great personages are of
his conspiracy, what will follow, time will show.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Middlebrough by May. E. D. to his friend in
London.
WHerein is showed, that since the 19. day of July, 1602. his Excellency
continuing his siege before the Town of Grave, took a Forte made over the
River Mosa, and from thence battered the Town where it is weakest, he is in
great hope and likelihood to win it shortly, being not easy to be rescued:
But at the other side of the Mosa, which without some fight is not easily to be
done. We hear the Admiral has sent supply toward Flanders, fearing some
attempt by an other way thereabout. And about Turnhout likewise the enemy made
some assembly, and about Venlo. The Prince Mauris issued in great haste forth
of his Camp, with some ten thousand footmen, and four thousand Horse, making
toward them, what success will happen we shall shortly know. There are as it
is reported, some two thousand men in Grave, the Princes Horsemen raunge about
Hertigenbosche, so that it is like half besieged lacking necessaries: And
Brabant is clean eaten up as well of the Spanish as of our soldiers, but by
means of the River Mosa our Camp lacks nothing. Many other places be taken
here and there of no great moment. We hear here little of the Archduke. The
Counsel of States general are gone toward the Camp: Some negotiation
underhand is imagined, which time will bring to light. There is good order and
discipline kept all about.

Of Ostend we hear nothing but good: For the great huge Fagots filled with
stones, called Puddings or Sauciges to be rolled, cannot be stirred, and they
have cut them in two, but it will not be of any moment, they must begin some
other invention.

FINIS.

