MAURITIUS AVR. PRINC. COM. NASS. MURS. etc. MARC VERAE ET VLISS CONF. BELG.
PROVE. GUB.
portrait of Count Maurice of Nassau Mauritz Prince van Orangien Grave, van
Nassau, Meurs etc Gouverneur generael van^ Geunieede Nederlanden. Ridder der Co
van^ fartiere.



THE BATTLE FOVGHT BETVVEENE Count Maurice of Nassaw, and Albertus Archduke
of Austria, nere Newport in Flaunders, the xxij. of June 1600, With the names
of such men of account as have been either slain, hurt, or taken prisoners by
either part.

Written by a Gentleman employed in the said service.

P S
ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA printer's device consisting of an open book
surrounded by a sunburst and containing a motto; beneath are the initials "P
S", indicating that the device originally belonged to the printer Peter
Short(1589-1603) but was probably passed on to Andrew Wise (1589-1603) at some
point

Printed at London for Andrew Wise, 1600.

The Battle fought between Count Maurice of Nassaw, and Albertus Archduke
of Austria.
HIS excellencies purpose was to hold, Oudenborough, Brendike, Snaskirke, and
the new sconse upon the downs nere unto Ostend called Albertus, well
garrisoned, the better to assure himself of those passages whiles he laid
siege to Newport.

The second day of the siege being Saterdaie the one and twentieth of June,
intelligence came that the enemy was come to Oudenborough, which his
excellency supposed to be John de Riuas with the forces of Flaunders: but
shortly after advertisement came, that the Archduke was there in person and had
taken in Oudenborough by composition, whereupon his excellency bethought
himself, how he might best hinder his nearer approach: And because he feared
least in the pursuit, the enemy might take in the sconse Albertus, and so cut
off the passage between Newport and Ostend, he sent the Regiment of the Scots
on the sundaie morning, and the Regiment of the Almains under the command of
Count Ernestus to hinder the passage by a bridge, which was made by us in a
dround land between Oudenborough and the sconse Albertus, and so he should
put them to march three days about, before they came unto him, and then also
it was in his choice, either to fight or leave them, and return to Ostend.

But the enemy had passed the Bridge before the Scots could come to make good
the place: and so they all fell under the execution of the vangard of the
enemy, being all Spaniards, and the choicest men of the Army: and were chased
to the walls of Ostend.

His excellency understanding that the enemy was come to the bridge, but not
knowing of the execution which he had made of the Scots, caused the English and
the Freeses to be drawn at a low water, from the other side of the Haven of
Newport, where they were quartered before the Town, and so brought all his
forces to an head: at what time it was disputed, whether they should send
forth the troops as they passed over the water, to second the Scots; or keep
themselves together, till further advertisement, which was the safer course;
and by good hap resolved upon.

Presently upon this resolution, part of the enemies Horse, being about
seven hundred, began to be discovered upon the sands as they came on marching
forward, and their foot Troops following after.

Count Lodwick being general of the Horse, at his excellencies command,
gave over the whole direction thereof, to Sir Francis Vere, who first commanded
six pieces of Artillery, which were planted upon the enemy, to be discharged
upon the enemies Horse, and then charged them himself with three troops of
Horse, and beat them into the Downs: the Infanterie of the enemy making a
stand upon the sands.

The enemies Horse being thus driven into the Downs, the commanders entered
into dispute, whether it were best to advance forward and charge upon their
foot troops, as they stood upon the sands; or to keep our selves in the
Downs, where we stood imbattailed, and there attend the enemy: wherein sir
Francis Vere apposed himself against the whole counsel of war, grounding
himself upon these reasons: that it was not safe to leave a place of
advantage, to go seek an enemy upon equal terms, considering the enemy
would be forced himself to seek battle, and come unto us: for it was
impossible in that hasty March, which passed all calculation of reason, that
they should so come provided with necessaries, to continue any time, whereas
our men were victuled for two days, and should in that time meet with some
alteration.

The resolution was directed by his opinion, and his excellency continued
firm in the Downs to see what the enemy would do.

It fell out according unto that, that Sir Francis Vere had before delivered:
for after three hours expectation, the enemy came on to charge the English,
which had the Vaungard of our Army.

The English as I said, being the Vaungard, having joined battle within a
short time, forced the enemy to retreat: Who flying to the tops of the
Downs, as our English followed the pursuit, it happened (as necessarily it
must thorough the unevenness of the place, which was vncaple of order, being
nothing but hills and valleies of sand) that the enemy had the like advantage
of our men, as ours had before upon them: so that our men sometime fell off
from the enemy, and sometime the enemy fell off from them, as the advantage
of the place assisted either party: which continued the space of three hours
and an half. In which time, the English dealt with the vaungard, the battle
and rereward of the enemy: at length the english were beaten back to our
Artillery, where Sir Francis Vere brought them again to a stand, and being
himself hurt, gave order for the charge the second time, and commanded the
following thereof to his brother Sir Horatio Vere, who carried it so well, that
concerning the fortune of the day, there is much attributed to his valor. For
our Troops charging the enemy with a shout, and being seconded with two
Troops of Horse, after the battle was well joined, the enemy disrowted and
never made head again.

It appears that all our English that were lost, were slain between our
Canon and the Canon of the enemy, which were planted in the front of either
Army.

The Archduke had intelligence that the states were between seven or eight
thousand strong on foot, and fourteen companies of Horse.

The Archduke came with resolution to fight in what place soever he found the
states forces, in regard he knew of what consequent it was, to suffer them to
make themselves strong in Flaunders.

Don Lewis de Valasco, general of the Archdukes Artillery came from Gilders
and Berk upon the Rheine with certain companies, being three thousand: all
the rest of the commanders came from Bruxels, and the Rendeuous was at Bruges.

Isabella the Infanta was left at Gaunt, she came from Bruxels with the
Archduke.

The Archduke came out of Bruxels upon Thursday the nineteenth of June, Stilo
nostro, being the same day that the Sconse called Albertus, distant from Ostend
upon the Downs, an english mile, was taken in by his excellency, our Troops
being all at Oudenborough.

The Archduke made such have to overtake our troops, that as Lewis de Villar
confesses, the commanders had no leisure to take notice what Gentlemen of
state were in the Army: so that they came to Oudenborough upon Saturdaie the
twenty one of June, and fought upon sunday the twenty two.

As Soon as the Archduke had intelligence of the Army, arrived at Phillippine,
he sent to Don Lewis de Valasco to bring the men from Berk, and disposed the
rest of the troops to meet with the said Don Lewis at Bruges.

The first squadron of the enemies were all Spaniards, consisting of 2500. men,
and commanded by Jasper Sapena, Don Ieronimo de Morkoy, and Lewis de Villar.


The second squadron were all Wallons, equal in number to the first, and
commanded by La Berlot, Don Alphonso de Auolos, and Bostock the nephew of Sir
Will, Stanley.


The third squadron were all of Flaunders and of like number with the first,
commanded by Le Count de Bonckoper.

The Admyrant of Arragon was general of the horse consisting of 1000.

Sir William Stanley attended the Archduke without command, having signed his
Regiment to his Nephew Bostocke.

Our English had the Vauntgard, the French the Battle.

Captains of the English Slain.
1 Captain Yaxley, 2 Captain Honywood, 3 Captain Duxbery, 4 Captain Purton,
5 Captain Tirrell, 6 Captain Woodward.
Lieutenants Slain.
Pierce D. Vere, Lieu. Read: Morgan, Lieu. Mallery Tirrell, Lieu. Scot.
Honywood, Lieu.
Captains hurt.
Hamond Holcroft Daniell Vere Vauysor Morgan Scotte Fearefax Petfield Metkerke
Ancients Slain.
Sherman, Yax Helues Garnets More of ours Slain and missing, 560. Men hurt,
250.
(...)
Drury Rocester Gilbert Gray Vosie More Kendall Wray Leg Bethro Fludde Audlin
Fitz Edmunds Dudley Kempe Cook
(...) taken 110.

Prisoners of theirs taken, viz.
The Admirant of Arragon. Lewis de Villar, and Jasper Sapena,
With many other Captains and Gentlemen of sort.

Our forces were 11000. horse and foot: That transported them 1128. sale
besides men of war.

FINIS.

