HEARING AND DOING THE READY WAY to blessedness, With AN APPENDIX Containing
RULES OF RIGHT Hearing Gods Word.

By HENRY MASON, PARSON of S. Andrews Vnder-shaft London.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his shopp,
under S. Peter's Church in Corne-hill. M.DC.XXXV.

REcensui librum hunc cui titulus est [Hearing and Doing etc.] in quo nihil
reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

Sa: Baker R.P. Episc. Londin. Cap. domest.
Ex aedib. Londin. Ian. 5. 1634.
TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of London, my Worthy
Patron and Diocesan.
Right Reverend,
HAving once more taken heart, to try the patience of the world by publishing a
small Treatise; I did heartily wish that this occasion might afford me an
opportunity of presenting my service and thanks to your Lordship: which now I
also do with your Lordships permission and leave. And I was the rather
emboldned thereunto, because I find it to have been an usual thing among men,
that Inferiors have brought poor and mean gifts to their Superiors and
Betters; and have been accepted for their good meanings sake. When Saul, at
that time a poor and mean man, was to go to Samuel, then both a Prophet and a
Prince, 1. Sa. 9.9, 10.
he thought it necessary to take a present in his hand though it were but a
poor one, no more then the fourth part of a shekel of silver, which, as Mr.
Brierwood de Number. c. 1. T^rin proleg de antiquis ponderib. and m^netis. p. 80.
the Learned do observe, is less then eight pence of our money. Upon which
passage there arise two questions. 1. Whether Samuel would not give his
direction without a reward. 2. Why Saul would bring so despicable a gift to so
honorable a person: which might seem both boldness in Saul to offer, and
baseness in Samuel to accept. To these questions the Non ad pretiu^, sed ad
honorem hoc refertur. Cajetan. in locum
Learned give one answer; that this was munus honorarium, a gift not meant as
a recompense of a good turn, but as an acknowledgement of homage and service.
And herein they commend unto us the modesty and humility of Samuel, that did
not scorn or refuse the meanest gift that came from a dutiful respect: because
in such a case the mind of the Giver, and not the worth of the Gift is
esteemed. For so we see, that God accepted from his people an handful of the
first fruits in a basket, Deuteronomy. 26 2, etc.
for acknowledgement of his mercy in giving them that good Land, which yielded
them all that they had. And our Lord did so highly esteem of a box of ointment,
Matt. 26.13.
which a woman out of her love and serviceable respect had powered upon his
head; that he honored the fact, with a perpetual remembrance of it in the
Gospel to the worlds end. Yea, and great Lords are sometimes contented with a
pepper-corne, or a red rose, for acknowledgment of their right and interest.
This consideration did encourage me at this time to tender this poor service
to your Lordship, in acknowledgment of that duty, and of those thanks, which we
your Clergy of this City, and my self more especially do owe unto you, for
your Fatherly care over us. I dare presume so much of my brethren, and I may
affirm it of my self, that we take our selves to be so much obliged to your
Fatherhood, as we know not how to make proof of it in any proportionable sort.
Notwithstanding we hope, your Lordship will accept of our good meaning at all
times: and my self at this time do pray that you will receive this poor
tender of my service: which I shall ever esteem among the rest of your favors
toward me. And to second this service with another of the like rank; I shall
ever pray for your Lordships life and prosperity, that we may long enjoy you
as a tender Father to this part of his Church. And so, with my prayers I leave
you to Gods blessings.

March 30. 1635. Your Lordships in all service to be commanded. Henry Mason.

A TABLE OF THE SEVERAL Chapters contained in this Treatise.
Chap. I. The scope of this discourse, and the intention of the Author. Page 1.
Chap. II. By earthly things a wise Christian may be occasioned to seek after
heavenly blessings. page 14. Chap. III. The blessings of this life are nothing
to the blessedness of the life to come. page 53. Chap. IV. There is a
supernatural blessedness appropriated to Gods service. 92. Chap. V. Gods word
has virtue in it to make one blessed. 132. Chap. VI. Hearing of Gods word read
is a means of blessedness. 173 Chap. VII. Hearing of Gods word preached is a
means of blessedness. 247 Chap. VIII. The keeping of Gods word is another
means to make a man blessed. 293 Chap. IX. Hearing and doing compared
together, and how and with what difference they concur, as joint helpers of
our salvation. 380 Chap. X. In doing of good works, the manner is to be
respected, as well as the matter. 446. Chap. XI. A man may hear amiss; and by
this error lose the benefit of his labor. 476 Chap. XII. Preparative duties, to
be observed for right hearing. 530 Chap. XIII. Duties to be performed in the
time of our hearing. 603 Chap. XIV. Duties to be performed after our hearing.
706 Chap. XV. General duties required at all times, both before and after, and
in the time of our hearing. 740
Errata.
Page 66. lin. 5. for want was, read for want thereof was. page 77. l. 5.
happiness, r. happinesses. p. 96. Ans. r. I. page 99. lin. 16. B. r. II. p.
109. l. last. C. r. III. p. 125. 4. befall there, r. befall me there. p. 160.
lin. 10. in the case, r. in the like case. p. 188 lin. ult. others points, r.
other points. p. 189. lin. 1. instructions, r. instruction p. 216. l. 9. at
fist, r. first. p. 348. lin. 4. Prove. 1.9. r. Prove. 21.9. p. 366. l. 8. of a S.
Paul, r. of S. Paul. p. 373. l. 3. my a become, r. may become. p. 410. lin. 15.
Conscience. r conscience, p. 414. lin. 1. error of, 1. the error of. p. 430. l.
11. hear thee, r. hear thee. lin. 12. moreover. Oh that, r. moreover; Oh p.
475. l. 7. gloried r. glorified p. 495. l. 13. a learned men r. a learned man
p. 504. l. 7. King Court. r. Kings Court p. 636. l. 9. put to the clift r. put
into the clift. p. p. 659. lin. 6. at lest r. at least.

A CATALOGUE of the several Treatises published by the Author.
1. The new Art of Lying covered by Jesuits under the veil of Equivocation. 2.
Christian humiliation, or, the Christians Fast. 3. The Epicures Fast. 4. The
Tribunal of the Conscience, or, a Treatise of Examination. 5. The Cure of
Cares. 6. Contentment in Gods gifts. 7. Hearing and doing the ready way to
blessedness, with an Appendix containing rules of right hearing Gods word.
HEARING AND DOING the ready way to blessedness.
CAP. I.
The scope of this discourse, and the intention of the Author.

there was never any man, but did desire his own happiness, as the sovereign
and most desirable good. This being so, he that could and would point out the
ready way, by which a man may become blessed, I suppose might deserve great
thanks at every man's hands. And this our Lord has done, as elsewhere in
sundry places of the Gospel, so more especially in that Text of S. Luk, But he
said, Luke 11.28.
Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. For
herein he instructs us in the way to blessedness; and that partly by his
example, and more fully by his doctrine.

And first by his example, for when he heard one of the company proclaiming
with a loud voice the blessedness of that woman who had bred and brought up
such a son; he takes occasion hereby to discourse of the true blessedness
indeed which far exceeds all such blessings, as the breeding and bearing of
a good son is: teaching us by this practice of his, how to make that use of
ordinary occurrences in the world, which may stir up our hearts to think on,
and to seek after the things that are above; which is a good step toward the
blessedness of heaven and eternal life.

And secondly our Lord teaches us the way to happiness more fully by his
doctrine here delivered; in which we find him telling us, that the true
blessedness arises out of piety and Gods service, that it is contained and
set out in Gods word, and may be communicated unto us by our hearing and
keeping of that word. All which points briefly and summarily set down in our
Saviors words, I intend by Gods grace to enlarge and amplify, still laying
the ground of my discourse in the sacred Text: hoping by my poor labors in
this argument, I may somewhat further both my self and others, to the
obtaining of that blessedness, which we all do so much seek after. That God
which has put this thought into my heart, put that virtue into my words, that
they may guide some soul or other to eternal life.

But before I enter upon the proposed points, it will be necessary first to
unfold the Text: that so both our Lords doctrines and my comment upon them, may
appear the more plainly.

The occasion of this speech was this: Our Lord had been preaching the
Kingdom of God to the people; and a woman of the company ravished with the
gracious words, that proceeded from him, brake out into his praises, in these
words, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that thou have sucked:
but this comme^dation given by the woman, our Lord corrects in this manner;
Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

Which correction of our Savior, that it may the better be conceived, we must
enquire, what there was amiss in this woman's speech, that deserved a
correction, and how our Lord did amend it.

And my answer thereto I set down in two propositions.

1. Proposition, There was not any thing so amiss in this woman's speech, as
that she may be said either to have committed a sin, or to have uttered an
untruth. For by this word [blessed] this woman meant not that perfect
blessedness, which consists in the fruition of all good; such as our Savior
meant, when he said, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom
of heaven. Mat. 5.3. but using the word in a vulgar sort, she meant by it a
great blessing of God bestowed on Christ's mother; in the same sense that S.
Paul said, I think my self happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my
self this day, before thee, touching all these things, whereof I am accused of
the Jews. Act. 26.2. For as Paul by these words meant, that he thought it a
great blessing to himself, that he had such a Judge: so this woman, by her
words meant, that she thought it a great blessing to Christ's mother, that she
had such a son. And thus to call her a blessed woman, was neither a sin, nor
an untruth. First it was not an untruth; for Solomon says, The father of the
righteous shall greatly rejoice; and he that begets a wise child, shall
have joy of him. Thy father and thy mother shall be glad; and she that bare
thee, shall rejoice. Prove. 23.24, 25. Where by saying, that they shall be glad,
and shall have joy of such a son; he implies, that he thought this to be a
great blessing. But David speaks more plainly, and in the very dialect or
phrase of this woman: Children says he, are an heritage of the Lord, and the
fruit of the womb, is his reward. He means it of good children only, and of
them he adds further; Blessed is the man that has his quiver full of them.
Psalm. 127.3, 5.

Secondly, it was no sin neither in this woman, that she did thus magnify
the happiness of Christ's mother in regard of such a son: for Solomon and David
in the places now cited did the like in the same case, or in a case not so just
as this was. And upon these grounds I say in the first place, that there was
nothing so far amiss in this speech of the woman, as that we can say, she
either committed a sin, or spoke an untruth.

2. Propos. There was a defect in this speech, which might be bettered and
amended: for else our Lord would not have corrected it with a Yea rather. And
(to speak particularly) the defect herein was twofold. 1. That she did mind
a lesser blessedness, and fixed her thoughts upon that; when she might, but
did not, think on a far greater blessedness, then that was, and which
concerned her in an higher degree. For it is a kind of blessedness indeed, to
have a good and virtuous child, that may comfort us in the world: but it is a
far greater blessedness, to enjoy a father in heaven, in whose presence is
fullness of joy for evermore. And if this woman did not so esteem of this
blessedness, but with neglect of it did magnify the other; this was a fault
that deserved reprehension; Or if she did upon the present occasion, as I
suppose she did, magnify the happiness of having a gracious son, reserving
notwithstanding her best affections for the happiness of heaven: then though
she could not be blamed, yet her speech might be amended. He that calls
them blessed, who have godly children, says well; but he that calls them
blessed, who keep Gods commandments, says better. And therefore our Lord did
amend the woman's speech, by turning it on that blessedness, which she had
neglected, or at least omitted to speak of. The sum of which correction is,
as if he had said, Thou say, Blessed is the womb, etc. Which though I deny
not to be true; yet I will tell thee of a far greater blessedness, then that
is; Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

2. This woman made not so good an use of our Saviors doctrine, as she might
have done. When she heard him preach with great wisdom, and evidence of the
Spirit; she brake out into the praises of the preacher, which were justly
deserved by him: but she said nothing, perhaps she thought nothing of amending
her life, or of performing what she was taught. And herein our Lord amendeth
her speech by telling her, what better use she might make of his Sermon. She
commended him for his good Sermon, when she had done better, if she had
amended her self by his instruction. She said, Blessed is the mother that bred
such a Preacher; but he said, Nay rather blessed is the hearer, that makes use
of his doctrine.

The Text being thus explained, I now proceed to speak of the points that I
propounded; omitting other by-notes, which though they be profitable in their
season, yet are not pertinent to my purpose.

CAP. II.
By earthly things a wise Christian may be occasioned to seek after heavenly
blessings.

by the mention or sight of earthly things.

My proofs for this are two, the constant practice of our Savior, and the
helps that it yields us to a godly and an happy life.

I. The constant practice of our Savior, related and commended to us in
Scriptures; for there we read, that when he saw Peter and Andrew busied in
fishing, he took occasion by the trade that then they did use, to tell them of
an heavenly trade of fishing for the souls of men. He saw them casting a net
into the Sea, (for they were fishers:) and he said unto them, follow me, and I
will make you fishers of men. Mat. 4.18, 19.

Again, when some told him of his mother and his brethren, desiring to speak
with him, he took occasion from the mention of his earthly kindred to instruct
us in the spiritual kindred, that is between him and every good Christian. It
was told him by certain, which said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to see thee. And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my
brethren are these, which hear the word of God and do it. Luke 8.20, 21.

And again, when the woman of Samaria came to draw water out of Jacobs Well;
out of this accident he fetches occasion to instruct her in the living water,
that would refresh her soul unto eternal life. There comes a woman of
Samaria to draw water: Jesus says unto her, give me to drink. -- Then said
the woman; how is it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me, which am a
woman of Samaria? -- Jesus answered and said unto her; If thou knew the gift
of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink; thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. -- Of which water
whosoever drinks, shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him,
shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life. Ioh. 4.7,
9, 14.

And yet again, when the people followed after him, that they might eat of
his bread; he takes occasion from their desire of earthly meat, to instruct
them concerning the bread of life. When the people came to Capernaum seeking
for Jesus -- Jesus answered them and said, verily, verily I say unto you, Ye
seek me, not because you saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
loaves, and were filled. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that
meat, which endures to everlasting life. John 6.26, 27.

Thus our Savior by a constant custom, takes occasion by the words that are
spoken, and occurrences that happen in the world, to raise men's thoughts from
earth to heaven: and from things that concern this life to teach them
spiritual lessons for obtaining of eternal life. By which practice of his, he
lifts up men to heaven, while they remain upon earth; and breeds in them
heavenly mindedness, while they are occupied about their worldly business.
And this being his constant practice who is the wisdom of his father; it
proves the truth of my conclusion, that it is a point of holy wisdom to take
occasion for heavenly meditations by the mention or sight of earthly things.

II. The same point is further proved by the helps that we may receive from it
toward holiness and an happy life. In which kind I may reckon these that
follow.

1. It will make every creature that we see, and every occurrence that we meet
with in the world, to serve us as Schoolemasters to lead us unto Christ; and as
a Monitor to remember us of some duty. The meat on our tables will teach us the
necessity of the meat that never perishes; and our hungring after that will
admonish us how we should desire the food of Gods word, that we may grow and
be strengthened in grace by it. The clothes we put on, will remember us of
putting on the Lord Jesus, and of the glorious robes of righteousness, with
which Gods children are adorned. The tender affection which we show to our
children; will bring to remembrance the great love of our heavenly father
toward his sons and daughters. The duty and service that we require of our
servants, will tell us, what greater duty we owe to our Lord in heaven: and
their failings toward us, will remember us of many defects of our own in Gods
service, and of our rebellions against his commandments.

And the like may be said of all other the like occasions and occurrences: so
that not a crumme of bread, nor a corn of salt, nor a drop of drink, but as
they serve to refresh nature, so they may serve also to increase and confirm
grace in us. And all the creatures will have not only a natural use for this
life; but also a spiritual use toward eternal life and the happiness of the
world to come.

2. This practice of gathering holy meditations from worldly occurrences will
help to preserve us from abusing the creatures in a sinful sort. He that when
he eats his meat for refreshing of his body, shall think withal, Yea, but
how much more necessary and comfortable is the food of Gods word to the
famished soul? will not likely abuse the creatures to surfeiting and excess.
And he that when he puts on his best clothes; shall think, Yea, but how
much more glorious are the garments of righteousness and the fine linen and
silks, with which the Saints are adorned? that man or that woman will not
likely be proud of a silk gown, or a gold ring, or a beaver hat, or an
imbroidered petticoate, or any thing, that fine minions take pride in. And if a
man while he is laboring in his Trade, shall think; Yea, but how much more
pains should I take to enrich my soul with the treasures of Gods grace? that
man will not have the heart to dishonor God by dishonest gain. And if a man,
when he exacteth diligent and daily labor from his apprentice or servants,
and chideth the^, if they be slack in his service; shall think with himself,
Yea, but how much more justly may God require all obedience at my hands, and
chide and chasten me for my great slothfulness in serving him? that man will
never rule over his servants with rigor, nor oppress them with too much work,
or too little meat. And the like is true in all other the like cases. And by
this means we shall be kept from a sinful abuse of the creatures, which
otherwise would be a great hinderance to our happiness and a blessed life.

3. The same practice will be a means to season our hearts with heavenly
mindedness, even while we are going about our worldly occasions. If we
should at any time forget God and our country that is above; every occurrence
in this life would remember us of the life to come. When we are at work in our
shops, or sit down to eat at our boards, or lie down to rest on our beds, or
walk out to take air in the fields; and whersoever we are, and whatsoever we
do; some accident or other would befall us in our way, that would present good
thoughts to our minds and memories. And by this means we should have our
conversation in heaven, while we are upon the earth; as the Apostle speaks:
or, as a learned Writer phraseth it, we should have an heaven upon earth: and
so in good part we should even in this life enjoy that happiness, which we
expect and desire fully to possess in the life to come.

These are the proofs: the uses follow.

Use 1. This detecteth the folly and preposterous course of worldlings, who
usually go the quite contrary way. The right way, and that which our Lord
directs us to by his example, is, that we use the creatures to bring us unto
God: but these men use God and his service to bring themselves to their desires
in the world. Such men I mean, who show great for wardnesse in religion, that
they may compass their worldly ends. They pray, and they profess, and they
hear Sermons, and they entertain Preachers: but their praying, and their
professing, and their hearing, and their honoring of Preachers, are but as so
many stalking horses under which they lie hid, till they have caught the prey.
It is but a fable (but the moral of it is an evident truth;) which wise men
tell us of a fishermans son. They say of him that he put himself into a
Monastery, and there lived as a poor Monk: but being of good parts by nature,
and thriving well in his studies, was for his well-deserving advanced to be
the Abbot of the Monastery. Which place of dignity when he had obtained, he,
in acknowledgment of his poor beginnings, and to remember himself whose son
he was; caused a net to be spread upon his table-cloth, whenever he went to
meat. Afterward, for his virtues he was thought fit to be a Bishop; and then
was advanced to be a Cardinal. And still in humility, and in thankfulness to
God, the net was every day spread upon his table. And by this means he gained
such an op nion of humility and holiness, that men thought him not only
worthy of the preferments which he had, but even of far greater; and so in
conclusion he was chosen to be Pope. In which place he lived as a great Lord,
but forbore to spread the net any longer. And being asked the reason, he
answered, that now the fish was taken for which he had spread the net all this
while: meaning, that now he had gotten the preferment, at which he had still
aimed. Beloved brethren, I suppose ye will laugh at the devise: and some men
perhaps will be the better pleased with it, because it was framed of a
Clergyman. But shall I tell you what the Poet said in a like case? [Mutato
nomine de te fabula narratur:] Change but the name, and the fable fitteth your
selves. It is not only meant of Scribes and Pharisees and such hypocritical
Preachers, who devour widows and men's houses too under a show of zealous
preaching. But it is meant of hypocritical professors also, who scarce ever
open their eyes, save when they look up to heaven: but it is that they may be
thought to be holy and devout me^, and such as mind nothing but heavenly
things. And it is meant of covetous professors, who frequent sermons, and pray
with their families, and set up Lectures abroad, and talk nothing but Scripture
phrase: and all this, that they may draw customers to their shops, or hook-in
other men's estates into their hands, and break with the more advantage. And it
is meant of ambitious professors, who talk still in a popular language, and
speak for the good of their country, and find fault with the errors in our
government, and like zealous Patriots indeed, take part with the Commoners
against their Alderman, and with the subjects against their Sovereign; and all
that they may steal the hearts of the multitude, and by their voices and votes
be chosen into some place of honor, to which they do aspire. Against all
these, and all others, who pretend religion, and intend their own ends, was
this fable devised. They are the men that spread the net, till the fish be
taken; and more then that, they mind not. And of all these I say, they take a
foolish and preposterous course, because they make religion to serve for
worldly ends; whereas all worldly things should serve the advancement of
religion.

Use 2. This is of great use for all them, who would serve God in sincerity.
For it teaches them how to gain zeal and good affections toward God; not
only by hearing of sermons and reading of Scriptures, and using a constant
course in all holy duties; but even by the ordinary occurrences that they meet
with in the world. If they follow this course, and make use of it, they may
grow in grace, and gain holy affections, while they are in their shops, and
while they walk in the streets, and while they confer with their friends,
and while they either think or do any thing by themselves. And this I suppose
may be a sufficient motive, to persuade us to this practice. And for our
better direction in the right use of it, learned men have prescribed us some
rules, and holy men have left us some examples; in whose steps if we shall
tread, we may gain the like comfort that they have done.

1. And first for rules: Ludovicus Vives, a man renowned as well for piety as
learning, among other learned works of his, has published a Treatise, which
he calls Excitationes animi ad Deum; that is, The liftings up of the soul
unto God. In this book he prescribes us rules of meditation and prayer upon
every incidentall occasion: for example, when we awake out of sleep in a
morning, and find our selves refreshed by our rest; then he bids us think,
how joyful and blessed a thing it will be, to be raised up to eternal life,
after our sleeping in the grave; and to pray withal, that as God has raised
our bodies from their sleep, that we may do the works of this life; so he
would raise up our souls from the sleep of sin, that we may do the works of
piety and a godly life. And when we are going on a journey; then we should
think, that our life here is a pilgrimage on earth, in which we are separated
from our own country and our dearest friends, that is, from heaven; and the
blessed souls that be there; and then we should pray, that God will teach us
to live here as pilgrims and strangers, that are traveling toward a better
country, and that our conversation may be in heaven, while our bodily mansion
is on earth. And when we see a candle lighted in the evening, to be a comfort
against the dismal darkness of the night; that then we should think, how
necessary the knowledge of Gods word is, which is a light to our eyes, and
lantern to our feet: and pray withal, that God would keep this candle still
shining before us, that we may know how to serve him aright. The like rules of
good thoughts and prayers he prescribes us, when we put on our clothes, when
we go out of doors, when we sit down to meat, when we prepare to bedward, and
upon other the like occasions; leaving us no part of the day, nor no occasion
of our life, without some holy thoughts, that may make us like to the Saints,
that be in heaven. This book of Vives and the meditations and prayers contained
in it, that worthy Martyr M. Bradford has translated, or the greatest part of
them into our English tongue, and has presented them to the view of the world,
in a book of his, called Bradfords Meditations and prayers. And after him, M
Henry Bull, who has gathered together many sweet flowers of such like
devotion, has also, for the benefit of his contrymen printed these
meditations and prayers among the rest. There, if ye please, ye may read
them: and I dare say, if ye read them with attention and care, you will not
think your labor either lost or ill bestowed. Besides these books, there is
one also of late years, penned by a reverend and learned Prelate of our
Church, called Occasional Meditations. In it you are directed how on ordinary
and trivial occasions, ye may raise up your thoughts to heavenward. But that
book I suppose, is in the hands of most men: and the known worth of the Author
will sufficiently commend it to their reading. I only will say thus much, that
who so shall peruse these books, and make use of them accordingly; I doubt not,
but he will find in them good helps to heaven, and great comfort to his soul.
And so I leave the Rules.

2. The examples, that I make choice of for this purpose, are two.

1. Examp. The first of one Pambo, an ancient and religious man. Of him Socrat.
hist. l. 4 c. 18. page 660. Rosw. de vitis Patrum l. 3. number. 164 page 524. v.
etiam l. 1. c. 3. in vita S. Pelagiae. pa. 377. de Nonno Episcopo.
Socrates reports, that seeing a light woman finely tricked up, and
sumptuously adorned, that she might please, and allure lovers unto her, he
burst out into tears, and being asked why he wept, he gave these two reasons
for it. 1. because he saw in what miserable state that woman was in; it grieved
him that so goodly a creature of Gods making, should be in so ready a way to
hell and destruction: and 2. because, said he, I do not take so much pains to
please my good God, as she does to please sinful men. This example if we will
follow, we may make use of it diverse ways for our good: namely thus; when we
see a Porter sweating under his burden, that he may earne a poor wages; we may
check our own dullness, who are so soon weary of laboring for an eternal
Kingdom; that we grudge to spend a quarter of an hour in prayer, or a whole
hour in hearing of Gods word, or a day in abstinence and fasting for our sins.
For what a shame is it that a laboring man should willingly take so much
pains for a tester or a shilling, when we think so little pains to be
overmuch for obtaining of eternal life and the Kingdom of heaven? And when we
see a Shopkeeper abridge himself of his meat and of his sleep, that he may
attend his customers and make gain of his trading; we may justly blame our
selves for our backwardness in Gods service, and that we cannot abridge our
selves in our eating and in our sleeping and in our sporting and in our
clothing, that we may be the fitter and more expedite for good duties and for
the Kingdom of God. And when we see a man that takes physic, fast aforehand,
and after the taking of it, to content himself with a thin supping, that the
medicine may work the better; we may think every man with himself, what a
fool am I, that on the Lords day, when God prepares and gives me physic for
my soul, I do so fill my stomach with meat, and my head with strong drink, as
makes my self unfit for Gods service, and my praying, and hearing and reading
unprofitable for my soul? And when we see men and women look themselves in
the glass every day, that they may carry with them no spots or deformity in
their faces, that may shame them when they go abroad among men: we should
accuse our shameless security in matters of our souls, and that we do not
examine our consciences and look our souls in the glass of Gods Law, that
there be no deformity in our lives, that may shame us before God and his
Angels. I might make many such applications of Pamboes practice to our selves,
and gather such collections to shame our selves for our indevotion and want of
feeling: but out of these there is direction enough for them that are willing
to make use of it; and too much for them, who shall despise it.

2. Examp. The second example is of a Cook in a College of religious men. Of
him Climacus a Greek father in the ancient Church, relates that he was very
devout in serving God, and often moved with compunction to mourn for his sins.
Which Climacus observing, importuned him to know by what means he had attained
to such a degree of sanctity and holiness; and he after some entreaties
answered him to this effect; (...). Climac. Grad. 4. page 49.
I, says he, in this work of the Kitchen, did never think that I served men,
but God, who enjoined me true service in my place: and judging my self
unworthy of any rest by reason of my many failings, when I look on this fire in
my chimney; how intolerable the burning thereof would be to my flesh, I am put
in mind of the everlasting and much more unsufferable burnings of hell fire,
due to all impenitent sinners; and the thought of this torment does resolve me
into tears for my sins.

And now if we will make use of this example, we shall not need to go abroad,
and gather instructions from other men's life's, as Pambo did: we shall find
matter enough at home to exercise our thoughts with. For example sake, and to
set our consciences on work in this duty; If any of us shall be tormented with
an headache or a toothach, or with the stone, or strangury, or a hot fever, or
some other tormenting pain, that will not suffer us to take any rest; we may
make the like use of the burning fever, or tormenting ach which we feel, that
this Cook did of the scorching fire, which he looked upon. We may think, if
this little smart in comparison, and these short torments seem so unsufferable,
as that I would not endure them for a year together, though I might gain a
Kingdom by it; how unsufferable are the eternal torments of hell fire, and
what a fool am I, if I plunge my soul into them for ever for gaining of a
paltry profit, and a fading and a filthy pleasure? And if after drinking a cup
of pleasant wine in our thirst, or after eating a good dinner in our hunger, or
if after a sweet sleep when we have been weary, we find our selves comforted
and refreshed; then there is occasion to think, O Lord how much more joy and
refreshing will it be to my soul, when I shall rest from all my labors in
Abraham's bosom, and with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob shall eat bread in the
Kingdom of God, and shall be fed with the pleasures of Gods house for
evermore? And again, if at any time we be overjoyed (and who sometimes is
not?) when some great preferment befalls us, such as are a high place in the
Court, a great office in the City: or some matter of much gain in our trading;
then it will be seasonable to think, if such a scant advancement do so much
overjoy me, what a joy will it be, and how shall I rejoice, when I shall be
taken to be Gods adopted son, and to be heir of his Kingdom, and a fellow
citizen with the Saints in glory? And thus we may do on all the like
occasions: and if thus we do do, still converting earthly occurrences into
matter of heavenly meditations, we shall be profited toward salvation by every
thing of moment that we see or hear abroad, and by those things which we find
and feel in our selves.

But this practice is never more seasonable, nor never more profitable, then
when we come to the Lords Table. In this Sacrament we have for the outward
matter of it, bread and wine, in substance the same with that which is upon our
own boards, but in use of a far different nature. When they be upon our own
boards, then they be natural things, ordained for the refreshing of the body,
and preservation of man's nature: but when they be on Gods board, they are
spiritual things ordained for the nourishment of the soul, and the
preservation of Gods grace within us. Now if it be a point of wisdom to take
occasion of heavenly thoughts from them, when they are mere natural things;
how necessary will it be to have more elevated thoughts of them, when they are
consecrated to a mystical and supernatural use? Now that they are set apart
to a sacred use, they must needs be profaned, if they be not handled in a
sacred sort. Here they are holy signs, which represent Christ unto us with all
the benefits of his Passion: and we make them as no signs, if we do not see
Christ and his death represented in them. Therefore in the celebration of this
Sacrament, the Church teaches the Minister to say, [sursum corda] lift up your
hearts; and it teaches the people to answer him back again, We lift them up
unto the Lord. When therefore our eyes do look on these creatures on the Lords
Table; our hearts should look to Christ in heaven. When we see the bread cut
and broken in pieces; that bids us remember, that his sacred body was broken
and torn in pieces for our sins. And when we see the wine powered out of the
vessel into the cup, and out of the cup into our bodies; that bids us
remember, that his precious blood was emptied out of the veins, that our
souls might be purged from their sins. And when the bread and wine is
delivered into the Communicants hand; that tells him, that God the Father
does now reach unto him from heaven, the flesh and blood of his dear Son, that
they may nourish his soul to eternal life, as the bread and wine does nourish
his body for this natural life. So that in the whole institution of this
Sacrament there is nothing dumb, or without its signification: and so likewise
in the celebration of it, we should pass by nothing, as if we were deaf, and
did not understand the meaning of it. For conclusion, as S. Paul said to
Timothy, so I say to every Communicant, Meditate on these things, while ye be
about this holy work: and, 1 Timothy 4.15.
Consider what I say; and the Lord give you understanding in all things; that
ye may know how to make use of all Gods ordinances for his Glory and your own
comfort.

CAP. III.
The blessings of this life are nothing to the blessedness of the life to come.

her of a far greater blessedness then that was, consisting in the hearing and
keeping of Gods word. And hence I collect, that the blessing of good children,
and other the good things of this life, are much short of the blessedness,
which accompanies godliness and an holy life.

The proofs for confirmation hereof are three, 1. The testimony of Solomon. 2.
The condition of worldly happiness in it self considered. and 3. Its want of
those excellencies, that are in the true blessedness.

I. The first proof is the Testimony of Solomon set down in the book of
Ecclesiastes. In it his Testimony is delivered 2. ways. 1. In a general
doctrine. 2. In particular instances.

1. His doctrine is this; Of all worldly blessings, and the happiness that men
can gain by them, he says in the entrance of his book, Vanity of vanities,
says the Preacher; vanity of vanities: and all is vanity. Eccles. 1.2. He
means that all the things of this life, without godliness and a good
conscience, are mere emptiness and things of nothing. Thus he begins his
speech concerning the glittering greatness of this world, and then of the true
blessedness, that accompanies Gods service, he adds in the conclusion of
that book; Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; fear God and keep
his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every
work into judgment, etc. Eccles. 12.13, 14. Where 1. when he says, Let us
hear the conclusion of all, he means that that which now he was to say,
namely to fear God, and keep his commandments, was the substance of all that
needed to be said, the sum of all that either the Preacher needed to teach, or
the people needed to learn. This alone is sufficient to make a man happy. And
2. when he says, for this is the whole duty of man, he gives the reason, why
he had said of godliness that it was the sum of all, namely because it is
the whole duty of man, that is, all that is required of him to the attaining of
blessedness and eternal glory. Lay these things together, and the sum is,
that all other things are of no worth; only the fear of God and his service
is enough of it self to make a man truly and eternally happy. This is the
general doctrine, that the Preacher teaches in that book.

2. His particular instances are these and such like. He propounds for
example sake, Eccl. 1.16. etc.
humane wisdom, ca. 2.1, 2.
worldly mirth ca. 2.3. etc.
pleasures of all sorts, ca. 4.9. etc.
riches, and worldly wealth, ca. 6.3. etc.
children and long life, etc. all which are esteemed the chief treasures of
this life: and of all these Solomon's conclusion still in the end of the
discourse is, that it is vanity and vexation of spirit. And by this he gives
us to understand, that having made diligent search, and gone through the whole
course of the world to seek for blessedness to content his soul; he could
find nothing among the most desirable things, but vanity and vexation, nothing
that could give him any satisfaction or contentment. It was only the fear of
God and his service that could yield that which he sought for. This is the
first proof of the point: and it is a full and a clear one.

II. The second is, the Condition of worldly blessings considered in
themselves; and it is this, that for all the goodly shows that they make, yet
if they be without godliness, they leave a man still in a cursed and a
damnable state. For a man may have good children and himself may be a bad man.
So it was with Saul and Jonathan his son; and with Ahaz and EZekias his son;
and with Manasses and Josias his son. And so a man may have riches, and
honors, and pleasures; and yet be in a worse case, then the beggar that lies
at his gate. So it was with Dives in the Gospel: he was clothed with purple,
and fared delicately every day, and was honorable among his neighbors; and
yet Dives was in a miserable case even in the midst of all this abundance. A
few days did but pass over his head; and he was carried into hell, and
tormented in that flame, and could not obtain so small a comfort, as a drop of
water to cool his burning. And whereto now did all his former pomp serve him,
but only to make him more sensible of his torments? Miserum est fuisse
foelicem; It is an increase of a man's misery, that he has formerly been
happy. And now I dare say there is never a man living, but will think that
Lazarus with all his beggary and sores was in a far more happy condition, then
Dives, who lived in such plenty and honor. And this example alone, (to say
nothing of Pharaoh and Haman, and Belshazzar, and Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod,
and such like; this example, I say alone) is proof enough, that all worldly
blessings may leave a man in a miserable and cursed condition, for any help
that they can afford him. And does that deserve the name of happiness, that
leaves the possessors of it in such a miserable and cursed state?

III. Thirdly, the same truth is further proved, because the greatest
happiness in this world is destitute of those prerogatives which are the
proper glory of the true blessedness, namely these 3. fullness, sincerity, and
eternity.

1. The first prerogative is fullness without any lack or defect. For true
blessedness is accompanied with full joy, even as much, as either the heart
can desire, or the soul receive. David speaking of this blessedness, says
unto God; In thy presence is fullness of joy for evermore. Psalm. 16. ult. A
vessel is said to be full, when it has as much, as it can hold; and so that
joy is full, when it is as much as there is any room to receive it. And such
is the joy says David, that is in Gods Kingdom. But that speech of the
Gospel is yet more significant and full, when it is said to the good servant,
Enter into the joy of thy Lord. Mat. 25.23. For when we speak of a cup of
water, we do not say that the man enters into it, but that it enters and
is taken down into the man: because that water though it may fill the man, yet
it is no greater, then the capacity of the man's stomach, into which it is
received. But if we speak of a river, or a bathing tub, or such like large
continent, we cannot say, that the river, or the tub of water enters into the
man, but rather that the man goes or enters into it; because the quantity or
measure of that water is greater then the man is capable of, or can receive.
And so in this case when our Lord receives his faithful servant, into his
heavenly Kingdom, Tam magnum est gaudium coelestis patriae de Deo, ut non
possit concludi in homine: and ideo homo intrat in gaudium illud
incomprehensibile, and non intrat gaudium illud in hominem velut comprehensum
ab homine. Cajet. in Mat. 25.23.
he says not, Let the joy of thy Lord enter into thee, but Enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord, because, as a learned Writer observes, those joys of Gods
Kingdom are so full, that they run over, and cannot be contained within us,
our scant vessels are not large enough to receive them. Such is the fullness of
joy that is found in true blessedness.

But now the blessedness of this world (take it when it is at the best and at
the fullest) though it have its comforts and its joys; yet a fullness of joy
it cannot be said to have, because always something is wanting that that happy
man still does desire: and that in two respects; 1. because there is no such
fullness or perfection in any one blessing, but that he who has it, does
desire more. 2. because if any man had as much of one blessing, as he could
desire, yet there would be a want of some other blessing, that would disturb
his joy in that which he possessed.

1. There is no fullness in one worldly comfort, but still there is a want of
something, that the man would have more then that which he has. Ahab was a
King and had great possessions and lands; but yet he wanted a garden of herbs,
such as Naboths vineyard might make; and for want was so grieved, that he could
not eat: and therefore he killed Naboth, that he might enjoy his inheritance.
And so now a days, a man may be a great rich man, say he be as rich as this
world has any; and yet he has not so much land, but he seeks to purchase
more, nor so much money but he thinks what way he may increase his store.
And still we see it happen as Solomon observed, that he who loves silver,
shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with
increase. Eccl. 5.10. And so it is in other things: The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. Eccles. 1.8. He that has an able body;
say as strong as Samson; yet wants soundness, or some strength, or some
agility, which he desires by physic, and food, and exercise to increase or
amend. And he that is endued with great learning and much wisdom, say he
were as wise as Solomon; yet finds each day some defect, and learneth by
continual experience, that there are mo things, which he knows not, then
those are which he knows. And so we may say of all other things of this
life; they are never so great, but more may be added, and more will be desired.
And therefore there is no fullness in them.

2. Say, that a man were so happy, as to enjoy some one blessing in such
perfection, as that he neither needs nor desires more: yet he is short in
some other blessing, the want of which will abate or rather damp his joy in the
other. For example, Naaman was rich and valiant and honorable: but yet Naaman
was a Leper, and sought with much labor and great cost, to be eased of this
disease. And so it is with us; a man may have some blessings that may comfort
him: but yet he wants many others that will afflict him not a little. It may
be a man may be rich, but unlearned; or rich and learned, but unhealthy; or
rich and learned and healthy (though all this is but seldom seen in one man;)
but yet he is unfortunate in his wife, or in his children, or in his friends,
or in his credit, etc. But the man was never yet known, that enjoyed all
things, that he could wish. And if there be a want of some good things; then
there is not a fullness of all joy. And consequently the worldly happiness is
much short of the true happiness, in which there is fullness without want, and
perfection without any defect.

2. True happiness has this prerogative, that it has sincere joys, without
mixture of any other sorrow. S. John in the Revelation describes true
blessedness to be such, as that men who enjoy it, shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. Apoc.
7.16. and Apoc. 21.4. God, says he, shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes: and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain. In which words, 1. when he says, They shall
hunger no more, etc. he means there shall be nothing within them that may
breed them any pain. 2. When he says, Neither shall the sun light upon the^,
etc. he implies that nothing from without them, shall annoy them. 3. When he
says, God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; he tells us the
reason, why there is such perfection of good, and such freedom from evil; and
that is, because in heaven we enjoy God himself by immediate vision, and in
God there is no defect: but while we are in this life, we are preserved and
upheld by the use of the creatures; and all they are defective and imperfect.
And hence the conclusion is, that in heaven there is no more death, nor no more
sorrow, nor no more pain.

But contrariwise the blessings of this life have ever some tang of sorrow mixed
with them, which will damp all the joy. Belshazzar was quaffing it in his cups,
and frollicking it with his friends, when lo, there came forth the fingers of
a man's hand, and wrote his judgment upon the wall: at the sight whereof the
Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. Dan.
5.5, 6. And so Haman was one of the worlds darlings, in great favor and highly
advanced by the King, and invited by the Queen to one banquet after another: so
that Haman went out joyful and with a glad heart: and a man would have thought
that he had been the Minion, on which the world had chosen to bestow her
choicest favors. But Haman was no sooner gone out overjoyed with his great
preferments, but he met with Mordecai the Jew, who would not do him
reverence: and this unrespectivenesse in a poor alien did so pierce his heart,
that he was forced to say; All this [greatnesse] avails me nothing, so long
as I see Mordecai the Jew fitting at the Kings gate. Ester 5.9, 13. And so it
is with all other the happy men of this world. Either men do molest them, and
fill them full of fear, or of anger, or of envy, or of some other unquiet
passion; or else God from heaven does thunder upon them, and sets their own
conscience against them, which (as the poet said,) surdo verbere caedit, gives
them many a smarting lash, when the world hears not the stroke. Thus one worm
or other there is, which gnaweth upon their heart, while they rejoice in their
pomp; and they still find Solomon's proverb to be true, Even in laughter the
heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Prove. 14.13. In
this respect then the worldly happiness is not comparable to the happiness of
heaven, all whose joys are without mixture of any grief.

3. True happiness has eternity added to its joys. As they are full without
want of any good, and sincere without mixture of any evil; so they are
eternal in the continuance of them both. In the description of the last
judgment it is said of Come ye blessed of my Father.
Gods blessed ones, that they go into life everlasting. Mat. 25. ult. And David
says of these joys, At thy right hand, O Lord, there are pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 16. ult. And S. Peter, that it is an everlasting Kingdom. 2
Pet. 1.11. and an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away. 1. Pet. 1.4. And the reason is, because God has appointed this life to
be a passage to the other; but the life to come to be the permanent and fixed
state, in which all men receive their reward. Therefore when Dives being in
hell, desired that Lazarus might come out of Abraham's bosom; to refresh him;
No, says Abraham, that cannot be, for betwixt us and you is a great gulf
fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can
they pass to us, that would come from thence. Luke 16.26: Implying, that there
is no removing nor no changing in the life to come; but those that are once in
hell, shall be in hell for ever, and those that be in heaven, neither can nor
will depart thence. The blessedness then of heaven, which is the only true
blessedness, is eternal and unchangeable.

But it is not so with the happiness of this world: they are changeable, nay
changing every day: and that two ways, or in two respects: Either because they
are of a fading nature, and may leave us when we have most need of them; or
because we are of a mortal constitution, subject to dissolution and death, and
then we must leave them, if they leave not us before.

1. Riches are of a fading nature, still ebbing and flowing like the sea, and
oftentimes dried uplike the summer brooks. Riches, faith Solomon, make
themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. Prove. 23.25.
Meaning by this expression to tell us how hastily they leave us. Job 1.
Job was a happy man in all worldly respects, happy in his children, and happy
in his authority, and happy in his possessions, so that there was none like him
in all the land: but in one day thieves came and carried away his oxen and his
asses, and murdered his servants; and a fire from heaven came, and burnt up his
sheep, and the servants that kept them, and a wind from the wilderness came,
and cast down the house where his children were, and destroyed them all. Nor
was this all, with the loss of children, and goods, and possessions, he lost
his authority and command also. For whereas he was before Job. 29.21. etc.
honored of the best, now Job. 30.1, 9, 10.
the very boys had him in derision, and the abjects of the world made him
their song. And thus it is with us now also. Be a man never so rich, and so
plentiful in all things; yet either thieves may rob him, or false servants may
beguile him, or bad creditors may fail him, or fire may consume him, or some
misfortune or other may befall him, and sweep all away in a moment. And if his
goods be once gone, then farewell his honor, and his credit, and his power:
he that sat before on the bench like a Judge, may with Job fit upon the
dunghill without any man that will care for him.

Secondly, say, that worldly preferments abide with us still; Yet if they leave
not us, we are sure to leave them; nor can we say, how soon it may be. The
rich man in the Gospel had laid up much wealth, which he supposed should
serve him for many years: and possible they might so, saving that he himself
wanted days to enjoy them. He said, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years; eat, drink, and be merry. But God said, (and his word must stand)
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: and then, whose
shall those things be, that thou have provided? Luke 12.19, 20. And so now, we
that are in health this day, are not sure that we can live till the next day.
If now we bless our selves in our fortunes, and think our selves happy in our
children, in our friends, in our preferments, in our possessions and houses,
and make an account that we are now settled to our mind: yet how can we be
sure, that it may not be said to us from heaven, Thou fool, this night, or
this day will they take away thy soul from thee. And then whose shall those
dwellings, and those preferments, and those friends and those offices, and
those bags and chests; whose shall they be, when thou go to thy grave and
they cannot follow thee?

This point is of use diverse ways: it serves for comfort to the poor, for
admonition to the Rich, and for instruction to us all.

Use 1. It is for comfort to the poor. For if the things of this life have so
little matter of happiness in them, why should any man grieve to want that,
which can do him no more good? And if there be such perfection of happiness in
enjoying God and a good conscience, why should any man be disco^te^ted for want
of other things, while he enjoys these? Mephibosheth was so well contented
with the favor of the King, that when Zibah his servant had cousened him of
the one half of his lands, he answered, Nay, let him take all, forasmuch as my
Lord the King, is come again in peace to his own house. 2 Samuel 19.29, 30.
meaning that he cared not for lands and livings, so he might enjoy the favor
of the King. And much rather may every poor Christian say; It mattereth not
though I be robbed of my goods, and turned out of my possessions, and left
destitute of all things, so that I may enjoy Christ, and his merits and live
with God in glory. Let the world take all; seeing I have God to be my father,
and Christ to be my Savior, and the holy Spirit to be my Comforter. This
comfort and contentment the poorest man that serves God aright may gather from
this doctrine.

Use 2. It is for admonition to the rich and great men of the world: it
teaches them, not to place happiness in these outward things. S. Paul's
direction to Timothy is, Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy. 1 Timothy 6.17. In these words I note two
things; 1. What rich men are charged with, and that is, that they trust not in
their riches, as if they were safe, because they were great, or happy because
they were wealthy. and 2. Why they should observe this charge, and that is
employed in the condition ascribed to their riches, uncertain riches. For it
were a folly to trust in that which may fail us, when we have most need of it.
And as rich men may not trust in their riches; so honorable men must not trust
in their honors, and learned men must not trust in their learning, and popular
men must not trust in their credit with the multitude: nor may any man trust in
man or humane things. But as our Savior, when one showed him the goodly
buildings of the Temple, See thou these great buildings? (said he,) there
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. So when
we look upon ou fair houses, we should say to our selves; There is never a
wall in this house, nor tile on this roof, but it will wast and come to
nothing: nor can I have any certain dwelling, till I have an house given of God
eternal in the heavens. And when we look upon our Lands and Lordships, our
thoughts should be these or such like. There is never a foot of this ground,
nor never a parcel of these possessions, but will be taken out of my hands,
and be possessed by I know not whom. And so when we look on our chests of
gold, and presses of cloths, and cupboards of plate; when on our goodly
children, and rich friends and kindred: still we should tell our selves; All
these things will fail and forsake me yer long. Not a penny of all my coin;
nor a rag of all my garments, nor any man or woman of all my kindred and
acquaintance, can follow me to my grave, or ease me of my pain, or help me
at my greatest need. Luke 12.33. Luke 16 9.
And oh then my soul, why do not I lay up treasures in heaven, and provide
bags that wax not old, and make me such friends of my goods, as, when I
fail, may receive me into everlasting habitations? These thoughts rich men may
learn from this doctrine. And if they learn it well, they will not be proud of
their worldly wealth.

Use 3. This point is for instruction of us all. We hence may learn, seeing
worldly blessings are nothing to the blessedness of heaven; that therefore we
should be very fools, if we would part with heaven for any thing upon earth.
We all condemn the profaneness of Esau, who sold his birthright for a mess
of pottage. And we detest the wickedness of Judas, who sold his Savior for a
few pieces of silver. And there is as great cause to condemn the unjust
dealer, that for a small gain, makes away his right to heaven. And so I may
say of the ambitious man, who sells Christ for honors; and of the
vainglorious man who sells him for praises of men; and of the intemperate
man, who sells him for his belly cheer; and of the lascivious man, who
sells him for carnal pleasure; and of every man, who for any thing in this
world, sells away God and a good conscience. Let not us be so unwise, as to
make such foolish bargains; Rather learn we of Naboth to hold fast our
inheritance. Ahab offered him as good a vineyard, as that was, if he would part
with it for the Kings use; but Naboth answered, God forbid, that I should give
thee the inheritance of my fathers. 1 Kings 21.3. The devil though he be an
impudent liar, yet cannot for shame say, that he can give us as good a
blessing on earth as the blessedness of heaven is. And therefore when he
offers us honors and preferments and pleasures and possessions to be gained
by wicked or unlawful means, which will deprive us of heaven and eternal
happiness; How much rather should we answer him in Naboths words, God forbid
that I should sell away the inheritance of my heavenly father; or part with so
glorious a possession for so vile a price. Let the devil offer such bargains
as these, to the fools of the world, whose minds the God of this world has
blinded, that they cannot see either the glory of heaven or the vanity of
earthly things.

CAP. IV.
There is a supernatural blessedness appropriated to Gods service.

and supernatural blessedness belongs and is appropriated to the service of
God.

This is plainly and plentifully confirmed by Scriptures, such as these are:

Blessed is the man, that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc.
Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. -- in whose spirit there is no guile. Psalm. 31.1, 2. Blessed are the
undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord. Blessed are they that
keep his testimonies and seek him with their whole heart. Psalm. 119.1, 2.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5.10. With many other the like sayings to the same
purpose. In all which I note two things: 1. That they speak of a supernatural,
not of any worldly blessedness, so called: for they place this blessedness in
the right to the Kingdom of heaven; and they ascribe this blessedness to
persecutions suffered for Christ's sake, which is quite contrary to the nature
of worldly happiness. 2. I note that these Scriptures do place the ground and
root of this blessedness in holiness and a godly life. Lay these two
together, and they prove the point, that true and celestial blessedness
belongs to Gods service or a godly life.

More then this needs not for proof of the conclusion: but for more full
declaration of it, 3. Questions are to be cleared; 1. Wherein this blessedness
does consist. 2. Why it is ascribed to the service of God. And 3. how men are
said to partake of this blessedness in this life.

1. Quest. The first question is, wherein this blessedness does consist: and
the answer thereto is, that it consists in the immediate fruition of God, of
and by himself supplying all good things, and expelling or driving away all
evil. In this answer I say three things.

Answ. That it is in the fruition of God. For all the good, that we have or
can have, is from him. In him we live, and move, and have our being. Acts
17.28. and Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the father of lights. James 1.17. And if every good gift, then
blessedness among the rest, or rather more especially then any of the rest, is
given us of God our heavenly father. And when from him we receive this
blessedness, then are we truly said to enjoy him, because he then
communicates himself unto us in one of his especial blessings. For as a man
is said to enjoy the Sun, when by its presence and aspect, it communicates
light and influence unto him; and as he is said to enjoy a friend, who has his
company and acquaintance, so as he receives comfort and contentment from him;
or, as the Apostle says, that God gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy
6.17; when we have them, and may use them for our good: so, and in the like
sense we are said to have the fruition of God, or to enjoy him, when he is so
near unto us, and in such manner present with us, as that he co^municateth unto
us his mercies and blessings. And that thus the blessed man does enjoy God, I
take it to be plain, when it is said in the Gospel; Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God. Mat. 5.8. For to see God includes two things,
to enjoy him, and to live in his presence in his glory. That it signifies to
enjoy him, appears by the custom of Scripture phrase; In which, to see good
is to enjoy it. Psalm. 34.12. and, to see good days, is to enjoy good days. 1
Pet. 3.10. and to see corruption is to partake of it. Psalm. 16.10. and to see
death, is to suffer death. John 8.51. and Heb. 11.5. and not to see good or
evil, when it comes; is as much as not to partake of it. Ier. 17.6, 8.

And if in the Scripture phrase, to see good, and to see evil, and to see
death, and to see corruption, be to partake of them, and when the speech is of
that, which is good, to enjoy them; then I do but speak according to the
phrase of Scripture, if I say that to see God, in that place of the Gospel, is
to enjoy him: and so to see and enjoy him, is the Blessed man's portion.

And therefore I say in the first place, that Blessedness does consist in the
fruition of God.

B. Secondly, I say, that this fruition, belonging to the blessed man, is the
immediate fruition of God. For understanding hereof we must note, that there
is a twofold enjoying of God; the one mediate, and the other immediate.
Mediately we are said to enjoy God, when he communicates himself unto us by
secondary means, and by interposition of the creature between him and us: as
namely, when he feeds us by meat and drink, lightneth us by the sun,
instructs us by his word, strengthens us in grace by the Sacrament. When
thus God communicates his blessings unto us, (as he still does in this life)
then we are said to enjoy him mediately. Secondly, we are said to enjoy God
immediately, when he communicates himself unto us without any other thing
between. And thus we are said to enjoy God immediately two ways; 1. In
respect of presence: and 2. In respect of influence. In respect of presence,
our enjoying of God is said to be immediate, when we live with him in the
place of his residence, and where his honor dwells: and that is, in heaven
above, as Solomon says to God; Hear thou in heaven, thy dwelling place. 1
Kings 8.30, 39, 43, 49. For while we live here in this world, we are said to
be absent from the Lord, because we are out of the place of his dwelling. 2
Cor. 5.6. But when once we have left this world, and are gone to heaven, then
we are said to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. And then, says the
Apostle, We shall ever be with the Lord. 1 These. 4.17. And from hence it is
that the wicked are said to be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2 These. 1.9. and that of
the godly it is said, Thou will show me the path of life; for in thy presence
is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm.
16.11. and that where Christ is, there shall his disciples be also. Ioh. 14.2,
3. and that they follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. Apoc. 14.4.

Which speeches do prove that the Saints in heaven do enjoy God in another
manner then they here did, while they lived in the flesh: namely, that in
heaven they enjoy him in his palace, in the place of his proper dwelling,
without separation or distance of place, which is found in all them, which
enjoy God most nearely in this world. And this also, as before I said is
employed in that saying of the Gospel, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. For this to be meant or intimated by the seeing of God in this
place, may clearly be gathered from other places of Scripture, in which it is
said, that now we see in a glass, but then we shall see face to face. 1 Cor.
13.12. and in which we are said in this life, to walk by faith, and not by
sight. 2 Cor. 5.7. He means that here we are led by an inevident and obscure
kind of knowledge; for so the Learned define faith to be, agreeably to that of
the Apostle, Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1. but in heaven
we shall walk or live by sight, having there the immediate and open view of
Gods face in Glory. In heaven then, where all they, that are the blessed of
God, shall be, there men enjoy God immediately in respect of presence.
Secondly, they enjoy him immediately in respect of influence. For there God
communicates himself unto them by immediate virtue received from himself,
without the use of any means. This is signified by that in the Revelation,
where S. John speaking of the Great City, the holy Jerusalem, he says of it;
And I saw no Temple therein; for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the
Temple of it. And the City had no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine
in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.
Apoc. 21.22, 23. Where 1. when he says, I saw no Temple in it; he gives us to
understand, that in heaven there will be no use of the outward means of
salvation. For if there be no Temple, then there are no priests nor no
preaching, nor no Sacraments, nor no solemn assemblies; for where there is need
of these, there, there is use of a Temple also: In this world, where we are
absent from the Lord, these things are necessary, and by them God communicates
himself to his servants. But in the life to come prophesying shall fail, and
the use of tongues shall cease, and the means of knowledge and instruction
shall vanish away; as the Apostle speaks: 1 Cor. 13.8. 2. When he says,
that this City had no need of the sun, nor of the moon to shine in it; he
implies that the outward means of our natural life should cease. Here in
this world the sun gives us light by day, and the moon by night; and here
meat and drink do nourish us, and clothes keep us warm: but in heaven there
will be no need, nor no use of such things: and The children of this world
marry, and are given in marriage: but they which shall be accounted worthy to
obtain the world to come, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry,
nor are given in marriage, neither die they any more. Luke 20.34. By all which
we learn that all natural means, now used for preservation of man's life,
shall then be at an end. 3. When S. John says, There shall be no Temple in it;
for the Lord God and the Lamb are the Temple of it: and again, There is no
need of the sun, etc. for the glory of God does shine in it, and the Lamb is
the light of it: he gives us the reason, why all outward helps and means are
of no use there. It is not because there is no service of God used there; for
they shall sing praises to him without ceasing: nor it is not, because men
there shall be deprived of life and strength, and vigor; for there they never
dye, nor never hunger, nor never faint: but the reason is, because God and his
Son Christ shall without any means, supply all good things unto them, by
virtue derived immediately from themselves; and that in a more plentiful and
more excellent sort, then all secondary means or causes could do. This also is
further signified by that of the Apostle, where he says that Christ shall
deliver up his kingdom to God. -- and shall himself be subject unto God, that
God may be all in all. 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. that is, Christ shall cease to govern
his Church in that manner of administration that now he uses; and God shall
do all by himself. And by this it appears to be true, which I said in the
second place; that in glory and in the state of heavenly blessedness, we enjoy
God immediately, both in respect of presence and in respect of influence.

C. Thirdly, I say yet further, that this immediate fruition of God supplyeth
unto the Blessed all good things, and expels or drives away all evil. This
the Scripture says also. S. John says of the Saints in heaven, that God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain. Apoc. 21.4.
By this he signifies the removing of all evil, or whatsoever might hurt or
afflict. He goes on: and ver. 6. I (says the great King) will give unto him,
that is a thirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely. He that
overcommeth shall inherit all things: and I will be his God, and he shall be
my son; meaning that he would give him all things necessary for blessedness
and an happy life.

And from hence it follows that in the blessedness of heaven, there is
neither want of good, nor presence of any evil.

And now, these particulars laid together, the sum of them gathered into one,
is, that the true blessedness which is in heaven communicated to the Saints,
is an immediate fruition of God, of and by himself supplying all good things,
and expelling or driving away all evil things. And this may serve for clearing
of the first question.

2. Quest. The second is, why this blessedness is ascribed or appropriated to
the service of God.

Answ. To which question my answer is, blessedness is ascribed to holiness,
or Gods service; partly because holiness is a necessary condition for
qualifying of those persons, which shall enjoy it: and partly, because it is a
kind of cause, that does effect or procure it.

1. It is a necessary condition, etc. for so the Apostle teaches us, when he
says; Without holiness no man shall see the Lord..i. (as before I explained
the word) no man shall enjoy God in his glorious presence. Heb. 12.6. And so S.
John: Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. For without
are sorcerers and whoremongers, and murderers and idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a lie. Apoc. 22.14. In which words; 1. When he says, Blessed
are they that do his commandments, that they may have right, etc. he
intimates that obedience to Gods will is a condition, upon supposall whereof
men may attain this blessedness. And 2. when he says, for without are
sorcerers, etc. He tells us in plain terms, that no wicked man shall ever
enter into heaven.

2. Holiness and Gods service is a kind of cause, that procures this
blessedness for them that serve God. A kind of cause I call it by way of
qualification or diminution; because it is neither any proper efficient cause,
which by virtue in it self may effect it; nor any meritorious cause, which by
its worthiness can deserve it. And yet a cause it is, because it is an outward
object, which moves God for his promise sake, to confer heaven and happiness
upon them that do serve him, and keep his commandments. This the Logicians
call causa procatar^tic^, or a moral cause, which works by way of object:
and I did therefore call it a kind of cause, because I am so warranted by the
Apostle, who speaking of affliction born with patience and obedience to Gods
will, says of it, that it works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. And if patience in affliction do this, no man
may deny the like to all other parts of obedience: and if they may be said to
work for us eternal glory, then no man may hinder me to say, that they are a
kind of cause to procure this glory. I conclude then that Gods service is both
a necessary condition, and a kind of a cause, to procure blessedness: and
therefore to it blessedness is rightly ascribed. And so the second question is
answered.

3. Quest. The third question is, how may men be said to be blessed in this
life, in which we are absent from the Lord, and enjoy him not in such immediate
sort, as has been said.

Answ. I answer, as Cajetan does, [Hic in spe, in futuro in re,] Here we are
blessed in hope, but shall be blessed indeed, in the world to come. For, as the
Apostle says of the heir in his minority, that though he differ nothing from
a servant [in his present condition of subjection] yet he is Lord of all;
because he has the right to all for the present, and shall have the possession
of all, when the full time is come. Gal. 4.1. so, and in the like sense, we who
are subject to many crosses in this life, yet may be said to be blessed,
because now we have a right to that blessed estate, and shall in due time have
the possession of it.

Thus much for this question, as also for the clearing of the whole point.

Use. 1. This serves first to set an edge on our zeal, and to make us in love
with heaven and eternal life, because here are such things as men do desire
and seek after.

1. For first, men desire wealth and lands and abundance of needful and
useful things. The labourer carries heavy burdens, and sweateth under his
labor that he may earne wages; the shopkeeper forbeares meat and drink and
sleep, that he may increase his gain; the Merchant ventureth life and living,
that he may make his stock great: and every man takes pains, and endures
hardness, and undergoeth dangers, that he may become rich, or reap a
plentiful reward, and they do it to obtain a corruptible treasure. But the
blessedness we have spoken of hitherto; has plenty of all good things,
without lack, without measure, without end. The bags here wax not old; the
treasure that is here, cannot be eaten by the mothe, nor stolen by the
thieve, nor wasted by continuance of time: nor can they either be taken from
us, or we from them, by any casualty or mischance. And why then should we
think any pains too great, or any cost too much, or any danger too hard, by
which going on in Gods service, we may obtain such an unvaluable reward? Or if
we shrink at the thought of too much, at least let us do as much for heaven,
as the labourer does for his hire, or as the shopkeeper does for his gain, or
as the Merchant does for his estate. And if we will be Christians, that
profess Gods service to be our trade, and heaven and happiness to be our
reward; let us think it a shame, that they should labor so constantly, and so
chearefully for the commodities of this life, while we grudge at every small
labor in praying, and hearing, and examining the conscience, and mortifying of
our carnal lusts; or while we repine at every small sum bestowed for Gods
service and for setting forth of his praise; or while we pull back and shrink
at every petty loss in our estates, in our credit, in our pleasures and
preferments; seeing by these means we aspire to an incorruptible Crown, to an
inheritance in heaven, and to a kingdom, that cannot be shaken.

2. All men desire and will endure much for freedom from misery and
grievances. We willingly lay our our money, and bestow our labor, that by
providing meat and clothes and maintenance, we may avoid hunger and thirst and
nakedness. And we part with lands and possessions and offices, that we may
redeem our liberty, rather then lie in yrons, or be tied to a Galley. And if
there be any fear of our death by sickness or dangers; then skin for skin,
and all that a man has, will he give for saving of his life.

But now this blessedness of heaven, it has freedom from all evils, and from
all fear of danger. There (as has been said) is no more curse, nor no more
crying, nor no more death or sickness, or sorrow, neither hunger, nor thirst,
nor any thing to disquiet our peace. And for such a blessed and secure state,
if we will not do, what we would do for freedom out of prison, and to redeem
our selves out of slavery, and to recover our selves from the stone or
strangury, from the gout or palsy, or from sickness and death; surely we
both overvalue these transitories, and undervalue heaven and happiness, more
then is tolerable in him who professes himself to be a Christian, and God
Almighty to be his exceeding great reward.

3. Lastly, there is no man but if he ask his own heart, it will tell him, that
happiness is to be desired above all. In all ages there have been great
disputes, and much difference about the matter of happiness; some thinking it
to consist in riches, and others in pleasures, and others in honors and
preferments: but there was never any man, but did think and profess that true
happiness is the summum bonum the greatest good, that any man could have, or
would desire. This is a principle so graffed in nature, that no disputes of
philosophers, nor no differences of opinions could ever root it out. But all
Christians now know, that the true blessedness is in the fruition of God in
glory. And why then should any Christian make more account of the vanities of
the world, then of the happiness of heaven? or why should we stick at any
labor, the fruit whereof will be eternal life? or why should we not desire
heaven, with the loss of all things? with this consideration our Savior
stirred up his disciples to the hardest service: Blessed are they which are
persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Mat.
5.10. And with this consideration S. Paul animated himself to undergo the
greatest dangers; Now behold: (says he) I go bound in the spirit unto
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall there: saving that the holy
Ghost witnesses in every City, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. But
none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so
that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Acts 20.22, 23,
24. And with this consideration August. Soliloque ca. 1 n. 3.
an holy Father of old did encourage himself to pray for death, that he might
the sooner enjoy God in his glory. He bemoned himself that he might not be
admitted to see Gods face; but remembering himself what he had asked, and
calling to mind, that in the like case God answered Moses, Thou can not see
my face: for no man can see me, and live. Exodus 33.20: He replied with great
confidence, why Lord, and is that all, that I cannot see thy face and live? I
pray thee then, E^a Domine: moriar, ut te videam; videam, ut hic moriar. Nolo
vivere, volo mori; dissolvi cupio, and esse cum Christo.
Lord, let me die; that I may see thy face: or, let me see thee, that I may
die in this place. I would not live, I would die, that I might see thee. Thus
holy men of God have been affected, who knew and considered what this
blessedness was. And if we did rightly conceive, what it were to enjoy God in
glory; we would count nothing so dear unto us, as the favor of God in
Christ, nor grudge to be bound in chains for the hope of Israel; and we would
even wish to die presently, so we were sure upon our departure to be with God.
And what then should let us, by an holy life and works of Gods service, to make
our calling and election sure: that whenever our translation shall be (as,
far off to the youngest of us it cannot be;) that then this mortal, may put on
immortality, and we may live with God in glory for ever?

Use 2. This may serve for comfort to all true Christians, who may hereby
understand how blessed their state is. But especially it fitteth them, who
together with a good conscience, do groan under some heavy cross. Our Saviors
instruction in this case to his disciples is, Blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely
for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in
heaven. Mat. 5.11, 12. Consider here, 1. what our Lord exhorts them to,
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, when men shall revile you, etc. 2. Upon what
ground he requires such rejoicing in so heavy a case, it is because they are
now blessed; and yer long shall have a great reward in heaven: Blessed are ye
when men shall revile you, etc. for great is your reward in heaven. And so I
may say to every poor Christian, that had rather have a small estate well
gotten, then by ill means to increase their wealth; Blessed are ye that are
impoverished for Christ's sake: for great is your reward in heaven. And so of
them, that refuse not a nickname or reproach for profession of the truth;
Blessed are ye that are reproached for Christ's sake: for great is your reward
in heaven. And to them who had rather lose a preferment, or a great friend,
then offend God and a good conscience; Blessed are ye that are stripped of your
friends and means for Christ's sake: for great, etc. And to them that had rather
endure sickness and death, then seek to wisards, and soothsayers for recovery
of health; Blessed are ye that are tortured with sickness and diseases for
Christ's sake: for great, etc. And so I would say (as by the like reason I may
say) of all others who prefer the peace of their consciences before the profits
and comforts of the world; They are blessed even while they are distressed for
Christ's sake; for great is their reward in heaven. And this, how should is
comfort all disconsolate souls, who in the midst of troubles serve God without
fainting? A learned and holy man of God, when a friend of his was pained with a
grievous sickness, wrote to comfort him in these words; A letter written to
ones friend in his sickness: in the midst of Master Smiths Sermons.
I marvel not, said he, that you are pained; for you are sick: but I marvel
that you are impatient, who have learned to know Christ and to profess his
Gospel. For, tell me, Patient (said he) how many stripes is heaven worth? And
then turning his speech unto God, he prays, Teach the Happy, O Lord, to see
his happiness through troubles. Thus he comforted his sick friend: and thus
every Christian that desires to serve God, may comfort himself, in sickness,
and travells, and troubles: let him but think, how much heaven is worth, toward
which he is sailing in this tempest; and it will glad his soul in the midst of
his greatest agonies. God give us grace to make use of such comforts, that in
the end we may partake of his glory.

CAP. V.
Gods word has virtue in it to make a man blessed.



1. By Testimonies of Scriptures; such as these are. S. John says of his
Gospel; These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the son of God; and that believing, ye might have life through his
name. Ioh. 20.31. In these words S. John tells us, that he wrote his Gospel
for this end, that men by it might be brought to believe in Christ, and to be
saved. And from hence it follows, that either the holy Ghost propounded to
himself a wrong end in delivering this Gospel (which no Christian dares
imagine;) or else that this Gospel has virtue in it to bring men to salvation.
Again, S. Paul says of the Gospel of Christ, that it is the power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes. Romans 1.16. And S. James exhorts,
Receive with meekness the ingraffed word which is able to save your souls.
James 1.21. And our Savior to the like purpose, Search the Scriptures, (says
he) for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they, that
testify of me. In all which sayings there is a saving virtue ascribed unto the
Scriptures: and in this last, is intimated unto us, that it was the known
opinion of Gods people in those days. Ye think, in them ye have eternal
life, says Christ. It is as if he had said, not I only, but your selves also
do agree, that eternal life is to be found in the Scriptures: and therefore
there is reason ye should search them.

2. The same truth may be gathered from the Titles, which are given to Gods
word. It is called the Gospel of the Grace of God. Acts 20.24. and the Gospel
of the Kingdom. Mat. 4.23. and the Gospel of salvation. Ephesians. 1.13. Implying
that the grace of God, and the Kingdom of heaven, and salvation is there to be
found, and from thence to be derived. Again, it is called the word of Gods
grace. Acts 14.3. and, the word of reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.19. and the word of
salvation. Acts 13.26. and 1 Pet. 1.23. the immortal seed, by which we are
new born. All which names and titles given to the word, what do they else
import, but that therein there is means contained to work grace and
reconciliation and eternal life?

This is proof enough for the point: yet it will be worth the labor to
consider how Gods word may be said to contain this virtue, and wherein it
shows it self. And thereto the answer is, that this virtue of Gods word
shows it self by three things: 1. By teaching the ready way to blessedness.
2. By persuading men to walk in that way. And 3. by enabling them with grace
both to believe what it teaches, and to do what it persuades.

I. It teaches the right way; or, it teaches what to believe, how to live,
and by what means we may be saved. So S. Paul says of this word, that it is
able to make one wise to salvation through faith in Christ Jesus: and that it
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. In these words we have three things to be
noted for this purpose. First, there is the main scope and end, for which the
Scripture serves: namely, to make one wise to salvation. Secondly, there are
the particular uses of this word, by which it makes men wise to salvation: and
they be these; first it is profitable for doctrine, to teach whatsoever we
need to believe. Secondly, for reproof; or, to confute and detect all
contrary errors, that gainsay the doctrine of truth. Thirdly, for correction,
or to reprove all sins that are against Gods will, manifested in his word.
Fourthly, for instruction in righteousness, or to inform us in every duty
belonging to our callings. In sum, it teaches the truth, which we ought to
believe, and the duties that we must perform, with conviction and confutation
of whatsoever is contrary to either of these two: so that we may neither be
misled with any error against the faith, nor misperswaded to any sin against
Gods Law. These be uses for which the Scripture is profitable. Thirdly, there
is the sufficiency or ability which men gain by these uses; and that is, that
the Man of God, even he that is bound to know, and do most, may want no
direction, that may serve either for instructing of his faith, or ordering of
his life. Now by all this we have a punctual and plentiful description of the
doctrinall virtue contained in Gods word. If any desire further consent of
other Scriptures, he may take that of David, Thy word is a lantern to my
feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119 105. and that of Solomon, All the
words of my mouth are in righteousness: there is nothing froward or perverse
in them: and that of Isay, To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Isay 8.20. and
that of our Savior, Do not ye err, because ye know not the Scriptures? Mar.
12.24. By all which, as by other like places of Scripture, it is clear, that
the Scriptures show the right way, and the ignorance of Scriptures is the cause
that men err and go astray out of the way.

II. Secondly, the word of God contains blessedness in it, because it
affords arguments of persuasion, and by them does win our assent to walk in
that way. And that it does 3. ways; 1. By loving invitations, such as these
are; I beseech you by the mercifulnes of God, etc. Romans 12.1. and God does
beseech you by us, and We pray you in Christ's stead, Be ye reconciled unto
God. 2 Cor. 5.20. 2 It persuades by gracious promises of much good to be
obtained; such as these are; Keep sound wisdom and discretion. So shall they
be life unto thy soul, and grace unto thy neck. When thou lie down, thou
shall not be afraid: Yea, thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked when it
comes. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from
being taken. Prove. 3.21. etc. and such is that of Moses: Blessed shall thou be
in the City and in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, etc.
Deuteronomy. 28.2. etc. and that of our Savior; There is no man, that has left
house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands for my sake and the Gospels: but he shall receive an hundred fold now in
this time, houses and brethren, etc. and in the world to come eternal life.
Mar. 10.29, 30. 3. It persuades by threatening of plagues and punishments
against all disobedience and sin, such as these are; If thou shall corrupt thy
self, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, etc. I call heaven
and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish
from off the land, whereunto ye go to possess it. Deuteronomy. 4.26. and that of
the Apostle, God will take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. 2 These. 1.8, 9. and that of our Savior at the last judgment; Then
shall he say to them on the left hand, depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41.

These and such like be the arguments of persuasion which the Scriptures use
to keep us in the way of righteousness, and to bring us to eternal life. And
he that has the heart of a man in him, and is not moved with such reasons;
has in the shape of a man cast off all humanity and reason. If entreaties by
the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, move us not, we are more unthankful then
many bruites be, which attend on their Masters, by whom they are fed. If
promises of rewards and happiness do not move us, we may be thought insensible
sensible of our own welfare. And if punishments and plagues, especially the
worm that dies not, and the fire that never is quenched, if these move us
not, how far short do we come of the wisdom that is in the dog and the
horse, and the ass, all which are forced to obedience by the rod, and the
spur and the whip, even when they are but threatened against them. And
consequently, if these many forcible persuasions contained in Gods word, do not
work with us to the obedience of Gods will, the complaint will be just
against us, that was used against the Jews; What could have been done more in
my vineyard, that I have not done it it? Wherefore, when I looked, that it
should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Is. 5.4.

III. Thirdly, there is a virtue of blessedness in Gods word, because where it
is preached, it brings with it that grace of God, which being entertained by
us, does enable us both to believe what it teaches, and to perform what it
persuades unto. The proofs of this point are gathered to my hands, by our
learned Divines of great Britain, who were a chief part of the Dort-Councell.
And as they have set them down, so I shall relate them from their pen. Suffr.
de 2. art. thesi 5. page 30.
They having said two things in their position, 1. that together with the
preaching of the Gospel some measure of grace is offered. 2. that it is so
much as may convince men of contempt or negligence, if they be not reformed by
it; they add for proof of the former, that it is plain out of Scriptures: and
from thence they allege, Isa. 59. ult. This is my covenant with them, says
the Lord; My spirit, that is upon thee, and my words that I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth from henceforth and for evermore. Upon
which words they comment to this purpose, Hinc patet, From hence it is plain,
that the Word and the Spirit, are Individuo nexu.
inseparably, by Gods promise, joined together in the ministry of the word.
And from hence, say they, the ministers of the new Testament, are called the
ministers not of the letter, but of the spirit, not of the killing letter, but
of the quickening spirit. 2 Cor. 3.6. And the ministry of the Gospel is called
the ministration of the spirit, v. 8. Hence also the Gospel is called Grace
that brings salvation. Tit. 2.11. and the word of reconciliation. 2 Cor.
5.19. And Luke 10.9, 11. When Christ sent his seventie disciples to preach the
Gospel, he commanded them to say to their hearers; The Kingdom of God is come
nigh unto you; doubtless, because supernatural grace was administered to those
men, to whom the Gospel was preached. Again, for proof of the 2. point, that
there is so much grace offered, as may convince them of contempt, who do not
believe and obey; the same learned men allege that of our Savior, Ioh. 15.22.
If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they
have no cloak for their sin. From this place it is plain, say they, that
Christ in propounding of the Gospel, did also administer that internal grace,
which was thus far sufficient, that because they did not accept but reject the
Gospel, they might be convinced of positive infidelity They add that also, Ioh.
3.19 This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world and men loved
darkness rather then light. Men therefore are justly damned for rejecting the
light of the Gospel. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? for neglecting salvation offered in the Gospel, (as they comment
upon the words) we become guilty of just punishment. Therefore salvation is
offered in the Gospel. These with some more, be the proofs brought by these
learned men. And they plainly prove, that God does accompany the preaching of
his word with the assistance and grace of his Spirit; that men, who hear the
word, if themselves be not in fault, do receive from God, both to believe and
obey it.

Now lay these things together, first, that the word of God does teach the
right way to blessedness; then that it uses powerful persuasions to incite us
on in this way; and lastly, that it brings with it that grace of God which
may carry us along to our journeys end: and then the conclusion will easily
result from them, that therefore Gods word has much virtue in it, and that
which is sufficient to make us eternally happy.

Use 1. This condemns them of folly, who leave Gods word, and seek other
directions to eternal life. Such were the Jews of old, and such have been
some ignorant papists in our time. What our vulgar papists are used to say for
proof of the true religion; they that have lived among them, do sufficiently
know: and what the Jews said in former times, Jeremy has told us at large,
chap. 44. And whosoever shall attentively consider his words will easily see, how
like our papists are to those Jews. The words of the Prophet are, Then all the
men, which knew that their wives had burnt incense unto other Gods, and all the
women that stood by -- answered Jeremiah, saying; As for the word, which thou
have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But
we will certainly do whatsoeever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, to
burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto
her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the
cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of
victuals and were well, and saw no evil. But since we left off to burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we
have wanted all things, and have been, consumed by the sword and by the
famine. Ier. 44.15. etc. In this passage of the Prophet there are 2. things set
down, the resolution of this people, and their reason for it. Their resolution
was, that they would not hearken to the word which the Prophet had spoken in
the name of the Lord: but they would do what they did do, that is, they would
burn incense to the Queen of heaven, etc. And the like is the resolution of
some seely people. Say what you will, or what you can out of Scriptures, they
care not for it: but they will do, what they are wont to do; that is, they
will pray in a tongue, whereof they understand never a word; they will worship
Saints and Images, though they know not why; and they will rest their faith on
the Popes dictats, though they can say nothing why he may not misleade them.
But this they do, and this they will do. This is their resolution. Secondly,
we may consider their reason, why they were so wilful, and that is twofold;
1. because they and their fathers had been accustomed to do so heretofore. As
we have done; we and our fathers, etc. and so our poor ignorant people; This
is the religion, wherein I was borne and bred; and therein will I dye. Thus my
father and grandfather believed before I was born; and I will follow them, who
have gone before me. The second reason, why they would continue in their
resolution is, because when they lived in that faith, they had plenty of
victuals and store of all things; but after they left their sacrificing to
Idols, they had scarsitie, and misery and want. Then say they, we had plenty
of victuals, etc. And so are our seely ones wont to dispute. Oh, say they,
when the old religion was on foot, then we had so many eggs for a penny, and so
much provision at a small price, and poor men were able to live by their
labors: but since Calvin and Luther began to reform, we have scarsitie and
dearth, and it is a hard world, to live in. Thus our people are wont to reason,
for their old superstitions and errors: and they speak so right in the very
phrase and words of the idolatrous Jews, that I might have thought they had
borrowed their discourse out of Jeremy, but that I know it is not their custom
to read so much in the Bible: that they leave to these new men, accounting it
as the book of Heretics, and Novelists. A Ladies Psalter likes them better
for a prayer book then David's Psalms, and a festival or Legend they esteem
a better book for instruction, then the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.
But now, if Gods word do teach the right way to heaven; I pray you, in what way
are they who leave Gods word to be guided by such fancies and fables? Let
Jeremy be the judge: Then Jeremy said to the men, and to the women -- who had
given him this answer, The incense, which ye burnt in the cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers -- did not the Lord
remember them, and came it not into his mind: so that the Lord could no longer
bear, because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations,
which ye have committed? Therefore is your land a desolation and an
astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day. Because ye
have burnt incense, and because ye have sinned, etc. Therefore this evil is
happened unto you. Ier. 44.20, etc. In which answer we may consider, and it is
worth the noting, that their burning of incense, to the Queen of heaven, and
their pouring out of drink offerings unto her, which they thought was the true
worship, and said it was the only cause of their plenty of victuals and of
all good things; was in very deed an abomination to God, which he could no
longer bear, and the true cause of the desolation and curse that was come upon
them. And so, when our ignorant people say, that the reformed religion is the
cause of scarsity and want, and that while they worshipped their images and
Saints, there was plenty and store: we may answer them according to the
tenor of the Prophets words; Nay rather, your superstitions, in burning incense
to the Queen of heaven, as they did; and your wilfulness in refusing the
truth, when it is brought unto you, as they also did; these and such like
abominations are the cause, that ye, and we for your sakes, do suffer at Gods
hands; as they did in the case before us. But as for such as know and serve God
better, and acknowledge Gods word to teach the right way: if any dorrell shall
tell them of cheapnesse of victuals, and example of forefathers, and their
own idle customs, as rules to guide their faith by; let them answer them in
the wise man's words, Say not thou, what is the cause, that the former days
were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.
Eccl. 7.10. Or else, let them return such men an answer out of the Prophet, To
the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. Isa. 8.20. And so I leave their error; and
come to say some thing of our own failings.

Use 2. Secondly then, if Gods word have such virtue in it, both to persuade
and enable us to Gods service; we may hence take notice of our great
negligence, who having had so long use of this word, have profited so little by
it. For, if a child have good and wholesome meat, and yet do not thrive, nor
grow by it; ye will say, and ye have great cause to say, that he is out of
temper, and somewhat is amiss with him. And if a sick man have good and
sovereign medicines given him, and yet is not purged, nor eased by them; ye
will say that either nature is much decayed in her strength, or much oppressed
by bad humors. And so seeing Gods word has in it such virtue toward
godliness and a happy life; if we, after long use of it, are not bettered in
our knowledge of God, and increased in our obedience to his Laws, and some way
or other furthered toward heaven and happiness, it is an evident sign that
grace is decayed in us, and sin has gotten the upper hand. And yet so it
falls out many times among Christians. The Hebrews were dull of hearing, and
when for the time they might have been teachers, yet they had need that one
should teach them again, which were the first principles of the oracles of
God. Heb. 5.11, 12. And is it not so with a great many of us? Are there not men
and women, who after many years teaching, have gained no great measure of true
learning? If by the Catechismes they have been taught, and by the Sermons that
they have heard, and by the Scriptures and other books which they have read,
they had learned but every week, nay every month, one only good lesson,
appertaining to godliness, they might by this time have proved skillful
Casuists in matters of conscience. But this is not so great a defect as that
which follows. Our knowledge is much more better then our practice. God
complained of his vineyard (and that vineyard was the house of Israel) that
after much care and pains bestowed in the dressing, in steed of good grapes,
which were rightly expected from it, it brought forth wild grapes. Isa. 5.4.
The meaning is, as the Prophet expounds it v. 7. He looked for judgment, and
behold oppression, and for righteousness, but behold a cry; even a cry for
wrongs and oppressions, and injuries done to their neighbors. And now a days,
may not God complain of us in like manner? There was never more dressing of
Gods Vineyard, then now there is: more instructions to teach the way of
blessedness, more exhortations to lay hold upon eternal life, or more
threatenings to deter men from sin. But may not God say now after all this,
I looked for grapes, fruits of righteousness and holiness and of a sober
life: but I find wild grapes, of lying, and of cousening, and of oppressing,
and of slandering, and of surfeiting, and drunkenness, and of new fantastic
fashions. And if these be the fruits of our hearing and reading and professing;
we may fear, lest that threatening may be ours also; This will I do to my
vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and
break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. And I will lay it
waste: it shall not be pruned, nor dug, but there shall come up briars and
thorns. I will also command the clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. ver.
5. and 6. He means that after so much labor lost, he would take away the
means of grace, and leave them to themselves; which is a fearful judgment,
not to be thought on, without trembling. It will be our wisdom then to look
every one into his own garden, and see what fruits he finds there. If we
find there any grapes of gall, or vine-sets of Sodom; or if our wine prove the
poison of dragons or the venom of aspes: it will be high time to take the
pruning knife, and cut off these wild branches, that bear such bad fruits,
or rather to take the pick axe and the mattock and to grub up the plants, on
whose roots they grow: that we may be trees of righteousness, bringing forth
fruits answerable to the labor bestowed upon us.

Use 3. If there be such virtue in Gods word to make a man blessed, we should
learn to esteem it as our happiness, when we do enjoy it. So David did, I
rejoice for thy word, (says he) as one that finds great spoils. Psalm.
119.162. On which words a good writer gives us this note, that David compares
the enjoying of Gods word to the getting of great spoils, rather then to the
having of any other riches, because spoils taken from enemies do not only
enable men with wealth, but honor them also with triumphs of victory. And so
we should esteem of the word of Gods grace, as a treasure that does far
exceed both riches and whatsoever else that cannot bring us to heaven and
happiness.

And from this esteem we may learn three duties;

1. To praise God, that has given us such a treasure. So David did; In a
Psalm of his, which was framed for a form of thanksgiving to God, and
therefore he both begins it and ends it with, Praise ye the Lord: in this
Psalm. he reckons this as a chief mercy for which he gives God thanks, that
he showed his word unto Jacob; his statutes, and his judgments unto Israel. Ps.
147.19. And so we should reckon it, as one of Gods rich mercies toward us,
that we have such plenty of his word, that may bring us to blessedness and
eternal life: and in remembrance hereof both begin our morning and shut up our
evening, as David began and ended his Psalm, with Praise we the Lord.

2. We may learn, to use all good means to get this treasure into our own
possession, that the word of Christ may dwell in us richly in all wisdom, as
the Apostle speaks Coloss. 3.16. Solomon's counsel for attaining this
wisdom, is that we seek for it, as for silver; and search for it, as for hid
treasure. Prove. 2.4. He intimates in this speech, that if any of us did know,
that there were a mine of gold to be found by seeking, we would be glad it
were in our own ground, we would moreover dig the earth and hew the rocks,
and draine the marshes, that nothing might hinder our obtaining of that
treasure. And in such manner would Solomon have us to labor for the knowledge
of God, that lies hid in his word. Young people should desire to be
catechized, old people to be further instructed, and all both young and old
should willingly undergo that pains what ever it be, that may open the Mine,
and bring us to the sight and possession of this treasure.

3. If there be any of us who have children, whose happiness we do desire;
we learn from hence to lay the foundation thereof, in the knowledge of Gods
word. Moses commanded parents, that they should teach their children upon every
occasion, and acquaint them with Gods word and his commandments; promising
them that then their days, and the days of their children, should be
multiplied in the land -- as the days of heaven, Deuteronomy. 11.19, 21. And so if ye
would leave a good portion indeed for your children, and provide that they may
live long upon earth, and eternally in heaven: catechize them in the principles
of Gods word, sow the seeds of godliness in their tender minds, and teach
them how to follow the directions of Gods Law; and this will give them
instructions to know the right way, and will follow them with exhortations to
go on in the way, and will never leave them, till it give them possession of
heaven and eternal glory.

CAP. VI.
Hearing of Gods word Read, is a means of blessedness.

Blessed, says he, are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

I begin with hearing, and hereof, there are two kinds mentioned in Scripture;
an hearing of the word read, as it is delivered in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles; and an hearing of the word preached, as it is unfolded and
applied by the ordinary Minister, sent of God, for that purpose. Of both these
it is true, that they are means, by which the blessedness of Gods word may be
conveyed unto us, and therefore both are necessary to be considered in their
place and order.

First then I say, that hearing of the word read out of the Scriptures, is a
means to make a man blessed, or to communicate blessedness unto him.

I. This is proved first by Testimonies of Scriptures: I will insist only upon
two.

1. The first is, that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The words are;
Moses wrote this Law, and delivered it to the Priests, the sons of Levi; --
And commanded them saying, At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity
of the year of Release, in the feast of Tabernacles; When all Israel is come
to appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose: Thou
shall read this Law before all Israel in their hearing. Gather the people
together, men and women and children, and the stranger that it within thy
gates; that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your
God, and observe to do all the words of this Law: and that their children,
which have not known any thing, may hear and learn to fear the Lord your
God, as long as ye live in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
In these words we may note for this purpose these things: 1. what Moses did:
and that is (1.) he wrote this Law, to wit that which God had delivered unto
him for the instruction of his people: and (2.) he delivered it to the Priests,
that it might be for the use of the Church. And this shows that the law
whereof Moses speaks, was the written word of God committed to the Church. 2.
We may consider what Moses commanded the Priests to do: and that is, that
they should read this Law to the people. And this is illustrated and amplified
by 3. things: (1.) by the solemnity of the time, when it should be read, to
wit in the great feast of Tabernacles, when all Israel were to be present.
(2.) By the universality of the persons, in whose hearing it should be read;
and they are specified to be men, women, and children, as well strangers as
natives. (3.) Why, or for what end the Law was to be read to all these sorts
of men, gathered in such multitudes. And the ends are diverse one subordinat to
an other, each former serving as a means for that which comes after, and all
of them tending and conducing to an happy life: the first is that they might
hear it, the next, that by hearing they might learn it; and the last that by
hearing and learning, they might be brought to fear God, and observe and do
all the words of that Law. Now lay these together that Moses wrote this Law,
and the Priests read this Law, and the people, all of them, heard this Law
written and read unto them, by Gods appointment; and all this, for this end and
purpose, that the people might fear God and keep his commandments; and they
plainly prove that the hearing of the word written and read, is an approved
means to an holy, and consequently to an happy life also. For he that so
hears the word, that he is a doer of the work, is blessed in his deed. Iam.
1.25.

2. The second testimony is that of the Prophet Ier. 36.5, 6, 7. Ierem.
commanded Baruch saying, I am shutt up; I cannot go into the house of the
Lord. Therefore go thou, and read in the Roll, which thou have written from
my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people, in the Lords house,
upon the fasting day: and also thou shall read them in the ears of all Judah,
that come out of their cities. It may be, they will present their supplication
before the Lord; and will return every one, from his evil way. In this
passage when it is said, that Jeremy being restrained that himself could not
preach, did therefore command Baruch (and that by Gods appointment as appears
verse. 2, 3.) to read Ieremies words in a written Roll; this shows both that
the people did hear the word written, and that it was a duty of consequence
and moment. And secondly, when he says, It may be, they will present their
supplication, and return: -- this implies, that though there might be some
doubt of the success, because of the obstinacy of the people; Yet this was a
likely way, and God made choice of it for that purpose, that they might relent,
and repent, and amend their evil ways, and obtain pardon, as is more
plainly signified v. 3. And this again proves, that the hearing of the word,
is a means to reclaim men from sin, and to procure their pardon; and
consequently to make them blessed. For blessed is he (says David) whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Psalm. 32.1. And thus
much for Testimonies.

II. Secondly, the same truth is proved by the constant practice and custom of
Gods Church, who from time to time have still caused the Scriptures to be read
to the people, according as was prescribed by Moses in the Law. So for example,
Moses who wrote that Law for others, did observe it himself. He took the
book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: as himself
says, Exodus 24.7. Joshua did the like: He read all the words of the Law, the
blessings and the cursings, according to all that is written in the book of
the Law. There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read
not before all the Congregation of Israel, with the women and the little ones,
and the strangers that were conversant among them. Josh. 8.34, 35. And in the
new Testament it is further said, that Moses was read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day. Act. 15.21. and chap. 13.27. the like is said of the Prophets,
that they were read every Sabbath day: and v. 15. there is mention made of
reading both of them together. After the reading of the Law and the Prophets,
the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them (to wit to Paul, and his fellows,
being now present at their service in the Synagogue; as it is verse. 14.) and
invited them to use some exhortation unto the people. By which passage it
appears to have been the usual custom of that Church, that both that Law of
Moses and the writings of the Prophets were read to the people for their
instruction. Which custom the Buxtorf. de Abbrev. Hebr. tit. de Paraschis.
page 249. Jo. Gerhard. Epist. dedic. praefixa^ homiliis dominical. Sera^. in
Maccab. page 613, 614. Lor^n. in Deuter. 31.10, 11, 12, 13.
learned tell us was observed in this manner. The Law, that is the five books of
Moses they divided into 53. Sections, and every week they read one of them for
the first lesson; that so once a year they might read it all over. And out of
the Prophets they gathered as many Sections, which were of like argument to
those of the Law, and those they read as second lessons answerable in matter to
the former. These Sections and lessons both in the Law and the Prophets are
distinguished and noted out in the Hebrew Bible, by which every one may see,
what portions of the Bible were read every Sabbath to the people. The like
custom has been observed in the Christian Churches also. Cassian Institut.
li. 2. c. 6. and Gaz. ibid.
Cassian tells us that in those ancient times, the Religious Fathers, after
the reading of the Psalms did add geminas Lectiones, unam veteris, and aliam
novi Testamenti, 2. Lessons, one out of the old, and an other out of the new
Testament. By which words we may learn, that the custom now used in our
Chur^hes, was begun in the time of the primitive Church; only with this
difference, that whereas we now a days do constantly read our lessons, one
out of the old and an other out of the new; they on the Saterdaies and
Sundaies (for in those old times, they kept both of them as holy days;)
appointed and read both the lessons out of the new Testament. By all which it
appears that the Church of God in all ages have still been accustomed to
read the Text of the Scriptures to the people: the reason cannot be imagined
to be any other, then this, that the people by hearing the Scriptures read
might learn to serve God aright, and by his service might obtain eternal
life. And this proves, that in all ages, the hearing of the Scriptures read
has been esteemed as an ordinary way to blessedness and immortal life.

III. Thirdly, this point may further be proved, and made more clear by
considering the benefits and helps that a good Christian may reap by hearing
the word read. And they be these and such like.

1. It serves to acquaint the people of God with the history of the Chuch, and
Gods dealing with it. For example, they may hear in the old Testament how God
created the world, punished Adam and Eve for their disobedience, drowned the
whole world for their overflowing sins, excepting Noah and his househould, whom
he had found upright in that wicked generation: how he destroyed Sodom and
Gomorrah with fire and brimstone from heaven, delivered the people of Israel
out of the hand of the Egyptians, led them through a vaste wilderness into a
fruitful land, dried up the river Jordan and the red Sea, to make a passage
for his chosen ones; with many mo such occurrences, which each one may learn by
the hearing of the Text read, and by them may understand the goodness of God,
the ingratitude of most men, and the duty of all; with many others points of
instructions conducing toward a blessed life. Again, in the new Testament, if
men hear the first chapters of S. Matthew read they will learn, that CHRIST
our LORD was borne of a Virgin, persecuted by Herod, honored by the wise men,
and miraculously preserved against those that sought his life. If they proceed
further to the following chapters, there they will hear, what miracles our
Lord wrought, what doctrines of religion he taught, what tentations he endured,
and how he lived from the Cradle to the Cross. And if they continue their
hearing till the end of the Gospel be finished, they may acquaint themselves
with the manner of his Passion, and his Burial, and his Resurrection, and his
Ascension into heaven: all maine points of the Christian Faith, and such as
every one ought to believe for the saving of his soul. And yet further, by
hearing the history of the Acts, and the Epistles of the Apostles, they may
see, how the Apostles preached to the Gentiles, planted the Churches, healed
the sick, converted the Nations, and suffered great wrongs for their masters
sake. The knowledge of all which, will both guide us in the way to heaven, and
spur us forward, to go on toward eternal life. For as David, after he had
rehearsed Gods dealings with the ancient Fathers, concludes in the end of all,
Whosoever is wise and will observe these things; they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord. Ps. 107.43: So may I say of these and the like passages
in Gods word, that whosoever is wise, and when he has heard them, will consider
them; they shall understand the wisdom, and power, and goodness and
providence of God in the ordering of his Church, together with his justice and
severitie against all them, that would not be reclaimed and amended; and hereby
receive instruction for their own souls.

2. Secondly, the hearing of the Scriptures read, may serve to teach us many
necessary duties of piety and an holy life. Every one of us may learn somewhat
hereby, that may direct us how to serve God, how to honor our Superiors, how
to govern our inferiors, and how to behave our selves toward all men. For
though the full and distinct unfolding of these points be left to the learned
preacher, who is therefore brought up in Scholasticall studies, that he may be
able to instruct the people in the sense of Scriptures and in the duties of
their calling, more perfectly then they could possibly learn by their own
industry; Yet even of them selves, by hearing the word read, with attention,
they may understand a good part of their duty both toward GOD and men. For
who is there even among the meanest Christians, but if he hear the 20. chapter
of Exodus read, will presently resolve with himself, that he is bound to
reverence his parents, not to kill or strike his neighbor, not to wrong him in
his wife, in his goods, or in his good name? Or, who that shall hear the 13.
chapter to the Romans read, but will presently conceive that it is his duty to
obey the Magistrate? Or, if he hear the 5. and 6. chapters to the Ephesians,
but will know by the very words, that he is bound to do faithful service to
his master, if he be a servant; to be kind to his wife, if he be a married
man; and dutiful to his parents, if he be a child that is under government,
and careful for the education of his children, if he be a father of sons or
daughters? And the like may be said of other the like cases. All which show,
that the hearing of Scriptures read may avail a man much to the leading of an
holy life. The further illustration whereof may be had out of some few
examples. First then, Athanasius an ancient Doctor of the Church, Athanas. in
vita S. Antonii page 445.
tells of S. Antonie, that having first revolved in his mind, how the
Apostles forsook all and followed CHRIST, he came into the Church and in the
Gospel which was then read, he heard the saying of our Savior to the young
rich man, If thou will be perfect, sell all that thou have, and give to the
poor, and come and follow me: and thou shall have treasure in heaven. Matt.
1921. And as soon, as he had heard that sentence, he went home and sold his
possessions, and gave them to the poor, and leaving all further care of the
world, he betook himself wholly to a devout life. Secondly, August. Confess.
lib. 8 cap. 12. page 37.
S. Augustine tells of himself, that having heard of this story of saint
Antonie, how he by hearing the Gospel read was converted to God; he in
imitation of this holy man, took up the book that lay by, to read, (for
hearing of Gods word read, and reading of it, do not much differ in this
respect;) and opening the book at all adventure, he read what first came to
hand, and that was the saying of the Apostle, Let us walk honestly, as in the
day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying, etc. Romans 13.13. Part of which words did so strike his
heart, that he presently forsook his loose life, and betook himself to Gods
service. Thirdly, the book of God it self tells us, that Josias having
heard the words of the Law read, which threatened judgment against such sins,
as were then too common among them; He humbled himself, and rent his clothes,
and wept before the Lord, and caused the book to be read in the audience of
the people: and both he and they moved by the hearing of the book read made a
covenant with the Lord for conversion and amendment of life; as is recorded in
the 2. book of Kings, in the end of the 22. and in the beginning of the 23.
chapter. By these examples we learn, that if men come to the hearing of the
word read, with honest and teacheable hearts, as these good men d d, they may
hear that by the sole reading of the text, by which they may be brought to
repentance for their sins, and a careful and devout service of the Lord their
God, as these holy men were before them.

3. Thirdly, the hearing of the word read (if it be heard with attention and
reverence, as it always should) will prepare and fit peoples minds for a
profitable hearing of Sermons. For when the Preacher in handling any point,
shall allege the Text; he that has been an attentive hearer of the word
read, and has imprinted the sayings of Scripture in his mind; will remember
and acknowledge the words, as they are cited and explained: and hereby he will
gain these helps toward a godly life. 1. He will learn the sense and
meaning of hard places, if any be expounded, and unfolded by the Preacher,
which himself understood not before. 2. he will be able, as his mind goes
along with the preachers words, in part to judge of the truth and soundness of
his allegations; and afterward more fully and exactly to examine the things
that were spoken, as the Bereans examined S. Paul's doctrine whether those
things were so, as he had said. And lastly, he will be enabled to remember
every thing that is said, the better; a good part of the Sermon being settled in
his memory by his former reading, and the rest having near coherence with it,
and dependence on it. And he that is furnished with these abilities, will
easily profit by all that the preacher teaches. But contrariewise, he that
hears Texts alleged in a Sermon, which he had never heard of before, can
neither judge of the sense, that is put upon them, nor understand the sequels
that are deduced from them, nor remember to any purpose what has been
alleged out of them. I conclude then, that he who will profit by the word
preached; must not neglect to hear the word read, that he may imprint the
sentences of the Scripture in his mind.

4. Fourthly, by hearing the word read though sometimes we understand not the
meaning, yet we may at least fasten the words in our memories: and if we carry
away but the words and phrases only, we may thereby be occasioned to ask
direction from others, who understa^d them better. The Eunuch, when he read the
Prophecy of Isai, understood it not: but was hereby moved to enquire of the
meaning of the Text. I pray thee, (says he) of whom speaks the Prophet this?
of himself or of some other man? Act. 8.34. And upon this occasion, Philip
explained him the text, preached unto him the Gospel of Christ, and converted
him unto the faith, and brought him by baptism into the bosom of the Church.
And so it will be with us. If when we hear the Text read, we meet with some
thing, which we understand not, yet even, that, if we do but carry away the
words only, will lie by us, till we meet with some more skilful then our
selves, and of whom we may ask, as the Eunuch did of Philip; I pray you, Sir,
of whom is this spoken, or whereof is it meant, or how is it to be accorded
with this or that Text which seem to say the contrary. And by this practice if
we use it accordingly, we shall every day gain somewhat for our furtherance in
grace. We shall either increase our knowledge, or amend our life's or prevent
some objections; or one thing or other we shall gain by it, that may do us
good toward salvation.

Use 1. This first of all confuteth the practice of the Roman Church; who, when
they read the Scriptures, do it in such a sort, as frustrateth the end that
God aimed at in the reading of them; and depriveth the people of that profit,
which they should reap by their hearing. For they read it in unknowen tongue:
and a language not understood by the hearers, is not for edification; Genesis
11.7, 8.
no, not of Babel it self. For I pray, how can it possibly be, that men should
learn by that writing, whose words they understand not? when Moses commanded
the Priests to read the Law to the people, Deuteronomy. 31.9, etc.
as in the place of Deuter. before mentioned he did; suppose he had spoken in
this manner unto them, (which is the resultance of the Romish practice and
doctrine;) Ye shall read all this Law in a strange language, in Latin or
Arabic, or some such other tongue unknowen to the Jews; that they may hear
it, and by it learn to fear God, and keep his commandments: how ridiculous
and foolish would the speech have been? Surely, S. Paul did think, that if an
unbeleever should come into a Christian Church, and hear the Doctors speaking
in a tongue unknowen to the people, he would think them no better then madd
men. 1 Cor. 14.23. Nor would any of us think him to be well in his wits, that
should read unto a plain Englishman, a Latin, Greek or Hebrew book, and in a
serious sort bid him to hearken and attend what that book did speak for his
instruction and comfort. Yea, and they of the Church of Rome themselves, when
they read to the people such things, as they care for, and would have men to
know and observe, then they speak to them in their mother tongue. Their
Festival and their Legend, they have been accustomed to read in the Church,
in the known language of our country: Yea and at this time, though they
administer the Sacrament of Baptism in the Latin tongue, as all their other
Service is; yet when they give order to bring back the Chrisome, to the Church,
and to keep the child from bodily harm, they break off their sacred language
and speak to the people in their own mother tongue. Godfathers and Godmothers
of this child Manna. Sacerd. de Baptis. page 38.
(say they) we charge you, that ye charge the father and mother, to keep it
from fire and water; and other perils to the age of seven years, etc. and
that the mother bring again the Chrisome at her purification. Now I would
gladly hear from any learned Papist, why Latin should not as well teach them
to bring again the Chrisome, as it can teach them to serve God in the duties
of piety, or to help their neighbors by the duties of mutual love and
charity. Or, if they think it behoovefull for the people to have these rules
of theirs propounded to them in the English and known tongue; why they should
not think it better and more availeable for them, to deliver the rules of Gods
word unto them in the like intelligible sort, then in a foreine language.
Surely, if a peevish humor to maintain all abuses of their Church were laid
aside, the point would need no long disputing.

Use 2. This also confuteth the folly of Separatists and fantastic zelots
among us, who vilify and contemn the reading of Scriptures, in the Church,
and by consequence the hearing of them read. The Admonit. in B. White-gifts
book page 579.
Autors of the Admonition to the Parliament, who were the fathers of our
English Schismatiks, say of reading of the Scriptures; Reading is not feeding
of Gods flock: but it is as evil, as playing upon a stage, and worse too.
Foul mouths, was the act of Moses no better then playing upon a stage, when he
read all the words of the Law, to the people? Exodus 24.7. and was Joshua as bad
as a stageplayer, when he did the like? Josh. 8.34. And was Baruch as bad or
worse then a stage player, when he read the words of Jeremy out of a written
roll, by Gods own appointment? Ier. 36.2, 3. etc. Nay, but such was the spirit
of these vipers, that they had rather cross Gods known ordinance then not
oppose the orders of the Church, in whose womb they were bred. And of some such
like temper are some others of later times. M. Jo. Down in a Treatise of the
Efficacy of Reading.
A learned Preacher in a book now lately published, tells of some in the
West country, where himself dwelt, that their manner was, neglecting the publik
service and reading, to send their servants or children, to know when the
Preacher was ready to go into the pulpit. For till then they list not to come.
And so (says he) according to the French jest, they turn all Gods worship
into a mere preachment. And some have I known, who following a preacher of
their own, to a strange place, have stayed without the walls of the Church
till the Sermon did begin. And would God, none of our better minded people were
tainted with a tang of this leaven. But when there are some, and they not a
few, who never appear in the Church, save when the Bell gives warning to a
Sermon; would not a man think, that they nothing esteem either the Liturgy of
our Church, or the hearing of Gods word read in the publik assembly? I say no
more of such but only pray God to give them a better mind. And for the rest,
who have learned better, I beseech them by the mercies of God, that they will
not countenance these fantastik men's error, by their negligent and needless
absence from the Church, when on holy days and week days, the Scriptures are
read to the people, and the prayers and praises of the Church are with joint
consent presented unto God. And so I leave to refute them, and come in the next
place to exhort our selves. And the sum of my Exhortation is, that

Use 3. Seeing the hearing of Gods word read is so useful to a godly and an
happy life, therefore, as we love our souls, we would not neglect the
opportunity of such a blessing, when it is offered. It was Gods commandment
to his people, that at such times as men came together in greatest multitudes,
then all of them should be called to the hearing of his word read. And the
learned say, that when the time of reading was come, a Trumpet was sounded
through the City, that all might have warning, and might be present to hear
what God did say unto them, for the good of their souls. By which things we
may see, what great care God and his Church had, that this duty might be
performed. And the like care they have of us at this day. For God has sent his
word home unto us into our own Parishes, and to many of us even hard at our
doors: so that we need not to make long journeys, as the people of the Jews
did, who came out of all the parts of the Land to Jerusalem to worship. And our
Church has assigned us the times of hearing, and the Bells give us warning
when the time is come. And nothing is wanting, that can be desired in this
kind, if we be not wanting to our selves. And if after all this, we shall
neglect to hear God, when he speaks unto us for our instruction; what can we
expect, but that he should refuse to hear us, when we speak to him for help
and assistance? Surely, he threatened to deal so with his people of old,
Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded: I will also laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes.
-- And, Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me. Prove. 1.24, 26, 28. He means, that
because they refused to hear him, when he taught them their duty out of his
word; therefore he would refuse to hear them, when they made their prayers,
for his help in their need. And so, if we turn the deaf ear to God, when he
speaks unto us in his word; it will be just with God to turn a deaf ear to
us, when we speak to him in our prayers. Nay the Apostle goes further, and
aggravateth our sin above the sin of the Jews, by the circumstance of the
time and persons. If the word spoken by Angels (says he) was steadfast and
every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how
shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at fist began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. Hebr.
2.2, 3. Where we have 2. things worth our noting; (1.) that the contempt of the
Gospel spoken by Christ and his Apostles is a greater sin, then the contempt
of the Law delivered by Moses and the Prophets. And (2.) that every contempt of
Gods word (whether a contempt of obeying it; or which is more, a contempt of
hearing of it) is a neglecting of our own salvation; because the hearing of
the word, and the obtaining of salvation are by Gods ordinance lincked
together. By the hearing of this word read, Josias and Antonie and Augustine
were converted to God, and furthered toward salvation: and what knows any of
us, but if we come to Church, when we are invited thither, we may hear that
chapter, or that part of the Gospel read, which may turn us from some sin,
or direct us to some necessary duty, and in conclusion help to save our souls?

Ob. But some perhaps will say, Nay, but I can read the Bible at home; and
what need I then to come to Church, to hear it read there?

This Objection involveth in it two questions, both which are worthy of our
consideration: 1. Whether reading of Gods word may be a sufficient excuse to
free us from hearing it read. 2. Whether reading or hearing it read in private
may excuse us from hearing it read in the public assembly. Of these severally.

And first for the former question, that I may speak more clearly and
distinctly, I will part mine answer into three assertions or propositions.

1. Prop. There is good use of both the one and the other. For hearing the word
read, I have delivered my reasons already: and the very same reasons may serve
to prove the use of our reading it also. For first it has the testimony of
Scriptures. The King is commanded to read the book of the Law, that thereby
he may learn to do his duty. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. And when one asked of our Lord,
what he should do to be saved, our Lord answered him by asking an other
question, What is written in the Law? how read thou? Luke 10.25, 26.
implying that by reading the Scriptures, he might have learned an answer to
his question, and thereby have been directed how to be saved. And Matt. 12.3.
Have ye not read (says our Savior) what David did? etc. And that implies,
that by reading that passage of Scripture they might have been better informed,
then to have condemned the guiltless. Thus, Reading of Scriptures by our
selves is confirmed by Testimonies of Scripture, as well as the hearing of it
read by the Minister.

2. Secondly, it may be proved by examples of holy men, who have used this
practice to their great profit, for example, Daniel by reading the Prophecy of
Jeremy understood Gods will for delivering Israel out of their captivity. Dan.
9.2. The Eunuch by reading of Isay the Prophet, was brought in the end to the
knowledge of the Messiah and Savior of the world. Act. 8.32. And S. Augustine
by reading Romans 13.13. was converted from a vicious to a godly life: And so, if
we read Gods word with attention and care, we may understand Gods will for
our Redemption from Satan and sin, and we may learn that which may direct us
to Christ the Savior of the world, and may meet with some motives that may
work in us remorse and repentance. These uses of reading Gods word may be
learned by the examples produced.

3. Reading of Scriptures has the like benefits and helps of grace, as were
observed to arise from hearing of them read. For (1.) reading as well as
hearing may acquaint us with the history of the Church, and the providence that
God has used in the governing and ordering of it. (2.) It may instruct us in
the duties of our callings and places, for therefore the King was commanded to
read the Law, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep all
the words of the Law, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. (3.) It will acquaint us with the
words and phrases and sentences of Gods word: and these being laid up in our
memories, will prepare us for a profitable hearing of Sermons. And (4) it will
occasion us, and enable us, when we doubt of any thing, to desire direction
from the learned, and by their directions to learn, what we could not
understand by our selves. These helps of reading I only name and do but point
at them; because the former proofs used in the point of hearing are as
applicable to this of reading. For these two, reading the word by our selves,
and hearing it read by others, do alike represent to our minds the meaning of
the holy Ghost in Scriptures: the difference in this respect only is, that the
one does it by the eye, and the other by the ear, which in respect of the
maine end, the instruction and salvation of our souls, is all one. I conclude
then that there is a like good use, both of reading the word, and of hearing it
read: which is my first assertion.

2. Prop. When we read the Scriptures by our selves, we have this benefit by
it, that if we meet with a matter of difficulty of special moment, we may
pause upon it, and read it over again, and consider of it in silence. And by
this means, we may in the end understa^d, what at the first we understood not,
and may also imprint in our memories, that which after once hearing or reading,
would have slipped away from us. And herein reading by our selves is better
then hearing things read by others. For when an other reads unto us, our
minds and memories are tied to go along with his tongue: nor can we command
any time of pausing and considering, when the occasion does require it.

3. Prop. When we hear the Scriptures read by Gods Minister, who has been
brought up in the rules of Grammar and Rhetorik; we shall gain this benefit by
hearing him, that the sentences being distinguished, by their rests and pauses,
and the words being pronounced with the right accents and tone, and every
clause so modulated by the voice, as is agreeable to the matter expressed by
them; the speech so uttered will delight the senses, and carry along the
affections, and persuade the understanding, and sway the whole man, much more
then the same sentences could do, if they were only looked upon with the eye,
or read without the right accent and modulation of the voice. Aeschines,
Quintil. lib. 11. cap. 3. page 666. Plin. l 2. epist. 3. Valor. Maxim. l. 8. c.
10.
when he pronounced an Oration of Demosthenes, and perceived that the people
were much affected with it; Yea, said he but, [quid si ipsam bestiam
audiissetis,] What if ye heard Demosthenes himself? meaning, that if he had
pronounced his own Oration, it would have affected them much more. And so, if
any shall read the Scriptures either in silence without any voice, or with
that carriage of the voice, as is not agreeable to art and reason, (and so
ignorant people, many times do read them;) the word of God would lose a great
part of that life and vigor which otherwise is contained in it, and by right
modulation of the voice would appear to the hearer. For example, when the
Apostle says what? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? if a man (as
those that be illiterate some times do) should read the word [what] without a
note of interrogation, he should much weaken the power of that sentence. And
so when the Prophet says, The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
Him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon Him: if any should read
the words without putting the accent upon the word Him, he would lose the grace
that belongs to the Prophets words. And in this respect hearing of the word
read by the Minister, who knows the rules of pronunciation and deliverie, is
better, then the reading of it by our selves, who either speak not to the
ear, or keep not the right accent, or put not that vigor and life in the
words, which is agreeable to the matter. The sum of all is, reading the word,
and hearing it read, each of them has a peculia virtue of his own, which the
other has not, yet both of them, for the substance of the duty, are alike
profitable and useful for a Christian. And therefore it is best, when both are
joined together, and used in their fit places and times. And this may suffice
for answer to the first question.

2. Quest. The second is, Whether reading in private, may excuse us from hearing
it read in public. To this my answer is, No. And my reasons be these.

1. It may be a question, whether they who allege their private reading to
excuse them from publik hearing, do always spend the hours of hearing in the
Church, in their reading at home. Surely, the best of us are negligent enough
in holy duties, and do quickly forget the times of devotion, and our purposes
of well doing; unless we have some monitor, that may put us in mind. Now for
the services of the Church, the set hour of the day and the sound of the bell
accompanying it, do summon us to work. But what summons each one has at home,
to call him into his closet, and warn him to his task of reading, I know not,
I leave every man's conscience to be his own Judge. Only I will say thus much,
that if men can dispense with themselves for publik hearing, when the time is
appointed by the authority of the Church; it is no breach of charity, to think
that they will dispense with themselves for their private reading, the time
thereof being limited, only by their own discretion.

2. Say, that men and women be so exact and diligent, that they do consecrate
the times of publik service unto private devotions, and read at home as much
the more for their able sense from the Church, as they could hear, if they
were present there: Yet I dare say, they will not, nor cannot make such choice
of profitable chapters and useful lessons, in their private devotions, as the
Church has done for them in her publik Service. For here we have chapters and
Gospells and Epistles fitted to the season and the present occasion. For
example, when we celebrat the Feast of Christ's Birth, those Scritures are read
unto us which relate the manner of this mystery, and the occurrences that then
happened. And these two, the time and the Scriptures being fitted each to other,
do help to support one an other. The Scriptures teach us how to celebrate the
time to Gods glory and our own good: and the time stirs us up, to attend
and apply and make use of the Scriptures read. And the like may be said of our
Lords Conception, and of the presenting of him in the Temple, and of his
Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension into heaven. And so it is also on the
festivail days of the Apostles and Evangelists and other Saints. On their
memorial days those Scriptures are read which tell us, what gifts God
bestowed upon them, and what services they performed to him, and what good the
Church has received by their means. And hence we may learn to honor God in
his Saints, and to take example from their virtues for our imitation, and to
celebrate their festivities with heavenly meditations agreeable to the time. And
by such helps as these are, we may gain knowledge in the articles of our
faith, and direction in the duties of a good life.

3. Let it be supposed (which yet I can not believe to be true;) that a man
or woman constantly spends in his private reading, the whole time that is
appointed for publik hearing; and that he and she can make as good choice or
Scriptures for their reading, as the Church has done for their hearing: Yet,
(all this notwithstanding) their private exercise will come short of the publik,
because in the Church men may join both reading and hearing together. When
they hear the Ministers voice, they may look upon the Text in their book; and
so at once, they shall have the use both of ear and of eye: the one of which
will stir up the affection, and the other will confirm the memory; and at
every pause may reflect back upon that sentence, that imports them most. And
consequently at one time, and in the same exercise, they shall in good part
reap the benefits both of reading and of hearing.

4. Lastly, suppose a man reapeth as much good by his private reading, as in
reason such an exercice well ordered, can produce: Yet he cannot promise to his
private devotions the like blessing, that God has promised to the publik
servi^es of his Church. For of the Tabernacle he has said, There will I
meet, with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat.
Exodus 25.22. And of the Temple he has said, I have chosen this place to my
self for an house of sacrifice. 2 Chro. 7.12. and verse. 15, 16. Mine eyes
shall be open, and mine ears attent to the prayer, that is made in this
place. For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be
there forever; and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually. And so,
of the Assemblies of Christian people CHRIT has promised, Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Matt. 18.20.
By all which we may learn, that when we pray and hear in publik, God has
promised a blessing, not only to the exercises themselves, but to the place
also, where they are performed; even because it is Gods house. But if we
perform the same duties at home, though he has promised a blessing to the
services, if they be performed in due sort, yet he has promised no blessing
to the place, because it is any man's dwelling, or his private closet. And now
according to this rule and observation, a man may expect a further blessing
upon his reading and hearing in the Church, then he can expect upon the like
performances in his own house.

All these things, concerning the two questions, laid together, the sum is
this: Reading of Gods word, and hearing of it read, are both of them good
exercises, which God has coupled together, and man must not put them a sunder.
Again, the performance of these duties at home and in private, is good in its
season, and may be a help that the word of Christ may dwell richly in us: but
it must not in any case justle out the public service of the Temple, where God
more especially does dwell. And therefore, as our Lord said of the duties of
mercy and justice compared with the duties of tithing anise and mint and
cumine; these things ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
Matt. 23.23. so may I say of publik and private both reading and hearing; These
we should do, and not leave the other undone.

My conclusion shall be an Exhortation, consisting of two parts.

1. That as occasion and opportunity will serve, we be careful to read the
Scriptures in our private houses. When I say, as occasion and opportunity will
serve, I mean, that I do not desire, much less require, that servants should
steal from their masters the hours that be due to their service or that
masters themselves should neglect the businesses of their calling, in which God
has set them: but I mean, that both master and servant, and all other
Christians should redeem the time, as the Apostle speaks, that is, should
take the occasion, and make their best advantage of it, while the time serves.
And he or she who besides the time allotted for such exercises on Sundays and
holy days shall take those shreds of time on the other days, which each man's
business will permit him without either wronging of others, or neglecting of
his own estate; I doubt not but within a few years, he may be well read in the
book of God. It is reported of Alphonsus King of Arragon, Serar. in Josh. l.
2. page 289. etc.
that notwithstanding his great affairs of government, and the daily
businesses of a Kingdom; yet he gained so much time for this use, as that he
read over the Bible fourteen times, with Glosses and Commentaries upon the
Text. And by this we may gather, that no man's place, who is his own master,
is so full of business, but if he will husband his time well, and not drown
himself in worldly cares, or lavish away his time in eating and drinking and
sporting, he may gain sufficient time for reading, without neglecting of the
works of his place and calling. Yea, and servants and laboring men, who have
the fewest hours to spare, yet if they be provident for their souls, may now
and then find some leisurable times for this exercise without either wronging
of others, whose work they do, or defrauding of themselves of needful times of
refreshing.

2. My exhortation also is, that we do not suffer our selves to be kept at
home without urgent cause, when God by the ordinance of his Church does call us
into his house. There are not a few in the world, who partly through idleness,
and partly through fansifulnesse and contempt of government, despise the good
orders of our Church, and neglect the publik service to the offense of God, and
wronging of their own souls. But they who are sober minded, though they live
in the midst of such a froward generation, yet will consider (and I beseech
them so to do with heedfulnes and care;) that God has promised to meet with
his people in the Tabernacle, and that his eyes will be open, and his ears
attent to the prayer that is made in the Temple, and that where two or three
are gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them. And they
may further be remembered, that David, when he heard that his child was dead,
went into the house of the Lord and worshipped. 2 Samuel 12.20. And not only the
Pharisee, who delighted to show his devotions in publik places, but the
humble-minded Publican too, went up into the Temple to pray. Luke 18.10. And
Peter and John the blessed Apostles of our Savior, after they had been filled
with the holy Ghost, went up together into the Temple at the hour of prayer,
being the ninth hour. Act. 3.1. Now there were none of these men, but might
have found an house, or a closet, or a chamber to perform their devotions in:
but they knew, nor did any man in those days make question of it, but that the
house of God was the fittest place to serve God in, and that the hour
appointed for publik prayer, was the best season for them to present their
prayers to God. They had not learned that subtle distinction, which some
phantastiks use now a days, that a private prayer must not be made in a publik
place. For then the Publican, whose prayer was well accepted with God, would
not in so publik a place as the Temple in Jerusalem, have made so pivat a
prayer, as this, God be merciful unto me a sinner. Nor did they then believe,
that there was any superstition in observing the Canonical hours of the
Church: for then Peter and John would not have chosen the ninth hour, which
was one of the Churches hours in those days, for their time of resorting to
the Temple. Those that are wise and sober minded will consider these things;
and will not doubt, but that praying and hearing and every exercise of devotion
will the sooner receive a blessing, if it be performed in the place of Gods
presence.

CAP. VII.
Hearing of Gods word preached is a means of blessedness.



For clearing of which point three things are to be declared; 1. what we are to
understand by this word [preaching.] 2. how it may be proved by Scriptures,
that the hearing of the word, preached is availeable to a blessed life. And
thirdly what special helps toward happiness we may reap by hearing the word
preached, over and beside the profit that we have by hearing it read.

I. Quest. What we mean by [Preaching.] For answer hereto these short notes
may suffice.

1. Note. The word [preach] in English, as also the Greek [(...)] whereto it
answers, is sometimes taken in a common and general acception, for any kind
of publishing or proclaiming, by what means soever it be done. Thus in the 12.
of S. Luke, our Lord dissuading men from hypocrisy and double dealing, uses
this reason verse. 3. because how cunningly and secretly soever men carry their
contrivances for the present, yet there will a time come, when all their
juggling and double dealing shall be disclosed and laid open in the clear Sun.
The words of the Text in the original are these, (...). The Geneva Translators
turn it thus in English, That which ye have spoken in the ear, in secret
places, shall be preached on the houses: Our late authorized Translation has
it thus, That which ye have spoken in the ear in closets, shall be proclaimed
on the house tops. Nor are either of these translations any whit amiss, or any
thing different in the substance. Only, that which says, shall be preached on
the houses, comes nearer to the word; and the other, which says, shall be
proclaimed, does more plainly express the meaning, and both laid together,
do teach us thus much, that to [Preach] sometimes is nothing else, but to
proclaim or publish a thing, that all may hear and take notice of it. And in
this sense reading of the Scriptures, whereof I spoke before, may be called
preaching, without any incongruity or error. Yea, and so it is called Act.
15.21. Moses (says the Text) has in every city them that preach him, being
read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day. Note here (1.) what is said to be
done, and that is, Moses is preached in every city. (2.) how this is said to
be done, and that is by reading of his Law. Moses has them that preach him,
being read, or seeing he is read in their Synagogues. Thus it appears that
preaching is sometime used in such a general signification, as that reading
may be called preaching. But this is not that preaching, which I mean in this
place. When I say, that hearing of the word preached is a means of
blessedness, I understand the word in a more strict or restrained sense, as
preaching is distinguished from reading, and as we commonly use the word in our
ordinary speech; and that is, when Gods Minister does by an audible voice
teach the doctrine of salvation in such manner as himself has contrived and
ordered it for the instruction of the people.

2. Note. This kind of preaching in the stricter and more proper sense, is of
two sorts. For sometimes men preach, being directed by inspiration or immediate
revelation from God. Thus Moses and the Prophets did preach in the old
Testament; and Christ and his Apostles in the New. Saint Peter says of the
Prophets, that they spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost 2 Pet. 1.21.
And our Savior says of his disciples, It is not ye that speak, but the
spirit of your father, which speaks in you. Matt. 10.20. Sometimes again men
preach Gods word, as they are enabled by the rules of art, and their own
industry and study. Thus the Priests and Levits did preach, when after the
reading of the book of the Law, they gave the sense, and caused the people to
understand the reading. Nehem. 8.8. And thus the Scribes and Pharisees did
preach, when sitting in Moses his chair, they taught men to keep and observe
the things written in the Law. Matt. 23.2, 3. And this is the preaching, which
the Doctors and Pastors of the Church, after the Apostles times have used, and
which Gods Ministers do use at this day. Of both these kinds of preaching, my
note is to be understood; that the hearing of Gods word preached, whether it
be performed by divine inspiration or by humane study, is still a means to
make men happy, that make the right use of it.

3. Note. These kinds of preaching, whether by inspiration or study, may be
performed two ways. For sometimes the preacher takes a Text of Scripture for
the ground of his Sermon. He explaineth the words, and out of them, draws
instructions, and then applies all to the use of his hearers. This course our
Savior took Luke 4. Luke 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and, as his custom was,
he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. And
there was delivered unto him the book of the Prophet Esaias: and when he had
opened the book, he found the place where it was written; The spirit of the
Lord is upon me because he has anointed me, to preach the Gospel to the
poor, he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to
the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them
that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, etc. In which
passage we may observe two things. (1.) that our Lord chose a Text of
Scripture to discourse upon: When he had opened the book he found the place,
where it was written, The spirit, etc. Isai 61.1. (2.) that he unfolded and
applied this Text to the present occasion. This day, says he, is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears; meaning that which the Prophet had foretold
in those words, was now fulfilled in himself, who preached unto them, as was
prophesied of him aforetime. In the like manner Philip also preached Act. 8.32,
etc. The Eunuch had read the Text out of Isai. 33.7. He was led as a sheep to
the slaughter, etc. And then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same
Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. In these places it appears that
Philip and our Savior took a Text to preach upon; the one such a Text, as the
occasion then offered, and the other such as himself made choice of for the
purpose. But at other times we find, that preachers have chosen a theme
which they thought useful for the time, and without any Text, to ground their
discourse on, have unfolded that point out of Scriptures and reason, and
applied it to the peoples use. Thus our Lord did preach, when he made that
famous Sermon, called by the learned, [Sermo Domini in monte,] Our Lords Sermon
in the mount, recorded by the Evangelist Matt. 5.6, and 7. chapters. For in
this Sermon we have many expositions of Scriptures, many doctrines of
religion, and many exhortations and directions for a godly life: but we find
no Text first read, by direction of which he proceeded in his Sermon. Thus our
Lord: and so Saint Peter preached also, Act. 2, and 3. chapters; and Saint
Stephen, Act. 7. and S. Paul Act. 13, and 17. And of later times, some also in
these parts of the Church have done the like; though the common use now among
us, is always to ground our Sermons upon some Text, even then when men scarce
once touch upon the Text in the whole Sermon. Of both these sorts of preaching
my note is true, that if Gods word be preached aright, whether by grounding on
a Text, or by propounding of a Theme; yet the hearing of the word thus
preached, is a means to make him blessed, that uses it aright.

The sum of all is, that the hearing of the word preached, in which of these
sorts soever it be, is availeable to blessedness, and alike profitable to
salvation. And the reason is, because by every one of them we may be
instructed alike in the knowledge of God and his service, and may be edified in
the faith of Christ, and in the obedience of his Laws; which is the only way,
that leads to happiness and eternal life. Thus much for the first point,
what we mean by preaching, or the word preached.

II. Quest. The next is how it may appear, that the hearing of the word thus
preached, is a means of blessedness. And the answer is, it appears by these
reasons.

1. Because it is the way and the means, by which Christ has founded his
Church, converted the nations, and saved the souls of believers. So S. Paul
says, that by the foolishness of preaching, (so the world esteemed it,) it
pleased God to save them that believe. 1 Cor. 1.21. And so it is said of the
Jews, that they did forbid the Apostles to preach to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. And to these sayings the event proves
answerable. For Saint Peter by the preaching of one Sermon converted three
thousand souls. Act. 2.41. and S. Paul converted many Jews and proselyts. Act.
13.43. and more particularly, and by name he converted Lydia and the Jailer.
Act. 16. and Dionysius Areopagita, and Damaris and others. Act. 17. And, in a
word, by him and his fellow laborers, all the Christian world have been
brought to the faith. Experience then shows it to be true, that the hearing
of the word preached, is a means to bring men to the faith, and by faith to
salvation.

2. It is proved also, because God does send preachers into the world, that by
their labors he may bring men to heaven and happiness. For this end it is,
that God sent his own Son to preach the Gospel. The Spirit of the Lord God,
(says our Lord in the Prophet,) is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to preach good tidings unto the meek, etc. that they might be called the trees
of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Is.
61.1, 2, 3. In these words we have two things for our purpose; (1.) the work,
that our Lord Christ was sent about: and that was, to preach good tidings, etc.
(2.) the end, that was intended and effected by it; and that was twofold; man's
sanctification, and Gods glory: that they might be called the trees of
righteousness, and that he might be glorified by it. And for the like end and
purpose, our Lord Christ himself did send his Apostles to preach, Matt. 10.5,
7: and the seventie Disciples, Luke 10.1. and S. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.17. And to save
labor in naming of particulars, the Apostle tells us, that when our Lord was
ascended up into heaven, he gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. But why and for what end all
this? why, it was, (says the Text,) for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all
come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. By this we see, that as the Apostles did bring men to the
faith by their preaching of the Gospel in the beginning: so God has
established a settled course of teaching to the worlds end; by which men may be
brought to happiness and eternal life. And thus much for answer to the
second question.

III. Quest. The last is, What help may we have by hearing the word preached,
beside or more then we might gain by hearing the Scriptures read? To this my
answer is, it may furtherus in the way of godliness diverse ways, over and
beside the benefit that is reaped by the word read. For,

1. It may further us for the right understanding of many passages of
Scripture, more then we could gather by hearing of them read. For though the
principles of faith and rules of a good life be delivered clearly and plainly
in Scriptures, and a man by reading or hearing them read, may gain much help
toward salvation: yet it is true also that there are many speeches and phrases
and words, which are not easily understood by an ordinary Christian; but may be
explained and made clear by a learned preacher. For example, the disciples
understood not the right meaning of that sentence of the Prophet, Behold, I
will send you Eliiah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful
day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children,
etc. Malac. 4.5. For they conceited that this was meant of Elias in person,
whereas it was meant of John the Baptist, who came in the spirit and power of
Elias; and because he resembled him in his office is therefore called by his
name. This when they understood not, our LORD expounded it unto them, and made
them to know the true meaning of that Scripture, as appears Mar. 9.12.
Again, the Eunuch of Ethiopia did not understand that saying of Isai, (cap.
53. v. 7.) He was led as a Sheep to the slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb
before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth, etc. Act. 8.32. but when
Philip came, and expounded the Text, and preached unto him JESUS out of that
Text, then he understood the words and believed in CHRIST to salvation. And so
among us, there is no ordinary Christian, but may stick at the meaning of some
Scriptures, which, if a learned preacher have them in handling, he may see
unfolded and explained.

2. By hearing the word preached a man may learn how this or that Scripture
does prove and confirm a point of divinity, or does confute a contrary error,
or does commend unto us some profitable duty belonging to our calling; which a
common Christian of and by himself would not have marked and observed. For
example, the Sadduces and common people of that time, did not see, nor could
not conceive how the Resurrection of the dead might be proved out of that
saying of Moses (Exodus 3.6.) I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob. But our Savior shows it by a plain reason, that that
Scripture proves the truth of that point, because that God is not the God of
the dead but of the living. Whence it follows, that because God says, that he
is the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, therefore Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob are living still, and consequently their souls were not perished or
vanished into nothing, as the Sadduces fondly imagined, and therefore said that
there was no Resurrection. Again, the people did not know, that that place of
David, Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption, (Psalm. 16.10.) did include any proof of Christ's Resurrection from
the dead. But S. Paul shows and that from the Text it self, that this saying
must needs be meant of Christ, who upon the third day after his death, rose
again from the dead, without any tincture of corruption; because of David that
Text could not be meant, who had been a long time dead, and now was consumed
into ashes, but never rose again from the place of corruption, as Act. 13.36.
Act. 2.29. And so in like sort, there are many passages of holy writ, which
yield plain proof for confirming of some truth, or for confuting of some
error, or for instructing us in some duty; which an unlearned man among us
cannot understand by himself, but may learn it from a skillful preacher.

3. By hearing the word preached we may learn how to apply the sayings of
Scripture to our own use, more then by hearing it read we could ever be able
to do of our selves. For Scriptures teach us general duties, and give us
general rules, without declaring how they agree to each age or place or
person. For that were an infinite labor, and not to be performed at once. Now
these rules and these sayings the unlearned do not know how to apply, so well
as the preacher can teach and instruct them. Nor will the learned be ready to
make application to themselves, till some monitor remember them of their duty.
An example hereof we have in our blessed Savior, who having read that place
of the Prophet, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. Is. 61.1: presently
applies it in such a manner, as the hearers would never have thought of: This
day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. Luke 4.21. An other example to
the same purpose we have in S. Paul, who having alleged that saying of the
Prophet, I have heard thee in an acceptable time, etc: he presently teaches
the Corinthians, (which before they knew not;) how to apply it to the present
time and occasion: Behold now, (says he) is that accepted time; now is the
day of salvation. 2 Cor. 6.2. To these we may add the example of David. He no
doubt, had oftentimes read of the judgment of God against adultery and murder;
nor could he be ignorant how necessary repentance was for preventing of that
judgment: but he neglected to apply these rules to himself, to whom they
properly belonged; till Nathan came to him, and applied them to his conscience,
and told him in plain words, Thou art the man. 2. Sam. 12.7.

By all this we may see, that there is great benefit in hearing the word
preached, besides that which may be gotten by the word read. And hereof there
is plain reason also.

1. Because the preacher is supposed to be bred and brought up in learning,
and thereby has gained skill to understand those things which belong to his
profession. For even in ordinary trades, he that has been an Apprentice for
seven years, may be supposed to have gained skill both to manage his trade,
and to train up others in the knowledge of the same art: which they will not
be able to do, who were never bred up in that profession. And so it is in this
case. If a man have spent sundry years, perhaps twice seven or upward, in the
study of Divinity, (as many of our preachers have;) in all probability and
likelihood, that man will be able to understand and teach points, much better
then men whose breeding has been in an other kind. But if any shall stepp
into the Pulpit, before he have passed through the Schools, and take upon him
to teach Divinity before he ever learned it; I speak not of such a one, nor
do I think him fit to teach men the mysteries of Religion. Such a man may
perhaps please the rude multitude, who esteem more of a glibb tongue, then a
solid brain, and are swayed more with sound of words then with weight of
reasons: but will never either satisfy the judgment of the learned, or direct
any man's conscience in the ways of salvation. Understand me then to speak of
such a one, as has been bred in the study of good arts, and is (as the
Apostle calls him,) (...), apt to teach, and then ye will confess it to be
true, that such a preacher will be able to teach his hearers the meaning of
Gods word, better then they of themselves could learn and understand it.

2. Because the preacher, besides his former studies, does or should bestow his
time on the week days, to provide for his labors on the Lords day or other
festivals. Other men spend the week on their worldly business, the merchant
on his traffic, the husbandman on his tillage, the handicrafts man on his
workmanship, the Lawyer on his Clients, the Physician on his patients; and
reserve only the Lords day for learning of Religion. But the employment of the
preacher, even on the week day, is to turn his books, examine his Text, and
study for matter of instruction that may do his people good; that when the
Lords day is come, he may speak pertinently to the purpose, and profitably for
the furthering of his peoples souls. And such a man will be more able to
expound Scriptures, to state a controversy, and to give rules of a godly life;
then any other can do, who has not studied the points aforehand, and turned
over his books for his better information. But if there be any of us
preachers, who study the world on the week days, and then preach on Gods day
what comes next to our lips: I speak not of such, nor dare I commend them
for men that may direct Gods people in the way of godliness; no, nor them
neither, who value their labors by the number of Sermons which they preach,
rather then by the solid notes of instruction which they do deliver. Such men
may please idle professors, who make their religion an eare-labour, as Papists
make their prayers a lip-labor. But understand me of such preachers, as
besides their former studies, do bestow the week days for provision on the
Lords day; and no man will deny, but such are more able to teach godliness,
then they who have spent all the week on profane or worldly occasions. There is
great reason then, to think, that the learned preacher may teach us more of
Gods truth, then possibly we could learn by our selves.

And out of all this, we may observe the great mercy of God toward us, and
his great love to our souls, who has provided such variety of means to
bring us to happiness and eternal glory. First, he has given us opportunity
of reading his word at home in a known tongue: and then he has provided us
means that we may hear it read in the publik congregation; and lastly, that
both the publik and private reading may be made more profitable and useful,
he sends his preachers to guide us in the right understanding and applying
of his word; as he sent Philip to the Eunuch, to instruct him in the faith. And
if after all this, we neglect so great salvation offered unto us; how shall we
escape the just judgment of God, who commanded the unprofitable servant to be
cast into outer darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth? Surely for
such a neglect God complains of the Jews, as of men that had despised both
his mercies and their own comforts. I, says he, have written unto them the
great things of my Law; but they were counted as a strange thing. Hos. 8.12.
Where (1.) when he says, I have written the great things of my Law, he puts
them in mind, that his word is not a thing of small value or not worth the
reckoning and esteem. But as Moses said of his Law, It is no vain thing for
you; because it is your life. Deuter. 32.47: So our God tells his people,
that his word was no vain, or idle thing; but the things therein contained
were great things, matters of life and eternal happiness. (2.) When he
says, I have written unto them these great things, he implies that these
weighty things are hard at hand, lying by them in store, that they may take up
the Bible, and read and learn those rules and directions, that may carry them
into heaven. (3.) When he adds; But they, [these great things of my Law,]
were counted, as a strange thing, he upbraideth the people with their great
negligence, or contempt rather, that having such a fair opportunity, they
despised so great salvation, as if it were a matter that concerned them not.

And so it will be with us Christians; if we neglect either to read Gods word
by our selves in private, or to hear it read in publik, now that we have it so
fairly and legibly written for our uses, God may chide us for our contempt of
his mercies, and that upon better grounds and with more reason, then he did
chide the Jews. For (1.) he wrote indeed great things for them, but they are
far greater things that he has written for us. They had the books of the old
Testament, wherein CHRIST and salvation were scantly and obscurely taught: but
we besides those books have the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
wherein CHRIST JESUS is crucified before our eyes, and we are brought into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, that we may see God, as it were with
open face. In respect of which clear light it is, that Kings and Prophets have
desired to see those things, which we see, and have not seen them: Nay the
very Angels in heaven did desire to look into those things, 1. Pet. 1.12.
which are made known by the preaching of the Gospel. Besides, these greater
things of the Gospel are conveyed to us in a more easy and less costly way,
then to our fathers of old. They had Gods word penned by the hand of a
Scrivener, which required much pains in the writer, and great cost in the
Buyer, and some skill in the reader of it. But since God has sent printing
into the world, we may purchase the whole Bible at a less price, then our
fathers could have obtained S. Matthews Gospel alone, and every boy and girl
may read with readiness and speed that which the learned might stumble or
stopp at. The sum is, God offers us a greater treasure at an easier rate;
and, if now we despise or set light by such a mercy, God may complain of us,
with more reason then he did of the Jews; I have written to them the great
things of my Law; but they are counted with them as a strange thing.

Again, God upbraideth the Jews, for an other contempt of the like mercy. The
Lord (says Jeremie) sent unto you his servants the Prophets, rising early and
sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear. Ier.
25.4. He means, that besides the Law written, he sent the Prophets to
preach and explain and apply that Law unto them; but they contemned all, as
things of no value. And is it not so with us too? God has sent preachers in
abundance; and what use we have made of their labors, let him judge, that
knows what our dealings be. I only will say, how shall we escape Gods
anger, if we neglect so great salvation?

It imports us then to make use of these mercies, which being used aright may
help to make us blessed, and being neglected may breed no small danger. For
our better direction wherein, besides what has been said already, we may
take these further observations or rules.

If God give us the opportunity of these helps together, as to most of us he
has; we must not separate in our practice those things, which God has joined
together in his precept. It is our duty to read the Scriptures at home, and
it is no less our duty to hear them read in the Church; and a duty also it
is, to hear the word preached. All of them have their use, all of them are
commended to us in the Scriptures, and all of them are availeable for
salvation: and consequently all of them are to be made use of by us in the fit
season. If any man shall set Gods ordinances together by the ears, and is
either so addicted to private reading, that he despises publik hearing, or so
honoreth the word preached, that he neglects the word read; I may say to
him, and all such as he is, as Iam. 2.4, 11.
S. James said in a like case, Ye are partial in your selfs, and are become
Judges of evil thoughts. For he that said, Hear the word preached, said also,
Hear the word read, yea, and read it in your private dwellings: and therefore,
if ye hear it preached, and will not hear it read, ye are become
transgressors of the Law. The conclusion is, They that will be blessed, may not
make a divorce between those ordinances, which God has made joint helps to a
blessed life.

2. If necessity do at any time force us to forbear some of these helps,
wisdom must teach us to make the more diligent use of the rest. For example,
if sickness, or some unavoidable necessity do keep us from hearing in the
Church, we must be the more diligent in reading at home. And if want of
education in our younger days has left us unable to read Scriptures by our
selves, we must be the more careful to hear them read by others. And if
attendance on children or other necessary occasions cause us to keep our
servants at home, when others are busied in the service of the Church, we
should do our endeavor to supply the loss of publik instructions by our
private admonitions, and by rehearsing to them at home those good directions
which our selves did receive in the publik ministry. And he or she, that is
careful thus to make up their wants and defects; though sometimes they be
hindered by occasion, yet will gain good opportunities, which will guide both
themselves and their people to true blessedness and eternal glory.

CAP. VIII.
The keeping of Gods word is an other means to make a man blessed.

for blessedness and eternal life.

. 1.
[I.] How far we may and must keep Gods word. For unfolding of this doubt,
three questions are to be solved. (1.) What it is to keep Gods word, (2.) how
far in this life a man is able to keep it; and (3.) Whence we have ability
to keep it in such sort.

1. Quest. What it is to keep Gods word.

Ans. This word [to keepe] when it is applied to speeches or doctrines, as in
this place it is, has two uses in Scripture. For it signifies either to keep
in mind and memory, or to keep in our life and practice.

In mind and memory we keep it, when with care we committ and lay it up in
memory, and do often think on it, and revolve it in our minds. Thus the
blessed Virgin kept what she had heard concerning her Son and our Savior.
For so it is said, that the Shepherds of Bethleem, upon the vision that they
had seen, and the words that the Angels had spoken unto them concerning the
birth of CHRIST, Came to Bethleem with haste, and found Mary and Joseph and the
Babe lying in a manger. And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the
saying that was told them concerning this child. Then the Text adds, But
Mary kept all these things and pondered them in her heart. Luke 2.16, 17, 19.
And in the same chapter ver. 51. When she had found her Son JESUS being then
but twelve years of age, sitting in the Temple, and reasoning and disputing
with the Doctors; and alleging for his so doing, that he must be about his
fathers business: his Mother, says the Text, kept all these sayings in her
heart. The meaning is, she laid them up in her memory, and often thought on
them in her mind.

Secondly, we keep Gods word in life and practice, when we do that which God in
his word requires to be done by us. Thus the word is used, 1 Kings 11.10.
where it is said of Solomon, that he (...).
kept not that, which the Lord commanded him. And in this sense is the word
frequently taken in the Scriptures: as Ezekiel. 20.19. Walk in my statutes, and
keep my judgments, and do them. And so Genes. 18.19. Abraham will command his
children; and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment.
And Exodus 15.26. If thou will hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God -- And
wilt keep all his statutes; I wilt put none of these diseases upon thee, etc.
And in the new Testament, All these [commandements] have I kept from my youth
up, says the young man. Matt. 19.20. And, ye have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it, says S. Stephen to the Jews. Act.
7.53. And so in many other places both in the old and new Testament: so that I
may safely say, that this is the common and usual acception of this word.

Now of these two uses of the word, Rivet in Exo. 20.8 page 157. (...) Deuteronomy.
5.12. est a (...), quod est, servare sive co^servare, etia^ tenere, retinere,
quod fit memoria: indicatque hoc verbum curam, sollicitudinem and diligentiam,
ne emittatur vel effluat aut excutiatur, quod observandum est. Hoc sensu verbo
custodiendi vel servandi usus est Dominus, Beati qui verbum Dei audiunt, and
custodiunt illud, (...). Luc. 11.28.
Doctor Rivet makes choice of the former, as fit for this place. When our
Savior says, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it; (...):
he thinks that here is meant a keeping in memory, or a care and solicitude,
that the word which we have heard, do not slipp from us and be forgotten. But
to my thinking the Angel in the Revelation construeth it in the later sense or
signification, when uttering for substance the very same sentence, that our
Savior used in this place, he expresses it in these words; Blessed are they
that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, etc.
And surely the common use of the word in this sense, and the intention of our
Saviors speech being compared with other like speeches in Scripture, and the
general stream of Interpreters, who run this way, may persuade any man, and
do give me sufficient warrant to understand this word in the later sense; and
to say, that to keep Gods word in this place is as much as to do it, and obey
it. Notwithstanding, I will grant thus much to D. Rivet, that the sense which
he puts upon the word, may be included or implied in this place, if we
construe the words to this purpose, They are blessed, who so keep Gods word in
their memories, that they may keep it in their life, and practice. But then
the keeping of it in memory is but only intimated; and the keeping of it in
practice is principally and mainely intended in the Text. In a word then, to
keep Gods word, is to do and perform what it commands or requires to be
done. And so much be said to the first question.

2. Quest. The second is, But can any man in this life be able thus to keep or
do Gods word? And it seems, no. For S. James tells us, that whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offends in one point; he is guilty of all.
Iam. 2.10: and not long after he tells us further, In many things we offend
all. Iam. 3.2. It follows, Therefore there is no man, but is guilty of the
breach of the whole Law: and consequently, no man can keep it. Ans. For answer
to this question and objection, we must note, that there is a twofold keeping
of Gods word or commandments; the one a Legal, and the other an Evangelicall
keeping of them.

I. First, there is a Legal keeping: and that is, when we keep and perform
the commandments so exactly, as is answerable to the rigor of the Law, and as
the rule of Justice does require. And this exactness consists in three
things. (1.) That our obedience be universal in respect of the object; or that
every thing commanded by God, be performed by us, without failing in any one
point. For, if the Law be considered in it self, and without mercy from
CHRIST to mitigat the rigor of it; it then denounces a curse against every
offense without any exception. Moses says, So the Original has it: and so
the vulgar latin, Iunius, Vatablus, etc. do render it: though our English
Translation, I know not upon what mistake, does add the word (all) that
confirms not all the words of this Law, which is agreeable to the meaning, but
not to the words.
Cursed is he that confirms not the words of this Law, to do them. Deuteronomy.
27.26. And S. Paul alleging this sentence, renders the sense of it thus,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the
book of the Law, to do them. Gal. 3.10. Where, by saying, All things, which
are written, -- he teaches us, that the Law in that sentence meant the curse
against any one only sin committed against that Law. And accordingly we see,
it was but one sin alone, that cast the Angels out of Heaven, and Adam out of
Paradise (2.) The exact rule of the Law does require that our obedience be
continual in respect of the time; or, that we perform not only all the
things, that are commanded, but at all times, while the Law is in force and
does require them to be done. For he that sins once only in all his life,
confirms not all things, because then he disanulleth or disobeyeth something
in the Law, whenever he performs not what the Law does command. And
therefore the Apostle alleging that former sentence of Deuteronomie, Cursed is
he that confirms not the words, renders it thus, Cursed is he that
continues not in all things; implying hereby, that the meaning of the Law is,
that he is accursed, who at any time transgresses the Law, though it be but
once in all his life. And this again is verified in the example of Adam and
the Angels. For the sin that cast the Angels out of Heaven, and Adam out of
Paradise, was but once committed by them in all their life. (3.) The Law, in
the rigor thereof does require, that our obedience be full and complete in
respect of the degrees and measure of obedience: or that it be with all the
heart, and with all the soul, and the utmost intension and affection of the
heart, that God ought to be obeyed withal, by men in this mortal life. For
if a man come short in any degree that is required in our obedience, therein
he has broken that part of the Law, which requires all: and consequently, by
Saint James his rule, he is a transgressor of the Law, and stands guilty of
the breach of it. Now, put all these together: and the sum will be this, that
the Legal keeping of Gods word requires that it be done in all things, and at
all times, and in the most exactest manner, that in justice is due or can be
exacted at our hands. And this is that which I call the Legal keeping of Gods
word. But thus and in this sense never any man was able to keep the Law, save
only the first Adam, while he stood in his innocence, and CHRIST the second
Adam, who never lost it. This also is further confirmed by that of the Apostle,
where he concludes, that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God.
Gal. 3.11. and ver. 10. that as many as are of the works of the Law, are under
the curse; because it is written, Cursed is every one, etc. He means, that
whosoever is to be judged according to the rule of the Law without mercy
procured by CHRIST for the mitigation of this rigor, and for a favorable
interpretation of the Law; that man is in a cursed and damnable estate; because
no man on earth can ever be able to keep the Law in this exact manner. And
hence it is, that the Angels, who were liable to this exact rule of Gods Law,
and by their creation were made able so to perform it; because they committed
one sin against it, and that once only, were rejected without mercy. And so
Adam, being by his creation in the like state and condition, that is, alike
subject to the exact rule of the Law; for one offense once committed by him,
was cast out of Gods favor, and should have so continued for ever, for any
help that the Law or the rule of justice could afford him. And had not CHRIST
our Lord come in as a Mediator to make peace and establish a new covenant of
grace, far different from that of the Law; both he and we all had perished,
and been deprived of heaven and happiness for evermore. Thus we see, what
the legal keeping of Gods word is: and that no man living is able to keep it
in this sense. And therefore this is not the keeping, which our Savior
commends unto us in this place, as a means, that may make us blessed, when
he says, Blessed are they, etc.

II. But secondly, there is another kind of keeping of Gods word, called by
the Learned, Evangelicall: and that is, when we so keep and perform this word
and Law of God, as CHRIST does require in the Gospel, and as God for CHRIST'S
sake does accept at our hands, in steed of that other of the Law. Now this
rule of obedience prescribed in the Gospel does mitigate the rule and rigor of
the Law in two things. (1.) Because it grants a pardon to some kind of
sins: and (2.) because it accepts of a man's repentance after any the most
heinous sin committed.

I. It grants a pardon to some sins. For though it allow or approve no sin,
yet it pronounces not damnation against every sin: as namely not against any
sins of infirmity; such as are sins of ignorance; which had we known, we
would not have committed; and sins of subreption, which escape without
observing of them, and which, if we had noted and observed, we would not have
done them; and sins of violent tentation, which by reason of some sudden
assault, do sway our passions against the right rule, and sometimes by fear,
and sometimes by joy, and sometimes by hopes, do carry us away, before we have
leisure to bethink our selves, and in cool blood to consider what we are a
doing. Such sins, as these, Divines call sins of infirmity, because they
arise not out of an evil purpose of the mind, but out of humane frailty,
from which we shall never be free, as long as we live in this body of
corruption. And if men committ such sins, as these; the Gospel condemns
the sins as evil, and repugnant to Gods Law, but it condemns not the
sinner for them, so long as he disliketh and detesteth them in his sober
thoughts and resolution. Thus Saint Paul did, when speaking of such like
sins, he cried out as a man undone; Oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7.24. For such sins as these,
the Gospel condemns us not: it only condemns men for deliberat content,
when they yield obedience to known sin, and against conscience transgress
the Law.

From hence it is, that the Apostle, delivering unto us the rule of the Gospel,
says; Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should
obey it in the lusts thereof. Romans 6.12. In this passage, when he says, Let
not sin; by this word he means the inbred corruption of nature, which we
brought with us into the world, and that habit of sinfulness, which we have
since contracted by our custom in sinning, and by which we are every day
solicited to the practice of actual sin. And because this sinfulness does
tempt and sway men to sin, therefore the Apostle says of it, Let not sin
reign, etc. (2.) when he says of this sinfulnes, Let it not reign in your
mortal bodies, he means that it should not bear sway, and carry away our
consent, to act what it suggesteth, and to do what it commands. So S.
Augustine expounds this word. [ Non dixit, Non sit, sed, Non regnet. Inest
peccatum, quum delectaris; regnat, si consenseris.] The The Apostle, said not
(says he) Let not sin be in your mortal bodies; but let it not reign. It
is in thee when it tickleth with delight; but it reigns in thee if it draw
thee to consent. August. in Psalm. 50. page 175. B. Yea, and so the Apostle
expounds his own meaning, when he adds in the next words, Let not sin
reign that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof: noting hereby, as a learned
D. Abbot, true Catholic, cap. 11. page 281.
Prelat of our Church has observed) that then sin is said to reign in us,
when we give obedience to it, to fulfill the lusts thereof. (3.) In that the
Apostle says not, Let not sin be within you, or, Let it not tempt you, or, Let
it not please and tickle you with delight; but Let it not reign in you, by
drawing you to obey it: this gives us to understa^d, that though it be a
misery to be tempted by our lusts, and a sin to be tickled and delighted with
them, when we are tempted by them; yet the Apostle now delivering the precepts
of the Gospel, and the rules, by which Christians, according to the new
Covenant of grace are to be regulated, does not charge men so deeply, as to
forbid them all tickling delights: he only requires that sin do not reign,
and that men do not obey it by consenting unto it. This is the rule prescribed
by the Gospel, and here commended to us by our Apostle, and as many, as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, as upon the Israel of God.
Other sins, such as I called sins of infirmity or humane frailty, to which
we do not give deliberat consent, these are pardoned in the blood of the Lamb.
But if any man sin against this rule, by consenting to sin, or acting it; and
so suffer sin to reign in him: the Apostles sentence will take hold on him,
Be not deceived: Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminat, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. This explication of this point was for the substance of it
long since delivered by the learned Father S. Augustine. Aug. de verb. Domini,
Sermon. 5. cap. 6, page 91.
[Aliud est non concupiscere, aliud, post concupiscentias non ire.] It is one
thing, (says he) not to lust, which the Law commands, when it says, Non
concupisces, Thou shall not lust: and an other thing, not to follow after our
lusts; which an other Scripture commands, when it says, Go not after thy
lusts. Ecclus. 18.30. For (as that learned Father further explaineth the point)
[Non concupiscere, perfecti est,] Not to lust, or not to covet that which is
unjust, is the property of a perfect Saint, whose habitation is in the Church
Triumphant in Heaven. But [post concupiscentias suas non ire, pugnantis est,
luctantis est, laborantis est,] Not to go after a man's lusts, by obeying their
command, and by doing what they do prescribe, is the property of a man, that
striveth and fights against sin, and labors under the burden of
corruption; such as they are who live in the Church Militant here upon earth.
De Temp. Ser. 45. cap. 3. page 215.
In an other place, he speaks to the same purpose. For whereas the Apostle
had said, Fulfill not the lusts of the flesh. Gal. 5.16. he descanteth on those
words in this manner; [Melius quidem erat implere, quod Lex dixit, Ne
concupiscas,] It were better, (says he) to fulfill that which the Law says,
Thou shall not lust; for this is the perfection of righteousness: but because we
cannot now fulfill this, let us at least fulfill that, which is elsewhere said,
[Post concupiscentias tuas ne eas,] Go not after thy lusts.

This then is one thing, wherein the Gospel does moderat the rigor of the
Law; that whereas the Law requires perfect obedience in every point, and for
every breach pronounces a curse and a damnatory sentence; the Gospel bears
with the sinner, and pardons him his sins of infirmity and humane
frailty, if so be, he gives not approbation or assent thereto in his cool
blood and deliberat thoughts.

2. Secondly, the Gospel does herein mitigat the rigor of the Law, because
the Law for one offense once committed, does condemn a man without leaving him
any way or means of recovery: but the Gospel on the contrary side accepts
of a man's repentance, and upon his repentance gives him a pardon. This rule of
the Gospel is delivered by our Savior, when he says, I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Matt. 9.13. And by the Apostle, when
speaking of the new Covenant made in Christ, he says in the person of God,
who is the Author of this Covenant; This is the Covenant, that I will make with
them -- I will put my Law into their mind, etc. Heb. 8.10. And then going on
to reckon up the privileges of this new Covenant, ver. 12. he adds, I will
be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities
will I remember no more. And to the same purpose the Prophet Ezekiell, (for it
is a sentence of the Gospel, though it be written in the old Testament, as
many other are:) If (says he) the wicked will turn from all his sins, that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that, which is lawful and
right; all the transgressions, that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him, or shall not be named against him. Ezekiel. 18.21. And verse.
30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions: so iniquity
shall not be your ruin. By all this it appears, that in the Covenant of
grace confirmed by CHRIST our Redeemer, there is place left for repentance,
even after known and reigning sins committed; and upon this repentance
joined with forsaking of sin, free pardon is promised to the offender.

The sum of all is, that the Gospel, though it require obedience to Gods
commandments, as the Law also does; yet it qualifieth the exactness and
rigor of the Law, partly because it does not cast men off for sins of
infirmity, and partly because it accepts of repentance for voluntary and
reigning sins. And let this be said for answer to the second question.

3. Quest. The third is, whence and how is it, that men are able to do thus
much; that is, so to keep the Law, as in the favorable construction may be
accepted? Ephesians. 2.1, 3.
For the Apostle says that by nature we are the children of wrath: and if of
wrath; how is our service accepted? And again, as the same Apostle says, We
are dead in sins and trespasses: and can the man that is dead in sin, do the
works of spiritual life, or such, as he does, who is alive to God?

Ans. In Scriptures we find two principles of obedience or of serving of God
aright: the one is nature, and the other is grace. By Nature, I mean all the
endowments of the reasonable soul, which we have, as men by natural
generation from Adam; And by Grace, those heavenly qualities and endowments,
which we receive by spiritual regeneration from CHRIST. Both these are
mentioned in Scriptures, as principles of obedience to Gods word; but the
former, as a false principle, by which men may imagine themselves enabled for
Gods service, and for the performance of his will; but indeed are not. The
later of these, that is, Grace, is the true principle of obedience; and that
wheresoever it is planted, does enable the soul, to keep Gods commandments
according to the Evangelicall and favorable construction of the Gospel.

This is proved in both the parts thereof by that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.15.
Where speaking of the abilities of nature, he says, The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. In which
passage of the Apostle, we may note (1.) the truth delivered by the Apostle,
The natural man does not, neither can he receive the things of Gods spirit.
He means, that though a man should teach and instruct him in the mysteries of
salvation, yet he is uncapeable of instruction; he does not acknowledge their
truth, neither can he conceive the mystery contained in them. And if he cannot
know and acknowledge them, much less can he do and perform, what they
require at his hands. (2.) we may note the reason or the proof hereof, and
that is, because the mysteries of heaven are foolishness to the natural man;
and the reason again thereof is, because they are spiritually discerned. By
this it appears, that the only principle, which enableth a man for the right
judging and discerning of heavenly things, is the grace of Gods Spirit, which
the natural man wants. And hence it follows, that as a man cannot live
without a soul, nor see without an eye, nor hear without an ear because
these are the grounds and principles, from which life and sight and hearing do
flow: so no man can know and serve God aright without Gods Spirit enlightening
and enabling him by his grace, because this is the principle, from which all
both spiritual actions and abilities do spring. The like to this we have
again in the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves,
to think any thing, as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Here the
Apostle first removes the false principle, We are not sufficient of our
selves; No, not to think a good thought, much less to do the good works that
are commanded in GODS Law. (2.) He lays down the true principle of all our
ability in Gods service, Our sufficiency is of God. And hence it is that the
Apostle says of himself, I can do all things through CHRIST, that
strengthens me. Philippians 4.13. And 1 Corinthians 15.10. By the grace of
God I am what I am: and his grace was not in me in vain: but I labored more
abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God, that was with me.
Where (1.) when he says, His grace was not in me in vain, but I labored,
etc. he shows what he could and did do; that is, he served God with great
zele in the ministry of the Gospel. And (2.) when he says, Yet not I but the
grace of God, etc. he shows what the ground of this laboring faculty in him
was: and that both negatively by removing the false ground, Yet not I, that is,
not I as I, or, not I of or by my self: and affirmatively, by setting down
the true ground, Not I, but the grace of God.

The conclusion of all is; By nature and of our selves, we can not do Gods
will, or keep his word, so as may be accepted of him; because by nature we are
dead in sin, and by nature we are children of wrath: but by the grace of God
in JESUS CHRIST, enabling us thereto, we can and do keep the word of God
according to the rule of the Gospel, and so as it is accepted of God to
eternal life.

From hence we may see the great privileges that a Christian man and woman
has by being in CHRIST; more then the rest of the world have: for example, (to
give the Reader a short list of them) such as these are.

1. He is endued with power from above to keep Gods word and do his
commandments, which the rest of the world who are out of CHRIST, can not do.
For (1.) they do not know, nor can they discern the things of God. But God
reveileth them to his children by the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.10. (2.) By nature and
of themselves men cannot think a good thought: but God works in his children
both to will and to do that which is good. Phil. 2.13. And lastly, of our
selves and by the power of nature, we know not how to pray for the things that
we want, as we ought: but the Spirit helps our infirmities, and makes
intercession for us with groanings, that can not be expressed. Romans 8.26. Thus
the child of God, by grace received from his heavenly father, is enabled to
serve God for the saving of his soul, which ability they have not, who have
not CHRIST for their Savior and Redeemer.

2. The child of God has this privilege above others, that the service,
which he does by the help of grace, though it be weak and unperfect, yet being
upright and sincere, is accepted with God, as if it were perfect and wanted
nothing. For of him that is meant, which the Apostle says, If there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that, that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12.

3. Those sentences of Gods word, which are Legally meant of the unregenerat
man, and therefore contain a curse against him: are Evangelically understood
of those, which are in CHRIST, and serve to direct him by the way of
righteousness to eternal life. For example, that sentence of Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Moses, wherein he requires a performance of all things that are written in
the Law, if it be applied to a man out of CHRIST, it carries in it the sentence
of his condemnation; because he keeps not nor can not keep that Law: and
therefore he remains liable to the Curse, there denounced. Cursed is every
one, that confirms not, etc. And to this purpose, the Apostle urges this
place Gal. 3.10. But if the same sentence be applied to a true Christian; it
speaks no condemnation to him, it is rather a commendation of his integrity
and piety; because he keeps this Law, so as God requires of him in the
Gospel. In this sense, it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, that they walked
in all the commandments and ordinances of of the Lord blameless. Luke 1.6.
And so it is said of Josias, that he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and
with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses.
2 King. 23.25.

These and such like privileges do belong to him, who is engraffed into
CHRIST: and by these, he may encourage himself in his calling, and stir up
his heart to cherefulnesse in Gods service, who has been so gracious unto him.

2. Secondly, seeing all our ability of keeping of Gods word, comes only
from Gods grace; we may hence learn whom to thank for all the good works that
we do. Out of this consideration it is that Saint Paul having said, I labored
more abundantly then they all; presently adds in the next words, yet not I,
but the grace of God, which was with me. 1 Cor. 15.10. And so, if any of us
be more fervent and frequent in prayers, then others be, and more strict in
the rules of conscience then they be, and more plentiful in the deeds of
charity: he should still remember to add after all; And yet, it is not I that
do this, but the grace of God, that is with me: that so God, who gives all,
may be praised for all.

3. Seeing all our ability of keeping Gods word, is from Gods grace; we
should again learn, when we want any grace, whither to go for help and
supply. If we want water, we go to the Conduit; because there is the well
head, whence the water flows: and if we want health, we go to the
Physician, because the knowledge of diseases and remedies is presumed to be in
him: and if we be wronged and oppressed, we go to the Justice or the
Magistrate, because he has the sword, that can right and relieve us. And so,
if any of you lack wisdom, (says S. James) let him ask of God, who gives to
all men liberally, Iam. 1.5. And so say I, If any among us do want knowledge,
to direct himself in Gods service; let him go by his prayers, to God, who
enlighteneth every man that comes into the world. And if he want patience to
bear the cross, let him go to him for mercy, who is the God of all patience
and comfort. And if he want strength to withstand a tentation; let him go to
him, who suffers not his servants to be tempted above their strength, but
together with the tentation makes a way for them to escape, 1. Cor. 10.13.
that they may be able to bear it. And in a word, if any man want any grace,
let him go to him, who is the God of all grace, and from whom comes every good
and perfect gift. If we pray to him for grace, and depend upon him for help,
and submit to him in the use of the means; there is no doubt, but he has
what we want, and will do that which we desire.

. 2.
[II.] The second general point concerning the keeping of Gods word, is, how
and wherein this keeping of the Law is availeable to happiness and eternal
life.

To this question the answer is, that it avails or conduces to happiness
two ways: (1.) as a condition qualifying men's persons for this glorious
estate. And (2.) as a service, which God rewards with eternal glory.

I. First it conduces, as a condition required to be in them that are
admitted into heaven. For though God be liberal and bountiful in bestowing of
his gifts; and uses to give more, then either we deserve or desire: yet he is
no prodigal or wastfull spender, he bestows them not carelessly, without
respecting who and what the men be, that partake of his favors: but he makes
choice of such as be fit and in some sense I mean a worthiness, which makes
a man fit to receive a favor; and not a worthiness, which makes him able to
deserve it.
worthy of such mercies. The Philosopher said [Benefacta male locata malefacta
arbitror,] Good deeds ill placed (and so they are, when they are bestowed on
unworthy men;) I count to be evil, not good works. And therefore God, though
for his great bounty, he be said to be the Father of mercies, and the God of
consolation and comfort, whose mercies are over all his works: yet gives he
not heaven and happiness promiscuously to all men. But, as when the sons of
Zebedee desired to sit, one on CHRIST'S right, and an other on his left hand in
his Kingdom; our LORD answered those importunat Beggars, To sit upon my right
hand and upon my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them, for
whom it is prepared of my Father. Matt. 20.23: So it is true of every degree of
blessedness, and every mansion in GODS Kingdom, it shall be given to them
only, for whom God has prepared it. And who those be, our Savior has told
us, when he says, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry, and ye gave me
meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me
in, etc. Matt. 25.34. Where (1.) when he says, Come ye blessed, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you: he shows that they are blessed men, and partakers
of Gods Kingdom for whom God had prepared it long before. And (2.) when he
says, for I was hungry, etc. he shows who and what manner of men they be,
for whom he prepared his Kingdom: and that is, they be such, as have served God
by works of mercy and duties of an holy life.

This point may further be cleared by two reasons or arguments.

1. Arg. Because the Scripture does not allot any place in heaven for wicked
and ungodly men, but still shuts them out of the heavenly Jerusalem. Saint
John having spoken of the glory of the holy City, adds withal, Without are
dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loves or makes a lie. Apoc. 22.15. And of the man, who had not on,
the garment of holiness and a godly life, the doom was; Bind him hand and
foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness, etc. Matt. 22.13.
And so of him that employed not his talents of grace to Gods glory, the
sentence was, Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matt. 25.30. Where (1.) when he says,
Cast him into darkness, that implies, that the place of his abode, is a place
contrary to heaven. For heaven is a place of light and glory. The glory of the
Lord does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Apoc. 21.23. And
therefore the place of these men's abode being a place of darkness, much like
to some deep dungeon, wherein a man can neither see hand nor foot, it
follows, that therefore the wicked are in a place, as contrary to heaven, as
darkness is to light. (2.) When he says, Cast him into outer darkness, or
darkness, which is without, that shows that both the sinner and the place of
his abode is without the Kingdom of heaven. And hence also it is, that S. Paul
says of them that obey not the Gospel, that they shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Heaven then and the presence of God is no place for
wicked and ungodly men. And there is great reason, why it should be so.

Rat. 1. First, because, Mortua quinet^a^ jungebat corpora vivis, Componens
manibusque manus, atque oribus ora: (Torme^ti genus) and sanie taboque
fluentes, Co^plexu in misero longa sic morte necabat. Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8.
page 318. ver. 26.
if the wicked should be there, they would disturb the quiet peace, and the
happy estate of Gods Saints. It was the devise of a cruel tyran to tie dead
and living bodies together; that as the dead carcass did putrify, it might
stifle the living with its stinch; and corrupt his flesh with the rottennes and
putrefaction. And a like torture it would be to the holy Angels, if they were
tied to a company of Devils; and so to the Saints of heaven, if they were
coupled with wicked men. Again Solomon says, It is better to dwell in the
corner of an house top, then with a brawling woman in a wide house. Pro. 1.9:
and of Lot it is said, that he vexed his righteous soul with the unlawful
deeds of the Sodomits, among whom he lived. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And it is storied of
a poor Barth. Casaus Narrat. Regionu^ Indic. de Cuba insula, page 41.
Indian, that having tasted deeply of the Spanish cruelty and pride, he
refused to go to heaven, if the Spaniard were there. Nor is there any of us,
that would be content to dwell in the house with a scould or a railor, or a
quarreller or a drunkard: we would leave them house and all, rather then be
contitinually troubled with their company. And so, if drunkards and
whoremasters and murderers and liers and railers and unclean persons should
be admitted into heaven, it might make the Saints of heaven even weary of that
blessed place: certainly, it would much disquiet and disturb their peace and
blessed condition, which the LORD of heaven may not in wisdom or with any
reason endure. This then is one reason, why wicked men should not be received
into heaven, among those blessed souls.

Rat. 2. Because it would be a dishonor to God, to have such vile persons among
his servants, and in the chiefest place of his Kingdom. Herein (says our
Savior) is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. Ioh. 15.8. He
means fruits of righteousness, which are by JESUS CHRIST to the praise and
glory of God, as the Apostle speaks. Philip. 1.11. And if God be glorified by
works of righteousness, then he is dishonored by iniquity and sin. Besides,
it is said of the Jews, that through breaking of the Law, they dishonored God,
and that God was blasphemed through them among the Gentiles. Romans 2.23, 24. And
if it be a dishonor to God to have wicked servants here in the Church
Militant; how much more dishonorable would it be, to have sinful servants in
the Church Triumphant; which is the Palace of his Kingdom. And therefore as
David said, He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house; he that
tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. Psalm. 101.7: So may our God say, and
that upon far greater reason, No wicked person shall dwell in my house, nor
no ungodly man shall abide in my presence. No, says our Savior, At the end of
the world, the son of man will send forth his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom, all things that offend, and them which do iniquity. Matt.
13.40, 41.

Rat. 3. It is against all reason, that they who have given themselves to all
evil, should receive the greatest good. The Apostle says, It is a righteous
thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them, that trouble you; and to you
who are troubled, rest with us. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. Where, when he says, It is a
righteous or a just thing with God; he implies that God should be unjust, if
either he should give heaven to them who have served the devil, or deny it to
them, that have served God. And because God cannot be unjust; therefore wicked
men must be punished; and because there is no punishment in heaven, therefore
wicked men must be excluded thence.

2. Arg. A second Proof or argument, to show that the keeping of the
commandments is a necessary condition required of them that shall be blessed,
is, because God has assigned hell, as the proper habitation of all ungodly
persons. It is said of Judas, that when in despair of mercy he had hanged
himself, he went [(...)] to his proper place, or, (as our Translation has
well rendered the word) to his own place. Where, there is no doubt, but he
means hell, whither Judas went for his transgression: and he calls hell his
own or his proper place, (1.) because he had deserved and purchased it by his
sin. For as it is said ver. 18. He purchased a field with the reward of
iniquity; so it is true, that he purchased hell with the practice of his
iniquity. (2.) It is called his own place, because God had assigned and
appointed that place to Judas, and all such, as Judas was, who sell CHRIST
either for profit or pleasure. And for this cause it is, that the Judge at the
last day, will say to the wicked, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. And if hell be the place deserved by the wicked,
and destinated to them by Almighty God; then heaven can be no place, to receive
such persons in. And therefore if these men go out of the world without
repentance, they go to hell without all redemption. And by this it appears,
that the keeping of Gods word, is a necessary condition, required to the
qualifying of that person, that shall be made partaker of blessedness and an
happy life. And this is the first consideration, in respect whereof the
keeping of Gods word is availeable to eternal life.

II. A second is, that the keeping of Gods word is availeable to salvation, as
a service or work, whose reward is blessedness and eternal life.

For the clearing of this, I will set down three conclusions.

1. Concl. Blessedness is the reward of well doing, or (which is all one) of
the keeping of Gods commandments. This may be proved first in general, and
then in particular.

1. In general thus: David says, The judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous altogether: And then he adds, Moreover, by them is thy servant
warned, and in keeping of them there is great reward. Ps. 19.9, 11. And Ps.
58.11. Verily (says he) there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a
God, that judges in the earth. And so our Lord says of himself, that when
he comes to judge the world, he will reward every man according to his work.
Matt. 16.27. And S. Paul, God (says he) will render to every man according to
his deeds. To them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory
and honor and immortality, eternal life; but unto them, that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth -- indignation and wrath. Romans 2.6, 7, 8. Where (1.)
when he says, God will render -- according to works; he shows what the rule
is, by which God will proceed in judging of the world, namely according to men's
works. (2) When he says, To them who by patient, etc. he explaineth that rule
by particular instances. He will render to men according to their works; 1. to
them which continue in well-doing, he will render eternal life as their
reward; and to them, that are contentious and disobedient, shall be indignation
and wrath. By all which thus much is apparent, that in general God rewards
well-doing with blessedness and eternal life.

2. Now in the 2. place, let us consider how God rewards particular and
special virtues; and we shall find, (1.) that he rewards Martyrdom and
patience in suffering for CHRIST with blessedness and eternal life. So says
our Savior; Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men revile you and
persecute you, etc. for great is your reward in heaven. Matt. 5.10, 11, 12.
(2.) He rewards mercifulness to CHRIST'S Disciples or Confessors; He that
gives a cup of cold water only to a Believer, in the name of a disciple, he
shall in no wise lose his reward. Matt. 10.42. (3.) He rewards almsdeeds to
the poor and needy. So our Savior; When thou make a feast, call the poor,
the maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shall be blessed. For thou shall be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Luke 14.13, 14. (4.) Affiance in
God and his promises, has a promise of reward. So the Apostle, Cast not away
your confidence, which has great recompense of reward. Heb. 10.35. (5.)
Faithfulness and obedience in servants, toward their earthly masters, has a
reward from God far more then their service is to men: Servants (says the
Apostle) obey in all things your Masters -- not with eye -- service, as
men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God. And whatsoever ye do
(in your service to your masters) do it heartily, as to the Lord and not unto
men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance.
Col. 3.22, 23, 24. Thus the Scripture goes before us in diverse particular
duties, showing how God does reward them; and by these gives us example, how
to judge of all the rest. And from hence the conclusion is apparent and clear,
that both in general and in each particular, heaven and happiness is the reward
of well-doing.

2. Concl. This reward of blessedness allotted to good works, is for the
measure of it, squared and proportioned according to the goodness of the
works. For though all good works are rewarded with blessedness, Yet all are
not rewarded in the like measure and degree. Those good works, which excel
other in goodness shall exceed other in the greatness of the reward. For
every man (says the Apostle) shall receive his own reward according to his
own labor. 1 Cor. 3.8. He speaks there of some that planted, and some that
watered, and of them he says that every one shall receive his own reward. He
means, he that planteth, shall receive the reward of a planter, and he that
waters, shall have the reward of a waterer. To the like purpose our Savior
says, He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a
prophets reward: and, he that receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. Matt. 10.41. By which
speeches, this is implied, that there is one kind of reward belonging to a
prophet doing his duty in his place, and an other belonging to a righteous
man, as he is righteous. And hereto agrees that of the prophet; They that be
wise, shall shine, as the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness,
as the stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3. The conclusion is clear, the
greatness of the reward is squared according to the goodness of the work.

3. Concl. This reward of well-doing is due to it, not for the worthiness of
the work, but by virtue of Gods promise.

By virtue of Gods promise I grant it to be due. For God has promised heaven
to good works, as has been showed already: and promise is due debt, as we
use to speak, and all men do acknowledge. Even a man's word tieth him to
performance, and Gods word must needs tie him much more. From hence it is,
that the Apostle speaking of the crown of glory laid up in heaven for the^
that serve God aright; styles God by the name of a righteous or just judge in
bestowing of that reward, 2 Timothy 4.8. And in an other place, God (says he) is
not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love. Heb. 6.10. Where (1.)
when he says that God does not forget their good works, he means that he
leaves them not unrewarded. And (2.) when he says, that God is not unjust to
forget them; he implies, that God should be unjust, if he did not reward
their labor in his service. But he speaks more directly to the same purpose,
^
2 These. 1.6, 7. It is a just thing with God, (says he) to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you, which are troubled, rest with
us. Where we may note, that it is a point of justice in God, as well to reward
the patient suffering of Martyrs and Confessors, as the wrong oppressures of
persecutors and evil doers. Be it granted then, that a reward is due to
well-doing, by virtue of Gods promise, who for our encouragement has tied
himself by this bond. But yet notwithstanding, there is no merit or worth in
our best works, by which we may lay claim to such a reward. This is clear
by the words of a S. Paul, who speaking of Martyrdom and patience in
persecution for CHRIST'S sake, which is one of the most glorious works, to which
CHRIST has promised his reward; yet even of this he says, I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be reveiled. To. 8.18. And 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction, (says
he) works for us a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Where by
elevating our service in suffering for CHRIST, and amplifying the reward, that
is given unto us for it; he plainly shows that there is no equality or
proportion between the work and the reward, Our Savior also, when we have
done all things that are commanded us, (And yet who is there that does so? but
upon supposition that we have done all,) yet he teaches us to say unto God,
We are unprofitable servants: we do that which is our duty to do. Luke
17.10. He means, that because it is no more, then our duty does bind us to,
therefore we cannot plead merit or desert; God owes us no thanks for it, no
more then a master owes thanks to his servant, when he has done, what he is
bound by his place to do.

I conclude then that the reward of blessedness promised to well-doing, is due
by Gods promise, and not for the worth of any works.

And now out of all these things laid together, the conclusion follows,
which I propounded in the beginning, that the keeping of Gods word is
availeable to happiness, as a service, to which eternal life is promised for
a reward. And hence we have these deductions for our further use.

1. Seeing holiness is a necessary condition required unto blessedness; this
may be for an Admonition to all evil doers, who live in any sin against
conscience. They may hence take notice how fearful their state is for the
present, and how needful it will be for them to begin a better life. For I
suppose, there is no man living so desperately madd, but desires that he may be
happy: nor is there any man among Christians, but knows that happiness is no
where to be had, but with God in heaven: and now it appears by the
declaration of this point, that no evil doers, shall ever enter into that
place. Take a view, if ye please, of all the ungodly men in the world; and ye
will not find that ever any one of them has been heretofore, or shall
hereafter be received in at heaven gates. In heaven, I confess, there are a
great multitude, which no man can number, of all nations and kinreds and
peoples and languages: but among all these, there is not one drunkard, nor one
adulterer, nor one slanderer, nor one oppressor, nor one deceiver, nor one
lier, nor any one evil doer. Again, in heaven there is no defect or want of
room. In my Fathers house, said our Lord, there are many mansions. Ioh. 14.2.
There is a mansion for the Prophets: they are in the Kingdom of God. Luke
13.28. And there is a mansion for the Apostles: They shall eat and drink with
CHRIST in his Kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. Luke 22.30. And there is a mansion for the Martyrs: they follow the
Lamb, whithersoever he goes. Apo. 14.4. There is a mansion for the penitent
thief: this day (says our Savior) shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke
23.43. And, in a word, there is a mansion for every righteous man: they shall
shine forth, as the sun, in the Kingdom of their father. Matt. 13.43. And in
these mansions are lodged all nations and countries in the world. They shall
come from the East and from the West, from the North, and from the South: and
shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. Luke
13.29. But now on the contrary side search the book of God throughout, from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation; and see whether ye can find
any mansion, any room, any hole reserved for drunkards, or harlots, or
whoremasters, or deceivers, or slanderers, or any other such wicked and ungodly
m^n. Oh then, think upon this, all ye that forget God; turn unto him betime,
wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do
evil, learn to do well; that your sins may be made as white as snow, and your
souls dear in Gods sight, and your selves my abecome citizens of the holy
City, which is above with God.

2. Seeing Gods rewards in heaven are squared and proportioned according to our
services and good works; this may be for the comfort and encouragement of all
well minded people. They may be comforted in that good, which they have done
already; as Ezekiah comforted himself with the remembrance of his upright
life. When he was in his greatest sorrow and sickness, he cheared himself by
saying unto God, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight. Is. 38.3. And so Nehemiah, Remember me, O my God, (says he)
concerning this: and wipe not out my good deeds, that I have done for the house
of my God, and for the offices thereof. Nehem. 13.14. And so may every good
Christian pray and expect a blessing from God, for the good deeds that he
has done, either for Gods house, or for Gods people, or for Gods glory. Herein
he has comfort, Matt. 6.20. Luke 14.14.
that he has laid up treasure in heaven, which he shall find with God at the
last day, and shall be abundantly recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.
Again, hereby good men may be encouraged to well-doing, because they know that
their labor will not be in vain in the Lord. This use the Apostle made of
this point. He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
and he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
And then he adds, Let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not. Gal 6.8, 9. He means, that as he that sows
much, shall reap the more; so he that gives plentifully for Gods sake (for
it is of liberality, that he speaks in that place;) shall be plentifully
rewarded at Gods hands. Where further, because doing of good is compared to
sowing of seed; and we, by the example of the husbandman, are stirred up to
sow our seed, without being weary of our labor: we have hence occasion given
us, of two good meditations fit for this purpose.

1. Med. The first is, that no man thinks his seed lost, though it rot for a
time in the earth; because he knows, that at the harvest it will bring forth
20, or 30, or, it may be 40, for one. And so, if we give to good uses, if we
relieve the oppressed, and abound in works of devotion; though we do not
presently see any profit by them, yet none of them is lost: when the harvest is
come, the cropp will make a recompense for all, and we shall receive our seed
with advantage.

2. Med. Among men, they are counted rich men, that have good store of ground
for their tillage; and every man is glad, if he can purchase land, where he
may sow in the spring, and then reap the cropp at the harvest. And so every
one among us, that desires to be rich toward God, should be glad, when he
has ground to sow his seed of righteousness in; that his cropp may be the
greater at the harvest. For example, if we see a poor servant of CHRIST in
want and distress, there is a piece of ground to sow our seeds of charity in.
If we relieve him, we shall enrich our selves by it. And, if we see a poor
man oppressed by a potent neighbor; here is ground to sow our seed of justice
in. If we can and do help him to his right, we shall gain help at Gods
hands, an hundred fold more. And if we meet with a man that is sad and
perplexed in mind; here is ground to sow our seed of compassion and comfort
in. And if we help to support and strengthen him in his grief; God will
comfort our souls against all perplexities and fear. The sum is, a man
cannot be a loser by doing of good deeds, no more then the husbandman is a
loser by sowing of his seed. I pray, as our Church does; Stir up, O Lord,
the wills of thy faithful people, that they plenteously bringing forth the
fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously rewarded, through JESUS CHRIST
our LORD.

CAP. IX.
Hearing and Doing compared together, and how and with what difference they
concur, as jont helpers of our salvation.

concur to the procuring of our happiness. To which purpose that I may
speak the more plainly and distinctly; I will set down that which I have to
say, in three several conclusions. And they be these.

I. Concl. Hearing of Gods word, whether read or preached, is so far forth
only useful for a Christians blessedness, as it directs and furthereth him
to the keeping of Gods word, and the doing of his will contained in it.

For proof hereof there be these arguments or reasons.

1. Arg. Hearing of Gods word is therefore availeable to blessedness, because
by it we learn the way to happiness, and are by it persuaded to walk and go
on in that way. This to be the use of Gods word heard and read, I have proved
already: and other use then this the Scripture reveileth none, nor can any man
with reason imagine any other. I now add hereto as an Assumption to that
proposition, But the way to blessedness is by the obedience of Gods Law, and
the keeping of his word. This is proved by those Scriptures, which call Gods
commandments, his ways; by which he leads men to heaven and happiness; and
our keeping or observing of those commandments, a walking in that way. In this
kind David describing the happy estate of a righteous man, says, Blessed are
they that keep his testimonies: they also do no iniquity, but walk in his
ways. Ps. 119.2, 3. But Solomon more directly to this purpose, He is in the
way of life, that keeps instruction. Pro. 10.17. Where (1.) when he says,
He that keeps instruction, he means such a one, as submits himself to
be guided by Gods word, and does that which God teaches him therein. And (2.)
when he says of such a man, that he is in the way of life, he means he is
going on in the right way to eternal life and happiness. And to like purpose
David prays, Teach me the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the
end. Ps. 119.33. and so he promises, I will run the way of thy commandments,
when thou shall enlarge my heart. v. 32. In all which, and many other sayings
to like purpose, we have two things worth our observation: (1.) that the
keeping of Gods word, is a walking in Gods way, and (2.) that this way of God,
in which we are to walk, is also the way of life and happiness.

And from hence, the collection is clear; If hearing do therefore profit us to
eternal life, because by it we learn the right way, that leads thereunto;
and this way be nothing else, but the keeping of Gods word: then hearing is
only so far availeable to blessedness, as it furthereth us to a godly life.

2. Arg. In Scriptures Hearing of Gods word is commended unto us, as the means
that brings us to obedience; and the doing of Gods word is set out, as the
end, for which Hearing is intended. This, (to go no further) is sufficiently
proved out of one book of the Law, Deuteron. I mean, in which the penman of
the word, does most clearly and punctually describe the use of Gods Law. In
that book chap. 4. ver. 1. thus Moses speaks to the people, Hearken, O
Israel, unto the statuts and judgments, which I teach you, for to do them: and
ver. 5. I have taught you statuts and judgments, that ye should do so: and
ver. 10. God himself, says of his people; I will make them to hear my words,
that they may learn to fear me; that is, to serve and obey me. Again, chap.
5.1. Hear o Israel (says Moses) the statuts and judgments, which I speak in
your ears this day; that ye may learn them and know them and do them. And
ver. 31. God himself speaks, I will speak (says he) all the commandments
and statuts and judgeme^ts which thou shall teach them, that they may do them.
The like speechs are found Deuter. 6.1, 2. and 31.12. and elsewhere: but where
the case is clear, it is needles to heap up proofs. Thus much is plain from
hence, that Hearing is the means, and Doing is the end, for which Hearing
serves.

Now concerning things, the one whereof is the means, and the other the end,
the Learned give us this rule [finis dat mediis mensuram,] the end prescribes
unto the means their quantity and measure, namely how much, and how far and
how often they may be used; and that is, so, as is requisite for attaining of
the end. Others deliver the rule thus, [Media accipiunt amabilitatem, ordinem
and mensuram a finc,] the desire and order and measure of the means are to be
esteemed and must be regulated by the end, for which they are intended, and
for which they do serve: so that they are to be used neither more nor less,
but so as they may further that end. For better explaining of this, take these
examples. Health is the end, which both the Physician and the patient do aim
at, and Physic is the means either to recover or preserve it; and therefore
Physic is only so far forth good, and to be used in that manner and measure
as may further the patients health. Again, meat and drink and exercise are the
means; strength and life and vigor are the end for which these means were
ordained. And therefore meat and drink and exercise are only so far forth
desirable, as they are effectual to preserve life and strength. And just so
it is in the case now propounded. Hearing and learning of Gods word are the
means; doing and performing of that word is the end for which Hearing is
intended. It follows, Therefore hearing is only so far forth good, as it
furthereth a godly life.

3. Arg. Hearing and learning are exercises only fit for a state of
imperfection, where men have need of these helps, to bring them unto, and
keep them in obedience of Gods Laws. And for this cause, while we remain in
this mortal life, where such is our ignorance, that without instructions from
Gods word we know not how to serve him aright; and such is our backwardness
to good things, that unless we be eftsoons incited and urged to the doing of
our duty out of the grounds of Gods word, we would go in a blindefold security
to hell and destruction: in this life, I say, and while we are subject to these
defects and weaknesses, there is necessary use of hearing and reading and
learning. But in heaven, where is no ignorance, nor no backwardness, nor no
such defects and infirmities; there hearing and all helps of persuasion are of
no use. To this purpose the Apostle tells us, that Prophecies shall failc,
and the gift of tongues shall cease, and knowledge, ( Ordinarium docendi munus
Beza.
that is, Arts and sciences serving for instruction,) shall vanish away. 1 Cor.
13.8. And he gives the reason of it in the next words: for (says he) we know
in part, and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect, is come;
then that which is unperfect, shall be done away. He means that these helps
were ordained for a state of imperfection, in which we have need of teaching
and exhorting, to supply our defects: but when we shall be perfect in
knowledge, and shall be ready to serve God without let, then all these means
of teaching and learning shall be done away. Whence I infer, that as the
Angels in heaven, do not hear Sermons, nor read Scriptures, nor use any other
helps of learning or instruction; so, in the life to come, when we also shall
be like the Angels in heaven, we shall neither hear, nor read, nor learn any
more. And because hearing only serves, to instruct us while we know not how
to serve God aright, and to persuade us to serve God, while we may be drawn
away from his service: therefore, Hearing of Gods word, profits us only so
far, as it serves to make us better; which is that, which I said in my first
conclusion.

II. Concl. Hearing of Gods word, if it be separated from doing, is rejected
in Scriptures, as a thing of no worth. This is proved,

1. By that saying of our Savior, Matt. 7.26. Every one that hears these
sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, which
built his house upon the sand: or (as S. Luke has it) He is like a man, that
without a foundation built an house upon the earth: against which the stream
did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell, and the ruin was great. Luke
6.49.

2. By that reproof mentioned in the Prophet, where it is said of the Jews, to
their reproach, They hear thy words, but they do them not. Ezekiel. 33.32. Where
expressly he only tells what they did do, but impliedly blames and
reproves them for so doing.

3. By that exhortation of the Apostle, Be ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only deceiving your own selves. Iam. 1.22. In which words the Apostle
first gives us a rule concerning Gods word, and that is expressed both
affirmatively, Be ye doers; and negatively, not Hearers only. And secondly of
this rule he gives us a reason, because, if a man hear, and do not do, he
deceives himself. The meaning is, he thinks he serves God, by hearing of
his word, and that thereby he may further his own salvation: but he that
thinks so, deceives his own soul, and will miss of his expectation. The
conclusion hence is, Hearing without doing is a labor in vain, and the
practice of a foolish man; and consequently rejected of God, as a thing of no
worth.

III. Concl. Hearing of Gods word, without practicing what we learn by it;
does hurt the soul, by aggravating of the sin. This is proved.

1. From the rule of our Savior; The servant, that knew his Lords will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes, etc. for to whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required; and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.
Luke 12.47, 48. Consider here (1.) a doctrine, The servant that knew his Lords
will, etc. and (2.) the proof of it, for to whomsoever much is given, etc. And
from both these the conclusion is, that where God gives a man more means and
better opportunities of learning and knowing Gods will, there he requires the
more duty; and will inflict the greater judgment, if it be neglected.

2. From those judgments, which GOD denounces against them, which do not
profit by his word, and other means of grace. Such as these are, He that
rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him: the word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day. Ioh. 12.48. And,
this is condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light. Ioh. 3.16. And, If I had not come and spoken unto them; they
had not had sin: but now have they no cloak for their sin. Ioh. 15.22. But
it is a cutting sentence to this purpose, which we read Hebr. 6.7. The earth,
which drinketh-in the rain, that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs
meet for them, by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God. But that,
which bears thorns and briers, is rejected and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned. The sentence is allegorical; the plain sense is, that
the men, upon whom GOD bestows much means of grace; if they be not fruitful
in good works, are liable to the greater curse, by how much they have had the
better means. The like is intended also by that parable of the vineyard, Is.
5.1, etc.

The sum that rises out of all this, is, that the more means we have, the
more duty we owe, and the more punishment we shall suffer if we neglect that
duty. Whence again it follows that Hearing and learning of Gods word, if
they do not further our obedience, they increase our judgment. It follows
from hence also, that all the goodness, which is in Hearing, is relative only;
so far forth as it furthereth our obedience and our keeping of Gods word.

But now on the contrary, the doing of Gods will, is good in and of it self:
it both pleases GOD, and makes us an immediate entrance into the Kingdom of
heaven. So S. John says, Blessed are they, that do his commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates
into the City. Apoc. 22.14. And S. Peter, If ye do these things, (says he) ye
shall never fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. 2 Pet. 1.10,
11.

These be the three conclusions, which serve for the explaining of the point.
Lay them together, and ye have a full answer to the question. The question is,
how and with what difference Hearing and keeping of Gods word, do concur to
the procuring of our blessedness and happy being: and the answer arising from
the premises is, that they do concur as joint causes or helps to happiness,
but in a much different manner. They be not [causae coordinatae,] causes of
equal and even respect, like two oxen that draw in the same yoke, or like two
men that carry one burden between them. But they be [causae subordinatae]
causes whereof one is subordinat and serviceable to the other; like the needle
and the thread, both which concur to the sewing of a garment together; but
the needle makes the entrance, and the thread knitteth and conjoyneth the
parts in one. Or, they be like the preparative and the medicine; both which are
joint means for recoverie of health: but the preparative makes way for the
medicine, and the medicine it works the cure. The substance of my speech is
this; Hearing and Doing concur, as joint helps of happiness: but hearing
makes way for doing, and doing makes entrance into glory.

And thus much may suffice for the explication and proof of the point
propounded. The uses are:

Use 1. Seeing hearing is of no use further then it helps us to the doing of
Gods will; by this we may see the great folly of those men, who think highly
of themselves, and prefer their own zele before their neighbors, because
they are frequent hearers, and skillful talkers of Scriptures and religion,
though in the mean while their practice be not answerable. And such there have
been in all ages, and such there are too many in our age also. This is made
good by some examples out of Scripture, and by their application to our own
times.

1. Ex. The first is that which we find Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. They speak one
to an other, every man to his brother, saying, Come I pray you, and hear what
is the word that comes forth from the Lord. And they come unto thee (says God
to the Prophet) as the people comes, and they sit before thee, as my people,
and they hear thy words, but they will not do them. For with their mouth the
show much love: but their heart goes after their coveteousnesse. And lo, thou
art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can
play well on an instrument. For they hear thy words, but they do them not.
Note here (1.) their forwardness in hearing, declared three ways. 1. They
invite and exhort each other to go and hear the Prophet, when he preached
Gods word; Come, say, they, and hear, what is the word, etc. just as if men
should now say one to an other, Come and let us go to such a Lecture, or let us
go and hear such a Sermon. 2. they flock to the Prophet in multitudes. They
come, says the Text, as the people comes; that is, not dropping in, one by
one, but they throng-in by troops. 3. They listen to that which is delivered.
They sit (says God) as my people: that is, devoutly and attentively, waiting
what God will say unto them. And thus far all is well, if it were as sincere
in deed, as in show it seems to be. This was the forwardness of this
people. (2.) Note their backwardness to do what they were taught. They hear
thy words, but do them not: and with their mouths they show much love; but
their heart goes after their covetousness. 3. Note Gods censure of this
dealing; Thou art to them as a lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice,
and can play well upon an instrument. He means, that they made the like use
of the Prophet, that a man would do of a minstrell, and they heard his sermons,
as a man would hear a play. Thus the Lord censured those hot professors among
the Jews: and the like censure agrees well to the speculative and talking
hearers, of our days. They, that frequent Lectures, and flock after sermons,
and gape after the preachers words; and yet, when they are gone home, are as
ready to slander their neighbors, and as forward to speak evil of
Government, and as watchful to deceive Customers, etc. as ever they were
before: these be the hypocritical Hearers, that Ezekiell speaks of, who
show much love with their mouths, but their hearts go after their unlawful
lusts; and these be the deceitful hearers, of whom S. James says, that they
deceive themselves. And of these I may say, They make no better use of a
preacher, then a man would do of a minstrell: that is, to delight themselves
with his voice, but not to follow his direction.

2. Ex. The second example, that fitteth this purpose, is that in Ezekiell
chap. 14. set down at large in many verses together: but summarily comprised
in the 7, and 8. verses. The words are; Every one -- which separateth himself
from me, and sets up his idol in his heart, and puts the stumbling block
of his iniquity before his face, and comes to a Prophet to enquire of him
concerning me; I the Lord will answer him by my self. And I will set my face
against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb. etc. In this passage
there are two things considerable: (1.) A case propounded concerning the
people. And (2) the answer that God makes unto it. The case is this; It is
supposed, that a man does not only repair to the Prophets Sermons in public,
but besides goes to him in private, and asks his direction in points of
religion and Gods service: and yet this man sets up an idol in his heart,
and a stumbling block before his face: that is, he has some one thing or other
that he makes his idol, loving and adoring it, and looking toward it, as the
desire of his eyes, more then he loves or adoreth the true God, whose word he
comes to enquire after. This is the case. Now the answer that God gives
hereunto, is, I will answer him by my self, I will set my face against him,
etc. Apply we this to our times, and it is thus much in effect. They, that
pretend to be more zealous and religious then other men be; these do not only
come to hear our sermons in publik, but they desire also to have our counsel
in private, and propound cases of conscience, desiring our direction therein.
And it is a commendable course, and a ready way to gain knowledge and
understanding by. But if such a man, thus zealous in his way, do notwithstanding
set up an idol in his heart; that is, if he have a purpose, or do live in any
known sin against his conscience. God will meet with that man in his anger,
and cut him off with the wicked, that never enquired after God.

3. Ex. A third example may be that spoken of by our Savior, Luke 13.26. They
shall say unto me, (says our Lord) we have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you
not, whence ye are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. And (as it is
Matt. 7.22.) Many will say to me in that day (of the great judgment,) Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils?
and in thy name have done many wonderful works? And then I will profess unto
them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Here I consider
two things. (1) What these great pretenders to religion did allege for
themselves, and that was, that they had heard CHRIST himself preaching unto
them in his own person; yea that themselves did preach in his name, and (which
is yet more) in his name had cast out devils. And hereupon they thought that
they had a special interest in Christ and his Kingdom. (2.) I consider what
our LORD answered to these allegations; he denies not, but that it was true,
that they had heard CHRIST preaching among them, and that they had taught and
done miracles in his name: all this he grants to be true. But he denies, that
for any or all of these, they had any right in him or in his Kingdom; I never
knew you; depart from me. And why? why, even because ye are workers of
iniquity. The application hereof is obvious and easy. If men be workers of
iniquity, that is, if they live in any known sin which they will not
presently forsake; no hearing of Gods word, though CHRIST himself were the
preacher; nor no preaching of Gods word, though themselves were honored with
that holy calling; no, nor no casting out of devils, as some even in our days
have pretended to do: neither any, nor all of these things, can gain them a
title to heaven, or a right to blessedness and eternal life. Let every good
Christian then take heed, that himself be not carried away, with error of the
wicked; who think highly of themselves for their hearing of Sermons, and
reading of Scriptures, and reasoning of religion. These are good, if they be
well used, that is, if they be made to serve as means of piety and a godly
life: if they make us more just, and more sober, and more peaceable, and more
charitable, and more conscionable in all our ways and dealings; then they are
the blessings of God, and prepare men by holiness to a blessed life. But if
they be separated from sanctity and a godly life; then the curse attends
them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity; and, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels: from which God will
deliver all them, that fear and serve him.

Use 2. Seeing Hearing is of no further use, then as it fitteth us for doing;
hence we have a good rule to judge of the goodness of a Sermon by. For if
hearing be no more worth then as it furthereth us to doing: then preaching is
of as little worth, if it be not fitted for the same end. The reason is,
because preaching and hearing, are both of them ordained for the same end: nor
would there be any use of preaching if there were no need of hearing. No man
ever preached to an infant, because he wants wit to learn what is taught; nor
will any man ever preach to the glorified souls, that be in heaven, because
they have no need of teaching. Preaching only is for this purpose, that men,
who have need of instruction, may learn and make use of what is taught. And
therefore, if that hearing be vain, which does not further a godly life, then
that preaching is no better then babbling, which is not fit to beget godliness
and virtue. And this note yields us two practical rules; one for the
Preacher, and an other for the Hearers.

1. Rule. The rule for the Preacher is this, that in framing and composing of
his Sermon, he should aim at the peoples profiting in an holy life: and all
his thoughts and words should be such, as may work men to the obedience of
Gods Law.

For confirmation hereof we have Gods own example. Isa. 48.17. I am the LORD
thy God, (says he) which teaches thee to profit, and leads thee by the
way, that thou should go. I note two things. (1.) When he says, I am the
Lord, which teaches thee, he professes himself to be a preacher, whose
office is to teach men the way of eternal life. And (2.) when he says, I am
the Lord which teaches to profit: the word is (...) that is, as Montanus
rendereth it, [ad proficiendum,] so as thou majest profit by it, or, as the
vulgar reads it more plainly, though not so literally, [docens te utilia]
which teaches thee profitable things; or, as Piscator paraphraseth it, [apta
ad prodessendum,] such things as are apt or fit to profit them, in goodness.
And this, as a Corn. a Lapides.
Learned Writer enlarges the sense is, as if he should say, [non curiosa, non
vana, non pomposa, and plausum captantia.] I teach thee, not curiosities, not
vanities, not florishes, and such things as may gain praises and applause: but
I teach thee, (says the Lord Almighty) such things, as may be for thy safety
here, and thy salvation hereafter. Thus the wise Lord, the great Pastor and
shepherd of our souls, has left us an example, that we who are Pastors in
his Church, should follow his steps. And in these steps did the blessed Apostle
tread, who in discharge of his duty, could say to his Scholars, I have kept
back nothing that was profitable unto you. Act. 20.20. and v. 27. I have not
shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. In which sentences put
together, it is worth the noting, that first he says, he kept back nothing
that was profitable, and then, saying the same thing over again, that he
declared unto them, all the counsel of God. And hence the collection is easy,
that therefore the whole counsel of God, which is to be declared and preached
unto the people, is only of such things, as are profitable to happiness and a
blessed life. And now, if any desire to know what these profitable things were,
which he used to preach to Gods people; himself has told us elsewhere, that
the sum of his Sermons was, that men should repent, and turn to God, and do
works meet for repentance. Act. 26.20. And Tit. 2.12. That denying ungodlines,
and worldly lusts, they should live soberly and righteously and godlily in this
present world: Soberly, by moderation in the use of temporal comforts; and
righteously, by just and fair dealing among men; and godlily, by serving God
in the holy duties of religion. These were the profitable things which God
taught the people of Israel, and the Apostle preached in the Christian Church.

And we that be the preachers of Gods word, and dispensers of his mysteries,
ought both to imitate God as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. and to be followers of
the Apostle, as he is of CHRIST. 1 Cor. 11.1. And more particularly, as God
himself taught his people profitable things; and as S. Paul taught his
Auditors, to repent and turn unto God, and do works meet for repentance, and
that they should live soberly and righteously, and godlily in this present
world: So our Sermons, both for the matter and the manner of them, should be
such as that the Hearers may profit in piety and a godly life, and by serving
God in holiness and righteousness, may be brought to heaven and eternal
glory. And therefore, when we are at our Studies, framing our Sermons in
private, and when we are about to utter them in publik; we should reflect our
thoughts upon every part or passage of our meditations, questioning with our
hearts (God and our own consciences being the Judges of our thoughts;) whether
such a point in the Sermon, or such a sentence in our discourse, be apt to
minister grace to the hearts of the hearers; and such as may further them in
the duties of a good life, and in one kind or other help forward their
salvation and happiness. And if we find any thing more then this, or
otherwise then thus, we may and ought to blot out that, and cast it away as
being either pernicious, or at the best, but superfluous and idle. This course,
if we hold both in penning of our Sermons and in delivering of them; we shall
approve our selves as good Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, and may in so doing both
save our selves, and them that hear us. God direct both our hearts, and
tongues, so to preach CHRIST, that we prove our selves to be the servants of
our people for JESUS sake.

2. Rule. The second rule is for the Hearers: and that is, that because a
Sermon is no more worth then so far as it furthereth men to an holy life;
therefore they should desire to hear such Sermons, and ever judge them best,
by which themselves may be made better. This rule is to be the more regarded,
because in all ages it has been so much neglected. For first look into the
old Testament, and consider the times before our Lords Incarnation; and there
ye shall find that the people of those times were rebellious, lying children,
that would not hear the Law of the Lord. They said to the Seers, See not; and
to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things. Speak unto us smooth
things, Prophecy deceits. Is. 30.10. And if a man walking in the spirit, and
falsehood, do lie, saying, I will prophecy unto thee of wine and of strong
drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this people. So says the Prophet Mic.
2.11. and he means, that if a man should pretend to be sent of God, and take
upon him the office of a preacher; and should withal preach liberty for their
lusts, and a freedom to follow their own wills: this would be the only man
in their esteem and reckoning They would praise him and pay him, and follow
him from town to town, and from one parish to an other. Again, look into
the new Testament; and there ye shall hear our Lord telling the men of his
time; I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if an other shall
come in his own name, him ye will receive. Ioh. 5.43. And S. Paul tells us of
aftertimes, that men would not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts
would heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and would turn away
their ears from the truth, and would be turned unto fables. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
Where (1.) when he says, Having itching ears; he means, that they delight
to have their ears tickled with such speeches, as may please the fancy: as on
the contratie the Poet says of unpleasing speeches, Quid opus est teneras
mordaci radere vero Auriculas?
that they bite and grate the ears of men. (2.) When he says, that they
desire, Teachers after their own lusts, he means they desire such, as will
preach what they please, and will say that is truth, which themselves fancy to
be so, or at least, which they wish were so. (3.) When he says of these men,
that they heap such Teachers; he intimates that they are not contented with
one or two, such as God and the Church has appointed to be their Pastors, but
they run from place to place, and single out such men for their masters, as
is agreeable to their own humors. This the Apostle did fortell of the later
times: and into these times are we now fallen.

For first same there be, who delight in fine phrases, and witty turnings:
and if they hear such a one, they entertain him with Hems of applause. But
when Leosthenes made such a like wordie speech, (...). Plutarch. Apoph.
to the Athenians, Phocion said his words were like the Cypress tree, which is
goodly and fair to see to, but bears no fruit. And so, I think, the men who
most admire such florishes of wit, can hardly say what fruit of godliness they
find in them. Others delight in men, that do glance at authority, and in a
canting kind of language, which their followers know whereto it tends, do
nible at the orders of our Church, and the Government of the present State.
Such a man, if he be once heard speak in a pulpit, is followed all the town
over. Nor is it any marvel: for it has been found true in all ages, that
nothing is more pleasing to the multitude, then to hear themselves flattered,
and their superiors traduced and slandered. See an example in Absalom, and the
people of that time. Absalom (says the Text) rose up early, and stood by the
side of the gate. And it was so, that when any man, that had a controversy,
came to the King for judgment; then Absalom called unto him and said -- See,
thy matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed of the King to
hear thee, Absalom said moreover. Oh that I were made a Judge in the land,
that every man, that has any suite or cause, might come to me and I would do
him justice, etc. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. 2 Samuel
15:2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In this Scripture we may note two things, (1.) the practice
that Absalom used: and (2.) the success that it found. His practice was in
three things. 1. He flattered the Commons, See, thy matters are right, and
ver. 5. he gave them his hand. 2. He accused the Government, There is no man
(says he) deputed of the King to hear thee; He means there was no man, to
decide his cause and to do him justice: He did not, nor could not for shame
say, that the King did them any injustice; but by accusing his officers, and
complaining of those that were about him, he brought the Kings Government into
dislike with the people. 3. He wished for better Counselors and Judges, that
would right the poor Commons; Oh that I were made Judge in the land, that men
might come to me, and I would do them justice. Such like was the practice of
Absalom. (2.) But how succeeded it? why, he stole away the hearts of the
people, made them ill affected to the State, and the conspiracy was strong:
for the people increased continually with Absalom, as it is ver. 12. Thus it
was in times past: we cannot expect any other thing in our days, but that if
men of place, especially if preachers shall show themselves popular, humoring
the people and slandering the State, this will be a pleasing way to the
multitude: and if a King were as good as David, and Bishops as good as the
Apostles, this course would steal away the hearts of the people, from the
obedience of King and State. And it is the great iniquity of the common sort,
that they delight in such perverse Teachers. Such men are here to be
admonished, that when they come from such Sermons, they think with themselves,
how they have thereby profited in grace and goodness; what good duty they have
learned to perform, what sin they have learned to subdue, or what rule they
have learned to better their life's by. I only add this more, that if they or
if any man be not edified by our Sermons, and made more holy and more just and
more sober; then is our preaching in vain, and their hearing is in vain, and
in vain it is to them, that God reveiled his will to the world: and better it
were that Preachers were dumb, and people were deaf, then that they should
abuse Gods word, in such a vain manner.

Use 3. Seeing hearing, and learning, and knowing of Gods word, is only so
far good, as it helps us to do what God does command; but Doing of Gods
word is acceptable in it self, and by it self profitable, as an immediate
condition, for entrance into Gods Kingdom: hence we learn, how necessary the
keeping of Gods word and commandments is. The young man in the Gospel asked
of our Savior, Good master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have
eternal life? and our Lord answered him, If thou will enter into life, keep
the commandments. Matt. 19.16, 17. David asked of God, Lord, who shall abide
in thy Tabernacle, and who shall dwell in thy holy hill? and the Lord answered
him, He that walks uprightly and works righteousness, and speaks the
truth in his heart. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to
his neighbor, etc. Ps. 15.1, 2, etc. And so ask of Isai, how ye may fast to
please God; and he will answer, It is to loose the bands of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free -- to deal thy
bread to the hungry, to bring the poor, that are cast out, to thy house, when
thou see a naked man, to cover him, etc. Is. 58.6, 7. Ask of Micah, Wherewith
thou shall come before God, to please him: and he will answer, What does the
Lord require of thee: but to do justly, and to love mercy? etc. Micah. 6.6, 8.
Ask of S. Peter, who it is, that is accepted of God; and he will answer, It is
he that fears God and works righteousness. Act. 10.34. Ask of an Angel
from heaven, who is a blessed man, and he will answer, Blessed are they, which
do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in, through the gates into the City. Apoc. 22.14. And whatsoever other
like question ye shall ask, the Scriptures will still give you the like
answer. It is not enough to hear the word: for hearers, if they be not doers
also, deceive themselves. Iam. 1.22. It is not enough to know Gods will: for
the servant that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Luke 12.47. It is not enough to profess CHRIST with great
zele: for not every one, that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father, which is in heaven, says
our Savior. Matt. 7.21. It is not enough to fast for sin: for to them who
fasted to strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, it was
said from heaven, ye shall not fast, as ye do this day, to make your voice to
be heard on high. Is. 58.4. It is not enough to preach the Gospel: for if a man
do not keep under his body, and bring it in subjection, after he has preached
unto others, himself may prove a castaway. 1 Cor. 9.27. Finally, it is not
enough to prophecy, and work miracles, and cast out devils: for unto many such
Christ will say at the last day, I never knew you, depart from me, ye workers
of iniquity. Matt. 7.22, 23. In all which speeches and sayings, there is still
walking and working and doing: and without doing of good, there is no obtaining
of life. Therefore, dear Christians, what ever ye do else, be sure ye do
Gods will, and keep his commandments: do your duty to God, by performing his
services of religion; do your duty to men, by observing justice and true
dealing; do your duty to your selfs, by watching over your own souls, that
ye may take all opportunities of well-doing. This do, and your souls shall
live. And so I end these Meditations with the words of the Text, Blessed are
they, that hear the word of God and keep it.

AN APPENDIX TO THE FORMER TREATISE, Containing RULES OF RIGHT Hearing Gods
word.

By HENRY MASON, Pastor of S. Andrew Undershaft, London.

LONDON, Printed for John Clark, and are to be sold at his shop, under S.
Peter's Church in Corne-hill. M. DC. XXXV.

RULES OF RIGHT HEARING Gods word.
HAVING already spoken of the use and necessity of Hearing; it will be
seasonable to say somewhat of the right manner of hearing. For the best work
that is, may be marred by the misdoing of it. For avoiding of which error in
this duty of hearing, our Lord has given us a short caveat, Luke 8.18: where
he says, Take heed how ye hear. And this caveat, being propounded in brief
by our Savior, I purpose, Gods Spirit assisting me, to enlarge with some few
notes agreeable to the Text: intending thereby so to regulat our hearing, that
we may profit by it in the duties of Gods service.

1. First then, when our Savior says, Take heed how ye hear, he implies
in this word [how,] that we must regard as well the manner as the matter of the
duty: the good work is not enough, unless it be done well. 2. When he says,
Take heed how, etc. this word [Take heede] implies two things; (1.) that
there is danger of erring in this duty, and that unless we be wary we may
do it amiss: and (2.) that by heedfulnesse, the danger may be prevented. For
caveats are needless, where there is no danger; and fruitless where they do
not help to avoid the danger. And these 3. the manner of doing, the danger of
mis-doing, and the profit of wariness in the doing; are the points, on which I
mean by Gods grace to insist.

CAP. X.
In the doing of good works, the manner is to be respected, as well, as the
matter.



I. In Scriptures, as God commands the duty, so he commands the due manner
of doing it also. For example, he does not only command us to pray but
requires also, that we pray in faith, and without wavering. Iam. 1.6. And
with fervencie and without fainting. Iam. 5.16. and Luke 18.1. Again, he does
not only command us to read, but that in reading we mark and consider. Matt.
24.15. And so he does not only command us to hear, but that we hearken to
his words, and let them sink down into our ears. Luke 9.44. and Act. 2.14.
Nor does he only command us to give alms, but besides, that we do it
cherefully, not grudgingly nor of necessity, nor for the praise and applause
of men. 2 Cor. 9.7. and Matt. 6.2, 3, 4. And so again, if any man speak, let
him speak, as the Oracles of God. 1 Pet. 4.11. that is, let him so speak Gods
word, as beseems the word of the Almighty. And, if any man prophecy, let him
prophecy according to the proportion of faith: and he, that gives, let him
do it with simplicity; and, he that rules, let him do it with diligence; and
he that shows mercy, let him do it with cherefulnesse. To. 12.6. Moreover,
when the Apostle says, The Law is good, if it be used lawfully. 1 Timothy 1.8: he
implies, that a man may, but ought not to use Gods Law in an unlawful manner.
And when speaking of the course of godliness, he says, So run, that ye may
obtain. 1 Cor. 9.24: He intimates two things. (1.) that we should not only
run the ways of Gods commandments, but run them in a right manner. And
(2.) that if a man do not run in a right manner, he may lose his labor and
miss of his reward. By all this it appears, that God does not only command
the matter of good duties, but the right manner of doing them also. It
follows, if we do the thing that is commanded, yet we sin, if we do it not
in the manner, that is required.

II. Good duties, if they be not done in a due manner, and with their due
circumstances, are rejected of God, as no parts of his service. To this purpose
is that which we read in the Prophet, To what purpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of
rams, and the fat of fed beasts: and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or
of lambs or of he goats. When ye come to appear before me, who has required
this at your hand, to tread my courts? Bring no more vain oblations: incense
is an abomination unto me: the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies I cannot away with: it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your
new Moons and your appointed feasts my soul hates: they are a trouble unto
me: I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide
my eyes from you; yet, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands
are full of blood. Is. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. In this passage we may note these
particulars: (1.) the works and services, which these men performed, and they
were multitude of sacrifices, burnt offerings of rams, fat of fed beasts, etc.
They were also keeping of new Moons and Sabbaths and solemn assemblies, etc.
All which were services commanded in Gods Law, and directed and serving to his
glory. (2.) Consider the acceptance and entertainment, that God gave to these
services of piety and religion: and that is 1. he renounceth them, as none of
his services; Who (says he) required these things at your hands? 2. He
complains of them, as of heavy burdens, that oppressed him, I am full of the
burnt offerings of rams, etc: they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear
them. 3. He shows his dislike and detestation of them; I delight not in the
blood of bulls, etc. incense is an abomination unto me: the new Moons and
Sabbaths I cannot away with. 4. He threatens the doers of these services with
his high displeasure; When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you, etc. This is the welcome that these duties found at Gods hands. (3.)
Consider the reason, why God accepted no better of the services of his own
appointment, and that is set down in the last words; Your hands are full of
blood. The meaning and intendment of the whole speech is this, that this people
dealt unjustly, and took bribes and oppressed their poor neighbors: for this
the Prophet means, when he says, your hands are full of blood. And because
they brought Gods sacrifices, and did the works of his service with polluted
hands, and defiled hearts, therefore he rejected both them, and their
devotions, though otherwise they were works of his own prescribing. And what
here is said of sacrifices and Sabbaths and Festival assemblies, the like is
elsewhere said of fasting and humiliation and mourning. Isa. 58.3, 4, 5, 6: and
Zach. 7.5, 6. And hence the conclusion is, that the best services of God in
every kind, if they be not performed in an holy manner, and with their due
circumstances and conditions, are of no account in Gods sight. It follows,
Therefore not only the matter of good duties, but the manner of doing them, is
required at our hands.

Use 1. This confuteth their error, who think they have served God well, when
they have done the outward works contained in his Law, though void of all true
devotion in the heart, and without the circumstances due to such works. Such
were the Jews of old time. They said unto God; Wherefore have we fasted, and
thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no
knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all
your labors. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist
of wickedness: ye shall not fast, as ye do this day, to make your voice to be
heard on high: Is it such a fast, that I have chosen? A day for a man to
afflict his soul, etc. Isa. 58.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Note here (1.) the good opinion,
that this people had of their fasting, they thought so well of it, that they
durst challenge God, as if he had done them wrong, because he did not reward
their service according to its worth; Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see
not? etc. (2.) Consider the fault, that God found with this service; and that
is, In the day of your fast ye find pleasure, etc. Where we may see that God
does neither deny them to have fasted, nor blame them because they fasted: he
only chalengeth them for doing it amiss. For whereas a fasting day should be
spent in humiliation and sorrow, they on their fasting day found pleasure, and
followed their delights: and whereas on the fasting day, men should exercise
themselves in charity and good works; they fasted for strife and debate, and to
strike with the fist of wickedness. It was not then the matter, that was
blameworthy in them, but their manner of performing. They did a good work, but
they did not do it well: (3.) Consider we the Censure that God passed on this
service. 1. He says, it will not avail them, or do them any good; Ye shall
not fast, as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high: Which
is, as if he should say, It is a special virtue of an holy fast, that it
carries our prayers through the clouds, and presents them before the Throne
of grace: but this fast of yours has no such virtue, it gains no audience to
your prayers. 2. God denies this fast to be any part of his service, or any
duty that he required or will accept of; Is this the fast, that I have chosen,
etc? And so in conclusion, though they took great pains, and (as they
thought) had highly merited Gods favor: Yet all was to no purpose, because
though they performed a good work, yet they did not do it in a right manner.
Thus Isai speakerh of a religious fast joined with an irreligious life. Jeremy
says the like of other holy duties in the like case. The place is Ier. 7.8, 9,
10, 11. The words are; Behold, ye trust in lying words, that can not profit.
Will ye steal, murder and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
incense to Baal, and walk after other gods, whom ye know not; and come and
stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are
delivered to do all these abominations? Is this house, which is called by my
name, become a den of Robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, says
the Lord. In these words these things are considerable, (1.) what the works
were, that this people performed; and they were these, they prayed and praised
God, and did all such services, as were usual in the Temple: for that is meant
by this phrase, ye come and stand before me in this house. (2.) What
confidence they had in these performances, They trusted in lying words, saying,
We are delivered, etc. (3.) What the defect of these services was; and that
was that together with these good works, they joined their own sins, murder
and stealing and lying for advantage. (4) What censure God passed on these
devotions thus performed; and that was in these two things: 1. that they
trusted in lying words: and 2. that by them they profaned Gods house, and made
it, no better, then a den of thieves, therein to hide their wicked deeds. This
was the error of the ancient Jews in the days of the Prophets. And the like
was the error of the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors time: and therefore
he says of them, ye make clean the outside of the cup and the platter: but
your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. Luke 11.39. And the like
has been the error of some seduced Papists in our own time, who think they
have served God well, when they have gone over their beads, and mumbled over a
tail of Latin prayers, which they understand not. Nor is the error of some
loose livers among our selves, any thing less or more excusable, who detesting
the superstitions of the Papists, do but change theirs for an other
superstition of their own: such I mean, as measure their religion by the
number of the Sermons, which they hear, as the other measured theirs by the
number of prayers, which they counted on their beads or on their finger ends.
These, if they hear often, and pray much, and repeat Sermons at home, they
think they are highly in Gods favor; though withal they slander their
neighbors, and revile their Governors, and condemn all for reprobats, that
dance not after their pipe. I speak not this to cast any aspersion on those
holy duties of hearing and praying and recounting of what we have heard: but
to detect their folly and iniquity, who make these holy exercises a cloak for
their sin, and a ground of their censorious pride. Isai and Jeremy did not
speak against fasting and sacrifices, when they reproved the hypocrites of
their time, for abusing those duties in an unholy manner. And no more do I mean
the least word against hearing and praying and repeating; when I tax the
hypocrites of our time, for perverting these good works to a bad end. I would
have all of us to honor God by these duties, and not to dishonor him by
mingling them with hypocrisy and bad dealing.

Use 2. Hence we may learn not to content our selves with the deed done; but
that when we are about an holy work, we do it also in an holy manner, and with
the due circumstances belonging or required in such a work. Now, to speak more
distinctly, there are three conditions required in every good work: 1. That it
proceed from a clear conscience, not defiled with known sin: 2. That it be
with an hearty and sincere affection: and 3. that it be done to a right end.

I. It is required in a good work that it proced, from a good conscience free
from known sin. For to the wicked and disobedient man, God says, What have
thou to do, to declare my statuts; or that thou should take my covenant
within thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind
thee. Ps. 50.16, 17. The meaning is, as if he should say, It pertains not to
thee, to profess religion, seeing thou do not practice it. And so if any
man having a polluted conscience, take upon him to preach Gods word, God may
say to him; What have thou to do to teach my Law, which thou observest not? And
if any such do come to hear Gods word, God may say to him; what have thou to
do to hear, who art resolved not to obey? And if such a one shall come to pray
or to praise God, with his people, God may say to him; what have thou to do, to
pray unto me, or to praise me with thy mouth, who blasphemest me daily in thy
deeds? But most of all, if any such shall come to partake of the holy
Communion, God may say to him; what have thou to do, to eat my bread, who
do lift up the heel against me? Or, to such a one our Lord may say as he
did to the unmanerly guest in the Gospel, Friend, how came thou in hither,
not having on a wedding garment? Matt. 22.11. Nor is this all: it follows in
the same Text, Take him away, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. This is the case and the condition of them, who
perform outward services of religion, while they have consciences within
defiled with known sin. The application hereof to our selves is this; that
therefore we do in this, as David did in the like case. He resolved, I will
wash my hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I compass thine Altar. Psalm.
26.6: meaning, Exodus 30 19, 21.
that as the Priests, before they offered sacrifice, did first wash their hands
and feet: so he would wash his soul in innocence? and cleanse his hands from
injustice and wrong; and then he would offer up his sacrifices unto God. And so
must we do: First cleanse our souls from sin, and then go to eat at Gods
board, and to hear his word preached, and to offer up our prayers and praises
to his name. A polluted heart cannot perform an acceptable work. This then is
the first condition in a good work, that it proceed from a good heart, free
from known sin.

II. The second is, that it be done with upright and hearty affection. For God
loves a cherefull Giver. 2 Cor. 9.7. And so I may say, God loves a cherefull
hearer, and a cherefull receiver, and a cherefull Petitioner, and a cherefull
doer in all his services. But when men performed not hearty obedience; he
complains of it, and threatens them for their hollow-hearted service. For
as much, (says he) as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and
with their lips do honor me; but have removed their heart far from me:
Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work among this people:
-- for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of
their prudent men shall be hid. Is. 29.13. And so, if any man come to hear
Gods word with his ears, or to pray with his lips, or to present himself at
Gods board with his bodily presence; and in the meanwhile send his heart an
other way, either not minding, or not caring, or not affecting the work in
hand: the reproof will be as just against him; This man draws near unto me
with his mouth and his ears and his outward parts; but his heart and his soul
are far removed away. And where his heart is, there is his treasure: and
where his treasure is, thence must he expect his reward. Hereof this must be
the application, that as David said of himself, My heart and my flesh rejoice
in the living God. Ps. 84.2. meaning that the joy of his heart did spread it
self into the parts of this body; so should it be with us; Our heart and our
mouth, should receive the blessed Sacrament; and our heart and our ears should
hear the word preached and read; and our heart and our hand should give alms
to the poor. And so in all other the like cases. For as when Plutar, in vita
Julii Caesar. page 737. Val. Max. l. 1. cap. 6. number. 13.
Caesar offered sacrifice, it was counted an ominous thing for him, that there
was no heart found in the beast that was slain: so it portendeth us no good,
if our heart be absent, when we pray and hear and praise God for his mercies.

III. It is required in a good work, that it be done for a right end, that is,
that God, whose service it is, may be honored by it. So S. Peter says, If any
man speak, let him speak, as the Oracles of God; and, if any man minister,
let him do it, as of the ability, which God gives; that God in all things may
be glorified through JESUS CHRIST, 1 Pet. 4.11. And S. Paul, Whether ye eat
or drink or whatsoever ye do; do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. Gods
glory then is the right end for which all good works must be done. And when
men neglected or missed of this end in their good works, God upbraideth them
with it; When ye fasted and mourned, -- did ye at all fast unto me, even to
me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your
selves, and drink for your selves? Zach. 7.5, 6. Of such services as these,
which are void of their right end, our Lord gives us this caveat; Take heed
that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise, ye have
no reward of your father, which is in Heaven. Matt. 6.1. And so, if we preach
to gain applause from men, and ye hear, to make a show of your zeal, and if
any of us give alms, or do any other work, not for Gods glory, but for our
own ends; it is a lame sacrifice, not rewardable by the Almighty. And hereof
we should make this application to our selves; that as S. Paul said of himself
and his fellow-workmen in the Gospel, We preach not our selves, but CHRIST
JESUS the LORD, and our selves your servants for JESUS sake. 2 Cor. 4.5. So we
should show the like faithfulness in all our good works, that we seek not
our own ends, but Gods glory in them. And if thus we perform our holy
services, it will be said of us and of them, as it was of Abel and his
sacrifice, The Lord had respect to Abel and his offering. Genesis 4.4. The LORD
will accept both of our persons and our performances; so that nothing which we
do for Gods glory, but will prove to be also for our own profit. God give us
the grace, that we may be fruitful in good works and faithful in the right
doing of them to Gods glory; that in all things GOD may be gloried through
JESUS CHRIST.

CAP. XI.
A man may hear amiss; and by this error lose the benefit of his labor.

Take heed how ye hear, gives us a caveat, to beware of misse-hearing: and
that implies, that a man may hear amiss, and so miss of his purpose. This
may be further confirmed by the parable of the Sower; the scope whereof is, to
show us the diversity that is found among hearers: and the issue thereof is,
that of four sorts there recited 3. are like bad ground, which brings forth
no fruit to perfection. And that proves, that the greatest part of hearers, do
hear amiss, and without profit. It may be confirmed also by that of S. Paul,
Not the hearers of the Law are just before God: But the doers of it shall be
justified. Romans 2.13. For all hearers are not doers: and by that which he
says of the preachers of the Gospel, to some sort of hearers they are the
savor of death unto death. 2 Cor. 2.16: and by that which our Savior says of
some of his hearers, Ye shall say, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you
not whence ye are; depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. Luke 13.26, 27:
and by that which elsewhere he says of them, who despised his doctrine, The
word, that I have spoken, the same shall judge them at the last day. John.
12.48. By these sayings it appears, that there are some, which received not
profit by their hearing, no, not of the gracious words that proceeded out of
our Saviors mouth: and thence I conclude, that therefore they heard amiss;
for the word of God, if the fault be not in the hearer, is the power of God to
salvation. Romans 1.16. But I only name these proofs, because I choose rather to
insist on such testimonies, as do both show us, that there may be a fault in
our hearing, and do also tell us what that fault is: that by the one we may
see how necessary it is, to be heedfull, lest we hear amiss; and by the
other how to avoid the error, that does procure the danger.

For this purpose I observe five sorts of bad hearers condemned in Scriptures;
1. Heedlesse hearers, 2. Partial hearers, 3. Forgetful hearers, 4. Sensual
hearers, and 5. Fruitless hearers, or such as do not obey the word delivered
unto them.

I. The first are heedlesse and negligent hearers: and they be such as hear,
but do not mark or attend to that which is spoken. Such as these they were, of
whom Isai complains; Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see.
-- He goes on; Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears,
but he hears not. Isa. 42.18, 20. Note here (1.) the fault, with which they
are charged: they are said to be deaf and blind. (2) the explication or
declaration, showing, wherein this fault consisted; Seeing many things, but
thou observest not: etc. he means that they heard and saw, but they did not
mark and observe, what they heard. And for this cause he calls them blind
and deaf; because no man is so blind and deaf, as he that will not see and
hear. (3.) We may consider the means, by which this error may be amended:
and that is in these words, Hear and look; by which he means that they
should attend and mark what they heard. Lay these together, and the fault will
appear to be this, that while they heard and came to learn, they did not
observe what was said. And the like to this was their fault, of whom the
Apostle says, Ye are dull of hearing. For when for the time, ye ought to be
Teachers; ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first principles
of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.11. Here the Apostle charge them with two
things: (1.) that they were dull of hearing. By which word he means not any
natural imperfection; for then he would rather have pitied them, then have
reproved them: but he means their wilful carelessenesse and negligence, by
reason whereof scarce could any thing be beaten into their heads. (2.) He
blames them, that they profited not by the word preached, as they might and
should have done. For considering the means that was afforded them, and the
time that they enjoyed it, they might become Teachers, if they had been
attentive hearers; Whereas now by reason of their negligence they had need to
be catechized in the first principles. The sum is, They were negligent in
hearing: and therefore continued dullards in Christ's school. And the like will
be our fault, if when we come to hear Gods word either read or preached, we
suffer our minds to gadd abroad, by musing on our merchandising, or our
bargaining, or our husbandry, or our business at home: or, which is not much
better, if we give our selves over to sleepiness or deadness of spirit; as I
have noted some to lay their heads upon their desk, as if they meant that
should be their pillow to sleep on; and to pull their hat about their eyes, as
if they meant to draw the curtains about the bed, and bid good night to the
Preacher. They that hear in this sort; out of doubt do hear amiss, if they
hear at all. And therefore when our Savior said, Take heed how ye hear, he
meant among other things, that we should beware of negligence in our hearing.

II. The next is, of such, as be partial hearers: men, who will hearken to
Gods word, while it accords with their lusts; but will none of it, when it
crosses their desires. And these are of two sorts: (1.) such as will abide no
doctrine, which agrees not with their own fancy, and those lessons, which they
have received from their own Masters: and (2.) such, as will endure no
admonitions, that strike at the sins, in which they delight.

1. They that will not abide any doctrine, which twharteth their received
opinions. Such were the Jews, of whom we read, that when Paul spoke unto them
in the Hebrew tongue, they kept the more silence, because by this he seemed
the better affected to their nation. But when he told them, that GOD bade him,
Depart from Jerusalem; because he would send him far thence to the Gentiles:
the Text says, that they gave him audience unto that word; but then they
lifted up their voices and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it
is not fit that he should live. Act. 22.2, 22. And such like were the Pharisees,
of whom we read, that they joined with the Sadduces to accuse Paul: but when
Paul had once said, Act. 23 6, 9.
Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee; of the hope and
Resurrection of the dead I am called in question: the Pharisees perceiving that
Paul took their part against the Sadduces, whose enemies they were, then they
changed their note, and, We find no evil in this man, say they: but if a
spirit or an Angel have spoken unto him, let us not fight against God. The
fault of both these sorts of men was, that they accepted and magnified the
Preacher, while he spoke agreeably to their opinions; but persecuted him, when
he crossed their Traditions and customs. And the like is the fault of many men
at this day. Let a Preacher speak any thing in favor of their opinions, and
they magnify him, for a man of rare parts: but let him once but cross or
gainesay that which they believe to be true, and he shall be debased, as
unworthy to tread upon the ground. In which kind, I have met with some Papists,
so stiff in what they have been taught, that a man might as soon charm a
deaf adder, as persuade them to consider of any reason. And among our brethren
of the German Churches, a great number are so wedded to Luthers opinions, that
they esteem every saying of his, as an Oracle from heaven; and, as Non-nulli
in illius (Lutheri) dictis aut factis aliquid argui omnino pati nequesit, and
siquis hoc facere audeat, cum statim impietatis reum declamitando peragunt.
Camerar. in vita Phil. Melancth. page 239.
Camerarius says, who was well acquainted with their manners, if any man did
question, what he had affirmed, they esteemed him as an enemy to God and true
religion: Iis videndum, ne praestantissimi atque summi viri bonam
existimationem, tribuendo nimium, diminuere vide antur. Camer. ibid.
by which excessive praises they did much diminish the honor of Gods servant,
as the same Author intimates in the same place. Thus they: and I would to God,
the same fault were not too frequent among our selves also. But Zanchius
tells us, that when he was at Geneva, Viret and Calvin did both preach in
diverse Churches at the same hour, and upon this occasion he asking a
Frenchman then a constant hearer of Calvin, why he did not sometimes at least,
go to hear so eloquent a Preacher as Viret was, Si veniret S. Paulus qui eade^
hora co^cionaretur, qua and Calvinus; ego, relicto Paulo audirem Calvinum,
Zanch, Epist. Nuncupat. ad Senate. Antuerp. praefixa Miscellaneis priorib. circa
medium.
He plainly professed, If S. Paul should preach at the same hour, that Calvin
does, I would leave Paul to hear Calvin. By which example he Hoc exempli
causa refer volui, ut quonam tandem rapia^tur, qui praestantes viros nimium
admirantur, oste^derem. Ex hominibus in summa faciunt sibi Deos etc Za^ch. ibid.
meant to show with what madness they are carried, who admire worthy men, more
then is fit for men: of men they make them Gods, and equal them with CHRIST
himself. And my self have known some Zelots, who did even gape after the
Preachers words, while he was upon a welcome theme: but when once he did but
mention the reverent gesture of kneeling at Communion, became as blank, as if
they had seen a ghost. Of all these sorts of men I may speak in a like manner,
as Teruill. A polog. ca. 6. number. 55. page 30.
Tertullian did of the heathenish Romans, who forbade the making of any new
God, but such as the Senate did approve: [Apud vos de humano arbitratu divinitas
pensitatur;] Among you, says he, Gods are esteemed, as men please: and [Nisi
ho mini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit,] If God do not please men, he must be
no God at all. And so I may say of these men, Among the^ the truth of God is
reckoned by the opinion of men: if it be not approved by such a man, as they
follow, it shall be no truth at all.

This partiality toward Gods servants, is a great derogation to Gods glory:
against which our Savior gives this caveat, Call no man father upon earth;
for one is your father, which is in heaven. Nor be ye called masters; for one
is your master, even CHRIST. Matt. 23.9, 10. He means, that though we may and
must reverence our Teachers; and, (as the Apostle speaks) esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake: 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Yet we may not make them
Authors or Lords of our faith, and therefore believe every thing to be true,
because they speak it. For this were not to magnify them, as worthy men, but
to deifie them, as if they were supernall Gods. And therefore the Apostle
reproves the Corinthians, as carnal men, because they said, I man of Paul,
and I am of Apollos, and I am of Cephas. For who is Paul, (says he) and who
is Apollos, but ministers, by whom ye have believed, even as the Lord gave to
every man. 1 Cor. 3.4, 5, And hereupon he infers, Let no man glory in men:
for all things are yours. ver. 21. And therefore, whosoever is best and
greatest in the Church, though he were as good, as S. Paul, yet we must esteem
him but as Gods Minister, who is then to be heard, when he speaks, what God
has put into his mouch. Herein the Bereans are commended to us, as a pattern
for our practice. They, after Paul had preached unto them, searched the
Scriptures, that they might see whether those things were so. Act. 17.11. And
so should we do; If the best man alive sgould commend unto us his opinions, we
should examine them, before we accept them, and search the Scriptures, to
consider whether that, which he speaks, be agreeable to the Texts, which he
alleges: that so God alone may be the master of our faith.

And this we shall the sooner do, if we be so disposed, as these Bereans
were, that is, men of noble and free spirits, not servilly addicted to any
without reason. Salvianus, an ancient and learned writer does ascribe the cause
of this partial following of men, to weakness of judgment, and want of
consideration. Tam imbecilla sunt judicia hujus te^poris, ac paene, ta^ nulla;
ut hi qui legunt, non tam considerent quid legant, quam cujus legant: nec tam
dictionis vim atque virtutem, quam dictatoris cogitent dign^ tatem Salv^an.
contra Avarit. epist. ad Salonium page 9.
So weak, says he) are men's judgments now a days, that they which read the
works of other men, do not so much consider, what it is which they read, as
whose it is: nor do they weigh so much the force of the speech, as the
authority of the speaker. But Ludovicus Vives, a late learned men, lays the
fault of this error upon the factious minds of men, who partially addict
themselves to one side, Videmus hodie rem potius affectibus geri, sicut in
partibus and factionibus Civitatum, quam ratione and judicio. Sic Judaeus
adhaeret mordicus suae secta: sic Saracenus and caeteri; quoniam eas a
parentibus acceperunt. Nec excutiunt quo meus and ratio, si apre in confilium
adhiberentur, eos essent tandem perducturae. Ludov. Vives de Verit. Fidei in
praef. vide and page 357.
Now a days, (says he) the business of religion is managed by passion,
rather then by reason, as it usually happens in the faction and siding of
Cities. The Jew adhereth to his sect, and so does the Saracen and others to
theirs, because they have been so bred and taught by their parents: nor do
they consider, whither reason and judgment would conduct them, if they were
admitted for counselors, to advise with. We may well join both these causes
together, and say that faction and siding in matters of religion does so
possess men's minds, that they give not themselves leave, to use reason and
judgment, for discerning of the truth. For, as Tullie observed long ago, the
Obest pleru^que iis qui discere volunt, autoritas coru^, qui se docere
profitentur. desinu^t enim suum judiciu^ adhibere: id habent ratum, quod ab eo,
quem probant, judicatu^ vident. Cicer. de not. Deoru^, paulo post principium,
page 197. lin. 4. and multas falsas and malas opiniones, been volenti^ erga
dicentes eorumque apud nos autoritate inducti in errorem, amplectimur.
Plutarch. de Auditione page 41.
authority of the Teacher does many times hinder the profiting of his Scholars.
For while they take all for good, which he says, [desinunt adhibere judicium
suum,] they forbear to use their own judgment. Nor, says he, was it a
commendable practice in the Pythagorians, who being demanded a reason of their
sayings, alleged the authority of their Master; and thought it a reason good
enough, if they could say, [Ipse dixit,] Our master said so. [Tantum opinio
praejudicata poterat, ut etiam sine ratione valeret autoritas,] Such was their
prejudicat opinion of their Masters worth, that with them his authority was
sufficient without reason. Thus wise men in all ages have thought the^
unprofitable scholars, who have factiously and partially addicted themselves to
some Masters of their own liking: and therefore I may upon good ground say,
that such are bad hearers, or such as hear Gods word amiss. Thus much for the
first sort of partial hearers.

2. The second sort are they, who will hear with all readiness and attention,
till the Preacher touch upon their own sore; but their darling sin, is a noli
me tangere, touch that and ye touch the aple of their eye. Such a one was
Herod, who heard John Baptist gladly, and when he heard him, did many things
according to his direction. But when he told the King, It is not lawful for
thee to have thy brothers wife; then insteede of hearing him, and following his
directions, he first sent him to the prison, and then to the block. Mar. 6.17,
18, 20, etc. And as bad or worse were they, who said to the Seers, See not; and
to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things: speak unto us smooth
things, Prophecy deceits. Isa. 30.10. Where we may not so construe the Text,
as if this people did utter those express words: they were not so shameless,
or so devoid of reason. But it is the manner of Scriptures, to put into men's
mouths those words which are agreeable to their thoughts: according to which
rule, when the Prophet says, they said Prophecy not right things, etc; we must
understand him to mean, that such were their thoughts, as might very fitly be
expressed by these words, or that they did in effect as good as say so: for
either they maligned and opposed the Prophets, when they told them of their
sins; or else they withdrew their maintenance and favors from them: but if any
would sing a Nightingalls song, and speak that which either might countenance,
or did not control their ill-dealings, he was the man that carried away all
the favor. And like to these were those of whom Micah speaks; If a man
(says he) walking in the spirit and falsehood, do lie, saying, I will
prophecy to thee of strong drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this people.
Micah 2.11. He means that such a Teacher would be the only man of account
with them; they would even put him into their bosom. Thus it has been in old
time, and the like may be observed to be usual among us at this day. For
there is no man, who is resolved to go on in a sin; but he is grieved, when he
hears it gainesaid by the Preacher: nor is there any man lightly, but will
be glad to hear that sin gently handled, wherewith himself is delighted. Of
Ahab we read that he hated Micaiah, because he never prophesied good, but
evil unto him: that is, he preached that, which pleased him not. And so we
see it to happen still: wicked men will hate the Preacher, who tells them the
truth.

This hatred against the true Prophets, as it is seen in all sorts of carnal
men; so more especially in these two sorts of sinners, (1.) in them who be in
higher place, and (2.) in them who, contribute to the Preachers maintenance:
for the one sort think themselves privileged from reproof by their greatness
above him; and the other sort, by their well-deservings toward him. And
therefore, as the first do over-aw him by their power, that for fear of
displeasure he may hold his peace: so the second sort do over-aw him by their
purse, that for fear of loss he may forbear them. In either kinds we have
an example in the Scriptures: the former in Jeroboam the King of Israel, and
the later in Balak the King of Moab.

I. The first is in Jeroboam: of him and his Courtiers we read, that when Amos
preached against them for their idolatry; Amaziah the priest of Bethel, said
unto Amos; O thou Seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there
eat bread, and prophecy there. But Prophecy not any more at Bethel: for it is
the Kings Chapel, and it is the King Court. Amos 7.12. Note here (1.) what
Amaziah permits him to do; and that is, to prophecy in Judah, and there to
speak his mind, if he pleased. (2.) What he forbids him to do; and that
is, he may not preach any more at Bethel in that manner: and (3.) why he might
not preach in Bethel in this rough manner; and that is, because it was the Kings
Chapel, and the Kings Court. As if he should say, that elsewhere, he might
take leave, and be welcome, but the King and his Courtiers would not endure so
much boldness. And just so is it now a days among us. We may tell an
Artificer, or a Labourer, or an husbandman, or a servant, or any such kind of
man; we may tell them of their faults freely, and without danger: but if we
touch a Nobleman, or a Gentleman, or an Alderman, or a Great moneyed man, we
do it at our peril and shall be sure to raise hornets about our ears. Thus
worldly men, if they be in higher place, think themselves privileged from
reproof.

2. The second example is in Balak the King of Moab. Of him we read that he
sent for Balaam to curse the people of God. But Balaam refused to curse,
because God did forbid and restrain him: and hereupon the Text says, that
Balaks anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together and
said; I called thee to curse mine enemies, and behold thou have altogether
blessed them these three times. Therefore now flee thou to thy place. I thought
to promote thee to great honor, but lo, the Lord has kept thee back from
honor. Number. 24.10, 11. Note here, (1.) what Balak intended for Balaam, if he
would curse where he bade him: and that was great preferment; I thought to
promote thee to great honor. (2.) Why he withdrew his hand, and sent him away
empty: and that was because he did that, which GOD had charged him to do, and
did not what Balak required of him. And therefore says he, God has kept thee
from honor. And just so is it now a days. They that give benevolence to the
Preacher, look that he should curse, where they would have him curse, and
bless where they would have him bless, or which is all one, praise and defend
that which they would have praised, and disgrace and condemn those and that
which they cannot abide: and if at any time he fall upon that sin, which
pleases them, then as David said of Absalom, Deal gently with the young man
for my sake. 2 Samuel 18.5: so they expect that the Preacher should deal gently
with that sin for their sake. All these men are partial hearers, who will
hear nothing with submission, but what pleases themselves: men, who come not
to learn of the Preacher, what they should do, but to teach the Preacher, what
he shall speak. Which is all one, as if the Scholar should tell his master,
what lessons he should teach him. Thus some for their greatness, and others for
their bounty exempt themselves from just reproof, which is one task that the
Preacher has to perform in Gods name. These then are all of them partial
hearers, and therefore bad hearers, because they refuse to learn what God does
command the Preacher to teach them. And consequently, when our Savior said,
Take heed how ye hear, he meant among other things, that we should beware of
partiality in our hearing; and that we should submit to every word of God, how
cross soever it be either to our opinions, or to our practice.

III. The third sort are forgetful hearers; such as through negligence and
carelessenesse, let slip out of their memories, what they have learned or
heard, like Nebuchadnezzar, who forgate his own dream. For God had sent him a
dream to instruct him in things belonging to his state and Kingdom; but
before the morning came, he had forgotten, what his dream was. Dan. 2.5, 8.
And so it is with these men. God teaches them by his word, the mysteries of
his Kingdom, and the means of their salvation, and they immediately forget,
what was said, as if they had been in a dream all the while. Thus far they
are like Nebuchadnezzar; but unlike him in this, that he used all diligence to
find out the dream, but these men hear and forget, and never think of it
after. S. James says of fruitless hearers, that they are like to a man, who
beholds his natural face in a glass, and goes his way, and straight way
forgets what manner of man he was. Iam. 1.23, 24. He means, that as such a
man forgets, what he saw, so these men forget what they hear. For defect in
practice, and neglect of remembrance usually go together. For if any man have
no care to do Gods will, he will have no mind to remember his word: and if any
man do forget the word, he has left himself no means to perform it. And
therefore in Scripture phrase to forget God, and his commandments, is as much
as to neglect both him and them: as, Psalm. 119.139.
when David says, My Zele has consumed me, because mine enemies have
forgetten thy words; he means that they did not think on them, much less did
they keep and perform them. And many such we have now a days, even among
them, who profess religion. They go from the Church to their houses, and from
Sermon to dinner, and from hearing of Gods word to talking of the things of the
world; but never call to mind what they have heard, nor consider what use it
may serve them for. Such men do quickly forget all, and practice nothing. Our
lesson in this case is delivered us by the Apostle, where he says, We ought to
give the more earnest heed to the things, which we have heard, lest at any
time we should let them slipp. Heb. 2.1. The word is, (...), that is, as Beza
translateth it, ne quando perfluamus, that we do not at any time run out. In
which speech the Apostle compares forgetful hearers to leaking vessels:
because as those vessels let out by the chincks, what they received by the
mouth; so these hearers let out at one ear, what they received at the other.
And because they keep not, what they hear, they lose the profit of their
hearing; like men, who eat, and cast up what they have eaten, without
receiving nourishment by it. These then are a third sort of bad hearers: and
therefore when our Lord said, Take heed how ye hear, he meant we should be
ware, that we be not careless and forgetful hearers.

IIII. A fourth sort of bad hearers are wanton or sensual hearers; such as
desire to have their ears tickled with fine phrases, rather then their souls
settled with wholesome doctrine. Such hearers were the Athenians, of whom it is
said Act. 17.21. that they spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell
or to hear some news. And some such like were they, of whom God speaks to
the Prophet, Son of man, the children of thy people -- speak one to another
-- saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes forth from
the LORD. And they come to thee, as the people comes, etc. And lo, thou art
unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice and can play
well on an instrument: For they hear thy words, but they do them not. Ezekiel.
33.30, 31, 32. Where we may note, that though this people showed great zele in
flocking to the Prophets Sermons; Yet all that they cared for was to please
themselves in his words: not unlike them, who hear a piper, or a fiddler,
because they delight in the music. This fault was in Aug. confess. l. 5. c.
13, and 14* page 43.
S. Aug. before his conversion: he went to hear S. Ambrose: not for any care of
his doctrine, but for love to his eloquence and rhetorike. And such also was
the fault of those Monks of whom Q^^m fratribus quibusdam de rebus necessariis
ac spiritualibus disputa^et, eosque videret lethaeo quodam sopore demergi;
otiosam repent fa^ulam introduxit, etc. Cassian. de Instit. li 5 c. 31. See
Eras. Chiliad. p. 325. de Asin um^ra.
Cassian reports, that while the Abbot was discoursing about points of faith
and religion, fell into a dead sleep; but when the old father meaning to
correct their drowsines, began to tell them a merry tale of some idle fiction,
then they rubbed their eyes, and lifted up their ears; and heard him with
great attention. And not much unlike is the fault of many in our days. For
some like no Sermons, but such as are stuffed with fine words and abound with
witty turnings, which make music to the ears; like the gallants of our time,
who like no clothes, but those which are cut and jagged, and according to the
new fashion. Others, if they hear a Preacher, that has both eloquence and
good matter; they single out the rhetoric for their use, and pass over the
matter, as unworthy of their noting. These kind of hearers Plutarch. de audit.
p. 41.
Plutarch compares to women, who gather out of their gardens such flowers, as
may make a nosegay, or adorn the windows of their house: and I may not unfitly
compare them to some Gentlemen among us, who with great cost and care plant
Tulips and strange flowers, which delight the eye with variety of colors, but
respect not either pott herbs, that may serve for meat, or physical flowers,
that are fit for medicine. But good hearers says Plutarch, are more like to
Bees. For as they sit upon thyme and such other herbs, whence they may gather
most honey, though they be bitter and unpleasant to the taste: so good hearers
delight in such Teachers, from whom they may gather best caveats against sin,
and best rules, for a godly life; and out of every Sermon they will pick that,
which is most for their souls health, though it have some bitterness and
unpleasant relish with it. If men then, in hearing of Sermons, respect the
tickling of the ear with fine words, rather then the stablishing of the soul
with wholesome doctrine; these are a sort of bad hearers. And therefore, when
our Savior said, Take heed how ye hear; he meant, that among other faults in
our hearing, we should beware of itching ears, which love vain delight more
then solid doctrine.

V. The fifth and last sort of bad hearers are those that be fruitless, which
hear, but do not; like the fruitless fig tree, which made a fair show by
its green leaves, but had no fruit, that might refresh nature. And these
hearers are of two sorts, proud and profane men.

1. Proud men I call such, who when they know what God commands, and are in
conscience convinced of the truth; yet will not submit to Gods Law, but break
through all without fear. Such were the Jews, of whom Jeremy writes, that
when he had told them of their idolatry, with Gods express command to the
contrary, they answered, As for the word, which thou have spoken unto us in the
name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: but we will do whatsoever
goes out of our own mouth, etc. Ier. 44.16. And not much unlike unto these,
though somewhat more shamefast then they, are those other mentioned by the same
Prophet. Jeremy had told them from God, that they should not go into Egypt,
Chap. 42. and then it follows, Chap. 43. Then spoke Azariah and Iohanan, and
all the proud men, saying to Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely: the Lord our God
has not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt, to sojourne there. But Baruch
the son of Neriah sets thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand
of the Chaldeans, etc. So -- they obeyed not the voice of the Lord, to dwell in
the land of Judah, Ier. 43.2, 3, 4. In these passages of the Prophet, note,
(1.) the difference between these two sorts of men: the first are peremptory
and plain, We will not hearken, say they; but the latter makes an excuse,
though an unjust one, Thou speak falsely, say they to the Prophet: and, The
Lord has not sent thee, etc. (2.) Consider their agreement in the like sin,
they both refused to hearken, and obey Gods word. (3.) See the censure, that
God passes on them, which is that they are proud men. For so it is expressly
said of the more manerly sort, and therefore must necessarily be meant of the
more peremptory: if he be a proud man, that obeys not, because he says the
Lord had not said so; he is much more proud, that says, I will not hearken to
the word of the Lord. And proud men the Prophet calls the^, because they
durst withstand Gods word, when it is evidently declared unto them. And so in
our days, we have some that are peremptory, and say they will do it the
rather, because the Preacher prateth so much against them. Others are more
manerly in making of excuses; sometimes they allege danger, and sometimes
their care for wife and children, and sometimes occurrences of necessary
businesses, and such other reasons, like the guests in the Gospel, who thought
themselves excused because they had married a wife, and bought a yoke of oxen,
and purchased a piece of Land. But of all it is true, that they may rightly be
called proud men, if they presume to disobey when Gods will is made manifest to
their consciences. And therefore it is that David calls the sins of such
men, Substantive positum significat peccata, quae quis sciens ac
volens-perpetrat Sch^ndl. Pentagl. in verbo (...)
(...) that is, word for word, Prides or proud sins, which for perspicuity
sake, is rendered in our Bibles, presumptuous sins, and they in the Text are
opposed to secret sins, or sins of ignorance and inadvertencie. Who can
understand his errors? says David, cleanse thou me from secret faults. Keep
back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over
me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression, Psalm. 19.12, 13. By this appears that some sort of fruitless
hearers, are proud men, and out of their pride disobey the known will of God.

2. The second sort are profane men: and so in this place I call them, who
hear Gods word out of custom, but mind not, nor care not what the Preacher
says. He may talk what he pleases, but as it is said of Gallio in another
case, so it is true of these men, they care for none of these things. These
hearers are herein like the unthankefull guests, who when they were invited,
made light of it, and went away about their other occasions, Matthew. 22.5. Nor
are they much unlike to those profane men of Ephraim and Manasses, who when
Hezekiah sent messengers to invite them to Jerusalem, that there they might
keep the Passover according to the Law, and serve God according to his will;
they mocked the messengers and laughed them to scorn. 2. Chr. 30.10. And so,
if any make light of the word preached, and scorn or despise Gods messengers,
who show them the ways of salvation; such I call profane men, who make no
reckoning of Religion. And of these and all others who disobey the Gospel, and
do not bring forth fruits of obedience, I say they be bad and ungodly hearers.
For if any man hear my words (says our Savior) and does them not, he is like
a man, who without a foundation built an house upon the earth, against which
the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that
house was great. Luk, 6.48, 49. And therefore I may conclude of these, as I did
of the rest; when our Lord said, Take heed how ye hear; he meant that among
other vices in hearers, we should take heed of fruitless hearing, when men
hear and do not.

Thus I have gone through the several sorts of bad hearers. I now desire every
Christian, that shall vouchsafe to read these lines, that after his reading,
he will examine himself by these notes. I suppose he has been an hearer of
Gods word for some space of time; and does still continue in that practice for
the salvation of his soul. And pity it were, that he should lose all that
labor in hearing, and the Preacher his labor in instructing of him in Gods
will: and much more pity, that God should lose his labor in providing him so
much good means of grace without use. And sure the labor is all lost, which
is bestowed upon such as be bad hearers, of whom hitherto I have spoken. Let
every Christian then in the fear of God, examine his own heart, whether he
have been either a negligent, or a partial, or a sensual, or a forgetful,
or an unfruitful Hearer: and if he find himself guilty, let him now at least
amend his error, and make better use of the means of grace. For direction
wherein I have in this place no more to say, but that he would remember the
words of the Text, Take heed how ye hear.

CAP. XII.
Preparative duties, to be observed for right hearing.

Take heed how ye hear, he does not only signify that there is danger in
hearing amiss; but also does implie, that by heedfulnesse we may avoid the
danger, and so hear, that we may reap benefit by it. And that is the point,
which after the danger discovered, comes now to be spoken of. For better
proceeding wherein, we are in the first place to consider, that this
heedfulnesse includes two things; Consideration, and Execution. Consideration
searches out what be the things, that are available for the purpose: and
Execution puts them in practice, when once they are found to be good. The
former of these two is included in the meaning of the word: for so much this
word (...), See, look, or take heed, does naturally import. And the later of
them is implied in the intention of the speaker. For searching after availeable
means is vain without making use of them after they are found. And therefore,
when our Lord said, Take heed how ye hear, he meant that we should consider
how we may hear with profit, that we lose not the fruit of our labor; and
that what rules we find to be good for the purpose, we make use of them
accordingly, that our speculation may be seconded by our practice. For our
better direction wherein, we are to consider of four sorts of duties necessary
for this purpose. The first are duties going before our hearing; the second are
duties or rules to be observed in the time of our hearing; the third are such
as are to be practiced after the end of our hearing; and the last are common
and do diffuse themselves through all these differences of time. I begin with
the first of these.

I. First then, before we come to hear, there are certain preparative duties,
that may fit and prepare us for the work. For Gods word is like seed sown by
the Preacher; and the Hearers are like the ground, in which this seed is sown,
as our Savior has taught us in the parable of the Sower, immediately preceding
this caveat of heed-taking how we hear. Now no wise man will sow his seed till
he have manured his ground. He will first plough and dung, and gather out the
stones and the rubbish, and then cast in his seed with hope of a plentiful
harvest: and so we, before the seed of Gods word be sown in our hearts, we
must take care, that they be prepared and made fit soil to receive such seed
in. This is meant by that of Jeremy, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not
among thorns. Jeremy 4.3. He means, that as no man does sow his seed before
he have ploughed the ground and pulled up the weeds and thorns; for else all,
both labor and seed would be lost, so every wise servant of God, should
prepare his heart before the seeds of grace and good instructions be sown in
it. For else, if the heart of a man be hard and without feeling, like the high
way side, that is hardened by often treading upon it; it will not open or
unclose it self to receive the seed. And if it be filled with the cares of the
world and the love of riches and pleasures, like the thornie ground, that is
overspread with rubbish; though it receive the seed, yet it choketh it in the
springing. It is then a point of necessary observation, that if we will hear
with profit, we prepare our hearts aforehand, that like good ground they may
bring forth fruit to perfection. Now for the ploughing up of the heart, and
preparing of it for the seed, diverse duties are first to be performed, which
for that cause I call preparative duties: and those are, as follows.

I. The first preparative duty is, that we put off Worldly businesses, and
empty our souls of earthly thoughts, which either might take up our time due
to this work, or distract our minds in the performance of it. For look how
long the mind roveth, and so much of the good seed is spilt, as is sown in
that time: and if besides, occasions of the world do keep us from hearing, or
hinder us in preparing for it; what in this case is bestowed on the world, is
stolen from God and our own souls. And therefore in the Decalogue, where God
commanded the Jews to sanctify the seventh day, as a day of rest for Gods
service, he tells them that they had six days allowed the^ to do their own
works in; but the seventh was a Sabbath of rest, in which being freed from the
world, they should be at leisure for God. For better keeping of which day,
Moses commanded them, that the day before the Sabbath, they should Exodus 16.23.
bake, what they had to bake; and sees, what they had to sees; that so they
might have no business of their own to do, when they were to keep Gods holy
day. And from hence it was that the Jews called the sixth day of the week,
Matt. 27 6^. and Luke 23.54.
the preparation of the Sabbath. Some have thought, that this was a peculiar
title of the day going before the Passover: and sure there is reason to think,
that it was in an especial manner used before that day, because as that Joh.
19.31.
Sabbath day was an high day; so this preparation day should be observed with
more solennitie and care, that it might usher in that great day, with the more
honor. But yet I take it, every Sabbath day had his preparation day going
before, according to that rule of Moses mentioned before. And so Parasceve
Graeca vox est, Latin dicas praeparationem. Eo nomine Judaei -- vocabant
sextam Sabbathi, seu sextam Hebdomadae diem, -- eo quod illo die pararent
necessaria omnia ad vivendum die subsequenti, ne qua re otium Sabbathi violare
cogerentur. Brugens. in Matt 27.62. Vox Parasceve, qua Romani hanc solam feriam
sextam compellant, communis est omnibus totius anni feriis sextis. -- Parasceve
vero praeparatio interpretatur, quo nomine Judaei, qui inter Graecos
conversabantur, sextam Sabbathi, quae nunc a nobis sexta feria nominatur,
appellaba^^, etc. Antiq. Liturg. tom. 2. de feria sexta, page 925. Vide Ca aeu^
in Cassian. Instit. lib. 5. cap. 24 page 12.
learned men generally do affirm. Answerably whereunto, and (as I take it) in
imitation thereof the Christian Church has been accustomed to keep Saturday
half holy day, that in the afternoon they might ridd by-businesses out of the
way, and by the evening service might prepare their minds for the Lords day
then ensuing. Which custom and usage of Gods people, as I will not press it
upon any man's conscience, as a necessary duty; so every man will grant me,
that Gods people, as well Christian as Jewish, have thought a time of
preparation most fit for the well observing of Gods holy day. And upon this
ground I may be bold to advise every good Christian, that before the exercises
of the LORDS day, he will take care to lay aside worldly occasions, and to
clear his mind from the thought of them: that so he may have nothing to do
with the world, while he is to converse with God, nor be distracted with
earthly thoughts, when he is to be busied about heavenly things. In regard
whereof I cannot but blame their looseness, who follow the businesses of their
trade in the morning of the Lords day; or spend other parts thereof in talking
with their servants about the disposing of the next weeks work, as if they
meant to make the Lords day a preparation day for the week following. By which
means, it falls out not seldom, that such people come tardy to Church, and
hear without attention, when they are come, and go away without profit when
all is done. I like not their rigor who allow no word nor thought on a Sabbath
day, but such as is spiritual: nor can I approve their loosenes, who take so
much liberty for themselves, as hinders any substantial duty of Gods
service. More I say not at this time, grant me but thus much, and then ye will
not deny, but so much preparation is necessary, as may make us fit for the
duties of Gods service, and may make the exercises of an holy day profitable
for our souls.

II. A second preparative duty for right hearing, is that we refresh the body
with seasonable and moderat comforts: that the senses and spirits being
refreshed, the mind may be made more cheerful in Gods service. For, our
souls work, as our bodies are fitted for them: and the reason is, because the
senses of the body are the servants of the soul, and the spirits are the
instruments by which it works. Now if a master-workman do want servants to
assist him, he will do but a little work: and if he want tools, or have none
but blunt ones, he can do no work, or none to any pupose. And so if the bodily
senses be decayed, and the spirits wasted; the mind cannot be free or forward
in good duties. And consequently, if we desire, that our souls may be fresh
and lively in hearing or praying or praising God, it will be necessary, that
the body be kept in vigor by its usual refreshings. And these refreshings
are two especially, moderat diet and seasonable sleep. In these I require two
things, 1. that there be a competent use of them allowed, to the body; and 2.
that this use be moderat and seasonable. And this the Apostle meant, when he
said, Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans
13.14. for by these words, Cassian. Inst. Ib. 5 c. 8. page 116.
says a good writer [non curam ejus omnimodis interdixit, sed ut in desideriis
fieret denegavit.] He did not forbid all care, but denied the fulfilling, of
its lusts: [Voluptuosam ademit diligentiam carnis, gubernationem vitae
necessariam non exclusit,] he took away the sensual care of the flesh, but
not the right ordering of it according to the course of nature.

1. It is necessary, that there be allowed a reasonable use of them, that the
senses may be lively and active for their work. For we read of the Egyptian
young man, that by long fasting he was ready to die, but when he had eaten some
food, then says the Text, his spirit came again to him. 1 Samuel 30.12. And so
Ionathans eyes were enlightened by eating a little honey in his hunger. 1 Samuel
14.27. And again, if the people had been suffered to eat of the spoil of
their enemies, there had been a far greater slaughter among the Philistines.
ver. 30. Efficacius semper cord concipitur, quicquid sensim and absque nimio
labor corporis intimatur. Cassian. Collat. 14 cap. 19. page 651.
And so in this case, sleep and food are necessary refreshings, that we may
be cheerful in Gods service. And the reason is clear in experience. For we
see that the famished body is unfit for work, and the hungry belly thinks
more of eating and drinking, then of praying or learning Gods word: and the man
that is weary with long labor, had rather sleep, then meditat or hear. It is
said of Sisera, that he was fast a sleep and weary; and the meaning is, say
the Learned Vatabl. in Jud. 4.21.
pressus sopore prae lassitudine, that by reason of his weariness he fell into
a dead sleep. The conclusion is, some refreshing is necessary for the body,
that it may be serviceable for the soul. And this is the first thing that I
say.

2. The second is, that this refreshing must be seasonable and moderat. For as
emptines breeds faintness, so fullness is a burden: and both of them disable
the soul in her functions. For as the Egyptian was not able to tell his tale,
when he wanted meat: so Nabal was not fit for good counsel, when he was
filled with wine and good cheer. 1. Sam. 25.36, 37. And for this cause our
LORD gives us warning, Take heed to your selves, that your hearts be not
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this life; and so
that day come upon you unawares. Luke 21.34. This shows that meat and drink,
if they be immoderat, are a burden to the soul. Likewise sleep, if it be
seasonable, refreshes nature and makes men fit for their work: but
unseasonable sleep is an hinderance to good employments; which made Solomon to
say, that if a man love sleep he will come to poverty. Pro. 20.13. and 6.11.
And so it is in the spiritual state of men's souls. Those that give themselves
to sleep, when they should watch and work in Gods service, will doubtless
come to great poverty in Gods graces. And no marvel. For if men sleep when
they should come to Church, they deprive themselves of some part of Divine
service: and if they sleep when they are come, they deprive themselves of all
the fruit, that they should reap by it, and consequently they lose the helps
and means, which God has appointed for the enriching of their souls with
divine graces. The conclusion is; Comforts of nature, in meat and sleep, are
necessary for attentive hearing, so they be moderate and seasonable.

But in both these refreshings men do oftentimes offend: and he that would
have good of these comforts, must be careful to avoid those errors, which be
these.

1. Men offend in eating and drinking, seldom in defect, but many times by
excess. It was sometimes a fault among the Primitive Christians (when men in
their zole did take the kingdom of heaven by violence) that they fasted so
long till they fainted: and therefore were reproved by the Ancient Fathers, for
their austerity and rigor. But our times are not greatly guilty of that fault.
Our sin is, that by too full feeding we become unfit for holy duties. For
whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart, as the Prophet speaks.
Hos. 4.11. And surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of the world, do
overcharge the heart, that it cannot keep watch against the great day; as our
Savior says. Luke 21.34. The meaning of which speeches is, that by eating and
drinking, and caring for the world excessively or overmuch, the soul of man is
pressed down, and laid grovelling upon the earth; so that it is unfit for any
heavenly thoughts. And this we find to be true by daily experience. For if we
feed to the full on the Lords day at dinner, we are the worse disposed to
hear, or pray, or serve God any way in the afternoon. And therefore, if we
desire to profit by our hearing, we must beware of full feeding: especially, we
must take heed, that a full stomach do not cause a drowsy head.

2. In sleeping men offend both ways, both by defect, and excess.

(1.) By defect: and so they offend, who on the Saturday night do continue so
long at their work, that they are sleepie the next day, when they should serve
God in good duties. For this we may be well assured of, that they who work
when they should sleep, will sleep when they ought to work: because nature, if
it be defrauded of its ordinary rest, will still be seeking of a supply of
that which is wanting. And therefore those, that would be cheerful in holy
exercises on the Lords day, must give themselves sufficient rest the foregoing
day. Yea, and if I might advise, they should allow somewhat more then ordinary
at that time; because it is harder to forbear sleep in the Church, where we
sit still without moving, then it will be in our shops, or in places abroad,
where we are stirring and moving about our occasions, and intent upon our
Trades and business.

(2). We offend herein by excess also. So they do, who slugge it so long in
their beds on the Service-day, as that some part of Gods service is past,
before they are ready to come. This fault deserves reprofe in two respects. 1.
Because it argues a great coldness in holy duties, and a dead spirit to
Godward. For what we do willingly and with a cheerful mind, that we do
speedily, and without lingering or delay. We read of Shechem Hamors son,
when he had a grant of Dinah Jacobs daughter to be his wife, upon condition
that he and his people would be circumcised; that he deferred not to do the
thing, because he had delight in Jacobs daughter. Genesis 34.19. And so if men
have a delight in spiritual exercises, they will take the first opportunity
and not defer and loyter about the business. So when Abraham was commanded
to sacrifice his son, the Text says, noting thereby his ready obedience, that
he rose early in the morning, to go speedily about the work. Genesis 22.3. And of
Jacob, it is said in like sort, that to express his thankfulness for Gods
mercies, he rose up early in the morning, and set up a pillar, etc. Genesis
28.18. And so on the contrary of wicked men, who pursue their sinful pleasures
with delight, it is said, that they rise early to go about their work. So
drunkards are said to rise early in the morning, that they may follow strong
drink. Isa. 5.11. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem, rose early and corrupted
all their doings. Zeph. 3.7. Yea, and God himself, to note his hearty desire
of man's salvation, says of himself, I spoke unto you, rising up early and
speaking: but ye heard not. Ier. 7.13. and verse 25, I have sent unto you all
my servants the Prophets, daily rising up early and sending them. By all which,
and other places of the like kind, we may see, that early rising for the doing
of any thing, is taken as an argument of hearty affection and love to the same
thing. And so on the contrary, slugging and delaying, is an argument of little
affection and love. And hereby it appears, that their devotion is cold in
Gods service, who lie in bed so long, that they come late and tardie to the
work. 2. This fault of slugging long in bed, is worthy of reproof, because by
coming late to Gods service, they may come short of his blessing. Esau stayed
so long in hunting for his Venison, that the blessing was gone, before he came
to receive it. Gene. 27. And afterward he found no place for repentance, or to
revoke the former grant, though he sought it with tears. Heb. 12.17. Let this
example scare sluggards out of their beds, and make our halfe-hearers, who come
when a good part of the Service is past; to bethink themselves, and beware lest
the blessing be past, before they come to receive it.

The sum is, He that will hear with profit, must grant sufficient
refreshing to nature, but not excessive; such as may cheer his senses, but not
such as may dull and depresse them.

III. The third preparative duty is, that before hand we season our minds with
some holy thoughts in private, that we may be the better disposed to good
duties in public. For look in what frame our hearts stand when we come from
home, and in the same we shall find them when we are come to Gods house. If
we jump in thither, being as it were yet warm with worldly thoughts; the mind
in praying and hearing, and other duties will remain the same that it was
before, that is, stuffed and possessed with the thoughts and desires of the
world. Quicquid ante oration's horam anima nostra conceperit, necesse est ut
orantibus nobis per ingestionem recordationis occurrat. Qua^obrem quales
orantes volumus inveniri, tales nos ante orationis to^pus preparare debemus.
Cassian. Collat 9. c. 3. p. 50^
But if we turn our hearts toward God, and fix our minds on heavenly things,
before we come from home; this will dispose us to heavenly-mindednesse in the
public service. For example, let this be our practice, let us lift up our
hearts and raise our thoughts to Godward by meditating on his word and works,
by thinking on our duty and the work we are about, by considering Gods
greatness, in whose presence we shall be, and by pouring out our souls to
God in our prayers, that he will direct our actions, and bless his own
ordinance, and honor himself in our voluntary service: and then our hearts
being thus turned upon God aforehand, we shall be the more zealous in praying,
and the more attentive in hearing, and the more forward and ready in good
duties every way. This rule Solomon prescribes us, Ecc. 5.1.
when he says, Keep thy foot when go into the house of God, or (as the
other Translation has it) Take heed to thy foot: that is, as Beza paraphraseth
the place, [Considera etiam atque eiam, quo tendas, and quem adeas] Think upon
it again and again, whither thou art a going, and into whose presence thou
come. Thus he commands, and so should we do. When we are to appear
before God, at the solemn times of his Service; we should think whither it is
that we go, who it is that we deal with, what it is that we are then to do,
and how we may receive comfort and profit by our doing.

Thus we have the duty: our part will be to think how well we have observed
it. If we come to hear without turning our hearts toward God aforehand, we
are not so fitted for this work, as we should be. And for want hereof, we may
fear, lest as the King said to his unmanerly guest; Friend how came thou in
hither, not having on a wedding garment? Matt. 22.12: So God may say to us, How
is it, that ye come to heavenly exercises, not having heavenly minds? and why
come ye to stand before God, when your hearts are turned toward the world?
These things considered, my exhortation is, as Daniel, Dan, 6.10
when he prayed, set open his windows toward Jerusalem, that he might look
toward that place, where God was, to whom he made his prayer: so when we
hear, or perform any service unto God, that then for the sharpening of our
attention we would set open the windows of our souls toward heaven; that
while we are hearing or reading, we may look toward the place, where our Lord
dwells, who is now speaking unto us.

IIII. The fourth and last preparative duty is, that before we come to hear
Gods word, we empty our souls of all known and unlawful lusts; that so our
hearts may be fit receptacles for the word of Christ to dwell in. For, if the
vessel be musty, it will mar the best wine, that can be powered into it; and
if the stomach be filthy, it will corrupt the most wholesome meat; and if the
ground be cumbred with thorns and weeds, it will choke the purest seed. And
so, if the soul be defiled with sinful lusts, it will choke the seed of Gods
word, and corrupt this food of the soul, and make it unprofitable to the
hearers. This S. James teaches us, when he says, Lay apart all filthiness
and superfluity of naughtiness; and receive with meekness the ingraffed word,
which is able to save your souls. James. 1.21. And so S. Peter, Laying aside
all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings; as
newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby. 1. Pet. 2.1, 2. In these places, these two Apostles do teach us two
duties, the one principal and primarily intended; and that is, that we
receive Gods word with all readiness, for establishing our souls in grace:
and the other a preparative duty, that must go before, and make way for it, and
that is, that first of all we lay aside all filthiness and naughtiness, and
sinful lusts. For more distinct and clearer understanding of which rules, we
may consider these particulars in the Apostles words. (1.) When we read in
Saint James, Laying apart; and in S. Peter, Laying aside; the word in the
Original in both places is (...); which according to the propriety of the
Greek Tongue, notes the time past: and therefore is rendered by Beza in the one
place, abjectis omnibus sordibus, all filthiness having been cast aside; and
in the other, deposita omni malitia, all naughtiness having been laid apart;
but we in our English, keeping the idiotisme of the Greek which the Latin
tongue cannot do, may more perspicuously render it thus, Having laid apart all
filthiness, and all malice, and guile, etc. But where in the second place we
read, Receive the ingraffed word, and, Desire the sincere milk of the word,
the Original words are, (...), and (...): which sort of verbs Clenard calls
Aorists, having respect to their form; but Sylburg. Gram.
Sylburgius more properly and fitly, respecting their signification, calls
them futura perfecta, because they signify the perfecting of an action to
come. For all verbs of the Imperative mood, as these be, though they may be
of the Preter tense for their form, yet are always of the future tense for
their signification. For things commanded, are not already done, but are to be
done afterward; the precept ever in nature going before the performance. And
therefore, Linacer, a learned and exact Grammarian, having first noted that all
verbs of the Imperative mood are either of the present or preter tense; adds
withal, Quibus tamen omnibus prateriti formis, siquis penitius inspiciat,
perfectio absolutioque potius, quam actio ulla praeterita significatur; ne quis
non gerendum aliquid imperari putet. Those that be Scholars know what this
note means: those that be not, may at least carry thus much with them, that
the former words [Lay apart, or Lay aside] do note the time past; and the
later, [Receive the word, and, Desire the sincere milk,] do implie the time to
come. And hence every one may collect, that sin is first to be laid aside, and
then the word of God to be heard. And therefore I called the duty signified by
the former word, a preparative duty, which makes way for that which follows
after, and the duty signified by the later word, the principal duty, for which
the preparative is intended. This is the first thing, that I note in these
words of the Apostles. (2.) The second is, that when S. James says, Lay apart
all filthiness, and all superfluity of naughtiness, he means all iniquity
and all sinful lusts: and by giving the^ this name, he compares them to
superfluities of indigestion, or to raw and indigested humors which distemper
the stomach: and implies hereby that Gods word is the food of our souls, the
digesting whereof is hindered by these superfluities of sin. (3.) When S. Peter
says, Laying aside all malice, etc. desire the sincere milk of the word, he
compares Gods word to wholesome meat, and implies hereby, that these vicious
qualities of malice, etc. are like to corrupt humors, which do hinder the
nourishment of this meat. (4.) When S. James says, Lay apart all
superfluities, etc. and receive the ingraffed word; and when S. Peter says,
Laying aside, etc. desire the sincere milk: both of them mean that as good
meat breeds not good nourishment in a corrupt stomach; no more does Gods word
nourish our souls, unless these bad humors of sin be first emptied and
purged out. The sum of all is, that he who will thrive and grow in grace by
the food of the word; must first disburden himself of the superfluities of
sin. And this shows that this emptying out of all sinful lusts, is a
preparative duty necessary for them, that will receive good by Gods word.

This may suffice for proving of the point: but yet we shall more clearly and
distinctly understand it, if we consider what helps and furtherances this
purging out of sin will afford him, that comes to hear Gods word for the
profit of his soul. And they be these, and such like.

I. It qualifieth the mind for the clearer understanding of Gods word, and the
mysteries of salvation contained in it. And that it does in two respects.

1. Because, sinful lusts are as so many clouds or dark mists cast before our
eyes, which hinder us from discerning of the truth, though otherwise it lie
plain before our face. This is gathered from that speech of our Savior to the
Jews; How can ye believe, which receive honor, one of another, and seek not
the honor, that comes from God alone. Ioh. 5.44. Note here, (1.) the
unaptnesse and indisposition of this people, to believe CHRIST'S word: how can
ye believe? (2.) the reason or cause hereof in these words, which receive
honor, one of an other. He means that because they were given to vain
glory, and esteemed the praises of men more then the honor that comes from
God, therefore they could not believe the Gospel, which did not only bring
contempt with it, but did teach men willingly to bear it. By which it
appears, that their vaineglory did so blind their eyes, that they could not
acknowledge the truth of the word, which was contrary to it. And so, by the
same reason, covetousness blinds men's eyes, that they cannot believe any
doctrine, that is contrary to their profit. And wantonness blinds their eyes,
that they cannot believe that, which is contrary to their lusts. And revenge
blinds the eyes, that they cannot see that truth, which is contrary to their
malice. And love of a man's self and of his own Teachers, does so blind his
eyes, that he discerns not the plain truth, that crosses his prejudice, and
the opinions which his Masters have instilled into him. And in a word, every
sinful passion is as a cloud to darke^ the understanding, that it cannot see
any truth that is contrary to that sin. And this may be one reason, why the
Apostle says, that the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God: for they are foolishness unto him: nor can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14. He means that the mysteries of the
Gospel are only discernable by a spiritual eye, whereas the natural man has
no eyes, but carnal. But contrariwise a clean heart makes a clear judgment,
because he that has purged his heart from all sinful lusts, is alike
disposed for all truths; nor has he any cloud within him, that may darken his
mind, when he is to judge of them.

2. Purity of heart disposes a man to the understanding of Gods word, because
his own feeling within himself, and the experience that he has of the power
of godliness, Ut boni vitifimus voluntate maxim constat; quam qui vera fide
induerit, facile easdem, quae virtutem docent, arts accipiet. Quintil. lib.
12. cap. 11. page 752.
and the deceits of sin, will be as a clear Commentary to the rules and
doctrines of Scripture, which concern those points. If one of us, who is a
father, and considers what his own affection was to his little son, when he
did beat him for his faults; should read that Text of David, As a father
pitieth his children; even so the LORD pitieth them that fear him. Ps. 103.13:
or that of Solomon; Whom the Lord loves, he corrects, even as a father the
son, in whom he delights. Pro. 3.12: that man would more clearly see, and
more feelingly judge of Gods tender mercies toward his children, described in
those Texts. And so he that has had his heart wounded with the sting of sin,
will best understand that Text, A broken and contrite heart, O God, will thou
not despise. Psalm. 51.17. And, he that is a pitiful and a merciful man, will
best understand that of S. Paul, Be ye kind, one to an other, tender hearted
forgiving one an other, even as God for CHRIST'S sake has forgiven you. Ephesians.
4.32: and that other, Put on, (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing
one an other, and forgiving one an other, etc. Col. 3.12. And the like may be
said of all other virtues and graces, in which the maine duties of christianity
do consist. And he that is thus disposed before he comes to hear; is in a
fair way to understand the Scriptures, when they be alleged, and to conceive
the Preachers meaning, when he explaineth and applies them to his conscience.
And hence it is, that Inst. lib. 5. cap. 33. page 134.
Cassian a learned and judicious Writer does say of Theodorus a Religious man
of that time, and one that was expert in the Scriptures, that the thing, which
made him so skillful in Gods book, was [Non tam studium lectionis, vel
literatura mundi, quam sola puritas cordis,] not so much his reading of learned
books or his human learning, as his purity and sincerity of heart alone. And
this man (says the same Ibid. cap 34. page 135.
Author) when men admired his clear understanding of Scriptures, and desired of
him the meaning of certain places, answered them, that he who would come to
the true understanding of Scriptures, must not bestow his pains in reading of
Commentaries, but rather bend his mind to clear his soul from fleshly
desires. [Quibus expulsis, confestim cordis oculi, sublato velamine passionum,
sacramenta Scripturarum velut naturaliter incipient contemplari.] For these
vicious lusts being expulsed and driven out, the eye of the soul after this
veil of passions is removed from before it, does begin, as it were by its own
disposition and temper to understand the mysteries of the Scriptures. Siquidem
nobis no^ ut essent incognita vel obscura, sancti Spiritus gratia promulgata
sunt: sed nostro vitio, velamine peccatoru^ cordis oculos obnube^te, red du^tur
obscura: quibus rursum naturali redditis sanitati, ipsa Scripturarum sanctaru^
lectio ad contemplatione^ verae scentiae abunde etiam sola sufficiat. Cassian.
ibid.
For (as he adds) the holy Ghost did not so pen and divulge the Scriptures,
that they might be unknowen and dark: but they become hard and obscure through
our own default, who with a veil of sins, do cover the eyes of our minds;
like the veil, that lay on the heart of the Jews, while they read the books
of Moses. 2 Cor. 3.14, 15.

II. This purity of soul disburdened of her sinful lusts, disposes a man to
the obedience of Gods word, and makes him ready and prepared to observe and do
what is therein prescribed. Now these works of obedience, they be the very
fruits and harvest cropp, for reaping whereof the seed of Gods word is sown.
For the end of our preaching and reading, is that men may hear; and the end of
their hearing is, that they may learn and know Gods will; and the end of their
learning and knowledge is that they may do Gods will and keep his
commandments. This gradation of causes, is clearly expressed by Moses Deuteronomy.
31.11, 12. And it is intimated by our Savior also in the Gospel, when he
says, This peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing,
and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should
be converted, and I should heal them. Matt. 13.15. By these speeches it
appears, that Doing is the end of Hearing. Now that which in our hearing does
fit us for this end, is if we purge our souls aforehand of all sinful lusts,
and yield up our selves to be molded by the word. For they that be in love
with any lust, are loath to hear and more loath to do that which God commands
to the contrary. Herod, because he was in love with his fleshly lusts, would
not hearken to John Baptist when he told him of his incest: Mark. 6.
the Pharisees, because they were in love with their money, derided our Savior,
Luke 16.13, 14.
when he preached against covetousness. And Ahab, 1 King 22.
because he was resolved to go up to Ramoth Gilead to battle; put Micaiah in
prison, for advising him to the contrary. And so it is still. He that is
resolved to live in oppression, will not care for the Preachers words, when he
tells him of S. Paul's threatening, Let no man go beyond or defraud his
brother in any matter, because that the LORD is an avenger of all such. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. And he that is resolved to go on in his unclean lusts, will not
care, when he is told of that sentence, Whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge. Heb. 13.4. And he that is given to his belly cheer, will slight that
caveat of our Savior, Take heed, lest your hearts be overcome with surfeiting
and drunkenness, etc. Luke 21.34. And generally whosoever is led with any
lust, until he be content to part with that lust, will never be willing to
yield obedience to that Scripture, which forbids it. Yea, and they who are
zelously affected to religion, and perform holy duties with some care, yet if
they have but any one unmortified passion behind; that lust will make them to
withdraw the shoulder, when they should yield obedience to the word. A plain
proof hereof may be seen in the rich young man mentioned Mar. 10.17, etc. For
he came to CHRIST with great zele, and was resolved to do any thing that he
might be saved: Good Master (says he,) what good thing shall I do, etc? But
when our LORD bade him, Go sell all that thou have, etc: and thou shall have
treasure in heaven: the Text says, he was sad at that saying, and went away
grieved. The meaning is, that though he were a forward young man, and purposed
to do any thing, that CHRIST would appoint him for gaining of eternal life;
yet because he was in love with his wealth, he thought this to be too hard a
condition to be accepted of. And so it is, and will be with all other men: if
they be in love with any one sin, that will not suffer them to submit to that
word of God, which forbids it. But contrariwise, he that has emptied his
soul of every known sin, is ready for every commandment, and will submit to
whatsoever God shall enjoyne him. For having purged out every lust, he has
nothing left behind, that may oppose GODS word, when it commands him his
duty. Such a man, if God should command him to sacrifice his life for religion,
as he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son; he would say with S. Paul, My
life is not dear unto me, so I may finish my course with joy. Act. 20.24. And
if God should require restitution of ill gotten goods, he would say with
Zaccheus; If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, or any
other unjust dealing, I will restore him fourefold. Luke 19.8. And if GOD
should require him to mortify himself by hard and austere chastisements; he
would say with S. Paul, I will keep under my body, and bring it in subjection.
1 Cor. 9.27. And so in all other the most troublesome services. For what can be
too hard for him in Gods commandments, who has forsaken every thing, that is
forbidden by them? Thus the purging of the heart from all sin, makes a man
ready for obedience of every commandment: which is the very crown and the
glory of our hearing.

III. This cleansing of the soul from all sinful lusts, inviteth God to
assist us with grace, and to bless our hearing with success, and to increase
all his mercies toward us. For the secret of the Lord is with them that fear
him, and he will show them his covenant. Psalm. 25.14. And, my son (says
Solomon) if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee,
etc. then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge
of God. For the Lord gives wisdom: out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. Prove. 2.1, 5, 6. And of Cornelius we read, that he being a
devout man, and one that feared God, and gave much alms to the people, and
prayed God continually; God was so well pleased herewith, that first he sent
an Angel from heaven to direct him what course he should take for saving of
his soul; and then he sent Peter to tell him those things, by which both he
and his household should be saved: and lastly, while Peter was preaching, and
Cornelius was hearing, he powered down the holy Ghost upon all them that heard
the word. Act. 10. And so it will be with us: if we be like to Cornelius in
devotion, serving God in purity of heart; we need not doubt, but God will send
us such Teachers, as may direct us in the ways of salvation, and will grant us
the assistance of his Spirit, to bless our hearing with an happy success.

But on the contrary, if any man come to hear Gods word with the conscience of
known sin, or with any lust, that lies unmortified within him; such a one
provokes God to blind his eyes, and to curse his labors. To this purpose the
Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 14.6, 7, 8, 9. Say to the house of Israel, Thus says
the Lord God, Repent and turn your selves from your idols, and turn away your
faces from all your abominations. For every one of the house of Israel, or of
the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and
sets up his idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face, and comes to a Prophet to enquire of him concerning
me, I the Lord will answer him by my self: and I will set my face against
that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from
the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. And if a Prophet
be deceived, when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that
Prophet, etc. Note here (1.) the sin that is supposed to be in this people,
If they set up their idols in their heart, etc. He means, if they cherished
idolatry in their heart, and looked on their abominations, as the thing that
they loved. (2.) Consider the punishment that God threatens against this
sin, and that is twofold. 1. That if such a one should come to a Prophet for
instruction, God would give him the answer, and set his face against him, etc.
that is, instead of instructing him in his word, he would persecute him with
his judgments: and 2. that if a Prophet were deceived, as some times they
were, God in his anger did suffer him to err, for a punishment to that man,
that came to hear with a polluted soul. (3.) Note the remedy or the means,
how to avoid this judgment, and that is set down in these words, Repent and
turn your selves from your idols, and from your abominations. Lay these notes
together: and then ye may see, that if a man come to hear Gods word with a
purpose of sin in his heart, (for every such sin is his idol;) God will give
him over to be seduced and to be plagued for his sin: and that the purging out
of sin, is the way to avoid all this mischief. Agreeable hereunto is that
also of the Apostle, where he says of Antichrist, that his coming should be
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and
with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: and that for this
cause, God should send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie,
that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11. By all this we may see, that if any
man come to hear Gods word, with a clear conscience, purged from dead works;
God is ever ready to teach and direct that man in the right way to heaven. But
if any come with a conscience defiled with known sin; God forsakes that
man, and leaves him to false teachers, to be seduced and misled to his ruin.

Thus the point is cleared, that he who will hear with profit, must first
empty his soul of all sinful lusts: the uses follow.

Use 1. Seeing such preparative duties are required for a profitable hearing of
Gods word; every wise Christian should examine himself, how well he has
performed those duties, and by them ploughed up the fallow ground of his heart,
that the good seed may be received into a good soil. More particularly,
whether before his hearing, he have labored to empty his heart of earthly
thoughts, that so he might be at leisure for God; whether he have used to
season his mind with heavenly thoughts at home, that he might be attentive in
Gods service; and whether by due examination of his ways, he have sought to
cast out all unlawful lusts out of his soul; or, whether he have not rather
busied his mind with thoughts of the world, when he was come before God, to be
instructed in his word; or, whether he have not gone into Gods house, without
thinking whither he was a going; or finally, whether he have not carried some
sin with him into the Church, which no persuasions of the Preacher could make
him to forsake. Those that have prepared themselves before hand, may comfort
themselves with this thought, that the good seed has been sown in good
ground and therefore will bring forth fruit to eternal life. But if we
consider how little fruit of obedience there appears in the world, we may
well think, that most men have used but small preparation before their hearing.
And therefore now it is high time, to begin this so necessary a work, that
their negligence do not make their labors fruitless.

Use 2. Seeing the heart is not fit for the seed of Gods word, till the rubbish
be weeded out, and the superfluities of sin purged away; it stands us
upon, to search every corner of our souls, lest some lust lie lurking there,
which we have not discovered, nor have had care to expel. For every such lust
is a superfluity of naughtiness, which hinders our growing by the word. For
example, if there be a lust of adultery and uncleanness, that is a
superfluity of naughtiness: purge out this, or else, it will hinder your
growth in grace. And if there be a lust of pride and vaineglory, that is a
superfluity, which must be purged out, or else the word will not enter in. And
so I may say of covetousness, and of malice, and of revenge, and of every
evil lust: they be superfluities of naughtiness: and if they be suffered to
harbor in the soul, they will shut the door against all good instructions.

Use 3. There is hence encouragement and comfort for all true hearted
Christians, because having purged out their lusts, and resolving to do what God
shall command, they are rightly qualified for hearing of Gods word. If any
thing be necessary to be known, which is too hard for their understanding,
Gods promise is, that he will reveile it unto them, and lead them in the right
way. Our Savior has said, If any man will do Gods will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or no. Ioh. 7.17. Where (1.) when he says, If
any man will do Gods will, he means, if he be resolved to perform,
whatsoever God shall command him. And (2.) when he says of such a man, that
he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, he means, he shall be
guided to know and understand the maine points of faith, even so much as may
serve to save his soul. For first, the eye of his soul is clear from mists
and foggs of passion; by reason whereof he will discern those truths, which
are proportionable to his understanding. And secondly, if any thing be too high
for his apprehension, God will reveile that unto him by one means or other,
rather then so faithful a servant of his should err from the right way, that
leads to eternal life. And consequently, he that does settle his heart in a
sincere purpose to do what God shall enjoyne him in his word; may be confident
in this hope, that he shall not err with danger to his soul. A great comfort
this may be to a true Christian in these wrangling times, and days of
contention, wherein variety of questions does much distract the minds of many
men. My conclusion is this, when we go to hear Gods word preached, or take a
Bible into our hands to read; let us abandon every known sin, and resolve
to serve God in every known duty: and then our comfort is, we shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make us free.

CAP. XIII.
Duties to be performed in the time of our hearing.

preparative duties, which go before our hearing: now we are to consider of
duties, required in the time of hearing. And they, as I conceive of them at
this time, are three. (1.) Attention to the things, which are spoken: (2.)
Reverence to the person, that speaks: and (3.) wisdom in fitting all to our
own use.

I. The first is Attention. And that (as Nigron. de exhor. domest. cap. 5. nu.
15. p. 89.
one defines it, not unfitly,) is [seria and diligens animi applicatio ad ea,
quae dicuntur] a serious applying of the mind to the things, that are said:
or, it is, when we bend the mind and understanding to observe and mark that
which is spoken.

Concerning this duty there are two things to be declared. (1.) What use and
necessity there is of it in our hearing: and (2.) what means we may use for
attaining to it.

[I.] What use there is of it. And the answer is, the uses of it are three
especially.

1. Attention is that which does enlive our hearing, and makes it effectual
and profitable. For if we hear, and attend not, we do not learn by the
instructions that should teach us; we are not moved by the exhortations that
should persuade us to well-doing; nor are we feared by the threatenings that
should deter us from sin. In sum, whatsoever is said to do us good, is as
water spilt upon the ground, that cannot be taken up for any use. But Attention
in hearing, is like the plough that goes before the Sower. For as the plough
opens the ground that the seed may enter in, and take root under the furrows:
so attention sets open the heart that it may receive the word in, when it is
spoken by the Preacher. And therefore when the Scriptures do describe diligent
and zealous Hearers, they set them out by their attentivenes to the word spoken.
Thus it is said of the people in Nehe. time, that the ears of all the people
were attentive unto the book of the Law, when it was read unto them. Nehem.
8.3. And so of the people in our Saviors time, it is said, that they were very
attentive to hear him; or, (as the other Translation has it,) they hanged
upon him, when they heard him. Luke 19.48. The meaning is, Mark. 6.
their minds did hang upon his lips, to suck-in his doctrine, as the child
hangs upon the dugs, that he may suck in his mothers milk. Whence we are
further advertised, that as children, who follow the dug, do thrive and grow by
the milk; so the hearer, that is atte^tive to the word, does grow and thrive by
it. But without attention, as our prayers are a lip-labor, which God
respects not; and for which he reproves the Jews, This people draws near
unto me, with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips, but their hearts
are far from me: Matt. 15.8: so without attention, our hearing is an
ear-labour, of which God may say by the same reason, This people draw near
unto me with their ears, but their heart is far from me. Attention then is
therefore necessary, because it makes our hearing profitable and availeable.

2. Attention to GODS word, makes God willing and ready to instruct us, and
lead us by his grace. For as we use to say of wise men, that they strike, while
the iron is hot; because then it will yield to the hammer, and may easily be
facioned, as the workman will: so God deals with his people; when they are
ready and rightly disposed for his blessings, then he uses to bestow them.
Open thy mouth wide, (said God) and I will fill it. Psalm. 81.10. So, if men
open their hearts, and be ready to receive, then God opens his hand, and
powers in his blessings. But if men shut their mouths, when they should
receive, God will shut his hand, when he should give. And there is great
reason for it. For a wise householder, because he will not have his wine spilt,
therefore will not power it upon the vessel, when the mouth is stopped. And so
our wise God, be-because he would not have his graces lost, will not bestow
them* when men are not fit to receive them. This point is clearly manifested in
the example of Samuel: When God called, Samuel, Samuel, once and again and the
third time; he still went to Eli, to know what he would have. And all this
while God said nothing to Samuel, of the message that he intended for him. But
at last, when God called, as at other times, Samuel, Samuel; then Samuel,
turned himself toward God and said, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. And
then God reveiled himself unto him by his word, and instructed him in his
will. 1 Samuel 3.10. And so, if our minds wander abroad, and talk with the
vanities of the world, while GOD speaks unto us in his word preached or read:
it is no marvel, if he take his word from us, and give it to them, that are
better disposed for it. Or, if he suffer his word to remain with us, yet he
may deny his grace, that might make it profitable unto us. Attention then is
necessary in this respect also, because it moves God to teach and direct us in
the right way.

3. Attention is an act of the mind, by which we witness our due respect to
GOD and his word. Job describing the account, that men made of him in his
prosperity, says, To me men gave care, and waited, and kept silence at my
counsel. Job 29.21. And on the contrary, it is a great indignity to a man, if
while he is talking with us, we turn our backs upon him, and look an other
way. A man of place or facion would take it in ill part to be so neglected by
us. But the indignity is much greater, if when the Lord of heaven speaks unto
us, about the weighty affairs of our salvation, we turn from him, and talk
with the vanities of the world. Such behavior is not fit for Gods presence,
nor can we think to please him, when we neglect him so much. It is said of
Lydia, that the LORD opened her heart, that she attended to the things, which
were spoken of Paul. Act. 16.14. Which shows, that if we attend not, when
God speaks to us in his word, it is because our hearts are shut against God
and we deny him entrance and entertainment: but if God by his grace have once
opened our hearts, then we with attention will hearken to his word. Again we
read, that Gods delight is in such men, as do hear his word with an awful
reverence and dutiful respect. Thus says the LORD, The heaven is my throne,
and the earth is my footstool, etc. for all those things has mine hand made;
and all those things have been, says the Lord. But to this man will I look,
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word.
Is. 66.1, 2. Which is, as if he should say, Heaven and earth and all the world
are mine; and I may be where and with whom I will: but he that trembles or
stands in aw of my word, is the man that I have made choice of, and that I
delight to dwell with. But if any be careless and unrespective of God, when
he speaks unto him; that man as he neglects God, so is he neglected of
him. The sum is, Attention to the word spoken, is therefore necessary, that
we may show a due and dutiful respect to God, whose word it is.

[II.] This may serve to show the use of this duty: the next enquiry is to
seek for such helps, as may further us in the performance of it. And sure, this
is a point of great moment, and worthy thy of our best care. For, how ever
attention be so necessary for right hearing, nor will any of us deny the
profitable use of it: yet such is our frailty and folly, that usually our
thoughts wander all the world over, while we are in Gods presence, and should
hear his word, which is able to save our souls. For sometimes, we do
willingly busy our selves with earthly thoughts about our Trades, and our
Lands, and our household affairs, and other things of like nature. And
sometimes, as the devil stood at Ioshuahs right hand to resist him, Zach. 3.1:
so he stands at our elbow, and casts worldly thoughts into our minds, or
heaviness of sleep into our heads, or disesteeme of the word spoken, into our
hearts. And at all times, such is the frailty of the flesh, and our daily
acquaintance with the things of this world; that though we strive to be
attentive, yet by-thoughts will creep in, and distract our minds, while we
are about that good work. By reason whereof, it will be hard to drive away
idle thoughts, and impossible to be altogether without them. And therefore, it
will be a labor well bestowed, if by enquiry we can find out some such
helps, as may serve to heal our infirmities, and to keep us steadfast in this
duty. For which purpose, I have thought on some rules; they that are
experienced in asceticall exercises, may perhaps add more, and find better;
and they shall do well to further us with their store. The rules that at this
present I have in readiness, are these.

1. Rule. It will be good, to accustom our selves to the daily reading of
Scriptures, and frequent Meditations on heavenly things. For if the mind be
thoroughly seasoned with such thoughts, it will not be so ready to admit of
imaginations and fancies; that being the readiest for our thoughts, with which
we are most familiarly acquainted. For proof of this, let us ask our own
hearts and they will tell us, that if a man have been busied in scraping and
heaping up riches, his mind while he is in the Church, will run upon his
baggs, and bonds, and his accounts, and other such means of thriving in the
world; and if a man be given to dalliance and fleshly lusts; his mind will
run upon his Minion, and the works of fleshly delights: and if a man be set
on ambition, and desire of high places; his mind will run on the means of
rising, and of great offices, and places of preferment. And, in a word (as our
Savior says) Where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be also. Matt.
6.21. Whence it follows, that if a man's study and delight be in Gods Law,
Citum satis atque efficax remedium poterit oboriti, si eandem diligentiam atque
instantia^ quam te in illis secularibus studiis habuisse dixisti, ad
spiritaliu^ Scripturarum volueris lectionem meditationemque transfer etc.
Cass. Coll. 14. c. 13. p. 645, 646.
and about duties of Gods service, those things will most readily come to his
mind, wherein he is oftenest busied. And when such things are mentioned and
talked of, he will as constantly and as attentively both hear and observe them,
as a worldly minded man will hear and speak of his profits, or an effeminate
man of his pleasures, or an ambitious man of his honors. And as a worldly man,
when he is about his purchases and bargains, goes seriously to work, and is
not easily diverted from the business that he is about; so the religious
minded man, if he be as heartily religious, as the other is covetous, will
be so serious and attentive in matters of Gods service, that other by-thoughts
will not easily divert or turn away his mind. And therefore, if worldly
thoughts do much disturb our hearing, it is an argument that the study of the
world is more frequent with us, and more delightful to us, then the study of
Gods word. For redressing of which error, and to keep our minds from
evagations and distractions; our care must be, to place our study on Gods
word, and thereby to season our minds with a love of heavenly things, and a
serious care of our salvation.

2. It will be an help also, if we use such posture of body, as may be apt to
keep our senses waking, and to drive away heavines and sleep. How this is to be
done, we may take direction from examples of former times. First then we read
in the Gospel, that when our Lord had read his Text, and was ready to speak
unto the people, the eyes of all them that were in the Synagogue, were fastened
upon him. Luke 4.20. Which words, as they show with what attention they
prepared to hear the Sermon; so they intimate, that by this means they were
likely to continue their attentio^. For as the mind sends out the eyes, to
look upon that which it self likes; so the eyes, if they be fastened on an
object, do stir up the mind to think on that thing, which they present to
its view. Consequently, as gazing abroad distracteth the mind with variety of
objects; so the fastening of them on the speaker, does settle the mind, where
the eyes are fixed. And by reason hereof, it will be some help to sharpen our
attention, if sometimes, and as occasion requires, we fasten our eyes upon
the Preachers face, and look that way, where we desire our minds to be. Again,
Solomon says of the wicked man, that he shuts his eyes to devise froward
things. Prove. 16.30. He means, that as men, when they are in serious
meditation, do shut the eyes, that nothing may distract their minds; so the
wicked man shuts his eyes, that he with more intention may devise mischief.
And so in this work of hearing, it may sometimes be an help to attention, if
we look downward, or cover the eyes; that the mind having no distraction from
without, may be the more intent on his present business. Thirdly, we read of
the ancient Monks in Egypt: (And the name of Monks, was then as honorable for
their devotion, as now it is grown contemptible for the superstition of later
times:) that they in their prayers did sometimes cast themselves down upon the
ground, and anon after, rose up again, and prayed standing, with their hands
lifted up to heaven. And this they did, Humi namque diutius procumbentem, no^
solum cogitationibus aiunt, verum etia^ somno gravius impugnari. Cassian. Inst.
lib. 2. c. 7. page 27.
because, as they said, if a man did lie long upon the ground, he would be set
upon, not only by idle thoughts, but more especially by sleep. And so, if in
our hearing, we find that by long sitting at ease, we grow heavy and dull
of hearing; we should rise and stand up, to awaken our senses. And if by long
standing we find our selves weary of our work, we may for a time seek some
ease by sitting: and so still change the site of the body, and use such
variety in gestures, as for the present we find most availeable to keep us in
attention.

3. It will be an other help, if we labor to remove all lets and impediments,
that use to disturb us. Solomon's rule is, It is not for Kings to drink wine,
nor for Princes strong drink: lest they drink, and forget the Law, and pervert
the judgment of any of the afflicted. Prove. 31.4, 5. He means that drinking
of wine, and strong drink might make them unfit for judicature, and doing of
Justice: and in such a case even Kings were bound to avoid it; lest it should
disable them for the doing of their duties. And this rule binds us also to
avoid such things, as may hinder us in Gods service. If we drink wine and
strong drink, that is apt to fume into the head and to procure drowsinesse and
sleep; if we eat a full meal, that calls the spirits to the stomach for
concoction, and in their absence, the brain is disabled for contemplation and
religious thoughts; and if before we come to Church, we drown our selves in
meriments and sports, that will season the mind with carnal delights, and
make the soul unfit to relish the things of the Spirit: and if any man stuff
his mind with worldly ears, and businesses of this life; that will leave no
room for spiritual instructions to enter in. And if any of us do find, that
by these or any other such occasions we be hindered in our hearing; we must
forbear drinking of wine, and feeding to the full, and delighting in carnal
sports, and cumbring our selves with worldly cares, and what soever else may
breed either drowsinesse or distraction. Else, it will be impossible, that we
should hear with attention, and as impossible that we should profit without it.

4. It will be an help to our hearing, if while we are about that work, we do
ever and anon reflect upon our selves, and consider what thoughts do then
lodge within us. And if we find distractions to divert us, we should blame our
untoward hearts, bewail our corruptions, and recall the mind to his business
again. This will help us against distractions, because our heart will learn by
often checks, to be the more watchful; and we by condemning our selves for
our neglect of God and our own good, shall be made the more wary of offending
any more: even as a traveller, that has missed his way through heedlessenes,
will be the more careful afterward to observe every turning, and to avoid
every by-waie, that might mislead him.

These rules I have thought not unfit for this purpose: if any man have those
that be better, he may leave these at his pleasure, and make use of that
which may do him more good.

II. The next virtue to be exercised in the time of our hearing, is due
reverence to God and his holy word. Solomon requires it of us in our prayers
and praises of God: When (says he) thou go to the house of God, be not
rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God. For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore, let thy words be
few. Eccles. 5.1, 2. We may note in this sentence two things, a rule and a
reason. (1.) A Rule, and that is expressed two ways: 1. negatively in these
words. Be not rash, etc. He means that we should not presume to speak unto
God, but with premeditation and advised soberness. 2. Affirmatively, in those
words, Let thy words be few. He means that our words should be well weighed;
and then they will not be many: and that our speech should be sparing; such,
as may argue modesty and awfulnes, rather then too much familiarity and
boldness. This is the Rule. (2.) The reason hereof given in the Text, is; For
God is in heaven, and thou upon earth. He means that there is as much
distance between him and us men, as is between heaven and earth: and that as
far as heaven is higher then the earth, so far, and more also, is Gods
greatness above our meandness and low condition. And therefore, as when we
come before an earthly King, we are wary and observant, lest any word should
fall from us, that beseems not his presence: so, and much more careful
should we be, when we come before the King of Heaven, lest any word may slip
from us, not beseeming his greatness. This Solomon requires of us, when we come
to speak to God, in our prayers, or praises of his name: and the same reason
holds, and therefore the same rule should be observed, when we come to hear
God speaking to us in his word. We must not be rash and bold, and
over-familiar with our LORD and Master: but hear with reverence, when he
speaks unto us; and tremble at his word, when he commands us, and lays
upon us a charge of obedience. And the reason is good: for God is in heaven,
and we are upon earth; and therefore we should learn to keep distance, and
never appear before him without tokens of submission and reverence.

Now this reverence may be seen and observed in three things; (1.) in a
reverent esteem of God and his word, (2.) in a dutiful behavior, while we
are in his presence: and (3.) in a modest quietness and silence, while he is
speaking unto us.

[I.] In a reverend esteem of God and his word; when we so think of them, and
the place where they are present, as beseems his greatness, and their worth
and dignity. And this duty we shall perform, if we observe two rules.

(1.) That we conceive of God as of the Lord of heaven and earth, whose glory
so far surpasses not only our mean condition, but our shallow
apprehension, as that we are no more able to abide his presence, then a weak
eye is able to look upon the sun in his strength. And therefore S. Paul
describes God to be the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and
Lord of lords: who only has immortality, and dwells in the light, which no
man can approach unto; whom no man has seen, nor can see. 1. Tim. 6.15, 16. In
these words the glory of our Lord is set out by three things: (1.) By his own
greatness; He is a Potentate, a King, and a Lord, that has immortality and
light: (2.) By a comparison with all other great Ones; He is the only Potentat,
the king of kings and Lord of lords: (3.) By his surpassing glory far above
all conceit, and apprehension of men; He dwells in the light that no man can
approach unto; no man has seen him, nor can see him. Thus every word does some
way set out his incomparable glory; which being considered accordingly will
breed an awful esteem thereof, and a trembling before him. And from hence it
is, that the Seraphims did cover their faces, when he appeared unto them; and
the posts of the door moved, when he spoke; and the Prophet cried out, Woe is
me, for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and mine eyes have
seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Isai. 6.2, 4. And for the same reason, when
Moses (like the sons of Zebedee, not knowing what he asked) desired to see
Gods glory; he was told that no man could see Gods face, and live. Gods
back-parts he was vouchsafed to see, that is, some small luster of his glory:
and yet then, he had need to be put to the clift of a rock, and to be covered
with Gods hand, lest the glory of the LORD should overcome him with its luster.
Exodus 33.19. etc. And from the same ground it is, that the people of Israel,
after they had heard the voice of God speaking unto them in mount Sina; they
were amazed and said, If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, we
shall die. For who is there of all flesh, that has heard the voice of the
living God, speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived? Deuteronomy.
5.25. Thus the Angels, and the Prophets, and the people of God have been
affected, if God at any time have manifested himself to them in glory. And
thus, and in this manner we should think of God, when he speaks to us in his
word; and always carry a reverend awe toward his Majesty, whenever we are
before him. So Jacob did; when God had reveiled himself unto him in a vision
by night, and he was now awaked out of his sleep, he said, Surely the Lord is
in this place, and I knew it not. And he was afraid (says the Text) and said,
How dreadful is this place? This is no other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven. Genesis 28.16, 17. Note in this passage. (1.) How Jacob was
affected at Gods presence, He was afraid, meaning, that he was struck with an
awful conceit of Gods Majesty, in whose presence he was. And so should we be:
when we come into Gods presence, and hear him uttering the wonderful things
of his Law, we should in all awful reverence, humble our selves before him.
(2.) Note what Jacob said upon consideration of Gods presence. First he said,
God is in this place; he meant, that God by appearing and reveiling himself
to his servant, did show himself to be there present, though Jacob never
thought of any such thing. And so, when God pleases to reveile himself unto
us by his word, though we do not see or discern it with our bodily eyes; yet
we must know that God is there present, because he reveileth himself.
Secondly, Jacob said. How dreadful is this place? This is no other but the
house of God, etc. The meaning is, that because God showed himself by his
visions in this place; therefore the place was to be esteemed as Gods house,
even as heaven it self, in which it pleases him to dwell. And so, when we
come into the Church, the place where God does speak with us, and has promised
his presence; we should esteem that, as Gods house where he dwells, and as
the gate of heaven, which is the place of his habitation. Thus we should think
of God and his presence, when he speaks unto us out of his word. And that is
the first rule to be observed by us, for declaring of our reverence toward him.

(2.) That we esteem the word spoken by Gods Minister out of the Scriptures,
as the very word of the Almighty God. This S. Paul commends in the
Thessalonians: For this cause (says he) we thank God without ceasing, because
when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us; ye received it not
as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God. 1. Thessal. 2.13.
Here are two things considerable: (1.) Who it was that spoke and delivered this
word, and that was Paul, a man like unto themselves: and (2.) Whose word they
esteemed it to be; not Paul's, nor any other man's, but Gods alone. And there was
great reason for it. For if the King should send an Officer, with commission to
proclaim his will to his people; no man would say, that this message were the
will or word of the Officer, who proclaimed it, but the will of the King, who
commanded it. And so these Thessalonians did rightly esteem the word preached,
as Gods word, from whom it was sent, and not as Paul's word, by whom it was
delivered. And they are commended for so doing, as having rightly distinguished
between God and his Minister: so it will be our praise, if when we hear
Gods word, delivered by a mortal man, yet we esteem it as the word of the
immortal and ever blessed God. A good rule then it is, that we esteem the
word spoken by the Minister, as the word sent from the Lord Almighty.

These rules, if they be duly observed, will further us diverse ways to the
right hearing of Gods word with profit.

1. They will work in us attentiveness, to mark all that is spoken. For even
among men, if the Speaker be had in honor, his words will be received with
heedfulnesse and attention. It is said of Simon Magus, that all the people gave
heed to him from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power
of God: and to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched
them with sorceries. Act. 8.10. Consider here: (1.) how this people were
affected to Simon Magus, They gave heed unto him, and regarded him: (2.) why
they thus observed and respected him, and that was, because he had bewitched
them, to believe that he was the great power of God, or one whom God had endued
with great abilities from heaven. The like hereto we may find in our own
experience. For if we think highly of any man's virtues, and esteem his words
to have weight and worth in them: we hear them with attention, and embrace
them as Oracles of great worth. And so, in this case, it is nothing but
disesteeme of God and his word, that makes men to neglect the word, when it is
preached in their hearing. And therefore as Rabsakeh said, Hear ye the words
of the great King, the King of Assyria. Isa. 36.13. meaning, that because he
was a great King, therefore they should give good audience to his word: so, if
we consider that it is the great King, even the King of heaven, that speaks
unto us; it will command our attention, and make us hear with heed and
observation. Let this then be taken for a first benefit, that a due esteem of
God and his word, will cause attention in our hearing.

2. A due esteem of God and his word, will make us willing to hear our faults
reprooved, with submission and patience. Old Eli is an example hereof. For when
Samuel told him of his sin in cockering of his sons, and of the judgment
of God threatened against him for the same; he answered, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good. 1. Sam 3.18. We may here observe, (1.) Eli his
willing submission to the reprehension of Samuel, Let him do what seems him
good: and (2.) the reason, that made him so tractable and obedient, and that
was, because it was the Lord who had sent that message. And so, if when we
come to hear a Sermon, we consider that it is God, who speaks unto us by the
mouth of a man, this will cause us with patience to hear our sins reprooved,
and our selves censured for them.

3. The same consideration will make us to yield a ready obedience to the word,
and to suffer our selves to be molded and framed by it, when it prescribes us
a duty to be done. This is so reasonable, that Balaam against his own mind
acknowledged it to be right; Must I not take heed (says he) to speak that
which the Lord has put into my mouth? Number. 23.12. And so, if we consider that
it is God who speaks, it will cause us to think our selves bound to do, what
he says. For no Christian is so shameless, that will say, that he will not
do, what God does command. And therefore we may observe, that when men are
resolved not to obey, they will rather deny that it is Gods word that is
brought unto them, then that it is their duty to obey his word. So the Jews
did; when Jeremy at their request had enquired of God for them, and told them
in Gods Name, that they should abide in their own Land, and not go into Egypt;
they being resolved that it was more expedient for them, to go then to stay,
told Jeremy to his face, Thou speak falsely: the Lord our God has not sent
thee to say, Go not into Egypt, to sojourne there. Ier. 43.2. And so among us,
no man that professes to serve the true GOD, will plainly deny submission to
his word. The sum of all is, that if we bring with us, a due respect to God
and his word, it will make us attentive, when we hear; and patient, when we
are reproved, and obedient when we are commanded that which is our duty to do.

[II.] The next thing, in which we are to show reverence in the time of
hearing, is a dutiful behavior in the outward man. For even among men, if
boys play the boys among their fellows, that is, if they be waggish and
bold and presumptuous before their equals; no man will greatly regard it. But
if they should do so before their Masters face, it were irreverence and
rudeness not to be borne with. And we our selves in our own houses, where we
are among our equals and friends, may use that liberty both of speech and
behavior; which would savor of contempt and disrespect, if it were used in
the presence of a Noble man, or of a Counselor, or of a Prince. And so when we
come into GODS presence; more soberness, and more modest and awful behavior
will be required of us, then is necessary, when we are at home, or abroad among
our neighbors. And therefore when we come to hear God speaking unto us; we
must have a care, that we do not by our gesture, bewray an undutifull respect
to God or his ordinances.

For better observing of which duty, I shall point at some such rules, as I
find to have been either required or observed amongst Gods people: that out of
them every man may select such directions, as may be useful and expedient for
himself.

I. First then, I find in Gods book, that when God appeared to Moses, being
now to reveile his Law unto him, he first of all commanded him, Draw not nigh
hither; put off thy shoes from off thy feet: for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3.5. And so the Angel, that appeared to Joshua
supposed to be Christ the second person in the Trinity, commanded him; Loose
thy shoe from off thy foot: for the place whereon thou stand, is holy.
Josh. 5.15. Consider in these passages (1) what was required. And that was, it
was required of Moses, that he should not come near the place, where God
appeared, but keep distance, Calceos exuere jubens admiratione and metu ad
humilitate^ ipsum crudit and format. Calvin, in Exodus 3.5. and Jos. 5.15.
like the Publican, who stood afar off in the lowest part of the Temple. And
secondly both Moses and Joshua are commanded to put off their shoes. The
meaning whereof (says Calvin) is, to instruct and frame them to humility and
an awful fear. For as we pull off the glove, when we salute our friends and
take them by the hand, in token of our observance toward them; and as country
people and servants, who go in pattons in the street, do in good manners put
them off, when they come into a Citizens house of any note: so in those
eastern countries, where Moses and Joshua dwelt, they were used to put off
their shoes, in token of reverence and respect, when they came into place,
where their betters were. And therefore, when GOD said to Moses, Put off thy
shoes, he meant to teach him his duty toward his LORD; as we, when we bid a
Child put off his hat, and make a leg, do mean to teach him good manners
toward his betters. (2.) We may consider in the Text, what the reason was, why
this outward carriage was required at this time, and in this place: and that
was, because the place was holy ground. But why were these places where Moses
and Joshua stood, more holy, then any other places in the country; especially
seeing the one of them was in the desert, an untilled and ill ordered ground,
and the other a place by Jericho, at that time a profane city of heathenish and
idolatrous people? To this question the answer is, that the only reason hereof
was, because God appeared there, and showed tokens of his presence. And hence
we have this observation, that wheresoever God is in any peculiar sort
present, there the place is made holy by his presence; and where God does so
sanctify a place, there we ought to declare our humility and dutiful respect
by external gestures of reverence, and by decent behavior and carriage.

Secondly, I find, that when God was to appear on mount Sina, there to
deliver the Law to his people; he first commanded to sanctify them, and that
they should wash their clothes. Exodus 19.10. The meaning of which ceremony
was, partly to admonish them of the purity of heart, required when we come
into Gods presence: and partly to teach them, that they ought to come decently
and in a comely manner, lest they might show neglect of his presence, if they
came in a sluttish or unsemely sort. And therefore, as Joseph when he was to go
before Pharaoh, shaved himself, and put on other apparel: so we ought to
come into Gods presence in grave and comely attire, which may beseem
godliness, neither rudely like clownes, nor finically like wantons. A note not
unfit to be thought on by our sober maidens, who come both into Gods house,
and unto Gods board, with bare breasts and naked arms and long locks, and such
loose behavior, as either beseems Ruffians alone, or no Christian at all.

Thirdly, I read of Constantin the Emperor, Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4.
cap. 33. page 400.
that being present in the Church, when Eusebius preached, he stood up all the
while: and though he were once and again entreated to sit down; he still
refused it. The reason whereof was, because as himself said, [ Nefas est,
institutis de Deo disputationibus, negligentes aures praebere.] It is not
lawful, when things concerning GOD are in handling, to be negligent in
hearing. And the like custom do I find to have been used by many others in
ancient time: but neither was it observed generally by all, nor do I require it
as necessary, of any. Only thus much I observe, that holy and devout men, have
been zealous to show reverence in Gods service, by every behavior that fitted
the purpose.

Fourthly, I find in some of the Learned, who prescribe rules of decency in
the time of divine service, that they will not permit men, when they are
hearing of Gods word to smile in secret, or to look about, or to lay one leg
over an other, or to whisper in their fellows ear, or to look sour, as if
somewhat displeased them, or to lean and lie on one side, Nigron. in Reg.
commun. 2. nu. 57. page 167.
etc. And surely even in these lesser things, there is a decency to be used in
our outward carriage; at lest so far, as that nothing appear, which may
bewray either dislike of the Preacher, or disesteeme of God and his word. And
hence we have two lessons.

1. A reproof for them, who allow no outward ceremonies or religious gestures
in Gods service, lest they should be superstitious and Popish. There be men,
that dare not kneel, when they receive the holy Sacrament, nor put off the
hat, when they pass through a Church, nor kneel down and make a private
prayer in a publik place: so that as the ancient worthies, upon all occasions
expressed their inward devotion by outward gestures of reverence; so these men
take care, to show how they detest superstition by avoiding all helps and
expressions of religion.

2. We have hence a ground of exhortation for our selves: and it is this, that
according to the rules of Scripture, which require revere^ce in the outward
man; and after the example of holy and godly men, who have observed those rules
with diligence and zele: we also, (as occasion shall be offered) would show
our esteem of God and his word by seemly behavior, and gestures of reverence
and humility. Where notwithstanding, I will press no man's conscience with a
necessity of every expression used by the Ancients: because for the most part
they are not simply necessary; but to be used with a kind of freedom, and as
occasion and reason shall require. Only thus much I may boldly say, and (as I
suppose) with the good leave of all that are well in their wits; that look
what modesty and signs of reverence we would use before a temporal Lord or
Prince: so much at least is due to him who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
And if any will show but a like reverence to God, that he would show to his
Prince, I will think him more devout, then most men among us are at this day.

3. The third and last duty, by which we ought to show reverence, is an awful
quietness and silence: which is, when neither by words nor deeds, we either
trouble the presence, or hinder the work in hand. For by such behavior as
this, men use to show their respect to their Betters. Job says of himself,
while he was in prosperity; The young men did see me, and hid themselves; the
aged rose and stood up. The Princes refrained talking, and laid their hands on
their mouth. The Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof
of their mouth. Job. 29.8, 9. And each man of discretion, if he be before
them, whom he honors, will be sparing of his speech, unless either the
command of his Superior, or the present occasion do require it. And still in
the presence of his Betters, he is careful lest by hard treading, or loud
speaking, or any noise making, he should breed disturbance, or seem to neglect
them. This, reason instructs men to do in their conversing among men: and
much more to do the like in holy Assemblies, where they have to deal with God.
The Turks out of the common notions of reason, Summo silentio verba praeeuntis
Sacerdotis excipiunt -- Sic vero stabant immobiles, ut in illo solo defixi, aut
ibidem succrevisse viderentur. Nulla tussis, nullus screatus, nulla vox, nulla
circ^acti capitis aut respicientis motus. Sacerdote Mahumetis nomen
pronu^ciante, pariter una omnes capita ad genua usque summittebant, etc.
are very observa^t of this rule. Busbequius, a learned and wise Statesman who
was Ambassador in Turkey, for diverse years; tells of the Turks, that they
heard the priest reading their service, with great silence: -- that they stood
so unmooveable in their place, as if they had been fastened in the ground:
there was no coughing, nor no spitting, nor no voice, nor any either turning of
the head, or looking back. When the priest pronounced the name of Mahomet, all
of them at once bowed down their heads to their knees. When the name of God was
spoken, they fell upon their faces, and kissed the ground. And in a word, they
pass their service with great ceremony and attention. Busbeq. ep. Ture. 3. pa.
266.
For if they do but scratch the head with a finger, they think all their
devotion is lost. And that no man may think that this was a curiosity in those
that believe not: Cassian an ancient and learned Writer of the Church, does
relate the like rites and ceremonies of reverend behavior to have been used
by religious Monks in his time. For speaking of a certain Covent, wherein were
diverse thousands together; he says, that when they met at their solemn
prayers, Tantu^ a cunctis silentium praebetur ut quu^ in unu^ tam innumerosa
fratru^ multitudo conveniat, praeter illum, qui co^surge^s Psalmum deca^tatin
medio, nullus hominu^ penitus adesse credatur: ac precipue quu^ co^summa tur
oration in qua non sputu^ emittitur, non exscreatio obstrepit, non tussis
intersona^, non oscitatio somnolenta dissutis malis and hiantibus trahitur,
etc. Cass. Inst. li. 1. cap. 10. page 31.
such was their silence and still behavior, that in so innumerable a
multitude, beside him who said the Service, no man seemed to be present, and
more especially in the concluding prayer, in which no man did spit, or hawk, or
cough, or gape, or yawne, as one that were ready to sleep. And if any man did
chance to transgress this rule of quietness and silence, they held him guilty
two ways: 1. [ quod orationis suae reus sit, quod eam videlicet negligenter
offerat Deo] that he forfeited the fruit of his prayer, because he offered it
up to God in a negligent manner: and (2.) [ quod indisciplinato strepitu,
alterius quoque, qui forsitan intentius orare potuit, intercipit sensum]
because by a rude and unmannerly noise, he did disturb the devotion of his
fellow, who might have prayed with more fervor. This was the silent reverence,
that was used in those days.

But, Lord, how unlike are our days to the former times? Men are now so far
from showing such reverence to their God in his Service, that they forget all
civilitie and good manners to their neighbors,. Men and women, I mean, who by
clapping their Pewdoores, and sometimes by redoubling the knock, do so disturb
the Assembly, that neither the Minister can be heard, nor the people proceed in
their devotion. Beside, the manner of such uncivil people is, to come to
Church, when service is half ended; (for they have more devotion to their beds
then to their prayers:) and indisciplinato strepitu, with this rude knocking,
they tell all the Congregation, that they come to serve GOD, when a great part
of his service is ended. It is pity, but some discipline were presently
exercised on such men and women. If a child trouble the Congregation with
crying, the Nurse carries him out of doors: if a dog disturb them with
barking, the Sexton lasheth him with a whipp: and if men and women, who ought
to have more both discretion and religion, do in as rude a manner disturb Gods
service, I see not why they should go away without correction. But those, which
are well minded toward God and his service, will I hope, upon this intimation
amend it.

III. The third and last duty to be performed in the time of our hearing is to
use wisdom for fitting that which is said, to our own advantage. And for
that purpose three rules are to be observed.

1. Rule. We must care for nothing in a Sermon, but that which may do us good
to salvation. The proofs hereof are these.

1. Proof. The end of all preaching is the profiting of our souls in grace,
and furthering them by grace toward eternal glory. For first God himself,
who is the Lawgiver, professes of himself; I am the Lord thy God, which
teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way, that thou shall go. Is.
48.17. He means, that the things which he teaches in his word are
profitable; and if men would follow his direction, he would lead them in a way,
that would be for their good. 2. CHRIST our LORD, who is the great Prophet of
the Church, he says of himself also; The Spirit of the Lord is upon me;
because he has anointed me, to preach good tidings to the meek, he has
sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives,
etc. that they may be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the
Lord. Isa. 61.1, etc. I note two things (1.) the matter of Christ's Preaching,
and that was, good tidings, the binding up of the broken hearted, etc. all
which are things belonging to our redemption and salvation: and (2.) the end of
his Preaching; and that was, that men might become trees of righteousness,
etc. He means, that like good trees they might be fruitful in good works,
of holiness, and upright living. All which implie a profiting in grace and
obedience: 3. Solomon the wise preacher of Israel, says, the sum and end of
all his Preaching, and of men's hearing, is this, Fear God and keep his
Commandments. Eccles. 12.13. 4. Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, says, that
God sent him to the Gentiles, to open their eyes and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might
receive forgivenes of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified.
etc. Act. 26.17, 18. And finally, to save labor in reciting of particulars,
the Apostle has told us in the general, that God gave to his Church,
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers: and all
for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. By this it appears that the end of all Preaching is the
good of men's souls: and from hence it follows, that therefore men in hearing
the word preached, should seek nothing but that which may further their
salvation.

2. Proof. It is a special property and virtue in Gods word, that it
begets faith, and works grace, and does help men's souls to salvation. S.
Paul says of it, that it is the power of God to salvation. Romans 1.16. Where
he does not only say, that it is useful, but that it is powerful to bring
men to salvation. S. James says, that the ingraffed word is able to save our
souls. James. 1.21. where (1.) he calls it, the ingraffed word; meaning
that the word must be rooted or settled in our heart: and (2.) he says, that
it is able to save our souls, if it be thus settled within us. S. Peter also to
the like purpose, Desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby. 1. Pet. 2.2. Where he says two things of Gods word, (1.) that it is
like milk, to nourish Gods children in grace: and (2.) that if they desire and
suck in this milk, it will make them to grow in goodness, till they become
strong men in Christ. And to the like purpose it is also, that S. Peter said to
his Master, Thou have the words of eternal life. Ioh. 6. 68: and that the
Angel said to Cornelius, that Peter should tell him words, by which he and all
his house should be saved. Act. 11.14. And by this it appears, that the use
and virtue of Gods word, is to work grace, and procure salvation: and hence
also it follows, that they who would make a right use of Gods word, must seek
for grace and salvation by it.

Thus the truth of the rule is confirmed: and if it be duly observed, it will
rectify two errors amongst us.

1. Their error, who, so that their ears be tickled, and their fancies
pleased, do think they have gained enough by a Sermon. Of such men the Apostle
did prophecy, when he said; The time will come, when men will not endure
sound doctrine: but after their own lusts shall heap unto themselves
Teachers, having itching ears; and shall turn away their ears from the
truth, and shall be turned unto fables. 2. Tim. 4.3, 4. In these words there
are four things said of these men. (1.) That they would not endure sound
doctrine, (...), that is, as the former Translation rendered it, wholesome
doctrine. By which word is implied, that as that is wholesome meat, which
breeds good nourishment, and maintains health: so that is good doctrine,
which nourishes the soul, and preserves it in spiritual health and vigor:
but such doctrine these men would not endure. (2.) He says of these men, that
after their own lusts, they would heap unto themselves Teachers. He means
they would delight in variety, but of such only, as pleased their own palate.
(3.) He says, that these men would have itching ears. He means, that as
when the flesh itcheth, men take pleasure in having it rubbed: so these
delighted in such speeches and doctrines as fitted their own fancies. (4.) He
says, that they would turn away their ears from the truth. He means they
were not contented with Gods word, so as it is plainly delivered for their
instruction; but so as it is devised by their own Masters, and fansied by
themselves. This the Apostle did fortell of the later times. Which prediction
does so suit with our times, that as our Savior said of an other prophecy,
Luke 4.21.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: so I may say of this
prophecy, In these days is this Scripture fulfilled among us. For now (if
ever) is the time that men have itching ears, and heap to themselves Teachers
after their own lusts. For some men's ears itch after Novelties and
curiosities: and if the Preacher tell them of some outworne antiquities of
elder times, or some present rarities in the newfound world, this will tickle
them with delight; and please them like the Athenians, whose delight was to
speak and hear news. And some men's ears itch after a curious phrase, and fine
composed sentences, and pretty jirks of wit: and if a Preacher phrase it in
good words, and flourish it in Rhetorik, and some turnings of wit; he is the
man, that pleases to admiration. And some men's ears, do itch after
controversies and questions of the time: and if the Preacher rail against that
side, whom they dislike; that is melody to their ears, and contentment to
their minds. And lastly (to forbear mo instances) there be men, whose ears
do itch after calumnies against the State, and reproaches against our Church
government; and if a Preacher shall gird at our Ceremonies, and glance at our
Bishops, and cry out of Popish rags and Relics of Rome; this makes their
hearts to leap within them, and to honor that man above his rank and without
reason. Though otherwise he be a lewd and scandalous liver, yet this one
virtue, as they esteem it, shall cover all his other vices and sins. No sin can
cast him out of these men's grace and favor; so he be true to the faction. But
when all is done, if ye should ask any of these itching Hearers, what they
have gained in godliness by the Sermon, which they so much commend; ye will
find, that they cannot give any account of any grace furthered in them, nor of
any sin mastered or diminished, or of any thing else, by which they may be
bettered toward salvation. Those that fear God, and desire their own comfort,
let them hence take this rule with them, that whenever they are pleased with
any passage in a Sermon, they do presently ask their own souls, wherein that
passage has or may profit them in obedience and a godly life: And if it no way
further them toward heaven, it is no way worth their hearing or acceptance.
It was an itching care, and not a religious mind, that made them take pleasure
in that passage.

2. This Rule duly observed will rectify an other error, namely the error of
them, who, if they find their affections warmed and their zele stirred up
within them; though they cannot tell why or upon what ground, yet then they
think they have made a good market that day. But this may prove a deceitful
fancy, which had need to be corrected. For Quintilian, a man both wise and
well experienced in things of this kind, has long since observed, that among
Orators, (and they were of like condition in the Commonwealth among them, that
Preachers are now in the Church among us,) the unlearned were many times best
esteemed: and he spends a whole Lib. 2. cap. 12. page 108.
Chapter in discovering and setting down the reasons of this erroneous opinion
in the vulgar. S. Hierome also has observed the like of Preachers in the
Church, Verba volvere, and celeritate dicendi apud imperitum vulgus
admirationem sui facere, in doctorum hominum est. Attrita fro^s interpretatur,
saepe, quod nesc^t; and quum aliis persuaserit, sibi quo que usurpat scientiam,
etc. N^hil tam facile, quam vilem plebeculam and indoctam Concionem linguae
volubilitate descipere, quae quic quid non intelligit, plus miratur. Hieron.
Epist. 2. ad Nepotian. page 16. Vide etiam Jul. Nigronum in Regulam 2. commun.
number. 67. etc. page 175.
It is the fashion of unlearned men, (says he) by volubilitie of tongue, and
celeritie in speaking, to raise an admiration of themselves amongst the rude
multitude. A bold face will oftentimes teach that which himself does not
know; and when he has persuaded others, he usurpeth to himself the praise of
learning. -- Nor (says he) is there any thing more easy, then to deceive the
baser sort and unlearned multitude with volubility of tongue. They when they
understand not any point, do so much the more admire it. Nor is it any marvel,
if the rude multitude do mistake in judging of a Preacher: they do so in
matters that are more plain, and more near to their capacity and
apprehension. We see it every day, that an horne-pipe or a morris dance, and
such country music, does please the common sort more then any exact and
artificial music can do: and that those strokes and tunes, make them to leap,
and frisk, which would make a sober and skillful man to laugh and deride them.
And so in this case; If a Preacher be furious in his action, and fluent in his
words, and vehement in exclamations, and do mouth it out with a throng of
words, which are as unable to beget notions of true religion, as they are
contrary to all rules of art and right reason: yet the multitude do greedily
embrace this music, and dance after this pipe. By all this I mean not to
disable the gifts of any, nor to censure their form of teaching, that may do
good to Gods people. Only I advise every wise Christian, not to esteem of a
Sermon by the delight that himself or others of the vulgar sort, do take in
the utterance of it. And I desire that instead thereof they will rather
consider, what increase of godliness they have gained by it, or wherein they
have been profited either for understanding of the Scriptures, and for
conceving of some point of religion, or for amending of their sinful life. If
they give an account of such spiritual profit to their souls; I hinder not,
but with great reason they may esteem such a form of teaching. But if they can
give no account of their profiting in godliness; I can give no approbation of
their vain censures.

2. Rule. The second rule which wisdom requires to be observed in the time
of our hearing, is that we select and single out such instructions, as do more
especially concern our own practice: and take more special notice of them
then of others that co^cern us not so nearly. For the mind of man is of a
finite nature, and cannot observe all things with like exactness and
attention: and our memories are feeble and frail, and cannot treasure up every
thing that is spoken. And therefore whatsoever ability and strength of mind
and memory we have; we should husband them in the best manner, and for our
best advantage. And so we shall do, if passing by things, that be
impertinent, and sliding through points of lesser moment; we fasten our minds
upon such lessons and observations, as do more nearely concern our selves. In
the use of this rule, the Prophet has gone before us, and showed us the way.
He being to instruct the Priests in things of their duty, begins with this
Preface; And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you. Mal. 2.1. And
so, if the Preacher tell Householders of their duty to their sons and
servants, he that is a master of a family, presently should say with himself,
This commandment is for me. And if the Preacher speak of the duty of
servants to their masters; he that is a servant, should say, This commandment
is for me. And if he insist on the duties of married Couples, the husband
should say, This commandment is for me; and the wife should say, That
commandment is for me. And if he preach of true dealing in bargaining and
contracts; the merchant, and the shopkeeper, and the Artificer, and the
Customer, and every man almost may say, That commandment is for me, and to me
it belongs. And in a word, every one, that hears any rule, that concerns
himself, should make application of it to himself: that that which is his for
the duty, may be his for the practice also. Thus we see all sorts of men, that
have care of their own state, do use to do in things of this life without any
teaching. If they hear of any medicine, that is proper for an infirmity of
their own; that they mark, and either imprint it in their memories, or write
it up in a book of remembrance, for their after-use; when in the mean while
they pass over many other better rules in their kind, only because they are
not so proper for their case and condition. And again, if a man read the book
of Statutes, and find a Law which concerns his own Lands, or his own
dealings: he will either fold down a leaf, or mark the place in the margin,
or transcribe the words in a notebook; that it may be in readiness, when the
time serves. And so, if in our hearing of the word either preached or read, we
meet with any lesson or rule of life, that concerns our selves in special,
we should consider wherein and how it may stead us: and this consideration will
be as a mark set upon it, to keep it in remembrance. For if we should forget
the rule it self, yet the very application of it to our selves, will put us in
mind of it. But as for other things, which are not useful and proper for us,
we may pass them over with less care and attention. For example, if we hear
some instruction, which we had learned as fully before, we may let that
pass, as having no need of it. And if we hear somewhat not useful for
sanctification and a godly life; we may let that go, as not worth the noting,
when better things are in place. And if we hear good instructions that are
useful for others, but concern not our selves; we may dismiss them also, as
not pertinent to our purpose.

In some such manner as this, we may single out such lessons as are proper, and
pass by those, which cannot further to a good life. And this condemns the
practice of two sorts; (1.) of them that busy themselves about trifles, and
things of no worth: and (2.) of them, who trouble themselves about other men's
duties, not pertinent to themselves.

1. They are to be condemned, who busy themselves about trifles or frivolous
things; and by entertaining them do exclude things of better worth. Such are
they, who are more affected with the Ministers wearing of a cap, or a surplice,
or an hood, then they are with their own duty of obedience to Governors, and
of just dealing with their neighbors, and of keeping the tongue from
slandering and deriding of their betters. Such men, if they hear any word
against a Ceremony, or against a Bishop; they mark and mind that, and clap
hands at it for joy: when they can hear threatenings against hypocrisy, and
self-love, and uncharitable censurings (sins too ordinary with such people)
and yet are no whit moved at the matter. Plutar. de Audit. page 43.
Plutarch tells of one, who being sick of a consumption, came to a Philotimus.
Physician to ask counsel for a sore finger: the Physician perceiving that he
was dangerously ill of his consumption; answered, [Non est tibi, amice,
adversus reduviam opus medicina] My friend, you have no such need of physic
for a finger: it is your lungs, that may enda^ger your life. And so I may say
to these men, There is no such danger to your souls, from a Ministers
surplice, or hood: Your danger is from your own sins, your pride, and
self-love, and overweening of your selves, with despising of your equals, and
slandering of your betters, etc. Cure these diseases first, and then we will
hear you, if ye have any thing to say that may discover a fault in our
Ceremonies. The conclusion is; They that will profit by hearing Gods word, must
single out such things, as may help to amend their lives.

2. They are justly condemned also, who busy themselves about impertinent
matters: things which either concern not themselves, or are above their reach
and capacity to understand. In this sort S. Peter offended. He when our Lord
told him, what conflicts himself was to undergo for his Master; presently,
leaving his own business, enquired concerning John, Lord, what shall he do?
But our Lord checked him for it: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? follow thou me. Ioh. 21.21, 22. And such a one was he that would
needs know, what God was a doing, before he made the world: to which busy
question an ancient Father gave a witty and wise answer, which was [Alta
scrutantibus gehennas parabat,] he was making hell for them that pry into his
secrets. August. Conf. lib. 11. c. 12. page 74.
And such like were those Monks, of whom we read, that they asked Copres an
holy and devout man, concerning Melchizedech, who and what he was: to whom
Copres, Rosw. in vitis Patrum, lib. 5. cap. de Humilit. number. 24. page 623.
[tundens tertio os suum] smiting himself three times on the mouth, said, [Vae
tibi Copre, etc.] Woe to thee Copres, which neglectest the things, which GOD
has commanded thee to do; and searchest after those things, which he never
required at thy hands. He meant by a figurative applying of their fault to
himself, to tell them how dangerous it is, to be busy about unnecessary
things. And so if any of us shall mark and enquire into the duties of other
men; What the duty of the King is in ruling of his people, what the Bishops in
ordering of the Church, what the Ministers in preaching of the word, or what
the Magistrates duty is in doing of justice; we may say to him, What is that
to thee, who art a private man? do thou learn and do thine own duty, and let
other men alone with their places, that concern thee not. Again, if any man
shall busy himself about the orders of Angels, and the degrees of glory in
heaven, and of the acquaintance that the Saints have, one with an other in an
other world: we may bid him first learn what God teaches him for his
salvation; and when he has learned all that, then he may have leave, to
enquire about needless things.

3. Rule. The last rule of wisdom in our hearing is, that if any sin be
reproved, or any judgment threatened, we should be suspicious of our selves,
lest we may be the men: and in an holy jelousie, apply every thing to our
selves, that reason will permit. For even in things of this life, Salves do not
heal, unless they be applied to the wound; nor medicines do not cure,
unless they be received by the Patient; nor meat does not nourish, unless it
be taken down into the stomach. And so it is here: Reprehensions and
comminations and caveats against sin; they do not humble the sinner, nor work
repentance and wariness, unless they be applied to the diseased and crasie
soul. This is apparent in the example of David. Nathan being sent to him to
reprove him, he first told him a parable, and under it described his sin; but
David passed over this, without once thinking on himself, who was aimed at in
that speech. But when Nathan once had said, Thou art the man. Thus says the
LORD, etc. then David remembered his fault, and said, I have sinned against the
LORD. And so he repented, and asked and obtained pardon. 2. Sam. 12.1, etc.
Thus it was with David: and so it is, and will be with us also. If sins be
spoke against in general only, that works seldom times any remorse: but
apply them to the conscience; and that works repentance and amendment of
life. Application then is most necessary. But it may not be expected, that
always it should be done by the Preacher, as here it was done by the Prophet.
For sometimes he can not do it, because he knows not the particular sins,
whereof each man is guilty, and to be admonished: and sometimes he may not do
it; because, if he should point out men in the pulpit, he might rather offend
the Assembly, then amend the sinner; or, he might shame him, rather then
reform him. Such applications by the Preacher may be useful in private, as
Nathans was: but what good may come by personating men in publik, I cannot
conceive. Seeing then that the Preacher cannot, or may not make this
application: wise hearers must help him, and make the application themselves.
If he tell them from the Apostle, Hebr. 13.4.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge: they, if any among them be privy
to himself of this sin, must say within himself, I am the man, that have
sinned in this sort, and am guilty of that judgment. And if He preach against
fraud and oppression, and press upon them, that of the Apostle, Let no man
overreach or defraud his brother in any matter, because the LORD is the avenger
of all such. 1 These. 4.6: they if guilty, should say, I am the man, and mine is
that judgment. And if He preach against drunkenness and good fellowship, and
tell of that threatening of the Prophet, Woe to them that rise up early in the
morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till
the wine inflame the^. Isa. 5.11: they should say each man for himself, I am
the man: I have made the fault, and I deserve that woe. And so should we do in
all other the like cases: still help the Preacher, by bringing that home to our
selves; which he sets before all his Hearers, that they may pick out that
which they have need of.

Thus I have gone through the rules; every wise man may make use of them, as
occasion serves: and either add more of his own unto them, or place others
that are better in their room. God grant us of his grace, that we may
conscionably use all such helps, as he does prescribe us for our spiritual
good: that by them, and his grace accompanying them, we may in the end attain
to his glory. Amen.

CAP. XIV.
Duties to be performed after our hearing.



He that will profit by a Sermon, shall do well, after the Sermon is ended, to
call to mind what he has heard, and then to consider of things more distinctly
and with more leisure. For in the time of our hearing, because our minds must
go along with the Preachers tongue, we want time to pause and consider and
weigh what we hear: the most that we can do, is but to think and consider,
which of the things delivered, may be fit for our use. The hammering and the
fitting of them, is left for afterward, when we may have more time to sift and
examine them more exactly. This course wise men use to observe in other the
like cases. When they read things in haste, they fold down a leaf or make a
mark in the margin of the book, that they may read the place over again at
more leisure: and when the time and occasion serves, they consider of those
remarkable passages. And so after we have heard the word preached or read, and
have marked out for our selves, those which seemed the most useful sayings: it
will be profitable, to take a time to think on them again in our private
houses. This the Learned think was resembled by that of Moses his Law, where
those beasts, are only allowed for clean beasts, which did chew the cudd.
Levit. 11.3. So Auditor verbi fimilis esse debet animalibus, quae ob hoc, quia
rumina^t, munda esse dicuntur. Prosper. senten. ex August. nu. 193.
Prosper, The Hearer of GODS word ought to be like to those beasts, which
because they chew the cudd, are therefore said to be clean. And like unto
such beasts good Hearers are in two things. 1. Because, Quu^ audit, fit similis
edenti; quum vero audita in memoriam revocat, fit similis ruminanti. Prosp.
ibid. and, In ipsa ruminatione, in qua significat Deus munda animalia, hoc
voluit insinuare, quia omnis homo, qui audit, sic debet in cor mittere, ut no^
piger sit ea cogitare: ut quando audit, similis sit manducanti; quum autem
audita in memoriam revocat, and cogitatione dulcissima recolit, fiat similis
ruminanti. Ruffin. in Psalm. 45. in fine, page 107. Vide Chrysostom. hom. 21. ad
populum Antioch. in principio, page 263.
as those beasts, while they eat, do let down into the maw, the meat half
chewed; and after they have done eating, do draw it up again into the mouth,
and grind and chew it better: so men must first hear, and afterward recall
and consider what they have heard: the first whereof is like the first eating
of the meat, and the later is like the chewing of the cudd. Secondly, good
Hearers are like such beasts, because, as the beasts, which ruminate or chew
the cudd, are reckoned for clean beasts; so GOD does approve and allow those
men, which first hear, and then ruminate and consider what they have heard.
This practice is further proved to be good, 1. from grounds of Scripture, and
2. from the benefit which we may reap by it.

I. From grounds of Scripture. For in them we find, that after S. Paul had
given instructions to Timothy concerning his duty, he adds for conclusion,
Meditate on these things. 1. Tim. 4.15. and, Consider, what I say, and the Lord
give thee understanding in all things. 2. Tim 2.7. And so David often
professes of himself, that his practice was to meditate on Gods word. Psalm.
119.15, 23, 48, 78, 148: and sets it down as a note of a blessed man, that
he does meditate in the Law of the Lord. In like sort it is said of the
blessed Virgin, that she kept all the things that were spoken to her by the
Shepherds, and pondered them in her heart. Luke 2.19: and ver. 51. after our
Saviors disputing with the Doctors, and his answer concerning the doing of his
Fathers business; it is said, that she kept all these sayings in her heart:
Meaning, that she noted and marked them, when they were spoken, and afterward
laid all together, and considered the purpose of God in them for man's
salvation. By all this we see, that holy men of God have not contented
themselves with bare hearing and reading of Gods word; but have meditated and
considered of it afterward with more leisure. Now of all the times that may be
employed about this service, none is more fit, then within a little while after
our hearing. And this time is therefore most useful; partly, because the
memory is then most fresh, and best able to give an account of what has been
heard; and partly, because present meditation and consideration, will both
confirm the memory, and prepare the heart for performance in the time to come.

II. There is much benefit to be reaped by this practice. For,

1. It will better our knowledge, and make us to understand things more fully
and perfectly. For in hearing, many things escape us through haste, which
afterward may be observed and understood in our second and more serious
thoughts. For example, in our hearing, while we mind the particulars in
several, the dependence and connection of the parts, do many times overslip us,
which upon a second review (especially time of consideration being allowed
thereto) we may easily discern; and thereby understand the whole discourse
more distinctly and fully. 2. In the Sermon or in the Chapter read, there may
happen some hard words, and dark sentences, and deep reasons; which on the
sudden we cannot, but with a little labor and meditation, we may apprehend
and discover. 3. There are in every Sermon lightly some testimonies of
Scripture, and some arguments from nature and reason, the soundness or
emptiness whereof appear not for the present. For light reasons set forth
with fine words, and a graceful delivery, do at the first please, yea,
transport a vulgar Hearer: whereas if they were turned out of their Rhetorical
coat, and showed in their natural feature, (as in the rehearsing of them by
the Hearers, they will be;) then the vanity of them will bewray it self. And
so on the contrary, many a sound argument, or solid reason, moves not the
hearers, when it is delivered; because they cannot on the sudden dive into the
depth of it; which by after thoughts they may understand. From whence it is,
that some men's Sermons, seem better in the repetition, then they did at the
first hearing; because now they are better understood, then they were before.
In these respects, whosoever shall imitate the commendable example of the
Bereans, who when Paul had ended his Sermon, searched the Scriptures, weighed
the allegations, considered the circumstances, and marked how every thing was
proved and confirmed: that man will gain both an increase of his knowledge,
and a confirmation of his faith, as the Bereans did; especially if he meet with
a solid Preacher, such as Paul was. Let this then be the first benefit of
recalling, what we have heard; it furthereth our knowledge and understanding.

2. The second is, that it will be an help to our memory, fastening and
imprinting therein, the lessons that were delivered. And this it will do, for
these causes, and in these respects.

(1.) The repeating of what we have heard, is a second presenting to our minds
of those lessons and instructions which we have heard: and the oftener they be
presented to the mind, the better they will be fastened in the memory; every
act of the understanding working upon the memory also. And therefore, as the
second blow drives the nail deeper then the first did; so this second
representing of things to the mind, and by the mind to the memory, will keep
a better remembrance of what we have learned.

(2.) The memory is hereby helped also, because in the first hearing the
material points, were clothed and covered (as we may say) with many words of
amplification and enlargement: which though they had their use for moving of
affections, yet are some hinderance to the memory, which is less able to
treasure up necessary points, when they are cumbred with so many circumstances.
But in our after thoughts, when we consider again what we have heard, we
may single out the bare matter from the Rhetoric, and lay the necessary points
by themselves alone: and then they will not only be contracted into a narrower
room, more easy for the memory; but besides, each thing will appear in its
due order and place, which will help the memory to remember that, which
otherwise it would have forgotten. For if it should forget the particulars,
taken severally and apart, yet the very dependence and connection that one thing
has with another, will help to bring all to remembrance. For conclusion of
this reason, I consider that sentence of the Apostle; Therefore we ought to
give the more earnest heed to the things that we have heard, lest at any time
we should let them slip. Heb. 2.1. In these words, these things are
considerable for our purpose. (1.) When he says, We must give earnest heed, he
means that we must meditate and consider with diligence and care. (2.) When
he says, we must give heed to the things which we have heard, he implies,
that this intention of mind, and this heed that is required, is a thing that
follows after our hearing. We must [now] give heed to the things, which we
have [formerly] heard. (3.) When he says, We must give heed, lest we let
them slip: he intimates, that if we do not afterward heed what before we
heard, we may quickly like leaking vessels, let all run out that has been
powered into us. And therefore, as I said before, that Attention in hearing, is
like the plough that opens the ground for receiving in of the seed: so now I
may as truly say, that Meditation and recalling of what we have heard, is like
the Harrow, which breaks the clods, and covers the seed sown, that it may
be kept from the fowls of the air, that would eat it up. Thus this
ruminating of what we have heard, helps to confirm the memory: and
remembrance is so necessary for our profiting by the word; that without it all
is lost, that was gained by our hearing. He that forgets what he has heard,
is like a man, that earneth wages, and puts them into a broken bag: or
like one with a weak stomach, who casts up his meat, as soon as he has
taken it in: that is, all of them take pains without profit; because they keep
not what they have gotten. The conclusion is, if we mean to profit by our
hearing, we must recall what we have heard.

Ob. But some perhaps will say, that their memories are frail, and they cannot
call to mind that which they have heard: when they bethink themselves of the
Sermon, they can remember nothing, or nothing to any purpose, that the Preacher
did say.

Ans. To these men I have three things to say.

(1.) That men and women most times do lay the blame upon their memories, when
indeed the fault is in their own negligence and carelessnesse. For even those
men, who complain of weak memories, yet when they have made a bargain, can
relate all the passages; and if they hear a play or an interlude, they can
tell by heart the merry jests contained in it; and if ye tell them a story of
their forefathers kindred, and their noble descent, this they can repeat over
with readiness and perfect memory; and if ye should direct them to a treasure,
that lay hid in a field, they would neither forget the place, nor the way that
leads to it. Only, when they hear instructions concerning heaven and
salvation, Here their memories fail them: and they can remember nothing. And
what can be the reason hereof, but that their care of heaven is less then
their care of the world? Tullie, when some objected, that old age was
forgetful, answered, [Omnia quae curant, senes meminerunt,] Old men do
remember all that they care for: never did any of them forget, where he laid
his money, or what bargain he had made. And so I may say of these men, [Omnia
quae curant, meminerunt,] they do not forget any thing that they care for:
their money, their bargains, their pleasures; these things they can remember,
and if they forget the instructions of GODS word alone, it is a shrewd
argument, that they care but a little for them. Let them amend their affection
to godliness and Gods service, and then their memories will every day grow
better, and will be as able to remember the things of God, as now they are to
remember the things of the world.

(2.) I say, It is true, that all men's memories are not alike good. For some
men's memories are ill disposed by nature, others are weakened by sickness or
old age, and others are deaded through intemperance and ill diet. And if any
man be disabled by these or any other accident, so that indeed he cannot
remember, what he does hear; I must needs say that man wants a great help to
godliness, which others do enjoy. But yet notwithstanding, if he do his
endeavor, both for the helping of his memory, and for recalling to mind, that
which he has heard; he may comfort himself in this, that our God, whom we
serve, is gracious, and will not require more of his servants, then he has
made them able to perform. But as the Apostle said of liberality, and
almsdeeds, If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that which
a man has, and not according to that which he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12: So it is
true of all duties and good performances; if there be a willing mind so that
we perform what we are able to do, God accepts of our endeavors, though they
be weak and poor in the performance. And therefore he or she who complains
of a weak memory, should first take care, that the defect be not in his own
negligence or disorderly carriage; as namely, because he did not attend, when
he did hear; or because he does not rubb up his memory, and call it to
account, after he has heard; or because he did or does entertain idle
thoughts of by-businesses, when he should mind the instructions that were
given him. And if the defect be not in himself, he may comfort himself in
GODS mercy, which is nor denied to them, who endeavor to serve God in
sincerity and truth.

(3.) I say, It may be that a tender conscience may in this case think worse of
himself, then there is cause. For perhaps he remembers not the words, but he
can remember the matter, and speak of it in a ruder phrase of his own; or
perhaps he cannot remember any orderly process concerning the matter, but yet
he can tell, that such a sin was condemned, and such a duty enjoined, by which
he is persuaded to serve GOD better; or perhaps again, when he begins to
think, nothing will come to his mind, and yet if one should question him
concerning this or that point handled in the Sermon, or, if himself should
have occasion to practice it in his course of life; he could then call to
mind, that he had heard it and can tell now how to make use of it. And if
there be but thus much, it is not to be accounted as nothing. Tender
consciences, who disquiet themselves with fears for their disabilitie of
memory, may consider of a story related in the life's of the old Fathers.
Quida^ frater dixit ad Senem; Ecce Abba, frequenter interrogo seniores Patres
ut dica^t mihi comonitionem pro sa^ite animae meae, and quicquid dixerunt mihi,
nihil retine^. Era^t aute^ Seni duo vasa vacua; and dixit ei Senex, Vade and
alfer unu^ ex illis vasis, and m^tte aqua^, and lava illud, and effu^de, and
pone nitidum in locum suum.
The story is this; One of the fraternity came to the old Father; and,
Father, said he, I do often desire of the ancient fathers some instruction for
the good of my soul, and whatsoever they tell me, I forget all. The old man
had two empty vessels, and bade him bring the one, and power water into it,
and wash it clean, and then power out the water, and set it up clean in its
place. Which when the young man had done accordingly, he demanded, Quale est
ex utrisque mundius? Respondit frater, Ubi aquam misi and lavi. Tunc Senex
dixit ei, Sic est and anima, fili, quae frequenter audit verba Dei: quamvis
nihil retineat ex his quae interrogat, tamen plus mundatur, quam illa, quae non
requirit. Rosw. de vitis Patrum, lib. 3. number. 178. page 526.
Which now of the two vessels is the more clean? The young man answered, that
into which I powered water, and washed it. And then the old father replied, So,
my son, is the soul which oftentimes hears Gods word: though it remember
not, what it has heard, yet it is more cleansed from sin, then that soul that
never came to hear at all. And so, if any man or woman among us have a weak
memory, and cannot give so good an account of a Sermon, as others can do; they
must do their endeavor to amend their imperfections, and if still they come
short and fail of their desire, yet they may comfort themselves with this
thought, that all is not quite lost, but somewhat sticks in the mind, which
though it appear not at the present, yet may do them good for afterward; as the
vessel, into which the water was powered, was cleaner and moister, then that
which stood dry, without any water powered into it at all. The conclusion of
this point is, Let men do their hearty endeavor, and not frame excuses of
weakness, when it is their own idleness and want of affection to the work:
and then I dare say, that no man's or woman's memory is so bad, but though they
cannot make any orderly repetition of their hearing, yet somewhat is laid up
in them, which when occasion is offered, will show it self, and may direct them
by a holy life to eternal glory. And thus much for the second benefit, which
is the helping of memory or remembrance.

3. A third is, Our recalling to mind after Sermon, what we heard in the
Sermon-time, will be a means to better our judgment, and will enable us to
fee, what passages are useful and profitable for a godly life. For if we
think, that every passage in a Sermon does alike profit us, as it does please
us, we greatly deceive our selves. For in common experience we see, that fine
and well shaped clothes, put upon a misshapen body do make him seem more
handsome to a vulgar eye, then the comeliest man, that is clothed in rags. And
so elegancie of phrase, and cadencie of sentences, and lively expressions of
the mind, especially being graced with comeliness of gesture also (which things
are the ornaments and the attire of a Sermon;) do usually more carry away the
ears and hearts of the vulgar, then sound rules and solid reasons possibly can
do. But now, if a man would know, which of the two is the more personable and
better proportioned man, he must strip them both out of their clothes, and
then he shall see them such as indeed they be. And so, if our Hearers would
know what is solid and substantial in our Sermons, they must turn them out of
their attire of utterance and eloquence: and then they may see what profitable
notes they contain, that may further a godly life. If there be any thing that
may serve either to reform our manners, or to make us wiser to salvation: that
is sound doctrine. But all other words or things, that some way or other
further not this end, they are either but empty shows, or at the best but
external ornaments. And if thus men desire to try and examine the goodness
of a Sermon; nothing is more fit for that purpose, then is Repetition and
after-consideration of what we have heard. For then and at such a time, the
matter and substance of doctrines debated, will offer themselves with ease to a
faithful memory; when the outward ornaments of eloquence and gesture will
fail us, do what we can. And so, hereby we shall be enabled to see each
limme, and each joint, and each sinew of a Sermon, in its native and and proper
shape; so our selves be careful to view and consider the parts thus
dissected, and presented to the view.

Object. But some perhaps will say. What? and do ye then condemn or debase
eloquence and action, the graceful virtues of an Oration?

Answer. I answer no, in no wise. I commend them and reckon them as graceful
ornaments, that serve to beautify true doctrine, as I would commend handsome
clothes that adorn a man's body. For as comely clothes put upon a well-favoured
person, do make him more lovely and amiable to the Beholders; so eloquence and
utterance, when they do attend and wait upon sound doctrine, do commend it to
the Hearers, and may induce them to embrace it. This I acknowledge, as to be
true, so to be a great virtue in a Sermon. But yet I would have men wise to
distinguish between the clothes and the person of a man; or else they cannot
discern his ability for each service. And so, much rather do I desire that
Christians should put a difference between substance of doctrine and ornament
of speech, the one being that which puts life of grace into his actions, and
the other only that which may moove him to go on the faster in his way. The
conclusion is, If any would judge thoroughly of a Sermon, he must do by it, as
the Lacedemonian did by the Nightingale. He having caught the bird alive,
thought he had gotten a fine dish of meat, but when he had stripped her out of
her feathers, he found a bare and a lean carcass: and then he gave this
verdict of her [Vox es, Plutareh. Apoph. Lacon.
and praeterea nihil,] Thou have a sweet voice for singing, but no meat to
satisfy hunger. And so, when the feathers are pulled off, it may be discerned
whether in a sweet tuned Sermon there be any thing else, beside a pleasant
voice. And thus I have done with this duty of recounting useful things after
our hearing.

CAP. XV.
General duties requisite at all times, both before and after, and in the time
of our hearing.

before, and after, and in the time of Hearing: there remains only now to
be considered the last sort, which is of general Duties, diffusing themselves
through all those differences of time. And in this kind there are three duties
to be observed.

I. The first is, that we be real, and substantial, in all our performances,
and not any where, perfunctory or formal; when we have to deal with God, an
outside will not serve the turn: he requires the heart, and will accept of no
service, which is not sincere and hearty. And that our services in this
business may be such, we must observe two rules.

1. Rule. We must not think it enough to do the outward works, we must join
true and hearty affections with them. For all outward acts, are but as the
shell, or the rind, which covers and preserves the fruit from violence and
harm: the inward affection of the soul, that is the kernel and the fruit of
devotion. Now the shell and rind though they be of good use, while they
enclose the fruit, yet are they vain, and of no worth or moment, when they are
separated from it, and stand alone by themselves. And so it is with acts of
Gods service: if they be joined with inward affections of the heart, they both
serve to express a godly zele and to increase it: but if they be disjoined
from hearty affections, they serve for no more use, then an empty shell and the
bare parings of an apple: that is, for nothing but either for the fire or the
dunghill. From hence it is that our Savior condemns the verbal prayers of
the Heathen. When ye pray (says he) use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen
do: for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking. Matt. 6.7. In
which words, our LORD sets out the vicious prayers of the Heathen by two
things: (1.) by their superfluity of words: and (2.) by their vacuitie of
matter. Their superfluity of words was, that they used much speaking and vain
repetitions; that is, they prayed at length, while words were at hand; and when
new words failed the^, they went over their prayers again. (2.) their vacuity
or emptiness of matter in these many words, is described two ways. (1.) In
that it is said, they used vain repetitions. The word in the original is
(...), that is, to speak as Battus did: and his manner of speech is set out by
the Poet to be this: when one asked whether any cattle were driven that way,
Battus in the Poet is said to make answer, that there were, and [sub illis
Montibus, inquit, erant, and era^t sub montibus illis] they went under those
mountains, and under those mountains they went; idly repeating, what before
he had said, which was foolish in the Speaker, and tedious to the Hearer. (2.)
The emptiness of matter in those prayers is set out by another word, not much
unlike to the former; (...), which in English is word for word, much speaking,
and in the sense imports many words to small purpose. For if a man continue
his speech long, as Paul did, when he continued till midnight. Act. 20.7, 9:
yet, if he speak materially and to purpose, he is not to be esteemed (...),
a man of many words: then only is a man said to use many words, when the words
are more, then the matter does require. And therefore the former Translation did
render the place not unfitly, when it said, They think to be heard for their
much babbling. The fault then taxed in these Heathens was, that they used empty
words without matter and affection answerable thereunto. And so it will be our
fault, if we pray without feeling, and hear without attending; or, if we turn
our Bibles, and repeat Sermons without care to profit in godliness by them.

2. Rule. In duties of hearing, and repeating, and conferring, we must not rest
in the present work, or the transient act of these duties; as if we performed a
service to God, because we hear, and rehearse, and talk of a Sermon: but we
must refer all to future practice, and esteem them only so far forth
good, as they make us better; either wiser in our knowledge, or holier in our
obedience. And therefore it is, that the Prophet describing the nature of right
hearing, says, Isa. 42.23
Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for the time
to come? In which words, (1.) when he says, who will give ear, and who will
hearken? he implies that all should, but yet few do so; and (2.) when he
says, who will hear for the time to come? he means that men should not
content themselves with the transient action of hearing, which continues no
longer, then while the sound lasts; but they must so hear for the present,
that it may serve for afterward: namely, that they think on it, and consider of
it, and put it in practice as occasion shall require. This is to hear for
afterward: but if any, while he hears, have some warm affections kindled in
him, and after he is gone, think no more on it, or amendeth not his life by
it; this man hears only for the present, and does not answer Gods
expectation, when he says, who will hear for the time to come? And so in
like sort, if a man note Sermons with his pen, and repeat them afterward with
his family, and yet for most part insisteth upon empty words and idle
allegations, which do not profit him or them in godliness, and neglects those
notes, which might make them better: this man's writing and repeating are both
alike of no value. But if further any shall abuse these holy exercises to
countenance their factious meetings, and instead of meditating on Gods word, do
devise slanders against Gods Church; these men turn duties of religion into
occasions of sin. Let not my pen ever speak any word for encouragement in
such an evil practice. The sum of all is, that if we will prove our selves
to be good Hearers of Gods word, we must so hear, and so repeat, and so
perform every duty required in this work; as that all of them may further us
in Gods service and an holy life.

II. The second general duty is, that together with our own endeavors and
performances, we join prayer to God for his blessing upon the work that we go
about. For as David said in a like case, Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it; and, except the Lord keep the City, the
watchman waketh but in vain. Psalm. 127.1: so, except God assist us with his
grace, we shall prepare our selves in vain, and hear Gods word in vain, and
what we have heard, we shall repeat in vain: and nothing that we go about,
either before, or after, or while we hear; can prosper, unless God give the
blessing, and make it to prosper. Now the blessing of God is to be sought and
obtained by prayer. S. James his direction is, If any man lack wisdom, let him
ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall
be given him. Iam. 1.5. In this Scripture we have first a precept, directing
us to our duty, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God: and secondly a
promise, assuring us of success, and it shall be given him: and thirdly, a
reason drawn from Gods nature, He gives liberally to all, and he upbraideth
no man with his gifts; and therefore he will be ready to give us that which we
want, if we beg it of him in our prayers. And so, if any man lack (and who
lacks not?) either a prepared mind before hearing, or due attention in the
time of hearing, or a firm memory after hearing, let him ask of God, who
gives liberally: and he needs not doubt but God will give what he does ask
according to Gods will. Upon this ground Col. 10. cap. 10.
Cassian an ancient and Learned Writer, advises men, upon every occasion to
make use of that prayer of David, [Deus in adjutorium meum intend: Domine, ad
juvandum me festina.] O GOD make speed to save me: O LORD make haste to help
me. Psalm. 70.1. For this prayer fitteth every condition of man, as he
declares in many particulars, the sum whereof may be this. If a man be in
any distress or danger, then he should say, Deus in adjutorium, etc. O God
make speed to save me: O Lord make haste to help me. And if he be solicited
by any tentation, then he should pray, O God make speed to save me, etc. And if
he want any grace or blessing, the^ he should pray, O God, make speed to save
me, etc. And if he have obtained any blessing or favor from God; for the
continuance of that mercy, and his right using of it, he should pray, O God
make speed to save me; O Lord make haste to help me. And what soever the
occasion be, still this prayer will be seasonable and useful. Thus this holy
man teaches us, how to observe that rule of the Apostle, Pray without ceasing.
1 Thessalonians. 5.17. This direction is applicable to this purpose. When we are
preparing to hear GODS word, we should pray God, that he will prepare our
hearts, and fit us for that service; when we are busied in the act of hearing,
we should pray, that GOD will direct us to lay hold on that which we find
useful for us; and after our hearing, we should pray, that GOD will bless our
memories, to keep the good lessons, which we have heard. This to be a
laudable custom, still to beg a blessing of God upon every endeavor of ours;
no man, I suppose, will deny: only perhaps some man may doubt, how a man may
pray in the time of his hearing, without hindering or interrupting the publik
and enjoined exercise, then certainly more necessary, then any private prayers
or devotions. To this my answer is, that the Scripture it self, does
sufficiently direct us herein. There we read, that Nehemiah, when the King was
talking and conferring with him, about the affairs of his people, and the
state of the holy Land; yet says of himself, So I prayed to the God of
Heaven: and I said to the King; If it please the King, etc. Neh. 2.4, 5. By
this we see that Nehemiah at the same time did both pray God for a blessing,
and continue his speech with the King: which shows, that while he was
talking with the King about those weighty affairs of the Church, he darted up
a jaculatory short prayer unto God, either that he would direct the Kings
heart for the good of his people, or that he would prosper the business in
hand, or some such prayer to the like purpose. And hence we have direction in
this case. When we hear an useful point, that concerns us much, we may by
a short prayer, desire Gods blessing upon it, for our good, without hindering
or diverting away our attention from any part of the Sermon. For example, if
the Preacher commend any necessary duty unto us, we may pray for grace, to
perform it: if he condemn any sin, by which we may be ensnared, we may pray
for strength to avoid it: and if he dispute of any hard point, which is
profitable to be known, we may pray for wisdom to understand it. And all
this we may do without any hinderance to the public service or the exercise
in hand. Nay, if we do thus at convenient times, and when the occasion does
require it; it will further us in that work two ways: (1.) it will obtain a
blessing of GOD upon the present work, that it may do us the more good: and
(2.) it will season our hearts with holy affections, and thereby prepare them
for the performing of what they have been taught. Prayer then is useful at
all times, both before we come to hear, and when we are in hearing, and after
we have made an end of the work: and therefore my exhortation shall be that of
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Pray without ceasing; and that of our Savior where he says, that men ought
always to pray. Luke 18.1.


For our better encouragement in which duty, we may consider the success and
event thereof, in two known examples. The first is the example of Cornelius,
of whom it is said, that while he was praying in his house, an Angel from
heaven appeared unto him, and directed him to Peter, who would tell him what
he ought to do. Act. 10.6: or, as it is Act. 11.14. would tell him words,
whereby both he and all his house should be saved. An other example we have
in Saul, afterward called Paul: Of whom we read, that after JESUS had
appeared unto him by the way, and preached unto him the sum of the Gospel, he
went into the City, and continued three days fasting and praying And then the
Lord appeared to Ananias and said, Arise -- and inquire in the house of Judas
for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold he prays. Act. 9.11. Where (1.) we
may note a commandment given to Ananias; Arise, go, enquire for Saul: it is a
short speech including more in the sense, then appears in the words. He
means, that he should inquire for him, and having found him, should say and
do unto him as afterward is expressed ver. 17. (2.) a reason, which moved God
to bestow these favors upon him, and that is in these words; For behold, he
prays. If Saul had gone his way, and neglected the vision that he saw, and
the words that he heard from our Saviors mouth, he might have continued
without any further direction and help. But now that he prayed to God after
the vision and the instructions of our LORD; Act. 9.17. and Act. 21.14, 15, 16
God sends his servant, who both opened his eyes, and instructed him in the
faith, and baptized him, and laid his hands upon him; and he was filled with
the holy Ghost. The application from these examples to our selves is this: If
we set our selves to prayer before hearing, as Cornelius did; and by prayer beg
Gods blessing after we have heard, as Saul did; we may hope, that God Ephesians. 2.4.
who is rich in mercy, and such a one Psalm. 65.2.
as hears prayer, will bless our endeavors, and prosper his ordinance, and
send us such Teachers, as may direct us the right way to salvation and life.

III. The last general duty is, that we be constant in our performances,
whether they be to be used before, or after, or amidst our hearing. And by
constancy in our duties, I mean two things: (1.) that we must not do them by
spurts: and (2.) that we must not do them by halves. 1. We must not do them by
spurts only, and when the toy takes us; but we must perform them usually at
the accustomed and convenient times. For those that come to Church now and
then, at their best leisure, and now and then prepare themselves, and now and
then recall to mind what they have heard; are like trewandly boys, which come
to school one day, and stay away another. Among such scholars, I have seldom
seen any, that ever learned his book to any purpose. And no marvel. For first
he loses a great part of the time in idleness, which others bestow at their
book, and misseth many lessons, which his fellows do learn in his absence. 2.
Such a trewandly boy is not disposed to learn, when he comes to school;
partly because his mind is upon his miching holes, where he uses to lurk, or
upon the pastime that he has spent his time in: and partly, because the
losing of his ordinary lessons in his absence, does rob him of much help, that
he might have gained for the lessons which come after. For one lesson well
learned, is a stepp and introduction to another; because there is a connection
and dependence among rules of the same Art. But surely, what ever the reason
be, the conclusion is true, that a trewandly boy never proves a learned man.
And the same may be observed in the school of Christ. Those that come by fits
only and hear, and repeat, and consider, when they have little else to do,
lose many good notes and instructions, which others who are more diligent, do
learn, and suffer many distractions of mind, when they are about the work,
and are every way indisposed for learning of Gods Law. Thomas by being once
absent, when CHRIST appeared to his disciples, lost a great measure of faith,
which they gained who were present. Our LORD showed them his hands and his
side, and used arguments of persuasion to convince them of the truth of his
resurrection, and they believed it: but Thomas wanting these grounds of faith,
remained faithless in that great point of our LORDS resurrection, as is
expressed at large, John 20. And so, he that is absent, when he should not,
may chance miss of those instructions, which might do him good to salvation:
and he that neglects to use the means of profiting, when he has fair
opportunity for them; may lose that assistance of grace, that might guide him
in the ways of godliness. Consequently he that is careful to thrive in
grace, must continue in well doing, and not do good duties by spurts, and as
his fancy leads him.

2. He that will be constant, must not do his services by halves. So they do
who in their private exercises, do out of idleness, and indevotion, curtall
and abbreviat either their prayers, or their meditations, or any other useful
exercise. But more especially they do so, who at times of public Service, do
come, when part thereof is past, or go away before all be ended. Such men
run into a twofold danger: one, that they do offend God by sleighting of his
service; and the other, that they may lose the blessing, which usually
accompanies the time of divine Service.

1. They may anger God by a slight esteem of his Service. For so the Prophet
says, Cursed be he, that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed be
he, that keeps back his sword from blood. Ier. 48.10. In this sentence we
have two things. (1.) A Commination of judgment: and (2.) an application of it
to the present occasion. The Commination is this, Cursed be he, that does the
work of the Lord deceitfully; the former Translation reads it, negligently.
The meaning is in both, the same. For he that does Gods work negligently, does
do it deceitfully also; because he gives God but one part of his due, and
keeps back an other part from him; or for that he gives him a worse thing
instead of a better. In which sense he is said to be a deceiver, who having a
male in his flock, voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. Mal.
1.14. And in this manner Saul was a deceiver, when being commanded to kill all
the Amalekites, he saved some of the best of them alive. 1. Sam. 15. And so
Ananias and Sapphira were deceivers, when having offered to God all the money
that the land was sold for, they kept back part for themselves. And in the same
sense may every one among us be called a deceiver, who gives God a part of his
service, and keeps from him some other part: or, who affoordeth him part of
the time, that is due to his worship, and depriveth him of the rest. Such a one
is both a negligent workman, and a deceitful dealer with God. 2. The
application of this threatening in the Prophet is this, And cursed be he that
keeps back his sword from blood. The meaning is, that God had now commanded a
work to be performed against his enemies, the Moabites; which was to slay, and
kill, and destroy them: and he that did not slay and destroy them accordingly,
was he that did this work of the LORD both negligently and deceitfully, though
he should pill, and poll, and impoverish them. The like application of this
general rule is proper to this occasion also. The hearing of Gods word, with
the other duties belonging to it, are GODS work, which he requires to be done
in their time and season: and if any man do willingly and unnecessarily
withdraw himself from any part, when he owes to God the whole; he does Gods
work deceitfully, and may fear the curse, that is denounced against deceivers
in the Prophet.

2. These men, who think to please God with a part of his due either coming
too late to his Service, or departing from it too soon, do run upon this
danger, that by their absence they may lose that blessing, which GOD has
appointed for that part of the service wherein they had no share. More
particularly they may miss that prayer, by which they might have obtained the
assistance of Gods Spirit, or they may miss the reading of that Chapter which
might have converted them to God from some evil way, or they may miss that
passage in the Sermon, which might have done them good all their life long. In
respect whereof, as he that comes too late to his dinner, or is called away
before his time, may chance to rise hungry or unsatisfied: so they that come
too late, or depart too soon from divine Service, may go away destitute of
that blessing of God which might nourish their souls with grace to eternal
life. He therefore that will be a profitable hearer of Gods word, must not
carelessely neglect any part of Gods service: wherein we may take for our
pattern the example of Cornelius, a man much commended in the Scriptures. He,
expecting the coming of S. Peter, who should tell him what he should do; did
in the mean while, call together his kinsmen and near friends, and they
altogether waited for the Preacher: and when Peter was come to preach the
Gospel unto the^, We (says Cornelius) are all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Act. 10.24, 33. Where (1.)
when it is said, that Cornelius had gathered and called together his kinsmen
and near friends; we may hence gather, that Cornelius thought it a special
benefit, which he desired his chief friends might be partakers of, to hear
the word of God preached by the Apostle. (2.) When Cornelius says, We are all
here present to hear, he gives us to understand, that all the Hearers were
present and met together, to wait for the Preacher before the Preacher came:
there was not one, that came tardie, or after the exercise was begun. (3.) When
he says, we are all here present, to hear all things that are commanded of
God to be said unto us; he implies that they meant not to lose or miss any
part of S. Peter's speech: there was not a man among them all, that meant to
depart before all was ended. The like affection and diligence should be showed
by every Christian. It is an argument of little devotion and respect to Gods
service, when we come slowly, and go away quickly, and think every hour too
much, that is bestowed in this duty. But if we be ready aforehand, and stay
till the full end, and hearken to every thing that God has sent his servant to
tell us; as Cornelius and his friends did: then we may hope, that as the holy
Ghost fell upon them, that then heard the word, verse. 44: so God will give us
his Spirit, to guide us in the truth, and to lead us by a holy life, to
eternal glory: Which God grant for CHRIST'S sake. Amen.

FINIS.

