The honorable Victory obtained by Grave Maurice his Excellency, against the
City of Rhyne-berg, the 20. of August. 1597.

Translated out of the Dutch Coppie, printed in S'Grauenhaghe, by Albert
Hendrickson.



Printed at London by Edward Allde for Thomas Stirrup: and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign the George.

The Victory against the City of Rhyne-berg, the 20. of August 1597.
THE Grave Maurice his Excellency, being come with his Army into the Field,
and having within the space of fourteen days, reduced the Town of Berg upon
the River of Rhyne out of the hands of the Spanish Faction unto the obedience
of the united Provinces of the Low Countries, has signified the means how it
was accomplished, aduertising the Agreement to the Lords and States of
Holland, according to the Coppie following.

Maurice borne Prince of Orange, County of Nassau, to the honorable,
worshipful, prudent, and discreet our dear Friends, the States of Holland, or
to their Deputies of the Counsel.
HOnorable, worshipful, prudent, circumspect, and most assured good Friends,
notwithstanding the hinderance we had certain days by great raines and
tempests, we took such pains, that we made our approach even to the walls of
the City, the which yesterday morning we summoned to yield after we had
made three vollies of Battery. Whereupon the Governor and Captains, at the
first showed themselves desirous of Parley with us: but at last they required
respit for three days. Hereupon we continued our said Batteries, and so
effectually went forward with our business, that in the afternoon we were out
of the danger of their Ordinance, and got one of their Bulwarks or Rauelins:
and were come so near each to other at the said Bulwarks, that we were ready
to make a trial thereuppon. Which they within the Town perceiving, upon our
second Summons, they desired to have Parley with us, and sent out certain
Captains to fall to composition with us. The which is accomplished according
to the Contract ensuing. And this day about noone they are accordingly departed
away. For the which we yield most hearty praise and thanks to almighty God.

Honorable, etc. In the Camp before Rhyne-berg. the 20. of August. 1597.
Underwritten. Your very loving Friend. Subscribed. Maurice Nassau.

The Contract.
HIs Excellency has agreed and hereby agreeeth with the Governor,
Captains, Lieuetenants, Soldiers and Mariners remaining at this present
within the City of Rhyne-berg, That they shall freely and frankly depart out
of the said City, with their Arms, Ensigns, and Baggage: and likewise all
spiritual and temporal persons, which will depart: and also al Officers that
have served the King of Spain. Secondly, whatsoever appertains to the K. of
Spain within the said City, shall be left there, and likewise the Ships of
war, and all mooueables that appertained to the Countess of Neuwenar. The
Citizens and Inhabitants shall be maintained in their Privileges.

Done before Rhyneberg, the 19. of August. 1597.
For which noble Victory, the eternal God is to be praised and thanked. And
God grant that his Excellency may always be blessed, and have most prosperous
succes in all his exployts and proceedings, that by his circumspectnes and
foresight the Enemy may be quailed more and more, and that all such as sigh
under the Spanish tyranny, may be delivered out of bondage.

Amen.
LONDON, Printd by E. A. for Thomas Stirrup: and are to be sold at the sign
of the George in Paul's Churchyard.


