REASONS Monarchy.

Set forth by Robert Mason of Lincolnes Inn Gent.

3. Tuscul. Munus animi est ratione vti.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims, dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of the
white Swanne. 1602.

To the right Honorable sir John Popham knight, Lord chief Justice of England,
one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel: and to the rest of the
Justices of Assise.
RIght Honorable, as Aeneas, in his most distressed estate, sought succor of
Queen Dido; So does reason, in her more than half exiled condition implore
your Honors assistance. If there be charitable duty to defend the Jnnocent
from oppression, there is no less, to aid Reason against the deprauers of her
sincerity, and obscurers of her worthiness. Under God, our most gracious
Queen, Defendresse of the Faith; under them both, you are vpholders of Reasons
Monarchy.

To your religious, honorable, and virtuous protectio^s therefore have J
adventured to present her Dignity, knowing you regard her excellency no
less, though it want glorious ornaments, than Darius did the friendship of
Zopirus, in his mangled and miserable seeming disaster. Patronize, J beseech
you, his labor, and pardon his boldness, that most humbly prays
continuance and increase of honor and happiness to your Lordship.

Your Lordships in all duty, To: M:

To the Reader.
THe far traveler by Sea, uses his Card and Instruments, and all his
endeavor, to find out the course of a long and dangerous voyage. Wherein, the
uncertainty of the thing he seeks, causes him often to fail his purpose.
But in this course which I direct, the Reader shall not have occasion to
adventure any such hazard, albeit the matter sought, be as precious, as
whatsoever. Reason, which every man should lodge in his own bosom, is it
which I advise to be enquired; whereof, as men, by their original natures do
participate, so ought they, by their reasonable Discretions, govern the whole
course of their lives. Her excellency can not in words be expressed, which
causes her rudiments to be so slenderly followed: Reason is in the son of
God, perfect, pure, and true: But in men, corrupted: what is there that she
does not in some measure search into? Her view pearceth into the earth, and
all the Elements. The powers of heaven and Angels, into all things that may be
comprehended with understanding; And farther, even into things that are
mystical, and above the compass of her self: For though she cannot reach
into the depth of eternity, and the saving of souls: yet she brings to the
knowledge of God, and belief in his mercies (whereby this salvation is
wrought) being a mystery far above the capacity of men. Whatsoever
concerns us, either in regard of this present world, or otherwise, Reason
shows, that it was possible to Gods power, agreeable to his Justice, and
mercy, answerable to his will and promises, and beseeming his glory,
behouefull to manifest our baseness, and necessary for our welfare. By her
powerful argument, she is able to put ungodliness it self to silence; whereupon
it is fitly concluded, that credit is not to be given to the outward person,
but to the divine thing within the person: whereby is meant, Reason, whose
original pureness, is in some measure hereafter discovered.

That this right Reason is corrupted in men, none can doubt, if they behold
themselves truly what they are, in respect of what they should be. Wherefore,
if Solomon thereby found out the imperfections of his life, and has not spared
to leave to the public view of the world, his errors manifested, and the
striving he had to reform the same, no man has Reason to be ashamed,
secretly, and privately, in the closet of his own heart, to view his
digressions and slidings from reason; and endeavor the composing of his actions
to the rule and order of Reason. Entreating of these things, I have rather bent
my self, to satisfy the Reader out of the opinion of the learned, and Reason
her self, then upon any imaginations of mine own. I pray thee therefore take
in good part my labor, and good will, and give the subject whereof I entreat,
thy furtherance, howsoever thou may be pleased with the manner of handling.
And let me desire (as Iustus Lipsius in his book of Constancy) that thou will
read twice before thou once censure it; and I shall be beholding for thy
pains, and wish part of all Gods good blessings toward thee. Farewell.

Thy ever well willing friend, R. M.

Hexasticon amici cuiusdam.
Dent alij mentis vanae deliria vana,
Tu Masone tuis, vtile dulce dabis.
Lumine tu coecos, moestos solamine vero
Imbuis, errantes turatione regis,
Viue, studeto, vale, rationis diuite vena,
Et dote ingenij perge bear tuos.
REASONS Monarchy.
Sect. I. The dignity of right Reason.
AS I intend not in this Discourse, to meddle with matters of State, and
government of Countries and Kingdoms, being far above my judgment. Yet am
I bold to make some discovery of the understanding of right and vncorrupt
reason; and of her excellent quality, place, and condition; and the dominion
and authority she ought to have over the affections, passions, and actions of
every particular man, which being truly known, men may the better contain
themselves in obedience and duty to authority and command. This labor I
hold my self bound to undergo, by the laws of God, of nature, and of my
country, lest I should otherwise charge my self with an idle employing of my
leisure. Because Reason is a quality, which every man challenges to enjoy, by
a proper and peculiar fruition in himself, solely by the course of his
original deduced nature from the beginning of all antiquities, echone holding
an vnremouable opinion, that the courses and directio^s which they take in
hand, proceed of Reason, and are warranted thereby. Yet for that it is most
apparent, that corruption is entered into the nature of man, and their minds,
and reason, are impaired from that ancient primarie perfection, wherewith the
first created man was endued; it shall be very necessary, that all men, very
advisedly, and with deep consideration, search, and examine themselves
concerning this point, that finding their errors, they may the better, and
more advisedly, reform their faults.

Right and true Reason, as it ought to have a government general, so does it
teach how to govern particulars: and by teaching government, it instructs how
to obey, which is one special mark I aim at. For if she, as the true Princes
and Queen, bear the Regal, and Monarcall place, and only she ought to
reign over all passions, and affections; then no doubt but she has, or should
have, many Subjects that ought to be disciplined, governed, and kept in order
by her authority: the repugning whereof is a kind of rebellion.

If this be a true position, Regnum est parcere subiectis, and debellare
superbos: This couclusion must rightly follow, that all those, either
affections, passions, or fancies, which stubbornly oppose themselves against
their Prince, or revolt from their duty, ought to be corrected as rebellious,
or at least, as disturbers of the peace of their Queen, lest their outrageous
intemprature turn to their own subversion; for it is a most clear and resolved
consequent, that take away order and government, there presently follows horror
and confusion: which ruin, as it often falls out in great kingdoms, among
multitudes of men, so yet originally do these defects commence in the
particular errors of some special private men, for from some small beginning
the greatness thereof must needs proceed: therefore, obstare principijs maxim
iuuat. It is very behoofefull to withstand the beginnings.

Such is the dignity and majesty of right and true reason, that she has a
place above all earthly, corruptible, and mortal things; above the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, and Firmament of heaven, above the Angels themselves, even
in the Son of God, in the presence of God himself, as by this ensuing
discourse shall be made manifest.

Sect. II. The Soul is the substance, and Reason a quality thereof.
BEfore I can fittely enter into the definition of Reason, being a quality in
a substance of higher valewe, I must borrow leave, for a few words, concerning
that substance whereof reason is this quality, for out of that will be found, a
way, how to discover the truth of all that ensues, and ought to be understood.

The Immortal Soul of man is this substance, which among Christians is not
doubted, and being learnedly handled by writers, taught by divines, and
conceived and understood by all, I will leave to speak thereof in any manner of
persuading others to give credence thereunto, and only touch the same, so
far forth as may discover the excellency of reason.

Hermes treating of the soul, says; Hermes in his Poema^ der cha. 10
It is the garment of the mind, and the garment of the Soul is a certain
Spirit, whereby it is united to the body: and this thing is that which we
properly call Man, that is, a heavenly creature, not to be compared to beasts,
but rather with the Gods of heaven.

Plato says, Plato in li. 11. de Legib. epist. 2.
that the ancient and holy Oracles are to be believed, which affirm men's
souls to be immortal.

Pithagoras held opinion, that the Soul is a bodilesse and immortal substance,
put into this body as into a prison for sin.

Architus says, that God breathed reason and understanding into man.

Plato says, Plat. in his Timens, and third book de Republ.
that God created man by himself, yea and his liver, and his brain, and his
senses, which is understood to be the soul, endued as well with sense, as
reason.

But speaking only of the reasonable Soul, Plato in Phoedon li. 10. de Repub.
in matter of state in his Alcibiades.
he says, that the Soul of man is very like the Godhead, immortal,
reasonable, uniform, vndissoluble, and evermore of one sort, which are
conditions that can not agree, but in things most divine: And therefore at his
departing out of the world, he willed his soul to return home to her first
original. Plat. in his first book of Laws.
And in an other place, he makes bold, to term it to be kin unto God, that
is to say, everlasting, and of one self name with the immortal ones.

Aristotle says, Aristot. lib. 3. de Anim.
that the soul of man comes from without, and not of the seed of man, as
the body does, and that the soul is the only part in us that is divine, which
is as much, as if he had said, immortal.

Cicero has two excellent sayings in this behalf, Li. 1. quaest. Tuse.
The original of our souls and minds (says he) can not be found in this
low earth: for there is not any mixture in them, or any compounding that may
seem to be made, or bred, of the earth; neither is there any moisture, wind,
or any fiery matter in them. And his reason in that place is, that no such
thing could retain in it, the power of memory, understanding, or conceit, to
bear in mind things past, to foresee things to come, and to consider things
present, which (says he) are matters altogether divine; concluding, that
because it consisted not of any elementall matter, it must needs be immortal.

In another place he says, Cic. lib. 2. de not. Deor.
that beetweene God and man, there is a kindred of Reason, as there is between
man and man, a kindred of blood. That the fellowship between man and man
comes of the body, but the fellowship between God and man comes of God
himself, who created the soul in us. By reason whereof (says he) we may say,
we have aliance with the heavenly sort, as folks that have descended of the
same race and root.

Seneca in his book of Comfort, Seneca in lib. Consolationis etc
writing of the death of the Lady Marcia her son, says, he is now
everlasting, and in the best state, bereft of this earthly baggage, etc. which
he inferred for the most excellent comfort of all, to be, when the soul is
departed from the body.

Out of the learning which it seems Hierocles had from Pithagoras, Hierocl.
ca. 10.
he very consideratelie, and deeply entering into the minds of the wicked,
says, that the wicked would not have their souls to be immortal, to
the intent they might not be punished for their faults: But yet (says he) they
prevent the sentence of their Judge, by condempning themselves unto death
before hand.

Plotinus, Plotinus of the being of the soul lib. 1. Enead 4.
who wrote many excellent treatises concerning the Soul, and took great
pains therein, says, men's Souls proceed not of their bodies, nor of the
seed of their parents, but are as ye would say, grafted into our bodies by the
hand of God.

The Soul (says he) has had company with the Gods, Plotinus in his book of
doubts concerning the soul cha. 26.27.
and is immortal, and so would we say of it (as Plato affirms) if we saw it
fair and clear. But for as much as we see it commonly troubled, we think it
not to be, either divine, or immortal. Nevertheless (says he) he which will
discern the nature of any thing perfectly, must consider it in the very own
substance, or being, utterly unmingled with any other thing; for whatsoever is
added else unto it, does hinder the perfect discerning thereof. Therefore let
every man behold himself naked without any thing, save himself, so as he
look upon nothing else, save his bare soul: and surely, when he has viewed
himself in his own nature, merely, as he is in respect of his mind, he shall
believe himself to be immortal; for he shall see, that his mind aymeth not
properly at the sensible and mortal things, but that, by a certain
everlasting power, it takes hold of things that are everlasting, and of
whatsoever is possible to be conceived in understanding. Insomuch, that even it
self becomes, after a sort, a very world of understanding and light.

Galen, Galen in his book of Manners of the soul
after he had most curiously searched into the nature of Elements, and as much
as he could, fathered the causes of all things upon the Elements: yet is
enforced to confess in his book of the doctrine of Hippocrates and Plato,
that the Soul is a bodilesse substance, whereof the body is only the chariot,
making a difference between the corruptible and immortal part of man.

The Turks, Arabians, In the Alcaron Azo 25, and 42.
and Persians hold firmly, that the Soul of man was breathed unto him of
God, and so consequentiy, incorruptible, and immortal. Besides, many other
strong resolutions amongst the Philosophers; the very Caribies and Caniballes
acknowledge the immortality of the Soul.

I omit to mention what is contained in the holy and sacred Book of God, and
writers of divinity, because I would have the most absurd that live, repair
to learn of such as were altogether profane: if they scorn (as many do) to
peruse the Book of God.

What moved all these, and many millions besides; nay, in a manner, the whole
world, to acknowledge the excellent immortality of the Soul, but this
reasonable understanding and apprehension of the Soul, which being in it self
immortal, searches out the knowledge of things that are everlasting, and
neither can finish, nor abide corruption in their substance? and so much for
the substance whereof Reason is the quality.

Sect. III. Reason advanced above things that are inferior to her.
IN comparing of things for their worthiness, or excellency, it is always to
be understood, that there must be other, and more things objected, over and
besides that which is advanced and commended above the rest, whereby the
comparison or advancement may be proved and discerned. In this matter I have
undertaken, to advance and set up Reason above other things. The better
therefore to discover the truth thereof, I will manifest those things that are
inferior, and ought to be subject unto Reason.

In the first Creation, God made many creatures, whereof the world does consist
in the whole, which being truly considered, do yield four degrees, and each
more excellent than other. The first sort have only being. The second have
being and life. The third have being, life, and sense. The fourth have being,
life, sense, and reason.

It was fitly said by a great learned man, that the earth, the sea, and the
air, are of great largeness, they bear up and sustain all things that have
life, all that have sense, and all things that have reason, and yet themselves
have no more but a bare being, without life, sense, or reason: as they are the
first things that were made of nothing, so are they nearest unto nothing, and
of meaner consideration then the rest. The plants and herbs are the next,
which besides their being, have a kind of life, as it is to be seen by their
growing, sucking, or drawing their nourishment from the earth, and their
refreshing from the air.

The Beasts have being, life, and sense, and have their nourishment and
feeding from the elements, and from the plants. These things did God behold
when he had made them, and they were all good.

Then did he make man, who had being, life, sense, and reason, this excellent
quality which I wish every man deeply to consider: for God breathed into man
the breath of life, and made him a living soul, he made him after his own
Image, by bestowing this living, reasonable, and immortal soul.

Mark well, how by degrees God made these things, the earth, the water, and the
air, of nothing, that it might bud and bring forth the trees, and every green
herb.

Then the trees and grass of the earth for the feeding of the beasts.

Then the beasts of the field, and the fowls, and every creeping thing.

And lastly, he made man his material body of the dust of the earth, but his
reasonable soul, by divine inspiration, who is properly vaid to enjoy the
Elements, line of the plants, and command the beasts, to consider and
discourse of all things, and to be a little world in himself. Superiority was
given to him, as having the dominion and property of the rest of the creatures
whom God brought to man, to receive their names, for they had notvnderstanding
to name one an other: but the reason of man did distinguish between them, and
gave them proper and several additions, which his memory, endued with reason,
did continually retain, he governed them, were they never so strong, and
employed them to what service it pleased him. And to this day man hunts the
wild beasts, and lawfully challenges the property of them. So much as the
divine and everlasting things are more excellent then corruptible, is the
quality of right reason of the immortal soul, above the rest of the
creatures subject to corruption.

An ancient Philosopher, Iamblicius concerning Mysteries chapter 8.7
out of the very instinct of nature, in the deep consideration of reason said,
that the first use of reason is employed in conceiving the Godhead, not
properly by knowing it, but as it were, by feeling. By which feeling he means
not a palpable, bodily, or material feeling, but a spiritual feeling,
according to the nature, both of God, and the Soul, and the quality of
reason, which reaches much further into causes then the bodily eye can
discern.

At the time of the creation of man, God (who in himself is all goodness and
excellency) breathed into man, a spirit which must be perfect, pure, and good,
because nothing proceeds from God but that which is good, perfect, and pure:
this spirit was his immortal soul, which had no partaking of any earthly
substance, but absolutely of it self immateriall. This Soul was endued with
perfect, pure, and true reason, knowledge, and understanding, will and mind,
being qualities, specially appropriate to the soul, as it was immortal: So
that by the nature of the soul, and not of the body, man was first possessed
of this Reason.

Man then consists of Body and Soul, and in respect thereof, is desscribed
by the ancient Philosophers and Writers, to contain in him, their lives, the
living as plants, the sensitive as beasts, and the last, the reasonable life.

Aristotle putting the difference between man and beast, says, The difference
betwixt man and beast.
Man and beast agree in this, that both of them have one sensitive power, and
one self same imagination of things perceived by the senses: and that they
differ, only in this, that man has yet further, a reason and mind above the
beast, which the beast has not.

In man is, as it were, an abridgement of God, and the world: of God, in
respect of spirit, and of the world, in composition of the body. As if God in
his divine purpose, out of his abundant wisdom, would set forth a Mirror
of his works, by reducing into a little compass, both the infiniteness of
his own nature, and the hugeness of the whole world together.

A great learned man endeavoring to express the same, Dupleisis c. 14 the
trunes of christian Religion.
says: We see in man's body, a wonderful mixture of the four Elements, the
veins spreading forth like rivers, to the uttermost members, as many
instruments of sense, as there be sensible natures in the world: a great
number of sinnewes, fleshstrings, and knitters, a head, by special privilege
directed up to heaven, hands serving to all manner of services: whatsoever he
is that shall consider no more, but only this instrument, without life,
without sense, and without moving, cannot but think verily, that it is made to
very great purpose, and he must needs cry out, that man is a miracle, which
far surmounteth, not only those lower Elements, but also the very heaven,
and all the ornaments thereof. But if he could out of himself behold his own
body receiving life, and enter into the use of al his motions, he would be
ravished with the consideration thereof. But if he enter into consideration of
his immortal and reasonable soul, it would draw him from the earth to the
heavenly creatures; and above them, to the presence of god, from things subject
to mortallitie, to the excellency of all eternity.

As there is a contrariety of the Elements among themselves directly one
against the other: yet these, by equal mixture make a temperament; so betwixt
the soul and body, the one being an immortal spirit, the other corrupt and
transitory: yet they put together, make a perfect man. Man, by his reasonable
soul, and yet no man without the body. So the reasonable man consists of
body and soul: for without the Spirit and soul, it were but a lump of
earth, and without the material body, it were only an immortal spirit.

This is the miraculous work of God, as it were, to join mortality and
immortality together in marriage: the immortal spirit as the head and
husband, and the mortal body as the spouse, to obey. These two in the first
creation, made perfect man; and this perfect man, which is properly understood
by the inward man, was endued with perfect, right, and true Reason.

Sect. IIII. The definition of Reason.
FEaring to exceed the bounds of Reason, whereof I have had care to consider,
because I find the depth thereof to be without the comprehension of men: I
say, for my self, as Cyprianus Leonitius spoke concerning his study of
Astronomy, though he could not attain the fullness thereof, yet, Est aliquod
prodire tenus, si no^ datur vltra: there is a proceeding to some good purpose,
though all cannot be known. And as Lactantius said of the Labors of
Hercules, that they were Opera viri fortis, viri tamen, the works of a strong
man, yet of a man: showing there were imperfections in them: so may it be
said of the best Labors of men, that they come short of perfection. In
like I may say of this thing which I desire to explane by definition, and am
driven to confess as Beza says of these words, 1. Cor. 11 10.
Propter Angelos. Quid hoc sit, nondum mihi constat, what this word Reason
means, I yet thoroughly know not. But, submitting my understanding unto her
worthiness, I make bold to explane her in the most worthy sort I can
attain unto.

The Latin word is Ratio, It is Englished by diverse Authors, and called by
diverse Titles which allude toward a definition. It is said to be, Reason,
Counsel, Purpose, Care, Respect, Consideration, Regard, the Cause, the Matter,
the State, the Means, the Way, the Fashion, the Form, the Proportion, a Rule,
the Feate, the Manner and sort, a Mind, a Counsel, Advise, an Account, or
reckoning, Business, Value, Affairs; And lastly, the Quantity, wherein is to
be observed, that out of the several causes, whereunto the scope of the
Authors tended, their writings have affoorded these several names or titles,
describing in part, by them, the nature and quality of Reason.

Others have gone further, saying, Reason is the eye of the Soul, whereby she
looks into things, past, present, and to come.

She is said to be, The Empress of the Senses, The Queen of Will, An
Apprehension of Heavenly and Divine things, The daughter of Understanding.

Reason is, by some, termed, A word of divine inspiration, agreeing with that
speech of Architus, where he says, God breathed Reason into Man.

Reason is said to be, Aprudent guide of the Soul in her actions: She is
said to be, The Medicine of the Soul.

Hesiodus coming very near the mark, says, Reason is a divine guide and
wisdom inspired from above.

Ratio est quaedam tacita facultas insita mentibus hominum, August. apud Iurisc.
Reason is a certain secret faculty ingrafted in the minds of men.

Ratio est rerum humanarum and diuinarum indagatrix, According to the
schoolmen.
quoad causas. Reason is a searcher out of humane and divine things, in respect
of the causes thereof.

Ratio est rerum omnium scrutinum and moderamen, quoad modos, Reason is a
finder out, and governor of all things, as concerning the manner thereof.

So have these men with great endeavor expressed their minds and
understandings, which I reverently account of.

But Reason being not defineable, Vt illud quod consistit ex materia, as
material things are, must needs be an immortal quality or faculty of the
Soul, if not essential (which I have reason to conceive) yet at the least
inseperable, exercising many offices as instruments, or intelligencers of
Causes, according to her emploiment.

Out of which Considerations, these sayings have proceeded.

Domina and Regina omnium est ratio, quae connexa per se, et progressa, longius
fit perfecta virtus haec, vt imperet illi parti animi quae obedire debet: Id
videndum est viro: quonam modo inquies? velut seruo Dominus, velut Imperator
militi, velut parens filio: Reason is the Lady and Queen of all things, which
first united by it self, and proceeding further, is made a perfect virtue: and
how she ought to rule that part of the mind which ought to obey, every man
must consider. But you will ask, in what manner she should rule? Surely even as
a master rules his servants, an emperor his soldier, and as a father his
son.

Nihil est, Cic. de legibus.
non dicam, in homine, sed in omni solo, atque terra, ratione diuinius, quae
cum adoleuit, atque perfecta est, nominatur rite sapientia: There is nothing, I
will not say in man, but in all the world, more divine than Reason; the which,
when it is grown ripe, and come to perfection, is truly called Wisdom.

Vt patrimonium homini ab homine Cic. de not. Deorum.
relinquitur, sic ratio homini a Deo. As a patrimony is bestowed from man to
man, so is Reason given as a portion from God to man. 2. Tnsc.


Cum praecipitur vt nobismet ipsis imperemus, hoc praecipitur, vt ratio
coerciat temeritatem: When this is commanded, that we should rule our selves,
this is intended, that Reason should bridle Rashness.

Sect. V. The division of Reason, and the error in understanding things to
proceed of Reason that do not.
REason is of two sorts; simple, right, and true.

Subtle, corrupt, and false, as by the manner of School distinctions is
manifest.

The manner of reasoning with right and true Reason, they call, Logic.

The arguing with false and corrupt Reason, they call, Sophistry.

But before we enter into this division, it shall be very necessary, first to
discover the common error of men, who understand many things to proceed of
Reason, that in truth do not; which being manifested, will be an easier way to
take knowledge of the rest.

And for the better understanding hereof let us take them as they offer
themselves to be discovered.

First, things that have being only, attain not to Reason, for so have stones.
Things that have being and life only, reach not near Reason, for so have
trees. To have being, life, and sense only comprehend things seeming to proceed
of Reason, as beasts who yet fail thereof. And because beasts in many things
have a neerenes unto Reason, being creatures in degree next unto men. Let us
peruse somethings in them which do deceive men, and wherein most men do err.
To move, to feed, to sleep, to wake, to see, smell or sense any thing,
comes not to Reason: to fear, to eschew, to desire, to discern, to imagine,
to generate, nor to preserve the young, comes not to right Reason. Barely to
prevent iminent dangers proceeds not of Reason, for the beasts enjoy all
these, and will flee from their pursuers and eschew to cast themselves headlong
from any high place. Bare knowledge proceeds not of Reasons, for the birds
know their mates, be they never so like to others of their plume, they know the
passage to and from their breeding places, and provide for, and feed their
young, they build curious nests to preserve their eggs, they sit and hatch
their young, and know the times of the year for that purpose, and the strength
of their brood to make shift for themselves before they will leave to feed
them. In these matchings and keeping to their mated Companions without change,
though they proceed not of right Reason, according to the quality of the
souls Reason, yet may they teach many that come short of that duty, and yet
hold themselves to be possessed of Reason.

Barely to make provision for a future time, to put in store, or to hide from
wasting and destruction, comes not to that which is called right Reason; for
so does the field mouse, who makes her way into the ground, and choosing the
best grains that are in the ear she there places it in great abundance for
her winter provision, and so orders the matter, that she keeps them dry,
as they may not grow with the moisture.

The wood-bucke hordeth up his nets, and the Ante her provision against
winter. But enter duly into consideration of the Be, (with who^ I will
conclude) her continual labor, cunning working, preserving her food, and their
knowledge and government, and obedience: And therein may a man, even with shame
behold his own faults, that such excellent matters should proceed from so
small creatures void of Reason, and only pertakers of sense. Spare your
patience to peruse the order of their employments a little at large.

First, being small and puisill creatures, they gather themselves together
into multitudes without confusion. They inhabit and dwell together without
discord, they continue in one house together without alteration, they join in
working together without larre, they give room one to another without annoy,
the unburdened to the laden without resistance, they join to defend themselves
against strangers, they rob not one another house, be they never so many. And
in their neighborhood they have a kind of regard and knowledge one of another;
and like a common wealth, as it were, they join to suppress others that are
of another garden, they dispose of their dead out of the hiue, least they
should annoy, and suffer their young to grow and come to maturitie. And as they
suffer their young to feed on their labor, so do they expel and chase away
the idle drones and sluggardes. In their labor they provide for two things,
honey for their food and wax to make them wells to put the same in: the most
skillfull workman in the world cannot frame a more artificial work then they,
who join together in their framing the waxen vessels in an admirable form,
that the walls of one work serves ten several uses, it is a square, it
self serving for four sides in that work, and for four other sides to the
four conioyning neighbors, either botom serves for two vessels, every
place after it is full is so fast walled, that nothing can fall out, and so well
covered, that nothing can come in: the whole work is so strongly wrought
together, that it falls not off from the place where it is first fastened,
that after a kind of artificial and geometrical proportion of ponderositie,
it rather seems to be pendent, than supported by any thing. And mark it
well, you shall find the hollow places, where the honey is settled, in such sort
and order, as it may be come at, without harming, or marring any other vessel.
They labor all together, and they feed all together, and if they want, they
perish all together. They obey their king, to depart from their habitation upon
warning. As they were bred all together, so they depart all together, and it is
holden, that they choose a place where to repose themselves, before they leave
their former home: but at the least, it is very evident they continue and keep
together, as it were, a sworn, united, and incorporate household, to partake
good or evil, as it befalls. They make their way through the air, and know
how to return. Their painful travel in summer, manifests they have knowledge
winter will come.

If any company of men did join themselves together, and perform this kind
of service for the mutual good one of another, would it not be holden for
the miracle of the world? or if any man would so order himself after that
sort, in the government of himself, his passions, actions, and affections, in
his little world, would he not be esteemed, the rarest of all that live?
Consider these things well, and mark what excellent parts of nature there
are herein performed, by these seely sensitive creatures.

How many men live that will judge otherwise, than that the doing of these
things proceed from right and true Reason, and yet in very truth they do
not? They are only those benefits of Nature which God has bestowed on these
kind of creatures, and tend only, and no further than to a temporary, a
dying, finishing, corruptible, and ending scope: for the creatures themselves,
and their lives being corruptible, their actions and doings can tend no
further than to the extreme and uttermost of their lives, which Nature taught
them to preserve by these means.

Sect. VI. Unto what things right Reason reaches.
But, right and true reason duly considered, is of a far higher, and more
excellent quality, it extends it self into things corruptible and
incorruptible, and it reaches into the things past, things present, and
things to come.

First let us look how it extends it self into the solid and massy part
of the earth. Reason discovers both the matter and form thereof. The
superficies, and the Chaos, or Cuball parts, it understands, that in her
intrailes are many veins for water to pass, concaue places for the air,
mettalls of gold, silver, copper, iron, tin, lead, stone, and other excellent
things. Reason has searched into the refining of things into a perfection,
which Nature it self has not yet brought to maturity and ripenes: Reason has
put a distinction between those mettalls, either for their worthiness, or
baseness. And out of the consideration of the matter and form thereof, by the
whole, and by their parts, Reason takes knowledge of God their first Creator.
All which, the only sensitive part of beasts, or men, do not conceive nor
understand.

Reason enters into the consideration of the diversity of creatures, and
their creation.

What other thing than the reason of man has found out, the virtues and
operations of trees, plants, and herbs? or discovered, that some one thing
shall have diverse powers, virtues, and workings, in diverse parts thereof,
cold without, hot within, of one color in the outside, of an other in the
substance, cold in the leaf, hot in the root, and of an other operation in
the rhinde. Reason informs to appoint some herbs to be eaten, some for
Physic, some to be used in hot causes, others in cold; nay more, Reason has
searched into the very solid bodies and substance of things, as to understand
what special virtue is in gold, silver, copper, iron, and other mettalles: in
trees, plants, and herbs, and to extract and draw from them their principal
and best virtues, and to make use of them for his own purpose, descending, as
it were, into the very nature, and condition of Nature it self, to help the
imperfections of Nature in some part. And such other rare and excellent things
(as being truly considered) must needs be adjudged to proceed from a nature
of deeper understanding than all the others, that are merely sensitive.

Of beasts and birds, Reason chooses, some for meat, and others for other
uses, as our common experience does teach us.

If we consider the works that are written by profane men, of Geometry,
Geographie, Arithmeticke, Astronomy, Astrology, Music, the liberal
Sciences, the Mensuration of the earth, the Altitude, Longitude, Crassitude,
Magnitude, Oppositions, Conjunctions, Aspects, Motions, Progressions,
Retrogradations, Courses, and Spheres of the celestial bodies of the Zodiake,
the Climates, Horizons, Tropiks, Poles, and Zones of the moving stars, and
how they finish their courses, of the Orbs, and their spaciousness, of their
conuex parts, and their absides, of their natures and government they have
over mortal creatures, of the Composition of Elements: who can judge otherwise
than that these things are wrought into men, by the excellent part of Reason?

If in mechanical Trades, we observe the curious building of houses, the
mollifying of hard things to be wrought by fire, to make sollide things
fusible, and liquide things hard, the forging of iron, and other mettalles, the
curious spinning, and exquisite needle-worke, the fashioning of things fit
for men's bodies, the Art of Printing, and a thousand other things which we see
daily in our view. And among all the rest, these ordinary things, the use of
our speech and discoursing, our reading, and writing, and understanding of
languages, which being properly ours, by Reason, ought to be contained within
the bounds of Reason.

As the reasonable soul has both contemplated, and made use of all these
things, so has she repair, even to the presence of God himself; and though
she be never absent from the body during life, yet is she not so included in
the body, as that she is not at one self same instant in other places we
see by these examples aforesaid, that she makes her passage into things that
cannot be touched, nor compassed otherwise, then by understanding and Reason.

Observe it in thy self, and thou shall find thou may send thy mind,
reason, and understanding, into the furthest part of the world, and call it
back in a moment, though thy body stir not.

If any man be of opinion, that his soul and Reason are shut fast in his
body, and that the body carries the Soul, the mind, and Reason, at his
pleasure, he is much deceived; for if he look truly into his own actions, he
shall rather find, that the soul does carry, and move the body from place to
place as the mind and Reason likes.

For consider the possibility of the one, and impossibility of the other: the
Soul may live and move without the body, but the body cannot possibly move
without the soul. Therefore, as life consists in the Soul, so do the
moouings or stirrings of the body proceed of the power and working of the soul.

Therefore, as the soul is in the body, and in every part thereof, by all, and
by the whole, so is the body conveyed and moved by the Soul, in all, and
every part of the body, the active part of man is the Soul, and the passive
part is his body.

Mark thine own actions, and and thou shall see and plainly discover it to
be true: have thou a journey in hand? thy understanding, mind, and Reason does
first determine and appoint, before thou move to undertake the labor; nay,
when thy body lies still, thy mind and Reason works. Be thou in prison, thy
mind is busy abroad, and Reason sets her self aworke, how to procure the
enlargement of that body of thine, that cannot stir a foot out of the
door, and if thy body were as easily conveyed, as thy mind and Reason, thou
should not long remain in durance: But they may not depart absolutely from
thee, and leave thee a living creature. Thus is it plain that the Soul, the
mind, and Reason, do carry, and cause the bodies motions, and it is not the
body that carries the Soul.

What caused Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and the Greeks to repair to the
scholars of Tresmegistes, the Egiptians to the Caldeans and Hebrews, for the
learning of Philosophy, but Reason, and the Motion of the mind, for the
worthiness of that worthy science? The like may be said of Archimides,
Sulpitius, Gallus, Thales, Jupiter, Belus, Socrates, and others concerning
Astrology.

Whosoever shall look curiously into the admirable works of Arithmeticke, and
Geometry, and proportions thereof, done by Pithagoras, Eudoxus, Euclides,
Archimedes and Tresmegistes, shall be driven of necessity, to confess, very
rare, curious, and profitable helps by them to be effected and published, to
the good of the world. And who can but wonder at the work of Archimedes, who
by those reasons, found out, what several mettalls were in the Kings Crown,
and how much there was of every metal, without either melting, or taking it
in sunder. Plutarch in the life of Solon and Lycurgus.


If it be demanded what caused Solon and Lycurgus to travel into Egypt, to
learn rudiments and laws to bring their people into a reasonable government,
It will be answered that the inclination they had to draw rude and confused
matters to some reasonable head and order, moved them to take that pains. The
laws of dominion and property of things, both real and personal, of mixed and
entire, are drawn out of Reason, and all their branches ought to be tied
fast thereunto. The law of severity and punishment, are in the nature of
keeping the guiltless from receiving wrong, and are as a protection for the
well governed, not drawn out of an unreasonable desire of punishment, without
cause, or tormenting the offender in respect of his person, but to take off the
offense.

In the orderly or fit doing of any thing, the mind and Reason begin their
work at the latter end, and at the effect; as in building a house, Reason has
laid the whole plot, and the cause to what end it is built, before any stone be
laid.

In any iourny, Reason, either has, or should set down the probability of
good to ensue thereof.

What caused the men of ancient time to enter into consideration of eternity,
and to search into the difference of things immortal, and things transitory,
subject to corruption, of the beginning and ending of time, and of the world,
and that time is not in respect of God and eternity, but of things that had
beginnings, and pass with time: and whosoever shall look into the works of
Homer, Hesiodus, Parminides, Mercurius, Sophocles, Aeschylus, Euripides, and
others, shall find that this Souls quality of Reason, even out of nature it
self, had searched far into these deep matters.

It is amongst the Philosophers agreed, that there is in man a double speech,
the one, in the mind before we utter it, and the other is called, the speech of
the voice, uttered with the mouth; the one private, the other serves to
publish that which the mind and understanding have conceived and determined to
manifest.

The learned translatours of the Greek word, Logos, sometimes call it speech,
sometimes, word, and sometimes, Reason, and it alludeth to this, Vox praefert,
animus ratiocinatur mentis verbum ipsa ratio est. The voice utters the mind,
reasons, and debateth, and so Reason is the very word or speech of the mind.
And as it is fitly said, that what proportion is between the voice or speech
of the mind; the like is between the speech of the mind, and the speech of
understanding, the voice has need of air, and is divided into parts, and
requires leisure, the mind is indivisible, but yet has need to pass from
one conclusion or Reason to another. But understanding accomplisheth his action
or working in less then a moment, and with one only act fills the Reason and
mind that it is constrained to make many acts of one: so that there is such an
indivisible uniting and putting together of understanding, mind, and reason, in
the Soul, that they may not be parted, nor be one without the other. For which
cause, Reason is properly said to be the daughter, speech, or word of our
understanding. That nature and ability of working of the Soul, which the
Latins call Men's, the French translators understand to be the reasonable
Soul. And as there is described to be in the reasonable Soul, working,
understanding, and willing, so are not these, three lives, nor three souls in
us, but one life, and one soul. And these are three powers, which the
reasonable and immortal soul cannot want. The like is said of the memory of
understanding, or of mindful understanding, to be an abundance of reason,
and as it were a hoorder up of the continual influences of the mind, which
mind Auerhos and Alexander term, the workefull mind, which is, a power, or
force, that can skill to extend reason from one thing to an other, which they
also conclude to be incorruptible, everlasting, and divine: and by this Mind,
is understood, the immortal reasonable soul of man. And, as a great learned
man, writing of the corruption of man's nature, shows, that the world, and
all the creatures were made for the use of man, and commending the
understanding and reason of man; He first speaking of the other creatures,
says, To what purpose are all their virtues, and excellent properties, if
themselves know them not?

The Sun, says he, excels among the Celestial bodies, and the Rose
among the flowers: The beast is a degree above the trees: But what skilles it,
what thou art, or what thou have, if thou know it not, nor understand it. For
what avails the light to the blind, meat to him that cannot taste, sweet
odours to him that smells not? Or, what avails the excellency of thy
Creation, or thy reasonable and immortal Soul, if thou discern not the
worthiness thereof?

By the means of Reason, only man of all the things in this inferior world,
can skill of these things, and how to enjoy them, and so of force it may
rightly and truly be concluded, that they were made for none, but for him.
That is, to speak more properly, God has given unto man, al, and whatsoever
al other creatures, either have, or be, and has not dealt with him, barely, as
with a creature, but rather, as with his own child: for whom he has
expressly created this world, and given it him to possess; and besides, gave
him an understanding mind and reason (which I so much labor to advance) to
enjoy, govern, and order the same.

Yet to draw Reason a little higher: this excellent quality in the soul of
man, by some is understood to be a religious regard, and understanding of God,
and to walk in his service, and a continual observation of good things that
tend to immortality. For as death separateth the body and soul for a time, so
does the soul carry with it so much of his substance, power, and quality, as
it first brought, that is, spirit, life, reason, and will: which it shall
bring to the body again, at the time of their second uniting. Again, if
Reason be the Daughter, and Understanding, which is a chief power of the
soul, be the Mother, then are these co-relatiues, and the one can not be
without the other. The soul cannot be without understanding, and understanding
cannot be without reason; therefore, as the soul is an immortal substance, so
is understanding an immortal power, and reason an immortal quality of the
soul.

The word Logos which the translators of the Greek many times call Reason or
word, is said by the divines to be incarnate by the holy ghost, to make the
son of God, the second person in the Trinity, whom we acknowledge and
believe to be subsisting of a reasonable Soul, and humane flesh. To whom the
Philosophers give the names of the Be-er or he that is, Wit, or Understanding,
the beautiful, and sometimes, speech, word, reason, wisdom, Son, and the
begotten, which Reason they affirm to be engendered of the understanding, and
to be as the light of the understanding, and depends thereupon.

This is the Image of God which we bear about us, our immortal reasonable
Soul, as if we behold with the eyes of our understanding, how the Son of
God vouchsafes us a brotherhoode, we cannot be ignorant of.

Right Reason therefore out of all these collections has a place above all the
vegitatiue and sensitive creaturs, and above all material things whatsoever,
yea, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and firmament of heaven, and is that
which Salomo^ desired at the hands of God, when he prayed to have that
understanding which sat next unto the Throne of God.

So is Reason placed next unto God himself, the worthiness whereof is seen in
this, that in the divine consideration of Gods eternity, his providence and
purpose of creation of things for his own honor. One man, through his
reasonable and immortal soul, was more precious, and of greater value, than
all the whole mould of the Earth, and all the creatures thereupon creeping,
moving and being. Besides this, it is most apparent, that in the time of
Innocence and perfection of man. Reason was not attainted, infected, incombred,
nor avoided with inordinate lust, desires, affections, nor passions, which now
are crept in, and have incorporated themselves in him, no, the very free will
of man had not originally place above Reason, but was at her command, and
subject unto reason. An example whereof no man shall need go far to seek,
for if he truly survey the corners of his own heart, and contemplate what
perfectio^s he desires to have which he wants, he shall find what man had,
and are now impaired. And considder well with thy self, what thon art
without reason, and thou shall find thy condition worse than the state of a
brute beast.

Thus have I made bold, and that rightly, and truly, to draw Reason, and her
immortal Soul, from these base and earthly things, and place her in her own
throne, even next unto God, above all corruptible things, among the immortal
ones, and nearest unto Eternity it self, whose palace, seat, and
government we may behold, only with the eyes of our understanding, for
thereby we are united unto the God of heaven, and selected from corruptible
things, and thereby our mortal bodies shall put on immortality.

As the Sun in his sphere takes his course, between the firmament, and the
lower Elements, extending his beams to the remotest places of them both: so
does reason in the immortal soul of man, during this natural life, wait
between heaven and earth, and by no means can be enclosed in the earths body,
as by these two reasons may appear. If the soul leave the body, and depart
into heaven, she caries reason with her, and the body becomes earth again:
or if the body carry the soul, and reason, into the depth of thearth, or offer
to include her in the massy lump thereof, presently, the soul flies from the
body, and reason absolutely departs: reason is a thing of more excellency,
than that senseless part of the world can contain, or whereto she ought to
be made subject.

This is truly her Monarchy, if she have her own, and due birthright; a
power, a command, and authority over all the actions, passions, imaginations,
and fantasies of men: and her feate ought to be above the thoughts and
conceits of the wisest. Who can measure her territories, or possessions? when
the mind and reason of man extends both generally and particularly into all
causes on the earth, the air, the powers, of heaven, the firmament it self,
nay into heaven it self, and to the very Son of God, who in excellency far
surmounteth the Angels, and sits at his right hand, possessed with the
reasonable soul of man, and in him sits right reason, next unto the throne
of God?

If any have knowledge by what means to augme^t the understanding thereof, let
him put his helping hand for this Empress is hardly besett in her Monarchy,
and almost pulled from her throne, and her Scepter trodden under foot: And so
leaving to speak further of that excellent, true, and perfect quality, I make
her place known, and leave her to maintain her title as she may, being much
distressed in her government.

Sect. VII. Of Reason corrupted.
IT needs no more proof to maintain the argument of innocence and
perfection in the reasonable soul of man, but that God was the Creator
thereof, from whom could proceed nothing but good. There needs no further
proof to discover, that this perfection and innocence is corrupted and
impaired, but every particular man's examination of his own actions, thoughts,
and words, that daily and hourly pass from him. For if any man will take any
one day, a note of all the words he has spoken, and examine the next day, how
insufficient and vain the most of them have been, he shall need no other
Judge but his own conscience. If he shall an other day record all his
thoughts, and after try their consonancie with reason, I leave to him that
shall make proof thereof, what he will censure in that behalf.

And if any will peruse his acts and deeds, even in some things that are now
lawful and honest, he shall find nature simply ashamed of them to be
discovered, because they were not originally in parts of nature, but are
sithence crept in by corruption. Any that will duly look into these causes,
shall plainly find himself deprived of all perfection and innocence, and his
own soul to be polluted with wickedness, and all the powers and qualities
thereof; yea his understanding, reason, and will, to be perverted, and nature
it self preuaricated.

In the first creation, man's understanding, wit, and reason, extended only to
the knowledge of good: his will was then tied to obey reason: And in that time
was not his nature, Soul, nor reason polluted with fond lust, wicked desires,
inordinate affections, intemperate passions, nor vain and idle fancies. But
this perfection and innocence remained not long, before the cunning Sophister,
enticed by persuasions, the will, mind, Soul, and reason of man, to undertake
a work that wrought his confusion, and corrupted all these good parts. To
dilate thereof, I forbear, because none can doubt of the truth of that
general overthrow of man's estate, life, soul, reason and will; and concluding
that with an affirmative, that corruption came in by sin, I will proceed to
the rest as the cause offers.

Since, and in the instant time of this overthrow, there are grown into the
very nature of man, and of his Soul and Reason, pride, lust, self-will, ennie,
hatred, anger, sorrow, deceit, falshoode, partiality, and infinite other
passions and affections, (which for breuity I omit to speak of) have thrust
themselves into this Monarchy, and wonderfully and universally opposed
themselves, and rebelled against their Empress, and her estate, and kingdom,
and grievously and sorely rebelled against her just government, setting up new
courses and orders; insomuch as Seneca in his time complained, Cessero
publicaiura priuatis, and cepit licitim esse quod publicum est. Plotinus. 1.
lib. 4. ca. 1
And Plotinus entering into consideration hereof, does as it were, wonder
thereat, saying, what should be the cause, that our souls, being of a divine
nature, should so far forget God their father, and their kindred, and
themselves? And making the answer thereto himselfehe says. The beginning of
this mischief, was acertaine rashness, and over boldness, through which they
would needs pluck their necks out of the Collar, and be at their own
commandment. By which abuse, turning their liberty into licentiousness,
they went clean back, and are so far gone away from God, that like children
being newly weyned, are by and by conveyed from their parents, and know,
neither whose, nor what they be, nor from whence they come. Plotin. 1. li. 8.
cap. 4.
And in another place beewailing this corruption, he says; The soul which
was bredd for heavenly things, has plunged it self in these material things,
and matter of it self evil, that not only all that is of matter, or matched
with matter, but also even that which has respect unto matter, is filled with
evil, as the eye that beholds darkness is filld with darkness

Hierocles the stoicke against Atheists says, that man is of his own motion
inclined to follow the evil, and to leave the good: there is, says he, a
certain strife bred in his affections, which stepping up against the will of
nature, has made it to tumble from heaven to hell.

The Ancient Philosophers, taking consideration of the number of affections,
and passions, wherewith the Soul and Reason of man is infected and corrupted,
which Plutark affirms to be much more sorrowful, and grievous then the bodily
diseases, endeavoring to reduce and bring those intemperate affections, and
passions, to some reasonable order, have made diverse books of Moral virtues and
laws, and given sundry rules, ordinances, and precepts, to bring them to
obedience. In which their exceeding painful works, they positiuely inueigh
against the rebelliousnes that is naturally in us, against Reason, that is, the
rebelliousnes that is crept in by this corruption of nature. These rebellious
affections and passions are not as spots or staynes, that may be washed, or
cleansed out of nature, but a deep impression in nature, with much ado to be
restrained and held short, but never utterly to be subdued or overcome;
whereupon it is very fitly said by a man of great learning. Seeing that reason
is so much more excele^t then passion or affection, as the forms, shape, or
fashion is more excellent then the matter, or stuff, wherein it is.

Whence comes this infection in us, that makes the matter to ouermaister the
form, and causes the form, as it were, to receive shape and fashion of the
matter, that is to say, which puts Reason in subjection to passions, and to
the impression which affection yields, contrary to the order which is in all
the world beside?

What else is this intemperance of man but Reason, as it now remains
inwrought or engraven with lust and concupiscence? what is anger, but Reason,
attainted with choser, etc. No^ sic suit ab initie. It was not so in the first
creation. The motions of lust, anger, and intemperance which now rule men
against Reason, were not in the original nature of man, neither proceed they
of the first creation: for then would not nature be ashamed of them as you see
it now is. These motions are crept in since by corruption. And therefore the
grieuing that happens to men by those passions, is a working of nature, which
is ashamed to play the bruit beast.

There are described to be in the reasonable soul of man four powers or
abilities, first, Wit secondly, Will, thirdly, an ability of being angry,
fourthly, an Abillitie of Lusting. In those four abilities the Philosophers
have intended to place four virtues. In wit, wisdom, in will, righteousness;
in the ability of being angry valor; in the ability of lust Staidness.
These powers, abilities, and virtues are maimed. And those abilities have not
those virtues, Wit is maimed with ignorance; Will, with doing wrong; Valor, with
cowardice Staidenes, with licentiousnes.

Besides the outward fences, imagination, and appetite, which are common to
beasts, man had wit or reason, and will, of the gift of the creator peculiar
to man only; by which we esteem our selves better then the beasts, and in
regard thereof, we look to have them in subjection under us. And all this Reason
leads us to understand. But observe the sequel, and we shall find, as the
corrupt condition of man's nature is now, that whereas imagination ought to rule
the fences, will, to rule the appetite, and Reason to rule the imagination, it
fares far otherwise, for imagination gives way to the outward sense:
Appetite rules will, and imagination carries Reason at her pleasure;
insomuch, that the very sensual part which is the meanest, carries all the
rest, and makes Reason an underling; nay, often times leaves Reason quite out,
and rebelleth against her, and so this spirit and reason of ours is forward to
nothing but evil, nor inclined to any thing save base, and transitory
matters. It fastneth it self to the earth, and is bondslaue to the body.

To discover how far the ancient Philosophers (out of such reasons as they
had) waded into these causes, would require a long work, therefore a word or
two. Philosophy it self is said to be an art of healing the soul of the
infirmities whereinto it was fallen from her first perfection.

The first step thereunto, or precept is, Nosce teipsum, begin to know thy
self.

Aristotle could not choose but know, that the understanding and mind of man
was out of tune, when in his Moralls, he declares, that the affections ought
to be ruled by reason, and our mind brought from extremes into the mean, and
from iarring into the right tune.

Theophrastus says, that the soul paid well for her dwelling in the body,
considering how much it suffered by the bodies means: showing that he
considered that corruption was entered into man, even into his soul, mind, and
reason.

Zoriastres the grandchild of Noa, and auncientest of Philosophers, bewayleth
this laps, fall, and digression of the race of mankind, crying, alas, alas,
the whole earth mourns even unto children.

And Hermes in his Poemander gives it a most absolute conclusion, where he
says, God created man after his own likeness, and gave him all things to
use, but man, in steed of staying upon the beholding of his father, would
needs be meddling and doing somewhat of himself, and so fell from the
heavenly contemplation, into the sphere of elements or generation. And because
he had power over all things, he began to fall in love with himself. And
gazing and wondering at himself, he was so entangled, that he became a
bondslaue to his body, being before at liberty. Which bondage, and abasing he
intends to be in the soul, mind, and reason of man.

If we shall grow a little nearer to this matter, and peruse an example or two
in the holy Book of God; consider whether it were corrupt, false, and
sophisticated persuasions and Reasons that the serpent used to Eve, what Reason
was that, that led Caine to kill Abell, or the Children of God to be bewitched
with the beauty of the daughters of men, or the Caldeans to erect the tower of
Babel.

The effect and issue will show what kind of reason it was. By the first came
the destruction and overthrow of all the perfection of man. By the second, a
perpetual curse to the murderer, and a continual anguish, sorrow, and grief
to his heart and soul. By the third, an universal deluge upon the face of
the whole earth: And by the fourth, an utter confusion of languages.

God in the creation made al things in order: and Order would that our wit
should obey God, and our senses and appetites obey Reason. But we see
apparently, that for breaking this order, these confusions have ensued.

If we desire a plain demonstration, let us look into our selves, by the rule
before prescribed into things inferior to us, and into what is above, and
greater then our selves. As the inferior creatures, whereof the sensitive are
the chiefest, come not near man in excellency, understanding, capacity, nor
Reason, neither do they strive therein, but abide in their first state.

So has God left in himself, a fullness of perfect and absolute power,
wisdom, and understanding, not to be conceived, nor comprehended by the wit
nor reason of man, in a far greater measure then man's understanding and
reason can attain unto, as man's understanding or reason was at any time above
the beasts of the earth.

These things he kept absolutely to himself, to be a Creator, to be obeyed,
and to have none equal, and to keep all his creatures under his subjection.

This order must man needs be doing withal, it was not enough for him to
enjoy, and know the good: but he must know evil also. And in truth, and no
doubt, but he extended his reason and will to a good end, for he got such a
knowledge of evil, and so entangled himself therewith, that he abandoned all
that was good, and became himself a very mass of evil.

Consider this reason; what would a man think if his horse should turn his
master to eat grass, and lodge in the field, and he to feed of the best
meats, and stay in the house? Nay come nearer, what if a man's feruant, nay his
friend; or to be short, his own son, would participate in worthiness with
the father, and take dignity from him, and become the absolute owner of the
fathers possession in his life, and make him live like a servant? I refer the
censure to the reader, because I know not how near it may touch him, being
matters so rife in practice.

To draw toward the conclusion of this part, it is greatly to be considered,
that in the estimation of the Creator, the reasonable soul of one man is of
more value and price then all the territories of the world, even then the whole
earth, and whatsoever is in the bowels thereof: Reason will compel thee to
confess this whether thou will or no, in regard of the immortality of the
one, and corruption and finishing of the other.

The earth was the thing given; and man the donee, the possessor is more worth
then the thing possessed, man is much better then money, in that money was made
for the use of man, and not man for the use of money: but see how the usage
thereof agrees with right and true Reason, which is the mark we shoot at.

Look into some particulars, and observe how many men thou know, that for
some small part of the earth (in comparison of the whole but a crumme) that
had rather see the destruction of many christian souls, then to loose any part
thereof, making more of a penny then of the life of his brother. Nay, look into
the will of men, and observe therein, whether they regard the shedding of blood
and murder, so much as the satisfying their will? What has been the cause of
wars and slaughters of men, whereof there remain so many histories: but the
breach of Order, and making a fraction of Reason.

In the civil government of countries, what has been the cause of injuries,
wrongs, violence, and oppressions, perverting, and corruption of Justice,
untrue suggestion, periuries, subordinations, theftes, robberies, and
cruelties, but that men exceed the bounds of right and true Reason?

Ask the great man, and the rich, to have co^miseration of the needy, and his
heart will be rather inclined to cruelty then pity, he had rather have his
poor debtors bones to make dice, then become pitiful. Ask the needy, and
him that is in distress how he finds it, and he will say, and truly, that
the world has forsaken him, friends fall off, and those of his own house will
use him, not much better then poor Job was used. But by the way, poor man,
take this for thy comfort: thy reasonable soul is better then all the rich
man's treasure, yea then all the earth beside if thou have patience for a
season. To conclude, let every man repair home to his conscience and closet of
his own heart, and examine himself before the seat of this Empress: Reason
how much he esteems and valeweth the lands, riches, and transitory things
of the world, above the price of his poor brothers Soul and life: nay, to end
in a word, then his own Soul: examine thy self well, how far thou would
extend, thy mind, thy word, thy travel, thy oath, and thy very Soul, to
procure and get a small part of this base, transitory, and corrupt world; thou
shall need no other satisfaction, but that right and true Reason is corrupted,
impaired, and become subject to that which it ought to govern.

Sect. VIII. Reasons particular government.
Having furnished the former arguments with some matters, the more lively to
express what they are, namely, the Soul of man immortal, the excellent
quallitie of right and true Reason, and the corruption thereof: It shall agree
with Reason, to reremember, that man is said to be an abridgement, as it were,
of God, and the world, and as a mirror of the whole work of God, reduced into
a little compass. For which cause he is called a little world of himself.
Now, if by observation we find an orderly kind of government, obedience, and
disposition, in diverse parts of the other creatures, how necessary it is for
every particular and private man, that will challenge himself to be endued with
Reason, to descend into himself, and examine how this little world of his
soul, his reason, his senses, and his body, is ordered: And how, and in what
manner reason does govern, and will, appetite, affections, and passions do
obey. Let a man pervse himself, and he shall find in his body, a part of
those creatures, that want sense and Reason: As his hair, and finger nails;
he shall find diverse passions and perturbations, that are void of Reason. A
body which we call the flesh of the earth, a vegitatiue part of growing, as the
plants, a sensitive part of moving, seeing, smelling etc: as the beasts, a
reasonable part in an immortal soul, and all those in so small compass. And
diverse learned writers reason, that man, and the course and motions of his
life, and being reasemble, the very course of the celestial bodies; in
studying whereof they have taken great pains. And Reason it self concludes
this point of divinity, that in man there is immortality and mortality, the
one of the soul, and the other of the body. The one, as matter subject to
corruption and wasting; and the Soul, a substance, that never shall leave to
have being, and life. There is no thing, nor nature whatsoever, that is either
known, or can be conceived, but is either immortal or mortal: part of both
these, is man, therefore is he a true pattern of all the rest, and so
consequently of the whole world.

If a man would enter into consideration, what a wonderful thing in nature,
the conjunction, and knitting together of the body and soul is, seeing the
soul, which is light, to be within the heavy body, that which is of
celestial fire, within that which is earthie and cold, invisible, and
immortal, in palpable and corruptible earth, what an admirable creature was
man if he knew himself? The definition and division of whose soul and body,
with this short touch, I leave the reader, to search further the learned
writings of such as have treated thereof, and fearing to be tedious, I retire
to my former purpose, that every man in his private state ought to consider
what he was, from which he is fallen, what he is by corruption, whereof is
already treated, what he would be, and what he shall be, which done, he shall
find, that there is non but would be happy. But the corrupt will and affections
tend to misery, calamity, and infelicitie, unless there be the greater care
and government thereof had. Now as we began in order, to take things in their
worthiness, whereby man is placed above the rest, so in man, that which is most
worthy, ought to be preferred above the rest, as his Soul above the body. And
Reason above passions, and affections. Reason the Queen, and the rest subject.
Take a view of thine own self, thy soul, thy conscience, thy mind, thy
reason, thy body, thy senses, these affections, passions, perturbations, and
imperfectio^s; the determination of the heart, the speech of the mind, and the
speech of thy mouth, and thou shall be driven to shift hard for help to excuse
thee. There is described to be in man a sensual appetite, which the School
men divided into two parts the lustful appetite, and the irefull or wrathful
appetite. There are also described to be in these two appetites twelve
principal passions, whereof six, which are love, and hatred, longing, and
loathing, gladness, and sadness, do follow the lustful appetite. The other
six, that is, hope, and despair, fearfulnes, and foole-hardines,
Cholericknes, and coldness, do follow the irefull part.

That these are al sensual, is plain, in that they finish, and end, when life
leaves the body. Besides, the very brute beasts have their parts in them as
well as men. These are the subjects which in every particular body, and
government of every person ought to be kept in obedience unto reason: and not
to issue or proceed any further, than they can show their warrant, authority,
and commission for.

Now seeing the imperfection of all these things is crept into the corruption
of the nature, as well of the bodies, as souls of men, it behooves every one
therefore to summon a parliament, and to assemble all these passions and
affections, to receive direction, how to be disposed, in what causes, and how
far. And to receive reprehension and discipline for their contempt or
disobedience. For the discovery whereof, observe this in all the things wherein
thou employest thy mind. And therein first consider, and conclude, that by the
reasonable soul and life, is understood, such a soul and life, as has
counsel, judgment, and reason, which was created to this end, that knowing
God her Creator, and loving him, in regard thereof, she might honor and serve
him. and finally, by degrees, attain to immortal life and happiness, which is
appointed for her end, and is the mark she should labor to attain.

For, as nothing in man is more excellent then Reason, whereof God has made
thee partaker, so is there nothing so well beseeming thy Reason, then that thou
know, love, and honor God, as whom nothing is so excellent, nor unto whom
nothing may be compared, and without whom, thou had not obtained, neither
being, life, sense, nor reason; for God is above thee, God is beneath thee, God
is without thee, God is within thee, God is round about thee, God is every
where else, thou wast no where. Now when thou sendest thy mind and reason into
the bowelles of the earth, to search there, for things of much virtue, as
gold, and other mettalles, weigh by the rule of right reason, to what use thou
intendest the employment thereof, whether to the glory of the Giver, or thine
own private appetite or desire, whether thou esteemest not more, a few
Flemmish angels, than the blood and life of a thousand blessed Saints? If thou
grow affected to the garment of the earth, the grass of the field, and their
stately branches, consider whether thou put true difference between them and
immortallitie, and how much less thou art inquisitiue after Eternity, than
those corruptible matters. Examine thy self, whether thou be thy moneys
master, or his vassal. If thy liking be carried after the moving things,
consider how the delight and pleasure in them ouer-ruleth thy affections, and
takes up thy mind from contemplating their right use, and the end whereto
they were appointed.

If in keeping company with those of thine own kind, there are two Sexes; The
first betwixt man and woman, in which is engendered man and woman. And therein
consider that Reason shows thee, that God made one woman for one man, and but
one man for one woman: which the more shows the excellency of his creation,
in that he made so large a world for so small a company. That this is a true
conclusion, not to be violated by Reason, the very rule of euen-hoode, and
right, does show. For whosoever would break wedlock, would not have the same
measure requited to himself: neither does the father like it in the son, nor
the mother in the daughter, and rather than confess it, Nature her self, in
respect of her original pureness, is so ashamed thereof, that she will rather
commit perjury, than acknowledge it: which agrees well with the words of
Gods own spirit, pronounced by Malachi, that God had abundance of spirit,
which shows that he might have made diverse women for one man, or diverse men
for one woman; but his purpose was otherwise, howsoever men regard it.

If thy purpose be, in accompanying with men, and having society with them,
respice finem, to what end it is, whether for thy present pleasure, or profit,
or the endless happiness of immortality. In these matters there are three
special things to be considered. First, the intent and purpose of thy mind,
and the conference and conclusion there, before any words vttred. The second is
the words which are the minds messengers, to make known her intent. The third
is the actions and practicke parts thereof. Consider therefore, whether thy
mind, and thy words agree, and whether thy words and actions agree. And in
them all, have regard, that thy purpose be honest, for nothing is agreeing
with right reason that is not truly honest: and nothing truly honest which a
man desires to an other, and would not have the same befall to himself.

Now if in thy mind thou conceive mischief, fraud, and deceit, and thy mouth
pronounces smoothe and pleasing words, send Reason to inquire, who it is that
sits between thy mind, and thy mouth, that causes this jar between thy
hearts intent, and thy voyced speech: and she will find there placed that
subtle sophister that beguiled Eve with an Apple, never intending more
mischief than under smoothe words, Mel in ore, verba lactis: fell in cord,
fraus in factis.

If thy actions and performance accomplish not thy promises, thy reason will
show, there was corruption in thy mind, or weakness in thy understanding,
that would a duenture to promise matters above thy ability.

If thy mind be disconte^ted (which is a general thing among men) some in
wishing to change their sex, as men to be women, and women to be men: old men
to be young, children to be of ripe age, the single to be married, the coupled
to be asunder, the servant to be Master, the Master to be servant, the rich
to be more rich, the poor to be as rich, the needy to have the wealth of his
neighbor, the man subject to obedience to rule the governor often times, to be
freed of his great burden. And this which is a general fault in every man of
advancement and preferment, to excel, and to bear Rule, insomuch, that often
times the subject unjustly contendeth for the kingdom. A thousand other things
there are in seeking of nouelty, exchange of trades, and courses of life, of
health, and liberty, and such like; which I leave to rehearse and send thee to
thy self for resolution.

Peruse thy whole body, and thou shall find diverse necessary parts and
members, as the feet, the legs, the hands, the arms, the head, the eyes,
the teeth, the liver, stomach, lungs, yeines, sinews, arteries, and such like;
Al which tend to the performance of several duties and offices to the heart,
and the life therein placed. And as none of these can be wanting, to make a
perfect body, so none of the^ envy another, nor desire to change; and being
made for these several uses, cannot exchange places nor offices. So is it thy
case to be a part or member of another world. And as thou would not be a
stone, to be the richest Jewel: nor a tree, to be the greatest Cedar; a
beast, to be the great Behemoth; a fish, to be the great Leuiathan; nor a
Devil, to be Belsabub himself: So Reason teaches, that thou can not be
Moses nor Elias, Solomon nor David; not borne of the root of Iosse, no Roman,
Itulian, nor German; thou can have no other Father nor Mother then thine
own. If thou be not borne of the blood Royal, it is not Gods fault: But if
thou rashly aspire to that whereto thou art not borne, it is thy fault. And the
same reason whereby thou requirest to have dominion over thy inferior,
requires thou should obey thy superior. For the powers that are ordained of
God, among whom the king is the most excellent, carrying representation of the
majesty, justice, and mercy of God.

If thou send forth, (as thou must of necessity) any of thy appetites,
affections, or passions. Then give them their Commission, for fear of
offending: and omitting the rest, I will particularly touch these. And first,
concerning necessary things, if thou suffer thy affection, or passion of
thirst at liberty, let her not riott so far as to ouer-maister thy Reason,
be as careful in thy greatest drought to keep moderation therein, as thou art
fearful, to burn thy self with fire, when thou art most cold; be as wary
in that point as thou would be to put a sword into a mad man's hand.

If thy passion of hunger crave liberty, set her bounds that she surfett not,
nor waste as much in one day, as would satisfy thee a month: If the affection
of cold require clothes, give her a law, that she exceed not her bounds, by
putting on thy whole wealth in a suit of apparel.

If thy affection of Love, or rather Lust, be extraordinarily busy, take order
in time that she overrun not her compass. And as Love is properly said to
be a desire of things fair, goodly, and beautiful; so let her not extend
them further then to things honest, profitable, and possible. For if the thing
thou love be not honest, it will be a clogge to thy conscience; if not
profitable, it will be wearisome to thy life; if not possible, it will turn
into grief, and so either into a desperate or mad humor. For if Plato conclude
rightly, that all things in this world are engendered by love, thou have
Reason, to take heed thou abuse it not, and it become thine own confusion. If
thou hate, see it be vice, and not virtue, for there is none so impudent, but
will confess that virtue is a good of the soul; and vice being the contrary,
is an evil. If Reason be thy medicine, the contrary must needs be the sickness
of the Soul.

If thou feel sadness or sorrow coming fast toward thee, set Reason stoutly
and valiantly to defend thee from it, remembering Salomons conclusion, that a
sorrowful heart dries up a man's bones: yet mistake not my meaning, for godly
sorrow for thy misdeedes, is a good protection against the other.

In the case of friendship, take Aristotle's Moral for thy direction, perfect
friendship is among good men that love virtue, and in all things avoid
rashness: out of this Reason Darius acknowledged, he had rather have one
Zopirus, then the conquest of twenty Babilons.

If the thing thou hope for, be grounded upon Reason, and depend upon a
possible; attaining the same, it will in it self protect thee from despair.
And if thy hope be rightly in God, Reason will teach thee to depend on his
providence, and not to hope for vain or impossible matters. And seeing that
hope is the fountain and trade of al sorts of men's employment in this life,
there is great cause it should depend upon Reason, and not rashly consume that
a man has, and foolishly hope for more.

Many vain things follow vain hope, which commonly work confusion. As the
hope and expectation of vain glory is vain: so is the excessive charge of
building, of apparel, of diet, prodigality, and popularity, which follows
the same as vain, and consumes the affected thereunto, alluding to this
saying: He that strives to be friend to many: can hardly be friend to any.

Vain hope of riches, honor, dignity, and things not like to be obtained by
the rule of reason has brought many to distracted wits, and wilful destroying
of themselves.

In the attempting of things something uncertain, examine these two passions,
by the rule of reason, fearfulness, and hardines: for as they are two
extremes, so yet is the mean of them, a good temper. As cowardly fearefullnes
is to be abandoned, so is fool-hardines utterly to be rejected. The temper
whereof Solomon shows, where he says: Blessed is the man that always
stands in fear. But he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief.
Which mean is fully described by Esaias in 66. chapter, saying: whom shall I
regard says the Lord, but him that is mild and gentle, and stands in fear
of my words? And God himself said, that Moses was a mylde man above all that
lived, accompting mildness for the height of virtue.

And because in the ireful appetite, heat, choler, and fury, bear a great
sway, which like the raging fire consumes without measure. Thou had need
ride such a colt with a strong mus-roll, and musle it as thou would a biting
mastiffe, lest in thy rage they overcome thy Reason, and rebel against their
Queen, and by treason, they bring thy life to confusion.

Cicero in his fourth book of his Tusculane questions says: The fountain of
incombrance, is, intempeperance, which draws, and estrangeth us from true
Reason, and is so contrary unto it, that it is impossible to govern and
restrain the lusts and desires of the heart: Self-will, rash vows,
outrageous oaths, intemperate fury, and frantic madness, do commonly follow
this wilful appetite, if it be not very moderately te^pered with respective
consideration. Al these passions, if they be inordinate, are the daughters of
pride, from whence comes whatsoever is evil, of whom beware and take heed,
as of the Crocadile, or the sword of thy malicious enemy. If thou will be
careful and curious in framing thy timber for the building of a house, that
every thing be fit and proportionable: so have thou need to take as great care
in reforming and keeping thy passions and affections, subject within the rule
of Reason. And for conclusion take this, that the performance hereof requires,
as much pains, diligence, and labor, as any mecanicall art: for of all
mischiefs, idleness is the most dangerous, which right Reason cannot abide,
nor endure in her Court; which cherishes and aduaunceth the labor of the mind,
which I commend unto thee above all riches.

Sect. IX. Reasons public government.
IN every government and order, the beginning is taken from the least, and
unworthiest parts, as Gramer begins at letters, Geometry from the point.
Arithmeticke from the unity, Music from the note, and so proceeds to the
better parts. He that runs most swiftly, began to creep, then to stand,
after to pase, and so by degrees to the facility of his speed: So in the
cases of government of a public estate, the beginning is at one person,
singularly by himself: Which is every man's case, and therefore did I endeavor
to handle that matter; first, that every man governing himself rightly, might
the more fitly and sufficiently become a member of a well governed
commonwealth: for Reason shows that it is well or ill, with the public
state, as all her parts are particularly governed, even from the least to the
greatest.

As the Magistrate is said to be the head; and the people, the body of the
commonwealth: So has Reason added a third matter to give life unto this body,
and to be, as it were, the soul of this head and body, which is the law whereby
all the parts thereof are kept in order.

This law ought to allow soueraintie in one, and obedience in all the rest. The
ministers and officers of the Law are her mouth, whose wisdom,
understanding, judgment, integrity, constancy, indifferency, and fidelity,
should be as just and equal as the beam that bears the balance, wherewith
Gold is weighed: and the standard measure that allows to every one alike. As
the Soul and mind of man walks between heaven and earth, and considers of
the^ both: So does the right minister of the law descend into the Soul of the
law, and walks between the head and the lower parts of the commonwealth, and
considers them both, giving to each his even measure; not a dram to him
that ought to have a gallon, nor a bushel to him that ought to have no more
then a pint, but to every man according to his right. I mind not to discourse
of the diversity of governments, and what they are, and how the use of them
have bin in other countries: as the Aristocracie, Democracie, Monarchy,
Oligarchy, or, Duarchie, and diverse other governments.

But pursuing my purpose, to discover to the weak, and meaner sort of men,
their places, duties, and offices, hold my self happy, that I am a poor
subject and member, under this most natural and most ancient government of a
Monarchy, the head and guide whereof God long continue with great comfort and
joy, which would be much the more increased, if her subjects, the members of
this body, would, according to true and right Reason, do their duties, and
perform their obedience toward God, their country, and her sacred Majesty.

Many men have traveled in other countries, to gain experience of vsages
abroad, wherein they oftentimes so much delight, that they forget their own
true and natural countries use; others learn languages, when striving to
attain the accent of the french, forgot to speak their countries language,
and so have no fit speech at all. Some men follow others so long, that they
lose themselves. Some are so eagre to search into the faults of others, that
forgetting themselves, they run into unrecoverable errors. The prodigal man
commends expense, delighting in a vain praise, til he have wasted all his
estate, utterly contemning frugalitie. The churl exceeds as much in misery,
and despises liberality. The vainglorious is ravished with kind words of
the flatterer, rejecting true advise. The proud is insolent and outrageous,
never satisfied with reason. The kinde-hearted, rather than he will sit out of
the company of fools, will make a fool of himself. The Gentleman's son must
take no pains, it is against his reputation. The Scholar oftentimes insteade
of proceeding in virtue and honest causes, studieth and practices mischief
and falshoode. He that has once waited at his Masters Table, thincketh it a
disgrace, at any time after, to take the plough in hand. And if the poor
father has brought up his son to some place of preferment, it is hard if the
son be not ashamed of his father. The friend (for the most part) is in show:
and to serve his own turn, will not stick to supplant him, whom he ought
most to regard. The countrieman is never quiet until he have the merchants
money: and the merchant commonly makes his match so, as he will not loose by
the bargain. But whosoever observes what others, protestations, untruths,
deceits, cunnings, crafts, and collusions are used amongst all sorts, shall
well find, that Reason has not her right government. If any man look but
into the Comoedy that treats of the Humors of men, and the book of
Cony-catching, he shall see those errors very lively, and at full discovered.

Now, as the beginning of government, is at a private man, so the first that
follows, is the government of a private family, in which the master of the
house has authority to impose domestical Laws. The next is between the Lord
and Tenants, over whom the Lord has authority to appoint ordinances, and to
receive an oath of fidelity. Then follows the government of Tithings, of
Towneships, of Cities, of Counties, and so concludingly of the whole state,
whereof to dilate, would be over tedious. The collegiate and ecclesiastical
gouernements, and al priuileged places, ought to have repair to one head. At
one is the beginning of obedience: and at one, is both the beginning and end of
government. And whatsoever is mean between those buttols or bounds, is the
public state, which by reasons rule and law, are to be ordered and disposed,
like as the stuff and several matters that go to the building of an house,
which, as they are to be at the direction of the principal woorkeman, yet are
they not to be lost, nor spoiled: so is it in the case of government, for the
ordering of causes, and suppressing of disorder in a public consideration,
without confusion of any. In which public state many ancient, laudable, and
godly Laws have been made, which of themselves, are in the commonwealth, as
the soul is in the body of a man, when he either sleeps or waketh. The life
of the law is the minister and officer thereof, who should distribute the same
to the indifferent and equal good of all. It is as the line or plumbe rule,
whereby the workman guides his building upright.

Gentle Reader, consider with thy self, which part of this building thou art,
whereof this maine state consistes, and reason with thy self, if thou be
contented or discontented with thine estate, and the cause that mooneth thee
thereunto: and likewise consider whether that cause be reasonable, or not, if
thou find, no, suppress it, set the queen of thy passions and affections to
judge thereof, and reform thine error: which, if every man in this Land would
perform, her Majesty's government would far pass the government of Numa
Pompilus, or any that ever lived.

If we enter into consideration, of the several kinds of living things, how
the bond of nature does make them affect the company and fellowship of
creatures, of their own sort, to live together in assemblies with a kind of
pleasure and contentment. The beasts, on the earth, in the air, the birds, and
in the water, the fishes, wherein they hold themselves strongest, and most
safe, as they are gathered together into greatest companies, in a kind of
agreement, as their natures are expressed by Aristotle, and others of like
learning. It will enforce men to wonder at their own intemperate government,
considering that against one beast, or bird that kills one an other of his
own kind, there are thousands of men murdered, and unnaturally slain by
their compares; so that among men, reason so little prevails, that the very
sensual parts rebel against their own nature. Insomuch, that men, through
their unreasonable actions, commit that which the unreasonable beasts do
eschew to perform.

Had not Reason need to impose laws, to suppress these disorders? In the
private body of a man, if the gangrina take any member, which is like to bring
the whole body to death, and destruction, will not the head, the heart, and
all the rest of the members consent to the seuering that member from the body
to save the rest? So in the state of a commonwealth, to preserve the
principal and general parts, Reason has made laws, not to respect any
particular that shall grow dangerous to the whole, and specially, to the head,
which is the life and honor of the rest.

As the private man that has his leg cut off, to save his body, has no
pleasure, but pain and grief in losing the same: So the good Magistrate, has
no pleasure in the death or punishment of the subject, but is rather grieved
that any such member should be so corrupted as he may not be abidden to remain.

The law is said to be the blood, and bond of the commonwealth, the spirit
thereof.

The law is said to be a singular reason imprinted in nature, comma^ding those
things that are to be done, and forbidding the contrary: by which the men of
the first world lived without any written law at all.

Besides the written law, the law of nature is a sense and feeling, which every
man has in himself, and in his conscience, whereby he discerns between good
and evil.

The law is as the medicine, the minister and distributer thereof, as the
Physician, and the offender, the patient. As in some causes, though the
Physician do not give the potion rightly, nor the patient have a stomach to
endure the taking; yet is not the fault in the simple medicine, but in the
giver and receiver, or one of them. The wrong is not in the law, if thou be
corrected for thy offense, but in thy self for thine error.

Many a man being sick of an ague, sindeth fault with his drink, where in
truth the fault is in his taste: the like may be said of those that complain
of the injustice of the law, when alas, it is a dombe thing of it self, and
inte^deth no harm to any, but the well using or abusing thereof is the matter
that is to be considered.

The evil disposed, wishes there were no law, that he might usurp over the
good, or at least, he holds the law, to be ouer-seuere, to punish his fault;
on the other side, the honest minded man, finds that the offenses against the
law, are notfully, and speedily reformed.

To treat of the diverse kinds of laws, of diverse Countries, and the several
uses of them, I intend not, but to leave a note to men of ordinary
understanding, that the government of men, used by the discipline of laws, is
as necessary as the life, to preserve the body from putrefaction.

He that thinks it an easy, or slight matter, to put his hand into meddling,
or dealing with state matters, making of new laws, or, abrogating the old, as
if they were to be put off and on, like a garment, or fantastically changed,
as the wild humor of some few affect, let them consider what Demosthenes said
of the decrees among the Locrians, that every Citizen that was to bring in a
new law, should come and declare it publicly with a halter about his neck,
to the intent, if his law were for the unworthiness thereof rejected, he
should presently be strangled.

Such consideration must be taken of the law, says Isiodore, that we must not
judge of it, but according to it, nor (says Cliton) the people must not
hearken so much to the orator or advocates of the law, as to the truth of the
law it self. Pausanias Reason, wherefore the laws among the Lacedaemonians
ought not to be altered, was, for that the laws ought to be rulers over men,
and not men masters over the law.

If Mercurius Tresmegistes took great pains and labor, to compose laws for
the ordering and governing of the Egiptians; Phoroneus, among the Greetians;
Solon among the Athenians; Lycurgus among the Sithians; Numa Pompilus among the
Romans; Pharomond among the Frenchmen; Charles the great among the Almans;
Julius Caesar and others, among the English, that were as lights to their
feuerall governments. whereby their subjects might live in obedience, to the
state, and have Justice, ministered and distributed among them according to
their equal rights, which to their immortal honor, have continued in those
countries, for the reasonable guiding of the people? what do the infringers,
violaters, corrupters, or contempners, of those laws, whereof there are many,
deserve?

Ignorance, ignorantly, is holden, to be the Mother of Devotion, which opinion,
has bred a wonderful confusion in the world: for if it be the Mother, and
Devotion, the child, they know not one another; and for want of knowledge must
needs err. Concerning themselves, Partus sequiturventrem, the Danghter
follows the Mother. Ignorance has no acquaintance, much less alliance with
Reason, and therefore cannot apprehend nor embrace things grounded on Reason.
Ignorance is the opposed enemy of Reason, and leads to all outrageous and
unlawful attempts: Blind Devotion her Daughter inciteth and stirs up the
minds of men to sensuality, self-will, rashness, intemperance,
foole-hardinesse, stubbornnes, contempt, and the utter subversion of the laws,
ordinances, and directions that Reason has provided.

This Ignorance, and her brood, has spread abroad many seditious and sla^derous
reproaches of indignity, insufficiency and gross defects to be in the Laws,
whereby this country wherein we live is governed. And this Ignorant and foul
error, has dispersed it self into many quarters; and gotten strong hold in
the world. To set down the particular errors in that behalf, and to answer
them fully, would require a great volume, worth the writing, and worthy the
reading, wherein I will not now insist. The like may I say of the continual
and daily euasions and slidings from the true tuch and period whereunto the
practice and execution of the Law should tend. Which fault, in the abusiue
practisers of the law, has been a great cause that the burden of that
reproach, although untruly, is laid so heavy upon the law it self. I may not
give way to the scope of this Discourse at large. And therefore, to satisfy the
ignorant hereof, in some measure, I send him to behold and view these special
points, concerning the course of government established, and set down by
reason and law.

The Master of a house orders his household, agreeing with the conditions
thereof; as the Babe newely borne is nourished with the mothers milk; the
elder children at school, to learn rudiments, how to be disposed at riper
age; those grown to man's state, are employed in other business; the servant
labor for all, and the master cares and provides for all; The apprentice is
bound for years, which he must serve out before he can have his freedom.

The School master has ordinances not to be broken; and he deals with
those whom he teaches, according to their capacities; first he teaches
letters, then sillables, then words, and after languages, and the congruitie
of them; and after, the knowledge of the tongues, he teaches Arts: and thus
by degrees proceeds in a reasonable and a temperate manner to the furnishing
of that which belongs to his place.

The Universities have laws and ordinances, to approve, try and examine, the
worthiness, sufficiency, and honesty of those, whom they intend to grace
with Titles or Dignities of learning, as the several professions whereunto
they bend themselves lead: out of which proceed our reverend Divines, learned
Ciuilians, and necessary Physicians; besides the worthy storage of the famous
Innes of Court, royal court, and other places.

In Cities and Towns corporate, they have orders for the election and choice
of men from office to office, and by degrees to look into the sufficiencies,
abilities, discretions, and understandings of men before they be admitted to
bear the principal government. And therein is likewise to be observed, that
Reason has imposed a fit ordinance, that by a common and general election the
chief officer is to be chosen. In which corporations, as there are many
Companies, whereof these governments do consist: So has each of these
Fraternities, special orders and ordinances, in their peculiar and particular
offices. In this behalf there are many orders ordinate and subordinate, and
which were ouer-tedious to recite: to be short therefore in that point, Reason
has given them abilities and powers to make ordinances and constitutions
within themselves, but limited with within bonds. That they be not contrary to
the laws of the land.

The Innes of Court have orders, both to constrain study, and to try and
examine the studients, as well for the sufficiency of learning, as congruitie
of manners, and to commend and give grace to the well deserving, and stop the
course of perverse and disordered persons. Out of this courtly Academie, what
good this Commonwealth has received, appears, in that the Kings and Queens
that reigned over the same, have always chosen their servants and ministers of
justice and authority from those places. Of the Law it self it is worthily
said, Lex Regi, quod Rex legi, The law is to the King, as the King is to the
law.

As the King vpholdeth and maintains the laws privileges, and rights of the
Land, so the law keeps men in subjection and obedience to the King: and
thereby gives glory and safety to the King, with peace and dignity to the
kingdom.

That in the desciding of controversies and questions grown among men, the
law has a most equal and indifferent course drawn down by reason, appears
in this. First, the smaller matters are to be tried before the Lord of a manor,
where the cause is between those of his homage, wherein, as in the causes of
greater moment in higher Courts, the trial is appointed, per probos and
legales homines, by a Jury of approved and lawful men: per testes fide
dignos, by witnesses, not attainted of notorious crimes, but deserving credit.
In which behalf is to be observed, what care the Law has of indifferency,
in that it has admitted many challenges for kindred, aliance, affection,
favor, or displeasure, and such like, lest by corruption, injustice might be
ministered.

And as the cause may require, so that it goes to the Judges themselves: For
like as by the verdict of Twelve men, every cause of some nature must be tried:
So by the Direction of the Law, causes of some other nature are to be descided,
and adjudged by the sentence of the twelve Judges of the Land.

Is it not of worthy consideration, and a very reasonable course, that reason
has set down, that the trial of Land shall be by men of the same neighborhood:
that they, knowing the right, may execute the work of the Law? Lex suum cuique
tribuit, the Law gives to every man his own. Then the common opinion of them
that say the fault is in the law, is erroneous, by condemning the Law, for the
peruerters of the Law, and Justice, of whom there are too great a number.

Look further into the true sincerity of the Law, and you shall find, that
Reason has made Laws, to reform those errors: and to punish the offenders:
according to the quality of their transgressions. What can she do, poor dumb
thing? she is not able to speak in her own behalf, and few will do her right,
either in word or action.

Comes she not near the Court when she punishes treason, to preserve the
Kings person? Embrace her, and use her worthily, for she is of great honor,
and the principal work that ever Reason brought to effect in causes of this
world.

The Soldier and man at Arms will confess, that without the Laws of wars
and martial Discipline, there is no possibillitie of keeping things in order.

The divines and professors of holy Writ in all countries, and in all ages,
have made alowance hereof, and muth endeavored the performaunce of some things
in that behalf.

All the Emperors, Monarks, and Kings of the world, depend hereupon, and hereby
their governments are preserved and kept from confusion: the least fraction
whereof works great anoy, as appears by the stories written by Cornelius
Tacitus of the lives of Nero, Galba, Vetellius, and others in the Roman Empire.

This consideration offers it self (though something abruptly,) that if the
offenses, errors, and transgressions of men in these points did consist of
substantial matter, as the bodies of the offenders do, and were, for their
unworthiness, appointed to be consumed with fire; All the water in the great
Ocean would not extinguish the flame. This being true, it shall agree well with
Reason, and be very convenient, that men look into themselves before it be
too late, and correct their errors whilst they have time, lest in the end, for
the faults of their material bodies, and sensual, and loose dispositions:
their Souls which consist of immateriall and incorruptible substance, be set
on fire, and burn in hell with unquenchable fire, that no water, of what
abundance soever can put out.

And so having drawn to thy remembrance, these short notes, I send thee to
consider (for the worthiness of the law) that Moses, from whom the grounds of
all laws are received did (in his time) publish the law to the people
himself, until the people grew to great numbers, and infinite disorders, and
then by the persuasion of Iethro his Father in law, he appointed ministers,
and officers under him. The law put in execution by those officers, was not the
law of the officers, but the law of Moses. And the law uttered by Moses, was
not Moses own law, but the law of God. Such is our case, the multitude of
offenses and evils committed amongst us, are too great, and over many for our
Queen, to order in her person: therefore, Reason has set down mean
authority under her. The laws they put in execution, are not the laws of the
Judges, but the laws of our Queen, and country. The sentence they pronounce,
is her Majesty's; they only give it a voice, and the maine point is this, both
the laws, and determination thereupon, if they be truly executed, and obeyed,
are the laws, and sentence of God himself. Was there not in Moses time, a
chief head above men? was there not a among me^ one above the rest? were
there not under him others that took pains to sit in Judgment, to hear the
peoples causes? was there not the^ a chief Magistrate, and inferior
Magistrates, some in authority to order, and govern, others under them to
obey? were there not men that sustained wrong, and others that did the injury?
was not Miriam that gallant Lady punished with leprosy, for murmuring against
the authority of Moses? And is not this the antientest government in the
world? And was not this a kind of Monarchy?

Does not our state and government resemble this? we have the same GOD they
had, a sole governor as they, laws as they had, Liuetenants, Deputies,
Officers, and Magistrates as they, people to be kept in obedience as they,
murmurers against the head as they. If they had Corah and his company that
rebelled, this land has not bin free from such: but God have the honor, they
have had their punishment as well as Miriam and Abiram. If the Magistrates in
that government found store of business, to punish offenses, and right the
oppressed; our country is not altogether unlike them therein; If Moses had
Aron for Church matters, our head has, under her, me^ authorized for that
purpose.

Behold all these things which co^taine within them a thousand other branches,
and consider whether Reason has not prevailed far in this our country, and God
bin very favorable to the success thereof: what impiety, inhumanitie, and
bestialitie were it, to pervert the good that has bin attained unto in these
points? And what do the contemners, resisters, disobeyers, peruerters, and
abusers of this so sacred and holy an ordinance of God deserve less then those
that were punished in Moses time?

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri: quibus acquiruntur ijsdem
praeseruantur modis: by diligence, labor, study, endeavor and obedience, have
these bin brought to order, and by the like must be preserved. In which
office, every member has a share, the chief head in governing, and the rest
in obeying, which is a duty to be performed by every subject: And whereunto
right and true Reason will lead every man, if he carefully observe his duty.
The omitting whereof, was a fault in the time of Saint Paul, and Saint Peter.
The one, writing to Titus, willed him to put men in remembrance, that they be
subject to principalities and powers. The other requires that men should
submitt themselves, unto all manner of ordinances of man, for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the king as to the superior, or unto governors as unto them
that are sent of him for the punishment of evil dooers, and for the praise of
them that do well. Besides, Saint Paul says in an other place, be subject to
the higher powers for who so resists the power, Romans 13.1, 2.
resists the ordinance of God. With which sayings I conclude, desiring that
every man will put himself in remembrance of his duty in those points, and
according to his calling, bear a faithful and true heart to his Queen and
Country, and obedience to authority, as the key that opens to all happiness;
and is the closing up of Reasons government in these worldly causes: and a
great inducement to eternity.

Finis.
The Minds privilege.
Who can restrain the freedom of the mind,
Or banish thoughts from grieved hearts perplex?
Or who can show what limits are assignde
To Sorrows griefs, which do poor souls sore vex?
Mind, keep thee free from ever being bound,
Fast from 'Despaire, and feast on good Content:
Yet surfeit not on too secure a ground,
Lest Time let pass, Remissness make repent.
Seem not to be, but be as thou do seem,
Thy conscience save, what ever thee befall,
It forc'th not much what other men do deem,
Thy guilt or guiltless conscience swayeth all.
In things that taste of good, is good delight,
Thou mansion for thy God to take repose:
Keep precious things wherein he may delight,
Then secrets all he will to thee disclose.
In all restraints, yet thou art still at large,
In all exiles, thou still remainst at home:
The secret matters thou do take in churge,
Servant like thee divine Virtue knows none.
The pollisht Temple of Dianaes shrine
Did not delight the viewers half so much:
As counsels good laid up in storch-house thine,
Which will abide the hammer, deft, and tuch.
Keep far from thee the praue and evil things,
The sanctimonies for thy turn are fit:
Thou harbor have among the Peers and Kings,
Thy Chair was made, thy maker there to sit.
Thou cloth of gold, of state, and richest price,
To clad thy God the high and might one:
In thee therefore, beware, let reign no vice,
An equal mate thy King abides none.
Let none come in, keep fast the utter gate,
Deceit is rife, and thou art in great danger:
Take heed, beware, there is a subtle mate
That presses in, yet ought to be a stranger.
She Will offer fair, both words and deeds of gain,
She says she will be gone, and will but view:
But keep her out, it will be to thy pain,
The words she speaks, is neither of them true.
The Bridebed once defilde, the Bridegroom leaves,
It is a place he does detest and hate:
See to thy self, when once she thee deceaues,
Thy Glorie's gone, thy Honor's out of date.
Friend to thy self be thou, for to be frended
Needs curious choice, I speak as reason binds.
Fair shows of love, with faint effects are ended,
When fruitles words show what the speaker minds.
The matter meant, the mind must needs contain,
That secret is to him that dooh intend:
Al pleasing words and speeches that are vain,
Against truths supports by no means may contend.
That ample walk within so large a field,
Would well permit my pen a ranging scope:
But yet my will to Reason now must yield,
To end this cause my Muse does stand in hope.
In fewest words, but words of great respect,
The minding well, and well affecting spirit,
Eternizd Joys with Angels shall amplect,
And endless bliss by promise shall inherit.
That blissed place, and place of highest bliss,
Without compare: Compare! what needs that word?
God has ordained for servants that are his,
Blessed are they that ever serve the Lord.
Finis.

