CHRIST'S VICTORY OVER SATAN'S TYRANNY. WHEREIN JS CONTAINED A CATALOGVE OF ALL
CHRIST'S FAITHFVLL SOVLDIERS THAT THE DEVIL either by his grand Captains the
EMPEROVRS, or by his most deerly beloved sons and heirs the POPES, have most
cruelly Martyred for the TRVTH. WITH ALL THE POISONED DOCTRINS WHEREWITH THAT
GREAT RED DRAGON has made drunken the Kings and Inhabitants of the Earth;
with the confutations of them TOGETHER WITH ALL HIS TRAYTEROVS PRACTICES AND
DESIGNS, AGAINST ALL CHRISTIAN Princes to this day, especially against our
late Queen ELIZABETH of famous memory, and our most religious Sovereign Lord
King JAMES. Faithfully abstracted out of the Book of Martyrs, and diverse other
Books.

By Thomas Mason Preacher of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by George Eld and Ralph Blower. 1615.

To the most Reverend Father in GOD, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
GRACE, PRIMATE and METROPOLITAN of all England, and one of his MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council. And to the Right Honorable SIR EDWARD COKE, Lord
Chief Justice of England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council: THOMAS MASON wishes all Happiness in this Life, and eternal
Felicity in the world to come.
MOST Reverend and Right Honorable zealous Lords, your daily and faithful
Orator, being a professed Soldiour under Christ's Banner, in the behalf of his
spouse against Antichrist: I could busy my self in no office so profitable
for the Church, and hurtful unto Antichrist, as to gather together the bullets
which have been shot at him by Christ's Soldiers in times past, that now his
children may shoot them at him again, with great facility. And whereas
venerable Mr Fox, of worthy memory, has gathered into one Book the Acts and
Monuments of the Church unto his time; one of the most profitablest Books that
is for Gods Children, except the Bible; a Club able to beat down the Popish
Tower of Babell: Yet what with the labor of reading so large a volume,
together with the deareness of the price thereof, few that have the Book read
it over, and the most part of men are not able to buy it, whereby very little
profit arises thereof unto the Church. I have, according to my power, pared
off the bark of this Club, and made it tractable for all sorts of people; they
may buy it with little charge, and peruse it with small pains; and I dare
promise them that they shall reap as much profit by reading this abridgement,
as by reading of the Book at large. I have willingly omitted no matter of
substance: Here the Reader may see the cruelty of the Emperors unto the
Primitive Church, and whom they put to death, and the manner of their deaths
during the first ten Persecutions; and how, and when Christianity began in
this Realm: And what success it has had at all times; and when, by what
occasion, and by whom most of the Monasteries, and Cathedral Churches of this
Realm were builded, and how, when, and by whom, all points of Popery came into
the Church; and how the Pope has exalted himself against Emperors and Kings;
what injuries he has done to them: With the Treasons, and Conspiracies that
Papists have practiced, against those that the Lord has anointed, unto this
day: The Reader may also here see the innumerable multitude of the Saints of
God, that the Papists have from time to time murdered in all Countries* for the
testimony of the Truth: With all the points of Religion that the Martyrs did
defend unto death; and all the reasons that the Papists used against their
Arguments, and how cruelly they handled them; with many other most profitable
things. After I had done this Book, I was discouraged from putting of it to
Print, by reason I found another had abridged the Book of Martyrs before me;
but when I perceived it was done but superficially, for all the points of
Religion that the Martyrs defended, or Papists objected were omitted; (which
disputations I chiefly labor to set forth) thereupon I was resolved to go
forward. When I had begun to quote all the Authors, from whence Mr Fox had his
proofs for them that the Emperors put to death, the Quotations were almost as
large as the Story, and made it very unpleasant: wherefore in most places, for
brevity, I have omitted them, leaving them that would see the proofs to the
Book at large. I have herein abridged many books, but especially the Book of
Martyrs; as the Papists cannot abide the book of Martyrs of all books: so
much more will they hate my book, which has so truly and briefly discovered
all their shame, not only out of that book, but out of diverse other books.
Wherefore most Reverend, and Right Honorable Lords, your manifest dislike that
you bear against the wickedness and falsehood of Antichrist; has imboldned me
to be an humble suitor unto your Lordships, to be the Patrons of this my Book,
and that you would vouchsafe to defend and further it, by your Spiritual and
Temporal Powers, to the honor of Christ, the great dishonor of Antichrist,
and the unspeakable benefit of Gods Children. So with my hearty prayers, I
commit both your Honors, your souls, bodies, and all that you have, unto the
safe preservation of Christ Jesus and his holy Angels.

Your Lordships daily Orator, THOMAS MASON, Preacher of Gods word in Odiham,
in the County of Southampton: whose Father was Heir unto Sr JOHN MASON,
sometime a Privy Councelor unto Queen ELIZABETH.

THE EPISTLE UNTO THE RBADER.
EVen as the Revelation and other places of Scriptures (good Reader) do^
foretell Antichrist to come, so this History declares the fulfilling of those
prophecies in all points: all the Martyrs died in this faith, that the Pope is
Antichrist. I could bethink my self of no instruction so profitable for the
reading of this Book, as to give thee a few rules to manifest unto thee that
the Popedom is that Antichrist; which I will endeavor to declare unto thee by
these rules following: first, by his outward place of abode; secondly, by his
inward and spiritual throne; thirdly, by his doctrine; fourthly, by his
conditions; fifthly, by the height, breadth, length and ruin of his Kingdom. I
will but open the way unto thee, this Book shall prove by experience my
sayings to be true.

Touching his outward seat, Revel. 17. 18. it is the City that then did
reign over the Kings of the earth, which was Rome: the place is also described
in the ninth verse, to be compassed about with seven mountains. This Book
shall prove that Rome has seven mountains about it. In the same verse, this
City has had five kings that were then fallen, another King did reign, which
was the Emperor, when the Revelation was made, and another was to come
afterward. This book shall teach thee, that the seven Kings signify seven
manner of Governments in Rome, of which five was fallen, the Emperor then
reigned, and after the Pope should reign there: so the Holy Ghost has pointed
out Rome, as plainly as can be, the place of Antichrists Kingdom.

Touching his inward or spiritual seat, S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. 24. says, He
sits as God in the Temple of God: Antichrist signifies an adversary of
Christ; and if it had bin meant of the Turk, or any other adversary that did
not profess Christianity, he might easily be seen without so many
revelations: but he is, according to the description of a false Prophet, Mat.
7. 15. a most grievous Wolf to Christ's Lambs, and yet so covered with a sheeps
skin, that it is impossible to know him without the spirit of God. Outwardly he
seems to be a good tree, but his fruit is nothing but thorns and thistles to
destroy Gods children. Matthew. 24. 24. Christ calls them false Christ's and
false Prophets, prophesying, that they shall do such wonders, that if it were
possible they should deceive the elect; so thou see the Antichrist which is
prophesied of must be a professor of Christ, as the Pope is, which calls
himself the Catholic Church, but he is the only adversary thereof, as this
book will teach thee by experience.

Touching the third point, to know him by his doctrines, 1. Tim. 4. 1: They
shall depart from the faith, and follow doctrines of devils, and speak lies
through hypocrisy: they shall have their consciences seared with an hot iron
forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats: and they teach the
same superstitious doctrins that S. Paul warns us from Coloss. 2. 16. Let no
man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or a new
Moon, nor Sabboths, nor make you forsake Christ the head in worshipping
Angels, neither let them burden you with traditions, as touch not, taste not,
handle not, which things have a show of wisdom, in that the professors be
voluntary religious, and humble their minds, and spare not their bodies, nor
have their bodies in any estimation, but all is nothing but to fulfill a
fleshly religion: and Jude in his twelfth verse compares them to clouds which
in a dries seem to bring rain but do not: for, though they make great
promises of feeding of souls, yet there is no true hope of remission of sins,
nor assurance of eternal happiness in their doctrines. And in 2. Pet. 2. 17.
he calls them Wells, not with a little water, but quite without water: for
although by name they profess the Trinity, yet their doctrins of every person
of the Trinity, and of al other points of religion, are contrary to wholesome
doctrine, they maintain their doctrines, though falsely, under the names of
the Scriptures, the Catholic Church, and the ancient fathers* this is the
golden cup that the Church of Antichrist holds in her hand, Revel. 17. 4. but
it is full of abominations and filthiness of her fornications: so if thou mark
this book, it is easy to know Antichrist by the falsenesse and wickedness of
all his doctrines, yet colored over with glorious shows of truth and
wholsomnesse, yea, although thou had no other means to discern him by.

Touching the fourth point of the conditions of Antichrist, Jude in the
eleventh verse, says, They follow the way of Caine: all the persecutions of
Gods children before times were but types and prophecies of the Papists in
killing their brethren, as Caine did, because they please God better then they.
The abominable desolations of Nabuchadnezzar, and of Titus and Vespasian of the
material Temples were but prophecies of the Papists abominable desolations of
Gods Saints. For this cause Antichrist is called in the Revelation a great
red Dragon, a Serpent, and a cruel Beast. S. John Revel. 17. 6. foresaw the
Church of Antichrist, drunken with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus
Christ. And although he had seen all the persecutions that were before or in
his time, yet he wondered at the blood that he foresaw that the Papists should
shed with a great marvel.

Jude in his 12. verse says, They are cast away in the deceit of Baalams
wages: for as Baalam, though he knew the Israelites to be the blessed of God,
yet he would have cursed them for lucre sake if God would have suffered him, so
the Papists maintain doctrines which they know to be false, and commit all
their murders of Gods children, only to maintain their Kitchen pleasures,
honor, glory, riches, and other worldly respects, as it shall plainly appear
unto thee in this Book.

In 2. Pet. 2. 14. Their eyes are full of adultery, and they cannot cease to
sin, beguiling unstable souls. This Book will show thee how inspeakeably
wicked they are, according to this prophecy: they are spiritually called
Sodom, because in that case they exceed in wickedness the Sodomites. These
and many other wicked conditions of theirs, are plentifully prophesied of in
the Scriptures; and thou shall see the true performances of the prophecies in
this book, which wicked conditions shall plainly show the Pope to be Antichrist.

Touching the height of Antichrists Kingdom, Revel. 17. 3. the Church of
Antichrist is said to sit upon a skarlet colored beast, full of names of
blasphemy, which is the Pope, who is a bloody beast to Gods children, and takes
all Gods names blasphemously to himself: and verse. 4. he and his Church are
arrayed with purple and skarlet, and decked with gold, precious stones and
pearls; and how gloriously the Pope and his Church has bin set forth, and how
rich they have bin, according to this prophecy, this book will show thee. In 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14 He sits as God in the Temple of God, and exalts himself above
all that is called God. C. Caesar Caligula the Emperor, which used to sit in
the Temples of the Idols, to be honored as God, and caused his picture to be
set up to be worshipped in all Temples, and in the Temple of Jerusalem, yet was
he not such an abominable Idol as the Pope makes himself to be: he is the
Jailer of Purgatory, and thither comes (as he says) all the souls of
Christians, except some few, to whom for building some religious houses, and for
being otherwise a special maintainer of his kingdom: he gives a special
prerogative, immediately to go to heaven: these souls his prisoners he
punishes how, and as long as he list, and at his pleasure he throws any of
them into hell, or sends any of them into heaven. Of the revenues of this
Jail has all the Popes riches, honor, and superiority above Emperors, and
Kings proceeded: he has taken from Christ the honor of pardoning sins to
himself: God made man of clay, but the Pope and all his shauelings can daily
make God of a piece of bread. In these, and many other respects (as this book
will teach thee) does the Pope exalt himself as God, according to this
prophecy; and he exalts himself above all kings, which are called Gods, and
at his pleasure with excommunications can cast them out of heaven and out of
their kingdoms, as himself says: he has trod upon Emperors, and made them
kiss his feet, hold his stirrups, and lead his horse. He made the Emperor
Hen. 4. his wife and his child to wait three days and three nights barefoot
in winter at his gates, to sue to him for his favor, and gave away his Empire
in the mean time. This prophecy of Antichrists exaltation above Princes, is
verified in none but the Pope.

Touching the breadth of his kingdom, it is not said he shall exalt himself
above one or two, but above all that are called God, which are all Christian
rulers, spiritual and temporal, to whom God vouchsafes this name, because he
rules and instructs by them, and dwells in them, if they be good: this
declares the large limits of his kingdom. And as he is said here to exalt
himself above all Kings, so Reu. 17. 3. he is said to have ten horns; and in
ver. 12. they are interpreted to be ten Kings, which shall give their power and
authority unto the beast, that is to say, the beastly Pope, and fight with the
Lamb, that is, they shall be the Popes Butchers to destroy Gods children; and
as the prophecies foretell such an Antichrist as shall reign over all
Christian Princes, so this story shall show thee the true fulfilling of this
prophecy in the Pope.

Touching the length of his Kingdom, it is prophesied Antichrist shall reign
three years and a half; and in Revel. 12. three times and a half: these
times and these years are all one; so is the forty two months, Revel. 13. 5.
for there be so many months in three years and a half: the same likewise is
the 1260. days in Revel. 12. 6. for there be just so many days in three
years and a half, at 360. days to the year, which was the number of the
days of the Jews year. And it is common with the prophets to set down a day
for a year; so by these prophecies Antichrist must reign 1260. years, which is
just so many years as Christ preached days: and Gregory the first shows
that Antichrist began when one Bishop exalted himself above all others. And
though there were many Popes before him which did exalt themselves above all
other Bishops, yet he would not but have himself called, Seruus seruoru^ Dei.

Wherefore Sabinianus which succeeded him in the popedom, was a malicious
detractor of his works, as thou may see in this book. Antichrist was not at
his height until Hildebrand had gotten above the Emperor, for then he was
above all that was called God; yet Antichrist began when the Bishop of Rome,
being the least of all the four Patriarchs, exalted himself above all other
Bishops, which was about the year of Christ 400. for then began pride and
superstition to creep into the Church, and Anno 666. according to the number of
the name of the beast in Reu. 13. 18. Latin service was set up in England and
all other places, and mass^s, ceremonies, letanies, and other Romish ware,
which was long before Hildebrands time. And if we account the aforesaid 1260.
years of Antichrists reign from thence, there remains but about 46. years
to come, until God shall call together the kings of the earth to destroy Rome.

Touching the fall of his kingdom, Mat. 24. 22. If God should not shorten his
kingdom, none of Gods children could be saved from his cruelty: but for the
elects sake, Reu. 11. 13. God first destroyed the tenth part of his Kingdom:
thou may note in this book when this prophecy was fulfilled; and Reu. 8. at
the blowing of the four first Trumpets, the third part of all his kingdom is
destroyed: which prophecy we see fulfilled at this day, for the third part of
his kingdom are wholly become Protestants, yet Revel. 11. 22. the Church of
Antichrist is not heerewith moved to repent of her murders, sorceries,
fornications, and thefts, but Reu. 18. 7. glories her self that she is a
Queen, and shall be no widow, that is, she shall never lose her Spouse the
Pope, therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, sorrow, and famine,
and she shall be burned with fire, for strong is the Lord God which will
condemn her. The means of her destruction is set forth, Reu. 17. 16* the ten
kingdoms that first took her part against Gods children shall hate the whore,
and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh and burn her with fire,
for God does put into their hearts to fulfill his will. The manner of the
destruction of Rome and the Popedom, is declared Reu. 19. 17. as fowls gather
together to a dead carcass, so God shall gather all Nations together to war
against Rome, and shall take her and the Pope, the false Prophet that works
miracles, whereby he deceived all that received his mark, and worshipped his
Image: and they shall not only be destroyed in this world, but they shall be
cast alive into a lake burning with fire and brimstone, to wit, into eternal
damnation: and Reu. 18. 20. the Angels and all Gods children are exhorted to
rejoice at her destruction, and verse. 21. Rome shall be destroyed with such
violence as a Millstone falls into the Sea, and there shall never any more
Mill grind any light corn, or any be married in Rome, but it shall ever
after be a desolate wilderness, as Babylon was. They that cannot behold
Antichrist in this Glass, 2. Cor. 4. 3. it is a sign the Devil, the God of
this world, has blinded their eyes: but as Solomon when he dedicated the
Temple, prayed God to hear every one that prayed therein, so I beseech God
with his holy spirit to illuminate all that shall read this book, that they
may plainly see the pope to be Antichrist, and to fly from him lest they be
partakers of his punishment in this world, and in the world to come.

AN ABSTRACT OF ALL THE HISTORIES OF THE CHVRCH from CHRIST to this day. 1614.
THE FIRST BOOK.
IN describing the whole State of the Prim^tiue, and latter times of the
Church: First shall be declared the suffering time of the Church* 300. years
after Christ: secondly, the flourishing time of the Church, 300. years more:
then the declining of true Religion, 300. years more: sourthly, of the reign
of Antichrist since Satan was loosed. Lastly, of the reforming of the Church
in this last three hundred years.

In the tractation of all which things, the Christian Reader may by experience
observe two special points: First, the Nature of the World: Secondly, the
condition of the Kingdom of Christ: By the World is meant, all that by
ignorance know not Christ, and that will not believe him, or that persecute
him. The Kingdom of Christ, are the believers in Christ, and take his part
against the World; and though they be much fewer then the other, and always
lightly hat^d and molested of the world, yet they are they whom the Lord does
bless, and ever will: and Christ's Subjects which we call the Ui^^b^e Church,
the^e are of two sorts; first, of such as only outwardly profess Christ;
secondly, of such as by e^ection inwardly are joined to Christ: the first,
honor Christ only in their lips, and partake the outward Sacrament, but not
the inward blessing: the second, in word and heart truly serve Christ, and
partake with the outward Sacrament the Grace of Christ.

And as between the World and Christ's Kingdom* there is a continual
resistance, so between these two parts of the Uisible Church often grows
mortal persecution, so that the true Church has no greater enemies then her
own Professors, which happened in the time of Christ, and other times, but
especially in the persecution of Antichrist.

Who should rather have received Christ then the Scribes and Pharisees, and who
persecuted and rejected him more? they refused Christ to be their King, and
chose Caesar, who after destroyed them, whereby we may learue the daung^r of
refusing the Gospel.

The like example is to be noted in the Romans, for when Pontius Pilate had
cer^ified Tyberius Caesar Tyberius Caesar.
of the doings of Christ* of his Miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension, and how
he was received of many as God, he did believe, and willed the Senate that
Christ might be adored as God, but they refused, because he was consecrated
before the Senate of Ro^^e had so decreed and approved him, so obeying the Law
of Man more then of God: they refused him, and contented themselves with the
Emperor, and as they preferred the Emperor and rejected Christ, God justly
stirred their Emperors against them, that the Senators were almost all
devoured by them, and the City it self horribly afflicted three hundred
years, for at last the same Tyberius was a sharp Tyrant to them, who spared
not his own Mother and Nephews, and of his Princes and Counselors, he left
but two or three alive: Many were condemned with their Wives and Children,
Maids also first defloured, then put to death. Pilate, Pontius Pilate.
under when Christ was crucif^ed, was deprived by him, and banished to Lions,
Anno 34.
and there slew himself, and Agrippa Agrippa.
by him was cast into Prison. In the seventeenth of his reign Christ suffered.

After whose death this Tyberius Nero lived six years, during which time no
persecution was in Rome against the Christians through the commandment of the
Emperor.

after him succeeded C. Caesar Caligula, Ca Caesar Caligula.
Claudius Nero, and Domitius Nero, which three were likewise scourges to the
Senate and people of Rome. The first took other men's wives from them, and
defloured three of his own Sisters, and banished them, he commanded himself
to be worshipped as a God, and Temples to be erected in his name, using to fit
in the Temples amongst the Gods, and made his Image to be set up in all
Temples, and in the Temple of Jerusalem: he wished all the people of Rome had
but one neck, that at his pleasure he might destroy them. By him Herod, that
killed John Baptist, and condemned Christ, was banished, where he died
miserably. Caiphas, which sat upon Christ, was at the the same time removed
from the high Priests room. The Tribunes slew this Caligula in the fourth
year of his reign, there was found in his Closset two Libels; 43.
one called the Sword, the other the Daggar, in which were contained the Names
of the Senators and Nobles of Rome which he had purposed to put to death, and
there was found in a Coffer diverse ^inds of poisons for the purpose to destroy
a number of people, and being thrown into the Sea, they destroyed a great
number of Fishes.

Claudius Nero, Claudius Nero.
which succeeded Caligula, reigned thirteen years, with no little cruelty,
but Domitius Nero, Domitius Nero.
which succeeded Claudius reigned fourteen years, with such cruelty, that he
slew the most part of the Senators, and all the Order of Knighthood: He
abstained not from his own Mother, his Sister, or any degree of his Kindred in
monstrous uncleanness and Incest, and ca^sed them, with his Brother, his own
Wife great with child, and his Master Seneca to be put to death, together
with Lucan, and diverse of his Kindred. He made Rome to be set on fire in
twelve places, which continued six days and seven nights, to see the example
how Troy burned, and the while sang verses of Homer. He laid the sauit upon the
Christians, and caused them to be persecuted, at last the Senate proclaimed him
a public Enemy, and condemned him to be whipped through the City to death,
and for fear he fled, and slew himself, complaining he had neither friend nor
enem^ would do it for him. In the latter end of his reign Anno 69. 69.
Peter and Paul Peter and Paul.
were put to death for the faith of Christ. Thus you see the just judgment of
God from time to time, on those that contemn Christ and will not receive him,
by this destruction of the Romans, by their Emperors, and by their civil
wars, and 5000. Romans slain at one time by the fall of a Theater.

But most especial by the destruction of the Jews, which in the year 73. 73
and three years after the suffering of Peter and Paul, The destruction of
Jerusalem.
was destroyed by Tytus and Vespasian to the number of eleauen hundred
thousands, besides them that were slain in Galily, and 17000. were sold for
slaves, and 2000. were brought with Tytus in triumph, and part devoured with
wild beasts, and the rest most cruelly slain. Whereby all Nations may take
example to reject the verity, and much more to persecute them which be sent of
God for their salvation, likewise the Emperors themselves for persecuting
Christ in his members, escaped not without their just reward, as in this Story
has and hereafter will appear.

Steven was the first Martyr; the same day that he suffered, Nicanor one of
the Deacons with two thousand suffered for the faith, after Herod slew James the
brother of John, whose accuser repented and confessed himself to be a
Christian also, and was beheaded with him.

Simon one of the Deacons was after Bishop of Bosrum in Arabia, where he was
burned, and Parmenas another of the Deacons suffered for the faith.

Thomas preached to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Germans, Hereaconies,
Bactries, and Magies, and was slain with a Darte in Calamia a City of Judea.

Simon Zelotes preached in Mauritania, Aphricke and Brittayne, who was
Crucified.

Judas Thaddeus, brother of James, preached in Mesopotamia and in Edisseus, and
the King there slew him in Berito a City thereof.

Simon the brother of Jude and James the younger, the son of Mary Cleopha and
Alpheus, as Dorotheus writes, was after James Bishop of Jerusalem, and
crucified in Egypt, Trayanus being Emperor, but Abdias writ he was slain
with his brother Jude by the people of Suauir in Persidis.

Mark was Bishop of Alexandria, he preached in Egypt, and there was drawn
with ropes to the fire and burned in the reign of Trayanus.

Bartholomeus preached long time to the Indians, and translated St Matthewes
Gospel into their languadge, did many Miracles there, and after many
persecutions in Albania of Armenia, he was beaten down with staves,
crucified, excoriated and beheaded-

Andrew, Peter's brother, was crucified at Patris in Achaya (by Egeas)
embracinge the cross and rejoicing therein.

Matthew converted Ethiopia and Egypt, Hercan the King sent one to run him
through with a spear.

Matthias preached to the Jews, and they stoned and beheaded him.

Phillip preached to the barbarous Nations who crucified and stoned him at
Hirapolis of Phrygia, where he and his Daughters with him were burned.

The Jews required James James.
to stand upon the Battlement of the Temple and dissuade the people from
Christ, but he preached him there and was thrown down headlong and stoned,
where he was buried, at which time the Jews put many other to death for the
testimony of Christ.

The first Persecution by Nero Domitius
NEro Domitius caused the first persecution, he regarded neither sect,
condition of life, or age, the streets were spread with dead bodies of
Christians, he endeavored utterly to abolish the name of Christians: in this
persecution, Peter was crucified, who required his head to be hanged downward
as unworthy to dye like Christ, the cause was thought to be because Simon
Magus, Simon Magus.
pretending to fly from the Mount Capitolinus to Heaven, by Peter's prayers was
brought down headlong, and his joints being broken he dyed, at that time
Peter's wife suffered, and the same day twelue-month Paul suffered.

The Second Persecution by Domitian.
THe Church had some rest under Vespatian, but Domitian moved the second
persecution, he killed all the Nephews of Judah called the Lords brothers, and
slew all he could find of the stock of David as Vespatian did before him,
least any of that stock should enjoy the kingdom: in his time Simon Bishop of
Jerusalem, after other torments, was crucified, and Iustus succeeded in his
Bishopric.

He banished John John.
to Pathmos, and under Pertinax he was released and came to Ephesus and
continued there unto the time of Trayanus: Eusebius 99
Governed the Church of Asia, and wrote his gospel there: Flauia, Daughter to
Flauius Clemens a Consul of Rome, suffered for Christ's name, and with many
other was banished out of Rome to Pontia.

Some of the stock of David were brought to Domitian to be slain, who seeing
they were poor, and understanding by them, that Christ's Kingdom should be
heavenly and not worldly, he let them go and stayed persecutions, they after
governed Churches and lived in peace unto the time of Traianus, in the time of
which persecution no kind of torment was omitted that might empaire the credit
of the Christians, they would not suffer their bodies to be buried and yet the
Church daily increased.

Euaristas, Bishop of Rome, next to Clement, succeeded in the third year of
Traianus, and suffered nine years after.

Alexander succeeded him, and converted many of the Senators of Rome to the
faith; he raised the son of Hermes from death to life, and made his maid, being
blind, to see, which Adrianus the Emperor hearing of him sent word to the
Governor of Rome to apprehend him and his two Deacons, Euentus and Theodorus,
and the said Hermes, and Quirinus* a Tribune, whose daughter Albina he cured,
which Cure, moved him to be baptized, and suffer for the faith of Christ, and
Aurelianus took Alexander with Hermes, his wife, Children, and whole household,
1250. put them in prison, and burned them all in a furnace, and martired the
said Theodorus for rebuking him thereof, and Quirinus had his tongue cut out,
then his hands and ^eete cut off, after was beheaded, and east to the Dogs.

The third Persecution.
THere was but one year between the second and the third persecution by the
Emperor Traianus, which was so grievous that Plinius Secundus, an Infidel,
wrote to the Emperor, that so many thousands were put to death without cause,
saving that they gathered themselves together before day to sing Hymmes to a
God which they called Christ, he reasoned why that sin should be punished more
then all other sins, and that he had put two Christian maids upon the rack to
prove if they could have extorted confession of further crime, but could not;
whereupon the persecutions were greatly alayed,

Symeon, son of Cleophas, Bishop of Jerusalem, was accused by the Jews to be
a Christian, and of the stock of David, wherefore Attalus commanded him to be
scourged many days together being an hundred and twenty years old, his
constancy was greatly admired; he was crucified.

Because Phocas, Bishop of Pontus, refused to sacrifice to Neptune, Traianus
cast him into a hot^e furnace, and after into a scalding ^ath.

Sulpitius and Seruilia, with there wives, whom Salma converted to the faith,
were also then martired: Salma was beheaded and Lepidus, in the Mount Auentine,
with whom suffered Seraphia, a Uirgen of Antioch, in this time Nereus and
Achilleus suffered at Rome and one Sagaris, who was martired in Asia.

In this time Ignatius suffered, he was sent from Siria to Rome; coming to
Asia he confirmed the Churches, and coming to Smirna, where Policarpus was,
he wrote diverse Epistles to Ephesus, to Magnesia, and to Trall^^; he was
aiudged to be devoured of Beasts, and hearing the Lions roar, I am the wheat
of Christ (said he) and shall be ground with the teeth of wild beasts that I
may be pure bread: at this time many thousands died for the faith, amongst them
one Publius Bishop of Athens.

Hadrian the Emperor, succeeded Traianus, who slew Zenon a Noble man of Rome,
and 10023 for Christ. Borgomensis Lib* 8. makes mention of ten thousand in
Hadrians days to be crucified in Mount Ararat, crowned with thorns, their
sides pierced with Darts, after the example of the Lords passion.

Eustachius, a Captain, who was sent against the Barbarians, and subdued them,
Hadrian met him honorably, and doing sacrifice to Apollo for the victory,
willed Eustachius to do so also, which he refusing, he was brought to Rome,
and with his wife and children suffered marterdome.

Faustin^ us and Iobita, Citizens of Brixia, suffered marterdome with grievous
torments, Caelocerius, seeing their great pa^ience cried out, vere magnus deus
Christianorum, whereupon he was apprehended, and suffered with them.

Anthia, a godly woman committed Eleutherius her son unto Anicetus Bishop of
Rome, who after was Bishop of Apulia, she with her son was beheaded, and
Iustus and Pastor, two brethren, suffered under Adrian at Complutum in Spain.

About the same time, Simpronissa, the wife of Gerulus, the Marter, suffered,
with her seven children, being first, often scourged, then hanged by the
hair of the head, then a stone fastened about her neck, she was cast into the
River, after her children were martired with diverse punishments, they were tied
to seven sta^es and so racked with a pully thrusting thorough one in the
neck, another in the breast* another in the heart, another about the navel,
another cut in every joint, another run thorough with a spear, the last cut
a sunder in the middle, then were they cast into a deep pit, which the
Idolatrous Priests entitled, Ad septem Biathanatos* Getulius, also a preacher
at Tiber with Cerdelis, Amantius and Prinitiuus* were condemned to the fire at
Hadrians commandment: Sophia with her two children, Serapia and Salma, were
likewise martired. Anno. 130.
Hadriana at Eleusina in Athens sacrifising to the gentiles Gods, gave all men
liberty to kill the Christians, whereupon Quadracus Bishop of Athens and
A^stydes ^ Philosopher, and Serenus Granus, a great Noble man, w^ote Apologies
for the Christians, so l^arnedly la^ing out their innocence, that the Emperor
wrote to the Proconsull of Asia, henceforth to exercise no more cruelty upon the
Christians; thus for a time they had some quiet.

Antonius Pius succeeded Hadrian, the rage of the Heathen ceased not to
persecute the Chr^stians, but the Emperors affection toward them appeared by
an Edict of his to the Commons of Asia, to ^ay the rage against the Christians,
ex^e^t they offended the laow of the Empire, willing them to consider their
patience in torments, and boldness in Earthquakes and Tempests, when others
quaked: This Edict was proclaimed at Ephesus in the public assembly of all
Asia, which applased the tempest of per^ecution in his days.

The fourth Persecution.
AFter him succeeded M: Antonius Verus, many Christians in his time suffered
diverse torments* at Smirna some were whipped that their ^eines appeared, and
their bowels were seen, and after they were set upon sharp shelles taken out
of the Sea, and nails and thorns set for them to go upon, and then thrown
to beas^s to be devoured, amongst whom Germanicus suffered so constantly that
they admir^d him.

Policarpus, a Disciple to the Apostles 86. years, a preacher 70. years
placed by St. John in Smirna, these persecutions being begun, he hid
himself, with a few of his company, and continued night and day in
supplication for the peace of the congregation.3. days before his
apprehension, he dreamed his bed was suddenly consumed with fire under him,
which he interpreted that he should suffer martyrdom by fire, and being
found by the pursuers, he entertained them cheerfully, made them di^e, and
desired an hours respit to pray, which he did in such sort, that they which
heard him were astonished, then they brought him to the City upon an Ass,
where Irenarcus, Herodes, and his father Nicetes met him, caused him to come
into their Chariot and persuaded him to do sacrifice, but when he would not,
they gave him rough words, and thrust him down the Chariot, that he might
break hi^ legs, but he went merrily to the place appointed, where there came a
voice from Heaven to comfort him: the Proconsull dissuaded him from the faith,
and willed him to say with them, destroy these naughty men, who with constant
countenance beheld the whole multitude, and looking up to heaven said thou,
th^^ it is, that will destroy these wicked men, then the Proconsu^l was ^arne^^
with him* and said, take thine Oath, and defy Christ, and I will discharge
thee, who answered, these four score and six years I have been his servant
and he has not hurt me, how then may I speak evil of my Lord and King which
has thus preserved me, and when they could not prevail by persuasions nor
threatenings he was commanded to be cast to the Lion, but because the Lion had
his prey already, the people with one voice required that he might be burned,
and when they would have nailed him to the stake with iron hoopes, he said, he
that has given me strength to ab^de the fire, shall also give me power that I
shall not stir in this fire, which when they only bound him, he praised God
and testified his faith: the fire seemed to the beholders to compass the body
like a veil, which seemed like gold and silver, and yielded a pleasant smell;
the fire not consuming his body one thrust him in with a sword, whereby so much
blood issued out of his body that it quenched the fire, after the body was
taken and burned,

At that time suffered twelve that came from Philadelphia with diverse other, as
Metrodorus a Minister and Pionius a worthy man, who after grievous torments
were burned, and Carpus, Papylus, and Agothonica a woman were put to death at
Pergamopolis in Asia: Felicitas with her seven Children suffered at Room, the
first was whipped and pressed to death, the second and third had their brains
broken out, the fourth was cast down head-longe and had his neck broken, the
other three were beheaded and left the mother slain with the sword.

At this time Justinius the learned Piilosopher suffered, who wrote appologies to
the Senate of Rome, the Emperor, and Liefetenant of the City for the
Christians, 174
he prevailed so much with Antonius Pius that he stayed the persecution in
Asia, he vanquished Crescens a Philosopher, in reueng whereof he procured his
death.

Under this Tyrant also suffered Ptolomeus and Lucius for confessing Christ in
Alexandria^in Egypt^ a vicious infidel, whose wife was vicious, but converted
by Ptolameus, and departed from her vicious husband, wherefore in revenge he
suborned a Centurion to accuse him, who being brought before Vrbanus he
condemned him to death, and Lucius a Christian blaming the Judge therefore, was
with him also martired, also Concordus, a Minister of Spoletum, because he
would not sacrifice to Jupiter, but spate in his face, after sundry torments
he was beheaded: Diverse other martires suffered under this tyrant, as
Symetricus, Florellus, Pontianus, Alexander, Caius Epipodus, Victor, Corona,
Marcellus, and Valerian, who were killed because they would not sacrifice to
Idols: Under this Tyrant suffered diverse Martirs at Uienna and Lions in France,
amongst whom Vetius, Zacharias, Sanctus, Maturus, Attallus, Blandina, Alexander
and Alcibiades are chiefly renowned.

Vetius Epagathus for reproving the cruel sentence of the Judge against the
Christians, and making an apology for them was martired, he was called the
advocate of the Christians.

At that time Photinus, Deacon to the Bishop of Lions, about 90. years old,
was first beaten, then cast into prison where he dyed within two days.
Blandina, was fastened to a stake, and cast to beasts to be devoured, but none
would touch her, so they put her in Prison until another time.

Attalus was brought forth, with one Alexander a Phrigian Physician, who
because he encouraged the Christians before the Judge, died most patiently
broyled in an iron chair.

After Blandina, and one Ponticus, but fifteen years old, was brought forth,
the child dyed with extremity of torments: Blandina after whipping gridirons,
and beasts, was cast into a net and thrown unto a wild Bull, and so gored to
death; they would not suffer the dead bodies to be buried; the causes why
these Persecutions were so sharp, was, because the Ethnicks, being servants to
the Christians, by threatening, for fear, said the Christians kept the feast of
Thiestes, and incest of OEdipus, with other haiuous crimes.

Meleto Bishop of Sardis, and Claudius Apolinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis
exhibited Apologies unto these Emperors for the Christians, so did Athenagoras
a Philosopher and Legate of the Christians, whereby the persecution for the
same time was stayed, others think that if was by a miracle in the Emperors
Camp, for when the soldiers wanted water five days and were like to perish, a
Legion of the Christian Soldiers withdrew themselves and prayed, whereby they
obtained rain for them, selves, lightenings and ha^le to discomfort and put to
flight their enemies, whereupon the Emperor wrote to the Governors to give
thanks to the Christians, and give them peace of whom came the victory.

Anthonius Comodus son to Verus succeeded and reigned 13. years, some think
the persecution slaked in his time, 175.
by the favor of Martia the Emperors Concubine who favored the Christians, by
reason whereof many Nobles in Rome received the Gospel: amongst whem one
Apollonius, being accused by Seuerus his servant, but this accuser was sound
false and therefore had his legs broken, yet he was driven to confess his
faith, and for the same beheaded by an ancient law, that no Christian should be
released without recantation.

The Emperor and the citizens of Rome on his birth day assembled to offer
sacrifices to Hercules and Jupiter, proclaiming that Hercules was Patron o^ the
City; but Vincentius, Eusebius, Perigrinus, Potentianus, instructers of the
people hearing thereof preached against the same, and converted Julius a
Senator, with others to the faith, whereof the Emperor hearing, caused them to
be tormented, and then pressed to death, saving that Julius was beaten to death
with Cudgels at the commandment of Vitellus master of the soldiers.

Perigrinus was sent of Xistus Bishop of Rome to teach in France where the
persecution had made wast, 1^8.
who established the Churches and returned to Rome and was Martired: this
Xistus was the 6. Bishop of Rome, after Peter, and governed the ministry there
10. years Telesphorus succeeded him, and was Bishop 11. years, and was
martired: after him succeeded Hyginus and died a martyr: after him succeeded
Pius, after them Anicetus, Soter, Elutherius about the year 180. 180.


In the time of Comodus, amongst others, were martired, Serapion Bishop of
Antioch, Egesippus a writer of Ecclesiastical histories from Christ to his
time, also Miltiades who wrote his Apology for Christian Religion.

About this time wrote Hiraclitus, who first writ Anotations upon the new
Testament; also Theophilus Bishop of Cesaria, Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, a
famous learned man, who wrote diverse Epistles to diverse Churches, and exhorts
Penitus a Bishop that he would lay no yoke of chastity, upon any necessity,
upon his Brethren, also Clemens Alexandrinus, a famous learned man, lived in
that time, and Gautenus, who was the first that read in open school in
Alexandria, of whom is thought first to rise the order of Uniuersities in
Christendom; he was sent to preach to the Indians by Demetrius Bishop of
Alexandria.

In this tranquillity of the Church grew contention for Easter day, which had
been stirred before of Policarpus and Anicetus, forthey of the west Church,
pretending the tradition of Paul and Peter, but indeed it was of Hermes and
Pius, kept Easter the 14. day of the first month, the Church of Asia followed
the example of John the Apostle, and observed another day.

The fifth Persecution.
AFter Comodus reigned Pertinax, after whom succeeded Seuerus, under whom was
raised the fifth Persecution, he reigned 18. years: in the first ten he was
very favorable, after (through false accusations) he proclaimed, that no
Christian should be suffered, whereupon an infinite number were slain in the
year 205. 205.
The crimes objected was rebellion to the Emperor, Sacrilege and murdering of
Infants, incestuous pollutions, eating raw flesh, libidinous commixture,
worshipping the head of an ass which wa^ raised by the Jews, also for
worshipping of the Sun in rising, because they used daily to sing unto the
Lord, or because they used to pray toward the East, but the special matter
was because they would not worship Idols: these Persecutions raged in Africa,
Alexandria, Cappadocia, and Carthage: the number that were slain was infinite.
The first that suffered was Leonides, father of Origin, who but 17. years old
desired to have suffered with his father, but that his mother in the night stole
away his garments, and his shirt, yet he wrote to his father: take heed you
alter not your purpose for our sakes, he was so toward in knowledge of
Scripture and virtue, that his father would often in his sleep kiss his
breast, thanking God that he had made him so happy a father of so happy a
son: his father being dead, and his goods confiscate to the Emperor, he
sustained himself, his mother and six brethren by keeping school, at length
he applied himself wholly to Scripture, and profited in the Hebrew and Greek
tongues, which he conferred with other translations, as that of the 70. and
found out other translations of Aquila, of Symachus and Theodocian, with which
he also joined 4. others: he wrote 7000. Books. the Copies whereof he used to
sell for threepence a piece to sustain his living: he had diverse Scholars,
as Plutarchus Serenus, his brother who was burned, and Heraclitus and Heron,
which were beheaded, another Serenus which was beheaded, and Rahis and
Potamiena, she was tormented with pitch poured on her, and martired with her
mother Marcella, she was executed by one Basilides, who showed her some kindness
in repressing the rage of the multitude; she thanked him and promised to pray
for him, he being required after to give an oath, touching the Idols and
Emperor, (as the manner was) refused it, confessing himself to be a Christian
and therefore was beheaded.

There was one Alexander, who after great torments, escaped and was Bishop of
Jerusalem, Narcissus who was 61. years old, he was unwieldy to govern alone:
he was 40. years Bishop of Jerusalem, until the Persecution of Decius, he
erected a famous Library, where Eusebius had his chief help in directing his
Ecclesiastical History; he wrote many Epistles, he licensed Origin to teach
openly in his Church: after under Decius in Cesaria for his constant confession
dyed in prison.

Policarpus sent Andoclus into France, Seuerus apprehending him, and first
being beaten with bats he was after beheaded: in that time Asclepiades suffered
much for his confession, and was made Bishop of Antioch, and continued there
seven years.

About this time Ireneus, with a great multitude beside were martired, he was
Scholar to Policarpus, and Bishop of Lions 23. years; in his time the
question of keeping Easter was renewed betwixt Victor Bishop of Rome, and the
Churches of Asia, and when Victor would have excommunicated them, Ireneus, with
others, wrote to him to stay his purpose, and not to excommunicate them for
such a matter.

Not long after followed Tertullian who writ learned Apologies for the
Christians, and confuted all that the slanderours objected, he wrote many
books, whereof part yet remain.

Victor Bishop of Rome died a Martyr, after he had sitten there 10. or 12.
years; he was earnest in the matter of Easter, and would have excommunicated
them that were contrary, but for Ireneus and others who agreed to have Easter
upon the Sunday, because they would differ from the (...), and because Christ
rose on that day. On the other side were diverse Bishops of Asia, as Policrates
Bishop of Ephesus, (alleging the example of Philip the Apostle) with his
three daughters, of John the Evangelist at Ephesus, Policarpus at Smirna,
Thraseas at Eumenia Bishop and Martyr, and of Sagaris of Laodicea, Bishop and
Martyr, and Iapirius and Melito at Sardis with diverse other more. This shows
that varience of Ceremonies, was no strange thing in Gods Church.

After Victor succeeded Zepherinus; he sat 17. years.

Under Seuerus also suffered Perpetua, Felicitas, and Rouocatus her brother,
and Saturnius and Satyrus brethren, and Secumdulus, who dyed in prison, the
rest were thrown to wild beasts.

Seuerus having reigned 18. years was slain at York, by Northern men and
Scots, (leaving two Sons Bassianus and Geta, Bassianus having slain his
brother in Britain, governed the Empire 6. years, he was slain by his
(...), with his sonn^ Pyadumenus reigned one year and were (...) people, then
Varius Heliogab: reigned two years, very (...) and was slain by his Sou^^iers
drawn through the (...).

Aurelius Al^xander S^uerus reigned 13. year^s, well commended (...) favored
the Christians.

Mammea the Emperors mother, commanded of ^erome for (...) she sent to ^n^ioch
for Origin, who stayed a while with the (...) and returned to Alexandria, the
Emperor and his mother were (...) Commotion in Germany* Though there was no
open persecution in his (...) Judges martyred many, because there was no (...)
to the contrary: as Calixus (...) of Rome, who was tied to a great stone, and
thrown out of a (...) He succeeded Z^pherinus, and Vibanus succeeded him, who
died a (...) many (...), amongst whom was ^yburtius and Valerianus, (...) of
Rome, and remained constant to Martyrdom.

Agapitus but 15. years old, suffered in his time, who was (...) because he
would not do Sac^ifice, after other torments, (...) the torments were
executing, the judge fall suddenly from his (...) his Bewels burned within him*
and dyed under whom also (...) of Rome, was drawn through the City and cast
into ^^ber.

In his time also Pamachus a Senator of Rome, with his wife (...) other men and
women, and Sin pliciu^ a Noble Senator* all these (...) had their heads smitten
off and their hands hanged up on diverse (...) Under him also suffered
Quiritius, a No^le man of Rome, with his (...) many more; also T^berius and
Valerianus, (...) of Rome and (...) with (...), and afterwords beheaded; also
Martina a Uirgin.

The sixth Persecution.
MAximinus succeeded Alexander, and for the hatered he bare him, he (...) 2^7.
Pers^cution, against the Teachers of the Church (...) in his (...) Origin writ
his Book De Martyrio; in ^is time (...) Rome who ^ucc^^ded V^banus, with
Phillip his Priest, was banished (...) there died.

In these times notable men were raised up to the Church, as Philetus Bishop of
Antioch, and Zebenus Bi^hop of the same, Ammonius Schoolmaster of Origin,
(...) Africanus Origens Scholar, and Natalius who had suffered for the (...)
^^clepiodotus and Theod^tus Arrians promise^ (...) to be the Bishop of their
Sect, whereunto he yielded, but the Lord (...) and regarding it not, he was
(...) with Angels, and he (...) and what had happened unto him, so Zephirinus
Bishop, with the (...) him again.

After Pontianus Bishop of Rome, Antonius succeeded, and after him (...)
Hipolitus Bishop of a head city in Arabia, he was a Martyr, he was a great
(...). Prudentius makes mention of great heaps of Mart^res burned by 60.
(...) says, that Hipolitus was drawn with (...) horses through fields, (...)

Go^ianus succ^^ded; Maximinus and Phillip succeeded him, and (...) two
Emperors were Christened with their Families and converted by Fabianus Bishop
of Rome and Origin. Phillip* with his Son* was (...) Captains, because the
Emperors had commit^ed th^^ treasures unto ^^bianus.

The seventh Persecution.
DEcius having slain the former Emperors, invaded the Crown^, in the year 250
50. who (...) a terrible Persecution against the Christians.

Fabianus was made Bishop of Rome, by lighting of a Dove upon him in the
Congregation, which was minded to elect some Noble (...) and was put to death
by Decius, who proclaimed the (...) of Christians, Origin wrote of the
rightuous^^^^ of his Faith^ Origin taught and (...) and sustained (...)
persecutions. Under Decius be (...) with bats of (...), and death and (...)
part of Scripture, (...) of the 46. Psalm; Why do thou preach my
Justification, and why do thou take my Testament in thy mouth? (...).

^

In his time Alexanderines Bishop of (...)* where he had (...) 40. years, and
was brought from thence of Casaria, and died therein prison. M^zananes
succeeded him the 36. Bishop after James.

Babilas Bishop of ^n^^och resisted an Emperor, who against his promise had
(...) a Kings son (...) suffer him to (...) to the Temple of the Christian^s
(...) was (...) by him his body was (...) into the Sub^^bs of (...) the
Christians, as s^tte as his body taken out of the Temp^e, (...) with fire.

In Decius his (...) 40. Uirgine suffered in Antioch, one Peter (...) one
Andrew, one Paul^on^, one Nichomachus an^ Dionisia a virgin were (...) and
(...) Chr^stians were led from (...) Cappadocta, Germanus, Theophilus,
Cesarius, and Vitalis suffered Martyrdom, and Policronios Bishop of Bathlon,
and Nesto^ Bishop of (...) Olimpiades and Maximus; in (...) Anatolia a virgin,
and Aud^x (...) the Faith.

In his time diverse suffered in Alexandria before the (...) sayer (...) up the
people* first, they (...) a Priest, beat him with (...) him in the face and
eyes with (...), and them stoned him. (...) took Quinta a faithful^ (...)
through the (...) upon the hard stones, dashed (...) against (...) then they
spoiled all the Christians, (...) the city, and took the They took Apollima
an ancient Uirgin rashed out all her teeth, made a fire (...) she would deny
Christ; but she (...) suddenly into the (...) and was burned. They took one
Serapion, and broke almost all the (...) and cast him from an upper often, so he
dyed, shortly after came the (...) against the Christians, whereupon the
Persecution grew more (...).

Cromon and Iulianus were laid upon Camels, and whipped, then cast into thy
(...) for the testimony of Jesus; a Soldier took part with them going to
Mart^^^^, and was beheader; also (...) was burned, and Epimacus and Alexander,
having suffered bands and torments with (...) scourges, were burned with 4.
women, Ammonarion a holy virgin, Marcuria an aged Mat^on, and Dionisia mother
of many fair children, after many torments, were slain by the ^word. Horon
and ^^odorus Egyptian^, were grievously tormented and then burned; there was
one Dioscorus of their company but ^5. years old, whe^^ the Judge (...) for
his (...) age, being (...) at his (...).

N^mesian an Egypt^an was accused of theft and purg^d, and then was (...) of
Christianity and was more grievously scourged then the thieves, and then was
burned.

Amnon Zenon, Ptolomeus, Ingenius Soldiers, and an old man Theophilus, they
seeing a Christian fearing to confess his Faith, encouraged him by signs and
being noted and ready to be taken; they pressed to the Tribunal Seat, and
confessed themselves to be Christians; whereat the Judges and their Assistants
were greatly amassed, and the Christians imboldened, and they departed glad for
the testimony they had given. Ischrion often moved of his Master to do
Sacrifice, and refusing, he run him through with a spear.

In this time many wandered in wilderness, suffered hunger, cold, danger of
wild beasts. Clerimon Bishop of Nilus, an old man, with his wife, flying to
the mountain of Arabia, could never be found again.

Dionisius Alexandrinus suffered much a^fl^ction, and had strange deliverances.
First, the messenger was struck^n blind and could not find his house, after
which three days, God had him fly; after, coming to Jerusalem, he was taken,
the Keeper was from home when he was brought to Prison, and the Keeper
returning home and finding diverse run away, he ran away himself, and
told the matter to one he met going to a Marriage, who told it to them at the
wedding, who in the night rushed toward the pri^oners with great shouting,
they that kept the prisoners were afraid and left them, then the company willed
them to depart, and they t^^ke Dionisius, set him upon an Ass, and conveyed
him away.

In this time suffered one Christopherus a Cananite, 12. cubits high; also
Meneates a Florentine, and Agatha a holy virgin in Sicily, who suffered
imprisonment, was be^ten, racked, famished, rayled on, tormented with sharp
shells and (...) co^es, and her breasts were cut from her body. Amongst others
also suffered 40. virgins by diverse k^nds of deaths; Triphon a very holy and
constant man of Nice, after much torments, suffered death by the sword.

Decius erected a Temple at Ephesus, and compelled all the city to dee
Sacrifice; 7. of his Soldiers refused, and they hi^ themselves in Mount Celius
in caves; the Emperor caused them to be rammed up with stones, and so they
were Martired.

Hieronimus writes of a godly Soldier, which could not be brought from his
Faith, was brought into a pleasant Garden, laid upon a soft bed, and an Harlot
sent to allure him, she offering to kiss him* he bit off her tongue and ^pit
it in her face.

Theodora a virgin, was commanded to the Stews, a young man, a Christian,
caused her to change garments with him, and convey herself away, and offering
himself to their violence, being found a man, he confessed himself a
Christian, and was condemned to suffer, Theodora offered herself to the Judge,
and desired that the other might be discharged, he commanded them both to be
beheaded, and cast into the fire.

Agathon was condemned to lose his head for rebuking them that derived the dead
bodies of Christians.

One Paulus, and one Andreas, were scourged, drawn through the city, and
aftrer trodden to death under the feet of people; also Justinius a Priest of
Rome, and Nicostratus a Deacon, and Portius a Priest of Rome, which is reported
to have converted the Emperor Phillip, were all Martyred.

Secundarius, as he was led to the Iaile, Verianus and Marcellinus asked
whether they led the innocent, whereupon they were taken* and after torments
and beatings with waisters, were hanged, with fire put to their sides; but the
Tormentors some fell suddenly dead, others were possessed with evil Spirits.

Beza registers these to suffer in this Tyrants time, Hipolitus, Concordia,
Hierenius, Abundus, Victoria a virgin being Nobles or Antioch: Belias Bishop of
Apollinia; Leacus, Tyrsus, and Galmetus, Naza^zo, Triphon, Phillas, Bishop of
Philocomus; Philocronius Bishop of Babylon, Thesiphon Bishop of Pamphilia,
Nestor Bishop of Corduba, Parmeuius Priest, Circensis, Marianus, and Iacobus,
Nemesianus, Felix, Rogatianus Priest Felicissimus, Iouinius, Basilius, Ruffina
and Secunda virgins, Tertullianus Valerianus, Nemesius, Sempronianus,
Olimpiadus, Teragone, Zeno Bishop of Cesaria, Marinus, Archinius, Priuatus
Bishop, Theodorus Bishop of Pontus, Pergentius and Laurencius children,
suffered Persecution in Tuscia.

Many revolted, as Serapion* Nichomachus in the midst of his torments,
Euaristus Bishop of Africa, Nicoftratus a Deacon, diverse of them were punished
by Gods hand, some with evil spirits, some with strange diseases.

At this time rose the heresy of Nouatus, he disturbed Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage, and Cornelius Bishop of Rome, he was assisted with Maximus, Vrbanus,
Sidonius, and Celerius, but they forsook him: after he allured three simple
Bishops in ^taly to lay their hands on him to make him Bishop of Rome, with
Coruelius, whom by all means he sought to defeat, and made the people that
came to receive the Eucharist* swea^e they would stand with him.

Two young men, Aurelius, which was twice tormented, and Mapalicus in the
midst of his torments, told the Proconsull, to morrow you shall see the
running for a wager, meaning his Ma^tyrdome.

Decius the Emperor reigned but two years, and with his son, was slain of
the Barbarians; presently God sent a ple^ue 10 years together, which made
diverse p^aces desolate, especially where the Persecution most reigned the
Christians comforted and ministered unto their sick brethren, the Infidels
forsook their neighbors and friends, and left them destitute of succor, upon
this Plague Ciprian wrote his Book, De mortalitate.

Vibias Gallus* and Volusian his son, by treason, succeeded Decius.

Gallus at the first was quiet, anon after published Edicts against
Christians; Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was banished, others were condemned to
the Mines, as Nemisianus, Fex, Lucius, with their Bishops, Priests and Deacons*
to whom, and to Seagrius and Rogatianus Cyprian wrote consolatory Epistles:
Lucius Bishop of Rome was banished, whom Cornelius succeeded, but a while after
he returned again to his Church, and Stephanus succeeded him, and sat 7.
years, 5. monethe, and died a Martyr, betwixt him end Cyprian fell a
contention about rebaptizing of Heretics.

Emilianus slew the former Emperors, and succeeded himself, after 3. months
he was slain, and Valerius and Galienus his son succeeded him.

Valerius 3. or 4. years was so cut^eous to Christians, as no Emperor before
him, that his Court was full of Christians, but he was seduced by an Egyptian
Magitian, finding himself hindered by them, from the practicing of his charms,
he brought the Emperor to Idols, he Sacrificed Infants, and reised the eight
Persecution.

The eight Persecution.
CIprian was an African borne in Carthage, an Idolater, and given to Magic,
he was converted to the Faith, by Ceci^a Priest, by hearing the Prophet Jonas,
as Soon as he was converted, he gave his goods to the poor: not long after he
was Priest, he was bishop of Carthage, he had the government of the whole East
Church* and Church of Spain, he was called the Bishop of Christian men: he
loved to read Tertullian, and called him his Master. In the time of Decius and
Gallus he was banished, in the time of Valerianus he returned again: but
after, he was found in a Carden, and his head stricken off. At this time Zistus
Bishop of Rome, with six of his Deacons, more beheaded: one Laurence a Deacon,
seeing the bishop go to execution, cried to him, Dear Father, whether go
thou without thy dear son? He answered, within three days thou shall suffer
in more painful manner then I, which fell out accordingly: for Laurence
having distributed the goods of the poor, by the charge of the bishop, the
Emperor hearing thereof, commanded him to render the Treasure to him* but
after three days respite, in sleede thereof, he presented unto him a sort of
poor Christians, as the Treasure of the Church; whereupon he commanded
Laurence to be broyled on a gridyron, where after he had suffered a great
space, he said this side is roasted enough, turn up Tyrant, try whether roasted
or raw be bettermeate. A Soldier of Rome was converted to the Faith by the
constant pro^^^^ion of this Laurence, and desired to be baptized of him, but
the Judge called him, and scourged, and be headed him.

At this time suffered Dionisius Bishop of Alexandria, he was banished and
scourged, then removed to a more strait place; one Gaius, one Petrus, and one
Paulus were afflicted with him notwithstanding; Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius,
and Lucius, visited the brethren, also Eusebius suffered affliction for the
truth, who after was Bishop of ^aodicia: Faustus long after being an oldman,
was beheaded* but Dionisius suruiued all these troubles and in great age
departed in peace, after he had governed the Church of Alexandria 17. years,
and taught School there 16. years, and Maximus succeeded him.

In the same time Priscus, Marcus, and Alexander, who stepyed to the Judge, and
declared themselves Christians, with a woman, were given to wild beasts.

In Carthage were 300. martyred in a Lime kill for refusing, because they would
not Sacrifice to lupiter.

Maxima, Donatilla, and Secunda, three Uirgins, after cruel torments, were
given to beasts, which refused to touch them, then they were beheaded; also one
Pontius after diverse torments, was given to beasts, who refusing to touch him*
he was burned at which time Claudius his Judge with Anabius his assistant, were
taken with wicked Spirits, and bit off their own tongues, and died.

The same time Zeno Bishop of Uerona was Martyred; one Phillippus President of
Alexandria came down with his Wife, two Sons, and his Daughter Eugenia she
with two E^nuches, Prothus and Hiacintus, were converted to Christianity; she
put on the apparel of a man to a^^ide trouble, and to hear Helenus Bishop,
and named herself Eugenius. Malena a Marton of Alexandria fell in lou^ with
her, end seeing that by no means she could obtain her suit, she made an
outcry, saying that Eugenius went about to de^lowre her, and accused her to
Phillippus, so she was forced to manifest her self to her Father; after, she
won him and other of her kindred, to the Faith, her Father was after
Martyred: after, she returned to Rome with her Eunuchs, and converted
Basilla, who was beheaded after sundry torments.

In the sixth year of Valerianus, Victor and Victorinus, with Claudianus and
Bossa his wife, after three years imprisonment, and diverse torments, were put
to death.

Fructuosus Bishop of Tarraconia, with his two Deacons Augurius and Eulogius,
at their execution, their hands bound behind them unloosed, and the fire flewe
from them* until they had prayed* at which time a certain Soldier did see
the Heavens open, and the Martyrs entered in; which sight he showed to the
Daughter of Emilianus the President.

This Emperor Valerianus, after he had reigned, with his Son, about six
years, and afflicted the Christians two years, was taken of Sapres King of
the Persians, who made him always his footstool to get upon his horse till
he dyed.

At the same time, amongst the Romans, there happenned 30. Earthquakes
together, whereupon the Persecution was moderated: yet some ^uffered, as
Marinus, a Nobleman, he was accused to be a Christian of him that should
succeed him; the Judge gave him three days to advise himself, but being
encouraged by Theodi^tus Bishop of Cesaria, he presented himself to the
Judge, by whose Sentence he was beheaded.

Galienus succeeded Valerianus, and Claudius succeeded him. Vincentius makes
mention of 262. Martyrs that suffered under him: Quintilianus succeeded him
after Aurelianus, under whom was moved the ninth Persecution.

The ninth Persecution.
AS Aurelianus was subscribing the Edict against Christians, 278.
he was terrified with ^^ghtning* and about the 6. year of his reign was
slain, yet Vincentius and Orosius reckon up a great number of Martyrs which
suffered under him in France and Italy.

Publius Annins Tacitus succeeded Aurelianus, and reigned 6. months; his
brother Florianus succeeded him 60. days. Marcus Aurelius succeeded him,
surnamed Probus; he moved no Persecution: after he had reigned 6 years, 4.
Months, because, by reason of Peace, he had no work for his Soldiers,
therefore he was slain. Carus with his two Sons, Carinus and Numerianus
succeeded him 3. years Numerianus kil^^ Cerillus, for not suffering him to
enter into the congregation of the Christians, he being their Bishop; he was
slain of his Father. Dioclesian succeeded; until the 19. year of his reign
the Church was quiet, which quiet^^sse had endured 44. years; the Church grew
mightily, and the chief of them in favor with the Emperor, were Derotheus
and Gorgotheus, and diverse more. The Church began to were wanton with Peace,
and to build large Churches, but their desolutenes brought on them the tenth
persecution.

The tenth Persecution.
Whilst Dioclesian abstained from Persecuting, he obtained diverse victories,
and being proud thereof, he would be worshipped as a God, calling himself
brother of the Sun and Moon, enjoined the people to kiss his feet, and in
the 19. year of his reign he moved Persecution, he commanded the Churches of
Christians to be destroyed, and the Scriptures to be burned; put Christians
from Magistracy, and constrained them with torments to offer to Idols.

After the Proclamation of the Edict, a Nobleman, a Christian openly rent it
in pieces, for which act he was put to most bitter death.

Dioclesian began with his Camp, willed the Christians to lay away their
weapons, and give over their charges, which they did willingly. At Tire there
were Christians given to cruel beasts: preserved miracul^usly, though they
were kept hungry of purpose; they raged against those that brought the
Christians, and devoured them they could catch, therefore they were beheaded,
and cast into the Sea.

At that time was Martyred the Bishop of Sidon, but Siluanus Bishop of
Gazen^^s, with 39. others, were slain in the Mettie-mines; thon Pamphilius an
Elder, and the glory of the Church of Cesaria, whom Eusebius writes of, was
Martyred. All the Bishops and Teachers in Syria were imprisoned; Tyrannion
thrown to fishes, Arnobius a Physician, slain with brickbats, some drowned
themselves rather then they would worship Idols, Siluanus Bishop of Emissa,
with others were thrown to wild beasts.

In Mesopotamia the Christians were hanged by the feet, and choked with smoke:
in Cappadocia their legs were broken, in Cilicia Taragus, Probus, and
Andronious Martyred: the Persecution was so outrageous, that they refrained not
from the slaughter of the Emperors children, and the chiefest Princes of his
Court, amongst whom was one Peter of the Household whom the King did love as his
own child, after cruel torments, he was whipped to the bones, powdered with
salt and vinegar, and ^ofled with a fire. Dorotheus and Gorgonius seeing it,
reproved the Emperor, and confessed they were Christians; wherefore, though
they were in great authority, they were almost tormented as he, and strangled.

Anthonius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Lucianus, and a great company of ^artyrs
were beheaded. Dioclesian beheaded his own wife Serena.

Elampia, Agapen, Irenea, Cronia, and Anastachia were burned, 2000. Christians
were burned in one Temple: In Arabia many Martyrs were slain with ^xes: I^
Phrigia, a whole City of Christians compassed, set on fire, and burned: In
Melitina, the Bishop and Elders were cast into prison.

A Sheriff in doing execution upon the Christians was converted, and confessed
himself a Christian, and after diverse strange torments, was burned. Eugenius,
Auxentius, Marderius, were Martyred: In Egypt, Pelus and Nilus Bishops, were
Martyred, the rage was great in Alexandria the Bishop thereof and Elders,
Faustus, Didius, Ammonius, Phildas, Hefichius, and Theodorus, with many other
were Martyred.

(6660. Soldiers, being Christians, under the Christian Captain Mauritius,
lying at (...) in Egypt, refusing to worship Images, died altogether constant
in the Faith. Ascla, Phremon and Apolinius with diverse Christians, were
martyred at Anteno, in Scilia were 79. put to death* in Calcedon Euphenea was
martired, in Rome, John and Crispus Priests, at Babem^ Agricola and Vitalis, at
Aquilia the Emperor commanded (...) man to kill the Christians, where Felices
and Fortunatus was killed, Victor suffered at (...) Belua^ns Lucian suffered.

In Spain was great persecution as at Emerita, Eulalia, Adula, Vincensia,
Sabina, and Christiana suffered; Leucadia virgin, Augusta, and 18. besides were
martyred. Where was such Persecution at ^re^^rs by the river Mosella, that ^he
blood of Christians (...) like a little Brook, and colored by River; Hors^men
(...) to kill the Christians: Agripina and Augusta were (...).

In (...) all the Christians were destroyed, no tongue (...) the death and
(...) that this Tyrant used, hanging them by one hand, (...) them* and (...)
but not to death: but every day. Eusebius says, he saw the the (...) of the
pesecutors blunt with often slaughter, themselves for weariness sit down and
(...); but the Martyrs nothing (...) were patient for Chr^sts sake.

Miletus Bishop of (...) gave back, wherefore Peter Bishop of (...) so did
Marcellus Bishop of Rome, wh^refore he was (...) and was Martyard.

In 30. days were (...) 17000 Martyrs, besides many that (...) There were
Mariy^^d at Alexandria. 300. (...) 120. more Martyrs.

This Persecution endured until about the 7. year of Constantius; at length,
being out of hope to ex^inguish them, the slaughter ceased* yet they (...)
many, and put 360. Regmus (...) the eyes of (...) and condemned many to the
(...).

After Dioclesian and Maximi^anus had reigned about (...). years th^y^^^ up
the Empier, and the Empire remained with Constantius, and Gal^^ius Maxeminus.
Maxeminus presecuted the Persecution about 7. years, vnt^ the years 318. but
Constantius ^ather ^auoured the Christians ^and to try (...) Cour^iers he
^eigned in Sacrifice to (...), and commaunced his Household so to d^e, and
finding a number that constantly refused ^e cherished them and (...) them to
great places, and refused the back^^ders.

Maximinus used great cruceltie in the East Churches (...) God stayed his rage
by sending him (...) a both as pu^^^fied his ^^trals, from whence came
inumerable multitudes whereupon he published Edicts of Peace to the Christians
and desired them to pray for him, but 6. months after he set out contrary of
(...) and (...) them to be^ (...) so Persecution rose again as great as before.

Siluanus, Lucianus, Petrus Bishop, Querinus Bishop, Marcellus, T^mothe,
Victorianus, Symphocrianus, Castorius, Cast^us, Cesarius, Me^^^ous, Nobilis
Dorotheus, Gorgamus, Pet^us unto inumerable Martyris; Iuliana, Cosmus Damanus
Basileus, with ^eauen others, Dorathca, Theophilus. Theodosia Vita^ is,
Agricola, ^^cha, Philemon, Hireneus, Januarius, Festus, Di^iderius, Grigorius,
Spolitanus, Agap^^s, Cro^ia, Hirenea. ^^heodora, with 270. others. Florianus*
Prinius, Felicia^^^, Vitus, Modestus, Crescentia, A^binus, Rogatianus,
Donatianus, (...) Catharina, Margareta. Lucia (...) A^theus the King with 3700.
Simplicius Faust^^^s, Beatrix, Panthaleon, Grigor^ns, Iustus, Leocandia,
Anthonia, with infir^^. Felix Victor, with his parents, Lucia widdowe,
Germinianus, with 79. others; Anastacia, C^^^ogonus, Felix, Audactus, Adrianus
Nathalia, Agnes of 13. years old, these (...) many other were then Martyred.

The Emperor in his Edict declared what plently they enjoyed when they adored
their (...).

As (...) as that Persecution began, there was a miserable F^mine and
Pestilence, wherein the Christians (to their power) re^^ued the Gentiles,
whereby grew some year.

(...) a Christian woman, whose husband they had killed to satisfy the filthy
desire of the Emperor, she killed her self rather then she would so do.

He banished a Noble woman of Rome, because she gave her goods to the Church.

The people of Rome, wearied with the vil^any of Maxentius, ^^quired ayd^
Constantine, he gathered an Army in France and Brita^ne, and being in (...),
looking up to Heaven about the going down of the Sun, he saw a brightness
like acrosse, with Stars of equal bigness, with this inscription, In hoc
vince. Eusebius Pamphilus reports he heard Constantine often affirm it; In
the (...), Christ appeared unto him with the sign of the same Cross, b^^ding
^im make the figure thereof and carry it before him in his wars, and he
should hau^ v^ctory; whereupon he (...) toward Max^ntius, who not being able
to sustain Constantines ^orce, and (...) ^o the C^tie, was overthrown of his
horse in the flood, and ^^owned, and so ended the last Persecution, he gave
li^ertie, by Procl^mation, to Christians ^o prolesse their Religion: Di^clesian
hea^ing her^of, dyed for sorr^w some say he poisoned (...).

Licinius first ^oyned with Constan^^ne, and ^onqu^red Maximinus a great (...)
in the West, who killed his Charm^rs that (...) him ^o war, and (...) with a
disease, he glorified the God of the Christians, and made a Law for their
(...).

Licinius called Learning* the poison of the common wealth, and said it was a
(...) for a Prince to be learned; he said, the Christians prayed for
Constant^^^ (...) and not for him, therefore he persecuted them, first in his
own Court, them in the (...) he rased many Churches to the ground, he hanged
Theodorus on a Cross, thr^st nails into his a^me pits then struck off his
head, He put to death Basilius Bishop, Nicl^olaus Bishop Grig^r^us of Armenia
the great Paul of (...) whose ^ands were (...) off ^ith a ^earing Iron, in
Sebast^a he drowned 40. Soldiers in a horse Pond, the wives of these 40. with
Ammones a Deacon, after inumerable torments were sla^^e with the sword.

Diverse b^t^els were sought between Licinius and Constantine first in
Hungary, where he was ou^r thrown, in Macedonia, where he fled and ^ep^yred
his Arm^^, and being vanquished by Sea and Land, he yielded to Costantine, and
was comm^^^^d^^ live a private life but he was killed by the Soldiers in the
year 324. 324.
Constantius ^he father of Constantine dyed in the year 310* and we buried at
York.

A^bon, the first that su^^^red Martyrdom in England, he was conuer^^d by A^
phibolus, a persecuted Clarke which he lo^ged; the Prince hearting thereof,
sent out (...) for him, Albon came to the Soldiers who brought him to the
Judge, and (...) would not sacrifice to Devils, after he was grieuo^sly
scourged he was beheaded, the Clarke fled into Wales, where he was set and made
to run about a Stake, his b^lly being opened, whilst (...) owels were drawn
out, he was stabbed with waggers, and after stoned, this was Anno 301.

It is to be noted that England was no^ touched with any of the nine
Persecutions, but only with the tenth, in which almost all Christiantie was in
the (...) ex^inguished.

Galerius threatening the Christians in Antioch, Romanus a Noble man encouraged
them he was strangely tormented, he requ^red the Tyrant that a child should be
presented unto him, he asked the child whether it was ^ore reason^ble to serve
one God rath^r th^n ^umerable; the Child answered the Tyrant, that one God was
to be worshipped; the Tyrant scourged the Child, and pulled off the skin of
his head, the mother being by, exhorted the Child to patience, the Child was
beheaded, and Romanus cast in the fire, which when it would not burn him, he
was ^^angled in prison.

Gordius a Centurion lived in the Desert a long time, but at a ^eest of Mars he
got upon the highest p^ace of the Thea^or, and v^tered himself to all the
people to be a Christian; after many torments, he was ^urned. Menas likewise*
a Soldier, con^essed himself a Christi^n in Colis, and after diverse
torments, wa^ beheaded.

Basilius writes of 40. Martyrs, young Gentlemen, professing themselves
Christians, they were caused to stand in winter in a Pond all night, and in the
morning bnrne^.

Nicephorus reports of 40. Martyrs drowned in a Ponde at Sebestia.

Cirus a Poysition, with one Ioannes, led a solitary life in Arabia in
Persecu^ion, they hearing of the imprisonment of Athanasia with her three
daughters, Theo^^ste, Theodota, and Eudoxa, they came to confi^me them, and
being accused, and would not do Sacr^fice, they were put to death.

Sebastian, Lieutenant or Diaclesian, was accused to the Emperor for
encouraging diverse Martyrs: he was brought into the Field, and of his own
Soldiers shot through with innumerable Darts, after threw his body into a
Iakes. Nicostratus, with Zoe his Wife: Tranquillinus, with Martia his Wife;
Traglianus, Claudius, Castor, Tiburtus, Castullus, Marcus, and Marcellus, with
others more suffered with him.

Barla, a Nobleman, whom Basilius mentions in a Sermon, after many torments he
was sacrificed on an Altar of their Idols, they put Fire and Incense into his
hand, thinking he would scatter it upon the Altar, and so have sacrificed, but
the fire burning about his hand, it endured as if it had been covered about
with Embers, he saying the Psalm, Blessed is my God which teaches in hands to
fight.

Vincentius was so racked, that all the joints of his body cracked, then there
was many wounds made in his body, then his flesh was combed with Iron Combs,
sharply filed, then they scourged him, then they laid his body upon an Iron
Grate, and opened it with Hooks, then they seared it with diverse plates,
sprinkling the same with hot Salt, then they drew him into a Dungeon sprinkled
with sharp shells, and locked his feet in the stocks.

Philoronimus forsook great possessions for Christ, and was beheaded, and
neither Friends, Wife, or Children could move him: also, Procopius being
converted, brake his Silver Images, and gave them to the poor, after grievous
torments, his hands and feet being cut off he was beheaded: so was Grigotius a
young man used.

Panthion, Theodorus, and Gerion, with 318. were martyred, Hermogines,
Eugraphus, Samonas, Gurias, Abilus, Hieron, Indes, Dominas, with two thousand
were martired. Enclasius and Maximinius, whom Fausta the Uirgin converted in
her torments: also, Thusus, Lucius, Callinicus, Apollonius, Philemon, Asilas,
Leonides, Arianus, Cyprian Bishop of Antioch, before his conversion being a
Magitian, suffered with Iustina a Uirgine. Glicerius, Felix, Fortunatus,
Achileus, Arthemius, Ciriacus, Anthonius, Marcellinus, Cucusatus, Barcimonia,
Felix Bishop, Audactus, Ianuarius, Fortunatus, Septimus, these suffered under
Dioclesian. Cassianus was stabbed of his Scholars with Iron Pen^ wherewith
they used to write. Eulalia was shut up of her Parents, least she should be
cause of her death, she brake out in the night, came to the Judge, confessed
her self a Christian, and reproved the cruelty of the Judge, and their vanity
in worshipping Images, she threw down the Idols, and scattered the Incense
when she was brought to worship them; she had one joint pulled from another,
her flesh was scraped off with claws of beasts to the bones, she rejoicing and
praising God, they seared her breasts with torches: when they had caught her
hair, which hanged down to her feet and covered her shame, she opened her
mouth over the flame and died.

Agnes, a Roman virgin, not marriageable, for her constancy in Christ was
condemned to be committed to the common Stews, and Younkers appointed to
assail her, whom when she refused, she was tied to a corner of a street naked:
one beholding the Uirgine with unchaste eyes, was stricken with lightning, his
eyes dashed out of his head, whom Agnes prayed for and restored: after ^he was
beheaded, she preferred the sight of her Executioners more, then of her lovers.
There are many miracles reported of her.

Katherine openly resisted the Emperor Maxentius to his face, and rebuked him
of his cruelty, after she had felt the rack, and the fouresharp cutting
wheels, she was beheaded.

Iulitta sued to the Emperor for goods wrongfully detained from her, her
adversary accused her of Christianity, being commanded to do sacrifice with
Incense, she refused it, and encouraged others, and was burned.

Barbara, a Noble woman suffering cruel torments, as cords, and burning of her
sides, was lastly beheaded for her Faith.

Fausta, Iuliana, Anisia, Iustina, Lucia, Agatha, and Tecla, with all holy
Uirgines, suffered in the tenth Persecution. ^aius succeeded Xistus B. of Rome:
Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius were Bishops afterward, and then Miltiades,
which was the last Bishop of Rome that was martyred: These all were Martyrs.
Sapores King of Persia put to death, Acyndiuus, Pegasius, Anempodistus,
Epidephorus, Simeon Arch-byshop of Seleu^ia, C^esiphon B. in Persia, with other
religious men. 128.

Simon, chief Bishop of Persia, was accused by the Magitians, as he was
leading to Prison: V^^hazares, who was the Kings Schoole-maister, and had
fallen from Christianity, who sitting at the Kings Gate, rose up and reverenced
him, but Simion rebuked him with sharp words, which made him put on mourning
weeds, sit weeping at the gate; saying, what hope have I of God when my
familiar friend Simion disdaineth me, which being known to the King, and he
confessing himself a Christian, the King commanded he should be beheaded: He
desired of the King to certify that he died for nothing but Christianity,
which he obtained; Simion being in prison, and hearing of it, rejoiced, and the
next day suffered with an 100. more.

Pusices, seeing an old Father shrink in the sight of the Martyr^, said; shut
thine eyes, be strong, and shortly thou shall see God, wherefore the King
caused an hole to be made in his neck, and thereout pulled his tongue, and so
he was put to death, and his Daughter, a Uirgine, died with him in Christ's
cause, the number of them that were martyred in Persia, was 15000. This coming
to Constantines ears, moved him, he granted Sapores his Ambassadors all they
requested, thinking thereby to move him to favor the Christians, and wrote to
them to take compassion on the Innocents, and showed how the hand of God had
been against Tyrants of the Church.

Benjamin, for preaching Christ, was thrust under the nails with twenty sharp
pricks, when he laughed at it, a sharp Reed was thrust into his yard, and a
long thorny stalk up into his body until he died. Under Iulianus Apostata,
Emilianus was burned, Domitius was slain in his Cave: Theodorus singing a
Psalm, was tormented from morning to night, hardly escaped with life, and
being asked how he could abide the torments, said, at first I felt some pain,
but after there stood a young man by me, who so refreshed me, that it grieved
me more when I was let down from the Ingine then before.

The Arethusians of Syria, took a company of Uirgines, Christians, whom first
they set sorth naked to be scorned of the multitude, then shaued them, then
covered them with draffe, and caused them to be devoured of Swine, their
cruelty was the greater, because Constantine restrained them, from defiling
Uirgines, and destroyed the Temple of Venus.

Marcus Arethusius, because, at the commandment of Constantine, he pulled
down a Temple of Idols, and builded a Church for Christians in the place, they
stripped him naked, and beat him grievously, then put him in a filthy sincke,
then they caused Boys to thrust him in with sharp sticks, then they
anointed him with Honey and Broth, and hung him in the Sun as meat for
Waspes and Flies, then they required somewhat toward the building of the
Temple again: he answered, it were as great impiety to confer one halfe-peny
to a matter of impiety, as a great sum.

Constantine reigned about thirty years: he was borne in Britain, his
Mothers name was Helena, Daughter of King Coilus; he travailed greatly for the
peace of Christians, he set peace amongst the Bishops at dissension; he made
provision for Preachers, and caused all to be restored unto the Christians
that was taken from them by Persecutors. He wrote to his chief Captain, that
Ministers should be freed from all public duties and burdens: He wrote to
Eusebius for the edifying of new Churches, and after he had gathered the Nicene
Council, for the unity of the Church, he writes to Alexander and Arius for the
same intent.

He enjoined a Prayer to his Soldiers in stead of Catechism. We knowledge
thee only to be our GOD, we confess thee only to be our King, we call upon
thee our only helper, by thee we obtain our victories, by thee we vanquish
our enemies, to thee be attributed whatsoever commodities we presently enjoy:
by thee we hope for good things to come, unto thee we direct all our suits and
petitions, most humbly befeeching thee to keep Constantinus our Emperor, and
his Noble Children to continue in long li^e, and to give them victory over
their enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

He granted great immunities unto the Ministers that they might appeal from
the civil Judge to their Bishop, whose sentence was of as great value as if
the Emperor had pronounced it.

He provided maintenance for liberal Sciences and Arts, for the Prosessors,
there Wives and Children, and gave them great immunities. He wrote to Eusebius
Bishop of Nicomedia, to procure fifty Uolumes of Parchment well bound, and
cause to be written out of the Scripture therein in a leageable hand, such
things as were profitable for the instruction of the Church, allowed him two
Ministers for the business: he was a Father to the Church, and enforced
himself every way to set forth the Gospel, and to suppress the contrary.

The end of the tenth Persecution.
THE SECOND BOOK Containing the next 300. years.
BY these Persecutions hitherto, we may understand that what the fury of Satan
and rage of men could devise to do by death or torments, all was to the utmost
attempted to extinguish the Name and Religion of Christ, yet notwithstanding
the wisdom of the world and the strength of men, Christ has the upper hand
as thou see.

Now because the tying up of Satan gives the Church rest* we will leave the
affairs of the Uniuersall Church, and prosecute the Histories of our Country
of England and Scotland, beginning with King Lucius, with whom the Faith began
first in this Realm.

The Papists do earnestly contend, that the Faith of Christ was first brought
and received into England from Rome, both in the time of Eleutherius their
Bishop, in the year 180. and also in the time of Augustine, whom Gregory sent
hither in the year 600. but it is proved otherwise by these seven Arguments.

1 Gildas affirms, Lib. de victoria.
that Britain received the Gospel in the time of Tyberius the Emperor, under
whom Christ suffered, and says farther, that Joseph of Arimathia, was sent of
Philip the Apostle from France to Britain, in the year 63. and remained
here all his time, and founded the Faith amongst the Britains.

2 Tertullian, Ex T^rtul. co^tra Iudeos
living about the time of Elutherius, testifies how the Gospel was dispersed
by the Apostles, reckons Brittany amongst the Countries converted by them.

3 Origin, Ex Origin hom. 4. in Ezech.
before the days of Elutherius, said the Britains consented to Christianity.

4 Bid affirms, that 1000. years after Christ, Easter was kept in Britain
after the manner of the East Church, on the foureteenth day after the full
Moon, what day soever it was, and not on sunday as we do, whereby is
gathered, the first Preacher came from the East, rather then from Rome.

5 Nicephorus Lib. 2. Cap. 4. says, Simon Zelotes spread the Gospel in
Brittany.

6 Petrus Cluniensis says, that the Scots in his time celebrated Easter after
the manner of the Greeks and as the Britains, were not under the Romain
order, nor under their Legate in the time of Gregory, nor would admit any
primasie of the Bishop of Rome above them.

7 By the Epistle of Elutherius to Lucius, it appears that Lucius had
received the Faith before he wrote to Elutherius, for the Roman Laws.

Elutherius might help something to convert the King, and to increase the
Faith, but was not the first that planted it, but if it were so, it makes
nothing for them, for he challenged no such Supremacy as they do, and was
far from their errors and superstitions.

The Chroniles write, that about the year 180. 180
King Lucius, Son of Coylus, which builded Colchester, hearing of the
miracles of Christians in his time, writ to Elutherius Bishop of Rome to
receive the Faith; the good Bishop sent him certain Preachers, which converted
the King of the Britains, and baptized them, there were the twenty eight
Priests called Flamines, which they turned to twenty eight Bishops, and
three Arch-Flamins, to three Archbishops, to wit; London, York, and Glamargan
by Wales. Thus all the Realm settled in good order, Lucius sent again to
Elutherius for the Roman Laws, thereby likewise to govern the Realm.

Unto whom Elutherius wrote again: we may reprove the Law of the Romans,
but the Law of GOD we cannot reprove: you have with you both parts of the
Scriptures, out of them, by Gods grace, with the council of your Realm, take
yea Law and rule your kingdom of Britain, for you are Gods Uicar in your
kingdom.

The Faith thus received of the Britains, continued and flourished 216
years, until the coming of the Saxons, who then were Pagans: whilst
Britain had thus received the Faith, the Emperors of Rome were Infidels,
wherefore much trouble wos sought against them, as it was against all parts of
Christendom.

Lucius, after he had reigned about 77. years, died without issue: whereupon
followed great misery and ruin to the Realm, for sometime the idolatrous
Romans, and sometimes the Britains reigned, as violence and victory would
serve; one King murdering another, until at length the Saxons deprived them
both.

Some write* but falsely, that King Lucius, after he was baptized, forsook his
kingly Honor and the Land, and became a Preacher in France and Germany, and
other places, and was made Doctor and Rector of the Church of Cureac, where he
was martyred, but this fancy is contrary to all our English Stories, which do
agree that he having founded many Churches, and given great liberalities to the
same, deceased in great tranquillity in his own Land, and was buried at
Gloucester.

Between the time of King Lucius, and the entering of the Saxons, there reigned
after Lucius Seuerus a Roman: after him Bassianus, a Roman; after him
Cerausius, a Britain; after him Alectus, a Roman; after him Asclepiodotus,
a Britain; after him Coilus, a Britain; after him Constantius, a Romain;
after him Constantinus, a Britain, by Helena his Mother, the Daughter of King
Coilus, and Wife of Constantius. Constantine first made the walls of London and
Colchester: when the Romans ruled it, it was ruled by Infidels, and when the
Britains ruled, by Christians; yet no persecution was raised in it, until the
tenth persecution, which was so cruel, that all our English Chronicles report,
that all Christianity almost in the whole land was destroyed, Churches
subverted, and the Scriptures burned, as before is showed.

It is worthy to be noted, that Constantine, that worthy Emperor, was not only
a Britain borne, but his Mother Helena, Daughter of King Coilus a Britain,
but also by the help of the Britains Army, which Constantine took with him,
with great victories he obtained the peace of the Uniuersall Church, having
three legions with him out of this Realm, of chosen Soldiers.

After, Maximinian took all the power that was left of fighting Men, to subdue
France, and after sent for 100000. Soldiers more at once, at which time
Conanus his Partner sent for 11000. Uirgines out of Britain, which were
drowned and spoiled by the way by Infidels, because they would not pollute
themselves with them.

Thus Britain being destitute of strength, had been oppressed by Guanus and
Melga, had not Guethl^^us Archbishop of London, and Constantinus, Brother to
Aldranus, defended the Realm and State of Religion.

Then came Vortigerne, who murdered Constance his Prince, and inua^ed the
Crown, and fearing Constance his two brothers, he sent for aid of the Saxons,
and married with the Daughter of Hengist, but not long after he was
dispossessed of his kingdom by the said Hengist, and the Saxons being all
Infidels, and the Britains were driven out of the Country. Two hundred
seventy one of their Nobles at one meeting at Almesbury, being subtly slain
by the Saxons, or at a place called Stonehenge, by the Monument of which Stones,
there hanging, it seems the Noble Britains were there buried. I pass over
the fabulous Story of the Welchmen, of bringing these Stones from Ireland by
Merlin. Some Stories record, they were slain, being bid to a banquet: Thus came
the Angles and Saxons first into this Realm, being yet Infidels, about the
year 469. they were diverse times driven out by Aurelius Ambrosius, and his
Brother Vter, but they returned again, and at length possessed all, and drove
the Britains into Wales. Hengistus reigned 43. years and dyed in Kent,
Galfridus says he was taken in the war of Aurelius Ambrosius, and beheaded
in the 39. year of his reign.

His Son Offa succeeded him twenty four years, Octa and Imericus his sons
succeeded him, 53. years, and were slain by Vter Pendragon.

The Saxons divided the Realm into s^auen Kingdoms: to the first Kent; to the
second Sussex and Surrey; the third West-sex, the fourth East^sex; the fifth
Cambridgeshire, Norffolke, and Suffolk: the sixth, the Countries of Lincoln,
Leicester, Huntingdon, Northampton, Oxford, Darby, Warwick: the seventh was
King of Northumberland: they continued so a while with great Wars amongst
themselves, at length all came to the possession of the West Saxons. This
^ingdome began in the year 522. and continued until about the coming of
William the Conqueror, which was 554. years.

Saint Paul's Church in London was builded by Ethelbert, King of Kent, and
Sigebert King of Essex, when Ethelbert turned unto the Faith. Malmsburie
writes, that Mauricius the Kings Chancellor, then Bishop of London, did
first begin this famous building of Paul's, and after Richard his Successor,
bestowed all the rents of his Byshoppricke upon the same, and it may be the
first Church was overthrown by the Danes, and re-edified by these Bishops.

These Kings of the Britains reigned in Wales and Cornwall, Vortiger,
Vortimer, Vortiger again, Aurelius Ambrosius, Vter Pendragon, Arthur,
Constantius 3. Aurelius Conanus, Vortiperius, Malgo, Carecius.

The sins of the Britains was the cause of the just judgment of God
against them, as out of an old Author, and partly out of Gildas does appear:
These be the words of the Author: There following Constantinus, and others
above named, out of the Realm all the Nobility, when the rascal sort had
gotten their places, and through abundance of riches were surprised with
pride, they fell into so great Fornication as never was heard of, and unto all
manner of wickedness, that man's Nature is inclined unto; hating the truth,
loving lies, regarding evil in stead of goodness, receiving the Devil in
stead of an Angel of light, choose such for their Kings as were most cruel,
and if any seemed to be humble and favor the truth, they hated and backbited
him as a destroyer of Britain, and not only the seculer men did thus, but
also the Bishops and Teachers, therefore it was no marvel that such a people
should loose their Country which they had so defiled.

As there were many wicked Kings among the Saxons, so there were some very
good, but none almost from the first to the last, which was not either slain in
war or murdered in peace, or constrained to make himself a Monk, whether it
were the just judgment of God, because they had violently dispossessed the
Britains, they were not only vexed of the Danes, conquered of the Normans, but
more cruelly devoured themselves.

Ethelbert King of Cambridgeshire, Norffolke, and Suffolk, came peaceably to
King Offa, for dispousage of Athilrid his Daughter, and by the Council of King
Offa, his Wife was secretly beheaded. Whereupon Offa, through repentance, made
the first peter pence to be given to S. Peter's Church at Rome.

One Lothbrooke a Dane of the Kings blood, The first coming of the Danes.
being a hauking by the Seaside in a little Boat, was cast by weather upon the
Coast of Norffolke, and being brought to King Edmund, he retained him in great
favor, at length he was privily murdered by one Bericke, which being known,
Bericke was sent away in Lothbrookes Boat without tackling, and was driven
into Denmark, and being seen in Lothbrookes Boat, and examined of
Lothbrooke, he falsely said the King had killed him. Whereupon Iugner and
Hubba, Lothbrookes Sons, gathering an Army of Danes inuauaded first
Northumberland, then Norffolke, and sent to King Edmund to divide his Treasures
to him, and be subject to him, else he would dispossess him of his ^ingdome,
he answered he would not be subject to a Pagan Duke, unless before he become
a Christian, then the Danes besiedged his house, but he fled and pitched a
field with them, but the Danes prevailing, he fled to the Castle of Halesdon,
where they took him and bound him to a stake, and shot him to death.

Seven or eight Kings are highly commended in the Histories for leaving there
Kingdoms, and becoming Moonkes, but they are more to be discommended for
leaving their calling, wherein they might so much benefit the Church.

There were four Persecutions in England, before Austen came into England: the
first under Dioclesian; the second, by the inuading of Gnarius and Melga, one
captain of the Hunnes, the other of the Picts, after they had slaughtered
11000. Uirgines, as before made a rode into Britain, hearing it wanted
strength, and murdered Christians and spoiled Churches without mercy: the third
by the Saxons, who destroyed Christ's Saints and the Churches, until Aurelius
Ambrosius restored again the Churches: the fourth, Gurmundus King of the
Affricans joined with the Saxons, and wrought much grieuance to the Christians
of the Land, which persecution remained to the time of Ethelbert the fifth King
of Kent.

In the t^me of Ethelbert, the faith was received of the Saxons; by this means
Gregory Bishop of Rome, seeing Britain Children to be sold in Rome, very
beautiful, understanding what Country they were of, pitied that the Country
which was so beautiful, and angellicall, so to be subject to the prince of
darkness: Wherefore he sent thither Austen with about forty Preachers with him,
and when they were apaled and would have turned back again* Gregory emboldned
and comforted them with his Letter, so they came to the I Will of ^henet in Kent,
Ethelbert as before was King of Kent, he had married one Berda, a French Woman,
upon condition she should use the Christian Religion with one Lebardus her
Bishop, Austen sent to the King, signifying he was come from Rome, bringing
with him glad tidings to him and all his people of life and salvation, if he
would so willingly hearken unto it, as he was gladly come to preach it unto
him. The King having heard of this Religion by his Wife, came to the place
where Austen was, Austen against his coming erected a Banner of the Crucifire
(such then was the grosenesse of the time) and preached to him the word of God,
the King promised they should have all things necessary, and none should molest
them* and gave them free leave to preach to his subjects, and convert whom they
might to the Faith.

When they had this comfort of the King, they went with procession to
Canterbury, singing Alleluia, with the Letany that was used at Rome in the
great plague, We beseech thee O Lord in all thy mercies, that thy fury and
anger may cease from this City, and from thy holy house, for we have sinned,
Alleluia, they continued in the same City preaching and baptizing, in the old
Church of S. Martine, where the Queen was wont to resort, until the King was
converted, at length the King seeing their miracles, and their godly
conversation, he heard them gladly, and was converted in the thirty six year
of his reign, Anno 586. After him innumerable daily were adjoined unto the
Church, whom the King did specially imbrase, but compelled none, then the King
gave Austen a place for his Bishops Sea, at Christ's Church in Canterbury, and
builded the Abbey there, where after Austen and all the Kings of Kent were
buried, which now is called S. Austine.

Then Austen by the commandment of Gregory, went into France to the Bishop of
Arelatensis, to be consecrated Arch-byshop, and so was then Austen sent to
Gregory, so declare how they had sped, and to be resolved of diverse questions,
how Bishops should behave themselves toward their Clarke, of offerings and
Ceremonies, and what punishment for stealing Church goods, and such like, to no
great purpose; therefore if thou be disposed to see them, I refer thee to
the Book at large.

Gregory, after he had sent resolutions to these questions, sends moreover
more Coadiutors, as Melitus, Iustus, Paulinus, and Ruffianus, with Books and
implements necessary for the English Church, and in reward of Austines pains,
he sent him a Pal only to be used at the solemnity of the Mass, and grants
two Metropolitan Seas, London and York, but granted to Austen during his
life, to be chief Archbishop of all the Land, and that they should not
destroy the idolatrous Temples, but convert them to Christian uses, and that
Austine should not be proud of the miracles that God wrought by him, and that
he should remember they were not done for him, but for their conversion, whose
salvation God sought thereby.

Then he wrote to King Ethelbert* first he praised GOD, then the King, by whom
it pleased God to work such goodness of the people, then exhorted him to
persevere in his profession, and to be zealous therein, to convert the
multitude, and destroy Idolatry, and to govern them in holiness of
conversation, according to the Emperor Constantinus the Great, comforting him
with the promises of life, and reward to come.

Austine receiving his Pall, as above said, and of a Monk being made an
Arch-Byshop, he made two Metropolitanes, as Gregory commanded; then Austine
assembled the Bishops and Doctors of Britain, in this assembly, he charged
the Bishops that they should preach the Word of GOD with him: also, that they
should reform certain rites and vsages in the Church, especially for keeping
of Easter, and baptizing after the manner of Rome, the Scots and Britains
would not agree thereto, refusing to leave the custom which they so long time
had continued. Beda, Fabianus, and others, write of a miracle wrought upon a
Blind Englishman, when the Britains could not help him. Austine kneeling
down and praying, restored him to sight before them all, for a confirmation
(as these Authors say) of keeping of Easter, I leave the credit of the
miracle to the Authors of whom I had it.

Austine gathered another Sinode, to the which seven Bishops, and the wisest
Men of the famous City of Bangor came, they took council of a holy man
whether they should be obedient to Austine, he had them agree to him if he be
the Servant of GOD, and you shall know it by his humbleness and meekness,
you are the greater number, if he at your coming into the Sinode arise up and
courteously receive you, perceive him to be an humble and meek man: but if he
shall contemn and despise you, despise you him again; thus the Britain
Bishops entering into the Council, Austine after the Romish manner keeping
his Chair, would not remove, wherefore they being very much offended thereat,
after some heat of words, departed in great displeasure, to whom Austine said:
If they would not receive peace with their Brethren, they should receive war
with their Enemies.

There was in Bangor in Wales an exceeding great Monastery, wherein was two
thousand and one hundred Monks, the Monks came out of this Monastery to
Chester, to pray for Brocmayle, fighting for them against the Saxons, Ethelbert
King of Northumberland seeing them intenti^e to their prayers, and perceiving
it was to pray for their Consul; he said, although they bear no Weapon, yet
with their prayers and preaching they persecute us, he commanded his men to
kill them, who killed, or rather martyred 1100. of them. The Authors that wrote
this, say that the forespeaking of Austine was verified on them, but Galfridus
Monumetensis, says, that Ethelbert the King of Kent being converted by Austine
to Christ's Faith, seeing the Britains deny their subjection to Austine,
therefore stirred up the said Ethelfrid to war against the Britains.

After Austine had baptized 10000. in a River called Swale by York, on a
Christmas day, perceiving his end to draw near, ordained Laurencius his
Successor: by his Baptizing in Rivers it follows there was then no use of
Fonts, and the Rites of baptizing in Rome was not then so ceremonial, nor had
so many trinkets as it has since: and not long after Austine died, 604
after he had sitten Archbishop 15. or 16. years. About this time also
Gregory died, who was called the basest of all the Bishops before him, and the
best of all that came after him.

Ranulphus Cestrensis writes, Poli: li. 5. ca. 10.
that John the Patriarch of Alexandria, as he was at prayer, there appeared
unto him a comely Uirgine* having on her head a Garland of Olive Leaves, which
named her self Mercy, promising him if he would take her to Wife, he should
prosper well: After that day this Patriarch was so merciful to the poor, that
he counted them his Masters, and himself as Steward unto them.

Gregory withstood the pride of John, Patriarch of Constantinople, which would
be the Uniuersall and Chief Bishop of all others, calling him the forerunner
of Antichrist, he brought in the Title of the Pope, Seruus seruorum Dei.

Sabinianus succeeded him two years, a malicious Detractor of his works,
after him succeeded Bonifacius the third, one year.

After Phocas had murdered his own Master Mauricius the Emperor and his
Children, thinking to establish the Empire to himself by friendship of his
people, and especially with the Pope, he granted Boniface all his Petitions,
and to be Uniuersall head Bishop over all Churches. Hiraclius the Emperor
that succeeded Phocas, cut of his hands and feet, and threw him into the Sea,
but Rome would not so soon loose the supremacy once given, as the giver lost
his life: for ever since they have maintained the same with all force and
policy, by the word of Gregory. Boniface may well be called the forerunner
of Antichrist, as Gregory brought in the Style of Seruus seruorum Dei; so he
brought in Volumus and mandamus, Statuimus and praecipimus.

Besides the building of Paul's, as aforesaid, by Ethelbert King of Kent, and
Sigebert King of Essex: Ethelbert also founded the Church of S. Andrew in
Rochester. Moreover, he caused a Citizen to make Westminster Abbey, which was
enlarged and new builded by Edward the Confessor, and new re-edified by Henry
the third, and when he had reigned 56. years he died, Anno 616. 616.


The foresaid Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, after the cruel murder of the
Monks at Bangor, was not long after slain in the Field of Edwine, who
succeeded him in his Kingdom. First this Ethelfride envying this Edwine,
persecuted him, who having fled from him, as he sat in his Study a Stranger
appeared unto him and said; I know thy thought and heaviness, what would
thou give him that should deliver thee out of this fear, and make thee a
mightier King then any of thy Predecessors, and show thee a better way of life
then ever was showed to any of thy Ancestors? will thou obey him and do after
his council? yea, said Edwine, promising with all his heart so to do, and the
stranger laying his hand on his head, he said; when this is come to pass
remember thy tribulation, and the promise which thou have made, and with that
he vanished away. Presently a Friend of his came to him, and said, the heart
of King Redwaldus is with thee. This Redwaldus suddenly assembled an Host,
wherewith he suddenly gave Ethelfride battle, and slew him, whereby Edwine
was quietly King of Northumberland. He married the Daughter of Ethelbert King
of Kent, Edwine yet remained a Pagan, albeit his Queen a Christian, and
Paulinus the Bishop ceased not to persuade him to the Christian Faith. When
Paulinus saw the King so hard to be converted, he prayed to God for his
conversion, who reuealer unto him the Uision before mentioned; whereupon
Paulinus coming to the King, he lay his hand^ on the Kings head, and aked if
he knew that token; the King be^ring the Uision, and remembering the token,
would have fal^en at his f^ete, but suffe^ed him not, saying; O King, you have
vaquished your enemies and obtained your Kingdom, now receive the Faith of
Christ, as you promised, whereupon the King was baptized of Paulinus at York*
with many of his servants, and his Idolatrous Priests, which by their old Law
mustride but upon Mar^s, ga^e upon Horses, and rode and destroyed all the
Altars of their Idols, and their Idols Temple. After this conversion, was so
great peace in the Kingdom o^ Edwin, that a woman, laden with gold, might go
safe from the one side of the Sea unto the other, and by all his high ways he
chained a Bowl of brass at every Fountain, for passengers to refresh
themselves with, and no man took them away during his life.

King Oswald, a Christian, by prayer unto God, with a little company ouerc^me
Cadwallo, and Penda the Britain^ King, which with a mighty Host came against
him. There is much commendation in writing of this Oswalds zeal in religion,
and piety toward the poor; he sent into Scotland for a Bishop called Aydanus,
a famous Preacher, as he preached to the Saxons in the Scottish tongue, the
King understanding the Scottish tongue, he disdained not to preach and expound
the same to his Nobles in the English tongue.

King Oswald being at Dinner on Easterday, one brought him word there was a
great company of p^re people in the streets which asked alms of him, be
commanded the meat prepared for his own Table to be carried unto them, and
brake a si^^er Platter in pieces and sen^ it amongst them: by his means
Kinigillus King of the West Saxons was converted to Christ's Faith, and after he
had reigned 9. years, he was slain by the said Penda, who was after slain by
Osway brother to Oswald, and succeeded him in his Kingdom, 643.
together with his Cousin Oswine.

This Oswine gave Aydanus, the Scottish Bishop aforesaid, a principal Horse,
with the trappers and appurtenances, and as he was riding upon this kingly
horse, a poor man craved his charity, who having nothing else to give him,
gave him his hor^e garnished as he was; wherefore, as he came to Dinner, he
King chi^e him, he answere^; O King, set you more prise by a horse, then by
Christ? Then the King prayed him to forgive him, and he would not henceforth
find fault with him for giving away any of his Treasure: then Aydanus wept,
and being asked wherefore he wept, he answered, for that this King cannot live
long, this people is nto worthy to be ^uled by such a Prince, which shortly
came to pass, for Osway caused him traterously to be slain.

One Benedict, a great man with Osway, that brought up Bid from his youth*
^orsooke Oswayes house, 65^.
and all his kindred, to serve Christ; he was the first that brought up the
Art of glazing in windows.

About this time there was a Counsel bolden at Ste^ne-halt, for the right
observing of Easterday. 664.
King Osway began with an Oration, that it was necessary ^or such as served one
God, to live in an uniform order, and such as looked for one kingdom in
Heaven, should not differ in celebration of heavenly Sacraments: then, by his
commandment, Colman Bishop, said he received the order of keeping Easter the
14. day of the first Month, from his Auncesters, Forefathers, and from John
Evangelist: to which* at the Kings commandment, Wilfride answered, Easter is
kept always on the Sunday, as we keep it in Rome, where Peter and Paul
taught, in Italy, France. Afric, Egypt, Greece* and in all the world. I will
not reprove Saint John which kept the rights of Moses Law according to the
letter, the Church being yet Jewish in many points, they could not reject
Images invented of the Devil, which all believers ought of necessity to
detest, least they should offend the Jews; therefore Saint Paul circumcized
Tymothy, therefore he shaued his head, and Sacrificed in the Temple: all this
was done only to eschew the offense of the Jews. Therefore ^ames said to
Paul; Thou ^eest brother how many thousand Jews do believe yet all are
zealous of the old Law; yet, since the Gospel was preached, it is not lawful
for the faithful to be circumcized, nor to offer Sacrifices of carnal things
to God: but Peter remembering that the Lord did rise from death the first day
after the Sabbath, instituted Easter on that day, and not according to the Law,
and though your forefathers were holy men, what is their fewness, being but a
corner of an Island, to be preferred before the universal Church of Christ?
Then said the King; Did the Lord give the kingdom of Heaven unto Peter? And
they both answer^d, yea; then the King concluded: being Saint Peter is the
Doore-keeper of Heaven, I will obey his Orders in every point, least when I
come to the gates of Heaven he shut them against me, and with this simple
reason they consented.

Ethelwood preached unto the people in Southsax, and converted them to Christ
in the time of whose baptizing, the rain, which before they lacked three
years, was given them plenteously, whereby there great famine slacked.

About this time, the detestable sect of Mahomet began to take place, which
well agrees with the number of that beast signified in the Revelation 666. 666.
Of Mahomet came the Kingdom of the Haarines, now called Saracens, to whom he
gave many Laws: they must pray Southward, Friday is their Sunday, called the
day of Venus, he permitted them to have as many Wives as they were able to
maintain, and as many Concubines as they list: they must abstain from wine,
excep^ on solemn days: ^hey were to worship one only God Omnipotent. Moses
and the Prophets were great* but Christ was greatest, being borne without man's
seed, and taken up into the Heaven, with many such Laws; at length the
Sarasins were wholly conquered by the Turks.

Theodorus was sent into England by Vitellianus Pope, and diverse other Monks
with him, to set up Latin Service in England and Mas^es, Ceremonies, Letanies,
and other Romish ware, he was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and began to play
the Rex in placing and displacing Bishops at his pleasure. He held a
Provincial Counsel at Therford, the contents thereof were the uniformity of
keeping Easter, that no Bishop should intermeddle in another Di^cesse, that
Monasteries should be free from Jurisdiction o^ Bishops, that Monks should
keep the obedience they first promised, and not go from one Monastery unto
another without leave of the Abbot, that none of the Clergy should be received
in another Diocese without Letters Commendatory of his Bishop, that foraine
Bishops and Clergy men should be content with the hospitality offered them, and
not meddle in any Bishops Jurisdiction without his permission, that once a
year a Provincial Sinod should be kept, that no Bishop should prefer
himself before another, but according to his time of consecration, that as the
people increased, so the number of Bishops should be augmented.

The next year was the sixth general Counsel of Constance, 705.
where this Theodore was present, under Pope Agatho; Marriage there was
permitted to the Greek Priests, and forbidden to the Latin: in this Counsel
the Latin Mass was first openly said by John Portuensis the Popes Legate.

Colfride, Abbot of Shirwin in Northumberland, writ to Naitonus King of Picts,
that shaven Crowns was necessary for all Priests, and Monks, for restraint of
their lusts; and that Peter was shaven, in remembrance of the Passion of
Christ, so we must wear the sign of his Passion on the top of our head, as
every Church bears the holy Cross in the front thereof, that by the defense
of that banner it be kept from evil Spirits; and exhorted him to imitate the
Apostolic Churches, and, when he died, the Prince of the Apostles would open
Heaven gate to him; whereat the King rejoiced, and kneeling down, thanked God
that he was worthy to receive such a present from England, and made
Proclamation for the performance.

When Iue, King of the West Saxons, had ruled them 37. years, he was persuaded
by his wife Etheburge, 724.
to go to Rome to be made a Munke, when the king an^ she had rested in a fair
Palace, richly adorned, she commanded all the rooms in the Palace to be
strewed with Dung of vile beasts, and hogs and beasts to be laid therein* and a
Sow and pigs in her chamber, then she brought the King to visit the Palace,
and said, My Lord, where are now the rich* clothes of gold and silver* that we
le^t here? where are the pleasant Seruitors, delicacies, and costly dishes
that we lately were served with? We shall vanish away as suddenly as these
worldly things be passed, our bodies that are now delicatly kept, shall turn
unto the filth of the earth: therefore busy you to purchase the Palace that
ever shall endure, by means of these, and other words, the King resigned his
Kingdom unto Etheraldus his Nephew, and for the love of Christ, in the habit
of a poor man, accompanied with poor men* went to Rome; and his wife went
into the Nunnery of Barkin, seven miles from London, where, after she had
been Abbess a certain time, she died. This ^ue was the first King of the
Saxons, that made Laws for his Country.

In this time was Beda, a man of worthy memory, he was a Priest of the
Monastery of Peter and Paul, at Wire; at 7. years old, he was committed to the
education of Benedict* as before; at 19. years old ^e was made Deacon, and at
30, Priest. He wrote 37. Uolumes; in his Treatise upon Samuel, he said; If my
exposition bring no utility to the readers, 735.
yet it conduces not a little to my self, that whilst my cogitation was upon
them, I had little mind of the slippery intisements of the world: he
continued in diligent study, until the age of 62. years, and in his latter
end, whilst he was sick seven weeks, he translated the Gospel of Saint John
into English.

Celulphus, king of Northumberland, when he had reigned 8. years was made a
M^^ke in the Abey of Farne* where, by his means, License was given to the
Monks of that house to drink wine, or Ale, which before, by the institution of
the aforesaid Aydanus, drunk nothing but milk and water.

Cutbert, 747.
Archbishop of Canterbury, collected a great Sinod, where these decrees were
enacted, that Bishops should be more diligent in seeing to their Office, then
in admonishing the people, and live in peace one with another, and once a year
go about all the Parishes of their Diocese. That they should admonish Abbots,
and Monks, to live Regul^rly, and Prelates not to oppress their infertours, but
love them* that none should be admitted to Orders, before his life was
examined: that the reading of holy Scrip^ures should be more frequented in
Monasteries: that Priests should not dispose seculer businesses: that they
should take no money for baptizing: that they should teach the Lords prayer and
Creed in the English tongue: that they should join in their Ministry after
one uniform manner: that they should sing in the Church with a modest voice:
that the Saboth be reverently observed: that the 7. Canonical Powers be
observed every day: that the Rogation days should not be omitted: that a
Festiual day for all Saints should be celebrated, and a Feast of S. Gregory an^
S. Austin, our Patron, should be observed* that the fasts of the 4. times
should be kept: that Churchmen should not give themselves to drunkenness: that
the Communion should not be neglected of the Clergy, nor (...): that Laymen
should be examined, and well tried, before they become Monks: that Monks
should not live amongst Laymen: that public prayer should be made for Kings,
and Princes.

Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz, a Martyr, an English man, wrote a Letter to
King Ethelbert, and rebuked him for abstaining from Marriage, that he might live
in luxuriousness with Nuns, and that, he heard the chief of hi^ Kingdom, by
his example, forsook their wives, and lived in adultery with Nuns; whereby
appears the great disorder of life that always has been in these Religious
houses of Nuns, whose vow of coacted chastity has never been good to
Church or Commonwealth; and this Boniface, and others were most to blame, for
that they g^u^ occasion thereof, by maintaining such superstitious orders of
lascivious Nuns, and other religious, restraining them from lawful Marriage.
For we find of him in Stories, that, he being the Popes Legate, builded
Monasteries, Canonized Saints* commanded Relics to be worshipped, permitted
religious Fathers to carry about Nuns with them a preaching; and he founded
the great Monastery of F^loa in Germany* of English Monks, in which, no woman
might enter, but only Leba and Sec^a two English Nuns, and by him Childericus,
king of France was deposed, and Pipinus* the betrayer of his master, made king.
From this Boniface proceeded that detestable doctrine; that in case the Pope
lived most filthily, and neglected himself, and all Christianity, and led
inumerable Souls with him to Hell* yet ought no man to rebuke him, because he
has power to judge all men, and ought to be judged of no man.

Pope Gregory the 2. Pope Gregory the 3. Pope Zachary, and Pope Constantine the
1. wrought great masteries against the Greek Emperors, Philipicus and Leo,
and others, for the maintaining of Images in Churches, of whom Philipicus lost
both his Empire, and his eyes: and Leo was excommunicated for the same cause.
This Gregory then brought into the Mass Canon, the clause for Relics, and
the Sacrifice for the dead. And Zachary brought in the Priest Uesture, and
Ornaments; and Constantinus was the first that gave his feet to be kissed of
the Emperors.

The aforesaid Pipinus, which was the betrayer of his said master Childericus
king of France, and by the Pope made king in his steed, to gratify the Sea of
Rome for this benefit to him, gave unto the said sea, the Princedome of
Rauenna, and the Kingdom of Lombards, and many other great possessions of
Italy, with all the cities thereunto adjoining unto the borders of Uenice; and
this no doubt, is the same which falsely has been thought to have been the
Donation of Constantine.

To this Pipinus was sent first into France the invention of the Orgaines out
of Grecia, by Constantinus Emperor of Constantinople, in the year 757. 757.


Pope Stephanus succeeded pope Constan^inus, and Paul the 1. succeeded him; he
thundered great Excommunications against Constantinus Emperor of
Constantinople, for plucking down Images, set up in the Temples,
notwithstanding he neglecting his cur^es, destroyed Idolatry to the end of his
life.

Then Constantinus the 2. came to be Pope, a Layman, and brother to Deside^ius,
king of Lumbardy, but he was shortly deposed, thrust into a Monastery, and his
eyes put out.

Stephanus the 3. succeeded Paul, he condemned the seventh Council of
Constantinople for Heretical, because the worshipping of Images was condemned
there: he advanced the veneration of Images, commanding them, most Ethnically,
to be incenced. In this time Charles the great reigned* by whom the Pope caused
D^siderius, the Lumbard, King to be deposed.

Pope Adrianus the 1. succeeded him, he added more then all the other to the
veneration of Images, writing a Book for the adoration and utility of them*
commanding them to be taken for Laymens Calenders. As Pope Paul before him,
made much of Petronel, Peter's daughter, so this Adrian clothed the body of
Peter all in silver, and covered the Altar of S. Paul, with a pall of gold. He
confirmed, by revelation, the Order of S. Gregory's Mass, before the order of
S. Ambrose his Mass: in this manner, both the Mass books were said upon the
Altar of S. Peter, and the Church door shut and sealed by many Bishops, who
continued in prayers all night, that the Lord would show by some evident sign
which of these Services he would have used; and in the morning they found
Gregory's Mass book plucked in pieces, and scattered about the Church, and
Ambrose his book lay open in the same place where it was laid; Pop^ Adrian
expounded it, that as the leaves of Gregory's book were sattered all over the
Church, so should Gregory's book be used throughout the world, and that
Ambrose his Service should only be used in his own Church, where he was
Bishop, so Gregory's Mass had only the place, and has to this day.

Charles, the son of the aforesaid Pipinus, confirmed the gift of his Father
unto the Pope, and added thereunto the city and Dominion of Uenice, Histria,
the Dukedomes of Foroinliense, Spoletanum, Be^e^entanum, and other more
possessions to the patrimony of Peter, making him the Prince of Rome and Italy,
wherefore the Pope entitled him, most Christian King, and ordained him only
to be taken for Emperor, and made him Patricium Romanum; and Caroloman,
Carolus his eldest brother, being ^ead, Bertha his wife, with her two children,
came to Pope Adrian, to have them confirmed into his fathers Kingdom: the
Pope, to show a pleasure to Carolus, would not agree, but gave her, and her two
children, and Desiderius the Lumbard king, with his whole Kingdom, wife and
Children, into the hands of Carolus, who led them into France, and kept them in
servitude during their lives.

By this Adrian, and Pope Leo his successor, was Carolus Magnus proclaimed
Emperor, and the Empire translated from the Grecians to the Frenchmen, in the
year 801. 801.
where it continued about 102. years, until the coming of Conradus and his
Nephew Otho, which were Germans, and so has continued amongst the Almains
until this time. This Charles builded as many Monasteries, as there be letters
in the A. B. C. he was beneficial to the poor, but chiefly to Churchmen; he
held a Council at Frankford, where was condemned the Council of Nice^e Irene,
for setting up and worshipping Images.

Egbert succeeded Ceolulphus, and when he had reigned 20. years in
Northumberland, was likewise shorn Monk, about the time of the death of
Ceolulphus, in his monastery. In the year 754. the cities of Weire, London,
York, Doncaster, with others* were burnt.

In the year 780. it rained blood it the city of York, it fell from the top
of S. Peter's Church, the Element being clear* out of the North part of the
Temple, and some expounded it to be a token of the coming of the Danes, which
entered thi^ land about 7. years after.

In the year 784. Irene Empress of the Greeks, by the means of Pope Adrian,
took up the body of Constantinus Emperor of Constantinople, her husbands
father, and burned it, and caused the ashes to be cast into the sea, because he
disanulled Images, as before is said; afterward reigning with her son
Constantine the sixth being at disscen^ion with him* she caused him to be cast
into prison, and his eyes to be put out, so cruelly, that within short time he
dyed: after, she held a Council at Nice^, where it was decreed that Images
should again be restored to the Church, which Council also was repealed by
another Council holden at Frankeford, by Charles the great* wherein he did
greatly lament, that no^ so few as 300. Bishops of the East did decree that
Images should be worshipped, which the Church of God has always abhorred; at
length she was deposed by Nicephorus, who reigned after her, and after,
according to the just Judgment of God, ended her life in much penury and
misery.

The first Cross and Altar that was set up in this Realm, was in Heuenfield
in the North, upon the occasion of Oswald king of Northumberland, fighting
against Cadwalla, where he in the same place set up the sign of the Erosse,
kneeling, and praying there for victory.

The Church of Winchester was founded by Kingilsus, king of the Mercians, and
finished by his son. Anno 636.

The Church of Lincoln founded by Paulinus Bishop 629.

The Abbey of Westminster begun by a citizen of London, by the instigation of
Ethelbert King of ^ent. 614.

The Schools of Cambridge erected by Sigebert king of East Angles, 636.

The Monastery of Malmesbury, by Meldulphus a Scot, 640. after enlarged by
Agilbet Bishop of Winchester.

The Monastery of Gloucester, builded by Opricus king of Mercia, 679.

The Monastery of Maybrose by Aydanus the Scottish Bishop.

The Nunnery of He^renton, by He^y, which was the first Nun in Northumberland.

The Monastery of Hetesey, by Osway king of Northumberland, who with his
Daughter Elfred, gave possessions for twelve Monasteries, 657.

The Monastery of S. Martine in Dover, builded by Whitred king of Kent.

The Abbey of Lestingie, by Cedda, whom we call Saint Ced, 651.

The Monastery of Whithy, by Hilda, daughter to the Nephew of king Edwine* 657.
she builded also another Monastery, called Hacanus, not far ^hence.

The Abbey of Abbington, builded by Sissa, king of Southsaxons, 666.

Saint Botulph builded an Abbey on the East side of Lincoln, called Ioann^,
654.

The monastery in Ely, founded by Etheldred, daughter of Anna K. of east
Angles, 674.

The Monastery of Chertsey in Southery, founded by Erkinwald, Bishoy of London
674. he founded also the Nunnery of Barkin.

The Abbey of Peterborough founded by King Ethelwald, 675.

Bardnere Abbey, by King Etheldredus, 700.

Glastenbury, by Iue King of West Saxons, 701.

Ramsey, by one Aylewinus a Nobleman, 973.

King Edgar builded, in his time, forty Monasteries, he reigned, Anno 678.

The Monastery of Wincombe, builded by king Kenulphus, 737.

Saint Albons, builded by Offa, king of Mercians, 755.

The Abbey of Eusham by Egwinus Bishop, 691.

The Abbey of Ripon in the North, by Wilfridus Bishop, 709.

The Abbey of Echlingheie by king Aluredus 891.

The Nunnery of Shaftsbury, by the said Aluredus, the same year; so you see
that Monasteries began to be founded by the Saxon kings, within 200. years
after they were converted; these had a zeal, but they lacked the true Doctrine
of Christ, especially that Article of free Justification by Faith* of Jesus
Christ: for lack whereof* as well the builders, as they that were possessed in
the same, have both run the wrong way, and been deceived: for so much as
they did these things seeking thereby merits with God, remedy for their souls,
and remission of sins, as does appear, testified in their own Records,
besides the 7. or 8. Kings that forsook their Kingdoms to be Monks; there
were many Queens and Kings daughters entered into Nunneries at that time, as
thou may see them in the book at large, named.

THE THIRD BOOK Containing the next 300. years, from the reign of King
EGBERTVS, unto WILLIAM the Conqueror.
EGbertus, King of the West Saxons, having put down all the other Kings he
governed ^oly.

King Brithricus doubting Egbert, because he was of the kings blood, was
chased out of the land into France; where, hearing of the death of Brithricus,
he came home, and ^btained the Crown.

King Bernulphus, and other kings, had him in deri^^^on, and made diverse
scorning Rimes of him; after he assembled his Knights, and fought with
Bernulphus, in a place called Elmeden, and there was ods, six or eight against
one; yet Egbert, through the help of God, gat the victory, 826.
at length he subdued all the Kings, and joined their Dominions to his,
Kingdom: he w^nne also the town of Chester from the Britains, or Welchmen,
which they possessed until this time: then he called a Counsel at*
Winchester, where he was Crowned King over this land, and where before it was
called Britain, he sent into all costs, and charged them straightly that
henceforth the Saxons should be called Angles, and the land Anglia.

About the third year of his reign, 833.
the Danes which a little before had made horrible destruction in
Northumberland, as before, entered the second time, with a great Host, and
spoiled the Isle of Sh^p^ in Kent; Egbert met with them at Carrum, but he was
compelled to forsake the Field: but in the next Battle, with a small company,
he ouerthr^w a great multitude o^ them. The next year they turned again into
the Land Westward and joining with the Britains, did much harm in many places
of Egberts Dominions; after that, they a^^aded in the Land, so that many of
them were married to English women, and many, that now be English men, descended
of them.

Ethelwolfus the son of Egbert succeeded him in his reign; he was Bishop of
Winchester, and by the dispensation of the Pope, was made King: he being nuzled
therein, was always devout to holy Church, 837.
he gave them the Tithes of all his goods and Lands, and freedom from all
ser^age and civil charges. He made his Donation to God, the Uirgin Mary, and
all the Saints, for remission of our Souls, and sins, and in that we have, in
some part, eased the seruitud of the Church, they may the more diligently power
forth their prayers without ^easing, to God for us. It is no swall derogation
to the merits of Christ thus to set remission of their sins, and remedy of
their Souls, in this Donation, and such like deeds.

The^ King Ethelwolfe went to Rome with his youngest Son Alfred, and committed
him to the bringing up of Pope Leo the 4. and re-edified the English School in
Rome, which was founded by King Offa, or king Iue, which in Egberts time was
consumed with fire; and, as king Iue had done in his dominions, he gave a penny
yearly to be paid for every fire-house throughout the Realm, to the Pope.
Also he granted 300. Marks yearly to Rome, to maintain lights in Saint
Perters Church 100 Marks, and to maintain lights in Saint Paul's Church 100.
Marks, and to the Pope one other 100 Marks: this done, he married Judith, the
daughter of Carolus Caluus, the French King, whom he made Queen, contrary to
the Laws of the West Saxons, that no Kings wife should have the name, or place
of a Queen, because Ethelburge poisoned king Brithericus, her husband.

The king was most ruled by the Counsel of two Bishops, one of them was
Swithinus Bishop of Winchester, who had been Scoole-master to the king, the
king showed his kind Nature, in that he not o^^y followed the aduertisments of
his old Schoolmasters but in that he ceased not until he had made him Bishop
of Winchester; but as concerning the Miracles which are read in the Church of
Winchester, of this Swithinus, them I leave to be read together with the Iliads
of Homer, or tales of Robin Hood.

Pope Leo the 3 succeeded Adrian, Stephen the 4. succeeded him, and Gregory the
4. succeeded him, in whose time, by the commandment of Lodouicus the Emperor,
a general Synod was commanded at Aquisgrane, where it was decreed that every
Church should have sufficient of his own Revenues to maintain the Priests
thereof, and that none of the Clergy should wear any Uestures of any precious
or scarlet color, nor Kings on their fingers, except at Mass time, or in
giving Consecra^ions, and that they should not keep great ports or Families,
or use great Horses, or use Dice, or Harlots, or use any gold or silver in
their shoes slippers, or girdles; by this it may be coniectured what pomp or
pride in these days was crept into the Clergy.

After him succeeded Pope Sergius the 2. he first brought up the altering of
Popes names, because his name was Os Porci, that is, Swines snoute: he ordained
the Agnus twice to be sung in the Mass, and the Host to be divided into three
parts.

Pope Leo the 4. succeeded him, it was enacted in a Counsel of his, that no
Bishop should be condemned under 72. witnesses, as you see in the witnesses
of Stephen Gardener, orderly practiced; he ordained the Cross, all set with
precious stones, and gold, to be carried before him like a Pope.

Next to him succeeded the Whore of Babylon, who appeared unto the world, not
only after the spiritual sense, but after the very letter and right form of a
whore indeed. In stead of a man Pope, they chose a Whore, called by name Ione
the 8 her proper name was Gi^berta, a Dutch woman of Magunce, who went with an
English Monk out of the Abbey of Ful^a, in man's apparel, unto Athens, after
through her dexterity of wit and learning, she was promoted unto the Popedom*
where she sat two years and six Months; after, in open Procession, fell in
travel of child, and so died.

Pope Benedictus the 3. succeeded her in the whorish sea, he ordained the Dirge
to be said for the dead, yet before him* Gregorius the 3. had done his part
therein.

After him succeeded Pope Nicholas the 1. who enlarged the Popes Decrees with
many constitutions* equalling the authority of them with the writings of the
Apostles. He ordained that no seculer Prince* nor the Emperor should be
present at their Counsels, to the end they might murder such as they Judged to
be Heretics, and that no Lay man should Judge Clergy men* or reason upon the
Popes power. That no Magistrate should have power over a Prelat, alleging that
a Prelat is called God. That all Church service should be in Latin, except
with the Sclauonians, and Polonians. Sequences in Mass were by him first
allowed, by him Priests began to be ^^strained from Marriage; whereof Hulderick
Bishop of Aus^rough sent a Letter to the Pope, that his Decrees, concerning
single life of the Clergy, were far discrepant from al discretion, I fear
how the Members of the Body will do, when the Head is so greatly out of frame.
Is not this a violence and tyranny, when a man is compelled by your Decrees, to
do that which is against the Institution of the Gospel, and the old Law, as
appears by many examples; there be many under a false pretense of
Continency, going about to please men more then God, some lie with their
fathers wives, some are Sodomits, and play the beasts with brute beasts;
wherefore, as Saint Paul says; Because of Fornication let every one have his
own wife. When the Counsel of Nice went about to establish this Decree, one
Paphnutius withstood them, confessing Marriage to be honorable, and called the
bed of Matrimony, Chastity, and persuaded the Counsel from making that Law:
some take Saint Gregory for their defense in this matter, being ignorantly
deceived how dangerous this Decree was, and how Saint Gregory after re^^ked the
same, with con^igne fruit of repentance: for as he sent to his Fish pond to
have Fish, he see more then 6000. Infants heads, which were taken out of the
same Mote, then he confessed his Decree to be the cause of that so lamentable a
murder, so he altered his Decree, commending the counsel of the Apostle, which
says; It is better to marry then to burn, What can be more foolish, then when
any Bishop, or Archdeacon run themselves headlong into all lust and Adultery,
and Incest, and So^omitrie, yet shame not to say, that chaste Marriage of
Priests stinkes: and they add this filthy and foolish suggestion, that it is
more honest privily to have to do with many women, then openly to be bound to
one wife.

After this Nicholas succeeded Pope Adrianus the 2. Ioannes the 9. Martinus the
20 Adrian the 3. and Stephen the 1. By this Adrian it was decreed, that no
Emperor, after that time, should have any thing ^o do in the election of the
Pope, and thus began the Emperors first decay, and the P^pacie to swell* and
rise alo^t.

About the latter end of the reign of Ethelwolfe, the Danes with 33. ships,
arrived about Hampshire, through whose barbarous tyranny much bl^ut shed and
murder hapne^ here amongst English men. They first overcame Ethelwolfe; and
after, he and his Son Ethelbaldus, warring against them in Sou^her^, at
Okley, ^raue them to the Sea; where they houering a space, burst in again with
horrible cruelty.

Besides the just Judgment of God for their manifold sins, which at this time
most plentifully abounded, there was two outward causes of the Danes coming
into England; the first was, the death of Lothbroke* which was falsely imputed
to King Edmond* as is ^^^ore recited.

The other was given by the means of Osbright, reigning under the King of West
Saxons in the North parts, who ravished the wife of Bruer one of his Nobles;
wherefore the said Bruer took shipping, and sailed into Denmark^, where he
was brought up, and had great friends; and making his moan to Codrinus the
King, who being glad of some just quarrel, levied a great Army, and sent them
with ^ugnar and H^bba, his chief Captains, into England, who first arrived at
Holdernesse, and burned up the Contry, and killed, without mercy, men, women
and children: and entering toward York, entered battle with Osbright, where
he, with the most part of his Army, was slain, so they took possession of
York.

Ethelbald, 857.
eldest son of Ethelwolfe succeeded his Father in Westsex, and Ethelbright
^is second son, in K^nt; they reigned both together 5. years. Ethelbald
married Judith his Stepmother, his Fathers wife. After these two, succeeded
Ethelred, his third son, he was so encumbered with the Danes, that he and his
brother Alured, fought nine battles with them in one year, and they spoiled
and burned the city of York. The Northumberlands likewise rebelled, thinking
to recover their Kingdom again, whereby the strength of England was weakened,
and the Danes the more prevailed, after he had reigned 5. years in much
trouble, he died.

Alured, 872.
otherwise called Alfride, his brother succeeded him; in the second Mon^t^ that
he was made King, he gave the Danes a battle besides Wilton, but he was put to
the worst; yet the Danes did agree with him to depart out of Westsax, and
re^^ned from Re^ding to London, and abode there all that winter: the number of
the Danes were so increased, as it is written of them, that in one day 3000. of
them were slain, sho^ty after they increased double as many.

The Danes having the Rule of the North part of England from the Thames* wi^h
M^rcian London, and Essex, 879.
they disda^^ed that Alfride should bear any rule on the other side of the
Thames; whereupon three Kings of the Danes* with all their strength, made war
with him, that King Alfride being ouerset with his e^emi^s, and forsaken of his
people, he withdrew himself into a wood Country in Summersetshire, called
Etheling, standing in a Marsh, that there is no coming to it without bo^e,
where he had nothing to live by, but what he got by hunting, and fishing; there
was a Cottage of a poor Swineheard, called Dunwolfus, by whom the King was
cheered with such poor fare as he and his wife could make him, for which, the
king after set the Swineheard to learning, and made him Bishop of Winchester.

Notwithstanding, the king, in time, was comforted by the providence of God:
First, 1300. Danes were slain, as they landed, by an ambushment of King
Alfrids men, who lay in Garrison for their own safety, then the King showed
himself more at large, and men out of Wiltshire, Somersetshire, and Hampshire
came to him, until he had a strong company

Then the king apparelled himself in the habit of a Minstrell, as he was very
skillful in Music, and entered into the Tents of the Danes, lying at
Eddingdon, and there espied their Idleness, and heard much of their Counsel,
and suddenly, in the nigh, he fell upon the Danes, and slew a great multitude
of them; his Subjects bearing of his manly Uictories, drew to him daily, so he
won Winchester from the Danes, and diverse other towns, and forced them to
seek peace, the which was concluded, upon condition that Gutrum their King
should be Christened, and that such as would not be Christened should depart the
Country.

King Alfride, was king Gutrums Godfather at his Baptism, and named him
Athelstan, then he gave Norfolk* Suffolk* and part of Cambridgeshire, and
Northumberland to them that were Christened, those that would not be Christened,
though they departed the Realm, they did diverse times return again, and did
much spoil in many parts of the Realm, but King Alfride overcame them ever.
During the whole time of the Danes, the Land was plagued with wars,
pestilence, and murren of beasts: the King always thanked God, what troubles
soever happened unto him, and after he had reigned 29. years and six months,
he died, and is buried at Winchester. He ever bestowed eight hours in the day
in study, 899.
there was none in England more quick in understanding, nor more elegant in
interpreting then he was. He sent for many learned men out of other Countries,
to instruct his people. He was the first that ordained certain Schools of
diverse Arts, at Oxford, and Franchised them with great Liberties: he
translated many books into the Saxon tongue; all that he could, by fair
means and threats, he endeavored to stir up his subjects to learning: he
preferred none to any great place, except he were learned; since his time,
learning was never extinguished in this Realm, Edward his son succeeded him
in his kingdoms.

After Stephen the fist was nine Popes of Rome in nine year. Formosus being
Bishop of Porti^ax, had offended Pope ^one the 8. which was a woman, as before,
and being afraid, fled; and because he would not return, he was
excommunicated, and after disgraded, and made to swear he would never claim
his Bishopric again, but remain a seculer man: but Pope Martine released
him of his Oath, and restored him to his Bishopric, and shortly after he
obtained the Pap^ci^; whereupon was a great controversy: some held, because of
his degradation and Oath, he could not be Pope; others held the contrary,
because he was absolved by Pope Martin from that his perjury and Degradation.
He sent to Arnulphus for aid, who marching to Rome, they would not suffer him
to enter; and a Hare coming near the City, the Host of Arnulphus followed
after with such a maine cry, that the valiant Romans, for very fear cast
themselves down from the walls; so that Arnulphus, with a little labor, scaled
the walls, and gate the City: thus he obtained the city of Rome, and rescued
the Pope, and beheaded his adversaries, whom the Pope to gratify, blessed him,
and crowned him for Emperor.

After Formosus succeeded Bonifacius the sixth, after him Stephen the sixth,
which so envied Formosus that he abrogated all his Decrees, and took up his
body, and cut off two fingers from his right hand, and threw them into Tyber,
and buried the body in a Laymans Sepulcre. Romanus succeeded him, and repealed
the Acts of Stephen, against Formosus. Theodorus the second succeeded him; John
the tenth succeeded him, who repugned the Romans, and held a Sinode at
Rauenna of 74. Bishops: the French King Eudo, with his Archbishops, being
present, where he ratified all the Decrees of Formosus, and the contrary Acts
of Stephen the sixth were burned. After him Benedictus the 4. after him Leo the
5. who was with strong hand taken and cast into prison, by one Christopher, his
own Household Chaplin, which Christopher being Pope 7. months, was likewise
hoysted from his Papal throne by one Sergius, he thrust him into a Monastery,
and shore him a Munke; thus in nine years were nine Popes.

This Sergius was rude, unlearned, proud, and cruel; he before was put back
from the Popedom by Formosus, wherefore he caused the body of Formosus to be
taken up again, disgraded him, beheaded him, and cut off the other three
fingers which were left, and threw his body into Iyber; and deposed all such
as by Formosus had been consecrated. By this Pope Sergius came up the use to
bear about Candles on Candlemasse day, for the purifying of the blessed
Uirgin, as though the sacred conception of the Son of God were vnpure, and to
be purified by Candlelight.

Pope Anastatius succeeded him, after him Pope Laudo succeeded, which was
father of Pope John the 11. Pope John is said to be the Paramour of Theodora, a
famous Harlot of Rome, by whom he had a daughter called Marozia, and the
aforesaid Pop^ Sergius had a son by her, which after was Pope John the 12.
After, she married Guido Marquis of Tuscia, by the means of whom, and his
friends at Rome, she caused John the 11. to be smothered with a pillow, and
John the 12. her son to be made Pope; but the Clergy and people did not agree
to his election, therefore Pope Leo the 6. was set up in his place: after him
Pope Stephen succeeded, who being poisoned, the said John the 12. was set up
again in the Papacy, where he reigned about 5. years. This strumpet Marozia,
married two brothers one after another, she governed all Rome, and the Church at
that time. After him succeeded Stephen the 7. After him Leo the 7. After him
Stephen the 8. After him, Pope Martine the 3. After him, Pope Agapetus the 2.
about whose time began first the Order of Monks called Ordo Cluniensis.

After king Alfride, as before, his son Edward succeeded, surnamed, the
Elder; there were three Edwards before the Conquest: the first Edward, the
Elder; the second Edward the Martyr; the third, Edward the Confessor. This
Edward began his reign in the year 901. 901.
The Princedome of Wales, and the Kingdom of Scotland, with Constantine king
thereof, were subdued unto him, also he recovered Northfolke, Suffolk, Essex,
and Northumberland from the Danes. In all hi^ wars he had the victory, his
men were so inured with continual practices of Feats of War, that when they
heard of any enemies coming, they would never tarry for the King, or any of
his Dukes, but incountred with them, the assaults of enemies were to the
Soldiers but a trifle, and unto the King a ridicle.

Then the King builded Chester, twice as big as it was, and builded a Castle at
Herford in the edge of Wales, and another Castle at the mouth of the water of
Auon, and another Castle at Buckingham; and another upon the river of Ouse. He
re-edified the towns of Tocester, and Wigmore, upon the river of Trent. He
builded a new town over against Nottingham, and made a Bridge over the River
betwixt the two towns, By the River of Merce he builded a new City called
Thilwall, and repaired the City of Manchester, and diverse others. His Daughter
Edgitha was ^aried unto Otho, ^25.
the first Emperor of the Almaines, when he had reigned 24. years he dyed.

Adelstan his Son reigned after him, and was Crowned at Kingstone; he was
nothing inferior to his Father in renown of Civil Government, and in
prosperous success in reducing this Realm into subjection of a Monarchy. He
expelled the Danes, subdued the Scots, and quieted the Welchmen.

One Elfredus, with seditious persons, conspired against the said King at
Winchester, presently after the death of his Father, went about to put his
eyes; but, by the help of God, he escaped. Elfred, being accused thereof, fled
to Rome to purge himself by his Oath, before the Pope, and swearing, or rather
forswearing himself in Saint Peter's Church, suddenly, upon his Oath, fell
down, and within three days died. The Pope sent to the King to know whether
he would have him buried in Christian burial; at length, by persuasion of his
kindred, he was buried in Christian burial.

Ater the death of Sythericus King of Northumberland, King Adelstone seized
that Province into his hands, and put out his son Alanus, who fled into
Scotland, married the daughter of Constantine King of Scots, by whose stirring,
gathered a company of Danes, Scots, and others, and entered the North of Humber
with a strong Navy of 615. ships. King Adelstone and his people joined in
fight with them at a place called Binford; where fighting with them from
morning till night, after a terrible slaughter on both sides, the like has not
been seen in England, King Adelstone had the victory; five under kings were
slain in that battle, with Constantine King of Scots, and twelve Dukes, with
the most part of the strangers that were there.

Then King Adelstone subdued the Britains, and forced them to grant to him
yearly tribute 20. lib. of gold, 300 lib. of ^iluer, 2500. heads of neat,
with a certain number of hawks and dogs.

King Adelstone caused his guiltless brother Edwine, through sinister
suggestion of his Cup Bearer, to be set in an old rotten bote in the broad sea,
only with one Esquire with him, without any tackling; where the tender Prince
dismai^e with the ^age o^ Winds and Floods, weary of his life, cast himself
into the Sea; the Esquire shif^ed for himself, and recovered the body of his
master, and brought it to Sandich, were it was buried. The reason the King the
more doubled of his brother, was because he was by his mother of a base blood,
and begotten before wedlock: for King Edward, his Father, coming into his
Nurses house, was ravished with the beauty of one Edwina a beautiful maid,
begat that night of her King Adelstone, and afterward married her: after the
King was stricken with great repentance for the death of his brother, by the
space of seven years, at length the Cup Bearer, his accuser, bearing the
Cup unto the King, stumbled with one foot, and recovering himself with the
other, saying; Thus one brother helps another. These words so moved the king,
that forthwith he commanded the false accuser of his brother to be had out to
execution; and he builded two Monasteries of Middleton and Michlenes, for his
brothers Soul. Whereby it appears what was the special cause of building of
Monasteries, to wit, for releasing of sins for them departed, and them alive,
which is contrary to the grace and verity of Christ's Gospel.

He devised diverse good and wholesome laws, as well of the state
Ecclesiastical as Seculer, which thou may see in the book at large, whereby
it is to be understood that the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome did not
then extend or derogate from the authority of Christian Princes, but that
every one in ^is own Dominion had the doing of all causes* whether they were
spiritual or temporal, he reigned 16. years, and because he had no Issue,
his brother Edmond succeeded him.

This Edmond expelled the Danes, 940.
Scots, Normanes, and all foreign enemies out of the Land, and recovered such
Cities as were in their hands from them; then the King set his mind to
building of Monasteries, and furnishing of Churches with possessions: in his
time Monks were dispersed out of the Monastery of Esham, and Canons substituted
in their place. At the first, Religious houses were replenished with Priests
and Canons, which were Clergy men; after, Monks succeeded, they professed
Chastity, that is, to (...) unmarried, for so they defined Chastity in those
blind days: the Priests and Canons lived more free from Monkish rules and
observations, were common^y marie^, and in their life came nearer to seculer
Christians, so there was great enmity between them, one ^uer sought to expel
the other.

Thus Monks first began, about the time of this King Edmond, when straitnes
of life, with superstition, was had in veneration; which men, either to have
public fame with men, or merit of God, gave themselves to lead a strict life.
There was a Monastery in France called Floriake, of the rule of Benedict, from
whence came our English Monks, for after they were professed there, returning
into England, they daily congregated men to their profession, and for their
outward holiness and strait life we^e in great admiration, not only with the
rude sort, but with Kings and Princes, who founded them Houses, maintained
their rules, and enlarged them with possessions.

After King Edmund had reigned 6. 946
years and a half, he was slain, and buried at Glastenbury, leaving bebing
him two children, Edwine, and Edgar, but because they were under age, Edred,
brother to King Edmund, governed, as Protector, nine years with great
moderation and fidelity to the young children.

Edwine, 955.
eldest son of King Edmond was crowned at Kingstone; the day of his
Coronation he forsook his Nobles, and went into a Chamber to a woman whom he
inordinately had retained. Dunstone, Abot of G^astenbury, followed the King
into the Chamber, and brought him out by the hand, and accused him to Odo
Archbishop, causing him to be separated from her company: for which ^act Odo
suspended the king out of the Church. The king being displeased, banished
Dunstone, who went into Flanders, where he was in the Monastery of A^andus:
about that time the order of Benedict Monks, or black Monks, began to
multiply in England, so that Priests and Canons were put out in many places and
Monks put in their (...), but King Edwine, for the displeasure he bare to
Dunstone, so vexed all the Order of the said Monks, that in Malmesbury,
Glastenbury, and other places, he thrust out the Monks and set seculer Priests
in their steed.

Edwine being hated of his Subjects for his misdemeaners was removed from his
kingly honor, and his brother Edgar received in his steed: yet one reigned
over all on the one side of the Th^mes, and the other on the other side of the
Thames: but Edwine after he had reigned 4. years dyed, leaving no Heir,
wherefore all fell to Edgar.

Edgar at the age of 16* years began to reign, 959.
but was not crowned until 14. years after. He sent for Dunstone home again,
whom Edwin had exiled, he was made Bishop of Woster, and after of London; and
not long after of Canterbury. By his intre^tie to the King, Oswoldus was made
Bishop of Woster; and by his means also Ethelwaldus, Abbot of Abendon, was
made Bishop of Winchester. By the means of these three Bishops the
multitnde of Monks began first to swarm in this Realm of England. By the
means of them King Edgar, builded 40. Monasteries, and by the instigation of
them King Edgar, in diverse great houses, and Cathedral Churches, where
Prebends and Priests were before, displaced them, and set in Monks, and many
seculer Priests, being put to their choice whether they would change their
habit or leave their rooms, departed out of their houses. After, Oswaldus was
made Archbishop of York, and then they had their mind; and when he by no
persuasion could make the Priests and Canons of the Cathedral Church of York
become Monks, within the Churchyard he erected another Church of our Lady,
replenishing it with Monks, and there he kept his seat, and was ever
conversant, whereby the other Church was desolate, and all the people gathered
where the Bishop was, so they were feign, for shame and contempt, either to
relinquish the house, or become Monks: so did Ethelwolfe drive out the Canons
and Priests, out of the Monastery of Hide in Winchester, and placed his Monks
so in Oxford and Mildune, and diverse places more seculer Priests and their
wives were expelled ^o give place to Monks.

The Monks of the primitive time did differ from the Monks of the middle
time, and from our Monks of the latter age. The name and order of Monks began
300. years after Christ; Basilius Magnus was one of the first institutors and
commenders of that Superstition. Cassianus makes mention of a certain
Monastery in Thebaid* wherein were 5000. Monks, under the government of one
Abbot; and here also in England, mention is made before of Bangor, wherein
were 2200. Monks, under one man's ruling, in the year 596. but these were such
as either by tyranny of persecution were driven into desert places, or else, of
their own de^^tion, joined with Superstition, for the love they had to
Spiritual contemplation, and hatred of the wicked world withdrew themselves
from all company, having all things common; these were Laymen leading a
stricter kind of life then others, as Saint Augustine, Lerome, and others
testify, one thing pertains to the Monks, and another thing to the Clergy;
the Clergy fed the flock, and the monks are fed. It appears also by the
forth Canon of the Council of Calcedon, that Monks should not meddle with
matters of the Church. And Leo in his 62. Epistle, does forbid Monks and
laymen to be admitted to preach. They differed from the Monks of the middle
age in three points; First, they were bound to no strict apparel, or diet, or
any thing else. Secondly, they were but Laymen, only being of a stricter life
then the rest, and had nothing to do in Ecclesiastical matters, until Pope
Boniface the 4. gave them authority. Thirdly, though many of the Monks of the
first age lived single from wives, yet some of them were married, and none of
them were forbidden from marriage. Athanasius in his Epistle ad Pracontium,
says, he knew Monks and Bishops married men* and fathers of children.

Yet though the former Monks were better then the latter, yet amongst them
superstition began to creep into the Church, by the subtlety of Satan, and
all for the ignorance of free justification by Faith in Christ, as for example;
One Abbot Moses testifies of himself, that he so afflicted himself with
fasting, and watching, that he felt no appetite to meat, and could not
sleep, that he prayed to God to give him a little sleep some piece of the
night. This Cassianus does testify, Cap. 7. Cola. ^. He says also of an old
Hermit that made a vow he would never eat without some guest, sometimes
fasted three or four days for lack of guestes.

One Mucius, to declare his obedience to the Abbot, did not stick at the
commandment of the Abbot, to cast his son into the water, not knowing
whetherany were there to save him from drowning, preferring the Abbots
commandment before the commandment of God. And Basilius Magnus, and
Nazeanzenus, with immoderate austeritie, did so pluck down themselves, that
when they were called to be Bishops, they were not able to sustain the
labor thereof.

After these Monks, followed Monks of the middle Age, who increased both in
number and Superstition, from their dens in Wildernesses, the approached to
great towns, where they had solemn^ Monasteries, founded by Kings, Queens,
Kings Daughters, and rich Consuls, for the remedy of their Souls remission,
and the redemption of their sins, the good of their Fathers pos^erities, of
their Country, and the Honor of our Lady, and lightly it was for some murder,
or great sin.

In which monasteries they abounded in wealth and riches, and did swim^e in
Superstition and Pharisaicall hypocrisy, being yoaked, in all their doings, to
certain observations, in watching, in sleeping, in rising, in praying, in
walking, in talking, in looking, in tasting, in touching, in gestures, and in
their Uestures; and the number of their Sects were diverse: some, after
Basilius rule, went in w^ite^ some, after Benicts rule, went in black: some,
after Hieromes rule, their white cloth girt with leather girdles: some
Gregorians, copper colored: some Gray monks; some ware a coat of male upon
their hare bodies, with a black cloak thereupon: some had white rochets upon a
black cote: some cloak, coule, and cap, all blewe: some Charter monks,
wearing heire-cloth next their body: some Flagillants, went in long linen
shirts with an open place in the back, where they beat themselves with
scourges on the bare shinne every day, before the people, till the blood ran
down, saying, it was revealed by an Angel, that in scourging themselves so,
within thirty days and twelve hours they should be made so pure from sin
as they were when they first received bap^isme: some Jesuits, with a white
girdle, and a russet coule, with enumerable more Orders; they were so subject
to servile rules, that no part of Christian liberty remained amongst them, and
so drowned in Superstition, that they lost Christ's religion, and the sense of
m^n.

King Edgar reduced England into a full and perfect Monarchy, he would suffer
no man, of what degree soever he were, to da^ly out his laws without
punishment* in all his time there was neither privy picker, nor open thief,
for if any were a ^heefe, he was sure to leese his life.

He coused Ludwallus, Prince of Wales, to pay him yearly for tribute 300.
wolves, whereby within four years, a wolf could scarce be found in England
and Wales.

He had in readiness 3600. ships of war, and in the Summer 1200. kept the
East Seas, so many the West Seas, and so many the South Seas, in the winter he
(...) Progress over the Land, to see how his Laws were kept, that the poor
should not be oppressed by the mighty.

In the 13. year of his reign eight Kings that were under him, of which the
King of Scots was one, came to him to Chester, and did him Homage, next day in
a royalty he caused the eight kings, every one rowing with an Oar, to carry
him in a bo^e up and down the river to the Church of Saint John and unto his
Palace again, in token that he was Lord of so many Provinces.

He sent one Ethelwold, an Earl of his privy Counsel, to see Elfrida,
daughter of the Duke of Somerset, whose beauty was commended unto him, who
told the King all things contrary, and after married her; the King came to see
her, her husband had prayed her to put on her worst apparel, and disgrace her
self as much as she could, but she set her self forth as gloriously as she
could: when the King see her, he was not so much inflamed with love of her as
with hatred to her husband, and sending for him to hunt with him, run him
through with his sword, and killed him: Wherefore Elfrida builded a Monastery
of Nuns in remission of her sins.

He was incontinent, and lascivious in deflowring Maids, he deflowred
Wilfrida, a Dukes Daughter being a Nun, and had a daughter named Editha by
her; and he coming to Andiuer, thinking to have his pleasure of a Dukes
Daughter, the mother grieuing to have her daughter a Concubine, con^eyed
another beautiful maid into his bed in stead of her Daughter, which the King
perceiving, made the Maid Mistress of both her Master and Mistress. He had
another Concubine Edelf^^eda, daughter to Duke Ordmere a professed Nun, of
whom he begat Edward. But his greatest offense was in that he was the first,
and chiefest cause of this Monkery: for lying with this Ethelfleda, Dunstone
held him from Coronation seven years, and had seven ^^eres penance enjoined
him. After he had raingned 16. years he dyed, and was buried at Glastenbury.
His penance was, to wear no Crown seven years, to fast twice a week, to
give his treasure to the poor, and to build a Monastery of Nuns at
Shaftsbury, as he had robbed God of one Uirgine, so he should restore many; and
that he should expel Priests and Canons, and place Monks in their place.

As for the lying Miracles, that all were healed of any disease that prayed at
the Tomb of this Ethelfleda, and how Saint Dunstone hunted the Devil away
with dogs, and caught him by the nose with a hot pair of tongues, and many
other miracles of this Dunstone, with many other lying miracles before; in this
Treatise I have omitted, thinking them not worthy to be abridged, referring
thee therein to the Book at large.

Edward succeeded Edgar, being his bastard son by Ethelfleda the Nun, 975.
by the means of Dunstone and the other Bishops, only to maintain their
Monkery, and Egel^ed the lawful son of Edgar was put back: then they
supposed they had established the Kingdom of Monkery for ever. Yet Alferus,
Duke of Mercia, following the Queens mind, with other great men, drou^ the
Monks out of the Cathedral and other Churches, and set in the Priests with
their wives again: there were great contentions about the matter, and two
Councels. In the first Council, they being almost all against Dunstone, he
turned them by making a Crucifixe speak on his side, which most likely was the
voice of some Monk through a Cane. And in the second Council, the roof of a
Chamber brake* where they were all assembled, and all fell down saving
Dunstone, which stood upon a beam, which did not fall: this was likely done to
by policy upon this the matter ceased, and Dunston had all his will.

King Edward after he had reigned almost 4. years, 979.
was murdered, and Egelred his brother succeeded him: the Queen being
consenting to his murder, in repentance of her fact, builded two Nunneries, one
at Amesbury, the other at We^ewell, this was Edward the Martyr.

After Pope Agapetus the 2. succeeded Pope John the 13. he is noted to be an
Adulterer, Incestuous, and Tyrannous: of some of his Cardinals he put their
eyes out, of some he cut out their tongues, of some their fingers, of some
their noses. In a general Council before Otho the first Emperor of the
Germans, it was Articled against him, that he never said Service, that in
saying Mass, he did not Communicate: that he committed Incest with two of his
Sisters: that at Dice, he called for the Devil to help him: wherefore he was
deposed, and Pope Leo substitute in his place: but after the Emperor was gone,
by the Whoores of Rome, and their great promises, he was restored again, and
Leo deposed. In the tenth year of his Popedom he was s^^nd with a man's wife,
and so wounded by her husband, that in eight days he dyed. After him, the
Romans elected Benedictus the first, without the Emperor.

Because they had put down Leo and chosen another without his consent, the
Emperor came with his Army, and set up Pope Leo the eight again; wherefore
Leo Crowned Otho for Emperor, and entitled him Augustus, and what Carolus
magnus had given to the Sea, and people of Rome, he by a Synodall Decre*
granted to the Emperor and his successors. The Emperor again restored to the
Sea of Rome, all such donations and possessions as Constantine, as they falsely
pretend, or which Carolus Magnus took from the Lumbards, and gave to them.

After him succeeded John the 14. against whom, for holding with the Emperor,
Petrus, the chief Captain of the City, with two Consuls, and twelve
Aldermen, and other Nobles, laid hands upon the Pope, and imprisoned him
eleven months: the Emperor came to Rome with his Army, executed the chief
doers of the fact.

But he committed Petrus to the Popes arbitrament, he caused him to be
stripped naked, his beard to be shaven, and to be hanged by the heir of the
head a whole day, then to be set upon an Ass, his face turned backward, his
hands bound under the Asses tail, and so to be led through the City, then
to be scourged with rods, and banished the City; from this Pope proceeded
first the Christning of Bells.

Benedictus the 6. succeeded him, who was imprisoned by Cinthius a Captain of
Rome, and there slain. Then came Pope Donus the 2. after whom, Bonifacius the
7. was Pope; he (...) the citizens of Rome to conspire against him, took the
treasure of Saint Peter's Church, and st^le to Constantinople. The Romans set
up John the 15. Pope; Boniface, by his treasure, procured a Garrison to take his
part, and returned to Rome, he took Pope John, put out his eyes, threw him in
prison, and famished him, but he, not long after, suddenly died. The Romans
drew his carkeasse about the streets by the feet after his death, in
despitefull manner, the people exclaiming against him.

Pope Benedictus the 7. succeeded him by consent of the Emperor Otho, the
second, and reigned 19. years. After him succeeded John the 16. after him,
John the 17. after him, Gregory the 1. Crescentius, with the people of Rome,
and the Clergy, conuenting against him, set up Pope John the 18. Wherefore the
Emperor Otho the 3. sent an Army into Italy, got the city, and took
Crescentius the Consul, and Pope John, he put out the eyes of Pope John, and
then killed him: he set Crescentius upon a vile Horse, his nose and ears cut
off, his face turned to the horse tail, and after his members were ^nt off,
and he hanged upon a gibbit. He assembled a Council at Rome, where he
established the Empire in his own Contry, and by the consent of Otho, ordained
seven to be Electors; three Bishops, three Princes, to wit, Prince Palatine,
the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburge, to whom was added the King
of Boheme to give the odd voice, if the eauen voices could not agree: this
Constitution being begun, Anno 997. was after established in Germany by Otho,
1002. which order remains to this day.

After the death of King Edward, Egelred his younger brother, reigned in his
stead; upon his Coronation a cloud was scene through the Land, one half like
blood, the other half like fire; shortly after, the third year of his reign,
the Danes arrived in sundry places of this Land, and did much spoil, and
retired to their ships again, and about the same time a great part of London
was consumed with fire. The King besieged the Bishop of Rochester; Dunstone
required the King, for Saint Andrews sake, to give over the siege, yet he
would not depart until the king had of him 100. lib. of gold.

The Danes, seeing the hatred of the Subjects against the King, rose again,
and (...) great harm in many places in England, ^990
that the King granted them great sums of money for peace, and a sore
sickness of the bloody Flix, and hot Feuours fell amongst the people, of which
many dyed; and a like murren amongst the beasts, and for lack of Justice, many
thieves and bribers were in the Lan^.

Not long after, the Danes invaded the land again in such sort that the King
was so seek in which Cost he should first withstand them, and was compelled
to appease them with great sums of money; and for lack of a good Go^ernour,
many things perishe^ in the Land: for the King gave himself to Lechery, and
polluting his Subjects, disinheriti^g them, and causing them with great sums
to reda^^e the same again. (...) paid the Danes tribute yearly, which was
called Dane-gilt; which tribute increase^* from 10000. lib. yearly, and in
five or six years, it came to 40000. lib. yearly. ^dricke Duke of Mercia,
and Alfrike Admiral of the Ships, warned the Danes (...) whatsoever the King
devised against them, wherefore the king put out the eyes of the Admirals
son, and of the two sons of Duke Edricke.

The Danes thus prevailing, were so proud, they forced the Husbandmen to plo^,
and sows their lands, and the whilst would sit at home with their wives and
daughters* and fared of the best, when the Husbandmen fared but scantly of
their own; they were glad to please them, and call them Lord Danes* which
after was turned to a name of ^^proby, when they rebuked another, they called
him Lurdaine.

The king in the 21. year of his reign, 1000.
married Emma, the Daughter of Richard Duke of Normandy, which Marriage inhaun^ed
the Kings mind, that he sent secret, and strait Commissions to the Rulers of
every town in England, that upon (...) Brices day, at an hour appointed, the
Danes should be suddenly slain, and so it wa^ performed.

Then Swanus king of Denmark, hearing of this slaughter of the Danes, with a
great Host and Navy, came into England, and did much spoil, but at length he
was met with of Duke Vskatell, and beaten, and many of the Danes slain,
wherefore they returned to Denmark.

The next year Swanus entered into the Land again, 1004.
and spoiled the Contry, and ever when as he heard of the Kings Host coming,
he took ship again, and went to a^ other part of the Contry, and when the
King would meet him by Sea, he would fly, or else bribe the Admiral, so they
brought the Englishmen into unspeakable misery, that the king was feign to
give them 30000. lib. for peace. But after Swanus broke cou^nant, and landed in
Northumberland with a great Host, proclaiming himself King, caused the Earl
with the Rulers of the contry, to swear him fealty: so he Conquered through
the Contry* and took pledges of them. He took Winchester, and Oxford, and
came to London, hearing the King was there; he went into Kent, and conquered
Canterbury, where he fired the city, and slew 900. Monk of the Abbey of Saint
Augustines, and 8000. of the men and women of the City, and they stoned
Elphegus ^^shoppe of Canterbury to death at Grinewich because he would not
give them 3000. lib.

The King, for fear, sent his wife Emma and his two sons, Alfred and Edward,
(...) the Duke of Normandy; after, the King fled to the Isle of Wight, and went
thence (...) to Normandy to his wife. Swanus teared exceeding impositions upon
the people, and required a great sum of money of Saint Edmunds lands, which
being d^nyed him* because the Land was free, he spoiled the Contry, despising
the Martyr, and mena^ing the place of his Sepulcher: wherefore the people fell
to prayer, and fasting, so that shortly after, Swanus suddenly crying and
yelling amongst his Knights, dyed: wherefore Canutus his son ruling as King
after his father, builded the Abbey of S. Edmundsbury our Saint Edmonds
Sepulcher, and ditched their Land with a great ditch; ordained a House of Monks
there, and g^ue them their au^tient freedoms. After that, it was vs^^ that the
Kings of England when they were crowned, offered their Crowns to Saint Edmonds
shrine* and bought them again.

King Eldred hearing the death of Swanus, returned into England. Canutus fled
to Sandwich, and cutting off the noses and hands of the pledges, which his
Father left (...) him, sailed into Denmark.

The next year Canutus returned again with a great Host, and forced the
people to be sworn unto him, and give him pledges. In this season King Eldred
died at London, after he had reigned 38. years, and was buried in Paul's.

After whose death the most part chose Canutus, the King of the Danes, King;
generally all the Clergy men choose him, but the Citizens of London, and
certain Nobles choose Edmund, the eldest son of Egelred King; who for his
hardiness to endure labor was surnamed Ironside. Betwixt these two martial
Princes many great battles were sought, with no great difference of victory; at
length, by rensent, they two only tried the quarrel in the fight of both
Hosts, and when they had assayed each other with sharp words and strokes, they
both agreed, and kissed each other, and divided the Land between them, and
during their lives loved as brethren. Shortly after, one of the sons of Duke
Edricus aforesaid killed King Edmund, after he had reigned two years. He
left two sons behind him, Edmund and Edward, whom the wicked Duke took from
their mother, she not knowing of her husbands death, and presented them to
Canutus, saying; Aue Rex solus. Canutus sent them to his brother Swanus, King
of Sweueland, to be ^laine; but he sent them to Solamon King of Hungary, where
Edmund married the Kings Daughter, and dyed: and Edward was married to Agatha the
daughter to the Emperor Henry the fourth.

Then Canutus held a Parliament, established the Crown to himself, he
disdained ever after those whom he found false to their native King, some of
them he exiled, some he beheaded, and some died suddenly by the punishment of
God; and wicked Duke Edrike was beheaded, an^ his head set upon London bridge.

In the mean time Swaynus* his brother, King of Denmark, dyed, and the Land
fell to Canutus, he (...) toither, and took possession thereof, and returned,
and married Emmalate wife of Egelred by whom he had a son called Hardyknight.
He held a Parliament at Oxford, where it was agreed that Englishmen and Danes
should hold the Laws made by King Edgar.

Then the Danes begun to be Christians, and Canutus went to Rome, and returned.
He governed the L^nd 20. years, and left two sons, Harold and Hardeknight,
which was made King of Denmark in his Fathers time.

Harold, called Harefore for his swiftness, succeeded him, he banished his
Stepmother Emma, 1039.
and took away her goods and Jewels. Hardeknight King of Demmarke succeeded
him, and when he had reigned two years, being merry at Lambeth, he was
suddenly struck dumb^ and died, being the last king of the Danes that reigned
in England.

In the time of these Danish Kings, there was one Godwine, an Earl in England,
when the aforesaid two s^nnes of King Egelred, Alfred and Edward, came from
Normandy to England to visit their mother Emma, and brought with them a great
company of Normaines, this Godwine, having a Daughter named Godith, whom he
thought to have married to Edward, and made him king. He persuaded the king
Hardeknight that the Normaines should be slain, and gat authority to order
the matter himself. Wherefore he met them at Guildowne, with a company of
English Soldiers, slew almost all the Normaines, winding their gots out of
their bellyes, and put out the eyes of Alfred the eldest brother, and sent him
to the Abbey of Elie, where he fed him with bread and water, until shorty
after he dyed. Edward escaped to his mother, who fearing Godwine, sent him
again into Normandy. This cruel fact to the Normaines, seems to be the
cause why the Just Judgment of God, shortly after, Conquered the English
Nation by the Normaines.

After the death of king Hardeknight, 1043.
last king of the Danes, the Lords sent into Normandy for the aforesaid Edward,
younger son of Queen Emma, to take possession of the Realm, who came with a
few Normaines, and was crowned at Winchester. He married Godith, Daughter of
Earl Godwine, he ruled with much wisdom and (...) 24. years.

In his time his mother Emma was accused to be too familier with Alwine
Bishop^^ Winchester, by the council of Godwine, they were committed to prison;
many of (...) Bishops labored for them to the King, but Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury stopp^^ their su^e, saying; How dare you defend her, she has
def^med her son the (...) and taken her ler^erous Lemman the Bishop: she is
accused to be consenting to ^he death of her son Alfred, and procured poison
for her son Edward; it she will (...) bare footed for her self four steps,
and for the Bishop five, upon nine (...), if she escape harmless, they shall
be af^oyled: she agreed theris: then the ^ing and many Nobles being present,
she was led blindfold to the place, where Irons lay burning hot, and passed
the nine shares unhurt, when they opened her eyes, and she s^e her self past
the pain, she kneeled down and gave thanks to God, then the King asked her
forgiveness but the Archbishop f^ed into Normandy.

The said cruel (...) Godwine took bread and eat it, in witness that he was
not guilty of the death of Alfred the Kings brother, but as soon as he had
recei^ed the bread he was choked at the table, before the king at Winsor, and
he was conveyed to Winchester and buried.

Harold the second son of Godwine succeeded Edward, 1066.
who was the last King of the S^x^ns. Then the Kings son of Denmark came
into England with 300. ships, who entered the North, and claymed the Land; the
Lords of the country rose against them, but the Danes had the victory, then
H^rold gave them a great battle, and got the victory, and slew the King of
Denmarkes son. After this victory Harold waxed proud and covetous, and would
not divide the pr^y to his Knights, but kept it to himself.

Whereas Harold had sworn to William Duke of Normandy* after the death of King
Edward, to take possession of the Kingdom of England to his use, according to
the will of King Edward, that the Duke of Normandy should succeed him. The
Duke sent to him, admonishing him of the Covenants that were agreed upon
betwixt them* Harald answered thus, That such a nice foolish promise ought not
to be holden, concerning the Land of another, without the consent of the Lords
of the same, especially because need and dread compelled him thereto.

Whereupon Duke William prepaired his Army, and sent to Pope Alexander
concerning his Title, and ^oiage, the Pope confirmed him in the same, and sent
him a Banner. And they took shipping with a great company, and landed at
Hastings in Sussex, the Normans and Harald joined battle in the place where
af^ter was builded the Abbey of Battle in Sussex, where the Normaines obtained
the victory through the Just Providence of God, where Harold was wounded in the
left eye with an arrowe, and incontinently dyed, when he had reigned nine
years, and was buried at Wal^ome.

This Duke William and King Edward were by the Fathers side, Cosen Germaynes.

After this Gregory the first, succeeded Siluester the second; he sat 4.
years, (...) month and 8. days Pope. By the testimony of Stella, Benno, and
Platina, and many others, he was a Sorce^er, and was exal^ed to the Papacy by
the Devil, upon this condition, that after his death, he should give himself
to the Devil. He demanded of the Devil how long he should ^nioy his
Popedom. He answered, Until thou say Mass in Jerusalem thou shall live. At
length the Pope* in Lent, saying Mass in the Temple of the Holy Cross, which
Church (unknown to him) was called Jerusalem* then he knew he should dye;
then repenting, he confessed his fault before all the people.

^f^er him succeeded John the 19. which brought in the Feast of All-Soules to
be celebrated next after All Saints day, by the means of Odilo, Abbot of
Cl^nake. This Abbot, thinking that Purgatory should be in Mount E^na, dreamed
upon a time that h^e, by his Mas^es, had d^liuered diverse Sou^es from thence;
saying, that he heard the voices and lamentatious of D^uils, crying out, for
that the Souls were taken from them by Masses, and Dirges fun^rall, Pope John
the 20. succeeded him, and after him Sergius the 4 after him Benedictus the 8.
then John the 12. who was pr^moted by Art Magic of diverse Sorcerers. He
brought in the fast of Saint John Baptist eauen, and of Saint Laurence. After
him followed Pope Benedictus the 9. aspiring to his Papacy by Magic,
practicing Incha^tments and Con^^rations in words: he resisted the Emperor
Henricus the third, son of Conradus, and placed in his room Pe^^us King of
Hungary. After for fear of Henricus, he was feign to sell his Sea^ so
Gratianus, called Gregory the sixth, for 1500. lib. at which time there was
three Popes in Rome together reigning, one against another, Benedictus the 9.
Siluester the 3. Gregorius the 6. for which cause, Henricus, surnamed Niger,
the Emperor, displaced these three monsters, placing for them Clement the
second; and En^cted that no Pope should be chosen without the consent of the
Emperor: and the Romans made an Oath to the Emperor to that effect. But the
Emper^ur being gone, they forgot their Oath, and poisoned the Pope; which (...)
some impute to Damasus the 2. his successor, and some to Erazutus, which
poisoned six P^p^s.

Damasus within 23. days after he was Pope, was poisoned. ^hen the Romans,
and Cardinals, sent to the Emperor for a Pope, who g^ue them Leo the 9. He
kept two Councels, one at Uercellis, where the Doctrine of Beri^garius against
the Real presence was condemned: the other was k^pt at Moguntia, where, amongst
many decrees, Pri^sts were utterly excluded from marriage, and that no ^ay man
^ight give ^eni^^ce, Bishopric, and Spiritual promo^ion, Leo being at Worms
with the Emperor on Christmas day, he excommunica^ed the Sub^eacon, for not
reading the Episte in Latin* the Archbishop being at Mass, staid and would
go^ no further, unless his Subdeacon were rest^red: whereupon the Pope
released him. Leo was poisoned by Brazutus, the first year of his Popedom.
Victor the ^. succeeded him, he kept a Council at Florence, he deposed
diverse Bishops and Priests for Simony, and Fornication: of Simony, because
they were took their li^ing of Secular m^n for money^ for fornication, because
they were married. In his ^econd year he was poisoned also* by the said
Brazutus, by the procurement of Hildebrand his master.

Stephanus the 9. succeeded him, he was chosen without the Emperor, he
accused the Emperor of Heresy, for deminishing the authority of the Roman
Sea. He likewise called it Symony for secular men to present to a Spiritual
Living. He sent Cardinal Hildebrand with Commission to reform the matter: in
the mean time he, tasting Brazutus cup, dyed.

After him the Romans set up Benedictus the tenth Pope: but Hildebrand
persuaded the Clergy to choose Nicolaus the second, who by force caused the
other Pope to vnpope himself.

Nicolas called the Council of Lateran, in which he vnderminded the Emperors
^urisdiction, and gave the full authority or choosing the Pope unto a few
Cardinals, and certain Catholic persons, and against such as be Popes without
the full consent of the Cardinals, he thundreth terrible blasts of
excommunication, accursing them and their children with denils; giving power to
Cardinals, with the Clergy and (...), to depose such person, and call a
general Council, where they will, against them. In this Council Beringarius
was forced to recant his Doctrine against the Real presence in the Sacrament,
and the term of transubstantiation was there first devised. He displaced the
right Heir of the Dukedom of Ap^^lia, and placed Robertus Quistardus to be
Duke, and general Captain^ of Saint Peter's land: but it stands not with the
Gospel, a Bishop with outward arms to conquer christian men and countries.
After he had reigned three years and a half, he met with Brazutus cup, and
turned up his heels. Then the Emperor set up Coralus Pope, but Hildebrand set
up Alexander the second, who overcame Coralus. Then there was a Council kept
at M^ntus, where Alexander was declared Pope, and it was concluded that Priests
should have no wives, and those that had wives should say no Mass: no
Benefices to be bought for money, Alle^uia to be suspended in Lent, that no
^pirituall man should enter into any Church by a Secular man, that the Pope
should be elected only by the Cardinals, this Alexander being at Mass, as he
was preaching unto the people, told them he would not sit in the place, except
he had the license of the Empe^our, which struck Heldebrand into such a furis,
that as soon as Mass was done, he forced him into a Chamber, and beat him
with his (...), rating him that he would seek favor of the Emperor; and kept
him in Custody, all^wing him but twenty pence a day: and Heldebrand incroched
all the revenues of the Church unto himself. At l^st Alexander, under this
miserable indurance, died, having been Pope 11. years and a half.

THE FOVRTH BOOK Containing other 300. years, from WILLIAM the Conqueror, to
the time of JOHN WICKLIFFE.
WILLIAM the Conqueror was the base (...) of Robert Duke of Normandy, Nephew
to King Edward after the (...) said Uictory against Harald, he was receiver
King over England, and was Crowned upon Christmas day. The year before his
coming was a great blasing Star the space of seven days, 1067.
he made the Englishmen pay for every twenty Acres of land 6. ^. yearly
wherefore many rebelled, but he conquered them: many of his Lords departed into
Scotland, wherefore he kept them that ^aried the straiter. He gave the
Nomaines the chiefest possessions of the Land, he changed all the temporal
Laws of the Realm, and set strait Laws upon the Spirituality. He builded
four strong Castles, two at York, one at Nottingham, and another at Lincoln.

In the 3. year of his reign, Harald and Canutus, sons of Swanus King of
Denmark, came into the North Contry, but, after much spoil, King William
chased them to their Ships, and he was so displeased with the Inhabitants for
favoring them, that he destroyed the Land from York to Du^ham, so that nine
years after the Province lay waste and vnman^red.

In the 4. year of his reign Malcoline King of the Scots, entered into
Northumberland and destroyed the Contry, and slew men, women, and children; but
within two years King William made such war with the Scots, that he forced
Malcome, their King to do him Homage.

In the same 4. year of this King, 1070.
there was holden a Council of the Clergy at Winchester, at which was present
two Cardinals from the Pope, and the King was there present: diverse Bishops,
Abbots, and Priors, by the means of the King, were deprived, without any
evident cause, that the Normaines might be proferred unto the rule of the
Church, as his Knights were to the rule of the Temporalty.

O^^ Thomas, a Normaine, was preferred unto the Archbishopric, of York, and
one Lanfranckus an Italian, was made Archbishop of Canterbury, betwixt them
grew a contention, about giving and taking the Oath of obedience; but the King
appeased it, and the Bishop of York, builded the Minster of York, and gave
possessions thereto. But when these two Archbishops came to Rome for their
Pale, the contreuersie renewed betwixt them for the Primacie, the Pope not
disposed to decide the matter, sent them home to have their matter determined;
so the mat^er came before the King and Clergy at Windsor, the Archbishop of
Canterbury said; Since the time that Austin converted this Land to
Christianity, and was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all
England, by Pop^ Gregory, the Primacie has succeeded there ever since, and
being York tooks the Christian Faith from thence, it was reason it should be
subject thereto. The Bishop of York answered, that the Britains, the first
possessors of this Kingdom, which endured from Brutus to Cadwalader, 2076.
year^s, under an hundred and two Kings, and they received the Christian Faith
in the year of Christ 162. In the time of Lucius their King, Elutherius being
Pope, who sent thither Fagamus and Damianus Preachers, who ordained in the
realm 28. Bishops with two Archbishopes, Theonus Archbishop of London, and
Theodosius Archbishop of York, so it continued 300. years* until the Saxons
(being Infidels) subdued the Realm, and divided it into seven Kingdom, and
so it continued until Gregory sent hither. Austin to convert the Realm, who
was after made Archbishop of Canterbury; and it was Gregory's purpose to reduce
the new Church of the Saxons to the order that was in the old time amongst the
Britains, under the two Metropolitaines of London and York: yet he gave
Austen this prerogative during his life time, to have the Jurisdiction above
all the Bishops and Priests in England; but after his dec^ase London and York
to ouersee the charge, and he willed no distinction of Honor to be betwixt
London and York, but that he that had been longest Bishop of the place should
be preferred. Upon this it was decreed that York should be subject to
Canterbury, and that wheresoever Canterbury would hold a Council, York, with
his Bishops, should come thither, and be obedient to his Decrees; and when
Canterbury should decease, York should come to Duer to consecrate the new
Archbishop: but if York decease, his successor should resort to Canterbury,
and where the Bishop of Canterbury should appoint, to receive his consecration,
swearing obedience.

In the 9 year of King Williams reign, another Counsel was holden at London,
w^ere was decreed that the Bishop of York should sit on the right hand of
Canterbury, and London on the left and in his absence Winchester; and that
Bishops should translate the Seas from v^^lages to cities; that Monks should
have nothing propper, and if any so had, he dying vnconf^ssed, should not be
buried in the Churchyard; that no Clarke or Monk should be retained in another
Di^cesse without Letters testimonial; that none should speak in the Council
without leave, but Bishops and Abbots; that none should buy or sell any ^ffice
in the Church; that neither Bishop, Abbot, nor any of the Clergy should be at
the Judgment of any man's death or dismembring.

At this time diverse good Bishops displaced Monks, and restored married
Priests again, the Bishop of Winchester placed above 40. Canons in stead of
Monks for his part, but this godly enterprise was stopped by Lanfranke the
Archbishop of Canterbury; he plucked down the old Church of Canterbury and
builded up the new.

After the death of the Pope Hildebrand succeeded, who was surnamed Gregory the
7. he was a Sorcerer, and the principal cause of all the per^urbation that has
been since in the Church, for before he wrought his feats, setting up and
displacing what Bishops he listed, setting them against Emperors, and
destroying Matrimony under color of chasti^ie; the Chuch was in some order,
and Popes quietly ruled under Christian Emperors, and were defended by them.

He first, contemning the authority of the Emperor, thrust in himself to be
Pope, vanting himself to have both the Ecclesiastical, and the Temporal
sword, committed to him of Christ, and full power to bind and loose what he
lifted, he challenged all the Dominion both of the East and West Church; he set
at light Kings and Emperors, who reigned but at his godamercie; Bishops and
Prelates as his underlings he kept in awe, suspending, cursing, and chopping
off their heads. He ^^irred up wars, releasing Oaths, Fidelity, and due
allegiance of Subjects to their Princes. To this scope tended chiefly all his
practices, to abolish the marriage of Priests, and to translate the authority
Imperial unto the Clergy, as appeared before in the Council of Later^n; for
though he was not then Pope in name, yet was he Pope indeed, and ruled the Pope
as he listed. In a Council which he held at Rome, he enacted that no Priest
hereafter should mary, that those that were married should be Divorced, and that
none hereafter should be admitted Priest, but should swear perpetual
Chastity.

The Clergy of France resisted this Decree, and said it was repugnant to the
word of God, that the Pope should take from Priests that which God and Nature
had given them; and against the Doctrine of Saint Paul; I have no commandment
of God touching Virginity, and he that cannot live continent, let him mary.
And that it was against the Canons of the Apostles, and the Nicen Council: and
that thereby would be opened a pernicious window to uncleanness, and
fornication, and conclud^d, they had rather give up their benefices then
forsake their lawful wives against the word of Christ. Likewise, the Priests of
Germany were as stout against the Pope: but at last, this greediness of
Livings, in weak Priests, made them to yield up their godly liberty to wicked
tyranny.

He preached, in a great assembly, that the Emperor should die before Saint
Peter's day next, and should be so dejected, that he should not be able to
gather together above six knights, and that if this prophecy were not
fulfilled, they should pluck him from the Altar, and he would be no more Pope.
And when he had gone about diverse ways to murder the Emperor, and yet God
preserved him beyond the appointed time, them subtily he turned his tale, and
said, he meant of the soul of the King.

About the time Hildebrand was made Pope, there was great wars betwixt Otho
Duke of Saxony and the Emperor, which was a fit occasion for the Pope to work
his seats. First, he excommunicated all that received Spiritual livings of
Laymen, and all the giuers thereof, which he called symony, whereupon he sent
Legates to the emperor, to appear before him at the Council of Lateran. The
Emperor appeared not: whereupon he threatened him excommunication, and to
deprive him of his Crown, If he would not renounce the heresy of Symony,
which was, giving of Spituall Livings. Wherefore Centius, a Roman Captain,
caught the Pope, and shut him up into a Tower; the next day the citizens
plucked down the Tower, and delivered the Pope, and cut off the noses of the
men of Centius, but he escaped to the Emperor. The emperor, being moved with
this arrogancy, called a Council at Worms, where all the Bishops of Germany
deposed Hildebrand. The Pope, in his Council of Lateran, excommunicated and
deprived as many as took the Emperors part, and excommunicated the emperor,
deprived him of his empire, and all his subjects of their Oath of alleagiance.
As soon as he rose out of his papal seat, to excommunicate the Emperor, the
seat being but new, and of strong timber, suddenly shiuered and rent us pieces.
The princes of Almany all concluded to forsake Henry, and choose another
emperor, except he would submit himself, and obtain the Popes pardon. The
Emperor, with his wife and young son, all having forsaken him, laying apart
his regal ornaments, in sharp winter, came bare foo^^d to the gate of
Canossus, where fasting from morning to night, humbly he desired to be
absolved, and to come in and speak with the Pope, Thus he continued and could
not be let in, in three days: the fourth day, being brought to the Pope, he
surrendered his Crown and princely ornaments unto him, desiring he might be
forgiven, and he would never do against him again. He told him, he would not
absolve him, but upon condition he should do such penance as he should
enjoin him, and appear at the Council when he should send for him, and
answer there all objections laid against him* and stand to his pleasure
whether he should have his Kingdom restored, or loose it; and should do
nothing as a King, until the cause were tried: and, upon his Oath, for
performance hereof, he was absolved. For all this the Pope sent to France, for
their consents, that Rodulphus should be Emperor. Then there was sent to
Rodulphus b^ing Duke or Sw^^ia a crown from the pope, with this very, Petra
dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho. Then he gave in commandment to the
Archbishop of Ments, and of Cullen, to elect Rodulphus emperor, and anoint
him King, and defend him with all their strength. Whilst this conspiracy was
in hand, the Emperor was absent, and the Popes Ambassadors with him, and,
unknown to him, Rodulphus was elected Emperor: the Bishop of Stasbrough (...)
Henry the emperor thereof, who seeing the Saxons so bent against him, marched
forward with his Soldiers to defend his right, but first sent to Rome,
requiring the Pope to excommunicate Rodulphus. But he minding nothing less,
sent word that he would not condemn any person without hearing the cause: so,
under color of Law, disapp^inted Henry; who being forsaken on every side,
with his men attempted battle with Rodulphus: there was great slaughter on
both sides, but no victory, so yet both chal^nged the Empire. Then they both
sent to Rome for the Popes determination, to whether of them the Empire
appertained: the Pope willed them to break up their A^mies, promising shortly
to call a Council, where this matter should be disputed; but before the
messengers returned, they had another conflict, but no victory So both being
wearied in war, (the Romish beast being the cause thereof) and the Pope
perceiving these wars would be to the great calamity, not only of Germany,
but to other Nations, devised another way to help Rodulphus; sent a Commission
to the Archbishop of Treuers, and others, giving them in charge to call a
Council to sit at Almany to determine ^he right, promising what they
determined, he by the au^horitie of God omnipotent, and of Saint Peter and of
Sant Paul would ratify the same: but Henry the Emperor would not permit a
Council to be had in Germany, except they would first deprive Rodulphus. The
Legat^ perceiving that was against the Popes drift returned. The Pope hearing
his purpose disappointed; drue another excommunication against Henry the
Emperor, hereauing him of his Kingdom, sending them through all places,
thinking thereby to further Rodulphus part, biginning his excommunication with
these words Blessed Saint Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and thou Paul also,
teacher of the Gentiles, give ear unto me a little, I beseech you, and gently
hear me etc. I take this matter in hand that my brethren (whose salvation I
seek) may the more obey me, and know that I trust upon your defense (next to
Christ and his mother) and thereby resist the wicked, and am ready to help the
faithful. I entered this Seat against my will with tears, thinking my self
unworthy to occupy so high a Throne, I chose not you, but you chose me, and
^ayd this great burden upon Our shoulders. Then reciting the whole matter of
the Story before, concludes therefore; ^ trusting in the Judgment and mercy
of God, and in the supportation of the blessed Uirgin, and bold upon your
authority (meaning S. Peter and S. Paul) do lay the sentence of Curse upon
Henry and his adherents. And again. I take his regal Government from him*
discharging all Christian men of their Oaths to him, and forbidding them
hereafter to obey him in any thing, but to take Rodulphus for their King, etc.
Therefore* O blessed Princes of the Apostles, confirm this your authority
that all may know as you have power to bind and loose in Heaven, you have also
power on earth, to give and take away Empires, Kingdoms Principa^ities, and
whatsoever belongs to mortal men on earth. For if you have power to Iudg^ of
matters of God, how much more of profane things; and if you can Judge the
Angels which rule proud Princes, how much more the princes. Let all Kings and
princes, by this example, know your power, that they may fear to contemn the
commandment of the holy Church. Exercis^ quickly this Judgment upon Henry,
that all may see him fall from his Kingdom, not by chance, but by your only
work: notwithstanding, this I would crave of you, that he being brought to
repentance, through your intercession, yet in the day of Judgment may find
grace with the Lord.

Pope Hildebrand further deposed the Archbishop of Rauenna for taking his part.
commanding all priests not to obey him, and sent another with full authority
thither. Upon this Henry and Rodulphus tried the matter with sword, with much
blood: whereas Henry, with Gods favor against the Judgment of Hildebrand, had
the victory, Rodulphus greatly wounded, was carried to Herbipolis, where he
commanding the Bishops* and doers of this conspiracy to be brought to him, and
lifting up his right hand, which was deadly wounded said; This hand gave the
Oath to Henry my prince, and has so often fought against him by your
in^^igation but in vain* go and perform you Oath and alegiance to him your
King, for I must go to my Fathers, and so dyed.

Henry, after his enemy subdued, and wars ceased in Germany, remembering the
injuries of Hildebrand, by whom he was twice excommunicated, expulsed from his
Kingdom, and making suit three days in sharp winter, and could find no
favor, and by him his enemy was incited and aided against him, assembled a
Council of 1083. Bishops at Brixienc^, where he purged himself, and accused
Hildebrand of diverse c^imes: to be an usurper, perjured, a Nigroma^cer, a
Sorcerer, a sower of discord; and that his Father had set in diverse Popes in
Rome by his assignement, without other election, and now this Bishop, contrary
to his Oath, thrust in himself, without the will and knowledge of him, being
their King and Magistrate. For in the time of Henry the third, his Father, this
Hildebrand and others, had took a corporal Oath, that during the life of him,
and this Henry his son, now king, they should no^ presume themselves
norsuffer any other to aspire to the Papal Seat, without the approbation of
the said Emperors. Wherefore, the aforesaid Council, with one agreement,
condemned this Gregory that he should be deposed.

The Sentence of the Council of Brixia against Hildebrand.
BEcause it in known this Bishop, not elected of God, but intruded himself by
f^aud and money, subue^ted Ecclesiastical order, disturbed the government of
the Empire, ^^nacing death of body and soul unto our peaceable king, set up a
per^ured king, making discor^s amongst friends and brethren, Diuorcements
amongst the married: (for he took away the marriage of Priests, as Henricus
Mutius witnesses) therefore we here in the name of God congregated, do
proceed in Canonical Judgment against Hildebrand, a man most wicked,
preaching Sacrilege and burning, maintaining perjury, and murders, calling in
question the Catholic Faith of the body and blo^d of Christ, following of
Diuinations and dreams, a manifest Nigromancer, a Sorcerer, infected with a
Pith^nical spirit. We adiudge him to be deposed, and expelled, and unless he
depart upon the hearing hereof, to be pe^pstually condem^^d. This be^ing sent
to Rome, they elected Guibertus Archbishop of Rauenna, which was deposed by
Hildebrand as aforesaid, in his place, and named him Clement the 3. And because
Hildebrand would not give over his hold, the Emperor with an Army came to Rome
to depose him: and Hildebrand sending to the Countess Mathilda, before
mentioned, required her, in remission of all her sins, to withstand the
Emperor, and so she did; but the Emperor besieged the City all the Lent, and
after Easter got it, and coming into the Temple of Saint Peter, placed Clement
in his Papacy Hildebrand ^^ed into Ad^ans Tower, where being besieged, he sent
for Robert Guischardus a Normaine, who with his Army, when the Emperor was
gone, burst in at one of the gates of the C^^y, spoiled it, and delivered
Hildebrand, and carried him to Campania, where not long after he dyed in exile.
In the mean time, whilst the Emperor was at Rome, the Abbot of Cluniake, and
the people of Rome, exhorted Hildebrand to Crown Henry Emperor at Lateran,
and they would ^ause the Emp^rour to depart with his Arm^ to whom he answered,
he would, so the Emperor would submit himself, ask pardon, amend, and
promise obedience. The Emperor not agreeing to the conditions, departed, and
took the new Pope with him. The Emperor was wont to pray in the Temple of
Saint Mary, Hildebrand knowing by spies the place where he was wont to pray
hired one to carry up stones to the roof of the Church, to let them fall upon
his head when he was at prayers; the hireling, ^aying his stones in order, fell
down and was slain. The Romans understanding the truth, drew him three
days, by the legs, through the streets for example; but the Emperor, of his
meekness commanded him to b^ buried. Hildebrand, being a dying, bewailed his
faults, and sent a Cardinal to the Emperor to desire him forgiveness, and to
pardon the Emperor and all his par^akers, quick and dead, of the danger of
excommunication. From this Pope sprang all mischief, pride, pomp, and
tyranny, which since reigned in his successors; hence was the subjection of
Temporal Regiment to the Spiritual, and the suppression of Priests marriages:
here came in the authority of both Swords to the Spiritualty, so that the
Magistrates could do nothing in giving of Bishoprics, benefices; in calling
of Counceis, in correcting the excesses of the Clergy, but the Pope must do
all. Nor no Bishop, nor Passor, in his own Parish, could excommunicate, or use
any (...) discipline, against his flock, but it was only the Popes
Prerogative. In him was the first example of persecuting Empe^ours and kings
with rebellion and excommunication; then Victor the third was made Pope, who
likewise showed himself staut against the Emperors; 1087.
but God gave the shrewde cow short horns: some say he was poisoned in his
Chalice, and reigned but one year and a half. Notwithstanding the Popes
followed still the steps of Hildebrand, as the Kings of Israel Jeroboam: in
the time of this Victor began the Order of Monks of the Charterhouse.

Next him V^banus the 2. was Pope, which confirmed the Acts of Hildebrand, and
gave new Decrees against Henry the Emperor, and against Clement the Pope, he
held two Councels, one at Plac^^tia, the other called Synodus Claromontana,
wherein he caused all Christian Princes ^o war against the Sa^^cens, 1094.
for recovering Jerusalem: whereupon 30000. were appointed for the same
business, by the said Vrbanus.

The King of Galacia, with the whole Di^ces of Saint James, was excommunicated
for the prisoning of a certain Bishop.

About this time the King of England favored not much the Sea of Rome, for
their pride and exactions, and would not suffer his subjects to give to Rome,
saying; The followed not Pet^rs steps that h^nted for rewards, 1908.
nor had Peter's power, which had not his holiness.

The order of Cisteri^ns was first est^blished in Burgundia, by the same
Vrbanus the seven Canonical hours were first instituted in the Church* By
him, the order of the Cartus^an M^nkes was confirmed. He Decreed no Bishop to
be made, but under the name of some place, he Decreed that Ma^^ens and hours
of the ^ay should every day be said, and that the Mass of our Lady should be
said every Saturday, and the Clergy that had wives, should be deprived of their
Order, and that it was lawful for subjects to break the Oath of Alegiance
with such Princes as were excommunicated, and that it was not lawful for a man
and his wife, both together* to Christen a child, with many more matters.

After him followed Pascalis the 2. 1100.
he putting on a purple Uesture and attire on his head, was brought upon a
white Palfrey, into Lateran, where a Scepter was given him, and a girdle about
him, which having seven Keys, with seven Seals, to token the seven powers
by the seven graces of the holy Ghost of binding, loosing, shutting openning,
sealing, resigning and Judging, which the Emperor Henry the 4. hearing of,
thought to come to Italy to salute the new Pope, but understanding the Popes
mind against him, changed his purpose. This Pascalis d^posed all such Abbo^s,
and Bishops, as the Emperor had set up; and banished many that striued, at
that time, for the Papacy, and made an Army against Clement, whom the
Emperor made Pope, as aforesaid, and being put to flight, not long after d^^d.
About the same time, the Bishop of Fluence began to teach and Preach of
Antichrist then to be borne, as Sabeli^us (...). Pascalis put to silence the
said Bishop, and condemned his Bo^kes, by a Council, which he assembled at
Tre^as. Married Priests, in this Council, were condemned for Nicholaitans. All
Laymen, that gave Spiritual Dignities, were condemned of Symony. The Statu^e
of Priests Tithes was renewed, counting the selling thereof sin against the
holy Ghost. He renewed the excommunication of Hildebrand against Henry the
Emperor, caused cer^aine Bishops to deprive him of his Crown, and to place
his sonn^ Henry the 5. in his Fathers room; these Bishops required of the
Emperor his Diadem* P^^ple, ^ing, and other ornaments of his Crown: when the
Emperor would know the reason, they aleadged, the Popes pleasure, and for
selling Spiritual Livings: but these Bishops being demanded of him, could not
deny but he took nothing of them, they being preferred by him: well, said
he, you requi^e me well, and admonishing them of their Oath and alegiance, as
he sat in his Throne, they pl^cke away all his Cu^periall Ornaments. The good
Emperor, being destitute, said, Videat Deus and Iudicat. Thus leaving him,
they confirmed the Kingdom to his Son, and caused him to drive his Father
out, who with nine persons, did ^^y to the Dukedom of Li^burg, the Duke
bearing of it, made after him, the Emperor having before put him from his
Kingdom, being afraid of death, cra^ed pardon of him, and not reuengement, the
Duke pitying his estate, remitted his displeasure, and received him to his
Castle, and collecting men of War, brought him to Colin. His Son hearing
thereof, besieged the City, but he escaped by night to Leodium, thither all
they that had compassion and consiant hearts resorted to him, so he was able
to pitch a Field against his enemies, and so did, he desired his friends, if
they that had the victory, they would spare his son, in that sight the Father
had the victory, and the Son was chased, but in another battle the Son had
the victory, and the Father was taken, who being utterly dispossessed, was
feign to crave of the Bishop of Spire, whom he had done much for, to have a
Pr^bendry in the Church, 1103.
to serve in our Ladies quire, who swore by our Lady he should have none. Thus
he came to Leodium, and there, for sorro ^ dyed, after he had reigned 50.
^eares. Pope Pascalis caused his body to be taken our of the grave, and to
remain at Spites five years without burial.

About this time Anselmus Bishop of Canterbury, which brought in the Conception
of our ^ady to be hal^wed; accused King Henry the first of England, to
Pascal^s for making certain Bishops by his own election; the Kings Proctor,
in his behalf, signif^^d to the people, that the King, for the value of his
Kingdom, would not forgo his right, in setting in Bishop* and Pr^lates. The
Pope answered. Before ^od, I for the price of my head, will not permit it unto
him. The Archbishop returning home, being the Popes Legate, was turned out of
his Bishopric, and goods.

Henry the 5. Emperor, after his fathers death, reigned twenty years, being
at Rome, 1107.
could not be crowned, except he would relinquish his claim of making Popes,
or any other Bishops: there was such a stir made by the Pope, that if the
Emperor had not defended himself with his own hands, he had been slain.
But the Emperor having the victory, took Pope Pascalis, led him out of the
city, made him agree to cr^wne him, and to allow him his prerogative of
election of Popes, and other Bishops; and being crowned, returned with the Pope
to Rome. But as soon as the Emperor returned to Germany, the Pope called a
Syno^e, ^euoking his agreement, and exc^mmunicated the Emperor, as he had done
his Father. The Emperor (...) a^ it, marched to Rome, and put the Pope to
flight, and placed another in his (...). The German Bishops, with all they
might, stirred the Saxons against the^r Caesar, it gr^we at length to a pitched
Field. The Emperor, seeing no end of his conflicts, 1115.
was feign to forgo his priu^ledge of the Popes election, and other things
belonging to the Church, and Churchmen.

In the time of Pascalis, li^ed Barnardus, of whom sprung the Barnardine Monks.

The Emperor had no issue, his wife was Mathildas, daughter of King Henry the
first of England, which was Gods just Judgment for deposing his Father.
Pascalis being dead, Pope Gelasius was chosen by the Cardinals, without the
Emperor; and the Emperor made another Pope, 1118.
Gregorius the 8. which made Pope Gelasius (...) into France, and there dyed.
The Cardinales choose Calixus the 2. Pope, without the Emperor; who before he
came to his Seat in R^me, sent his Legate to excommunicate the Emperor, and
drove Gregorius, the Emperors Pope, out of Rome. The Emperor fearing the
vain thunderbolts of the Popes curse, perswad^d by his Princes and f^iends,
resigned his ^y^le, pertaining to the (...) of the Pope, and the inuestiture of
Bishops. This being set vy in writing, in the Church of Lateran, in triumph of
the Emperor thus sub^ued. Then the Pope made out, and took his fellow Pope
Gregorius, set him on a Camel, his face backward, holding the tail for a
bridle, brought him thro^gh the streets of Rome, and sho^^ him, and thrust him
into a Monastery. ^ee established the Decree of the Papal Sea against the
Emperor, and brought in the four Ember-fasts, called ember ^aies. He ordained
the order of Monks, called Praemonstratenses. It was (...) by him to be judged
adultery for any person to put away his Living or Bishoprick^ ^uring his life,
according to Saint Paul; The wife is bound unto the husband as long as he
lives.

By a general Council at Rhemes, he decreed, all Clergy men should put away
their wives, 1119.
or be deprived of their Livings, whereupon an English writer made these verse^:

O bone Calixte, nunc omnis clerus odit te.
Quondam presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti,
Hoc destruisti, post quam tu Papa fuisti.
Pope Honorius the ^. succeeded him, he sent one John Cremensis Cardinal,
Legate into England, ^12^.
and Scotland, in color of redress, but to fsill his purse, as all other did
after him in those days; afte^ he had well refreshed himself in Bishops and
Abbots houses, he assembled the whole Clergy, inquired of Priests wives, and
made a Sta^tute they should have no women in their houses, unless i^^h kindred
as were not to be ^usp^cted, and the offend^r of this Act, to forfaite all his
Spiritual promotion, and that no kindred should mary until the seventh
generation; and r^fling within hours at night, was taken in the same vice he
was so strict against, to no little shame of the Clergy.

At this time the Emperor Henry the 5. dyed without issue, 1127.
the Imperial crown came to Lotharius Duke of Saxon. Not long after deceased
Henry the first, King of England.

In this Honorius his time, came a Priest to Rome, called Arnulphus, who
preached vehemently against the pride, avarice, and incontinencie of the
Clergy, and exhorted them to follow Christ. He was well respected of the
Citizens, but the Cardinals and Clergy hated him, and made him away in the
night by drowing him. Sabelicus and Platina say, they hanged him. His Martyrdom
(he said) was revealed to him by an Angel in the Desert, and said unto them. I
know you will kill me privily, and no marvel; for if Saint Peter were here,
and rebuked your vices that exceed, you would serve him so, and said with a
loud voice; I am not afraid to suffer for the truth, but God will be revenged,
you play the blind guides, and lead the people to Hell.

In the second Book of Councels, printed at Colen, either this Arnulphus or
about his time, one complains of the number of Holly days, and the increase
of vice thereby* whoores, say they, vantage more in one Holy day, then in
fifty other days: and of the curious singing in Cathedral Churches, wherein
much time is spent that might better be be^towed in other Sciences, and
learning. And of the multitude of begging Friars, and other professed men and
women, the cause of Idleness, and uncomely life; of promotion of evil
Prelates, and their negligence in reproving vice. Of the wantonness of their
servants, and their excess in apparel: Of the excessive gains of the
prelates and their officers for their Seals: giving them, they care not for
what, so they get money. That Prelates be too slack in looking to non
residents. Of giving benifices, not for godliness and learning, but for
favor, friendship, or hope of gain, of which comes the great ignorance in
the Church. How Prelates wast the Church goods in superfluity on kinsfolks,
or worse ways, and not on the poor. How, by negligence, the Books of the
old Co^ncels, and o^ the new, are not to be found, which should be kept in all
Cathedral Churches. The negligence of Pre^ates, and their voluptuousness, by
example of Storks, whose nature is, if one leau^ his mate, and join with
another, all the rest fly on him, and pluck his feathers off: so, and much
more, should prelates d^e to their fellows, that defile so many* and stink in
the whole Church. And as E^dras, in purging Israel from strange women, began
with the priests, so now the purgation ought to begin with them, as it is
written in Ezechi^ll: Begin with my Sarctuary. etc.

Again, if the whole Realm of France was interdicted, because Phillip the
King, had but one Concubine, which was not his lawful wife. And the King of
Portugal, sequestered from his Dominion, and thought by the Clergy
insufficient to rule. What shall be said to prelates which abuse men's Wives,
Uirgings, Nuns, and are insufficient to take charge of Souls.

About this ti^^e the Order of the Knights of the Rhodes, called Iohannits, and
the Order of the Te^^lers rose up.

After Honorius succeeded Pope Innocentius the 2. At every mutation of new
Popes, 1130,
came new troubles, sometime two Popes, sometimes three together. The Romans
elected another Pope, called Anacletus, betwixt whom was great conflicts. The
Duke of Sicile taking with Anacletus, until Lotharius the Emperor drove
Anacletus (...) of Italy.

This Pope decreed that whose struck a shaven Priest, should be
excommunicated, and not absolved but only by the Pope.

Steven king of England, 1133.
reserved to himself the authority of bestowing Spiritual livings, and of
inuesting Prelates.

At which time Lodouicus the Emperoue would have done the like, had not
Bernardus give in him contrary council.

At this time came in the manner of cursing with Book, 1144.
Bell, and Candle, in a Council of London, holden by William Bishop of
Winchester, under Pope Celestinus, successor of Innocentius.

After Lotharius succeeded in the Imperial Crown, Conradus Nephew of Henry
the fifth, he reigned 15. years. There was diverse Popes in his days, as
Celestinus the 2. Lucius the 2. E^genius the 3. at which times the Romans
endeauored to recover the old manner of choosing Con^uls, and Senators; but the
Popes, being in their ruff, would not abide it* which caused much civil
war; insomuch that Pope Lucius sent (...) the Emperor for aid, who thought
to have dest^oyed them in the Senate: but they were ware o^ it, and were all in
array, the Pope being in the fight was well pelted with stones and blows, that
he lived not long after.

Eugenius cursed the Romans for that matter with excommunication, 1145.
which when he saw would not serve, came upon them with his Host, and compelled
them to abolish their Consuls* and to take such presidents as the Pope should
assign.

Then followed Anastatius the 4. after him Adrianus the 4. an English man, 1154.
called Breakespeare, belonging once to Saint Albons, he likewise kept great
slur^e with the Citizens of Rome, to abolish Consuls, with cursing and wars
until he had brought them under.

In the mean time Fredericus, called Barbarossa, succeeded Conradus in the
Empire, marched to Italy to subdue rebels; the Pope and his Clergy met him to
have aid against their enemies, the Emperor lighted to receive him, and held
his left stirrup where he should the right, the Pope displeased, he smiling,
excused himself as not used to hold stirrops, and that it was not of duty:
the next day the emperor sent for him, received him, and held his right
stirrup, and all was well. When they came in the Pope told the Emperor that
his predecessors left some token of benevolence for crowning of them; as
Carolus Magnus subdued the Lumbards, Otho the Bexingarians, Lotharius the
Normans; therefore required him to restore the Country of Ap^lia to the Church
of Rome. He and his Princes seeing he could not otherways ^e crowned, promised
to do it, and the next day was crowned. Whilst the Emperor was providing for
Apulia, the Pope excommunicated William Duke thereof, and sent Emanuell
Emperor of Constantinople, incensing him to war against the said Duke. The
Duke hearing it, sent unto the Pope for peace, promising to restore what he
would, which the Pope, by the Council of the Cardinals, would not grant. The
Duke put Emanuell the Emperor to flight, and besieged the C^tie Bene^entum,
where the Pope and Cardinals were looking for victory, that they were glad to
entreat for the peace they refused, the Duke only granted not to invade the
possessions of Rome, and the P^pe made him King of both Sicils.

The Pope was so troubled with the Senators and Consuls of Rome, that when his
curses would not avail, he was feign to remove from Rome to Ariminium.

The Emperor, considering the wrongs the Pope had done to his predecessors
required of the Bishops of Germany Homage and Oath of alegiance, commanding if
the Popes Legates came thither without sending for, they should not be received,
charging his subjects not to appeal to Rome, and prefixed his name in his
Letters before the Popes name.

Whereupon the Pope wrote to him, that God promises long life to them that
honored their Parents, and death to them that cursed them: and the word of
truth says* He that exal^eth himself shall be brought low. He marvelled not
a little that he showed not the reverence he ought to blessed Saint Peter* and
the holy Church of Rome (...) prefer your name before Ours, wherein your
incur the note of insolency, or rather arrogancy. How keep you the Oath of
fidelity to Saint Peter and us, seeing you require Homage and Alegiance of
them that be Gods, and all the sons of the high God, and presume to join
their holy hands with yours; and exclude from your Churches and Cities our
Cardinals, Legates from our side; amend, amend: ^hile you go^ about to obtain
the things you have not, I fear me, your Honor will loose the things which
you have.

The Emperor wrote again, that Justice gives to every one his, We derogate
not from our parents, as We have received our Imperial Crown of them, we
render their due and ^^ue Honor to them again: and forasmuch as duty of all
sorts of men is to be sought out, did not Constantine restore Peace to the
Church, and of his liberal benig^ity, and other Princes, gave whatsoever
Regality or Patrimony the Sea of your Papacy has, as is to be found in the
Chronicles? Of them that be Gods by adoption, and hold Lordships, why may not
we require Homage and sworn Alegiance, when he that is you^ master and ours
paid ^oule and tribute for himself and Saint Peter to Caesar, giving you
example to do the like, and therefore says, Learn of me, for I am humble
and meek. therefore* either render our Lordships, or if they b^ too sweet to
you, give God his due, and Caesa^ his due. We shut out the Cardinals because we
see them no preachers but prowlers, not repayrers of peace, bat rakers for
money; not Pillars, b^t pollers of Church. (...).
When we see them such as the Church requires them to be, then they shall find
us ready to receive them with stipends and all necessaries. By your inferring
such questions, not conducing to Religion* you incur no little blemish of
your humility, which is keeper of all virtues; let your Fatherhood beware,
least in moving such questions, as seem unseemly for you to do, you give on
offense to such as ^^pend on your word, and give ear to your mouth as an
evening shoure. We cannot (...) fell you of that we hear, seeing now the
detestable beast of pride does cr^epe into the Seat of Peter, providing always
as much as we may for the peace of the Church.

Upon this, the Pope sent a Bull against the Emp^^our, excommunicating him
conspired with the Duke of Apulia, and sought all ways to i^fest him, and set
all men against him, especially the Clergy.

The Pope wrote to the Bishops of Germany, that the Empire of Rome was
translated from the Greeks to the Almaines, so that the King of Almaine could
not be called Emperor* before he were crowned by the Pope. Before his
consecration he was a King, after an Emperor: he has the name of King by the
Princes election, the name of Emperor, Augustus, and Caesar, by our
consecration, ergo, by us he reigns Emperor. Pope Zacharias promoted Carolus
to the name of Emperor, after that* all the Kings of Almaine were called
Emperors, (...).
and Advocates to the Sea Apostolic. So that Apu^ia, conquered by him, was
subject to the Pope; which Apuli^, with the citi^ of Rom^, is ours, and not the
Emperors. Our seat is at Rome, the Emperors at Aquis ^n Ardenna, which is a
wood in France. Whatsoever the Emperor has, he has of us: we may translate
it to the Grees again, as Zacharias did to the Almaines, it lies in our power
to give it whom we will being set up of God above gentiles and Na^ions, to
destroy, pluck up, build and plant.

When this Emperor Predericus came first to Rome, the Pope showed him a
picture of Lotharius the second Emperor, with verses, showing how he first
swear to the city, after was made the Popes man, and so received the Crown of
him. Fredericus di^^red that the picture might be abolish^d, least hereafter it
cause discention.

The Pope seeing the emperor loath to be subject to his Sea, devised all
crafty ways to bring him under. First, taking occasion by the imprisonment of
the Bishop of Laodicia, sent unto him diverse sharp Letters, and not so sharp
as prou^ and disdainefull, wherein the salutation was, Salutat vos beatissimus
pater noster Papa, and vniuersitas Cardinalium, ille vt pater, hii vt fratres,
meaning he should understand himself to be subject to the Pope, no less then
the Cardinals; where reciting, what many and great benefits, and fullness of
Honor, he had received of him. The emperor with his princes, perceiving
whereat the Pope, by his Legates, shot, could not ^^ree such a proud Message, so
that much contention fell betwixt the Legat^ and princes, of whom then, said
the Legates does Caesar receive his Empery, if not of the Pope? With which
words the princes were so offended, that they would have v^ed violence, if the
Emperor had not stayed them, and commanded the Legates away straight, charging
them not to turn by the way to any person, but straight to depart home. And to
certify the whole Empire of the matter, he directed Letters to this effect.
First, he greatly sorroweth that the root and foundation of dissentions, and
evil, should rise from the holy Church, imprinted with the Seal of love and
pear of Christ, where with we fear (except God prevent it) the whole body of
the Church will be polluted, and the unity broken between the Spiritual and
Temporal Regiment. Then he shows them the manner of the proud Legacy as
aforesaid, and touching his straight sending them home, without tarying, or
going out of the way, was, because there was Letters found about them to the
Churches of Germany, to spoil the Altars of our Churches, to carry away the
Jewels thereof, to fley the lym^es and plats of the golded crosses thereof, etc.

This Letters of Caesar fretted the Pope, who wrote again to the Bishops of
Germany, accusing the Emperor, willing them to work against him what they
could. They answered him again with all obedience, yet excusing the Emperor,
and blaming him rather, exhor^ing him henceforth to temper his Letter and
Legacies with more modesty, which council he followed, seeing he could
prevail no other way.

In his time lived Gracianus, compiler of the Popes decrees. Petrus Lumbardus,
Pet^us Comester, Auicenna, Abbas Ioachimus, 1159.
and the order of Hermits rose by William Duke of Aquitania, and afterward a
Friar.

This Hadrianus walking with his Cardinals to a place called Auignon, was
choked with a Fly* getting into his thr^at, when he had reigned 4. years and
odd months, He would say in his latter time, there is no more miserable life
then to be a Pope, and come to it by blood, which is not to succeed Peter, but
Romulus, who to reign alone, slew his brother. Though he was bad, his
successor was worse, Pope Alexander the 3. The Emperor, with nine Cardinals,
set up another Pope, Victor the 4. betwixt whom there was great and long
discord.

The Emperor being required therefo, sent for them both to hear their cause,
and Judge the matter. Victor came, but Alexander ^isdainfully refused to
appear. Whereupon the Emperor, with full consent of his Bishops and Clergy
about him, ratified the (...) ^lection of Victor, and so brought him into the
City to be received and placed. Alexander flying into france, accursed them
bath, as maan to be cast out of all Christian (...) sending Letters there of
into all Christiandome; and with money and flattery, not the greatest part of
the City to savor him, and to set vy such Consuls for his purpose: (...)
returned from France to Rome, and was received with much savor, through the
help of Phillip the french king. The Emperor hearing thereof, came with great
power to Italy, where he destroyed great cities, and came to Rome, required the
Citizens that the cause betwixt the (...) Popes might be decided, and he that
had the bestright* to be taken for Pope, and then he would restore to them that
which he had taken. Alexander, doubting his part, and the wills of the Citizens,
having ships prepared, fet^hed a course about to Uenis. The Emperor required
the Uenetians to send him, but they would not: wherefore Fredericus sent
thither his Sonn^ Otho, with men and ships well appointed, charging him to
attempt nothing before his coming: notwithstanding he joined with the
Uenetians in battle, and was overcome, taken, and brought into the City. The
farther to redeem his Son, was compelled to submit himself to the hope and
entreat peace.

To the Emperor coming to Uenis at S. Marks Church, where the Pope was,
there to take his absolution, was hid to kneels down at the popes feet, the
proud Pope set his foot upon the Emperors neck, and said.

Super aspidem and basilicum ambulabis, and concultabis leonem et Draconem. ^e
an^i^^red; Non tibi, sed Petro. The Pope again. Et mihi, and Petro. The
Emperor fearing more quarreling, held his peace, and peace was made betwixt
them. First, that he should receive Alexander for true Pope; then, that he
should restore to the Church of Rome all that he took from it, thus he
obtained his son.

Alexander was Pope ^1. years, he kept sundry Councels at ^urd and Lat^ran,
wh^re he confirmed the proceedings of Hildebrand, and other his predecessors.
In this time spung up the Doctrine of the Waldenses, Waldenses.
which was of one Waldus a chief Senator of Lion^ in France.

The aforesaid Gratianus, 1140.
master of Decrees, and Petrus Lumbardus, at this time did much maintain proud
Prelacie; after whom followed two, as evil or worse* Franciscus and Dominicus,
maintaining as much blind hypocrisy. I^ pleased God to raise up the Waldenses
against their Doctrine of Pride and hypocrisy. Thus we never see any great
corrup^i^n in the Church, but some spark of the true ligh^ of the Gospel by
Gods providence, does remain, howsoever their aduersari^^ (...) them, yet by
the Judicial ^^aying their Articles, thou shall find that they maintained
nothing else, but the same doctrine wh^^h we now defend; yet I suppose the
Papist did gather them, and wrest them otherwi^e then they were meant, as they
did them of Wiclife and H^s.

It chanced that certain of the chief of the city of Lions went a walking,
with the aforesaid Waldus, of whom came the Waldenses was one, one of them
f^ll down suddenly dead, the sight whereof smo^e this Waldus with a ^eepe and
inward repentance, with a careful study to reform his life. First* he began
to give large alms to the needy. Secondly, to instruct his family and
himself, with the knowledge of Gods word. Thirdly, to exhort all that resorted
to him to rep^ntance and v^r^uous life, by his alms, and diligent teaching,
more resorted to him daily, to whom he gave certain rudiments of the Scripture.

The Bishops and Prelates seeing him so meddle with Scripture, and to have such
a resort about him, though it were but in his own house, moved with great
malice against him, threatened to excommunicate him, if he did not leave so to
do. He neglecting the threatenings of the wicked, said; God must be obeyed more
then man, and was the more diligent to set forth the Doctrine of Christ against
the errors of Antichrist. When they saw their excommunication despised, they
ceased not with prison, with sword, and banishment to prosecute, till they had
driven the said Waldus and all his favorers out of the city. Here follows
their Articles they held.

1 That the holy Scripture is to be believed, in matters pertaining to
salvation, and no man besides.

2 All things, contained in holy Scripture, necessary to salvation, and nothing
to be admitted in Religion, but what only is commanded in the word of God.

3 To be but one only Mediator, other saints to be made in no wise Mediators,
to be inuocated.

4 That there is no Purgatory, but all men either by Christ are Justified, or
without Christ, condemned; besides these two neither three nor four places.

5 That all Masses, sunge for the deads, are wicked and to be abrogated.

6 All men's traditions to be rejected, at least, not to be reputed necessary to
salvation: therefore singing, and superflueus chaunting in the Chaun^ell to be
left* constrai^ied and prefixed ^aste bound to days and times, differences of
meats, varieties of ^egres and orders of Priests, Friars, Monks, Nuns,
super^luous holy days so many been dictions, and hallowing of creatures,
vows, Pilgrimages, with all the rablement of Ceremonies brought in by men to
be abolished.

7 The supremacy of the Pope, usurping above all Churches, and especially
above all polliti^ue Realms and Governments: or for him to occupy and usurp
the Jurisdiction of both swords to be denied, neither that any other degree is
to be received in the Church, but only Priests* Deacons, and Bishops.

8 The Communion of both kinds to be necessary to all people, according to the
institution of Christ.

9 I ^^^m the Church of Rome to be the very Babylon spoken of in the
Revelation, and the Pope to be the fountain of all error, and the very
Antichrist.

10 They reject the Popes pardons and indulgences.

11 The marriage of Pri^sts and ecclesiastical persons to be Godly and
necessary in the Church.

12 Such as hear the word of God, and have a good Faith, to be ^he right
Church of Christ, and to this Church the Key^s of the Church to be given, to
drive away wolves, and to institute true Pastors to preach the word, and
institute the Sacraments, these were their principal Articles.

Being exiled, they dispersed in diverse places of whom many remained long
after in Bohemia.

E^eas Syluius in the Bohemian Histories, writes that these Articles they held.

The Bishop of Rome to be equal with other Bishops, no difference of degrees
amongst Priests, no Priest to be reputed for the dignity of his Order, but
for the worthynesse of his life.

No Purgatory, as before, in vain to pray for the dead, a thing only ^ound
out for the lu^^ee of Priests. The Image of God (as of the Trinity) and of
Saints to be abolished. The hallowing of ^^ater, and palms, a ridic^e. The
religious of begging Friars to be found out by the Devil, That Priests sho^l^
not incro^h riches, but be content with their Tithes, and men's devotions. The
preaching of the Word to be free to all men, called thereunto.

No deadly sin to be tolerated, for what respect soever of greater commodity
to ensue thereby. Confirmation of Bishops, with oil, and extreme v^^tion,
none o^ the Sacraments. Auricul^r confession, but a toy. Baptism to be
ministered only with pure water, without mixture of holy oil. The Majesty of
God not to be restrained more within Temples, Monast^ries or Chapels, then
any where else.

Priests apparel, ornaments of Altars, Uestments, Corporaces Chalices,
patenes, and other Church-plate, to serve in no steed. It makes no matter in
what place the Priest consecrateth the Sacrament, and that it is sufficient to
use only the Sacramental words, without other superstitious ceremonies. Prayers
to Saints vain, they not able to help. In saying, and singing the hours and
Mattens of the day, the time lost. A man ought to cease from his labor, no day
but Sunday. The Feasts of Saints to be rejected* coacted feasts have no merit.
The truth o^ these Articles be the less to be doubted, being set out by a
Popes pen.

They being accused slanderously by one Doctor Augustine, unto the Bohemian
King, gave up their confession, with an Apology of their Faith.

They held Thomas Aquinas author of Purgatory. Concerning the Supper of the
Lord, their Faith was, it was to be eaten, and not to be showed, and
worshipped. That it was for a memorial and not for a Sacrifice, to serve for
the present, not to be reserved; to be received at the table, not to be carried
out of doors, according to the use of the primitive Church, when they used to
communicate sitting: this they proved by Cronicles, ^ and by Origin upon the
third of Moses. Doctor Austin asked them, whether it were not the same Christ
in the Sacrament which is in heaven, else how can it be said, there is but one
Faith, and one Christ; then, why he should not be worshipped in the Sacrament
as well as in Heaven. They answered to this effect; that the same Christ that
is in Heaven is in the Sacrament, but after diverse manners, in Heaven he is
corporally, locally, with the full proportion and quantity of the same body
wherewith he ascended, and to be seen in the Sacrament, he is but
sacramentally to be remembered, not to be seen; our bodies receive the sign,
our spirit the thing signified.

They asked him again, whether Christ was not as well in them that receive the
Sacrament, as in the Sacrament before it was received, and why it should not be
worshipped as well in the breast of the receiver, as before it is received,
seeing ^e is in a more perfect manner in ^an then in the Sacrament, in it he is
but for a time, not for the sacrament s^ke, but f^r man's sake. In man he is for
his own sake, not for a time but for ever, as it is written, Qu^ manducat hunc
panem, viuat in aeternum.

Then they asked whether he was there wholly God and man, which if he grant
it, it is contrary to Nature and Faith, that any creature should be changed
into the Creator. If he say, it is changed into his body and soul, and not
into the Godhead, then h^e separates the natures of Christ, if he say into the
body alone, and not the soul, then he separateth the Natures of the true
manhood, and so cannot be the same Christ that was betrayed for us, so to what
part soever he should answer he could not defend transubstantiation without
great inconueni^^ce of all sides.

It appears in a certain Libell of Inquisition that upon their kne^s with
great reverence they used to pray, every morning, and every evening, and that
they used to say grace before meat and after: and after meat to edify one
another with some instruction.

They were so diligent and painful in teaching that Reynerius an old
Inquisitor against them writes, that one of them to bring another unto the
faith, in the night, and in winter swamme over the River Ibis to come to him,
to teach him, and they were so perfect in the Scripture, that he heard an
unlettered man that could say the book of Job word by word without book, with
others which had the New Testament perfectly by heart.

He writes moreover, that none durst stop them for the number of their
favorers: saying, I have often been at their examination, and there were
numbered forty Churches of their opinions, in s^much that in one parish of
Camma^h were ten open schools of them, and when he had spoken what he could
against them, he is driven to confess that they both live justly before men,
and believe all things wel^ of God, and hold all the Articles contained in the
Creed; only they blaspheme the Church of Rome and hate it.

Touching the^r persecution, which commonly follows true preaching, they
being scattered from Lions, that the sound of their doctrine might gee abroad
^n the world; some went as it is said into Bohemia, many into other provinces
of France; some into Lombardy and other places, but these could not be suffered
to live at rest, as may appear by the consultations made by the Lawyers and
Bishops of France against them, writ above three hundred years agone,
remaining yet in writing* whereby it appears there were a great many in
France.

Besides there was a Counsel kept in Tol^se about 355. years agone* and all
against these Waldenses, they also were condemned in another Counsel at Rome
before that.

What persecutions they had in France by three Archbishops, appears by their
writings: who is such a stranger, that knows not the condemnation of the
Waldenses, done so many years agone, so famous, so public, followed upon
with so great labor, expenses and travel; and sealed with so many of their
deaths; so solemnly being condemned, and openly punished, where by we may know
persecution to be no new thing in the church of Christ, when Antichrist three
hundred years agone did rage against the Waldenses.

But there was never more trouble then was against them of late, in the year
^545. in France by the French King, which follows in this book, when we come
to the year wherein it was done, where it shall be set forth more at large. In
which persecution is declared, that in one town Cabria by Miuerias were slain
eight hundred persons at once, not respecting women, children, nor any age: and
forty women, most of them great with child, were thrust into a Barn, the
windows kept with pikes were fired and consumed: besides in a Cave not far
from Mussin, were five and twenty persons fired and destroyed the same time;
the same tyrant at Merindolum, seeing all the rest were fled away, finding one
young man, caused him to be tied to an Olive tree, and destroyed with torments
most cruel: the foresaid Reynerius speaks of a Glouer, one of them in the
town of Cheron, that in his time was brought to execution.

There is an old Monument of processes, wherein appears 443. brought to
examination in Pomarina, Marchia, and places there ab^ut, in the year 1391.
thus much of the original doctrine, and lamentable persecutions of the
Waldenses, who as it is said began about the time of Pope Alexander. Now for as
much as Thomas Becket Thomas Becket.
happened in this Popes time, let us somewhat story of him.

THE HISTORY OF THOMAS BECKET Archbishop of Canterbury.
KIng Henry the second K. of England conuenting his Nobles and Clarks required
to have punishment of certain misorders of the clergy, but the Archbishop
Thomas Becket would not agree thereunto: the King came to this point to know
whether he and the rest of the Clergy would consent to the customs set forth
in Henry the fifth his time, he with the rest of the Bishops, upon consultation
held, they would consent with this exception, Saluo ordine suo, so all other
Bishops being particularly demanded, except Christopher, who seeing the King
angry, said, for Saluo ordine suo, he would bona fide, the King told them he
was not well content with that exception which was captious and deceitful,
having some venom lurking under, therefore required an absolute grant: they
answered, they would not bind themselves in no other manner, at which the King
and all the Nobility were not a little moved: the King, when he could get no
other answer, departed with great anger, not saluting the Bishops: Chester was
greatly rebuked of his fellows for changing the exception; the next day the
King took from the Archbishop all such Manors and Honors as he had given him
before being Lord Chancellor; not long after unknown to the Bishops he sailed
into Normandy; not long after the Bishop of London followed after him to crave
his favor, and gave him counsel to join some of the Bishops with him, least
if all were against him, he might the sooner be overthrown: thus by his
means the greatest number of the Bishops were reconciled unto the King, only
the Archbishop with a few other remained in their stoutnes: when the King saw
no fear or threats could turn him, he assaid him with gentleness but it
would not serve, though many Nobles labored to exhort him to relent unto the
King: Likewise the Archbishop of York, with diverse other Clergy men,
Bishops and Abbots, especially Chester did the same: besides his own house
daily called upon him, no man could persuade him; at length understanding what
danger might happen by the Kings displeasure, not only to himself but to all
the Clergy, and considering the old kindness and love of the King toward him
in times past, was content to give over unto the Kings request, came to the
King at Oxford, and reconciled himself: whereupon the King received him with a
more ch^erefull countenance, saying, he would have his Ordinances confirmed in
open sight of his Bishops, and all his Nobles; after this the King being at
Clarem Down, called all his Peers and Prelates before him, requiring to have
that performed which he had promised in consenting to the observing his
Grandfathers ordinances and proceedings; the Archbishop drew back, and would
not that he would before, yet with great tears, entreaties, and persuasions
of Bishops and of two Templers, that desired him on their knees, with tears,
and with threatenings of Imprisonment, and other dangers he did agree only,
with a clause of exception, bona fide, and he and all the Bishops set too their
hands and seals.

Alanus records that the Archbishop in his voyage to Winchester greatly
repented that he had done, so that he kept himself from al company, lamenting
with tears and fasting, and afflicting himself, did suspend himself from all
divine service, and would not be comforted before he had sent to the Pope, and
were assoiled of him, the Pope in his Letters not only assoiled him from his
trespass, but with words of great consolation, encouraged him to be stout in the
quarrel he took in hand. Upon this, Becket took no small heart and
consolation: The King hearing of him, and how he denied to set his seal to
those sanctions, which he condiscended too before, took no little displesure
against him, threatened him of banishment and death, called him to reckoning,
and burdned him with paiments: the Archb* thought to make an escape out of y^
realm, attempting to take the Sea, with two or three privily. Amongst other
the kings ordinances. This was one, that none of the Prelasie or Nobility
without the Kings license, or his Justices, should depart the Realm. So Becket
twice attempted the sea to fly to Rome, but the weather served not, which being
known and noysed abroad, the Kings Officers came to seize upon his goods to the
Kings behalf, but finding Becket at home and returned, they did not proceed
on their purpose, Becket seeing this, went to the Court, the King taunted him
gestingly, as though one realm could not hold them both, but showed him no
great favor. The Archbishop of York did labor to renew peace and love
betwixt the King and him, but the King would not be reconciled, except the
other would subscribe unto his laws, which Becket would not grant to, but by
virtue of his Apostolic authority, gave censure upon these Laws of the King,
condemning some, and approving some as catholic. The Pope sent the Archbishop
of Rotomage to the King, to ma^e peace betwixt the King and Canterbury: the
King was content, so the Pope would ratify his Ordinances, which could not be
obtained at the Popes hands. The King sent to the Pope to obtain of him, that
the same authority of the Apostolic Legacy might be conferred unto another
after his appointment, which was the Archbishop of York, but the Pope denied;
but he was content, so the King would be Legate himself, at which the King was
angry, and sent to the Pope again, according to the old practice of popish
Prelacy to play on both sides: privily he conspireth with one, and openly
dissembleth with the other, He grants the Legate should be removed, and the
Archbishop of York placed in the office, and writ to Becket that he should take
no harm thereby, for the Kings Ambassadors had promised him, and did offer to
swear unto him, that the Letters which they obtained, should not be delivered
unto the Archbishop of York, without the Popes consent therein: assure your
self it is not, nor never shall be our will nor purpose to subdue you or your
Church unto any, save only the Bishop of Rome; therefore if you see the King
will deliver the said Letters, give us knowledge, and we will clearly exempt by
our authority Apostolical, both your person, your Church, and your City
committed unto you from all jurisdiction of any legacy. Upon these letters and
such other, Becket took all his stoutnesse against the King. The King after he
had received his letters from the Pope, was more strong in his purposed
proceedings against the Archbishop, and proceeded to punish the offenses of
Clergy men, and there was above 100. found that had committed homicide and
murder, beside other offenders: he adjudged them first to be deprived, and then
committed to the seculer power. This seemed to Becket to derogate from liberty
of holy Church, that seculer power should give judgment upon the crimes of
Ecclesiastical persons, they pick this law out of Anacletus and Euaristus,
who deduce this constitution from the Apostles, that all Ecclesiastical
persons, shall be free from seculer jurisdiction. The King daily incensed more
and more against Becket, cited him to appear at a certain day and place,
where at the time all the Peers, Nobles, with the Clergy were assembled by the
Kings proclamation, where great fault was found with Becket because he did not
appear but by Deputy. Whereupon by the public sentence both of the Nobles and
Bishops, all his moueables were adjudged to be confiscate to the King: the
stuborne Archbishop answered, he was primate and spiritual Father, not only
of all other in the Realm, but of the King himself, and that it was not
convenient the Children should judge the Father, and the the flock the Pastor:
but especially complains of his fellow Bishops which should have took their
Metropolitans part; the next day the King laid an action against him for the
injury done to his Marshall, and required the Archbishop to repay him 500.
marks which he lent him when he was Chancellor: he answered it was given him,
but could bring no probation thereof: whereupon the King required him to put in
an assurance for the payment: whereupon 5. persons of their own accord st^pped
in and were bound for it, else the Archbishop had been in a great strait: the
third day he was charged with other moneys due unto the King, by reason of many
Bishoprics, and Abbaricks which he had kept long vacant in his hands, and he
and all the Bishops being shut into a room together by the Kings appointment,
they did all take counsel what was best for the Archb. to do in this case,
they all advised him to yield to the Kings Laws, or else he would be in danger
and the rest of the Clergy, or else to resign his Arch-byshoppricke, and then
no doubt the King would have compassion on him, if not, they saw no other way
but he would loose his life, and then what good would his Byshoppricke do him:
to this effect was their consultation. Becket checked them with rebukefull
words, you go about to cherish your own cowardlinesse with a shadow of
sufferance, and with dissembling softness to choke the liberty of the Church:
who has thus bewitched you O insatiable Bishops! is not God able to help the
state of the Church without the sinful dissimulation of the teachers thereof?
when should the Governors thereof put themselves in danger for the Church, but
in the distress thereof, I think it no greater merit for the ancient Bishops
to found the Church with their blood, then for us to effude our blood for the
liberties of the same, and I think it not safe for you to swerve from the
example which you have received from your holy Elders. Then the Archbishop
sent for two Earls, to whom the Archbishop said: touching the matters betwixt
the King and us, we have conferred, we would crave respite until the morrow,
then we will be ready to give our answer unto the King: two Bishops were sent
to the King with this message, which the King granted, the convocation being
dissolved, the most part of the Bishops separated themselves from the
Archbishop* for fear of the Kings displeasure: he being thus forsaken, sent
for the poor, lame, and halt, to furnish his house, saying by them he might
sooner obtain his victory, then by them which had slipped from him; the said day
appointed was Sunday, therefore nothing done, the next day he was sick of the
Gout, he could not come, it was thought he fained, the Earl of Deuon: and the
Earl of Leicester were sent to him, to try the truth of the matter, and to
cite him to appear at the Court, the Bishops came to persuade him to
submission to the will of the King, of all his goods and Arch-bishoppricke, if
peradventure his indignation might swage by that means* else perjury would be
laid to his charge for breaking his oath made to observe the Kings Ordinance,
he answered it was dolorous that the world was against him, yet it greeueth me
most, that Sons of mine own Mother be pricks and thorns against me, but I
charge you be not present personally in judgment against me, and that you
shall not so do I appeal to the Church of Rome, the refuge of all such as be
oppressed, and if any seculer men lay hand on me, as it is rumord they will, I
straightly charge you, that you exercise your Ecclesiastical censure upon them,
as it becomes for your Father and Archbishop, and whatsoever happen, I will
never cowardly shrink, nor vily forsake my flock: then he addressed himself
to his Mass of S. Steven with all solemnity, with his Metropolitan pall, which
was not used but upon holydaies: the Mass beginning with Sederunt principes,
and aduersum me loquebantur. The Bishop of London accused him that it was done
by art Magic, and in contempt of the king, then the Archbishop went to the
Court, and to make him more sure, he privily takes the Sacrament within: as
he was entering into the door of the Kings Chamber, he takes the Cross with
the Crosse-staffe from the Crosse-bearer, and carried it himself: one of the
other Bishops would have borne the Cross, saying it was not comely for him,
the Bishop of London told him, if the king met him so, he would draw his sword
at him; he answered, the Kings sword strikes carnally, but mine spiritually
strikes himself down to hell. The King complained to the Nobles and Bishops,
that he showed himself as a traitor, all gave witness thereto, affirming him
always, to be a vain and proud man, so altogether with one cry, called him
Traitor, and being he had received such great benefits, preferments and honors
of the King, and thus requite it, was well worthy to be handled as a perjured
Traitor: The Bishop of Excester desired him to have compassion of himself, and
of them, else they were all like to perish, for there comes a precept from
the King for your apprehending and suffering as an open Rebel, and whosoever
shall take your part, and the Bishops of Salisbury and Norwich are to be had
to the place of execution, for their resisting, and making intercession for
you. He answered, Avoid hence from me, for thou sauorest not the things of
GOD. Upon great consultation, the Bishops agreed, that they would appeal the
Archbishop to the Sea of Rome upon perjury, and that they would oblige
themselves to the King, with a sure promise to do their dil^gence in deposing
of him, so the King would promise their safety; it being so finished, two
Bishops were sent to him in stead of them all, which said, once you were our
Archbishop, and we bound to your obedience; but now, being you once swear
fidelity to the King, and do resist him, neglecting his Laws, appertaining
to his ter^rne honor: Wherefore we here pronounce you perjured, neither be we
bound to give obedience to you, but putting our selves and all ours in the
Popes protection, do appeal you up to his presence, and assignd him his time
to appear: the Archbishop answered he heard him well enough, and sends to
Rome in all have, signifying to the Pope the whole matter, to whom the Pope
writes again: we are not a little disquieted in our spirits for your sake
being our most dear Brother, remember that the Apostles departed away
rejoicing from the face of the Council, receive consolation that w^ may
rejoice with you in the Lord, who has preserved you in this distress to the
corroboration of the Catholic verity, and God through his punishment of
afflic^ions has wiped away the blot of your offenses, that they might not be
called to account in the day of Judgment: be not grieved that you are
appealed to the Apostolic Sea, which to us is grateful and accepted, draw not
you back spare not to follow the appeal, for the authority of the Church of
Rome tendreth your constancy, our diligence shall be to preserve the right
and pre-eminence of your Church to you, as one working for the Church, a
constant and valiant Champion, I thought good especially to premonish you,
neither for adversity nor whatsoever happens renounce not the right and
dignity of your Church.

The Archbishop sitting with his Cross in his hand as before was not abashed
at all that was: the King sent for him presently to render account for thirty
thousand marks, and fruits and revenues of the Realm in the time when he was
Chancellor; he answered, the King knew how often he had made reckonings of
those things, and that Henry his Son and heir, with all the Barrons, and the
Lord chief Justice of England told him was free and quit to god and holy
Church from all receipts, computations on the Kings behalf, and so taking his
discharge entered into his office, for other accounts he would make none: when
his answer was brought to the King, he required the Barons to do their
office, who adjudged him to be apprehended and laid in prison: the King sent
the Earl of Cornwall and Devonshire, and the Earl of Leicester to show him his
Judgment; to whom he said, hear my Son and good Earl, how much the soul
is more precious then the body, so much ought you to obey me rather then your
terrene King, no Law does permit the child to condemn their Father: wherefore
to avoid all your judgments before you all I appeal to the Sea Apostolic,
and as for you my fellow Bishops, which rather obey man then God, you also I
call and claim to the Judgment of the Pope, and I do depart from you as from
the enemies of the Catholic Church, and of the authority of the Apostolic
Sea: whilst they returned this answer to the King, the Archbishop passed
through the throng and took horse, holding the bridle in one hand, and his
Cross in the other; the Courtiers followed, saying, tarry Traitor and here
thy Judgment; the utmost gate being locked, one of his servants found a bunch
of Keys and trying them found the right and opened the gate, he went to the
house of the Cannons where he did lie* and calling to him the poor where they
could be found, after supper he caused a bed to be made him betwixt two Altars;
but whilst the King was at supper, he changed his garments, and named himself
Derman, and made an escape to the Sea, and taking ship sailed into Flanders,
and thence iournied unto France; the King sent the Bishop of London, and the
Earl of Arundell unto the King of France, to require him not to receive the
Archbishop, nor retain him in his Dominion, and that he would be a means to
the Pope not to show any familiarity unto him, but the French King, contrary
to the Kings Letters and request, not only harbored and cherished him, but
writ to the Pope, entreating him upon all loves, as ever he would have his
favor to tender the cause of the Archbishop Becket. The King sent another
embassage to Pope Alexander, by the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London,
Winchester, Chichester, Exeter, with other Doctors and Clerks: with the Earl
of Arundel, with certain more Lords and Barrons, they were friendly accepted at
the Popes Court, the next day following the Pope sitting in the Consistory
with his Cardinals, when the Ambassadors were called for the hearing of
Beckets matter, and the Bishops every one in order had made his Oration, the
Pope did not accept some of their speeches, and disdained some: wherefore the
Earl of Arundell disdained in this manner, spoke:

Though I am unlettered, and cannot understand what these Bishops have said,
neither can utter my mind in that tongue which they have done, yet I must
declare the cause of my sending as well as I may, which was not to contend with
or injury any man, especially in presence of such a one at whose beck all the
world does stoop, but our Legacy is to present, in the presence of the whole
Church of Rome, the devotion and love of our King, which he ever had and still
has toward you, and that it might the better appear to your excellency, he
has appointed for the furniture of this Legacy his greatest and cheifest
subjects of such worthiness and parentage, that if he could have found greater
in his Realm he would have sent them, for the reverence of your person and
holy Church of Rome: I might add more, which your Sainctitude has already
proved, the hearty fidelity of our King toward you, who at the entrance to his
Kingdom, submitted himself, and all his, wholly to your will and pleasure,
and we believe there is none more faithful in Christ then he, nor more devout
to God, nor more moderate in keeping the unity of peace: neither do I deny
touching the Archbishop of Canterbury, a man not unfurnished with gifts in his
calling, being both sage and discreet, saving that he seems to some more
quick and sharp then needs, if this blot had not been, the King and he had
not discented: then both the temporaltie and spiritualty might have flourished
one with the other in much peace, under so worthy a Prince, and so virtuous a
pastor, therefore our message and supplication to your vigilant prudence, is
that through your favor and wisdom the neck of this discention may be
broken, and reformation of unity and love by some good means may be sought.

But the Pope would not condescend to their suit, which was to have two Legates
sent from his popish side into England, to examine and take up the controversy
between the King, and the Archbishop, but because Becket was absent he willed
them to tarry his coming up: for he being absent he would in no case
proceed against him, but they alleged there time appointed to be ended, and
having other lets they could not wait for the coming of Becket, and so
returned back, there cause frustrated, without the Popes blessing to the King.

Within four days after, Becket comes to the Popes Court, offered the pope
a scroule of the custom and ordinances of the King: the Pope condemned and
cursed the most part of them, and blamed Becket for so much yielding to them at
the beginning: yet because he was repentant, he was content to assoile him for
the same, and the rather because he had suffered so great troubles for the
liberties of the Church: The next day, the Pope and his Cardinals being
assembled in his secret chamber, Becket made an Oration to them to this effect:
he confessed with grief the cause of these perturbations was because he
entered into the sold of Christ, not by the door of Christ, because the King
made him Bishop, not the Pope, and if I had resigned it to the King again at
his commandment, I had left a dangegerous example unto the Catholic Church:
therefore now recognizing my ingresse not to be Canonical, and my ability not
sufficient for such a charge: therefore I render into your fatherly hands the
Archbishopric here of Canturbury, and putting his Ring from his finger
offered it to the Pope, and desired a Bishop to be provided for the Church of
Canturbury, and so with tears ended.

This done he was bid stand a part, after consultation they concluded, being
he had ventred his goods, dignity, and authority, and his life, for the
liberties of the Church, if he should now be deprived at the Kings pleasure it
would be an exampl^ to others hereafter none to resist his Prince in like case,
and so weaken the Catholic Church, and derogate the Popes authority, and his
cause being maintained it would be a president to others to do the like, so
he received his Pastora^l Office at the Popes hand again with commendation
and much favor, and ^he Pope sent him unto the Abbey of Pontiuiacke in France,
with a Monks habit, where he was two years; thence he removed to Senon, where
he was five years; so he was in exile seven years.

The King being certified by his Ambassadors that the Pope inclined more to
Becket, then unto him, was wrathful, and sailing into Normandy sent over
certain injunctions against the Pope and the Archbishop to this effect.

1 Whosoever brought any interdict or curse from the Pope or Becket, so be
apprehended and executed as a Traitor.

2 That no Clarke, Monk, or convert of any other country, without the Justice
and Kings Letters, to pass over or return into the Realm, otherwise to be
imprisoned.

3 None to appeal to the Archbishop or bring any transcript from them.

4 No Decree from them to stand in force or be received in England upon pain
of imprisonment.

5 If any person shall keep the sentence of their interdict, they shall be
exiled with all their kindred, and take none of their goods with them, and be
bound without special license not to resort where the Archbishop was.

6 All the possessions and goods of such as favored the Pope or Arch bishop to
be confiscate for the King.

7 All such of the Clergy as were out of the Realm to be warned in every
Sheere within three months to repair home, or else their rents and goods to
^eturne to the King.

8 That the Peter pence shall be no more paid unto the Apostolic Sea, but to
be reserved unto the Kings Coffers.

The Archbishop writ to a friend of his to write to him with speed what was
done touching the Kings Decrees, here set out, which are these: that all
Havens be diligently kept, that no interdict or curse be brought in, if the
bringer be a religious man, his feet to be cut off; if a Priest to loose his
pr^uy members; if a layman to be hanged; if a Leper to be burned; if a Bishop
will depart for fear of the Popes Interdict, let him have nothing with him but
his Staff, and that a^l Scholars and Students beyond the Seas shall repair
home or loose their Benefices, and if they remain still to loose the liberty
of all returning: if any Priest for the Popes interdict will refuse to sing, to
loose his privy members: In sum al such Priests as show themselves Rebels to
the King, to be deprived of their Benefices.

Further it was proclaimed that all of the kindred of Thomas Becket should be
exiled with their goods with them, 1166.
and sent to him, which was no little vexation to him to behold.

Moreover, the King writ to the Abbot of Pontiuiack, where he lay, not to
retain him in his house, or else he would drive out of his Realm all the
Monks of his Order: whereupon he removed, by the French Kings appointment, to
Senon as aforesaid, and found of him five years.

In the mean time messengers went daily from the King to the Pope, and from
the Pope to the King; and betwixt the Archbishop and others, where I find
only rehearsals of matters, which are declared sufficiently in the History,
whereof if the Reader be desirous to see, let him resort to the book at large.

After these Letters sent too and fro in the 15. year of Henry the second, 1169
the King misdoubting that the Archbishop would proceed in excommunication
against his own person, made his appeal to the presence of the Pope, requiring
to have certain Legates sent from Rome from the Popes side, to take up the
matter betwixt the Archbishop and him; requiring also that they might be
absolved, that were interdicted: whereupon two Cardinals sent from the Pope,
with Letters from the Pope came into Normandy, where they appointed the Bishop
to meet before the King, but the Archbishop delayed his coming, until eight
days after, neither would come any further then Grisorsium, where the two
Cardinals, and the Archbishop with other Bishops conuenting together, had a
treaty of reconciliation, which came to no conclusion.

The two Cardinals writ to the Pope to this effect: coming to England we found
the controversy more vehement then we would, for the King and the greater part
about him said the Archbishop stirred up the French King against him* and made
the Earl of Flanders his open adversary: and after the King had received your
Letters, and brought forth other Letters, diverse and altering from them
received of us, be was moved with no little indignation; saying, that since we
came from you, the Archbishop received of you other contrary Letters, whereby
he was exempted from our Judgment: Moreover, the King and the Bishops there
did affirm, that the complaint that was made unto you of the ancient customs
of his progenitors, for the most part was false; affirming farther to us, that
if there were any customs and laws in his time that seemed pr^iudiciall to
the Statutes of the Church, he would willingly revoke and disanull the same:
therefore we and other Bishops and Abbots of the land, hearing the King so
reasonable, labored by all means that the King should not break from us, but
incline to us, and to have the matter brought before us, betwixt him and the
Archbishop. Whereupon we sent our own Chaplains with Letters to him,
appointing him the time and place, where safely he might meet with us, yet he
made his dilatories till eight days after, which ^tirred the Kings heart more
then is to be thought: thus when he refused to meet us in the borders of the
King, though we offered him safe coming: we to satisfy his mind condescended
to meet him at a place which he appointed within the Land of the French King,
we exhorted him humbly to submit himself unto his sovereign and King, who had
heaped him with such benefits and dignities: after advise with his Couns^ll,
he said he would submit himself to the King saving the honor of God, the
liberty of the Church, the honesty of my person, the possessions of Churches,
and the Justice of him and all his in all things: we asked him whether h^
would submit himself to us, as the King and the Bishops were content to do:
he said he had a commandment from you not to answer before he and all his
were restored to all their possessions, then he would proceed in the matter as
he should receive commandment from the Sea Apostolic, whereof we made
relation to the King, yet keeping back a great part, which we had heard and
seen: which when the King and Nobles understood, the King said he was so much
the more clear, for that the Archbishop would not stand to Judgment: after
much heaviness and lamentation of the King, Bishops, and Abbots, they required
of us whether we had any power to proceed against him, and perceiving we had
none, least the Archbishop should work any disquietnes to any of the Noble
personages of the Realm agreed together with one assent to make their
appellation to your audience, prefixing accordingly the term of their appeal.

The Archbishop saying, he stood only for the peace of the Church, one of the
Cardinals offered him, if he would relinquish his Bishoppricke, the King should
relinquish his Customs. He answered, He could not renounce his Church, saving
the honor of the Church and his person, but it stands upon the souls
health, and honor of the King to renounce his customs.

After the Cardinals were gone, the French King seeing the King of England
disquieted, and s^^icitous of peace, pretending to set agreement betwixt them,
the King and the Archbishop, both were content to stand to his arbiterment.
The Archbishop prostrating himself at the feet of the King of England, said
he would commit the whole matter to his own arbiterment, Saluo honor Dei, the
King was highly therewith displeased, rebuking him of pride and
stubbornenesse, and charged him with sundry and great benefits bestowed on him,
and he a person unkind and forgetful.

And speaking to the French King there present said, whatsoever displeases
this man he says it is contrary to the honor of God, and by this means will
vindicate to himself that which is his own and mine too, there have bin Kings
of England of greater and less puissance then I am, and there have have been
Archb. of Canterbury both great and holy men, what the best of them have done
to my predecessors before me, let him do the same to me and I am content: the
standers by with one voice cried, the king has debased himself enough to the
Bishop, the French King said what my Lord will you be better then those holy
men, will you be greater then Peter, you have peace and quietness put in your
hands if you will take it: he answered, my predecessors every one in his time
did pluck up, and correct something in his time, though not all things, for
then there would be no cause of this fire of temptation to try us: though some
have been slack, we are not to follow their examples, we rebuke Peter for
denying Christ, but we commend him for resisting Nero, he could not in his
conscience consent unto him; he did not dissemble, whereby he lost his life: by
such oppressions the Church has always grown, our forefathers suffered,
because they would not dissemble the honor of Christ, shall I* to have the
favor of one man, suffer the honor of Christ to be suppressed: the Noble men
standing by, noted him of arrogance, and wilfulnes: and one openly protested,
that seeing he refused the request of both kingdoms, he was worthy of the
help of neither: as England had rejected him, so France should not entertain
him.

One of the Archbishops Chapleins writes that the French king prostrated
himself at the feet of the Archb. repented he had given him such council in a
case pertaining to the honor of God, and desired to be assoiled, and that
Henry sent to the king to desire him not to support his enemy within his
Realm: the French King utterly denied the Kings request, and took part rather
with the Archbishop.

The King of England returned from Normandy into England and in the 16. 1170
year of his reign kept his Court of Parliament at Westminster, and by assent
both of the Clergy and Temporalty, caused his son Henry to be crowned King:
the Coronation was done by the Archbishop of York, other Bishops assisting
Becket: not being called took no little displeasure; and so did the French
King, hearing that Margaret his Daughter was not like wise crowned with her
husband: whereupon he came with a great army to Normandy, but the King sent
his son to him which entreated peace, promising that his son should be
crowned again, and his daughter crowned with him.

Becket sent to the Pope, complaining of four Bishops, especially the
Archbishop of York, who durst be so bold in his absence, without his license to
crown the king, being a matter peculiar to his Jurisdiction, at whose instance
the Pope excommunicated the Bishop of London: the other three with the
Archbishop he suspended: they resorted to the King, declaring how miserable
there case stood, for fulfilling his commandment, the King was highly moved.

The King of France with his Clergy and Courtiers slacked no occasion to incite
the Pope to excommunicate the King of England, also thinking to have some
advantage against the Realm, neither was the King ignorant of this, which made
him the readier to agree.

The pope sent two Legates with full commission, either to drive the K. to be
reconciled, or to be excommunicated: the King seeing himself in great
straites, which he could not avoid, and by the mediation of the king of France,
and other great prelates and Princes of the king, was content to be reconciled
with the Archb. whom he received into his Realm, and granted him free return
to his Church.

But he would not grant him his lands until he came into England, and did see
how he would agree with his subjects, he was ioifully received of his church,
albeit he was not very welcome unto the young king: so that coming to London to
the king, he was returned back to Canterbury and bid to keep his house, he
excommunicated one Robert de Brocke on Christmas day, for cutting off the tail
of one of his Horses the day before, he would not absolve the foresaid four
Bishops without cau^els and exceptions, who went to Normandy to the king, and
complained of the miserable state and discourteous handling, which made him
conceive such displeasure toward Becket, that he lamented often to them about
him, that none would revenge him of his enemy: upon occasion of which words, 4.
addressed themselves in great heat of have, within 4. days after, the said
Christmas day they came to Canterbury, they pressed at length into the palace,
where the Arch-b. was sitting with his company about him: they said they
brought him a commandment from the king, bad him choose whether he would
receive it openly, or secretly, the company being commanded away, and he alone,
they told him the King commanded him to repair to the King his son to do
his duty, and swear fidelity for your Baronage, and to amend those things
you have committed against him, in denying to be sworn to him: he perceived
their intent, and called for his company, and they commanded him in the Kings
name that he should absolve the 4. Bishops: he answered, he did not
excommunicate them, but the Pope, if that were their grief they should resort
to him; seeing you thus stand against the Coronation of our new King, it
seems you aspire to take his Crown from him, and to be King your self: he
said nay, if he had three crowns he would set them all upon him, except his
father there is none whose honor I now tender and love, and touching the
sequestring of the Bishops, there was nothing done without the assent of the
King, for I complain to him what injury my Church had by their crowning the
^ing, he gave me leave to seek my remedy at the Popes hand, they said what
do thou ma^e the King a Traitor and bewrayer of his own son, when he
commanded them to cr^wne him, and then gave thee leave to suspend them for so
doing; and they said, think thou we the kings subjects will suffer this, thou
have spoken enough against thine own head: the Achbishop said, since my coming
over, ^e has suffered many injuries and rebukes conc^rning my self my men,
cattle, wines, and other goods: yet the King writ to his son I should live
in safety and peace, and now you come hither to threaten me; they answered, if
you have any ^niury, the law is open, and ^e said he sought for remedy at the
Kings hands as long as he could be suffered to speak with him, but now I am
stopped and can find no redress, nor can have the benefit of law or reason,
such law as an Archbishop may have I will Realm: then they denounced he had
spoken words to the ieopardie of his head, so they depart, charging the Monks
in the Kings name to keep him forth^comming: the Archbishop would not fly for
the king nor any man: the names of the four Soldiers were, first, Renold
Berison: Secondly, Hugh Morteuill: Thirdly, William Thracy: Fourthly, Richard
Britto: who going to harness themselves, returned the same day, but the Hall
door being shut, they went to a back door, and broke up a window: the Monks
had gotten the Archbishop into the Church, and caused his cross to be borne
before him, and proceeded into the Quiere, the Harvest men following came to
the Church door, the Monks would have shut the door, but as the Story says
the Bishop would not suffer them: so they came into the church, and the Bishop
meeting them on the stayres was slain, every man striking him with his sw^rd
in the head, who fied into the north, and at length were pardoned of the Pope
by the Kings means, and went to Jerusalem.

Newbergensis an ancient Chronographer condemns the doings of Becket.

Cesarius a Monk in his eighth book of Dialogues 48. years after the death
of Becket, writes that it was a question amongst the Masters of Paris, whether
Thomas Becket were saved, or damned.

But it is certain this antheme collected and primered in his praise is
blasphemous.

Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christ scandere quo
Thomas asendit.

Wherein is a double lie, first that he dyed for Christ; secondly, that his
bond should purchase heaven, which none of the Apostles durst challenge, for
then Christ died in vain.

After his death the king fearing the popes curse, which the French king helped
forwards what he could, the King sent his excuse unto the pope which he would
not hear. And after second messengers which some of the Cardinals received,
showing them that the pope used to curse and assoile on Good Friday, which was
near at hand, and it was noised that the King, Bishops and realm, should be
interdicted: and hereupon the kings messengers were put into prison, some of
the Cardinals showed the pope that the Kings messengers had power to swear
that the King should obey his penance which was taken both for the King and the
Archb. of York, so that in the said day, the pope only cursed the deed, doers,
consenters, ayders and harbourers of them: the deed-doer^ had in penance to go
in linen clothes barefoote, in fasting and prayer, to Jerusalem, who by this
hard penance are said to die in few years after.

Two Cardinals were sent to inquire who were consenters to his death, the king,
being not certain wherefore their coming was, with a great power entered into
Ireland, giving charge that no bringer of any brief should come into the
realm, or pass out without special license, and an assurance to bring
nothing prejudicial to the Realm: the King in short time subdued the whole
land of Ireland, which was governed by five Kings, of whom four submitted
themselves; only the fifth, the king Tonacta, denied to be subdued, keeping
himself in woods and Marshes.

In this time the two Cardinals were come to Normandy: 1172
the next year in October, the king went to them, and made his purgation
touching the death of Becke^, taking his oath he was never aiding nor
consenting, but only spoke rigorous words against him; wherefore for penance
he was sworn to send so much money to the holy land, and should find two
hundred Knights for the defense thereof, and should set forth by Christmas
following his own person to fight for three years, exc^pt the pope should
dispense with him: and that if he went into Spain, and fought with the
Sarrac^ns, as long as he was there he might prolong his journey to Jerusalem.

Ite^, that he should not hinder or cause to be hindered any appellatio^s made
to R^me.

Item, That he nor his Son should dissent from Pope Alexander, nor his
Catholic successors.

Item, That the goods and possessions taken from the Church of Canterbury
should be restored.

Item, that the foresaid decrees established against the church should be
extinct, and repealed, besides other secret fastings and alms enjoined him.

All these conditions the King and his Son agreed unto, debasing himself with
humility and submission before them whereof the Cardinals took no little
glory, using this vers^ of the Psalm: Qui respicit terram, and facit eam
tremere: qui tangit montes and fumigant.

The returning from Normandy, by reason the Scots had made a road into
England, by the way, as soon as he came to the fight of Beckets Church he
lighted and went barefoote to his toombe, whose steps were found bloody by the
roughn^sse of the stones, and received a whip, with a rod, of every Monk of
the Cloister, whereby thou may see the lamentable superstition and ignorance
of those days, and the slavery that Kings and Princes were brought too under
the Popes Clergy, 1174
the same year almost the whole City of Canturbury was consumed with fire,
and the said Minster church clean burnt.

The next year in a convocation of Bishops, 1175
Abbots, and other of the Clergy at Westminster, there was great discention
betwixt the two Archbishops, whether York must bear his Cross in the Dioces
of Canterbury, and whether the Bishoprics of Lincoln, Chichester, Worcester,
and Hereford, were of the sea of York.

Wherefore the one appealed the other unto the presence of the Pope.

How much better had it been if the Supremacy had remained in the King,
whereby much travel, and great wastfull expenses had bin saved, and there
cause more indifferently, and more speedily decided.

Diverse of Gloucester in the Dioces of York were excommunicated by the Archb. of
Canterbury, because being summoned they refused to appear: a Cardinal by the
Kings procurement was sent from Rome to make peace: by the means of the King
it was agreed that Canterbury should release his claim to Gloucester, and
absolve the Clarks thereof, and the bearing the cross and other matters was
referred to the other Bishops, and a league of truce for five years betwixt
them.

The next year Henry the second denided the Realm into six parts, 1176.
and ordained three Justices of assise on every part: to the first Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridge shire, Huntingdon-shire, Buckingham-shire, Essex,
Hereford-shire: to the second Lincolnshire, Nottingham-shire, Derby-shire,
Stamford-shire, Warwickshire, Northamptonshire, Leichestershire: Thirdly,
Kent, Surry, South-hampton-shire, Sussex, Berk-shire, Oxfordshire: Fourthly,
Heriford-shire, Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Salop-shire: Fifthly,
Wilt-shire, Dorcester-shire, Sommerset-shire, De^^n-shire, Cornwall:
Euerwick-shire, Richmond-shire, Lancaster, Copland, Westm^r-land,
Northumberland, Cumberland. In this year the Archbishop of Canterbury made
three Archdeacons, where there was but one, and the K. granted the pope, that
no Clarke should be called before a temporal Judge, except for his offense in
the Forest or his lay-fee that he holds, and that no Bishopric or Abbey
should remain but one year in the Kings hands without great cause,

This year there was great controversy betwixt the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Abbot of S. Austen, he being Elect, whether the Bishop should come to
his house to consecrate him, or he to come to the Metropolitan church of
Canterbury to be consecrated: The ^bbot appealed to the audience of the Pope,
and went thither with a fat purse, procured letters to the Bishop of Worcester
to command the Archbishop to consecrat him in his Monastery, because it did
properly belong to the Jurisdiction of Rome, and should do so likewise to his
successors without exception of obedience, and if the ^rchb. refuse to do it,
then he should do it: the Archb. understanding it, and loath to yield, used
policy, he watched a time when the Abbot was from home, came to the Monastery,
with all things appointed for the business, called for the Abbat to be
consecrated: the Abbot not being at home, he fained himself not a little
gree^ed: whereupon the Abbot was disappointed, feign to fill his purse a new,
and make a new course to Rome to the Pope of whom he received his consecration.

This year a Cardinal was sent into England, 1177
(as few years there was not one sent to get many, he was to make peace
betwixt the Archbishops of York and Canterbury, who kept a Council at
Westminster, to which all the chief of the Clergy resorted with great
confluence; York thinking to prevent Canterbury, came first and placed
himself on the right hand of the Cardinal: Canterbury seeing the first place
taken, refused to take the second: York alleged the old Decree of Gregory by
whom this order was taken betwixt these two Metropolitans, that he that should
be first in election, should have the pre-eminence in dignity, and go before
the other. From words they went to blows, Canterbury having more servants was
to strong for York, plucked him from the right hand of the Cardinal, treading
on him with their feet that it was well he escaped alive: his Robes were all
rent from his back, this Noble Roman Cardinal which should have ended the
strife committed himself to flight: the next day York showed his Rochet to
the Cardinal to testify his wrong, and appealed, and cited the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and certain of his men to the Pope.

The kingdom of England in the Henry this second his time, extended so far
as has not been seen: The King of Scots, with all the Lords spiritual and
temporal, did him homage for them and their successors: Ireland, England,
Normandy, Aquitane, Gaunt etc. Unto the mountain of Pireni, in the utmost
parts of the Ocean in the British sea: protector of France, and offered to be
King of Jerusalem, by the Patriarch and Master of the Hospital there, which he
refused, alleging his great charge at home, and it might be his sons would
rebel in his absence.

The fame of his wisdom, manhood, riches, was so renowned through all
quarters that messengers came from the Emperor of Rome, and from the Emperor
of Constantinople, and from many great Kings, Dukes, and other great men to
determine questions of strife, and ask council of him: he reigned thirty five
years, and having great wars, yet never set tribute or tax upon his
subjects, nor first fruits, nor appropriations of benefits upon the Clergy; yet
his treasure being weighed by King Richard his Son after his death, weighed
900000. pounds, besides Jewels and Household Stuff, of which 11000. pounds came
by the death of Robert Archbishop of York, for he had procured a Bull of the
Pope, that if any Priest dyed without Testament, he should have all his goods.

His Son Henry, 1181.
whom he joined with him in his Kingdom, and at his Coronation served him as a
Steward, and set the first dish at the Table, renouncing the name of King, the
Archbishop of York sitting at the right hand of the young King, he told him,
he might greatly rejoice, being no King had such an Officer as he had, the
young King disdaining his words, said; My Father is not dishonored, for I am a
King and a Queens Son, and so is not he. He took Arms with the French King
against his Father, and persecuted him, but after he had reigned a few years,
died in his youth by the just judgment of God.

After his death, his Son Richard, called Cor-de-Lyon, rebelled against his
Father, and John his youngest Son did not degenerate from his Brothers steps,
the said Richard brought his Father to such distress of body and mind, that
for thought he fell into an Ague, and within fou^e days dyed, Richard meeting
his Corpse, beginning to weep, the blood burst out of the Kings nose at the
coming of his Son, giving a monstration that he was Author of his death.

His Children, after his death, worthily rewarded for their unnaturalness,
lost all they had beyond the Sea which their Father had gotten.

Alexander Pope decreed, that no Archbishop should receive the Pall, vnless^
he first swear obedience to the Pope. These be the words in English of the
giving of the Pall.

To the honor of Almighty God, and of blessed Mary the Uirgin, and of blessed
S. Peter, and S. Paul, and of our Lord Pope, and of the holy Church of Rome,
and of the Church committed to your charge: we give you the Pall taken from the
body of Saint Peter, as a fullness of the Pontifical Office, which you may
wear within your own Church, upon certain days expressed in the priuiledge^
of the said Church, granted by the Sea Apostolic.

This Pall ought to be asked with great instance, and within three months,
without which Pall he is not Archbishop, but may be deposed. The same Pall
must be burned with him when he dies, and when it is given, some privilege
must be given with it, or the old renewed, the Arch bishops pay sweetly for it.

Every Bishop must swear to be obedient to Saint Peter, the Apostolic Church
of Rome, and to the Pope, to do nothing whereby either of them, or any member
of them may be impaired, nor help, counsel, or consent unto any so doing, not
to utter their council any way sent to them, to any body to their hurt, to
reta^ne and maintain the Papacy and the Regalities of S. Peter against all
men, honorably to entreat the Popes Legates going and coming, and help them in
all necessities, to be ready to come to a Sinod being called, without any
lawful let, to visit the Palace of the Apostles every third year, by
himself, or a Messenger, except otherwise licensed by the Pope, not to sell,
give, or lease out any the possessions of his Church without the Popes license,
So God help him and the Holy Ghost. By this Oath, the Bishop could do nothing
but what the Pope would in general councels, which was the corruption of them.

Besides this, it was decreed in the said council of Rome, by 310. Bishops, by
Pope Alexander, that none should have spiritual promotion, except he were of
full age and borne in wedlock: that no Parish Church should be void above six
months; that none within orders should meddle with temporal businesses; that
priests shall have but one Benefice; that Bishops be charged to find the Priest
a living until he be promoted.

That open Usurers shall not communicate at Easter, nor be buried within the
Church yard.

That nothing shall be taken for ministering Sacraments, or burying.

Item, that every Cathedral Church should have a Master to teach Children
freely, without taking any thing for the same.

In this Council the vow of Chastity was laid upon Priests, Thomas Becket and
Bernard were canonized for Saints.

In this year Richard, 1179.
the eldest Son of Henry the second, succeeded his Father, at which time
Clement sat Pope, succeeding Gregory, who died a little before for sorrow, for
loss of the Holy Cross by the Popes means. He and Frederick the Emperor,
and Phillip the French King, went with their Armies to Palestina, atchieuing
the recovery of the Holy Land. Richard in this journey gat Cyprus, Acon,
Ptolemayda, Surrah. For preparation for this journey he sold Lordships,
Castles, Offices, Liberties, Privileges, Byshopprickes, etc. He said he would
sell London, if he could find one able to buy it: Many Bishops purchased to
their Bishopprickes diverse Lordships. The Bishop of Winch^ster purchased
Werregraue, and Meues. The Bishop of Duresme, Hadberge, with all their
appurtenances for 500. marks, and purchased the whole Province of the King for
his own, and himself to be made Earl of the same.

In this Kings days there fell a great dissension in the Church of York,
betwixt the Archbishop of York, and the Deane, because evening Song was
begun before the Arch-bishoppe came, his Grace coming into the Quire, was
angry, because they tarryed not for him, and commanded the Quire to stay: the
Dean^ and Treasurer willed them to fing on, the Quire left and recanted, and
begun again. The Treasurer not to take the foil, caused the lights to be put
out, so the evening Song ceased, for the Popish evening Song is blind, without
light, though the Sun shine never so bright: His Grace suspended the whole
Church from Divine service until the parties had made him amends. The next day
being Ascension day, the Deane and Treasurer would make no sar^sfaction, the
people would have fallen upon them if his Grace had not let them. The Deane was
feign to fly to his House, and the Treasurour to Saint Williams Tomb for
succor: The Bishop excommunicated them, and the Church was suspended from
Service that day. Thus much of the Heroical c^mbat betwixt these
Ecclesiastical persons.

King Richard, in his journey aforesaid, talked with Abbot Ioachim of his
Uisions and Prophesies, especially of Antichrist: he expounded unto him the
place in the Reu^lation. There be seven Kings, five are fallen, one is now,
another not yet com, He said they were seven Persecutors of the Church: Herod,
Nero, Domitianus, Maxentius, Mahomet, Turka, the last, which is not yet come,
was Antichrist, which is already borne at Rome, and should be there exalted
into the Apostolic Sea, as the Apostle faith; He is an Adversary, and
exhalteth himself above all that is called GOD, then the wicked man shall be
revealed, and the Lord shall consume him with the breath of his mouth, and
destroy him with the brightness of his coming: Why said the King, I thought
Antichrist should have been borne in Anti^ch, or Babylon, and of the Tribe of
Dan, and ruled in Jerusalem three years and a half, and disputed against
Enoch and Elias, and put them to death, and then died himself, and that sixty
days of repentance should be given to them that were seduced by his preaching.

When King Richard went his journey, he committed the Custody of his Realm
principally to the Bishop of Duresme, and the Bishop of Ely, and to two Lay
men: The two Bishops fell at variance for superiority, at length this order was
taken by the King, that Duresme should have v^der his custody from Humber is
the Scottish Seas. Ely was ordained Chancellor, having under his government
from the said stood of Humber, all the South parts besides: but Ely being more
ambitious, so practiced with the King and his Ambassadors, sending his Letters
to the Pope, obtained the authority Legatiue upon the whole Realm of England,
and became so ambitious and proud, that all the Realm cried out of him, he
being intolerable unto the Clergy and Layty. He assembled a general
Council at London, in color for Religion, but it was for his own pomp and
oppression of the Clergy and Layty, wonderfully oppressing the Commons. He
used ^o ride with and thousand Horses: Noble-mens Sons were glad to be his
Slaves. He married his Cosens Neeces and kinswomen (I will not say his
Daughters) unto the best Barons and Earls, yet his Grandfather was a poor
plowman, and his Father a Cow-heard; and having thus tyrannously abused his
office, fearing examination, fled with a few of his trusty servants to Dover
Castle, to have stolen beyond Sea: and coming in a woman's apparel with a
pe^ce of cloth under his arm, and a mete rod in his hand, being taken upon
susp^tion, his Kercheefe plucked off, his Balaams mark or shaven Crown
appeared: the people wondered, rai^ed and spit on him, and drew him, some by the
arms, some by the legs over the Sea sands, until they brought him to a
dark Seller with shame enough to be kept, till the Council ^ent for him to
the Tower of London, where he was ^xamined, deprived, and banished the Realm:
after restored by King Richard, and sent to Rome, but died by the way.

As King Richard returned from the Holy Land, driven by di^^resse of weather
about the parts of Austria, 1192
he was taken in Synaca by Hubald, Duke of the same country, and sold to the
Emperor for 60000. mark: the Emperor writ of the matter to the King of
France, that he might rejoice with (...): at len^th King Richard was ransomed
for 140000. Crowns, and as he was coming into England, besieging a Castle in
Pictauia, took his deadly wound, and being sick, amongst others, Fulco
Archbishop of Roane came to him, who said to the King: 1199
O mighty King thou have three Daughters very vicious, provide good Husbands
for them, least thou incur great damage, and the utter ruin: the King called
him lying, and mocking hypocrite; saying all the world knows I have no
daughters; he answered yes if it p^ease your Grace, I mean greedy
couetousn^sse, mischievous pride, filthy ^uxury: again I say, O King, beware
of them and get them marriages: Whereupon the King calling his Lords and
Barrons, ^^^laring the matter to them, and said; wherefore here before you
all, I give my Daughter swelling pride unto the proud Templers to Wife; and my
Daughter greedy Auaric^ unto the covetous and Cistertian Monks; and last of
all t^y filthy Daughter Luxury, to the ryotous Prelates of the Church, whom I
think v^ry meet for them.

The King not long after departed without issue, and John his Brother reigned
after him: the Archbishop putting his crown upon his head, swearing him to
de^end the Church and his good laws and destroy the evil, and except he
thought in his mind to do this, he charged him not to presume to take upon
him this dignity: On John Baptist day next after, he went to Normandy, where
he was royal^y received, and a truce made betwixt him and the French King: and
the Earl of Flanders, and all the Lords of France that were in league with
King Richard, cam^ to him, and were sworn unto him.

Not long after the French King made Arthur Knight, and took homage of him for
Normandy, Britain, and all his possessions beyond the Sea, and promised him
help against King John: after the French King, and King John with their Nobles
spoke together an hour: the French King asked him much land for himself, and
King Arthur, which he would not g^ant, but departed in w^ath.

The same year a Legate came into France, and commanded the King upon pain of
interdiction to deliver one Peter out of prison, which was elected to a
Bishopric, who was delivered, the same Legate came into England, and commanded
King John upon pain of interdiction to deliver the Archbishop whom he had
kept in prison two years, which the King denied until he had paid him six
thousand marks, because he had took him in harness in a field against him,
and he swore him he should never bear harness against a Christian man.

This time King John and his wife were divorced, 1200.
because they were in the third degree of kindred, and after by the Council of
the French King, was married unto the Daughter of the Earl of Anguilla, and
then Arthur of Brittan did homage for Britain, and other his possessions to
King John.

This time was strife betwixt the King and the Archbishop of York, because he
would not suffer the Sheriff to do such affairs as he had to dee in his
Dioces for the King, and excommunicated the Sheriff, and would not go with the
King into Normandy, to make the marriage betwixt the French Kings Son and
his Niece.

The King of France required King John to depart with all his Lands in
Normandy and Pictauia, 1202.
etc. unto Arthur his Nephew, else he would war against him, which he
denying, the next day the French King, with Arthur, set upon certain of his
Towns and Castles in Normandy, but he was so repulsed of the English, who
followed so near, and so enforced upon them, that they took Arthur and many
other Prisoners, and left none to bear tidings home. This Arthur was the Son
of Geffery, the elder Brother of King John: Geffery was the third Son of Henry
the second, and John was his fifth Son. Arthur being taken, was brought to the
King home, he exhorted him with many gentle words, to leave the King of France
and incline to his Uncl^, he stoutly required the kingdom of England, with
all things thereunto belonging, to be restored to him as lawful heir of the
Crown: Whereupon he was committed to the Tower of Roane, where he finished his
life. No Story agrees certainly how, whether by leaping into the Ditch or no.

The next year King John lost all his possessions in Normandy, 1203
by the force of the French King.

This year grew great dissension about choosing the Archbishop of Canterbury,
1205
the younger sort of the Monks there, at midnight, and before the old
Archbishop was buried, and without the Kings assent, elected one Renald,
sending him to the Pope, charging him upon his oath to be secret, but he
revealed the matter, whereby the rest of the Monks sent privily to Rome, and
sent to the King for h^s ass^nt to choose an Archbishop: the King granted their
petition, desiring them to show ^auour to John Gray, Bishop of Norwich, which
they did, and elected him, and the King sent to Rome at his own charge, to
have this election ratified: ^he Suffragans of Canterbury sent likewise to
Rome, to have both those elections frustrated, because their assents were not
to them.

The next year the Pope d^cided the matter betwi^t the Monks and Suffrigans,
1206
pronouncing with the Monks, charging the Suffragans and Bishop to meddle no
more with that election.

The next year the Pope decided the controversy betwixt the younger Monks
and the elder Monks, 1207
and condemned both their elections, comma^nding them to choose Steven Langton,
Cardinal of Saint Chrisogone for their Archbishop; they said they durst not
for fear of the King, and that it was prejudicial to their liberties. He in a
fury said, We will you to know, that we have full power over the Church of
Canterbury, and are not wont to tarry the consent of Princes; therefore We
comma^nd you, under pa^ne of the great curse, that you c^use him. Whereupon
they all assented, saving he whom the King had sent for the Arch bishop of
Norwich.

Upon this the King conceived great displeasure against the Monks of
Canterbury, wherefore he banished 64. of them out of the Land.

The King sent Letters to the Pope, sharply expostulating with him, for
re^u^ing the Bishop of Norwich, and setting up one Stephen Langton (unknown to
him, and brought up in the kingdom of France amongst his enemies) Archbishop
of Canterbury: and that the Monks without his consent, presumed to promote
him, and meruailed that the Pope did not reuolue with himself, how necessary
his favor had ever been to them. What great revenues had proceeded hence,
thither, the like whereof has not been received out of any Country on this
side the Alps, and that he would stand for his liberties unto death, nor would
not be so shaken from the election of the Bishop of Norwich, which he sees so
commodious to him, and that if his request were not heard, he would provide by
Seas that there should be no more such g^dding to Rome, to export the riches of
his Land thither, whereby he is less abled against his Enemies, and that he
had sufficient Prelates of his own, and has no need of any from abroad.

Pope Innocentius writ to him again. Whereas we have written gently to you,
conc^rning the matter of Canterbury, you have written to us after a threatening
sort; and where we, above our duty, have given to you, you have not given to
us ou^ duty, which you are bound to do, and though your savor (as you say)
be necessary for us, yet consider, ours is not a little opor^une unto you; and
whereas we have not shew^d the like honor to any Prince, as to you, you have
so much derogated to our Honor, as no Prince besides has presumed to do.
Where you say, the Archbishop is unknown to you, and brought up amongst year
enemies. Then be shows how learned ^e was, how he was Prebend at Paris, and
of an ho^^st stock, borne an Englishman, and known to the King being he wrote
to him three times before; and says, that at the Monks request he sent his
Letters once or twice to the King for his assent, although was not the manner
of the Sea Apostolic, who has the fullness of the power of the Church of
Canterbury, to wait for princes consents in such elections: therefore,
according to the Canons of the Fathers, w^ did pro^ide that the said Church
should be no longer (...) of her Pastor: therefore, being this election has so
orderly proceeded upon a person so meet for the same, w^e will not for any
man's pleasure, nor may without danger of ^ame and conscience defer the
consummation thereof. And my son, seeing we have respected your Honor more
then our duty is, study to Honor us so much as ^u^tie requires, that you
may deserve favor at Gods hands and Ours, and least doing contrary, you bring
you self into such a pe^ke of t^oubles, that you cannot ri^ your self again,
for it will fall out, he will have the better to whom every knee does bow,
whose turn I serve in the earth: therefore obey not them that desire
unquietness, that they might f^sh the better in a troubled water. It will not
be for your saftie and glory to resist God and the Church, in whose quarrel
the blessed and glorious Martyr, Bishop Thomas has lately shed his blood;
especially seeing your Father, and brother being Kings of England, did give
over those three wicked Customs into the hands of the Sea Aposto^^ke: but if
you will yield your self humbly into our hands, we will look that you and
yours shall be sufficiently provided for. Thus have you the glorious Letter of
the proud Pope, I beseech you mark it well.

Not long after proceeded a commandment to certain Bishops, requiring them
by the authority Apostolical, that if the King would not receive the Prior of
Canterbury, and his Monks, then they should interdict him through his Realm.
Whereupon the four Bishops, of London. El^, Winchester, and Herford, showed
the King thereof, but the King refused the same, and would not grant their
request, whereupon they pronounced the said In^erdiction throughout England and
Wales, and the Church doors were shut up, with keys, and other fastnings.

Then the King took all the possessions of the four Bishops into his hands,
and appointed certain to keep the Livings of the Clergy throughout the
Realm. The Bishops cursed all that kept, or meddled with Church-goods, against
the wills of the owners. Then they went to the Bishop of Canterbury, and showed
him all the matter, he promised, he would shortly come to Canterbury himself,
or send some which should do as much as himself. (...) came to the King, that
the Bishops had been Beyond Sea, with the Archbishop and were returned. He
sent to them Bishops, Earls, and Abbots, to show that the King would receive
the Archbishop Steven, and the Prior, and all the Monks of Canterbury,
promising on his behalf, that he should never take any thing of the
Church-goods, but would make amends for them taken, and the Church should have
all her Franchices, as amply as in King Edwards time the Confessor.

This agreement was concluded, and engrossed in a pair of Indentures, the
said four Bishops set their hands to one part, the other part was carried to
the King, which he liked well, but he would not make restitution of the
Church-goods. The four Bishops would not agree to put out that Article, then
the King sent for the Archbishop to come to him and speak with him at
Canterbury, and for his safe conduct to come and go at his will, sent three
Justices to be pledges for him: whereupon the Archbishop came to Canterbury,
and the King came to Ch^^ham, and sent his Treasurer to him to put out the
clause of restitution, which he denied to do, or any word of the same.

Then the king caused to be procl^imed throughout the Realm, that th^se that
had any Church-liuings, and went beyond sea, should return at a certain day,
or loose the^^ Livings for ever. And that all Sheriffs should inquire if any
Churchman, from that day forward, received any commandment from the Pope, to
apprehend him and bring him before him: and that they should take into their
hands, unto his use all the Church Lands, that were given by the Archbishop
Steven, or the Priors of Canterbury, from the time of the election of the said
Archbishop, and that all the woods of the Archbishop, should be cut down* and
sold.

Thou the Pope sent over two Legates, which resorted to the King at Northampton,
where he held his Parliament, and saluted him, they said, they came from the
Pope, to reform the peace of holy Church, and we admonish you, in the Popes
behalf, that you make full restitution of the goods that you have ravished of
holy Church, and of the land, and that you receive Stephen Archbishop, into his
dignity, and the Prior of Canterbury, and his Monks, and yield again to the
Archbishop, all his Lands and rents; and Sir, yet moreover, that you shall make
such restitution to them, as the Church shall think good.

The King answered, he would gladly grant their request touching the Prior and
Monks of Canterbury, but touching the Archbishop, let him give up the
Archbishopricke, and I will give him some other Bishopric; upon this
condition I will admit him, otherwise not.

Then one of them said, holy Church was never wont to disgrade Archbishop,
without reasonable cause, but to correct Princes, that were disobedient to her.
What now, (quoth the King) threaten you me? They said, You have told us what is
in your heart, now we will tell you what is in the Popes will. He has wholly
interdicted and accursed you, for your wrongs to holy Church, and the Clergy,
and we do accurse all those that shall common with you hereafter, and we
assoyle all Earls, Barons, Knights, and others from their homage, fealty, and
service they should do to you; and to confirm this, we give power to the
Bishops of Winchester and Norwich; and the same power over Scotland, we give
unto the Bishops of Rochester and Salisbury; and in Wales, we give the same
power to the Bishops of Saint David, Landaffe, and Saint Assaph. And we send
throughout all Christendom, to all Bishops, to accurse all that help and
comfort you in any need. And we a^^oyle all your adversaries, and command them
to warr^ with you, and with all that are enemies to the Church: Then the king
answered; What may you do more? They said, we say to you in verbo Dei, that no
heir of yours, after this day, may be crowned. Then the King swear, if he had
known their news, he would have kept them out this tweluemonth.

Upon this occasion Pope Inocent commanded ageine, in pain of his great curse,
that none should obey King John, nor keep company with him, to eat, drink,
common, or Council with him, or his servants to do him any service, at bed,
board, hall, or stable. But, the greater part that sled from him by this
means, of diverse and sundry diseases, that year, died. Betwixt England and
France, that year, fell great amity, but false, to the bitter betraying of
England.

Further, the Pope with his Cardinals, gave sentence definitive, that King John
should be deposed from his Regal Seat, and promised Phillip the French King
full remission of all his (...), and clear possession of the Realm of
England, unto him and his heirs, if he did either kill him, or expel him.

Moreover, he wrote unto other Nations, that they should take upon them the
badge of the Cross, and revenge him of the manifold injuries done to the
universal Church, by the cursed Tu^ke, and Pagan, King John.

The next year, the French King, manned with the Bishops, Monks, Prelates,
and Priests, and their servants, began his att^mpt, in hope of the Crown of
England, but the English Navy took 300. of the French Kings ships, laden
with wheat, wine, meat, flesh. Armor, and other necessaties for war, and
burnt 100. within the Haven, and took the spoil of them.

The Priests of England provided them a false prophet, one Peter Wake^ield,
they noysed daily amonst the Commons, that Christ had twice appeared to him, in
shape of a child betwixt the Priests hands, once at York, and again at
Pomfret, and breathed, saying: Peace, peace, peace, and that he was rapt in
spirit, and he saw the ^oyes of Heaven and sorrows of Hell. He prophesied of
King John, that he should reign no longer then ^scention day, within the year
of our Lord 1213. Being asked the question, he could not tell whether he should
be slain, expelled, or of himself give over the Crown: but he was sure, he
nor none of his stock should reign, that day once fi^^shed. The King laughed
thereat, when he saw himself out of dange^. He prated thereof at large so,
that they which l^ned the King, apprehended him, and put him in prison, the
King not knowing thereof: the fame hereof went through the whole Realm, and the
more, because he was imprisoned. When the prophesied Ascension day was came,
King John commaun^ed his Regal Tent to be spread abroad in the open field* and
passed the day with his Noble Council, and men of Honor, in the greatest
solemnity that ever he did before. When that day was passed withal, his
enemies turned it to an al^goricall understanding, and said, He is no King, for
the Pope reigns, and not he* yet reigned he still, and his son after him, to
prove the prophet alyer. And because this false prophet had troubled the
Realm, perverted the people, raised the Commons against the King, and was
carried over the Sea by the Prelates, and gave encouragement to the French King
to invade the Land, the King commanded the false prophet should be hanged, and
his son, least any more should rise of his race. At length, the King seeing
himself so compassed with enemies, and treasons, and great danger that was
like to follow, especially fearing the French King* was enforced to submit
himself to that execrable monster, and Antichrist of Rome, converting his Land
into the patrimony of Saint Peter, as many other had done before him: for he
was sure, though not without shame, being under his protection, no foreign
Potentate was able to subdue him.

King John made a Letter obligatory to the Pope, in this manner; Whereas we
have grievously offended God, and our mother Church of Rome, and our body and
Realm is not a sufficient satisfaction to him that humbled himself on the
Crosie for us, through Council of the noble Earls and Barons, we freely grant
unto God and the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and to our mother Church
of Rome, and to our holy Father Pope Inocent the third, and all the Popes that
come after him, all the Realm, and patronage of the Churches of England and
Ireland, with all the appurtenances, for the remission of our sins, and the
help of our kinsfolks souls, and of all Christian Souls; so that henceforth
we will hold as Farmer to her Mother Church, doing fealty to the Pope, and his
successors. We will do homage to the Popes Legate* as it were in the Popes
presence; paying ^or all manner of Custom which we should do for the said
Realms yearly 1000. marks of silver, saving to us and our heirs, our
Justices and our Franchises, and other realties that appertain to our Crown.
And for the assurance hereof, we bind our successors and heirs, that if any
of our heirs shall go against these things, and being warned, will not an
end, he shall then loose the foresaid Realms for evermore.

But before the relea^ment of the Interdiction, the king was compelled to give
over his Crown and Scepter to the Antichrist of Rome for five days, and to
receive it at another Cardinals hands.

Then all that had their hearts wounded for obeying their liege King, came and
were absolved of their own Bishops, but the Spiritual men were compelled to
seek their absolution of the Pope. Some of the Clergy were not pleased that
the King should be absolved, until the King had paid all which any of the
Clergy should demand, and complained of the Popes Legate, that he was too
partial for the King, in the matter of restitution, and because he went, with
the Kings Officers, to the Cathedral Churches, Abbyes, Priories, and other
Churches vacant, and appointed two Iucumbants, to every place, one for the
King, and the other for the parties, and commonly compelled the election to
pass upon him whom the king nominated.

The Archbishop called a Council at Oxford, some would not tarry, seeing the
confysion thereof, others reviled the king most spi^efully, behind his back,
saying; he ought to be taken for no Governor of theirs, that it grew to a
grievous tumult, and most grievous commotion.

In this years Pope Inocent held the Council at Rome, called Lateran; it was
pretended to be for the r^formation of the Church Uniuersall, and to have the
holy Land recovered from the Turtes: but it was because the Doctrine of the
Truth, which they call Here^^^, begin to (...) very high, by reason whereof the
Emp^rour Otho, and many other Priests and their Countries were excommunicated.

In this Council he established by public Deerce, that the Pope should have
the correction of all Christian Princes, and that no Emperor should be
admitted, except he were s^orne to him, and Crowned of him.

Item, that whosoever spoke eu^il of the Pope, should be punished in Hell, with
eternal damnation.

Item, Transubstantiation was first invented, brought in, and a Pix ord^ined to
cover the bread, and bell to be rung before it, when it went abroad; and the
Mass to be made equal with Christ's Gospel.

Item, the Act was established and ratified, of compelling Priests to abjure
lawful m^^iage.

Mark how the Priests and their adherents were plagued for handling king John
so, Stephen Lancton, Archbishop of Canterbury, in this Council was
excommunicated of Pope Inocent, with all th^se Bishops, Pre^lates, Priests,
Barons, and Commons, which had been of Council with him in the former
Rebellion; and when the Archbishop had (...) instant suit to be absolved, the
Pope answered; I swear by Saint Peter, thou shall not so soon obtain thy
absolution: for thou have hurt the king of England, and injured ^uch the Church
of Rome. He was also suspended from Church, saying Mass, or exercising other
Ecclesiastical Office, because he would not execute the Popes curse upon the
said Rebellious Barons, and cursed all the other rebels with b^ll, book^, and
candle, and they appealed to the general Council.

In the same year, many were summoned to Rome, because they would not consent
to the Kings deposing, and submitting to the Pope. Thus the whole Realm was
miserably divided into two factious, some Lords, and Gentlemen, a great number
followed the King, and loved his doings.

Others fled to the French King, desiring of him his eldest son Lodowicke,
and they would elect him their King, and that he would send with him a mighty
Army, to subdue the King: but as certain Lords and Barons were choosing
Lodowicke for their king, the Pope sent a Cardinal to stop their rash and
cruel attempts, charging the French king, upon his alegiance, with all
possible power, to ^auour, and de^end King John of England, his Feoda^y, or
Tenant. Tho French king answered. The Realm of England was never yet part of
Peter's patrimony, neither now is, nor ever should be. No Prince may pledge, or
give away his Kingdom, without the lawful consent of his Barons: If the Pope
shall se^ up such a president, he shall, at his pleasure, bring all Christian
Princes, and their Kingdoms to naught, Though he be my adversary, I much
lament that he ^^th brought the noble ground, and Queen of Provinces, under
miserable (...). The chief of his Lords standing by, cried by the blood of
God, in whom we hope to be saved, we will stick in this Article to the
loosing of our heads, that no King may put his ^and under tribute, and make his
Nobility captive servants.

Lodowicke (...) that his purposed journey might not us let, for the Barons
have elected me, and I will not loose my right, but fight for it to death, and
I have fri^ndes there: to which the King answered not, belike doubting
somewhat, because he saw all (...) of the Priests, that they might live
licentiously in wealth, free from the Kings yoke.

The same time a such treasons and conspiracies were wrought by Clergy men,
that the King knew not where to find trusty friends. At length he went to
Dover, looking for aid from other quarters, to whom resorted a wonderful
number of men from Flanders, (...), Holland, and many other parts. It was
reported the Pope writ to them to a^de him. First, because he submitted his
kingdom to his protection, and he had taken upon him the (...) of the white
Cross, to win again Jerusalem. Thirdly because he had gotten by him,
England, and Ireland, and was like to loose both.

Upon the A^^^nciation day of our Lady, he ^ooke upon him his voyag^ against
^he Turks, to recover Jerusalem. He told his servants (...) did prospe^^ with
him since he submitted himselfs and his kingdoms to the Church of Rome.

In this year, one Simon Langton was chosen (...) of York, but he was deposed
by the Pope, because he was brothe^ to Stephen ^rchbishop of (...), w^^m the
Pope hated, having brought him up of naught, and ^ound him so (...), and he
places the Bishop of (...) in his ^oome.

The (...) night the Pope renewed his curse upon the king of France his (...),
for usurping upon king John, and against the said Simon Langton, and Geruas
Hobruge, for provoking him to the same, with won^erfull (...), cousing, the
^els to ring, ca^les to be ^^ghted, and doors opened, the (...) to be red,
committing them wholly to the Deu^l, and communded the ^ishops and (...) to
poblish it through the whole Realm, to the ^errour of all subjects. The (...)
Simon, and Geruais der^^^d him and appealed unto the (...) all Council, for
Lodowicke and themselves. The Magestrates, and citizens of London did likewise
(...) at the Popes commandments, and kept company with the excommunicated, at
^able and Church, in contempt of the Pope, and (...). Lodowicke, at (...)
taking himself, king, made Simon Langton hig^ Chancellor, and Geruais
Hobruge, his chief Preache^: vy whose daily Preaching, the Bar^^^, and
Citizens bring excommunicated, caused all the Church doors to be opened, and
(...) sung, and Lodowicke was sit for them in all paints.

About this time Cardinal Pandulphus was made Bishop of Norwich, for gathering
Peter (...), an old ^illage of the Pope, and other great labors ^one by him
for the Pope.

About this time one Uicont of Meinn, a (...) man, which came over with
Lodowicke, felll ^^cke, and called to him certain English Baron^, and said; I
pity the destruction that is coming toward you and your Realm^. Prince
Lodowicke has sworn a great oath, and sixteen of his Earls and Nob^es are
of (...) with him, that if he obtain the Crown of England, he will ^anish and
deprive of their Lands and goods, all that h^ now finds to go against their
leach King, and are Traitors to him; upon my Faith, n^w lying at Gods mercy, I
was one that was (...) to the same: and with tears, he said, take heed in
time, your King for a (...) has kept you under, but if Lodowicke prevail, he
will put you from all, he had them keep his counce^l, and so he dyed. This
trobled the Barons, and seeing withal (...) Prince Lodowicke obtained by
wars, he gave to French men in spite of them, saying they were but Traitors.

They at length concluded to submit themselves, (...) never drunk before: I
trust this Wassell shall make all England glad, and drank a great draught
thereof, the king pledged him: the Munke went away, and (...) bu^st out, and
he dyed, and had ever after three Monks to sing continually Mass for his
Soul, confirmed by their general Chapter. I would you would see how
religiously they bestow: heir confessions, absolutions, and Masses.

King John feeling himself not well, asked for Simon the Monk, they answered*
he was dead; then the took his Chariot, and departed, and dyed within three
days. He admonished that his Son Henry would learn by his example, to be
gen^le and leuing to his native people. He being imbalmed, his bowels were
bur^^ed in Crompton Abbey, his Soldiers ^olded his Corpse triumphantly in
Armor, and honorably buried him in the Cathedral Church or Worcester, having
reigned 17. years, 6. moneth^, and odd days.

After whose death the Princes, Lords, Barons, and strangers, that were on the
kings part, with the Council of the Legate Gualdo, proclaimed Henry his son
king, and at Gloucester, with the Earl there, they anointed and Crowned him
King, b^ the Legate Gualdo, assisted with the Bishops of Winchester, and Bath,
and called him Henry the third.

The Pope sent with all speed, that they should mightily stand ^ith the young
king, being but ten years old, and defend England with Arm^ur, and his
thundering curses against Lodowicke. He confirmed his Legate Gualdo, and
committed to his discretion all that appertained to his Office, none to appeal
from him. He compelled the Prelates to be sworn to the young King, and
punished them which refused, The Bishop of Winchester laid a heavy talk upon
his beneficed men, to help the king in his wars.

Gualdo left not one beneficed man unpunished, that had taken part with the
French King.

In this year, 1219.
Gualdo was sent for home to Rome* for by this time he had welfa^oredly unladen
the purses of the Clergy men, and returned with all his bags well stuffed,
leaving Cardinal Pandulfe behind him, to supply his Baliwicke The Bishop of
Lincoln, not long before, paid 1000. marks for recovery of his Office, and an
hundred marks to the Legate, for his goodwill; so were other holy Prelates and
Priests taught by his example.

Inocentius Pope, condemned Almeri^us, a worthy Bishop, for an heretic, for
teaching, and holding against Images: also he condemned the Doctrine of Ioachim
Abbas, as before, for heresy. He brought in first the paying of privy ty^hes,
and the receiving once at Easter, and the reservation of the Sacrament, and the
going before it with a bell and a light.

He stirred up Otho against Phillip the Emperor, because he was elected
without his will, whereupon followed much slaughter in Germany; and against
Otho, which he had made Emperor, he set up Frederick king of Ci^le, and
caused the Archbishop of Mayence to excommunicate him* and depose him of his
Empire: for which cause, the Princes of Germany did invade his Bishopric, and
burned his possession: all was because Otho held certain Cities, Towns, and
C^stles, which the Pope said belonged to him.

In his time came the order of Black Friars, called the Preaching Friars; it
began of one Dominicke a Spaniard, who after he had Preached ten years against
the Albigenses, and others that held against the Pope, coming to Lateran,
desired to have his Order of Preaching Friars confirmed, which the Pope
refused, until he dreamt that the Church of Lateran was ready to fall,
until Dominicke came and propped it up with his sholders, and so preserved it.
The Pope waking, called Dominicke to him, and gr^nted his request. Dominicks
mother being great with child, dreame^ she had a wolf in her womb, which had
a burning tor^ch in his mouth, the which dream, the Preachers of that order
advance to their glory.

In his time came up the order of the Minorits, of one Frances an Italian, he
left off shoes, had but one cote of vile cloth, and an hempen cord about his
middle, and so apparelled his Disciples, teaching them to fulfill the
perfection of the Gospel, walk in poverty, and holy simplicity; this rule
was confirmed by Pope Innocent. Many Nobles, and others, in Rome, builded
manflons for him and his disciples, he was likewise str^^t to his flesh,
leaving clothes* in winter, he (...) himself in Ice and snow, he called
poverty his Lady, he kept nothing over night, he was so desirous of Martyrdom,
that he went to Siria to the Solda^, who received him honorably: it is written
that Christ and his Saints marked him with five wounds. These Franciscans, or
begging F^^ers, though they have but one Rule, they have many Orders, there by
101. several sorts of Friars and Nuns, which the reader, if he be disposed,
may see in the book at l^rge, with their names, Fol 70.

Hildegardis a Nun a Prophetess, lived in the year 1170. She reprehendeth
grievously the abominations of the l^ues of the Spiritual Papists, the
contempt of their Office, and destruction of Gods children with these words;
Now is the Law neglected amongst the Spiritual, which negl^ct to Preach, and
to do good things. The masters and Prelates, sleep and negl^ct Justice. The
Church appeared to her in the shape of a (...), her face (...) with dirt, and
her (...) rent, complaining that the Priests did not shine over the people
neither in Doctrine, not example; but contrary, did drive the innocent lamb
from them, that Eccles^asticall order grew worse and worse, and Priests
destroyed the law of God, and did not teach it; and proph^^eth to them Gods
heavy wrath and punishments.

She prophesies likewise of the reformation of Religion, and says, it shall
be most godly, saying; Then shall the Crown of the Apostolical honor be
divided, because there shall be found no religion amongst them, and the name of
that dignity shall be despised, and they shall s^t over them other men, and
other Archbishops, and the Apostolical order shall have scarce Rome, and a ^ew
other Countries thereabout, under his Crown^; and this shall be done partly be
war^es, and partly by a common consent of Spiritual and Seculer persons, then
Justice shall flourish, and men shall honestly apply themselves to the ancient
Custo^es and disciplines of the ancient.

She prophes^eth likewise of Friars; There shall rise a senseless, proud,
greedy people, without Faith, and subtle, which shall eat the s^^nes of the
people, pretending in Order of certain devout persons, under the dissimuled
cloak of beggars, pr^ferring themselves before others in feigned devotion, in
puffed up knowledge, and preten^ed holiness, walking without (...), and the
^ea^e of God, finding out many new mischiefs, strong and sturdy. Of wise men,
and Christ's faithful that Order shall be accursed; they shall cease from
labor, and study for quietness, rather taking on them the Order of
flatterers then beggars, they shall study altogether how to resist the
Preachers of the truth, and kill them with the mighty. The Devil shall root
four vices in them, Flattery, Enui^, Hypocrisy, and Backbiting: that by
flattery, they may have bou^tifull gifts; that by Hypocricie they may please
men, and by Back^iting, dispraise others, and extol themselves, for the praise
of men, and s^ducing of the simple. And in example of Martyrs, having no
devotion, shall preach instantly. They shall speak evil of Princes, and
withdraw the Sacraments from Pastors, rere^uing the alms of the poor, weak,
and needy; and conueying themselves into a multitude of people, being familier
with women, teaching them how to deceive their husbands, and friends, and
convey away their goods by stealth, and give it them, and say that they would
pray for them; so that they cover other m^ns faults curiously, and forg^t their
own utterly. They shall take away things from Pirates, thieves,
Church-pillers, from Usurers, Heretics, and Apostates, Adulterers, lecherous
women, b^ud^, from the mighty, p^riured Merchants, false Judges, Soldiers,
Tyrants, Princee living against the Law; and they shall follow the Devil, and
sweetness of sin, de^icatenesse of life and (...) to their eternal
damnation, all men shall see this, yet shall they daily become more indurate
and wicked. But when their iniquities, and seducings shall be tried, men shall
cease to give them, then shall they go^ about hungry, and looking down to the
earth like mad dogs, and shrinking in their necks, like Turtles, that they
may be filled with bread, then shall the people say, Wo^ unto you wretches,
children of sorrow, the world seduced you, the Devil snared your mo^ths, your
flesh slippery your heart without taste, your minds wandering, your eyes
delighted in vanity, and madness, your p^nches desire sweet dishes, your
feet swift to mischief; consider how you were accounted (...) and zealous,
poor rich men, and simple stout men; but you were devout slatterers, false
betrayers, perverse back ^i^ers, holy hypocrites, peruert^rs of the truth, too
much strickt and precise, proud, shameless, and unstable Doctors, delicate
Mar^yres, professors for lucre sake, meek slanderers, religious covetous,
lowly proud, godly hard men, pleas^nt liars, peaceable persecu^ors, oppressors
of the simple, inuenters of evil Sects, unmerciful lovers of the world,
sellers of pardons, spoylers of benefices, unprofitable makers of prayers,
seditious conspirers, dronken whisperers, desirous of honor, curious in men's
faults, the extortioners of the world, insatiable preachers, pleasers of men,
seducers of women, so we^s of discord. Moses well prophesied of them in his
Canticle; A people without Council and Wisdom, would God they were wise and
understood, and foresaw the latter ends to come, you builded aloft, and when
you could build no higher you fell down. Like Simon Magus whom the Lord
repressed, and struck with a mighty plagne, so you likewise have fallen
through your deceivable wickedness, lies, (...), the people shall say to
them, away teachers of peruersitie, subuerters of verity, brethren of the
Shunamite, father of Heretical pra^i^^e, false apostles, you seem to follow
the life of the Apostles, but follow not their steps one ^ot, you children of
iniquity, we will none of your trades and ways, for presumptuous pride has
deceived you, and insatiable concupiscence subverted your erroneous heart, and
when you coueted to climb up higher and higher, then, by the just Judgment of
God, you have fallen down to everlasting shame.

About the same time that the Franciscans, and Dominicke Friars began, sprang
up the Cro^bearers, or Crouche^ Friars, by Pope Innocent the 3. who raised an
Army, signed with the Cross on their breast, to (...) against the Albenses,
whom the Pope and his sect account Heretics. About the parts of Tholous, I
find in some records, that the opinion of them was sound enough, professing
against the wanton wealth, pride* and tyranny of the Prelates, denying the
Popes authority to have ground in Scriptures, neither could they away with the
ceremonies or traditions, as Images, Pardons, Purgatory, calling them
blasphemous occupyings; many of them were slain at times, and burned by the
Pope, and Simon Ecclesiasticus, with other more.

After King John, as aforesaid, had submitted himself, and his whole Realm
under tribute to the Pope it is incredible how the insatiable a^arice of the
Romans did oppress the Commons, and all estates of the Realm, especially
the Churchmen, who, what for the Pope, for the Legates, for the Holy Land, and
other subtle devises to get away their money, were brought to such slavery and
penury, that whereas the King durst not, or could not remedy their
exclamations, they were almost driven by for^e to remedy their own wrongs,
that they writ to the Bishops, and other Ec^les^asticall Governors, that they
had rather die then be thus confounded of the Romans, that it was not unknown
to them, how they had deposed men, and given away the B^nefices after their
own lust, and how they have thundered excommunications against you, if you
place any, in any Spiritual Living, in any of your Dioces within the Realm,
until f^ue Romans in every Dioces, and in every Cathedral, such as the Pope
shall name, be provided for, to the value of 100. lib. yearly; and what other
grieuances they do inflict to the Layty, and Nobles. Wherefore, w^ considering
the rigorous austeritie of the ^omanists, which take upon them to Iudg^ and
condemn us, and lay on us intoll^rable burdens: therefore upon a full advise
had amonst us, we have though good rather to resist then to be subict to their
intolerable oppre^sions, and greater slau^ry to be looked for hereafter.
Therefore we straightly command you, as your friends, that you do not
intermeddle, or take part with them, let^ing you understand for truth, that in
case you shall be found culpable herein, not only your ^oods and possessions
shall be in danger of burning, but a^^o your bodies, shall incur the same
peril as shall the said Romish oppr^ssors.

In the reign of Henry the third, who succeeded King John, and reigned 57.
years, Cardinal Otho was sent to the King with Letters to him and other
places for exactions of Money: the Letters were to require for the Pope two
Prebends in every Cathedral Church, a portion of every Abbot, and of every
Covent, as much as belonged to one Monk: their good being equally divided,
because the Church of Rome of greatly slandered, that none could proceed there
in any cause without great gifts and expenses, whereof the poverty of the
Church is the cause; therefore it is sit, that you as natural Children should
help and succor your Mother, for if we should not receive of you and other
good men, we should lack, which were a great dishonor to our dignity. The
King answered, He could do nothing, because it concerned the Commons, and he
ass^mbled a Council, he was answered, they could conclude nothing, because
the Arch-Byshoppe, the King, and other whom it concer^ed were not there.

The next year the same Cardinal came again into England, and summoned all
the Cl^argy to another Council, to be held in the Cathedral Church of S.
Paul in London, for redressing of diverse and sundry matters concerning
Benifices Religion, and other abuses of the Church: putting them in fear and
hope, some to lose, and some to obtain spiritual promotions at his hands.
Diverse pre^ious rewards were offered him, in Pal^ries, in rich Plate, and
Jewels, in costly and sumptuous Garments richly furred, in Coin and Uictuall,
etc. The Bishop of Winchester sent him fifty fat Oxen, and hundred coome of
pure Wheat, eight tun of chosen W^ne, likewise other Bishops offered to the
Cardinals Box after their ability.

The Cardinal commanded, at the West end of Saint Paul's Church, a high
solemn Throne of great State to be prepared, rising up with a glorious
Scaffold: before the Cardinal begun his Sermon, there happened a great
discord betwixt the Arch-byshops of Canterbury and York, about sitting on the
right hand of the glorious Cardinal: the Cardinal showed them a Bull of the
Pope, in the midst of which was pictured the Cross, and Paul pictured on
the right side of the Cross, and Peter on the left: saying, yet there is no
contention betwixt these two, yet Saint Peter for the Prerogative of his Keys,
and for the Pre-eminence of his Apostle-ship, and Cathedral Dignity, seems
most worthy to be placed on the right side, and from that time forth, the
Arch-Byshop of Canterbury has enjoyed the Dignity and Pr^heminence of the
^ight hand.

The Cardinal, sitting like a God in the midst betwixt them, made his Sermon
upon these words; In the midst of the Seat, and round about, were four
Beasts, full of eyes behind and before. He compared them about him to the four
Beasts, declaring how they ought to have eyes before and behind; that is, they
must be careful and provident, as well in disposing secular things, as wise
and circumspect in spiritual matters, contriuing, and joining wisely things
past with things to come. And this was the greatest effect of his Clearkely
Sermon.

Then he gave forth sundry Constitutions and Statutes, for ordering of
Churches, dedicating Temples, for seven Sacraments, for giving Orders, farming
Benefices, Collations, and resignations, Priests apparel, and single life, for
eating of flesh in religious Houses, for Archdeacons, Bishops, Proctors, etc.
The King dreading the Commons, willed him to repair home to Rome, but he could
not so be rid of him, but he renewed his commission, and still applied himself
to his Harvest, gleaning and raking what he could, writing his Letters to
every Bishop or Archdeacon, for procurations to bear his charges, and
withal, to be speedily collected and sent to him. Provided, that the sum
collected, should not exceed above four Marks of a Living, and where small
Livings were two Livings to join, and if any contradicted or gaine-sayed him,
to excommunicate them.

And they sent forth Preachers and Friars in all places, to persuade men to
fight against the common enemy the Turk, whom when they have bound with a vow,
and signed with the cross, then they send their Bulls to release them for
money, and the Bishops and Archdeacons to proclaim it.

The Pope was not ashamed to require the fifth part of every Ecclesiastical
living, and further, he promised and gave to the Romans, for helping him in
wars against Frederick the Emperor, which had married King John's daughter:
the gift of all the spiritual livings in England, belonging to the religious
houses, and thereupon sent express Commandment to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and other four* Bishops joined with him that they should provide
spiritual livings, for three hundred Romans, in the best Benefits in
England, at the next voidance, so that the said Bishops should be suspended
in the mean time from all collation of Benefice: the Archbishop seeing their
unreasonable oppressions being not able to endure it, went into France.

And further one Petrus Rubeus, was sent from the Pope, to go from Bishop, to
Bishop, Abbot and Abbot, telling them such a Bishop, such an Abbot has given
thus much unto the Popes Holiness, trusting you also will not be behind, in a
matter that so much concerns the good of the Church, by which cunning
subtlety he gathered together into the treasury of the Church such a Mass of
money as is almost incredible to believe.

At length the Bishops, Abbots, and Archdeacons came to the King, whose
Father they had so obstinately resisted and repugned; lamentably complaining of
their extreme miseries, of the unmeasurable exactions of the Pope, so all the
Prelates were called together, and upon talking together made many exceptions
against the same: the Legate and his follow hearing these allegations, seeing
their own utter confus^on, were the less importunate.

Not long after this followed a general Council at Lions, in the Kingdom^ of
France, called by Pope Innocentius: in the which Council the English Nation
did exhibit sundry Articles of all their greeuances, and that the Italians did
succeed one another in the benefices, whose language they could not understand,
and that there was no preaching in their Churches, nor no alms given to the
poor, and that there came fresh Letters from the Pope, commanding the Prelates
to find at their proper costs and charge for a whole year, some ten armed
soldiers, some more, some less, to be ready at the Popes commandment, when,
or where be should appoint.

After these terrible greeuances and enormities, the States of England
consulting together, directed their Letters to the Pope for Reformation: First
the Abbots and Priors, then the Bishops and Suffragans, after the Nobles and
Barons, and last of all the King, but all was never the better.

Not long after the Pope sent for new tallage and exactions, which when it came
to the Kings ear he vehemently disturbed writ severally to every Bishop, in
manner following.

THat whereas we have heretofore written to you, once, twice, thrice, both by
our Privy Seal, and our Letters Patents, that you should leuy for the pope no
exactions, either upon the Clergy, or Laity, yet you vilepending our
commandment, and contrary to our provision made in our last Council at
London, have proceeded in collecting the said your taxes and tallages whereupon
we greatly marvel and are moved: Wherefore we straightly will and command you,
that you do so no more, as you will enjoy our ^auour and your possessions; and
if you have made any such collection or gathering, that you suffer it not to be
transported out of the Realm, but keep it until the return of the
Ambassadors, and that you make this our inhibition common to your Archdeacons
and Officials.

At length the Ambassadors came home, bringing word that the Pope was greatly
displeased with the Realm, saying; Rex Anglorum qui iam recalcitrat and
frederiscat suum habet consilium, ego vero and meum habeo, quod and sequar,
etc. And that they were half counted Schismatickes, for speaking in the Kings
behalf, and could no more be heard, the King being insenfed heere-with, sent
out Proclamations through all the Realm, that none should consent to any tax
of Money for the Pope: he hearing of it, in cruel rage sent to the Prelates,
upon pain of interdiction to provide the said sums of Money by the Feast
of Assumption, the King for fear of the Pope, durst not stand to the liberties
of the Church.

Moreover, the gulf of the Romish Avarice waxt so immeasurable, that he shamed
not, upon his curse, to ask the third part of Church goods, and the yearly
fruit of all vacant Benefices.

Otho coming to Oxford, lying in the house of Osney, was received with great
honor, the Scholars presenting him honorable Dishes and rewards Dinner being
done, they came to welcome him; coming to the Gate, the Porter an Italian
asked what they would have, and holding the door half open, with contumelious
terms, thrust them out, they with force thrust open the gate, and came in,
the Romans within fell to alarm by the ears together, some of the Scholars
going ^or Weapons, the Master Cook cast scalding liquor, wherein meat was
sodden, in the face of a poor Scholar, an Irishman, which waighted for
Alms: another Scholar a Welsh-man seeing it, shot the Cook thorough with an
Arrow, and killed him: Whereupon was a great clamor, the Cardinal hearing the
tumult, like a valiant Roman, ran up into the steeple, and locked himself
(...) until midnight. The Scholars sought all corners for the Legate, crying
out; Where is that Usurer, that Sym^niacks, that Proylar and Extortioner of our
Livings and Moneys? Who peruerteth the King, and subuerteth the Kingdom,
enriching himself with our spoils: The Cardinal heard all this and held his
peace, and conuayed himself by night unto the King, and the King sent to
Oxford a garrison of armed men to deliver the Romans which were hid, for fear
of the Scholars. One Odo a Lawyer, and thirty of the Scholars were
apprehended and carried to Wallingford Castle, and thence in Charts to London,
and by much entreaty of the Bishops, were brought barefooted to the Legates
door, where they pardoned, and the Uniuersity released of interdiction.

The State of Germany, and of the Emperor Friderick the second, was then as
much or more pitiful then that of England, who were so persecuted by Pope
Innocentius, Honorius, Gregorius, Celestinus, Innocentius the fourth, infamed
with excommunications, and did commonly war against them in open field, and
all with English men's Money: first they made him Emperor against Otho, whom
they deprived, then for clayming his right in Apulia and Sicilia they accursed
him, when they had warred against him, they sent him to fight against the
Turks, who recovered Jerusalem, Nazareth, and Ioppe, from the Souldane. Whilst
he was occupied in these Wars, these unholy Fathers invaded his Lands and
possessions at home, subduing Apulia under his own possession, and inhibiting
his Soldiers to go over to him, and when the Emperor sent to the Pope and
other Christian Princes his Letters gratulatory, declaring what God wrought by
him against the Turks, the Pope stayed the Messengers, kept the Letters close,
and caused it to be noysed abroad that the Emperor was dead, and the said Pope
Gregory the ninth wrote to the Souldane, that he should not render the holy
Land into the Emperors hands. The Emperor hearing this stir of the Pope,
took truce with the Souldane for ten years, and repayreth home, and drives
the Popes Army out of Apulia, and recovered all the Pope had gotten from him
before: The Pope laid his curse upon the Emperor, for making truce with the
Souldane, and conspired with the Tuscanes and Lombards against him: the
Emperor, at the instigations of the Princes, glad to compose with the Tyrant*
was feign to ransom the absolution of the Pope for ten hundred thousand ounces
of gold, and yet he sent to the Princes of Germany, charging them to admit
none of the Emperors stock to be King of the Romans, and stirred up the
Cities of Italy against him. The Emperor understanding his politic and
subtle traynes, marched into Italy, where he put down the Rebels, and
recovered again the Cities belonging to the Empire. Wherefore a new
excommunication was laid upon him, and all his Subjects released of obedience
and loyalty, and much indulgences and eternal life promised to them that would
fight against him. After Gregory, succeeded Celestinus the fourth, who reigned
not long. After him, succeeded Innocentius the fourth, who following the steps
of his predecessors, called a general Council at Lions, as is before
mentioned, where standing up, he cited the Emperor: his Legate required
lawful time for him to come, which he would not grant, but in his fury
denounced him accursed, and deprived him of his Imperial Dignity, charging him
with perjury and sacrilege, writing Libels of defamation to all Kings.

The Emperor made purgation of these ^landers, charging the Pope, not with
fained, but true and most heinous crimes, of slander, falsehood, perdition,
perjury, rebellion, hypocrisy, and proves him by his Letters, to be very
Antichrist. He wrote to the French King, that he much marueiled that the
prudence and wisdom of the Frenchmen, did not more quick then others see
the Popes subtilty and covetousness, 1250.
purposing to subdue all Realms as he has done England, and does
presumptuously achieue to subdue the Majesty of the Imperial Crown. This
Emperor departed to Apulia, and there dyed, being poisoned, as some think, by
means of the Pope.

In the time of this Innocent, dyed one Robert Grosted, Bishop of Lincoln, a
famous learned man, as that time served, whose Sermons to this day are extant,
in the Queens Library at Westminster. There is one special Sermon written to
Innocent. Cestrensis writes, that he was grieved for the exactions of the Pope
in England, and would not admit of the Popes Nephew to be Canon of his Church.
Writing to the Pope, that he could not admit such into his Church, which did
neither know themselves, nor their charges: he was therefore called to Rome
and excommunicated, who appealing from the Pope to Jesus Christ, shortly after
departed. Two years after the said Pope being asleep, one apparelled
Bishoplike, appeared unto him, and striking him with his Staff, said; Surge
miser and veni in iudicium, the next day after, the Popes Bed was found bloody,
and he dead.

After Henry the third, 1307.
succeeded his Son Edward the first, who reigned thirty five years, Edward
the second his Son succeeded him, who reigned twenty years, he was deposed,
and being in prison, was stricken in with a hot Spit. After whom, succeeded
Edward the third, in whose reign Calis was first won, and after the French
King taken Prisoner, 1347.
and brought into England, and ransomed for 3000000. Florens. At which time
happened the great conflict betwixt the Townes-men of Oxford and the
University, whereof a remembrance remains to this day. In whose reign two
Friars Minorites were burned in Auignion, 1374.
and in his reign was Master John Wiclife Reader of Divinity in Oxford.

THE FIFTH PART OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL History containing the Acts of Martyrs.
ALthough the Holy Ghost raised up many before Wickliffe, to vanquish the great
errors which daily did prevail in the world, as Berengarius, Bruno of Aniow*
Oklens the second, Valden: Marsilius, of Pado^: John of Gandauo: Okchammus,
with diverse others of that school, yet because they were not very famous nor
notable, we will begin at Wickliffe, at whose time the furious fire of
persecution seemed to take his original. 1371


In those great and troubelous times, and horrible darkness of ignorance, what
time there seemed in a manner to be no one so little spark of pure doctrine
remaining, this foresaid Wickliffe, by Gods providence, sprang up, through whom
the Lord would first waken, and raise up again the world, which was overmuch
drowned, in the deep streams of humane traditions, when he had long time
professed Divinity in Oxford, and perceiving the true doctrine of Christ's
Gospel to be adulterate with so many filthy inventions of Bishops, sects of
Monks, and dark errors: first, he began to touch the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, in which he took much pains, protesting in open school that
it was his purpose to call back the Church from her Idolatry in this point, but
this sore could not be touched, without the great grief of the whole world:
first the whole glut of M^nkes and Friars were mad with him, fighting for their
altars, panches and bellies: after them the Priests; after them the Bishops
took the matter in hand; at last when there power seemed not sufficient to
withstand the truth, which then was breaking out, they ran wholl^ to the
thunderbolts of the Bishop of Rome, against them all: this valiant Wickliffe
happily maintained the cause of the Sacrament, proving it by Scriptures, and
the ancient Doetors: he refused the Doctors since the thousand years after
Christ, saying, that after these years Satan was loosed, and the life of man
has been most subject to errors, and that the simple and plain truth does
appear and consist in the Scriptures, when all humane traditions must be
referred: he proved most stoutly, in the Sacrament, the substance with bread,
the accident not to be present. As long as King Edward the third lived, he was
well enough defended by him against all there woluish cruelty, yet in the last
year of his reign, he was taken by the Bishop of Canterbury, at the
instigation of the Pope, and put to silence in presence of the Duke of
Lancaster, and the Lord Henry Piercy, yet after by the favor of certain
Noblemen he kept not long silence, but King Edward being dead, Pope Gregory
never ceased to move King Richards mind, by his Letters, Bishops and Bulls,
to persecute Wickliffe, and his adherents: by this means the examination of
Wickliffe being at hand before the Bishops of Canterbury and London, a certain
Noble man called Lewis Clifford, coming in amongst the Bishops, commanded them
that they should not proceed, with any defin^tiue sentence against Wickliffe,
wherewith they were so amazed, and their combs so cut, that they had not a
word in their mouths to answer: and when the Bishops and Wickliffe were come
together in the Archbishops Chapel at Lambeth, the Citizens and common people
of London by force brake in upon them, and disturbing the Session, were not
afraid to entreat in the cause of Wickliffe, by which means he escaped, after
he had made a short protestation, to be a true Christian, and to profess and
defend the law of Christ as long as he breathed, and if he should err he
would ask God forgiveness, and submit himself to the correction of our holy
Mother the Church, and that he wou^d set forth in writing, the Articles he
was now accused for, the which to death he would defend, which all Christians,
especially the Pope and all Priests ^ught to defend: for understand the
conclusions after the sense of the Scriptures, and holy Doctors, and I am ready
to expound them if they seem contrary to the faith.

The first conclusion of JOHN WICKLIFFE, exhibited in the Convocation of
certain Bishops at Lambeth.
1 THat none but Christ was ordained, and not Peter and all his offspring
politiquely to rule over the world for ever; for in the 1 Cor. 15. Then shall
the end come when he shall deliver up his kingdom to God his Father, when he
shall have made void all princely dominion: it seems probable that they
defraud her of her reward, and unjustly defer to take vengeance upon the body
of the devil which he has deserved.

2 The substance of the second was that by no power any writing was to be
canonized, contemning the Scripture, this was spoke to one that commended man's
writing, and contemned the Scripture.

3 That every man in grace justifying, has not only right to all things, but
above all the good things of God, as appears by the 24. of Matthew, verily he
shall make him ruler over all his goods: and in the eight to the Romans, God
spared not his Son, but gave him for us, how then did he not give us all
things with him: this allureth us to love God, that has chosen us to so many
great and true riches.

4 None can give any temporal Dominion or gift, but as the Minister of God;
the Apostle says Jesus Christ was a Minister, let not his Uicar then which
should be a servant of servants be ashamed to use the ministry of the Church,
for his pride of seculer Dominion, with his worldly style, seems blasphemy,
and the advancement of Antichrist: especially, where they repute the Scriptures
as cockle, and the determination of all controversies of Scripture in
themselves.

5 As sure as God is: the Temporal Lords may lawfully and meritoriously take
away the riches from the Church, when they do offend: yet I say, that it is
not lawful to do it by the authority of the Church, and for lack of some
spiritual governor, and in case when the Ecclesiastical Minister, being
strayed from the Catholic faith, is to be corected and punished.

6 The Uicar of Christ is not able by his Bulls, of himself, not by the consent
of his college, to make a man the more able, or disable a man, that ought to
proceed of God, but he only in the Name of God, to notify to the Church whom
God has enabled, else he is as presumptuous as Lucifer, for in the 1. Cor. 3.
All our sufficiency comes of God.

7 A man cannot he excommunicated to his hurt, except he be first
excommunicated of himself, as Chrysostom says, None can be hurt except sin
hurt him* which takes away Gods help and aid, as in Esaias 59. Your sins have
separated betwixt God and you.

8 That none ought to be ex^ommunicated but in Gods cause, and we ought to
forgive all private injuries: Math. 18. If thy brother offend thee, forgive
him, even to 70. times 7. times.

9 An Excommunication does not bind, except pronounced against the adversary
of Gods Law: For if God justify, who can condemn?

10 There is no power given by the example of Christ, or his Apostles, to
excommunicate any for denying of Temporalties: in the ninth of Luke, Christ
rebukes his Disciples, when they would have fire come down from Heaven to
excommunicate them that would not entertain them; You know not (said he) what
Spirit you are of.

11 The Disciples of Christ have no power to exact, by any Civil authority,
Temporalties by censures, until Churches were endued with possessions: Christ's
Disciples, what need so^uer they had, they did only exhort men to willing
alms.

12 It is not possible, by the absolute power of God, that the Pope, or any
Christian, can bind or loose at their pleasure, by what means so^uer, yet may
they exact temporal things by Ecclesiastical Censures incidentally, if case
be that it appertain to the reuengement of their God. He that does pretend to
have such Power, is the man spoken of in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. that sits in the
Temple of God, and shows himself as though he were God.

13 All the power that Christ's Uicar has, is then only lawful in effect, so
long as it is ruled by the good will of Christ, the Head of the Church.

14 That every Priest, duly ordered by the Law of Grace, has power to
Minister the Sacraments, and to absolve any man, confessing his fault, and
being penitent for the same: whereby it appears, that the power is ali^e to
all Christian Priests: as Hugo in his 2. Book of Sacraments declares.

15 That the K. man take away the Temporalties of the Clergy, abusing the same
habitually, in cases by Law limited, according to the 2 Thessalonians. 3. We declared
unto you, that they that would not work, should not eat.

16 The ^ndowment of Churches are given conditionally, that God should be
honored thereby, and the Church edified; with condition, if it be left vndo^e
in any point, the title of the gift is lost: the Lord* which gave the gift,
ought to correct and amend the fault, and not to b^ stopped from the execution
of Justice ^or any excommunication. And yet God forbid, that by these words
occasion should be given to the Lords Temporal to take away the goods of
Fortune from the Church.

17 An Ecclesiastical Minister, and also the Pope, may be rebuked of his
subjects, either of the Clergy or Laity: Gal. 2. Peter was rebuked by Paul:
for the Church is above the Bishop; and to say, he ought not ^o be rebuked, but
only of God, what offense soever he commit, he should be above the Church, the
Spouse of Christ.

These be the effect of the conclusions of Wickliffe at that time, which either
being not read, or understood, they granted him free liberty to depart. Soon
after died Pope Gregory; which was happ^e to Wickliffe: for presently after
fell a great dissension betwixt the Romish and French Pope; which continued 30.
years, with great ^orrow and destruction of men on both parts: and about 3.
years after there fell a great dissension in England betwixt the Comm^ns and
Nobility; in which trouble, Sudburie, Archbishop of Canterbury, was taken by
the rude people and beheaded: to whom William Cou^tnay succeeded; who was no
less diligent to root out heretics then his predecessor. Notwithstanding,
Wickliffes sect daily increased, and gr^w to greater strength, until one
William Barton, Uicechancelor of Oxford, calling together 8. Monastical
Doctors, and 4. other* with the rest of his affinity, putting the common seal
of the University unto certain writings, set forth an Edict, threatening
every man, under ^rieuous penalty, not to assemble themselves with any of
Wickliffes favorers, and threatened to Wickliffe greater excommunication, and
imprisonment, and all his favorers, unless after three days canonical
admonition, they do repent and amend: Wickliffe appealed to the King; but the
Duke of Lancaster forbad him to begin such matters, but rather submit himself
to the censure of his Ordinary: whereby Wickliffe being in the midst of the
waves, was enforced again to make confession of his Doctrine; wherein he
answered, with intricate words, and a gentler kind of phrase, whereby he either
persuaded or deluded his enemies.

William Archbishop of Canterbury held a Convocation at London; 1382.
where Wickliffe was commanded to be: when as they were gathered together at
the Gray-friers in London, to consult about Wickliffes Books, and the whole
Sect, a wonderful Earthquake fell: diverse doubting, thought good to leave off
their purpose; but the Archbishop interpreting the chance to another meaning,
strengthened their hearts to proceed: who discoursing Wickliffes Articles, not
according to the Scriptures, but to their private affections, they condemned
some Articles of Heresy, and others of Error.

These of Heresy.
1 The substance of Bread and Wine remains in the Sacrament after
consecration. 2 The accidents remain not without the subject after
consecration. 3 Christ is not truly and really, in his proper corporal
Person, in the Sacrament. 4 That a Bishop or Priest, in deadly sin, does not
Order, Consecrate, or Baptize. 5 That outward Confession is needl^sse, if one
be inwardly truly penitent. 6 That it is not found in the Gospel, that Christ
ordained Mass. 7 If the Pope be a Reprobate and a member of the Devil, he
has no power given him over the faithful, except by the Emperor. 8 That none
is to be received for Pope since Urban the sixth, but to live as the Greeks,
every man under his own Law.
These as erroneous.
1 That no Prelate ought to excommunicate any, except he knew him first to be
excommunicated of God. 2 He that does so excommunicate, is an Heretic, and
excommunicated. 3 He that excommunicateth any of the Clergy which appealed to
the Council, is a Traitor to the King and Realm. 4 All that leave off
preaching or hearing the Word for fear of Excommunication, are excommunicated,
and at the day of Judgment shall be counted as Traitors to God. 5 That it is
lawful for any man, Deacon, or Priest, to preach without license of the Pope,
or any his Catholics: that one is no Prelate, so long as he is in deadly
sin. 6 Temporal Lords may take away goods from Churchmen, if they offend. 7
The Tenths are pure Alms, the Parishioner, for the offense of the Curate, may
bestow them upon others. 8 That Spiritual Prayers applied particularly to any,
profit them no more then General Prayers profit others in the same case. 9
That one is more unapt and unable to keep the Commandments of God, by entering
into any private Religion. 10 That those that have instituted private
Religions, or have ind^wed them with possessions, or the begging Friars, that
have no possessions, have grievously offended. 11 That those of Private
Religions are not of the Christian Religion. 12 That Friars are bound to get
their livings by labor, and not by begging. 13 That he is accursed that gives
Alms to begging Friars.
When these Articles were condemned, it was commanded, that the condemnation
should be published through the whole university, the Chancellor hindered as
much as he could, and when there must needs be Sermons made he committed the
preaching to the favorers of Wickliffe, of which Repington was one: who said
in his Sermon, he that commends the Pope or Bishops above Temporal Lords, do
against the Scripture, and that Master Wickliffe was a true Catholic Doctor:
that he taught no otherwise of the Sacrament of the Altar then according to
the intent of the Uniuersall Church, and his opinion thereof most true; and
concluded he would keep silence touching the Sacrament, until God had better
^nlightned the Clergy.

The Archbishop hearing hereof sent for the Commissary, and the Proctors of the
University, and one Master Brightwell, and accused them as favorers of
Wickliffe, and forced them to confess his Articles heretical and erroneous:
the Commissarie fell on his knees and desired pardon, which was granted upon
condition he should make inquiry, and put to silence all that he found
favoring Wickliffe, Harford, Repington, Ashton, and Bedman: and that he
should publish in the head Church of the University the condemnation of
Wickliffes conclus^ons: and that he should put all his adherents he found to
purgation, or cause them to abjure: he answered he durst not do it for death:
what said the Bishop, is Oxford a nestler of heresies that the Catholic truth
cannot be published? Oxford was the first University that maintained the truth
that is now spread farr^ and near: the next day the Bishop showed the matter
to the Kings Council, who sent commandment with all diligence, to execute the
Archbishops iniunction.

One Henry Crompe a Cistertian Monk, which after was accused of Heresy, now
was suspended by the said Commissarie, for calling the Heretics Lolards: he
complained to the Archbishop, who sent for the Commissarie and Proctors in the
Kings and Councels name, where he received a new commandment to punish the
Wickliffes: then Philip Repington, and Nickolas Harford, being privily warned
by the Uice-chancellor: they fled to the Duke of Lancaster, but they were
apprehended and sent by him to the Archbishop: Wickliffe was exiled, and after
returned again to his parish of Lutterworth where he died: the providence of
God is to be noted in this man and many other whom the Lord pr^serued in such
rages of 1387.
enemies from all their hands vntilll his old age, whom the Lord will keep
nothing can hurt.

All his books were condemned and forbidden to be read by the Council of
Constance, and by the D^cree thereof forty years after his death, by the
commandment of the Bishop, his bones were dug up and burned, and the ashes
powered into the River: he had written diverse works, which in the year 1410.
were burned at Oxford: the Abbot of Shrewsbury being Commissary, and sent to
ouersee the matter, his books were likewise burned in Boheme by the Archb* of
Prage, he burned 200. of his books, richly adorned with bosses of Gold, and
rich couerings.

In the year 1384. he wrote an Epistle to Pope Urban the sixth, that the Gospel
of Christ was the whole body of the Law, and that Christ was very God, and very
man: and that the Pope Christ's Uicar was bound most of all other unto the
Gospel, for the greatness of Christ's Disciples consists not in worldly honor,
but in near ^ollowing the life and manners of Christ* Christ was a most poor
man, casting off all worldly rule and honor, therefore none ought to follow
the Pope, nor other holy man, but as they follow Christ: for Peter and the
sons of Zebedy in desiring worldly honors offended, and therein they are not
to be followed, therefore the pope ought to leave his temporal dominion to the
seculer power, and thereunto exhort his whole Clergy.

There was none so great enemies to him as the Clergy, yet he had many good
friends both of the meaner sort and the Nobility: amongst whom these men are
numbered: John Clenton, Lewis Clifford, Richard Sturius, Thomas Latimer, William
Neuil, John Mountegew, who plucked down all the Images in his Church: the
Earl of Salesbury when he died refused the Sacrament of the Altar, and
confession: and one John of Northampton Mayor of London, who used such severe
punishment against the fornicators and adulterers that they were ashamed of
their offenses, and others afeard to offend: the Lord Cobham, who confessed he
never hated sin with his heart, before he was instructed by Wickliffe: all
these were Noble men, and there was no want of the meaner sort of such as did
with all their diligence defend his Doctrine, especially Oxford men, who were
most shamefully forced to recantation, and most cruelly judged to the fire.

One John Ashton Master of Art, being examined, confessed that the bread by
the sacramental words was the very same body of Christ in number, which was
borne of the U^rgin Mary: yet because he did not answer simply, according to
the tradition of Rome, as touching the subject and accident of transmuting the
substance of the bread, he was committed to the secular powers, and cast into
prison where he died: many other notable Clerks, some were burned, some died
in prison, but all were afflicted: as William Swinderby, John Puruey, Henry
Crompe, Richard White, William Thorpe, Raynold Peacock, Bishop of Saint Asaph,
and after of Chichester, Lawrence Redman, David Sawtry, John Ashwarbie Uicar of
S. Mary's in Oxford, William James, Thomas Brightwell, William Hawlam, Raffe
Gre^hurst, John Scut, Philip Noris, which being excommunicated by the Pope,
appealed to a general council.

Peter Pain, who flying from Oxford into Bohemia, stoutly contended against
the Sophisters about both ^indes of the Sacrament, and was one of the fourteen
that was sent to the Council of Basil, and disputed three days touching the
Civil Dominion of the Clergy: Also the Lord Cobham: thus much touching the
adherents of Wickliffe.

The Uice-chancellor of Oxford, with the whole congregation of the Masters,
made a public testimony of the learning and good life of John Wickliffe, that
his conditions throughout his whole life were sincere and commendable, whose
honest manners and conditions, profoundnes of learning, and most redol^nt
renown and fame, we desire the more earnestly to be notified to all the
faithful, for that we understand his maturitie and ripenes of conversation,
his diligent labors to tend to the praise of God, the help and safeguard of
others, and the profit of the Church, there was never note or spot of suspicion
raised of him, in answering, reading, preaching, and determining: he behaved
himself laudably, and as a stout and valiant Champion of the Faith,
vanquishing by the force of Scripture, all such who by wilfu^l beggary
blasphemed Christ's Religion, neither was he con^ict of heresy or burned by our
prelates after his burial: God forbid our Prelates should condemn a man of
such honesty, for an heretic, who amongst all the rest of our University had
written in Logic, Philosophy, Divinity, Morality, and the Speculatiue art
without p^are: In witness whereof we seal this testimonial with our common
Seal 5. October 1406.

John Hus having read over Wickliffes Books, concludes by many infallible
presumptions and reasons that he was no Heretic, but in the number of the
saved, and that it was a foolish consequent, because the number of Prelates and
Clergy in England, France, and Boheme do count him for an Heretic, that
therefore he is one: like is the reason for burning of his books, for in the
first Chapter of the Book of Machabees, they burned the Books of the Lord,
and tore them, and whosoever was found to have or use them was put to death by
the Kings commandment: if this argued the wickedness of the books, then the
Law of God was wicked: so likewise of the burning of S. Gregory's books and of
diverse other good men, it follows not because the Scribes and Pharisees
condemned Christ as an Heretic, that therefore he was one, so John Chrysostom
was twice condemned an Heretic by the Bishops and Clergy.

Besides the Articles before, there were other Articles gathered out of his
Books, which his malicious adversaries peruersly collecting, and maliciously
expounding, did exhibit to the Council of Constance.

They sin in Simony that be hired by temporal livings to pray for others.

The prayer of the Reprobate prevails for no man.

Hallowing of Churches, confirmation of children, the Sacrament of orders be
reserved to the Pope, and Bishops only for temporal lucre.

Graduation and Doctor-ships in Uniuersities and Colleges as they be used
conduce nothing to the Church.

The excommunication of the Pope and his Prelates is not to be feared, because
it is the censure of Antichrist.

Such as founded Monasteries offend, and all such as enter into them be members
of the Devil.

A Deacon or Priest may teach Gods word without the authority of the apostolic
Sea.

They that enter into Monastical Order or Religion, are unable to keep Gods
commandments, or to come to heaven except they return.

The Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Satan, neither is the Pope the
immediate vicar of Christ, nor of the Apostles.

The decretals of the popes be Apocripha, and seduce from the faith of Christ,
and the Clergy that study them be fools.

It is not necessary to salvation to believe the Church of Rome to be supreme
^ead over all Churches.

It is but folly to believe the Popes pardons.

All oaths made for any contract or civil bargain betwixt man and man be
unlawful.

Benedick, Francis, Dominick, Bernard, and al other that have been patrons of
private religions, except they have repented, with such as entered into the same,
be in damnable state, and from the pope unto the lowest nouis they are all
heretics.

Thus you have the whole sum of Wickliffes Articles, albeit not as he
uttered them, but as his froward adversaries collected them out of his
writings, if some of them seem hard or strange, think it rather to be imputed
to their evil will, then to his good meaning, as it might appear if his
books had now been extant: but this is certain howsoever his Articles were
taken of the evil disposed, with all good men he was highly favored and had
in such estimation for his profound knowledge, and great learning, that all
foreign Nations were moved with his authority; especially the Bohemians had him
insuch reverence, that John Hus, the greatest doer in the University of Prage,
took profit of his Doctrine, and openly defended his Articles.

Wickliffes Doctrine came into Bohemia, by reason of a Student of Bohemia that
was at Oxford being of Noble stock: who returning to Prage, carried certain
books of Wickliffes with him, De realibus vniuersalibus, De civilly iure, et
Diuino, De Ecclesia, De questionibus var^^s contra clerum etc. a Noble man of
Prage builded a Church called Bethelem, giving lands to it, and finding two
preachers every day to preach to the people, of the which John Hus was one, he
being familiar with the young man, reading and perusing these books, took
such pleasure and fruit thereby, that he defended and commended them in
schools and sermons, commending him for a good man, wishing when he died to be
there placed where his soul was.

We think it worth labor to show certain prophesies, whereby so many
pers^cutions were figured: and first the aforesaid Abbot Ioachim, told King
Richard, as he went to Jerusalem, that the last of the seven Kings spoken of
in the Revelation was Antichrist, and that at that present he should be bred
at Rome, and be exalted into the apostolic Sea, according to the Apostle, he
is exalted above all that is called God: he was in the year 1290.

And in the Prophecy of Hildegardis, before mentioned, she says in the year
1200. the Doctrine of the Apostles, and Justice which God appointed to
spiritual Christians, began to war flack, and doubtful, but this womanly
time shall not so long continue as it has done.

Bishop Fluensius, doubted not openly to preach, that Antichrist was borne in
his days.

Bi^h. Gerardus, in the year of our Lord 1239. in his Book of the preservation
of Gods servants, does conjecture Antichrist to be at hand, by the rarity of
prophecy, and the gift of curing.

Hierome Sauanorol 69. years before prophesied, that Italy shall be plagued by
the scourge of God for the manifold sins thereof, amongst the Princes as well
Ecclesiastical as secular, and when the Cities of Rome and Florence are
overthrown, then shall the Church be renewed, which shall happen very
shortly, and the Turks, and the Mauritanians shall be converted unto the
knowledge of Christ, and that one should pass the Alps like unto Cyrus, and
he shall subvert all Italy.

I think it lacks not his prophecy, which happened in the year of our Lord
1501. that throughout all Germany there was scene upon men's garments, Crosses,
crowns of thorns, similitude of Nails, and drops of blood f^ll from heaven,
and oftentimes they fell within the houses, insomuch that many women wore the
same long time upon their railes.

One John a Franciscane Friar, in the year of our Lord 1346. fore-shewed that
the Ecclesiastical order, should suffer much through the Ambitious avarice,
and pride of the Pope: whereupon Pope Clement the sixth, cast him in the prison.

One Manfredus a Dominick Friar, fore-shewed that Antichrist should rise up in
his time, after the year of our Lord 1300. and should fully rage over the
godly, and that there should be persecution in the Church, and he said that
the Cloister Monks did falsify the Doctrine of Christ, that the sacrifice of
the Altar was not profitable to the quick nor dead, and that there was no
knowledge i^ the consolations of the Pope, but only of men's works: at last
Frederick King of Cicill sent him to the Pope, where he died upon the Sea by
the way.

Peter, John Aquine a Franciscane Friar, prophesied that in the later days the
law of Liberty should appear: Pope Clement 4. pronounced him an heretic
after his death, and caused his bones to be dug up and burned.

There was so many Christian Martyrs, in all parts of the world, whereof a
great number were c^mpassed in with craft and deceit: some were poisoned,
others tormented with torments, many oppressed with private and unknown
deaths, others dyed in prison, some by famine, some by other means were openly
and privately destroyed, that it is scarsely possible to attain to the
knowledge of a small number of them: or if I happen to attain to the knowledge
of the names of them, yet I can not find out the manner of the execution of
them, and their causes, no one man is able to do it, but by the example of
some of them, you may ^asily Judge what has happened to all: for the cruelty
of Bishops have been alike against them, and the form of their Judgments all
one: the reason of their condemnation agreeing, and the order and kind of
their death.

It was five hundred years since Satan was set at liberty: this Story were
wonderfully to be enlarged, if all that were put to death by the Primates of
the Church should be recited: for in Narbone 140. chose rather to suffer the
fire, then give any credit to decretals: and in the year 1210. at Paris were
four and twenty put to death, and in the year after, four hundred burned,
and fourscore beheaded: the Prince Armericus hanged, and the Lady of Castele
stoned to death.

At Erphurd Begardus was burned, 1218. and a Deacon burned at Oxford 1222 and
in the County of Cambray, diverse more were burned by the Dominicans.

The Pope commends a King in Boethius, that for one that the Pope had slain,
he had slain four hundred, cutting away the genitals: there were many burned
in France 1392. not long before Wickliffe, Eckhardus a Dominick Friar, was
condemned at Hedelberge: I pass over the Aluenses, that were burned in K.
John's time, and I pass over the Hermit that disputed in Paul's Church, that
the Sacrament then used was not ordained by Christ: of this number were two
Gray-Friers that were burned at London. 1395.


Certain Conclusions were put up unto the Parliament house: first, when the
Church of England began first to dote in temporalties, according to her Mother
in law the Church of Rome, and Churches were appropriated, Faith, Hope and
Charity began to vanish away, because pride with her Genealogy of mortal and
deadly sin, did challenge the title of truth.

2 Our priesthood that took original from Rome, is not that which Christ
ordained to his Disciples, because it is done by signs and pontificiall
ceremonies, and benedictions of no effect, having no ground in Scripture,
neither see we the Holy Ghost given by any such ceremonies, it is a dolorous
mockery, to see Bishops play with the Holy Ghost, by giving of crowns when
they give orders, in steed of white hearts, the mark of Antechrist, brought in
to clo^e their idleness.

3 The law of Chastity, inioined unto Priests, which was to the prejudice of
women, induces Sodomy into the Church, by reason the delicate fare of the
Clergy will have a natural purgation or worse, and the secret proof of them
is they do delight in women, the primate religions must be disanulled, the
original of that sin.

4 The fained m^racles of the Sacrament of bread, induces almost all to
Idolatry, because they think the body, which is never out of heaven, is
included in the little bread which they show the people: the Feast of Corpus
Christi and the service thereof, invented by Thomas Aquinas, fained and full of
false miracles, for he would have made a miracle of an Hens Egg: these lies
openly preached, turn to the approbry of him that is always true.

The Orcismes or blessings over the Wine, Bread, Water, Oil, Salt, Incence,
the Altar Stone about the Church walls, over the Uestment, Chalice, Myter,
Cross, and Pilgrim-staues, are the practices of Negromancers, for by it the
Creatures are honored to be of more virtue then by nature they are, and we see
no change in any creature exercised, except it be by false faith, which is the
principal point of devilish Art: if the coniuring of Holy Water were true, it
would be an excellent Medicine for all kind of sicknesses and sores, the
contrary whereof daily experience teaches.

6 One man to be a King and a Priest, a Prelate and a Temporal Judge makes
the Kingdom out of order: the Temporaltie and Spirituality are two parts of
the Church, to be called Amphradite, or Ambidextri are good names for such men
of double States: we show this to the Parliament, that it be enacted, that the
Clergy should only occupy themselves with their own charge, and not meddle
with others charge.

7 Prayers made for the souls of the dead, is a false foundation of Alms,
wherein all the alms houses in England are falsely founded, meritorious prayers
ought to proceed of Charity, but the gift is the cause of their prayers which
is Simony: again, a prayer made for one in hell is unpleasant to God, and it
is most like the Founders of such Alms houses, for their wicked indowings are
most of them passed the broad way: every prayer of effect proceeds of
Charity, and comprehends generally all such as God would have saved, these
strong Priests are able to labor and serve the Realm: let them not be
retained in idleness, for it has been proved in a Book to the King, that a
hundred almes-houses are sufficient for the whole Realm.

8 Pilgrimages, prayers, and offerings to blind Crosses or Roods, and dea^e
Images are Ido^atry and far from alms: though these be forbidden, yet they
are thought Books of error to the common people: and the common Image of the
Trinity is especially abominable: but God commands alms to be given to the
poor, and not to Idols: the service of the Cross celebrated twice every
year, is full of idolatry: for if the nails and the spear ought so
profoundly to be honored, then were Judas his lips a marvelous good relike, if
one could get them. Thou Pilgrim when thou offerest unto the bones of Saints,
whether do thou relieve their souls being in joy.

9 Auricular Confession, and the fained power of Absolution, sets up the
Priest of Priests, and gives them opportunity of other secret talks, Lords
and Ladies do witness that for fear of their Confessors, they dare not speak
the truth, and in time of confession is opportunity ministered to play the
Bawdes, and make other secret conuentions to deadly sin: they say they are
Commissaries from God, to Judge and discern all sins, to pardon what they
please, that they have the k^yes of hell and heaven, that they can
excommunicate, bless and curse, bind and lose at their pleasure: for twelve
pence they will sell the Kingdom of heaven, by writing and clause of warrants,
sealed with the common Seal, the Pope has fained that he is the Treasurer of
the whole Church, having the treasure of the passion of Christ in his keeping,
with the merits of all Saints in heaven, whereby he gives fained pardons a
poena et culpa, and whereby he can deliver all captives being in purgatory at
his pleasure, and make them not to come there.

10 The vow of Chastity made by women, imperfect by nature, brings in
horrible vices, the murdering of Children borne before their time, and before
they are Christened, the destruction of their natures by medicines, accompanying
amongst themselves, and with beasts, and any creature without life, comes to
such vnseemlinesse, that they are punished with hell torments, we would that
Widows and Maids which take the mantle and ring were married.

John Bale, a man endued with great knowledge and understanding was condemned
to death by Robert Triuillian chief Justice, 1382. albeit he was chief
Justice he suffered the like punishment, and was hanged at Tyburne, being
justly requited for the blood which he had shed.

One John Puruay was accused of heresy at Oxford: Walden writes he was the
Library of Lollards, and glos^r upon Wickliffe; he with Harford, a Doctor of
Divinity were gre^uously tormented in the prison of Saltwood, and made to
recant at Paul's Cross, by Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and one and
twenty years after, taken and imprisoned again by Chichely, Archbishop of
Canterbury: these be his Articles he recanted.

1 There can be no accident without the subject in the Sacrament after
consecration; but there remains the same substance visible bread, and the
same wine as before the consecration; as when a Pagan is baptized, spiritually
he is a member of Christ: yet he has his nature and substance as before.

2 Auricular Confession, is a whispering, destroying the liberty of the Gospel
newly devised by the Pope and Clergy, to entangle the conscience in sin, and
the soul in hell.

3 He that is holy and predestined to eternal life, though he be a Lay man,
is a Priest before God.

4 Wicked Prelates have neither the keys of hell nor heaven, though the pope
interdict the Realm, he could not hurt but profit us, for thereby we should
be dismissed the service of his Church, and his Laws.

5 If any make a vow to keep perpetual chastity, or any other thing that God
has appointed him too, no Prelate can compel him to keep it.

6 He that has taken the office of Priesthood, though he have no charge of
souls committed to him, they may and ought to preach the Gospel freely, else
he is a thief, excommunicated of God, and the holy Church.

7 That Pope Innocent the fourth and six hundred Bishops, and a thousand
Prelates and the rest, that ordained Transubstantiati^n, auricular confession,
and other such laws were fools, heretics, blasphemers, and seducers of the
people: and we ought not to believe them nor their successors, nor obey their
laws, except they be grounded on the Scripture, or some reason that cannot be
impugned.

About the same time Richard Wiche having preached the Gospel, the Bishop of
Durham made him recant these Articles.

1 Images are not to be worshipped. 2 God of his ordinary power cannot make an
Image bleed. 3 That we should not confess to a wicked Priest. 4 Every Layman
is bound to know the Gospel, and to preach it privately or openly if he hau^
ability. 5 A Layman ought to pray in his own tongue which he understands,
such prayer is most accepted. 6 Every priest according to his capacity is bound
to know the whole Scripture, and by his office to preach it. 7 Pilgrimages to
Jerusalem or Rome are vain, what you may have there, you may have at home, and
Baptism may as well be had hee^e as in other places. 8 Men or women in
iourneying ought to have their communication upon the Scripture. 9 No Priest
ought to beg any thing: alms is to be given to the lame, feeble, and sick* or
they that have been spoiled. 10 The Cross^ is not to be worshipped. 11 Every
place is as fit for prayer as another. 12 ^hey do against the Law that burn
men.
In the same year one William Santrey, who, ^nflamed with true Religion,
required in the Parliament that he might be heard, for the commodity of the
whole realm: but the matter being before smelt of the Bishops, they obtained
that the matter should be put to their hearings and Judgments, by whom he was
at last attached of heresy, condemned for seven Articles, disgraded and burned
by the commandment of the King.

Thirteen years after the death of Wickliffe, Henry the fourth then reigning:
King Richard was deposed and put into the Tower, and there died: A Parliament
was holden, in which it was decreed that the favorers of Wickliffe should be
apprehended* who then were called Lollards: and if they did persevere to be
delivered to the Bishop of the Diocese, and from him committed to the
correction of the secular Magistrate: this brought a certain Priest unto
punishment that year, who was burned in Smithfield in presence of a great
number: I take it was Swinderby, who as aforesaid was forced to recant by the
Bishop of Lincoln.

Here follows the examination of Master William Thorpe, written with his
own hand; he shows first the reasons why he wrote it: First at the earnest
request of diverse friends, and that he had a desire of himself so to do,
that profit might come thereby, for the truth has this condition, where ever
it is impugned it has a sweet savor, and the more enemies address themselves
to oppress it, the sweeter smell comes thereof, and will not pass away like
smoke, but rest in some clean soul that thirsts thereafter: thirdly, that
the good by showing it one to an other, may strengthen one another, and showing
it to some enemy of the truth, he may be astonished and converted.

His examination before ARVNDEL, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor, in
his Closet, with but three with him.
Bishop. WIlliam this twenty years and more, thou have traveled (...) about
the North, and other Countries to poison all the Land with ^hy untrue
preaching, but by Gods help thou art in my ward, and I will let thee to
inuenome the sheep of my province: but as Saint Paul says, as much as in us
is we will have peace with all men, if thou will faithfully swear to submit
thy self to my correction and ordinance, I will be gracious unto thee.


Thorp. After he had made a confession of his Faith in the Trinity, and in the
Son of God, reciting the whole substance of the Gospel, from the Conception
of Christ until the holy Ghost was sent, he believed the Catholic Church was
all that ever were, are, or shall be, that endeavor to know and keep Gods
commandments, fearing to offend him, and loving to please him, hoping
steadfastly in his mercy, continuing in Charity, gladly suffering persecutions
by the example of Christ and his Apostles: all these have their names written
in the Book of life. The gathering together of these that be alive, is the
Church fighting against the fi^nd, the prosperity of the World and the fleshly
lus^s: and I will submit my self only to the rule and governance of them, whom
after my knowledge I may perceive, by the having and using of the foresaid
virtues, to be members of the holy Church. These Articles and all other that I
ought to believe by the word of God, I verily believe in my Soul, and I
believe that the word of God is sufficient to salvation: if I have erred that I
submit my self to be ^econciled, and I believe the authorities of Saints and
Doctors as far as they may be approved by the word of God, and no further,
for any earthly power or dignity.

Sir, I pray shall I lay my hand on the Book to swear by it; yea, said he,
wherefore else? Sir, I say a Book is a thing coupled together of diverse
Creatures, and Gods and Man's Law is against swearing by any Creature, but I
will swear unto you as I ought by Gods Law, but for Charity, tell me wherein I
shall submit my self, and wherein you will correct m^?


Bishop* I will that you swear to forsake all the opinions of the Sect of
Lollards, which I shall rehearse after you have sworn, and that you will
neither privily nor openly teach none of them, nor favor none of that opinion,
but withstand them, and them that will not yield, make known to the Bishop of
the Diocese, and that thou preach no more until I do know that thy heart and
mouth accord.


Thorp. If I consent unto you, here^n I should be every Bishops spy, Sommoner
of al England; yea, I should deceive many persons, and be y^ cause of their
death bodily and ghostly, for many of them that stand now in the truth, and are
in the way of salvation, would rather choose to forsake the way of truth, then
to be scorned, slandered, and punished, as Bishops and their Ministers now use
to dee: and I find not in the Scripture that this office you would now enfeoff
me with, accords to any Priest or Christian; therefore to do thus, were to me
a full noyous band, for many trust so mickle in me, that I would not do it to
save my life, and they might well account me a Traitor to God and man, and that
I had fa^sly and cowardly forsaken the truth, and slandered shamefully the Word
of GOD, If I do thus for fear of bondcheefe and mischief in this life, I
deem in my conscience, I were worthy to be cursed of GOD and all his Saints,
from which keep me and all Christians Almighty God.


Bishop. Thy heart is full hard indurate, as the heart of Pharaoh, the Devil
has blinded thy wits, that thou have no grace to know the truth, nor the
measure of mercy that I have pro^^ered thee: but I say to thee lewd Lossell,
either quickly consent to me, or by Saint Thomas* thou shall be disgraded, and
follow thy fellow ^o Smithfield.


Thorp. I thought with my self God did me great grace, if of his mercy he
would bring me to such an end, and my heart was not afraid of his menasing, but
I considered in him, that he was not sorrowful that he had burned William
Santry wrongfully, and that he thi^steth to shed more innocent blood, and I was
fast moved to hold him to be no Priest of God, and mine inward Man was
departed from him to have no fear of him, and I was right heavy that there was
no audience of seculer men by: and I prayed the Lord to comfort me against
them, that were against the sothfastnesse, and I purposed to speak no more
then my need behooued. All the while I prayed God for his grace, to speak
with a meek and easy Spirit, and that I might have authorities of Scriptures,
or open reason for my words, and his Clearks said, Why muse you, do as my Lord
commands you.


Bishop. Have thou not yet bethought thee, whether thou will do as I have said?


Thorp. My Parents spent mickle Money about my learning to make me a Priest, but
I had no will to be a Priest, wherefore they were right heavy to me, that I
thought to leave the^; at length I desired that I might go to such as were
named wise, and of virtuous conuersa^ion, to have the^^ Council, so I communed
with such, till I perceived their honest and charitable works, to pass their
fame; wherefore (...), by the example of the Doctrine of them, after my cunning
and power, I have exercised me to know perfectly Gods Law, having a desire to
live thereafter, and that others exercised themselves faithfully there abouts.
Then he shows the reasons aforesaid, and what would follow, if he should
forsake, so suddenly, the learning that he had exercised this 30. winters,
according to the example of some, whose name I will now recite, and according to
the present doing of Phillip Rampington, now Bishop of Lincoln, by Gods grace,
I will learn by them to fly such slander as they have defiled themselves with,
and as much as is in them, they have enuenomed all the Church of God, by their
flaunderous reuoking at Paul's Cross, and how now Phillip Rampington pursues
Christ's people, which will not be unpunished of God.


Bishop. These were fools, and heretics, when they were counted wise of
thee, and such lose^s, but now they are wise, though ye deem them unwise.


Thorpe. I think they are wise concerning this world, I did think by their
former doings, that they had earnest of the wisdom of God, and deserved ^^ckie
grace of him, to have saved themselves and many others, if they had continued
faithful, and in their bu^^e f^^itfull sowing of Gods word: but woe worth
false covetousness, evil council, and t^ranny, by which they, and many be
led blindly to an evil end.


Bishop. Which are those holy and wise men, of whom thou have taken thine
information?


Thorpe. Sir, master John Wicliffe, holden of ^ull many the greatest Clarke
then living ^us^ing rul^ an^ innocent in his living great men communed often with
him* they so loved his learning, that they wrote it, and b^s^ly enforced
themselves to ^ollow it; and his learning is yet holden most agreeable to the
learning of Christ and his Apostles, and master John Ayston taught and wrote
accordingly, and used himself right perfectly to his lives end. And sometimes
Phillip Rampington* Nichols Herford, David Gotray of Pak^ing, and John Puruay,
and many other, which were holden right wise and prodent, taught and writ
busily his foresaid learning: with al^ these men I was right homely, and
communed with them, but of all other, I those to ^ollow Wicliffe himself, as
the most wise and godly man that I heard of, or know. Some of these I heart
them whilst they sat in Christ's chair, but after the works they now do, I
will not do, by Gods ^elpe, for they feign would hide and contrary the truth,
which before they taught plainly and truly, and some of them have confessed
they do it because they are constrained by pain, to leave the truth; so they
blaspheame God rather then suffer a little, though Christ shed his heart blood
for us.


Bishop. That which thou call truth, is slander to holy Church, and though
Wicliffe were a great Clerk, and a perfect liver yet holy Church has damned
many of his Doctrines, and well worthy; but Phillip Rampington Bishop of
Lincoln, will not hold the learning that he taught, nor no Bishop pursues more
sharply them that hold thy way then he does.


Thorpe. Many wonder at him* and speak him mickle shame, and hold him a cursed
e^nemie of the truth.


Bishop. Then the Bishop read a Certificate that the bailiffes of Shrewesbury
sent to him under their Seal the third Sunday after Eas^er, 1407. William
Thorpe preaching in Saint Chaddes Church, in his Sermon, said, that the
Sacrament, after con^ecration, was material bread, and that Images should not
be worshipped, and that men should not go on Pilgrimages, that Priests have no
title to Tithes, and that it is not lawful to swear. Then he said, is this
wholesome learning to be amongst the people?


Thorpe. I am sorry, and ashamed of them, I never taught such Doctrine.


Bishop. I will believe those worshipful men before thee, thou have troubled
them, and they pray me, that if thou suffer for thy heresies, that thou most
be executed there, that such other ^o^els, for fear, may be reconciled, and
they that stand in Faith of holy Church more stablished, by my thirft, this
fervent requ^st shall b^ thought on.


Thorpe. I thank God, for all this, I was not afraid, but my heart rejoiced,
and still does; for I then thought, and yet think, that grace shall come to
all the Church of God herethorow, and I said, I doubt not but I can prove that
they which are fained to be out of holy Church at Shrewsbury, and other
places, are in true Faith of holy Church, for they dread to offend God, and
love to please him, i^ true and faithful keeping his commandments; and they
that are said to be in faith of holy Church there, and in other places, are
proud, e^^ious, co^etous, lechero^s, and foul in words and deeds, and know
not, nor will know the right Faith of holy Church, their customable swearing,
and shameful works witness it. And sir, where you say, I have troubled the
Communaltie with Preaching, it is not to be wondered at of wise men, seeing all
the Communaltie of Jerusalem was troubled at Christ, and all the Synagogue of
Nazaret moved against him, that they led him to a mountain, and would have
cast him down headlong.


Bishop. Thou, and such l^s^ls* presume to Preach without license of any Bishop.


Thorpe. It is every Priests duty to Preach busily, freely, and truly the
word of God, and they should take the Order of Priesthood chiefly to make Gods
word kn^wne to the people, and approving the truth of the word by his virtuous
works and for this purpose chiefly Bishops and Prelates should take their
Prelacie, and for this cause Bishops should give their Orders, and should
accept none to be Priest* except he were well disposed, and well learned to
Preach. Wherefore, by the example and Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and
Prophets, we are bound under full great pain so to do.


Bishop. Le^^de losell, why make thou me such vain reasons, asks not
Saint Paul, How should Priests Preach, except they be sent? And I sent thee not
to Preach. And says not Saint Paul, Subjects ought to obey their Sovereigns,
and not only the good and virtuous, but tyrants and vicious.


Thorpe. None of you will grant us any such license, but we must oblige us to
you^ by unlawful Oaths, not to pass the bonds you will limmit us, and we dar^
not so oblige our selves. Wherefore, though we have no such licenses, we dare
not leave the ^ffice of Preaching, for so much as we have taken upon us the
Office of Priesthood, trusting God will bo our sufficient letters and witness,
if we occupy us faithfully to d^e our Office justly; yea, the hearers shall be
our Letters, for the truth, where it is s^wne, cannot be vnwitnessed, as Saint
Paul says; We need no Letters of commendations, a^ some do, which Preach
for covetousness, and men's praisings. Touching obedience to superiors, good
superiors with sound Doctrine and holy couersation, to them we must willingly
and gladly obey, consenting to their charitable biddings, and working after
their fruitful works, of these Saint Paul speaks; Be mindful of your
Sovereigns, that speak to you in the word of God, and follow the faith of
them, whose conversation you know to be virtuous. These Sovereigns make
fervent prayers, that they, and their Subjects may live in the fear and love
of God, and live so virtuously, that they that will live well may take example
by them: but Subjects ought not to obey Tyrants, whose biddings and works are
vicious, that they ought to be hated and left. But if they menace oppressions
and punishings, Saint Peter bids the servants of such Tyrants, to, Obey
meekely, suffering patiently their malicious cruelty: but he councelleth not
any servant or subject, to obey any Lord, Prince, or Sovereign in any thing
not pleasing to God.


Bishop. If a Sovereign bid a Subject do the thing that is vicious, the
Sovereign is to blame, but the Subject deserves meede of God, for obedience
pleases God more then Sacrifice.


Thorpe. Samuel told Saul that God was more pleased with the obedience of his
commandment then with Sacrifices, but David, S. Paul, and S. Gregory accords
thereto, that they that do evil are not only worthy condemnation, but they that
consent thereto.


Bishop. All these a^^agings are nothing else bu^ proud presumptions, for
hereby yo^ enforce you are just, and ought not to ^bey the Prelates, and of
your own authoriti^ you will Preach and do what you list.


Thorpe. Presents not every Priest the Office of the Apostles, and Disciples
(...) Christ* He said yea, the tenth of Matthew, and the last of Matthew
witnesses, Christ sent his Apostles to Preach. And in the tenth of Luke, He
sent his 72. Disciples to Preach in every place that Christ was come to. And
Saint Gregory says, He that takes upon him the Office of Priesthood, takes
on him the Office of Preaching, and that the Priest stirs God to great
wrath, whose mouth is not heard to Preach, and Ezekiel says; The Priest that
preaches not busily to the people, shall be partaker of their damnation, that
perish by their default. And though the people be saved by other means, yet if
the Priest Preach not, he is a man^^^per, because they hold from the people the
word of God, the life of their souls. Saint Isidore says; Priests shall be
damned for the wickedness of the people, if they teach not the ignorant, and
blame not the sinners. Christ says; He came into the world to bear witness
of the truth.

Lincoln says; That Priest that Preaches not the word of God, though he have
no other default, he is Antichrist, and Satan, a night thief, and a day
thief, a slayer of Souls, and an Angel of light turned into darkness.
Therefore, I count my (...) in damnable ^ase, if I, for fear, neglect
Preaching; and so I do them that willingly neglect Preaching, and so I do
them that have purpose or will to let any Priest of this business.


Bishop. Lo^ sirs, this is the business of this losell, and such other, to
pi^ke sharp Sentences out of the Scripture, and Doctors, to maintain their
(...). Thou desire the Psalter I took from thee, but thou shall never have
it, nor none other book, until I know thy heart and tongue ac^ord to be
governed by holy Church.


Thorpe. My will is, and ever shall be, to be governed by holy Church. And he
asked me what holy Church was; Christ and his Saints are holy Church, though
every one in charity be the Church, yet it has two parts, the first part has
overcome wretchedness, and reigns in joy with Christ, the other is in earth
fighting day and night against the temptations of the Feind, forsaking the
glory of the world, and the ^usts of the flesh, and which only are the
pilgrims of Christ, wandering toward Heaven by steadfast faith, grounded hope,
and perfect charity; these will not be let from their purpose by any Doctors
discording from the Scripture, nor by the floods of tribulations, nor the wind
of pri^e, or menasing of any creature: for they are fast grounded upon the
stone Christ, hearing his word, loving and practicing it with all their wits.


Bishop. (...) you not how he is indurate, and traveled with the Devil,
occupying himself busily to aledge Sentences to maintain his Heresy? Thus he
would do all ^ay, if we would suffer him. One of his Clerk^s ^id the Bishop
appose him upon the the points of the Certificate from Shrewsbury. And he said;
Was it true that is certified thou did Preach touching the Sacrament.


Thorpe. As I stood in the pulpit Preaching, there toled a Sacring bell, and
much people went from me, and I said; Good men, you were better stand still,
and hear Gods word, for the virtue of the Sacrament stondeth much morein the
belief thereof, that ye ought to have in the soul, then in the outward sight
thereof.


Bishop. Rests there in the host material bread after consecration?


Thorpe. Saint Paul was a great Doctor, and he called it bread that he brake,
and in the Canon of the Mass, after consecration, it is called holy bread, and
every Priest after he has received the Sacrament, says* that thing that we
have taken with our ^^^thea, we pray God we may take with a pure mind. And
Saint Augustine says. That which is seen is bread, but that men's Faith asks
to be informed of, is very Christ's body. Fulgentius says, It is an error to
say Christ is very man, and not God, and that he is very God, and not man; so
is it to say the Sacrament is but a substance.


Bishop. I command thee answer me shortly.


Thorpe. I understand it all one, to grant that there dwells substance of
bread, and that Christ's body is accident without subject; your asking passes
my understanding, I dare not deny it, nor grant it, I commit this term
accidens cum subiecto, to those Clerks which delight in subtle Sophistry,
they determine often so difficult matters, and w^nder so in them, from argument
to argument, with pro and contra, until they understand not themselves, but
the shame that proud Sophisters have to yield to (...), before men makes them
often fools, and to be shamefully concluded before God.


Bishop. I will not oblige thee to the arguments of Clerks, since thou art
unable thereto, but I purpose to have thee obey the determination of holy
Church.


Thorpe. By open evidence, and plain witness, 1000. years after Christ, this
determination which I rehearse was accepted of holy Church, as sufficient to
salvation, but that which was brought in since the Devil was loosed by Thomas
Aquinas, calling the Sacrament an accident without subject, I utterly deny to
make this Friars sentence, or any such my belief, dee with me God what he
will.


Bishop. Well, well, thou shall say otherwise before I leave thee.

Thou Preachest that Images ought not to be worshipped.


Thorpe. Not so, for all c^eatures are the Images of Gods glory, and a man is
made after Gods Image, and they are worshipful in their ^^nde; but the (...)
or painting of Images, though it be in high dignity with man, and for a
Calender to lewd men, that nether will nor can be learned to know God in his
word, nor by his creatures, nor wonderful works; yet this Imaginary ought
not to be worshipped.


Bishop. But a Crucifixe ought to be worshipped, for the Passion of Christ is
painted therein, and brought to our remembrance thereby, so of the Image of the
Trinity, and of the Uirgine Mary, and of the Saints: as when men receive the
Kings, or their Lords Seal, whe^ein is their Pictures or Arms, in worship
of them they put off their cappes to these Letters, and since in Images we may
know many things of God and his Saints, shall we not worship their Images?


Thorpe. These worldly vsages of Temporal Lords may be done, but this is no
similitude to worship Images, since Moses, Solomon, Ba^uch, and others in the
Bible forbid plainly the worshipping of such Images.


Bishop. Lewd ^osell, there was no likeness of the Trinity in the Old Law,
but since Christ became man, it is lawful to have Images to show his manhood,
though great Clerks hold it an error to paint the Trinity, I say it is well
done, for it mo^eth devotion, so do other Images of Saints. Beyond Sea are the
best Painters, and this is their manner, before they make an Image, they
shreeue themselves to a Priest as if they should d^e, and take penance, and
make a vow of fasting, prayer, or pilgrimage, praying the Priest to pray for
them, that they may have grace to make a fayr^ and devout Image.


Thorpe. I doubt not if the Painters truly understood the Sciptures they would
repent themselves of their sinful and vain Art of Painting Idols, and the
Priests that (...) them penance, and prayed for them, sinned more then the
Painters, for they comfort them in that which they are under pain of the great
curs^ of God they ought to forbid, for (...), if the word of God were truly
Preached, and ministers lived thereafter* there would be no need of these
Images*


Bishop. I hold thee a vi^ie^s and cursed Priest, for thou, and such others go
about to destroy all Priests and Images of holy Church. Lozell, were it a fair
thing to come into a Church, and see never an Image.


Thorpe. They that come to Church to pray, their inward wits may be the more
fervent in that their outward wits be closed from outward seeing. Christ
blessd them that saw him not and believed, it suffices to know God in his
word without Images.


Bishop. Is it not a stirring thing to behold an Image?


Thorpe. Being every person of the Trinity is eternal, and you say it was not
lawful to picture it before Christ, and in that there were many Prophets.
Mar^^res, and professors before Christ, why was it not then as lawful to make
Images, to move men to devotion as now it is?


Bishop. The Synagogue of the Jews had not authority to approve things, as
the Church now has.


Thorpe. Saint Gregory was of great dignity, as the Cannon Law witnesses*
he greatly commended a Bishop for forbidding Images to be worshipped.


Bishop. Ungratio^s losell, thou sauorest truth no more then a houn^, since at
the Roode at the North door at London, and at our Lady at Walsingham, and many
other places in England, are many great and praisable miracles ^one.


Thorpe. I am certain there is no such miracle done of God* that any Image
should be worshipped, therefore I say as I have often Preached; None should
t^ust there were any virtue in them, nor vow to them, nor seek to them, nor
(...), bow, pray, o^^er, kiss, or incense them. The Brazen Serpent was (...)
by Gods biddi^g, ^et the good King Ezekiah, because it was incensed so,
worth^^y destroyed it, and it is to be dread, that for the unfaithfulness of
^en, the F^^^d (...) power to (...) the miracles that now are done in such
places: wherefore s^eing the God of (...) is the most unknown and wonderful
Spirit, what Image may he be painted (...)?


Bishop. As holy Church suffers Images to ^ee painted, and showed, it
suffiseth to them that are members of holy Church, but thou art (...) member
cut off from holy Church, thou fauourest not the ordinances thereof.

Thou speak against Pilgrimage, and that pilgrimages to Canterbury,
^euerley, Carlington, Walsingham, are accursed, and f^^lish spending their
goods in wast.


Thorpe. There be true travelers, travel all their life, with all their
endeavor to please God, that they may attain to the heavenly Kingdom: but I
say now as I said at Shrewsbury, I have Preached often in other places, and
will do as long as I live God willing; They that travel their bodies, and
spend their money to s^eke, or visit the bones of Images of this Saint, or
that, such pilgrimage is neither, praiseable, or thankful to God, nor to any
Saint of God; since such pilgrimages, almost all* despise God, and his
commandments, and upon Saints they waste blamefully Gods goods, in such
vain Pilgrimages, sometimes upon vicious Hostices, which they should do
works of mercy withal upon the poor and needy, they offer their go^ds to
rich Priests, which have more then they n^ede, many of them borrow other men's
goods, and never pay them, and sometimes they steal them. And they have with
them Singers, that can sing wanton Songs, and some will have Bag-pipes, so that
every Town where they come, with their noise of singing, piping, ^angling of
Canterbury Bells, and the barking of dogs, they make more noise then if the king
came thither, with all his Clarions and Minstrels, and if they be a month in
pilgrimage, they will be half a year after, wranglers, tale-bearers, and
liars.


Bishop. Lewd losell, thou see not far enough into this matter, it is fit
they have such music with them, that when one goes barefoote, burteth his
foot against a stone, and makes it bleed, it is well done that his fellow
sing a song, or play on a bag pipe, to drive away with mirth the hurt of his
fellow, and with such solace their travel and wearin^sse, is lightly, and
merrily brought forth, David's last Psalm teaches me to have diverse
^nstruments of music.


Thorpe. By the sentence of ^iuerse Doctors, that music that David, and other
Saints of the Old Law spoke of, ought not to be interpreted li^terally, but
gostly, for Saint Paul says, all such things befell to them in figure,
therefore I understand that the letter of this Psalm, and other Psalms and
Sentences does slay them that take them now literally. This sense I understand
Christ approves, pu^ting out the minstrels, ere he would quicken the Damzell.


Bishop. Lewd losell, is it not lawful so have Organes in the Church, to
worship God withal?


Thorpe. Yea, by man's ordinance, but a good Sermon to the peoples
understanding, were much more pleasant to God.


Bishop. Organs, and delectable Songs, quicken men's wits more then a Sermon.


Thorpe. Worldly men delight in sencible solace* but the faithful lovers of
Christ delight to hear Gods word, and understand it tru^ly, and Saint Jerome
says; No body may joy with this world, and reign with Christ.


Bishop. What think you this (...) will speak, whereas he has no dread,
being be speaks thus in my presence? well* well, by God, you shall be
ordained for.

Thou saidest Priests had no tittle to Tithes.


Thorpe. One would know of me whether Priests, by the word of God, may curse
one for not paying of Tithes, Christ and his Apostles took no Tithes, nor
commanded none so to do. Saint Paul says, The Lord has ordained, that they
that Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And if Priests were now in
measurable number, and lived virtuously, add ta^gh^ busily and truly Gods
word, without Tithes, (...), and other du^ies, the people would give them
suffici^nt livings. One of his Clerks said, How can that be, sluc^ by the Law,
Priests can scarcely constrain the people to give them their Living?


Bishop. Thou say it is not lawful in any case.


Thorpe. I never taught in that wise, I have Preached in many places, that it
is not lawful to swear by any creature, and that none ought to swrare in any
case, if without an oath he may excuse himself to them that have authority so
take an oath, but as he cannot otherwise excu^e himself, he ought only to
swear by God, taking him only that is true to witness truth.

And there were many other arguments* wherein was no great mat^er worth
abridging, if the reader be disposed, he may see the book at large. After he
had denied to swear obedience unto the Bishop, except in those things that
were according to the word of God, the Archbishop bade the Constable have him
away in ha^^e.


Bishop. I was led forth, and brought to a ^oule and dishonest prison, where I
was never before; when they were gone, and had shut the door, I busied my
self to thin^^ on God, and thank him of his goodness, and I was greatly
comforted, that I was delivered for a time, from the sight, hearing and
presence, and scorning* and menasing of mine enemies, but much more I rejoiced
in the Lord, that of his grace he kept (...), that without heaviness, and
anguish of conscience, I passed away from them.

Now O God, to the praising of the blessed name, make us one together by
authority of thy word to be knit and made one in truth, faith, and steadfast
hope in perfect charity Amen.


Another Treatise of the said WILLIAM THORPE.
CHrist, in Saint Matthew, likeneth them that hear his word, and keep it, to
a wise man that builds his house upon a stone, this house is man's Soul, in
which Christ desires to dw^ll, if it be stablished in Christ's living and
teaching, adorned with his fair Uertues, and chiefly Charity, without ^edling
of any ^rrour, upon none other ground; none may make any building, or house,
but upon the teaching and living of Christ, as Saint Paul teaches to the
Corinthians, and to comfort these, Saint Paul writes to the people of Ephesus.
Now ye are not strangers, guests, nor comelings, but Citizens, and of the
household of God, builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; in
which foundation, every building that is builded, it increas^th to a holy
Temple.

This is the stable Stone Christ, fast holding together two walls, for through
him, ^he Father is pitious, and mercifully joined, and made one together to
mankind, and through dread so offend God, and fervent love to please him, men
be inseparably made one to God, and ^^^ended surely under his protection. This
stone Christ was figured by the square Stones of the Temple: for wheresoever a
square stone is laid, it abides stedf^st* so Christ, and every faithful
member of his Church, by example of him, abides ^^ably in true Faith, and in
all heavenly virtues, in all adversities, that they suffer in this valley of
^eares. When these ^quared stones were laid in the walls and Pillars of Gods
Temple, no noise or stroke of the workmen was heard, this ^lence signifies
Christ, and his faithful members, which have been, are, and ever shall be
meek and patient in every aduers^tie, and no sound of grudgi^g perceived in
them.

This Stone, and ground of all virtues, proud beggars reproved, Christ suffered
it most meekely in his own person* to give example of meekness to his
faithful followers. This world is now so full of proud beggars, called
Priests, but are far from such as Christ approves Priests.

^ For from the highest to the lowest, they do all to please the World and the
Flesh, since I had discretion, all the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and all the
contagious flock of the Priest-hoode have increased damnably, (...) sin to
sin, ^^oud Heretics, covetous Symoners, desouled Adulterers, abusing the
Sacram^ntes, especially the Sacrament of the Altar, the highest Priests occupy
unlawfully Temporal Lordships, for favor and gain they sell Benefices to
unworthy and unable persons. Their Somn^rs sell sin, suffering men and women
so lie in diverse vices. The Priests sell the Sacraments full dear to the
people, and thus the Priest-hoode is blown up into pride, and vainglory of
their dignity, that they disdain to follow Christ in meekness, holiness,
and busy Preaching of his word, and to take their living at the peoples
hands, as pure alms, and if they Preach not, to labor for their living. And
they enforce, that all holy Scripture should be expounded according to their
manners.

Therefore all Kings and Rulers, that know the truth of this Testimony of
Priesthood, and will not enforce themselves to withstand these enemies, and
Traitors of Christ and his Church, all these strive with Antichrist against
Jesus, and they shall bear the indignation of God Almighty, without end, if
in convenient time they amend them not and repent, doing due mourning and
sorrow. For through the presumptuousnesse and negligence of the Prelates,
wicked men are wrongfully named Hermits, and have leave to defraude the poor,
and live by their false winnings, and begging, in sloth, and other vices, and
the copper nosed Prelates, are suffered to live in pride and hypocrisy, and to
defile themselves bodily and Ghostly. Also by the sufferance of these Prelates,
there be vain brotherhoodes and Priesthoodes, full of pride, they are cause
of much dissension, and exercise themselves in eating, and drinking
vnmeasurably, and out of time, and they are of one clothing, and hold
together, and in all unlawful doings they are Partners, medlers, and
Councellers.

Also, Prelates admit Pardoners, and strange beggars, with flatterings to
beguile the people, against true belief, and to increase diverse vices in
them: and thus the viciousness of Prelates have been, are, and shall be
cause of Wars within this Realm and without, and cause of Pestilence of men,
and murren of beasts, and barrenness of earth, and all other mischiefs,
until the Lords and Commons able them with grace, accordring to Gods will, to
redress this foresaid Priesthood, unto the innocent ^eaching, and living of
Christ and his Apostles.

Therefore, all that know the viciousness that now reigns cursedly in these
Priests, and in their learning, let them pray for the health of his Church,
and abstain from these indurate enemies of Christ and his people, and from all
their Sacraments, which are fleshly and false. Saint Ciprian, and other great
Doctors witness, That not only vicious Priests, but they which favor and
consent to them shall perish with them, as they perished that consented to
Dathan and Abiram, for nothing were more confusion to them, then refusing their
Sacraments, which are most unlawful, and none needs to ^eace to dye without
taking any Sacrament of these, Christ's enemies, since Christ himself will not
fail to minister all healthful Sacraments, to all them that are in true
Faith, Hope, and Charity.

But some mad fools, to eschew slanders, will be shrieued once a years of
their propper Priest, though they know him defouled with slanderous vices, no
doubt, these are culpable of great sin, since Saint Paul witnesses, that,
Not only they that do evil are worthy of damnation, but they that consent to
evil doers. And the vicious Priests despise and cast from them heavenly
wisdom that is given of the Holy Ghost. Therefore the Lord throws such
dispisers from him, so that they do no Priesthood unto ^im. Therefore they
that took, or consent that any other should take any Sacrament of any such
Priest sins against the Trinity, and are unable to any Sacrament of health.

And that this Sentence is ^rue, and in the hope of the remission of all my
sins, trusting steadfastly in the mercy of God. I off^^ to him my Soul, and to
prove that this is true, I suffer meekely, and gladly, my wr^tched body to be
tormented, to his praise, and the edification of the Church.

And I, wretched cai^^^e, shall now, through the spiritual grace of God, make
him a pleasant Sacrifice, with my most sinful body, I beseech all that read,
or hear this my Testament, that they i^deauour by all means, to understand
truly, and keep faithfully the commandments of God* and to pray devoutly to
^he blessed Trinity, that I may have grace and wisdom from above, to end my
life for his cause, in a true and liu^ly faith, steadfast hope, and perfect
charity.

A Handicrafts man dyed constantly in the opinion 1410.
that it was not the body of Christ really which was Sacramentally v^ed in the
Church. He was ca^yed to the place of execution, and included in ^ Pipe, or
Tun. The Prince, the eldest Son of King Henry was present, he endeavored
to save him, p^rswading him from his opinions, adding often threatenings, which
might have daunted any man's stomach; but this valliant Champion of Christ,
negl^cting the Princes fair words, ^ather determined to suffer any torments*
then so great Idolatry. Being enclosed in the Pipe, he was torment^d by the
raging of the f^re, and miserably roaring in the midst thereof, the Prince,
being moved, came to him again, commanded the f^re to be taken away,
comforted him, and promised him life, and a yearly styp^nd during his life, if
^ee would consent to his Council. But being more inflamed with the Spirit of
God, th^n with any earthly desire, he continued immovably in his former
mind. The Prince commanded him to be put in again, and that after, he
should look for no grace. So this Layman pers^uered invincible unto the end,
not without a great and cruel battle, but with so much the more triumph and
victory.

As soon as King Henry the fifth was Crowned, at the same time the Lord Cobham
was cast into the Tower, the Bishops and Prelates came to the King,
complaining that they, and the whole Clergy were despised, and their censur^s
and Sacraments not regarded, and all iending to utter ruin and decay, and all
by suffering of Heretics, which hold assemblyes in secret places, and
corners; which if it were any longer suffered, would overthrow the
Commonwealth.

Whereupon the King held a Parliament at Lecester, and made an act, that they
that held Wicliffes opinion, were Heretics, and Traitors, and to be hanged
and burned. The Bishops, being armed herewith, exercised wonderful cruelty
against many guiltless men, amongst which (besides the Lord Cobham, whose
Story is deferred) was Sir Roger Acton Knight, John Brown Gentleman, and John
Beuerley a Preacher, who were condemned by the Law aforesaid, and crowned with
the double Martyrdom of hanging and burning, 1413.
at Saint Gyles i^ the Field.

At that time there was 36. together, all of Noble, and gentle blo^ds,
condemmed by the Bishops for Heretics, whom this cruel Law drove unto the
(...). Also one John Claydon a Currier, and Richard Turmine a Baker, were
burned in Smithfield.

I pass over such, whom John Mayor in his sixth Book reports to be
condemned for Heretics, in the year 1447. amo^st which, such as were found
most constant were burned.

About the same time a Friar Minor, an Englishman, being Ambassador of Pope
Benedict 13. unto Scotland, if he had not escaped by flight had been burned,
for certain herisies that were laid against him.

About this time was a Sermon written, whether by Wickliffe or Thorpe, or any
other, it is uncertain, it is mentioned to be in the year 1388.

Christ likeneth the Kingdom of Heaven to a Householder, that went in the
morning to hyre Worke-men into his Uineyard; so did he about the third hour,
the sixth hour, and the ninth, and the eluenth, and as he found men standing
idle, He said to them; Why stand you beer vn-occupyed, go into my Vineyard,
and that which is duty I shall give you, and when the day was ended, he called
his Steward, and bad him give every man a penny. This Householder is Christ,
head of the Church on Earth, which calls in diverse ages; as in the time of
Nature he called by inspiration Abell, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and diverse others.
In the time of the old Law, Moses, David, Esau, Jeremy, with the Prophets: In
the time of Grace, the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Uirgines, some in
youth, some in middle age, some in the latter days: it is to labor in his
Uineyard, which is his Church, as there be diverse Officers in trimming of the
maternall Uine, no less needful in the Church be these three Officers,
Priesthood, Knighthood, and Laborers. The Priests must cut away the branches
of sin with the Sword of Gods Word: the Knights must maintain Gods Word: the
Teachers thereof, and the Land from wrongs and Enemies: the Laborers must by
their sore sweat, get sustenance for themselves and others, if Priests want,
the people for want of Gods Word all will grow wild in vices, and dye ghostly,
and were not men to rule people, Thieves and Enemies would so increase, that
none could live in peace, and were it not for Laborers, Priests and Knights
must be Artificers, Plough-men, and Heard-men, or else die for want of
sustenance: as the great Clarke Auicenna says, every unreasonable Beast, if he
have that which belongs to Nature, can live of himself alone. But if there
were but one man in the World, if he had all the goods in the World, yet for
default he would dye, or his life worse then if he were not, because that which
is prepared for man's sustenance must be altered, or else it accords not with
him; therefore he says, it is very needful to have men of diverse trades and
callings. This should be a great cause that every calling should love, and not
hate one another, and this I dare say, that they which do not diligently
labor in some one necessary calling or other, when the day of reckoning shall
come, which is the end of this life, as he lived without travel, so shall he
want the reward of the Penny, the endless joys of Heaven, and be cast into
Hell. Wherefore, if thou be a laboring man, do it truly; if thou be a
Servant, be subject, and fear to displease thy Master for Christ's sake; if
thou be a Merchant, deceive not thy Brother in chaffering; if a King, defend
the poor and needy; if a Judge, go not to the right hand for favor, nor to
the left for hate. If thou be a Priest, instruct the ignorant, praise the
obedient, and reprove the disobedient to God, for in the end of the world you
shall every one have a reward, a good or a bad, then Christ will say to every of
these three States, Come give a reckoning of thy Bayliwicke: First, Priests
that have cure of Souls shall be called, and they shall answer for themselves
and others: The second is, Temporal Lords shall answer for themselves and
others: The third Baily shall account but for himself, or at least, have less
charge then the other, and every one shall answer three questions: How entrest
thou? How rulest thou? How live thou? To the Priest, how entrest thou? by
Truth or Symony, God or the Devil, for that thou would labor in thy
calling, or for that thou would be richly arrayed? Answer in thy conscience
to thine offense now, or thou shall ere it be long answer to GOD? and I ask
the question, why men set their Children to school, whether for their worldly
advancement, or to make them the better to know GOD and serve him? They set
them to the Law, not to be Ministers of Justice, to defend the poor, but
because it is a means to make them great men; therefore there be so f^w to
learn the word of GOD to be Preachers, because there is no gains therein.
Chrysostom says, Parents care for the bodies of their Children^, but not for
their souls; they desire their welfare in this world, but they pass not what
they shall suffer in another; they will sore bewail the hurt of their bodies,
but they reckon not much of the health of their souls, they are moved for
their poverty, but not for their sin: hereby they show, that they begot the
bodies, but not their souls.

To return to Priests, there is now great abominations in the Church; Priests
come into Christ's fold, not at his calling, but to make themselves rich, which
is cause of many errors. In the Book of mourning the Prophet says, The enemy
has put his hand to all things he would, for he has seen a lawless people
in the Sanctuary, of which thou said they should not enter, The enemy is
Satan, for in what plenty is pride, envy, wrath, and covetousness; and
wherefore, but because such are entered into the Temple, which cannot keep the
Law of God themselves, nor teach others: And Osea Ose. 4.
says to them, Because thou have put away the knowledge of Gods will, I have
put thee away from using Priesthood to me.

The second question, how have thou ruled Gods flock committed to thy cure, for
the good of the sheep, or for hire, as a father, or a wolf; whom have thou
turned from their cursed living by thy preaching and good example? whom have
thou taught the law of God? he that is ignorant, the fatherless, Children and
thy flock shall grievously accuse thee, that thou have lived by their labor,
and done nothing therefore, but let them go astray. S. Barnard says, Priests
be in place of Saints, and they do wickedly, not being content with necessary
wages, but ouer-plus: that the needy should live by, they wast in houses of
pride and lechery; beware, thou shall give an account to the last farthing,
think thou that thou shall not be disalowed for nourishing young men, idly
taught, as in a school to blaspheme God in all evil living: for feeding of
fat palfries, of hounds, and of hawks, and of lecherous women. Hear what is
said of such, they lead their days in vanity and wealth, and in a moment go
down to hell.

The third question, what light have thou showed, and what myrror have thou
been unto the people in thy living? It is wonder to see how the life of Priests
is changed, they be clothed like Lords, they speak as dishonestly as any
Ribold or Harlet: No Merchant more covetous for gain, they ride like Princes,
and all is of poor men's goods, they be blinded with to much shining of riches,
they make houses as big as Churches, superfluously abounding with all things,
they paint their Chambers with pictures, and cloth their Images with Silks of
diverse colors, but the poor for want of clothing, and with an empty womb,
cries at their doors; and oftentimes the poor be robbed to cloth stocks
and siones: thou occupiest the place of Peter and the Apostles, no otherwise
then Judas and Simon Magus, as a candle newly quenched that stinketh over the
house, in stead of light, and as smoke that blinds ones eyes in stead of fire;
they shall have an hard judgment, because they have misentred, and harder,
because they have misruled, and the hardest, because they have cursedlie lived.

The second that shall make account for himself and others, is Kings, and
other temporal rulers; Have thou entered thine office to profit the people, to
destroy sin, and further the truth, or for worship and riches? Some desire
such estate to be rich, and to oppress such as they hate, and to take bribes,
for sparing to punish sin, and make themselves partners of other sins, and
for bribes work all things. Many in high office, think they are of higher
kind of nature then others, not knowing they are poor men's brethren, and
servants for the good of the Commonwealth, and that their glory is vanity. Of
whom the Prophet Osea says, They have reigned, but not by me; so was Roboam
when he answered the people, My little finger is bigger then my Fathers
Rib-bone, my Father grieved you somewhat, but I will add more, which made the
people rebel, and the kingdom never came wholly together again; wherefore it
is good for Rulers to take sober council, to eschew eare-rounders, and to have
an eye of love unto the Commons, for be they never so high, they shall come
before an higher Judge to give a reckoning.

The second question, how have thou ruled? Have thou not been the harder to
the poor for his poverty, nor favored the rich for his riches? what abuse is
now amongst Officers, if a rich man plead with a poor, every Officer is ready
to further the rich man, and the poor man shall have so many delays, that
though his right be never so good, for default of spending, he shall be
constrained to let his cause fall. And I have heard say of them that have
proved both Courts, that the Court that is called most Spiritual, is most
cursed; therefore it is truly said, a gift out of the bosom subuerts right
Judgment, but the words of Christ be to be feared, As you judge you shall be
judged.

The third question, how have thou lived? Thou that punishest other for sin,
must not sin thy self, else thou condemnest thy self in doing the thing
thou damnest in others, and when any stands before him in Judgment, he must
take heed before what Judge he must stand himself: but it is to be feared,
that it fares with some, as with the two false Priests that would have put
Susanna to death, because sh^e would not consent to their Lechery, and of the
most worthy to be hanged, damn the less worthy. Socrates being demanded why
he laughed, said, Because I see great Thieves lead a little These to
hanging: who is the greater Thief, he that takes House and Land from one, and
his Heirs, or he that steals a Sheep.

The third Bailey, is every Christian that shall reckon to God for the goods he
has had of him; First, how have you entered here to your goods, if by
extortion, stealth, usury, or deceit; woe shall it be to you at this dreadful
day, as S. Augustine says, if he shall be in hell that has not given of his
goods well gotten, what shall become of him that steals others goods: desire
of honor, and fear of poverty be the causes that ma^e men live by the rape of
other men's goods; the vengeance of this covetousness is discribed by the pot in
the sixth of Zachary, wherein sat a woman named Impiety, into which the Angel
threw a weight of Lead: and two women like Spirits with wings, carried it
betwixt Heaven and Earth, unto the Land of Sinear; as a pot with a wide mouth,
so Covetousness gapeth for riches and honor, and as liquor in a pot profits
not the pot, but them that draw it out, so worldly goods profit not the
Getters, but others that comes after, as Owls see better by night then by day,
so the covetous are blind in heavenly matters, and quicke-eyed in earthly
matters. The Lead is obstinacy, the Woman is called Impiety, because Piety is
lost by Avarice: the Pot is covered with Lead, which stops in Impiety, to
show that Covetousness hardens the heart, that Impiety cannot go out by
repentance, the two Women that bare the Pot, are Pride and Lust of the Flesh:
which in Scripture are called the two Daughters of the Water, each crying,
bring, bring. The first Winge is Pride of Spiritual gifts: The second Wing
Pride of Temporal gifts: The Wings of the second Woman, be Gluttony and
Sloth. Doctor Gregory speaking of Gluttony, when the belly is filled, the
pricks of Lechery are stirred. And of Sloth Doctor Augustine says, Lot was
a good man whilst he was in business in Sodom, when he was idle in
drunkenness he lay with his Daughters. Saint Augustine says, ravening Fishes
when they are full be satisfied, but only covetous men cannot be satisfied,
he is not afraid of GOD, nor ashamed of Men, he spares not Father nor Mother,
Brother or Friend, oppresses the Widow and motherlesse Children, he makes
free men bond, he brings forth false Witness, and occupyeth dead men's
goods. What madness is this, to looselife and grace, to win damnation, and to
loose Heaven to win Go^d: And Innocentius says, how many has Covetousness
deceived for Balacks rewards. Balaam would have cursed Gods people,
notwithstanding his Ass reproved him, Covetousness made Achan steal the
accursed things to the destruction of him and his house: Gehesie was stricken
with Leprosy for selling a man's health that came by the grace of God: Judas
for covetousness sold Christ, and after hanged himself; Couetousne^ was the
cause of the lying and sudden death of Ananias and Saphira.

If a rich man have a whole street, or a great field, and a poor man have an
Acre of Land, or but one House near, either by entreaty, or pursuing, he
never ceas^th until he has gotten the poor man's House and Land, as Achab and
Iezabell s^^w Naball for his Uineyard. Saint Ambrose says to the rich, how
long will you scratch out your covetousness, will you dwell alone, and have no
poor dwell with you: why put you out your kind, and challenge the earth which
Nature has made common to poor and rich: Nature brings forth all men poor,
naked, and needy of meat and drink, without riches or gay clothes, and the
earth takes us naked again, and closes none of our riches: he that makes
difference betwixt poor and rich, when they have lien a little in the grave,
look upon them who was poor, and who was rich, and thou shall se^ no
difference in their bones, except there be more clothes rotten with the rich
then the poor, which is a hurt to the living, and no good to the dead: of such
extortioners it is written, they reap other men's fields* and they pluck away
the Grapes of the vine of the oppressed, they pluck away their clothes and
leave them naked: and in that the aforesaid pot was lift up betwixt heaven and
earth, shows that covetousness has no Charity to God, or Man, and they
carry the pot to the Land of Synear, that is, the land of stench or Hell. Here
we should ask how thou have governed thy Wife, thy Children and servants,
whether thou have brought them up in Gods Laws, and continued them therein
according to thy power, otherwise thou shall give an account, and to avoid
these hard accounts, I council every one to trust in the mercy of God, through
Christ's demerites with a lively Faith, and repenting heart of thine iniquities,
and Amend, else who shall grant thee pardon and release of thy accounts.

Now we will consider, who shall call us to this reckoning, before whom, and
what punishment to the wicked, and what reward to the faithful: there be two
Judgments, one at separation of body and soul, which is the particular doom:
and the second at the general resurrection that is universal; to the first we
shall be called one after another, to the second we shall come altogether in the
twinkling of an eye: we are called to the first by three summons; sickness,
age, death: the first warns, the second threatens, the third takes; some
are slain without sickness or age, and the most part without age, and there is
a sickness that makes the body fe^ble, and a sickness of the soul which is
general to all men, and the continuance thereof is cause of corruption: if a
man cast all worldly things out of his mind, yet can he scantly think only
of God a Paternoster while: O God, what a sickness is this to the sons of
Adam, of this sickness spoke S. Paul, I see another Law of my members, rebelling
against the Law of my Spirit; as a man looking on the Sun cannot long endure,
yet the fault is not in the Sun for it is most clear, but in the feeblenes
of man's eyes: so since Adam was put out of Paradise, all his offspring have
been thus sick^: the second sickness is of the body, as hunger thirst, cold,
heat, sorrow, weariness, and many others: as Job says. A man borne of a woman
is full of many miseries, and is but for a little time: there be other
sicknesses that happen to some as Fevers, Dropsy, Blindness, and such like, as
it is said of the Israelites, if thou keep not the comman dements of God I
shall increase the sorrows and sicknesses of thy seed, but God sends such
sicknesses sometimes to good men, and tribulations for two causes: First to
know that it is of God, and to increase in meekenes: of this says Saint Paul,
Romans 12.
least my great revelations should extol me in pride, to me is given the
prick of the flesh: I three times prayed God it should go from me, he
answered, my grace is sufficient; for my power is manifested in weakness; the
Devil asking Job to be tempted, was heard, and not the Apostle asking his
temptation to be removed* he heard the damned, and heard not him that should
be saved: also God sends sometime his Saints to give us sinners example of
patience, being we have deserved much more: as Toby came from the Charitable
work of burying the dead Swallows were suffered to dung in his eyes being
asleep, and make him blind it is written, that it was for an example of
patience to them that should come after, and though he ever feared God he was
not agreeued with God, but feared him still, and thanked him always, and the
sicknesses of wicked men be for two causes: first that they should leave their
sins and love God; we see often men in sicknesses know God, that never would
turn to him whilst they were whole: Also God sends sickness and troubles
often to the wicked, to make others afraid to follow their sins, as Antiochus
worms crauled out of his body whilst he was alive, and his friends were weary
of his stink, yea he might not abide his own stink: then he said it is
rightful to be subject to the Lord, and for mortal man not to hold himself
equal with God: the Story says, he asked mercy of God, and could none have,
and vowed to do more good to the Temple and Jews then he had done harm, and
to become a Jew an^ go over all the land preaching Gods Law; yet because it
cam^ not out of true repentance springing of Faith, but of his odious pain,
he obtained not favor: by this men should see what it is to be disobedient to
God: also sickness shows that the patient is mortal, and that he must die
though he may now escape.

The second Somner is age, he will not leave thee until he have brought thee
to death: yet many, though they see all their members decayed with age, take no
heed; but if he see a little mirth forgets the Somner has him by the
sleeue, and what a reckoning he must make, which if he answer not well, he
forfeiteth body and soul to damnation: a Doctor says, this is the greatest
abuse of the world; the reason is because these three, idle youth, dishonest
speech, and wicked deed, which if they grow with a man from his childhood to
his old age, they make a threefold cord to bind the old man in custom of
sin: wherefore Esaias says, break the cords of sin.

The third Somner is death, his condition is come, he, first or last spares
neither poor nor rich: Saint Augustine says, we ought fear death, for in
what estate it finds one, it brings him to Judgment: therefore the Wise
man says to his Son, think on the last day, and thou shall never sin.

We shall likewise be called with three messengers unto the last Judgment: the
first the sickness of the world, the second his age and feeblenes, the third his
end: as decay of Natural heat, and increase of unnatural heat, is the
sickness of the body: so decay of the love of God, and our neighbor, and
increase of unnatural lusts is the sickness of the world, Christ says this is
a sign of the end of the world that wickedness shall wax plenteous, and
charity wax cold: know well says Saint Paul, in the last days shall be
perilous times, Mat. 21. 2 Timothy 3.
men lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, vnobedient to parents, without
affection, etc. when thou see suchmen, know the first Somner warns the
world that the day of reckoning draws near.

The second Somner the age of the world, the day of the end of the world was
hid from the Apostles, and from Christ's manhood as to show it us: yet by
authorities of Scriptures we may show that that day of wrath draws near,
least any say as that foul belly seruer, Luke 12. 1 Cor. 10.
I will say to my soul, eat, drink and be merry, thou have much goods laid
up for many years. If Paul said 1300. years past, we be those to whom the
ends of the world is come, much more we may say the same, and Chrysostom
says, when thou see the Sun so low that the valleys be dark, thou know
night is near: much more when it is so low that the hills be dark, so if thou
see darkness of sin have mastery of seculer men, it is a token the end of
the world is nigh: but when thou see the darkness of sin has gotten the
upper hand of Priests, that should be as hills amongst the communaltie in
perfect living, who doubts but that the world is at an end: and Abbas Ioakim
says from the year 1200. all times be to be suspected: and Ildiger in her
prophesies says, as the seventh day the world was full made, and God rested
from his work: so in seven thousand years the number of them that shall be
saved shall be fulfilled, and then shall the Saints wholly rest in body and
soul: and now it is from the Creation six thousand and six hundred years.

The Disciples asked Christ three questions; the first of the destruction of
Jerusalem, the second of his coming to Judgment, Mat. 24.
the third of the end of the world: To the first he said, when the Romans
besiege the City, soon after it shall be destroyed, to the second and the
third he gave many tokens, as that there should be wars, pestilence, and
earthquakes: lastly, when we shall see the abomination of holiness standing
in the sanctuary, then who so reads let him understand: this abomination as
Doctors say shall be in the great Antichrists days 1240. days: and a Doctor
says that a day must be taken for a year by authority of Scriptures, and by
reason: and it is thought to this Clarke, that Antichrist shall more appear,
in the year of Christ 1400. then any time before, and there lacks but twelve
years of the fulfilling thereof. Revel. 7.
In the opening of the seven seals is declared the state of the Church, from
Christ to the end of the world: the four first seals from Christ to
Antichrist; the first Seal the state of the Church in Christ's and his Apostles
time: the voice of the Lion is Christ's voice, the white horse his Disciples,
the whiteness shows their righteousness, by their bow their true preaching,
pricking repentance into men's hearts, they went to Iewry ouercomming them to
leave the trust they had in the old Law, and to trust only in Christ: they
went out winning the Payenims from Idolatry to Christ: The Calfe in the second
Seal which is a Beast, was used to be sacrificed, betokens the state of the
Church in the time of Martyrs, and that is tokened by the Red Horse: this began
at cursed Nero, and endured unto Constantine the great that endowed the Church:
in this time many shed their blo^d for the testimony of Gods word, and of two
and twenty Bishops, until Siluester the first, I read but of four but they
were Martyrs: and in the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, the persecution was
so great, that in thirty days were slain 22000. in diverse countries for the
Gospel. The opening of the third Seal, tells the state of the Church in the
time of Heretics, by the Black-horse is figured false understanding of the
Scripture: then cried the third Beast which is a man, for it was needful to
preach Christ's Incarnation and Passion against Heretics, that took those
points amiss: The fourth Seal t^lleth the state of the Church in the time of
hypocrites, that by outward signs of repentance only blind the people: the
pale color of the Horse signifies their hypocrisy, the rider was death, to
signify they slay ghostly, that teach any other way but Christ, and Hell
follows them* for Hell receives those that deceive men: in that time it was
needful that the fourth beast the Eagle which flies highest of all Birds, to
make his cry, to raise up the Gospel, least men's traditions ouergrow it, by the
information of these hypocrites: The fifth Seal shows the state of them that
shall follow, and the desire the followers of Gods law shall have to be
delivered from this woe. The sixth Seal tell^th the state of the Church in
Antichrists limbs; the Angels that stood in the four corners of the earth, to
hold the four winds from blowing are the Devils Ministers: the four winds
are the four Gospels, they shall let the preaching thereof, and the breath of
the Holy Ghost to fall upon men: after this comes the mystery of the seven
Seals, that Antichrist is come in his own person, whom Jesus shall slay with
the breath of his mouth, he and his servants shall show their uttermost
persecution against Christ and his subjects.

I said in my second principle, that it was to be known before what Judge we
must reckon: the Judge is God himself that sees all our deeds and thoughts,
and every man's deeds, and the secrets of their hearts shall be opened to all
the world: as Saint John says, the dead men, great and small, stood about the
Throne, and books were opened, and the Book of Life was opened, and the dead
were judged according to their deed written in that Book: this Book is men's
consciences, that now are closed, but then shall be open to all men: the Book
of Life is Christ's Gospel, which is now hid from the damned, through their own
malice: in the first book is written all that is done, in the second all that
should be done: therefore look in the Book of the Conscience whilst thou art
here, if thou find any thing contrary to Christ's example and Doctrine,
scrape it out with the knife of repentance, and write it better.

I said it were good to know what reward the good shall have, and what reward
the wicked shall have: it is written, Christ shall come with the same body that
was crucified, all that shall be saved shall cleave to him, and be ravished,
meeting him in the air, they that shall be damned lying upon the earth. Then
Christ shall ask account of deeds of mercy, reproouing false Christians for
leaving them undone, rehearsing the pains that his true servants have
suffered: then the wicked with the Devil shall go into everlasting fire, and
the righteous into ^uerlasting life: then that which is written shall be
fulfilled.

Woe woe, to them that dwell on the earth; woe to the Paynim that worshipped
Idols, and other creatures; woe to the Jew that trusted too much in the Old
Law, and despised Christ; woe to the false Christian that knew the will of God,
and did it not, and has not contemplated his mercies and ways, and been
thankful for his benefits, and have made thy heart a house of swine, and a den
of thieves, by unclean thoughts and delights: thou have shut God out of thy
heart, and he shall shut thee out of heaven, thou have harbored the fiend,
and thou shall ever dwell with him in hell, thou should have sung holy,
holy, holy Lord: but thou shall cry woe, woe, woe to me: but they that be
saved shall joy in God, Joy all amongst themselves, and one of an others
salvation: how happy be they that their travels be finished, and brought to
so gracious an end: especially, that they have escapt the pains: O how happy
are they for the endless bliss which they have in the sight of God.

In this year began the Council of Constance, 1414.
called by Sigismond the Emperor, and Pope John the 23. for pacifying a
Schism betwixt three Popes, all striving for the Pope-dome, which continued
nine and thirty years: the Italians set up this John, the Frenchmen set up
Gregory, the Spaniard set up Benedict, and every Nation defended his Pope, to
the great disturbance of Christian Nations: this Council endured four years,
wherein all matters were decided most by four Nations: the English, Germans,
French, and Italians, out of every Nation was a president: there names were,
John the Patriarch of Antioch for France, Anthony Archbishop of Rigen for
Italy, Nicholas Archbishop of Genes^ensis for Germany, and Richard Bishop of
Bathe for England: the aforesaid Pope John, resigned his Pope-dome, for which
the Emperor thanked him, and kissed his feet: but after he repented himself,
(...) being disguised fled, but was taken by the Emperor and put in prison:
this Pope was deposed, by the Decree of the Council; more then forty most
heinous crimes proved against him; as for hiring a Physician to poison
Alexander his predecessor, and that he was an Heretic, a Symoniack, a Lier, an
Hypocrite, a Murderer, an Inchanter, a Dice-player, an Adulterer, a Sodomite,
and many others: he held a Council at Rome about four years before, and ever
when they assembled there was a huge Owl in the place, or somewhat else in the
shape of an Owl, which did always look so earnestly upon the Pope, which
made him still break up the Sessions, and at length to dissolve the Council:
some said it was the Spirit of God in the shape of an Owl, indeed there Spirit
is better figured in the shape of an Owl then of a Dove.

The Council said the way to reform the Church was to begin a minoritis: the
Emperor said, non a minoritis, sed a maioritis, there was five and forty
Sessions in this Council: there was three several Popes deposed in this
Council.

In the eighth Session was the condemnation of John Wickliffe, and his five and
forty Articles, and of his memory and bones to be burned, as it is before
recited: and in the thirteenth Session was decreed that no Priest under pain
of excommunication shall communicate unto the people under both kinds of Bread
and Wine: In the fifteenth Sessions silence was commanded under pain of the
great curse, and that none should make any noise of hand, foot, or voice: and
then the condemnation of John Hus was read. In the seventeenth Session, the
Emperor took upon him a journey to the King of Arragon, to entreat with Pope
Benedictus about the resignation of the papacy, and an excommunication was
denounced against all that should go about to hinder the Emperors journey, and
that the Council should every Sunday make prayers and processions for him, and
an hundred days of pardon given to them that would be present at the said
prayers and processions, and that all Prelates should then wear their
Pontificalibus: granting besides to every Priest that said one Mass for the
same an hundred days pardon, and to all other that once a day should say one
Paternoster, and one Aue-Mary for the safety of the Emperor forty days
pardon.

In the nineteenth Session, Jerome of Prage was accused of Heresy, cast into
prison, and forced to abjure.

In the two and twentieth Session, Letters were made and set upon all Church
doors, admonishing Duke Frederick, to restore George Bishop of Austridge such
Lands, Kents and Revenues as he detayned, under pain of interdiction,
suspention, and excommunication.

In the one and twentieth Session, the Bishop of Londy made a Sermon, which
being ended, Jerome of Prage, which had abiured, stood upon a Bench; replying
against his Sermon, preaching sundry things: whereupon the said Jerome was
condemned and delivered to the seculer power to be burned.

In the seventeenth and eighteenth Sessions, there was great process given out
against Duke Frederick, accusing him for sacrilege, and excommunicating him:
for not obaying the admonition of the Council, concerning the usurpation of
the possessions of the Bishop of Austridge as aforesaid.

In the one and thirtieth Session, Letters were directed to a certain Earl in
Italy, for laying violent hands upon the Bishop of Asce, and imprisoning him,
commanding him to set him at liberty, under pain of interdiction and
excommunication: and an other Decree was set forth for the restoring of the
Liberties of the Church of Baron.

In the nine and thirtith Session, it was ordered that every Pope should swear
to believe and hold the Catholic Faith, after the traditions of the Apostles,
general Councels, and holy Fathers, namely of the eight general Counsels,
Ephisme, Calcedone, two of Nice, and four of Constantinople: also the Councels
of Lateran, Lions, and Ui^nna; to observe, preach and defend him to death: and
by all means to prosecute the right of the Sacraments, canonically delivered
to the Catholic Church, and writing his Oath, he should offer it before
witnesses upon some Altar.

On Saint Martins Even a new Pope was chosen, therefore they called him Martin,
and he was brought to the Emperor and Council, into the Church of Constance,
and there authorized for Pope: and was brought thence most honorably with
sumptuous procession, unto the Monastery of Saint Augustine, to be crowned:
The Emperor on foot leading his horse on the right hand, and the Marquess of
Brandenburge, Prince Elector, leading his Horse on the left hand.

When this Council should be ended, the Pope sent a Cardinal with
proclamation to dismiss the Council, and to give every man leave to depart,
and to show the Popes indulgence, which he had granted to all and every person
present, at: that Council that they should have full absolution during his
life, so that he procured his absolution in writing within two months: also
an other iudulgence was granted of plenarie remission of sins at the hour of
death, and was not only for their Masters, but for their household: upon
condition that from notification thereof, they should fast every Friday one
whole year, for the absolution of their life time: and for their absolution at
the hour of death, to fast the same Friday one other year, if they had no
lawful impediment, and after the second year they should fast to their lives
end every Friday, or else do some other good work.

There were at this Council three hundred forty and six Archbishops and
Bishops: five hundred threescore and four Abbots and Doctors; sixteen
thousand seculer Princes, Dukes, Earls, Knights, Esquires: four hundred and
fifty common women: six hundred Barbers: three hundred and twenty Minstrels,
Cooks, and Iesters: there was 60500. forrenners at that Council from Easter
to Whitsontide; the chief thing to be noted in this Council was, that the
Popes authority is under the Council.

The History of JOHN HVS.
John Hus being a preacher at Prage, in the temple of Bethelem, those rather to
teach the Gospel of Christ, then the humane traditions of Bishops; their
sprung up certain which accused him as an heretic to the Bishop of Rome: the
Pope committed the matter to the Cardinal of Columna, who appointed a day he
should appear at Rome: The King and Nobility of Boheme, sent to the Pope to
acquit him from his appearance, and if they suspected the Kingdom to be
infected with any heresy, they should send an Ambassador to correct the
heresy, and the King would bear the charge, and likewise assist the Legate
with all his authority, to punish such as shall be sound with erronoous
Doctrine: and John Hus sent his meet procurators unto the Court of Rome, and
with firm and strong reasons did prove his Innocence, but when the Cardinal
would admit no defense, his procurators appealed to the Pope; notwithstanding
the Cardinal excommunicated him as an obstinate heretic, because he came not
at his day, and the matter was referred to two other Cardinals, who after they
had delayed the matter a year and a half, confirmed the Judgment of the
first Cardinal, and some of his procurators were committed, and grecuously
punished for being so earnest for him.

But the general Council being assembled as aforesaid: The Emperor sent
certain of his Gentlemen to bring John Hus Bacheler of Divinity unto the
Council, to purge himself of the blame which was laid against him, and
granted him a safe conduct, that he might come freely to Constance, and
return home without fraud or interruption: he seeing so many fair promises,
and his safe conduct, sent unto the Emperor that he would come unto the
Council: but before he went he caused certain writings to be set upon the
gates of the Cathedral Churches, Parish Churches, Cloister and Abbeys,
signifying he would go^ to the Council, and that if any that have suspicion
of his Doctrine, that he should declare it before the Lord Conrade, or the
Bishop of Prage: or if he had rather at the general Council, for there he
would render an account of his Faith before them all: the Bishop of Nazareth,
the inquisitor for heresy, made his certificate under his hand and Seal, with
a testimonial unto Master John Hus, that he had oftentimes been before him,
and had conferred with him, and yet could never find any heresy in him: and
so did the Bishop of Prage, set up Letters in every City as he passed to
Constance, that he was going to the Council to descud his faith, and if any
could lay any thing to him as touching his Faith let him come thither: many
resorted unto him all the way as he went, and he was gently ^^reate^,
especially of the Citizans, and Burgesses, and sometimes of the Curates: and if
there were noise of his coming, the streets were ever full to see him: In
Norrenberge many Curats came to him, desiring talk with him secretly, he said
he had rather show his opinion openly before all men: so after dinner until
night he spoke before the Priests and Senators, and Citizens, that all had him
in great reverence, save one Doctor which was a Charter House Monk, who
impraued all that h^^ had said: then after he was come to Constance, Master
Clum, and M. Latzembodge, which came with him went to the Pope, and certified
him John Hus was come to Constance, and that he had the Emperors safe conduct,
desiring him to grant him liberty likewise to remain there without trouble,
which the Pope promised he would: in the mean time Master Pallets, John Hus
his great Adversary was come to Constance, but his Companion Zuoyma, Husses
other Adversary died of an impostume by the way: then this Pallets associated
himself with one Causis a Boh^mian, which afore-time had undertook to find a
Mine of gold for the King: and having received much money of the King toward
the business, seeing his hope of making Gold to fail, run away to Rome with
the Kings money: these two drew certain Articles out of the writings of Hus,
against him, and took great pains to show these Articles to the Cardinals,
Bishops and Monks: and showing that he had done many other things against the
holy constitutions of the Pope and Church: whereby they made John Hus to be
apprehended the six and twentieth day he came to Constance: and the Cardinals
sent the Bishops of Augusta, and Trent with the Burgess of Constance, and a
Knight to John Hus his lodging, to report they were sent by the Pope and the
Cardinals, to certify him he should render some knowledge of his Doctrine
before them, as he had often desired, and they were ready to hear him: he
answered, he desired openly to defend his Doctrine, but not privately:
notwithstanding, I will go to them, and if they handle me cruelly, I trust in
the Lord Jesus that he will comfort me, that I shall desire rather to die for
his glory, the^ deny his verity, which I have learned in his holy Scriptures:
and John Hus took his horse and went to the Popes Court, when he had saluted
the Cardinals, they said to him, we have heard many reports of you, which if
they be true are not to be suffered, that you have faught many errors,
contrary to the Doctrine of the true Church, and that you have sowed your
errors through all Bohemia by a long time: to whom he answered, I rather
tho^se to die then to be found culpable of one error: therefore I came to the
Council to receive correction, if any can prove any errors in me: The
Cardinals said they were pleased with his answer, and departed, leaving John
Hus, with Master Clum, under the guard of armed men, and they suborned a
Franciscane Friar, a subtle malicious hypocrite, to question with him: Who
said Reverend Master, I a simple rude Idyot am come to you to learn, for I
have heard that you have taught many things contrary to the Catholic Faith:
I desire you for the love that you have to the truth and to all good men, that
you would teach me some certainty: First it is said you maintain that there
remains but natural bread in the Sacrament after consecration, which he
denied: Then the Friar asked him what manner of union is betwixt the manhood
and God-hood of Christ: Then Hus said, you say you are simple, but you are
double and crafty, in that you have propounded so difficult a Question: yet I
will show you my mind, which when he had done, the Friar thanked him, and
departed: after the Popes Garrison told him that this Friar was counted the
subtillest Divine in Lombardy: then Pallets and Causis his Adversaries made
earnest means to the Cardinals that he should not be set at liberty: and
having favor of the Judges, mocked the said Hus; saying, now we will hold you
well-enough, you shall not depart until you have paid the uttermost farthing:
At night the Provost of the Roman Court told Master Clum he might depart, but
they had otherwise provided for Master Hus: Master Clum went to the Pope,
declaring all that was done, beseeching him to remember the promise which he
had made: the Pope answered, it was done without his consent, and told Master
Clum apart, why do you impute this to me; you know that I my self am in the
hands of these Cardinals and Bishops, so he returned very pensive, and
complained openly and privately of the Popes wrong, but it profited not. Then
Hus was led to prison and kept there eight days, from thence he was carried to
an other prison belonging to the Abbey, where by reason of the sti^^e of the
place he fell sick, and was so weak that they despaired of his life.

In the midst of his sickness they put up these Articles to Pope John, the 23.
and to the principals of the Council, desiring that John Hus might be
condemned.

1 That he taught that the Sacrament ought to be ministered in both kinds,
and so his Disciples did now use it, and that material bread remains in the
Sacrament after consecration.

2 A Minister in mortal sin cannot minister the Sacrament, and that other
men besides Priests may minister the Sacraments.

3 He both not admit that the Church signifies the Pope, Cardinals,
Archbishops, and the Clergy underneath them: but says this signification was
took from the Schoolmen; and that the Church ought to have no temporal
possessions: and that the temporal Lords may take them away without any
offense: and says also that Constantine, and other seculer Princes have erred
by endowing Churches and Monasteries.

4 That all Priests are of like power, and that the reseruations of the Popes
casualties: the ordering of Bishops, and consecrating of Priests, were
invented only for covetousness.

5 When the Pope, Cardinals, and rest of the Priests are in sin, as is
possible enough, then the Church being in sin has no power of the Keys:

6 He being excommunicated contemns it, and says Mass notwithstanding.

7 He makes Ministers himself, and puts them into Churches without the
ordinary of the Dioces, or other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and teaches it
to be lawfully done.

8 That one being ordained a Priest or Deacon, cannot be kept back from the
office or preaching: therefore he would never be let from preaching by the
Apostolic Sea, nor the Archbishop.

Moreover, when there was Questions moved in the University of Prage, upon the
45. Articles of John Wickliffe, and the Divines of Boheme concluded every one
of them Articles, either to be heretical, seditious, and erroneous: he held
that none of them were heretical, seditious, or erroneous, as after he did
dispute and teach in the common schools of Prage: notwithstanding they were
condemned in England, and by the whole Church.

Because I find these Articles and many others answered by John Hus in
writing, which hereafter follow, and which were read in the Council, I omit
his answers in the Council, because what with the outragiousnes of the
Council against him, so many interrupting him at every word, and some mocking,
and making mouths at him, that it was impossible for him to make a perfect
answer to any thing: I likewise omit for brevity, the many supplications that
the Nobles of Boheme made for his Bail and liberty, and what surety they
offered: if thou be disposed to see these circumstances, and with what great
labor they obtained that he should answer openly, and how cruelly he was used
in prison; I refer thee to the Book at large.

The Answers of JOHN HVS, written with his own hand.
I John Hus, unworthy Minister of Jesus Christ, Master of Art, and Bacheler of
Divinity, do confess I writ a Book entitled, of the Church: in reproof
whereof there are diverse Articles drawn out of the said Treatise, delivered
unto me.

1 The first Article: there is but one holy universal Church, which is the
universal company of all the predestinate. Answer. I confess this
proposition is mine, and confirmed by the saying of Saint Augustine, upon S.
John.

2 Saint Paul was never a member of the Devil, though he did many things like
the malignant Church: nor Saint Peter, though he horribly sinned in perjury,
and denying his Master. Answer. It was by Gods permission, that they might
more steadfastly rise again and be confirmed: I answer according to S.
Augustine, that it is expedient that the Elect should offend: there be two
separations from the Church; the Elect are divided from the Church, but not to
perdition: the second is to perdition, by the which certain Heretieks are
through there deadly sin divided from the Church.

3 No member of the Church does at any time fall away from the body, because
the Charity of Predestination, which is the bond of the same, does never fall:
Answer this is proved by 1. Cor. 13. Romans 8. All things turn to good to them
that love God: Also I am certain that neither death nor life can separate us
from the love of God, etc.

4 The Pr^destinate although he be not in the state of Grace, according to
present Justice: yet he is always a member of the Church. Answer. I declared
in my book that there be diverse manners of being in the Church: there be some
in the Church according to a misshapen Faith, and some according to
Predestination, which are now in sin, but shall return to grace.

5 No degree of dignity, nor election of man, nor any sensible sign can make
a man a member of the Church. Answer. I say Predestination makes us members
of the Church, and prepares for us grace here, and glory in the world to
come; and not degree of dignity, nor the election of a man, nor sensible
sign: for Judas, though Christ elected him an Apostle, and gave him Temporal
Graces, and that he was so reputed of men, yet was he a Woolfe in a
sheeps-skin, as Saint Augustine says.

6 A Reprobate man is never no member of the Church. Answer. It is in my Book
with sufficient long probation of the Psalm 26. and the 5. Ephesians. and by Saint
Bernards saying; the Church of Christ is more plainly his body, then the body
that was crucified: the Church is the flower of the Lord in which is corn and
chafe: the Elect and Reprobate.

7 Judas was no true Disciple of Christ: Answer. This I confess, S. Augustine
in his Book of penance where he expounds 1. John 2. They came out from us, but
were not of us: Christ knew from the beginning who should believe, and him that
should betray him: and said, none comes to me except it be given him of my
Father, from that time many departed from him, though they were called by the
Gospel, they were no true Disciples, because they did not continue in the word
of Christ, as it is said, if you remain in my word you be my Disciples: it is
evident, that Judas could not be the Disciple of Christ, by means of his
covetousness: For Christ says, except a man forsake that he has, he cannot be
my Disciple: therefore because Judas was a Thief John 12. and a Devil, John
6. It is evident that Judas was no true but a fained Disciple. Saint Augustine
upon Saint John, that Christ's sheep hear his voice, says, what manner of
hearers were his sheep; Judas heard him but was a Woolfe, yet he followed the
shepherd, but being clothed in a sheep-skin he laid wait for the shepherd.

8 The predestinate whether they be in the state of grace, or no, according to
there present Justice, is the same Church which has neither wrinkle nor spot,
but is holy and undefiled, which Christ calls his own. Answer. In the fifth
to the Ephesians, Christ so loved his Church that he offered himself for it. I
pray you then, is there any faithful man that doubts that the Church does
not signify all the Elect: the glorious spouse of Christ, holy and without
spot: This is an Article of faith which we ought firmly to believe.

9 Peter never was, nor is the universal head of the Church. Answer. All men
agree, that Peter received of Christ, which is the Rock of the Church,
humility, steadfastness, and blessedness: When Christ said upon this Rock I will
build my church, he did not mean that he would build every Militant Church
upon Peter, but upon Christ which is the Rock: from whom Peter received his
Faith, for he is the head and foundation of every Church, and not Peter.

10 If he that is called the Uicar of Christ, follow Christ in his life, then
he is his true Uicar; otherwise he is the messenger of Antichrist, the enemy of
Peter and Christ, and the Uicar of Judas: Answer. For this cause Saint Bernard
in his fourth Book did write unto Pope E^genius, thou delightest to walk in
great pride, being gorgeously arrayed, what fruit does the flooke receive by
thee* If I durst say it these be rather the pastures of the Devils then of
sheep: Saint Peter, and Saint Paul did not so, thou seem to succeed
Constantine, and not Peter. It follows in my Book, if thy life be contrary
to Peter's, or given to avarice, then he is the Uicar of Judas, which loved the
reward of iniquity, and sold the Lord: As soon as they read the same, the
Rulers of the Council looked one upon another, and making mockes and moes,
nodded their heads at him.

11 Priests that use Symony, and live desolutely, have an untrue opinion of
seven Sacraments, as Bastards and not Children, not knowing the O^^ice of the
Keys of Censures, neither of the rights of Ceremonies and service of the
Church, nor of worship of Relikes, nor of Orders of the Church, nor of
indulgences and pardons. Answer. It is in this manner in my Book, the
authority is abused by such as sell Orders, and get riches by Symony, making
markets of holy Sacraments, living voluptuously, desolutely, a filthy villainous
kind of life. They pollute the Ecclesiastical estate, and though they profess
they know God, they deny him indeed, and believe not in him, but as
unbelieving Bastards hold a contrary opinion, as aforesaid, to whom Malachy in
his first Chapter says, Unto you Priests be it spoken, which despise my name.

12 The papal dignity has his original from the Emperors of Rome. Answer.
This is proved by the 96. distinction, for Constantine granted this privilege
to the Bishop of Rome, and others after confirmed the same; that as Augustus is
counted the most high King above all others, so the Bishop of Rome shall be
called the principal Father above other Bishops: then a Cardinal said in
Constantines time, there was a general council at Nice, in which the highest
place in the Church was given to the Bishop of Rome, why did you not then say
it took his dignity rather from the Council?

13 No Man with reason, without revelation can affirm, that he or any other
is head of any particular Church. Answer. I confess it, but it follows,
that he ought to hope through his good living, that he is a member of the
Spouse of Christ.

14 No man ought to believe that the Pope is head of any Church. Answer*
confess it, for the Church was deceived by Agnes, a Woman Pope, as it
app^areth by Saint Augustine, and it so being deceived, Christian Faith should
be depraved.

15 The Popes power, as Uicar, is nothing worth, if he live not according to
Christ, and follow the manners of Peter. John Hus confessed this, and said
before the Council, I understand, the power of such a Pope as does not
represent the manners of Christ, is void.

16 The Pope is most holy, not because he supplieth the place of Peter, but
because he has great revenues, my words be mutilated. Thus it is written, he
is not holy because he is Uicar of Peter, nor for his great possessions, but
if he follow Christ in humilit^, patience, labor, and perfect love.

17 The Cardinals are not the true Successors of the Apostles, if they live not
after the fashion of the Apostles, keeping the ordinances of Christ. Answer. I
confess it, for if they enter not in at the door which is Christ, they be
Thieves and Robbers.

18 An Heretic ought not to be committed to the secular power to be put to
death, it is sufficient that he suffer the Ecclesiastical censure. Answer.
These are my words, that they might be ashamed of their false judgment, for
Christ would not condemn such to bodily death: The first point appears in
the 12. of Luke: The second, by the Woman taken in Adultery, and in the 18.
Chapter of Matthew, If thy Brother have offended thee, etc. therefore an
Heretic ought first to be instructed with Christian love, by reasons drawn
out of holy Scriptures, as Saint Augustine and others have done, disputing
against Heretics; but if for all this they will not leave their errors, they
ought to suffer corporal punishments. The Judges had read in John Husses
Book, where he grievously inueyed against them which delivered an Heretic
unto the Secular power, not being convicted of Heresy, and compared them unto
the Highpriests, Scribes, and Pharisees, which told Pilate it was not lawful
for them to put any man to death, and delivered Christ unto him, but Christ
told Pilate they were greater murderers then he which delivered him unto him,
then the Cardinals and Bishops made a great noise, saying; Who are they that
thou do asimule unto the Pharisees? And he said, All that deliver any that is
innocent unto the civil sword.

19 The Nobles of the World ought to compel the Ministers of the Church to
keep the Commandments of Christ. Answer. These be my words, the Militant
Church consists of these parts; Ministers of the Church, which should keep
purely the Ordinances of Christ; and the Nobles of the World, which should
compel them to keep his Commandments, and of the common people serving to
both parties.

20 The Ecclesiastical obedience, as the Priests and Monks have devised, it
has no authority in the Scripture. Answer. I confess it, there be three
obediences, the Spiritual, Secular, and Ecclesiastical: the Spiritual, which
is only according to the ordinances of God* in which Christ and his Apostles
lived, and all Christians ought to live in: the Secular obedience, is due
according to civil ordinance: the Ecclesiastical obedience is such as the
Priests have invented, without any express authority of Scripture.

21 He that is excommunicate of the Pope, and apealeth unto Christ, the curses
of the Pope cannot annoy him. Answer. I acknowledge not this, but I did make
complaint in my Book, that they had done me, and such as favored me, great
wrong, and they would not hear me in the Popes Court: and after the death of
one Pope, I apealed to his successors, and it profited not, and to apeals to
the Council, it were to long; therefore at la^^ I apealed to the head of the
Church Christ Jesus. Then said a Cardinal, will thou presume above Saint Paul,
who apealed to the Emperor, and not to Jesus, and they mocked him: the tenor of
his apeale, was nothing but an earnest Prayer to Christ, to be his refuge and
help when all kel^es failed, and that he did appeal before God, for his
grief, from the wicked sentence and excommunication determined by the By^^ops,
Scribes, and Pharisees, as John Chrysostom did twice from the Council of the
Bishops; And Andrew Bishop of Prage, and Robert Bishop of Lincoln, apealed
unto Christ, who is not defiled with cruelty, nor corrupted with gifts, nor
deceived by false witnesses.

22 A vicious man lives naughtily, and a virtuous man lives godly. Answer.
My words are these: All humane works are divided into two parts, they be
either virtuous or vit^aus; therefore if a man be virtuous, that he does, he
does virtuously, and if a man be naught, that which he does is naught: for as
vice infecteth all the deeds of the Subject, so virtue quickens all the doings
of the virtuous, which is proved by many places in the Scriptures.

23 The Minister of Christ living according to his Laws and having knowledge
of the Scriptures, and an earnest desire to edify the people, ought to preach,
notwithstanding the excommunication of the Pope: and such a Minister ought not
to obey any forbidding of him to preach. I Answer. We ought rather to obey God
th^n man, for a Minister to preach, and a rich man to give Alms, are duties
commanded of God: and if the Pope or any other command a Minister not to
preach, and a rich man not to give Alms, they ought not to obey him. I call
that an unjust excommunication, which is given contrary to Gods law, for such a
one a Preacher ought not to leave preaching, nor fear damnation: then they
obi^cted that he had said that such excommunications were blessings: even so
say I now again as the Prophet says, They shall curse, but thou O Lord shall
bless.

24 Every man admitted to the Ministry, has thereby authority to preach, and
ought so to do^, notwithstanding the excommunication or forbidding of the Pope,
or any other. Answer. I do confess this, and that no Christian ought to
doubt, but he that is sufficiently instructed in learning, to instruct the
ignorant, and to tell the unruly of their sins, then for to do any other
work of mercy.

25 Ecclesiastical Censures, are Antichristian, such as the Clergy has
invented for their own preferment, to defend their malice, and multiply their
covetousness: It is not thus in my Book, but I confess it in substance.

26 There ought to be no interdictment unto the people. Answer. For Christ the
High Bishop, neither for the injury done unto John Baptist, nor for any other
injury did make any interdictment. I complained that for one man's fault, a
whole Land shall be interdicted, and all the good cease to praise God, but
Christ notwithstanding, John Baptist was imprisoned, then whom there was no
greater amongst the Children of men, did not give any curse, no not when Herod
beheaded him, neither when himself was spoiled, beaten, and blasphemed; he did
not curse, but prayed for them, and taught his Disciples to do the same: and
Peter exhorts to follow Christ. Who when he was cursed, cursed not again.
And S. Paul says in the 12. to the Romans, Bless them that persecute you.
These are the Articles which are alleged out of his Book of the Church.

Seven Articles gathered out of his Book against Stephen Pallets.
1 THE first Article, If the Pope, Bishop, or Prelate, be in deadly sin, he
is then no Pope, Bishop, or Prelate. Answer. I grant thereunto, and I send you
to Saint Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, Gregory, Cyprian, and Barnard, who say
moreover, that he that is in deadly sin, is no Christian; how much less,
Pope, Bishop, or Prelate, of whom it is said in the eight of Amos, They have
ruled but not through me; they became Princes, and I knew them not: but I
grant, a wicked Pope, Bishop, or Priest, is an unworthy Minister of the
Sacrament, by whom God does baptize, consecrate, or otherwise work, to the
profit of his Church. God says by Samuel to Saul, because thou have cast off
my word, I have cast thee off from being a King, much more a Pope sinning.

2 The Grace of Predestination, is the bond whereby the body of the Church and
every member thereof are firmly knit unto the Head. Answer. This Article is
mine, and it is proved out of the eight to the Romans, Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ: And the tenth of John, My Sheep hear my voice, I
know them, and give them eternal life, they shall not perish, nor any shall
take them out of my hands. This is the knot of the body of the Church, and the
spiritual head, vnderstandding the Church of the predestined.

3 If the Pope be a Reprobate, then as Judas, he is a Devil, a Thief, and the
Son of perdition, and not the head of the Militant Church, nor member thereof.
I answer, If he were a member of the Church, then should he be a member of
Christ, and then he should cleave unto Christ by grace of Predestination and
present Justice, and should be one spirit with God, as in the 1. Cor. 6. Know
you not that our bodies are the members of Christ.

4 That an evil Pope or Prelate is no Pastor. Answer. The Text of my Book,
is, if he be evil, he is a hireling: of whom Christ says, He is no Shepherd,
nor the sheep his, he sees a Wolf and forsakes his sheep, so does every
Reprobate, therefore no true Pastor.

5 The Pope is not, nor ought not by his Office, to be called most holy. I
Answer, When as the King, according to S. Augustines mind, represents the
Deity of Christ, and the Priest represents only his humanity; therefore the
King of Romans by reason of his Office, ought rather to be called most holy.
These things are more at large discided in my Book (says John Hus) but I can
find no foundation, whereby I should call the Pope most holy, when it is only
spoken of Christ.

6 If the Pope live contrary to Christ, though he be lawfully chosen according
to humane election, yet he comes in another way then by Christ. Answer. The
text is thus, if the Pope live contrary to Christ, in Pride and Avarice, does
he not then come in another way, then by the lowly and meek door of Christ.
Judas was lawfully chosen by Christ, yet be came in another way: and as Christ
says in the sixth of John, Was a These, a Devil, and the Son of perdition,
and whosoever does enter into a Bishopprick or any other place, not with intent
to labor in the Church, but to live voluptuously and richly, and to advance
himself with all kind of pride, he comes in another way, and not by Christ,
and is a Thief.

7 The condemnation of the forty five Articles of Wickliffe, made by the
Doctors, as wicked and unreasonable, and the cause by them alleged is fained
and untrue. Answer. So it is, to say that every one of them is heretical,
erroneous, and offensive: then he said to Cardinal Cambray? O Master Doctor
where is your proof! Then the Cardinal said: John Hus, thou did say thou
would defend none of John Wickliffes errors? I will not if they be errors,
but in my conscience, I could not consent to the condemnation, being I saw no
Scripture against them.

There remains six Articles of the thirty nine, out of a Book wrote against
STANISLAVS de Zuoyma.
1 THe first Article: A Minister is not the Successor of Christ by his humane
election, be it never so rightly done, but in that he does more abundantly
work to the profit of the Church, he has thereby more abundant power given
him of God. Answer. It stands in the hands of wicked Electors to choose a
Woman into Ecclesiastical office, as it appears by the election of Agnes,
which was called John, who occupied the Popes place and dignity two years and
more, and they may choose a thief, a murderer, a devil, and an Antichrist, or
such a one as God allows not of: so whatsoever the election is, we ought to
give credit to the works of him that is chosen; therefore Christ says in the
tenth of John, Give credit unto works.

2 The Pope being a Reprobate, is not head of the Church. Answer. I would know
of the Doctor how this is contrary to Faith? Did not Christ dispute against the
Faith, when he demanded of the Scribes and Pharisees. Math. 12. You offspring
of Vipers, how can you speak good things when your selves are wicked. I demand
of the Scribes, if the Pope be a Reprobate, and the stock of Uipers, how is he
head of the holy Church? for it is more possible that a Reprobate may speak
good things, being he may be in the state of grace according to present
Justice, then to ^e the head of the holy Church: In the fifth of John Christ
says, How can you believe which seek glory amongst your selves, and seeks
not the glory that comes of God: And I demand how the Pope can be head of the
Church which is a Reprobate, and receives the glory of the world, and seeks
not for the glory that comes of God, for it is more possible he should
believe so doing, then be head of the Church.

3 There is no appearance that there ought to be one head in the spiritualty to
rule the Church. Answer. I grant it, Christ sits at the right hand of God,
does necessarily rule the Militant Church as head, and there is no spark of
appearance, that there should be one head in the spiritualty* ruling the Church
that should always be conversant with it, except some Infidel would
heretically affirm, that the Militant Church should have here a permanent and
continual City, and not to seek after that which is to come: And it is
evident in my book, how vnconsequent a similitude it is for a Reprobate Pope
to be head of the Militant Church, and a Reprobate King to be he^d of a
Kingdom.

4 Christ would better rule his Church by his true Apostles, dispierced
throughout the world, without such a monstrous head. I answer, Albeit that
Doctor does say, that the body of the Church is often without a head; yet we
verily believe that Christ is the head of every Church, ruling it without lack
or default, pouring on it motion and sense, even unto the latter day: then they
said, behold now he prophesies? but John Hus said, the Church in the time of
the Apostles, was fa^ better governed then now it is.

5 Peter was no universal Shepherd of the sheep of Christ, much less is the
Bishop of Rome. Answer. It appears by the words of Christ, that he did not
limit unto Peter for his jurisdiction the whole world, no not one only
Pronince, nor to any other of the Apostles: some walked through many regions,
some fewer; as Paul travailed more then all the rest, and did convert more to
the Faith of Christ. Wherefore, it is lawful for any Apostle or Uicar to
convert and confirm as much people, and as many Provinces as they are able.

6 The Apostles and faithful Priests of the Lord, have stoutly ruled the
Church in all things necessary to salvation, before the office of the Pope was
brought into the Church, and would do so to the end of the world. Then they
cried out again, Behold the Prophet.

Certain other Articles which were brought unto JOHN HVS in Prison.
1 THE first Article, Paul, according to present Justice, was a Blasphemer, and
none of the Church, and withal in Grace, according to Predestination of
eternal life. Answer. This proposition is not in the Book, but thus: as Paul
was both a blasphemer according to present Justice, and also a faithful child
of our holy Mother the Church according to Predestination; So Iscariot was both
in Grace according to present Justice, and withal, was never of our holy
Mother the Church, because he lacked Predestination of life everlasting.

2 Christ does more love a predestinate Ban being sinful, then any Reprobate,
in what grace soever he be. Answer. The reason is, because the predestinate
shall have perpetual blessedness, and the Reprobate eternal fire; therefore
GOD infinitely loves them both as his Creatures, and much more because he
gives them greater graces, to wit; everlasting life, which is far more
excellent then only grace, according to present Justice; and the predestined
cannot fall from Grace, for they have a certain redicall grace rooted in them,
although they be deprived of the abundance of grace for the time.

3 All the sinful according to present Justice are unfaithful, swaruing from
the true Catholic faith, for none can commit deadly sin, but in the point he
swarueth from the faith. Answer. I acknowledge it to be my sentence: for if
they did believe the punishment that shall be laid upon sinners, and had faith
of the divine understanding, etc. then they would not so offend. This is
verified by the Prophet Esaias, Thy fellows are misbeleeuers, and fellows of
thieves, they love bribes, and are followers of rewards, so he calls them
Infidels for their offenses: also in the first of Titus, They confess they
know God, but in works they deny him.

4 John 22. Math. 16. and the 18. Receive the holy Ghost, whatsoever you shall
bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. Many for lack of understanding,
shall be terrified by the Priests and be deceived, presuming upon their power
and authority. Answer. I allow this sentence, it is not possible for a Priest
to bind and lose, except that binding and losing be in heaven: but many are
made afraid, thinking whether they be just or unjust, the Priests may at their
pleasures bind them, and the ignorant Priests presume to have such power,
saying; they have such power to absolve every man confessing himself, of what
sin soever it be, though many sins are forbidden the^. And an Hypocrite may
confess himself, that is not contrite for his sin, whereof proof is often
found, and is evident, because the Letter kills, but the spirit quickneth.

5 The binding and losing of God is plainly the chief and principal.
Answer. This is very evident, for it were a blasphemous presumption, that a
man may forgive an offense to GOD, he not allowing the same: for it is
necessary, that GOD do first forgive, before his Uicar can do the same* and
no Article of our Faith ought to be more common and known to us then this, and
whosoever grants this authority to the Pope, grants he is without sin, and
that he is God, the fact of the Pope proves this same: for always in his
Absolutions, h^ presupposes contrition and confession, but unto true
Absolution there is required; first, contrition; secondly, the purpose to sin
no more; thirdly, true confession; fourthly, steadfast hope of forgiveness: the
first appears by Ezechiel, If the wicked repent: the second in the 5. and 8.
of John, Sin no more: the third by Luke, show your selves to the Priests: the
fourth, Christ says, My Son believe, and thy sins shall be forgiven.

6 The Priests heap up out of the Scriptures, such things as serve the belly,
but such as pertain to the imitation of Christ, they reject as impertinent to
salvation. Answer. This Saint Augustine proves in his seventeenth Homily,
The Harvest is great, but there are few Haruest-folke; and speaking that, which
I cannot without grief, though there be many that would hear good things,
there lacks such as should declare the same unto them. The world is full of
Priests, yet there are few Worke-men in the Harvest of the Lord: we would be
willingly Priests, but we do not the office of Priesthood; we are fallen into
outward affairs, and take upon us an office for honor, and hire another to
ease our labor; we leave preaching, we are called Bishops to our pain; we
retain the name of honor, but not the virtue; we daily call for our stipend,
but care not for our flock; we gape after earthly things and glory, and leave
the cause of God undone; we take upon us the place of holiness, and are wholly
wrapped in cares and troubles. And S. Barnard says in his 33. Sermon upon the
Canonicals, all are friends, and all enemies, all kinsfolks, and all
adversaries, all of an household, and no peacemakers, they are the Ministers of
Christ, and serve Antichrist; they go honorably, honored with the goods of
the Church, and yet they do no honor.

7 The power of the Pope, which does not follow Christ, is not to be feared.
Answer. Subjects are bound willingly to obey their good Rulers, and those
which are wicked: yet if the Pope do abuse his power, it is not to be feared as
by bondage: so his Cardinals as I suppose, did not fear Gregory the 12. before
he was deposed, when as they resisted him; saying, He did abuse his power.

8 A wicked Pope is not the Successor of Peter, but of Judas. Answer. If the
Pope be humble, neglecting the honors and luker of the world: if he be a
Shepherd, taking his name of feeding his sheep, if as Christ commands, he
feed the sheep with the word and good example, then is he the Uicar of Christ,
but if he walk contrary, because there is no society betwixt Christ and
Beliall: and Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me. How is he the
Uicar of Christ, and not rather the Uicar of Antichrist? Christ called Peter,
Sathanas, when he contraried him but in one word, why should not any other then
being more contrary to Christ, be called Sathanas, and Antichrist.

9 The Pope is the same beast, of whom it is spoken in the Revelation, Power is
given him to make war upon the Saints.

10 It is lawful to preach notwithstanding the Popes inhibition. Answer. The
Article is evident, because the Apostles did preach contrary to the
commandment of the Bishop. And S. Hialry did the like, contrary to a Pope
that was an Arian: and Cardinals, contrary to the commandment of Pope Gregory
the 12. sent throughout all Realms such as should preach against him.

11 If the Popes commandment be not agreeable to the word of God, it is not
to be obayed. Answer. S. Isidore says, He that rules and commands any thing
contrary, or besides the word of God, he is honored as a false witness, and a
Church-Robber; therefore we are bound to obey no Prelate, but in case he
commands the commandments of Christ. And Saint Augustine speaking of the
Chair of Moses, says; They teach in the Chair of Moses the Law of God,
therefore God teaches by them: but if they will teach you any of their own
inventions, hear them not, neither do as they command you; let therefore my
Adversaries and Slanderers learn, that there be not only twelve Councels in
the Gospel, but as many Councels as there be Commandments of God binding us
thereunto, under the pain of deadly sin.

12 It is lawful for the Clergy and Layty, to judge by their jurisdiction of
all things pertaining to salvation, and of the works of Prelates. Answer.
Subjects ought first to examine themselves. 1. Cor. 11. Secondly, to examine
all things which appertain to their salvation: for a spiritual man judges
all things; therefore I say a Lay man ought to judge and examine the works of
his Prelate, and to bewar^ of false Prophets, and they ought to examine their
works, that if they be good, they may rejoice in GOD, and if they be evil, be
sorry for them, but not to do the like, least they be damned with them,
according to the saying: If the Blind lead the Blind, they shall both fall into
the ditch.

13 God does suspend every wicked Prelate from his Ministry whilst he is in
actual sin, because then he sins in whatsoever he does. Answer. 1. Cor
11. Paul suspendeth all such as are in any grievous crime, from the eating of
the ^odie of the Lord, and the drinking of his blood; and so consequently
suspen^^th all sinful Prelates from the ministration of the Sacrament: and God
does suspend the wicked from the declaration of his righteousness. Psalm. 49.
To suspend, is to prohibit the ministry of any other good thing for the
offense sake: or as the new law terms it, to interdict or forbid.

14 The Clergy, for their own preferment and exhaltation, does undermine the
Lay people, and multiply their own covetousness, cloaketh their malice* and
prepares a way for Antichrist. The answer which is made to the 25. Article in
pri^on, suffices for this: the first part he proves by the example of Peter
de Luna, which named himself Benedict, and of Angelus Coriarius, who named
himself Gregory the twelth: and of John the 23. and by the 13. and 14. of
Ezechiell, and out of Gregory, who says, What shall become of the flock when
the Shepherds are become wolves? The second part is proved by Jerome and
Gregory 17. Homily, and by Barnard upon the Canonicals: the third is proved by
experience, for who defends the wickedness of any scisme, but only the
Clergy, alleging Scriptures, and bringing reasons therefore. They excuse
symony, covetousness in heaping together many benifices, luxuriousnes and
fornication, how many now say it is no deadly sin, alleging the saying of
Genesis, Increase and multiply: hereby also the fourth part is verified, for
Barnard upon the Canonicals, says, wicked Priests prepare the way for
Antichrist.

15 John Hus openly teaches, that these Articles are true. Answer. Some of
these I did publish, and some mine enemies fained; now adding, then
diminishing; now falsely imputing the whole proposition unto me, which the
Commissaries did confess before me, whom I desired that they might be punished
for the false faining of those Articles.

16 All the foresaid conclusions be false, erroneous, and seditious, and weaken
the power of the Church, invented contrary to the scriptures and the Church.
Answer. If there be any such, I am ready most humbly to revoke and recant the
same.

17 They objected against him to change the Treatise that he wrote against
Pallets, and Stanislaus de Zuoyma. Answer. I desired for Gods sake, that it
might be openly read in the audience of the Council, and that I would submit
my self to the judgment of the whole Council.

18 John Hus preached he should go to Constance, and if he should be forced to
recant that which he had taught, he never purposed to do it with his mind,
because what he had taught was pure doctrine of Christ. Answer. This Article is
full of lies, God says to the inuenter thereof, All the day long thou have
imagined wickedness, and with thy tongue as with a sharp razor thou have wrought
deceit: thou have delighted to talk of wickedness rather then of Justice. I
wrote an Epistle, and left it to be read unto the people, that they should pray
for me, and persevere steadfastly in the doctrine of Christ, knowing certainly
that I never taught any such errors as mine enemies ascribe unto me, and if I
should be overcome with false wilnesses, they should not be troubled, but
continue steadfastly in the truth. First the council condemned all his books
to be burned, and condemned al his Articles to be heretical and himself to be
an heretic, and when the sentence was ended, kneeling down on his knees he
said, Lord Jesus Christ forgive mine enemies, by whom thou know I am falsely
accused, and that they have used false witness and slanders against me,
forgive them for thy great mercy sake: and the chief of the Priests derided
his prayer.

Seven Bishops which were appointed to disgrade him, commanded him to put on
his priestly garments, when he put on his white vesture he remembered the Albe
that Herod put on Christ to mock him withal, and in all other things
comforted he himself by the example of Christ: when he had put on his
vestures, the Bishops exhorted him to change his mind, and provide for his
honor and safeguard, and according to the manner of the Ceremony, going to the
top of the scaffold, he spoke to the people in this sort.

These Lords and Bishops exhort me, that I should confess before you all that
I have erred, if it were a thing that might be done without the slander of any
Man, they might easily peradventure persuade me, but I am in the sight of my
Lord my GOD, without whose great ignominy, and the grudging of mine own
conscience, I cannot do that which they require. I never taught the thing that
they have falfely alleged against me; with what countenance should I behold
the Heavens? With what face should I look upon them whom I have taught,
Whereof there is a great number: if those things which they have hitherto
known most certain, should now be made uncertain by me, should I by this
example astonish so many consciences, endued with so certain knowledge of the
Gospel of Christ armed against all assaults of the Devil, I will never commit
such offense, more to esteem this vile carkase appointed to death, then their
health and salvation.

And being commanded to come down, one of the Bishops took away the
Chalice from him, saying; O cursed Judas! why have thou forsaken the way of
peace, and councelled with the Jews? we take from thee this Chalice of
salvation? He answered, I trust in my Lord Jesus, for whose sake I suffer these
things, that he will not take away his Chalice of Red^mption, but have a
steadfast hope this day I shall drink thereof in his Kingdom: then each of the
Bishops took away a vestiment, and gave him a curse; He answered, he
willingly imbrased their curses for the Name of Christ. When they should raze
off his shauing, they could not agree with what Instrument they should do it,
then he turning to the Emperor, said; I marvel being they are of like
cruelty, they agree not in their kind of cruelty: At length they agreed, to
cut off the skin of the crown of his head with a pair of Sheares: Then they
said; Now has the Church taken away all her Ornaments, then they made a
Crown of Paper, a cubit deep, in which were painted three ugly Devils, and
this Title set over, Heresiarcha; He said, Christ for my sake ware a Crown of
Thorns, why should not ^ wear this light Crown for his sake, be it never so
ignominious? I will do it willingly, the Bishops when they had put it on,
said: Now we commit you to the Devil; but he said, Lord Jesus, into thy
hands I commit my Spirit which thou have redeemed: then they delivered him to
the Emperor, who caused one to receive him, and deliver him to b^e burned.
When he saw his Books burned before his face, he smiled, he exhorted all that
were by, that he died not for Heresy, but for the hatred of his Adversaries:
almost all the City followed him in Armor. In his Prayers he often repeated;
into thy hands I commit my Spirit, the standers by said, what this man has
done we know not, but he prays very devoutly and godly.

A Priest sitting on horseback in a green gown, draw no about with red
Silk, said he ought not to be heard, because he is an Heretic: as he prayed
his crown fell off, one of the Soldiers said, let us put it on again, that
it may be burned with his Masters. When he rose from prayers, he said, Lord
Jesus assist me, that with a constant mind I may bear this cruelty, and
ignominious death whereunto I am condemned for preaching thy most holy Gospel:
when he was fastened to the stake, being turned to the East, certain cried, he
ought not to look toward the East, because he is an Heretic, so he was
turned to the West, then the Emperors master of his horses, exhorted him to
repent of his errors, and be mindful of his safeguard; he answered he preached
no errors: the principal end of my Doctrine was to teach all men repentance,
and remission of sins, according to Christ's Gospel and Exposition of holy
Doctors, therefore with a cheerful courage I am ready to suffer death: when
the fire was kindled he began to sing with a loud voice, Jesus Christ the Son
of the everliving God have mercy on me, and when he had said it thrice, the
fire smothered him, they made a new fire and burned the part of his body, they
cut the head into small gobbits that it might the sooner be consumed: his heart
being found amongst his bowels, when they had well beaten it with staves, they
pricked it upon a sharp prick, and roasted it in another fire till it was
consumed: they took the ashes and cast into the River Rheyne that there might
be no dust of that man left upon earth: but they could never abolish his
memory out of the hearts of the godly.

Master Jerome of Prage grievously lamenting the false repro^h of the glorious
Kingdom of Boheme, 1415.
and the manifold injuries of John Hus, of his own accord came to Constance:
and seeing John Hus was denied to be heard, and that he himself was laid
wait for, he departed a mile off that night, and writ unto the King of Hungary
and the Council earnestly, for safe conduct to come and go, and he would
answer before the Council to every one that could lay any thing against him:
The said King denied him safe conduct: the Lords of Boheme moved the deputies
of the four Nations of the Council therein, who answered, they would give him
a safe conduct to come, but not to depart: he hearing hereof writ certain
intimations, and caused them to be set upon the gates of the City, and of the
Churches and Monast^ries, and of the houses of the Cardinals, and other Nobles
and Prelates to this effect: To the most Noble Prince Sygismond, by Gods grace
King of Romans, and Hungary always Augustus etc. Jerome of Prage, Master of
Art of the Uniuersities of Paris, Collein, Heidelberg, and Prage, do notify
to all men I am ready to come to Constance, openly to declare to the whole
Council, the purity of my true Faith: wherefore if there be any slanderers,
which will object any error or heresy, let them come openly before me in the
presence of the Council, and I will be ready to answer for mine own
innocence, and declare the sincerity of my true faith* and if I shall be
found culpable to suffer such punishment as shall be meet: wherefore I desire a
safe conduct, that all the world may know, that if I have any violence or
imprisonment offered me, this general Council does not proceeds according to
equity: or if they put me back from this profound Justice, being com^ hither
freely of mine own accord; the which thing I suppose to be far banished from
so sacred a Council of wise men, when yet he could not obtain a safe conduct,
the Nobles and Knights, specially of Boheme, gave him their Letters, Patents
under their Seals, witnessing the premises: with the which Letters, the said
Master Jerome returning to Bohem, but by the conspiracy of his enemies, he
was taken in the Dukedom of Horrissaw, and sent again by the Duke to the
Council: the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, understanding thereof
assembled and sent for him, and they led him in chains, making a great noise,
one going a great way before, leading him by the same chain, with which chain
they kept him bound in the Cloister: when he was before them, the whole rabble
rising up alleged sundry accusations and testimonies against him, with a great
noise and tumult: when they held their peace the Chancellor of Paris said;
Jerome when thou wast at Paris tho^ thoughtest thy self an Angel by thine
own eloquence, alleging in the Schools many erroneous conclusions, and
consequences: Answer. I put them philosophically, teach me that any of them
be erroneous and I will amend them.

Then said the Master of the University of Colleyn: when thou wast at Colleyn
thou did propound many erroneous matters: then he said, show me one error:
he said I remember them not now, but they shall be objected against thee: Then
said the Master of the University of Heidelberge, when thou wast with us,
thou did propound many erroneous matters, and compared the Trinity to Water,
Snow, and Ice; That which I taught there, I will teach here, and teach me that
they be erroneous and I will recant: then certain cried out let him be burned:
he answered, if my death do delight you let it be so: the Archbishop of Rygen
sent some of his servants which led away Master Jerome, be^ing fast bound in
chains both by the hands and neck, and when it was night they carried him into
a ^ower of the City, tying him to a great block, his feet in the stocks, his
hands being made fast upon them: the block was so high he could not sit
thereon, but his head must hang downward: thus he lay two days and two nights
relieved only with bread and water, and one M. Peter hearing thereof, got leave
to give him meat: hanging thus by the heels 11. days he fell sore sick even to
death, he lay in that prison a year lacking but seven days: after they had
put John Hus to death, they threatened him with death, and what with fear of
death, and hope of delivery, they made him recant, yet they sent him to prison
again, but not so straightly chained as before: but when his Adversaries plainly
perceived that he did not recant of pure mind, but to the intent to escape there
hands: and also certain Friars of Prage put up new accusations against him,
and certain Cardinals, being appointed to hear his answer, he refused to
answer in prison, desiring open audience: they thinking he would renew his
recantations granted him open audience: at which time he answered all their
arguments profoundly* and subtly disputing of many matters, at last he much
praised the blessedness of John Hus: affirming that he knew him from his youth
upward, and that he was neither Fornicator, drunkard, or any vicious person,
but a chaste and sober man, and a just true preacher of the Gospel, and
whatsoever thing Master John Hus had holden or written against the enormities,
pomp, and disorder of the Prelates, he would defend unto the death: and added
that all his sins did not so much gnaw and trouble his Conscience, as that
sin which he committed in that pestiferous seat which in his recantation he
had spoken against that man, and his Doctrine: concluding that he utterly
revoked and denied that wicked recantation, and that he did it through weakness
of heart, and fear of death: when he had spoken these and many other things
touching the praise of John Wickliffe, and John Hus, then was he carried again
unto prison, and grievously fettered by the hands, arms, and feet, with great
chains and fetters of Iron: and when he was brought again to his Judgment,
they exhorted him again to recant: he answered, I take God to my witness I hold
all the Articles of the Catholic Faith, but I shall be condemned, because I
will not consent unto the condemnation of those most holy and blessed men
aforesaid, whom you have most wickedly condemned, for certain Articles
abhorring your abominable life: then he confessed his belief, and uttered
many things profoundly, and eloquently, that all that were present could not
sufficiently commend his great eloquence, and profound learning, and by no
means could they persuade him to recant: he said further you will condemn me
unjustly and wickedly: but I after my death will leave a remorce in your
consciences, and a nail in your hearts, and I cite you all to answer me
before the most high and just Judge within a hundred years: when sentence was
given they brought unto him a great long miter of paper, painted about with red
Devils: then he throwing away his hood, he put the Miter on his head; saying,
Christ when he suffered death for me wore a crown of Thorns, and I for his
sake will willingly wear this Miter: when he was led to execution with a loud
voice he sung, Credo in vnum Deum: after he sung other Canticles of the Church:
he was tied to a stake like the picture of John Hus: whilst he was praying
the tormenters took him up, and lifted him up from the ground, stripped him
naked, and girded him about the lomes with a linen cloth: and so bound him to
the Image: when they began to lay the wood to him he sung, Salve festa dies,
then they cast his Garments on the Wood, and set them on fire, and when he
was fired he sung, In manus tuas domine commendo Spiritum meum, when he
vehemently burn^d he said, Lord have mercy upon me, for thou know how
sincerely I have loved thy truth: after he was dead they burned his bedding,
Boots, Hood, and all things he had in prison, after they gathered his ashes,
and cast them into the River.

Thus ends the tragical History of John Hus, and Jerome of Prage faithfully
collected by a Bohemian, being a present beholder of the same: John Hus being
a Minister at Bethelem, had a vision by night, that he had pictured in his
Church of Bethelem, pictures of Christ and his Apostles: and the Pope and his
Cardinals came and defaced them, and that a while after other Painters renewed
the said pictures, much more fairer then before: and that there was so many
Painters that they gloried against the Pope and his Cardinals, bidding them put
them out if they could, which with all their power they were not able to do:
this vision he thus expounds, applying the pictures to the preaching of
Christ and his Apostles, which though the Pope and Cardinals should extinguish
in him, yet the time would come that Doctrine should be renewed by other
preachers, so plentiously that the Pope with all his power should not be able
to prevail against it: whereunto the prophecy of the said Hus, a little
before his death, and printed in the Bohemian come called Moneta Hu^sa, having
this superscription, Centum reuolutis annis Deo respondebitis and mihi, this
was Anno 1415. if we count from this year unto the year one thousand five
hundred and sixteen: in which year Martine Luther first began to write
against the Pope, we shall find the number of an hundred years fully
complete.

When as the News of the barbarous cruelty exercised against John Hus, and
Jerome of Prage, was reported in Boheme: their Disciples assembled, and
celebrated a memorial of their deaths, decreeing it to be holden yearly, and
after they obtained certain Churches of the King to preach and minister the
Sacraments in: then they suppressed diverse Monasteries, and Pharasaicall and
Idolatrous Temples, driving the vicious Priests and Monks out of them, or
compelling them to a better order, whereby their number augmented under the
conduct of one Nicholas a Noble man, and coming again to the King for more
Churches, the King told Nicholas thou have begun a Web to put me out of my
Kingdom, and I will make a rope of it wherewith I will hang thee: Whereupon
Nicholas departed, and the king went to a new Castle which he had builded, and
sent Ambassadors unto the Emperor his brother for aid.

The Protestants being assembled at Prage, the King sent his Chamberlain with
three hundred horsemen to run upon them, but he was feign to fly for fears of
his life: at this news the King and all about him were amazed; but his
Cup Bearer said, I knew these things would thus come to pass, the King in a
rage caught him and threw him down, and would have slain him with his Dagger:
but being let with much ad^e he pardoned him, immediately the King fell sick
of a Palsy, and within eighteen days died: when he had marked the names of
them which he would have put to death, and before the Princes which he had
sent to for aid were come, when he had reigned 55. years, and was 57. year
old.

Immediately after whose death, a Noble man named Zischa, minding to revenge the
injuries of John Hus, and Jerome of Prage, gathered a number of men of War,
and subverted the Monasteries and Idolatrous Temples, breaking in pieces the
Images, driving away the Priests and Monks, which he said were kept up in
their Cloisters like Swine in their fat sties a fatting: his army increased to
forty thousand men: he went to Pelzina where he knew he had many friends of
his faction, and took the Town and fortified it strongly, and some of his
company took the Castle of Uissegard: then the Queen sent Letters to the
Emperor Sygismond, and other Nobles, requiring aid: in the mean time the
Queen raised an army with the treasure of the King which could not prevail
against them.

Then the Protestants sent Letters throughout the whole Realm, that they
should not let the Emperor enter, who was an enemy to Boheme, had bound the
ancient City of the Prutenians unto order by pledges, put the Marquis of
Brandenburge from the Bohemian Crown, and not only suffered but procured John
Hus, and Jerome of Prage to be burned, and with all his endeavor does impugn
the Doctrine which they taught: Zisca was twice assaulted of his enemies, but
was always victor: after he went to Ausca, a town, out of which the Papists had
cast many Protestants, he took the town and set it on fire: the chief
Papists fled to the Castle Lytius, but he took the Castle, and put them all to
sword save one: then he chose a place by a river which was fenced by nature,
this place he compassed in with walls, and commanded every man to build them
houses, and named it Thaber, and his companions Thabarites, as if they had
seen the transfiguration of Christ in the mount: the way to it by land was
scarce thirty foot broad, for it is almost an Island, they had no horsemen
until the Emperor sent Nicholas, Master of the Mintes, with a thousand
horsemen, to withstand the Thaborites, upon whom Zisca came in the night, and
took away all his horses and armor.

In this time one Picardus coming out of the Low Countries into Boheme, by
enchantments got credit with the people, and allured a number of men and women
unto him, whom he commanded to go naked, calling them Adamits, and possessing
a certain Island, he called himself the Son of God: they had no respect of
marriage, yet it was against the Law for any man to know a woman without the
leave of Adam: but when any desired a woman, he must lead her in his hand to
him, and say, I am inflamed to this woman, and he answers go and multiply
and replenish the earth, he affirmed that they and their posterity were free
and all other bondmen: on a time forty of this sect came out of the Island an^
slew two thousand husbandmen, whom they called the children of the devil:
Zisca hearing hereof and detesting their abominable doings let his army against
them, and subdued the Island, and slew them all saving two, of whom he might
understand the superstition of the people.

In the mean time the Emperor with a great army entered Boheme, and got
Cencho, with large gifts and promises, to render up unto him the Castle of
Prage, and there placed himself to anoy the town: the Citizens of Prage sent
for Zisca, who speeded thither with his Thaborites, and received the City
under his governance, the Castle was so strong it could not be conquered, but
by famine, therefore they stopped all the passages, that no victuals should be
carried in: but the Emperor opened the passages by force, and gave them in the
Castle all things necessary, and besieged the City, and was crowned in the
Metropolitan house in the Castle.

Zisca planted a strong Garrison upon a high hill, near the Town of Prage,
with whom the Emperors host skermishing, having gotten the top of the hill,
were driven back into a corner: Some were slain, and some falling headlong
from the hill were destroyed: whereupon the Emperor raised his siege, and
Zisca and his company returned to Taber: they of Prage strongly besieged the
Castle, then they were compelled to eat horseflesh, and except the Emperor
did aid them by such a day they promised to yield it up: the Emperor was
present before the day: but entering into a strait under the Castle, was
suddenly set upon by the Soldiers of Prage, had a great overthrow, and so
leaving his purpose undone returned back again, and the Castle was delivered
unto them.

Zisca subverted and burned five Monasteries in Pel^^na, and pitched himself
at the Monastery of Saint Clare: thither came the Emperor with his army: but
when Zisca brought his army against him, he fled; and shortly after left
Boheme: Then Zisca won Commitauia a famous City, and burnt all the Priests
therein: and having but one eye in the siege of Raby he lost that eye and was
blind, yet still he took the charge of his army.

After the Garrisons of Prage went to Uarona, where was a great garrison of the
Emperors, and took it by force, and took many other towns and holds.

After the Emperor and the Princes electors appointed a day when they and
their army should invade the West part of Boheme: and the Emperor with an
other Host would enter the East part, and many Princes and Bishops came to his
aid: when the Emperor was entered Boheme, Zisca although he was blind set upon
him, and he being afraid and many of his Nobles slain f^ed: Zisca pursuing the
Emperor a days journey, got great riches and spoil: The Emperor passing by
a Bridge over a River, one Piso which had brought fifteen thousand horsemen
out of Hungary to these wars passing over the Ice, which brake and deuo^red a
great number: Zisca having obtained this victory would not suffer any Idol to
be in the Churches, nor Priests to Minister in Copes and vestures: the Consuls
of Prage being agreeued at this, called John Premonstrensis, and nine others,
which were principals of this faction into the Council house, as though they
would confer, and slew them, but the blood of them seemed to be washed through
the sinkes and Channels: wherefore the Council house was overthrown, and
eleven of the principal authors thereof slain, and diverse houses spoiled.
About the same time the Castle Purgell, wherein the Emperor had a garrison,
whether many Papists with their wives and children were fled, was through
negligence burned.

When the Emperor perceived that all things came to pass according to Zisca
his mind, and that the state of Boheme depended on him, he sought means to
g^t Zisca into his favor, promising him the government of the whole Kingdom,
and great yearly revenues, if he would proclaim him King, and cause the
Cities to be sworn unto him: whereupon Zisca going to the Emperor died by
the way.

The Epitaph of JOHN ZISCA.
John Zisca not inferior to any Emperor or Captain in warlike policy, a
severe punisher of the pride and avarice of the Clergy, and a defender of my
country lie here: That with Appius Claudius in Council, and Marcus Furius
Camillus by valiantnes did for the Romans, I being blind have done for the
Bohemians: Eleven times in joined Battle I went victor out of the field: I
worthily defended the cause of the miserable against the delicate, fat, and
gluttonous Priests, and for that cause received help of God: notwithstanding my
bones lie here in this hollowed place in despite of the Pope.

Pope Martin perceiving the Gospel to increase more and more, sent a Cardinal
into Germany to move them to war against the Bohemians: whereunto the Emperor
assisted: there were three armies: in the first were the Dukes of Saxony, the
second was under the conduct of the Marquis of Brandenburge, the third was led
by the Archbishop of Treuers.

They entered Boheme, and set upon a Town which the Protestants the night
before had won from the Papists: The protestans hearing thereof gathered an
army and came toward them: they fled leaving behind them their warlike
Engi^es, with a great prey: they followed them, and destroyed many Cities, and
returning back again, they had great sums of money sent them that they
should not destroy the Countries of Bamberge, and Norenberge, whereby the host
of the Bohemians was greatly enriched.

After this News the Emperor gathered a new aid, and Pope Martin sent an
other Cardinal to Germany to stir them to make war against the Bohemians:
so there was a new expedition decreed. Many Bishops allowing a great ayd^
thereto: the number of the horsem^n was forty thousand, but the footmen were
not full so many.

A Cardinal entered into Boheme with this huge army, destroying many of the
protestant towns, killing Men, Women and Children, sparing none: the
Protestants hearing thereof gathered their host, besieged a Town and won it:
so that there fell such a sudden fear amongst the Papists throughout the
whole Camp, that they ran away: the Cardinal marueiling thereat, went to the
Captains, exhorting them to order the batta^l^s, and courageously to abide
their enemies, saying; they fought for the religion of Christ, and salvation of
souls, notwithstanding, they did all fly, and the Cardinal with them; the
Protestants courageously pursued them, and had a great prey and spoil of them.

The Emperor going to Rome to be ^rowned Emperor, wrote Letters to the
Nobles of Boheme, how he was borne a Bohemian, and that he was not more
affected unto any Nation then his own, and that he went to Rome for no other
cause but to be crowned: the which honor should be also to the Bohemians,
whose renown has been always his care, and that through his endeavor the
Council of Basil is begun, exhorting all such as were destrous to be heard
touching Religion, that they should come thither, and that they should not
maintain any quarrel against the holy Mother the Church, and that the
Council would lovingly and gently hear their reasons, and that they should
endeavor themselves to agree with the Synod touching Religion, and to reserve
a peaceable kingdom for him against his return, neither should the Bohemians
think to refuse his Empire, whose Brother, Father, and Uncle had reigned over
them.

The Council of Basil also wrote their Letters to the Bohemians, to send
their Ambassadors to show a reason of their Faith, promising safe conduct to
go and come, and free liberty to speaks what they would. Whereupon an
Embassage of three hundred Horses was sent to Basil: the chief were William
Cosca a valiant Knight, and Procopius, sir-named Magnus, for his manifold
victories, John Rochezana, Preacher of Prage, Nicholas Galicus, Preacher of the
Thaborits, and one Peter, an Englishman, of an excellent prompt wit: all the
streets were full as they came to see them, and maruelling at their strange
kind of apparel, stout courageous countenances, saying; it was not untrue
that was reported of them. These Ambassadors were gently received: the next
day Cardinal Iulianus sent for them to the Councell-house, and made a gentle,
long, and eloquent Oration unto them, exhorting them to unity and peace,
saying, the Church was the spouse of Christ, the Mother of the faithful, and
has the Keys of binding and los^ng, and is white and fair without spot or
wrinckle, and cannot err in necessary points of salvation: and that he which
contemns her, is profane, an Eth^icke, and Publican, and that the Church
cannot be better represented then by the Council, and that they should give
no less credit to the Council, then to the Gospel, by whose authority the
Scriptures themselves are received and allowed, and that the Bohemians, which
call themselves the Children of the Church, ought to hear their Mother, which
is never unmindful of her Children; and how that of late they have lived apart
from their Mother, but that was no new or strange thing: for there have been
many in times past have forsaken their Mother, and yet seeking salvation have
returned again. All without the Arc in Noah's flood perished, the Lords
Passover is to be eaten in one House, there is no salvation out of the Church;
she is the Garden and famous Fountain of Water, whereof whosoever shall
drink, shall not thirst everlastingly. That the Bohemians have done as they
ought, in that they have sought the Fountains of this water at the Council,
and now at length given ear to their Mother: now ought hatred to cease, Armor
be laid aside, and war rejected; the Fathers would lovingly hear them in
their own cause, requiring them that they would willingly receive the Councels
of the sacred Synod, whereunto all faithful Christians ought to consent and
agree, if they will be partakers of eternal life. This Oration was commended
of the Fathers.

The Bohemians answered: they had neither contemned the Church nor Councels,
and that they are come to manifest their innocence before the whole Church, and
required open audience, where the Laity may be present, their request was
granted them: and being demanded in what points they did differ from the
Church of Rome, they propounded four Articles.

1 First, all such as would be saved, ought of necessity to receive Communion
under both kinds of Bread and Wine.

2 All civil rule and dominion to be forbidden to the Clergy by the Law of
God.

3 That the preaching of the Word of God is free for all men and in all places.

4 Open crimes are in no wise to be suffered for the avoiding of greater evil.

One affirmed he heard sundry things of the Bohemians offensive to Chrstian
ears: one of them was, that they should preach that the invention of begging
Friars was diabolical. Then Procopius said, it is not untrue: for if neither
Moses, nor the Partriarcks before him, nor after him the Prophets, nor in the
new Law Christ nor his Apostles, did institute the orders of begging Friars,
who doubts but the Devils invented them, and that they are the work of
darkness, all the Council derided him, and Cardinal Iulianus labored to
prove that not only the Decrees of the Patriarcks, Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles: but also the Decrees which the Church should ordain to be the works
of God; yet the order of begging Friars may seem to be taken out of some part
of the Gospel: the Bohemians chose four Ministers to dispute for them, and
the Council chose four, the disputation continued fifty days, many things
were alleged on both parts, which we will discourse more at large when we come
to the Council of Basil.

The History of the most valiant and worthy Martyr of Christ, Sr John
Old-Castle, Knight, Lord Cobham.
AFter the true servant of Christ John Wickliffe six and twenty years most
valiantly had battelled with the great Antichrist of Europe, and his disguised
hosts of anointed hypocrites, to restore the Church again to the purity of
the Gospel, and was departed hence in Christ Anno 1387. he left a number of
godly Disciples, against whom Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury was as fierce as
ever Pharaoh, Antiochus, Herod, and Cayphas, and having called a Council about
the matter, they concluded it was not possible for them to make whole Christ's
coat, without seame (meaning thereby their patched Popish Synagoue) unless
certain great men were wrought out of the way which were chief maintainers of
the Disciples of Wickliffe: amongst whom the Lord Cobham was complained of for
a mighty maintainer of suspected preachers in London, Rochester, Hereford, that
he not only sent them thither, but maintained them with force and arms, and
that he believed otherwise of the Sacrament of the Altar, of penance, of
pilgrimages, of Image worshipping, and of Ecclesiastical power then the Church
of Rome taught, and it was concluded that process should go against him, but
first they would know the Kings mind: whereupon the Archbishop with his
Bishops, and a great part of the Clergy went to the King, and grievously
complained against the Lord Cobham: the king desired them, in respect of his
Noble stock, they should favorably deal with him, and that if it were possible
they should reduce him to the unity of the Church without rigor, and promised
he would seriously common the matter with him.

Anon the King sent for the Lord Cobham, and secretly admonished him to submit
himself to his mother the holy Church: he answered, I am ready to obey to you
most worthy Prince, for I know you an appointed minister of God, but touching
the Pope and spirituality, I owe them neither suit nor service, for I know by
the Scripture he is great Antichrist, the son of perdition, the adversary of
God, the abomination standing in the Holy Place: when the King heard this he
would talk no more with him, and when the Archbishop resorted to him again, he
gau^ him full authority to cite him, examine him and punish him: then the
Archbishop sent his chief somner to his house with citation, when he came
thither he durst not enter his gates without license, but returned without
doing his message: then the Archbishop got one John Butler, door k^eper of the
Kings Privy Chamber, to go with his Somner, who went to the Lord Cobham,
showing him it was the Kings pleasure that he should obey the said citation: he
answered, that in no case he would consent to those most devilish practices of
the Priests: after he sent another citation to be hanged upon the Cathedral
Church door of Rochester, and because he appeared not, excommunicated him:
and when he heard that he derided his proceedings, he threatened the seculer
power with curses and interdictions if they did not assist him, against that
seditious Apostata, Scismatick, and Heretic, troubler of a public peace,
enemy of the Realm, and adversary of holy Church: then he writ a Christian
profession of his Faith, and signed and sealed it: wherein he answered four of
the chiefest article^ that the Archbishop laid against him: then he took a copy
thereof and went to the King, it agreed in all points with the Apostles Creed:
and moreover that Christ is the only head of the Church, and that all that
have been, or shall be saved, are members of his holy Church, and that it is
severed into three estates: Priesthood, Knighthood, and Commons: and that it
is Gods will that one should aid and not destroy the other: the priests,
secluded from all worldliness, should conform their lives unto the example of
Christ and his Apostles, evermore occupied in teaching and preaching the
Scriptures purely; in giving wholesome Council of good living unto the other
two degrees of men, more modest also, more loving and lowly in spirit should
they be then any other sort of people: in Knighthood are all they that bear
sword by Law of office: these should defend Gods laws, so that the Gospel were
purely taught, reforming their lives according to the same, and secluding all
false preachers, they ought rather to hazard their lives then suffer wicked
decrees to blemish the word of God, and let the free passage thereof, whereof
heresies and scismes sprung: for they spring of nothing else, as I suppose:
which Constitutions craftily creep in by hypocritical lies for advantage:
they ought also to preserve Gods people from oppressors, tyrants and thieves:
and to see the Clergy supported so long as they teach purely, and pray rightly,
and minister the Sacraments freely: and if they do otherwise they are bound by
the law of God to compel them to change their doing, and to see all things
performed according to Gods ordinances.

The last is the common people, whose duties is to bear a good mind and true
obedience to their Kings civil Governors and Priests, their office is justly
occupied in their calling; whether it be merchandise, handicraft, or husbandry.
And I believe that the Sacraments of the Church are necessary to all believers:
so that they be truly ministered according to Christ's institution: I believe
in the Sacrament of the altar to be contain^d Christ's body under the forms of
bread and wine: and I believe the law of God to be most true and perfect, and
that they that follow it not in faith and works, one time or other, cannot be
saved: whereas he that seeks it in Faith, learneth it and delights in it,
and performs it in love, shall taste felicity everlasting.

Finally, that God will ask no other obedience then to his law, and if any
Prelate require more, or any other kind of obedience; he contemns Christ;
exalts himself above God, and becomes an open Antichrist, all these
premises I believe particularly: and generally all that God has left in holy
Scripture, desiring my most worthy King, that this my confession may be
examined by the most godly and learned of the Realm, and if it be found
agreeing to the verity, then let it be allowed and I holden for a true
Christian: and if it be proved otherwise, let it be condemned; provided that I
be taught a better belief by the word of God, and I shall most reverently obey
thereunto.

This being offered to the King, he would not receive it, but commanded it to
be delivered unto them that should be his Judges, then he desired that 100.
Knights and Esquires might be suffered to come upon his purgation, which he knew
would clear him of al heresies. Moreover, he offered himself, according to the
law of arms, to fight with an^ man living in the quarrel of his faith, the K.
and Council excepted, or y^ he would suffer any manner of correction that should
after the law of God be ministered to him: notwithstanding, the king suffered him
to be summoned in his privy Chamber, then he said he had appealed to the
Pope, and showed his appeal ready written: the King said he should not pursue
his appeal, but tarry in hold until the Pope allowed his apeale, and then
whether he would or no the Archbishop should be his Judge. And because he would
not be sworn to submit himself to the Church, and take what penance that the
Archbishop would enjoin him, he was arrested at the Kings commandment and led
to the Tower: then he caused the foresaid confession to be written in manner of
an Indenture, that at his answer he might give one copy to the Archbishop,
and keep the other himself; which he did do when he was shortly after
called before the Archbishop. The Bishops of Winchester and London said
moreover touching the Sacrament of Penance, We must forsake our sins and do
penance with true contrition to God, and confess them to Christ, and have
satisfaction in him, else can we have no salvation. Images pertain nothing to
Christian belief, but were permitted to be Kalenders to Laymen, to bring to
mind the passion of Christ, and martyrdom and good living of Saints. He that
worshippeth them, hop^th in help of them, or prefers one above another,
commits Idolatry: and I believe that every man living is a Pilgrim, either
toward bliss or pain; and he that will not keep the commandment of God,
though he go to all quarters of the world in pilgrimage, he shall be damned,
and the faithful shall be saved in Christ though they never go in
pilgrimage, as men use now-a-dayes to Canterbury, Walsingham, Compostell and
Rome, or any other place. Then the Archbishop said, We deny not but that there
are many good and Catholic things herein, but you are appointed this day to
answer other matters.

Whether do you believe that there is material bread in the Sacrament after
consecration, and whether a Christian be necessarily bound to confess his
sins to a Priest? The Lord Cobham said, he would answer no otherwise then he
had in his Writing. He said, take heed; for if you will not answer directly by
our law* we may openly proclaim you an heretic: notwithstanding, what
question any of the Bishops asked him, he would make no other answer, but bade
them resort to his Bill, he would stand to it unto death.

The Archbishop said, the holy Church of Rome followed the sayings of Saint
Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose, and of other holy Doctors that have determined in
these matters, which all christian men ought to believe and follow. Then he
said, I will believe all that the Church, which Christ instituted, decreed, or
what God has willed us to believe or do: but that the Pope and his Clergy
have power to determine such matters as stand not with Gods word, I will not
affirm. Then the Archbishop said he would send him Articles, and bade him
advise himself to answer them by Monday.

The latter examination of the Lord COBHAM.
Archb. YOu are excommunicated: the last time you were before me I gently
proffered to have assoyled you if you would have asked it, and yet I do the
same if you will humbly desire it, in manner as holy Church has ordained.


Cobh. I will not, for I never trespassed against you: and God says in the
second of Malachy, Maledicam benidictionibus vestris: and kneeling down, he
said, I s^ri^ue my self before you all: In my youth I offended thee, my Lord,
in pride, wrath gluttony covetousness and lechery: I have hurt many in mine
anger, and done many horrible sins: good Lord, I ask thee mercy; and
therewith weepingly stood up, and said aloude. Lo good people; for breaking
Gods laws they never cursed me, but for their own laws they most cruelly
handle me and others.


Archb. Then he examined him of his Christian belief.


Cobham. I believe all the Laws of God, and all is true that is contained in
the holy Scriptures: finally, I believe all that God would I should believe.


Archb. He asked an answer of the Bill he had sent him, especially how he
believed touching the Sacrament of the Altar.


Cobham. With the Bill I have nothing to do: but this is my belief touching
the Sacrament, That Christ sitting at his last supper with his Disciples, the
night before his death, he took Bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gave it
to his Disciples, and said, Take and eat it, this is my body that shall be
betrayed for you; do this in remembrance of me, etc.


Archb. Then he asked if it were bread after the consecration.


Cobh. I believe it is Christ's very body in the form of bread. Then said a
Doctor, If the sacramental words be uttered, there remains no bread, but it
is the only body of Christ. Then he said to one Master Whithead; you said
once to me that the sacred Host was not Chrsts body. I proved there was his
body, though Seculars and Friars could not therein agree, but held one against
another in that opinion. Then said many together with great noise, We say all
it is Gods body. and diverse with great anger asked him if it were bread after
the consecration. Then he looking earnestly upon the Archbishop, he said: Sir,
I believe surely that it is Christ's body in form of bread. Do not you do so?


Archb. Yes marry do I. And the Doctors asked him if it were only Christ's
body after consecration, and no bread.


Cob. It is both Christ's body and bread, as Christ on earth was both God and
man, and the invisible Godhead was hidden in the manhood, as one of your own
Doctors Eutiches says. As the self same Sacraments do pass by the operation
of the holy Ghost into a divine nature, and notwithstanding keep the property
still of their former nature: so that principal mystery declares to remain
one true and perfect Christ. Then they smiled one upon another, that the people
might judge him taken in an heresy: and diverse said with a great brag, it is
a foul heresy.


Archb. What bread is it? And the Doctors inquired of him whether it were
material, or not.


Cob. The Scripture makes no mention of material bread, therefore my faith
has nothing to do therewith: but I say and believe, that it is Christ's body
and bread. Christ says in the sixth of John, I am the living bread, and not the
dead bread. Then all with one voice said, it is an heresy. And one of the
Bishops said, it is an error manifest to say it is bread after the Sacramental
words once spoken, but Christ's body only. He said I am sure S. Paul was as
wise and more learned then you be and in 1. Cor. 10. calls it bread and not
Christ's body, but a means whereby we receive Christ's body. They said; Paul
must be otherwise expounded: for it is an heresy to say it is bread after the
consecration. He asked how they could make that good? They answered, it is
against the determination of holy Church.


Archb. We sent you a writing concerning the faith of this blessed Sacrament,
clearly determined by the Church of Rome our mother, and by the holy Doctors.


Cobh. I know none holier then Christ and his Apostles, and that determination
is none of theirs: for it stands not with the Scriptures but is clean
contrary. It has been the Churches but since she received the great poison
of worldly possessions, and not before. Then they asked him if he believed not
the determination of the Church. He answered no: for it is no God. In is but
thrice ment^oned in the Creed, in God the Father, and in God the Son, and in
God the holy Ghost: the birth, death, burial, resurrection and ascension has
none In for belief, but in him. Neither has the Church the Sacraments, the
forgiveness of sins, or resurrection, or eternal life any other In then in
the holy Ghost. Then one of the Lawyers said, But what is your belief
concerning holy Church? I believe the Scriptures be true, all that is grounded
upon them I believe, and I know it is Gods pleasure I should so do: but your
Lordly laws and idle determinations I do not believe; for you are none of
Christ's Church, as your deeds show, but very Antichrists, obstinately set
against his law and will: your laws are nothing for Christ's glory, but for
your own vainglory and abominable covetousness. They said in great ^ume
this was an exceeding heres^e not to believe the determination of holy Church.


Archb. Then he asked him what he thought holy Church.


Cobh. Holy Church is the number of them which shall be saved, of whom Christ
is head.


Archb. Can you tell who is of this Church?


Cobh. Yea truly can I. Then a Prior said, it is doubt to you who is thereof:
for Christ said noli iudicare; if you must not judge your neighbors, much less
your superiors. He answered, Christ says in the same Chapter, As the ill tree
is known by his ill fruits, so a false Prophet by his works. And he says in
John, Believe the outward doings. And again in John, Iustum Iudicium iudicate:
When we know the thing is true we may judge. And David says, Recte iudicate
filii hominum. As for your superiority; were you of Christ you would be meek
Ministers, and not proud superiors.

Then Doctor Walden said, You make no differences of judgments: so swift
Judges always are the learned Scholars of Wickliffe. He answered, your
judgments are preposterous, as the Prophet Esaias says, ye judge ill good, and
good ill: therefore your ways are not Gods ways, nor Gods ways your ways.
Before that virtuous man Wickliffe, whom you disdain, I will say before God and
man; before I knew the despised doctrine of his, I never abstained from sin,
but since I trust I have done otherwise: so much grace could I never find in
all your glorious instructions. Doctor Walden answered, It were not well with
me if so many learned and virtuous men, teaching the Scriptures, and the
examples of the Fathers so plenteous, if I had no grace to amend until I heard
the Devil preach. Hierome, says, he which seeks such suspected masters,
shall not find the midday, but the midday Devil. He answered, the Pharisees
your fathers ascribed Christ's miracles to Beelzebub, and his doctrine to the
Devil; and you, their natural children, have still the same judgment of his
faithful followers: they that reprove your vicious living must needs be
heretics, and when you cannot prove it by Scriptures, then your Doctors must
prove it. Then said he to them all, to judge you we need go no further then
your acts: Where find you in Gods law that you should thus sit in judgment,
and sentence every man to death as you do here daily? You have no ground in
Scripture but in Annas and Cayphas, which sat thus upon Christ, and upon his
Apostles after his ascension: you learned it not of Peter and John. A Lawyer
said, yes sir, Christ judged Judas. He answered, no; Christ judged him not,
he judged himself: Christ said indeed unto him, woe unto him for that
covetous act of his, as he does yet still to many of you; for since the venom
was shed in the Church, you never followed Christ, neither were perfect in his
law.


Archb. What mean you by that venom?


Cobh. Your possessions and Lordships: for there cried an Angel in the air,
as your own Chronicles mention, Woe, woe, woe, this day is venom shed into the
Church. Before that time almost all the Bishops were Martyrs, and few since;
but since that time one has put down another, one has poisoned another, one
has cursed another, and one has slain another, and done much more
mischiefs, as all the Chronicles ^elleth: and if all men consider this well,
Christ was meek and merciful, the Pope is proud and a tyrant; Christ was
poor and forgave, the Pope rich and a malicious manslayer; Rome is the neast
of Antichrist, and out of that neast proceeds all the disciples, of whom
Prelates, Priests, and Monks are the body, and these pill^ Friars are the tail
which covers his most filthy part. Then a Prior said, alack^^r, that is
uncharitably spoken. He answered, it is not only my saying, but the Propet
Esayes; He that preaches lies is the tail. As your Friars and Monks be like
Pharisees, divided in outward apparel and visages: so ye make division amongst
the people. Thus you, with such others, are the natural members of Antichrist.
Then he said unto them all; Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, you
shut the Kingdom of heaven from others, and enter not your selves, nor suffer
any other to enter: you stop up the ways with your traditions, therefore are
you the household of Antichrist. You will not let Gods verity to have passage,
fearing to have your wickedness reproved by such vain flatterers as uphold
your mischiefs: you suffer the common people most miserably to be seduced.


Archb. By our Lady sir, there shall none such preach in my Diocese as make
division amongst the poor Commons.


Cobh. Both Christ and his Apostles were accused of sedition making, yet were
they most peaceable men. Both Daniel and Christ prophecy that such a troublous
time shall come as has not been been before: this is partly fulfilled in your
days and doings; for many have you slain, and more will you slay if God
fulfill not his promise: if he shorten not your days scarcely should any
flesh be saved. Moreover, though Priests and Deacons, for peaching Gods word,
and ministering the Sacraments, with provision for the poor, be grounded in
Gods law, yet your other Sects have no ground thereof.

Then a Doctor of the law plucked out of his bosom a Writing, wherein was
four Articles, and examined him ^her^on: the first was touching the Sacrament
of the Altar, which he answered as before: the second, whether a man is bound
to con^esse himself to a Priest; he answered, a diseased or wounded man had
need have a true and wise Surgeon, knowing the ground and danger of the
same: therefore it is most necessary to be first shreeuen to God, which only
knows our diseases, and can help us. The laws of God are to be required of
a Priest which is godly learned: but if he be an idiot or vicious, that is my
Curate, I ought rather to fly from him then seek him, for I might sooner get
ill then good of him. The third was touching the authority of the Pope: he
answered, he that most followed Peter is next him in succession; but your
Lordly order esteems little the lowly behavior of Peter, nor the humble
manners of them that succeeded him until Siluester, which for the most part
were Martyrs: you let their good conditions go, and hurt not your self
therewith. ^ll know it, and yet you boast of Peter. Then said one of the
Doctors, then what say you of the Pope? He answered, he and you together make
an Antichrist: he is the great head, you Bishops, Priests, Prelates, and Monks
are the body, and the begging Friars the tail, for they cover the filthiness
of you both with their subtle sophistry. Never will I obey until I se^ you
with Peter follow Christ in conversation. The fourth was touching Pilgrimage to
Images: he answered, I owe them no service by the commandment of GOD,
therefore I will not seek them for your covetousness. You were best sweep
them fair from Cobwebs and Dust, or lay them up safe for catching hurt, or
bury them in the ground, as you do other aged people which are GODS Images.
It is a wonder that Saints being dead should be so covetous, needy, and
beggars, which in their life time hated covetousness and begging. I would all
the world knew it, With your shroeues and Idols, your fained Absolutions and
Pardons, you draw unto you the wealth and chief pleasures of all Christian
Realms. Then a Friar said, Will you not worship the Cross, as Saint Paul
says. God forbid I should rejoice in any thing but in the Cross of Christ.
Then did he spread his a^^es abroad, and said, This is a very Cross, and much
better then your wodden Cross* being it was created of GOD himself, yet will
not I seek to have it worshipped.

Then said the Bishop of London, yet wot you not how he died upon a
material Cross? He answered yea; and I wot also that our salvation came not
unto us by the material Cross, but alone and only by him which dyed
thereupon, and well wot I^ that Saint Paul rejoiced in none other cross, but
in Christ's passion and death only, and in his own suffering like persecution
with him for his verity. Then another said, Will you then do no honor unto
the holy Cross? Yes, it he were mine I would lay him by, least he took harm,
and were robbed of his goods, as he is now adays.


Bishop. Sir John, you have spoken many wonderful words, to the slanderous
rebuke of the whole Spiritualty, giving a great ill example to the common sort
here, to have us in the more disdain, and (...) spent mu^^ time in vain, as
far as I can see: well, we must be now at this short point with you, you
must either submit your self to the ordinance of holy Church, or else throw
your self into most deep danger, see to it in time, a^one ^lse it will be
too late.


Cobham. I know not to what purpose I shall submit my self* much more have you
offended me, then I ever offended you, in thus troubling me before this
company. And because he would not submit himself the Archbishop read ^he
definitive sentence.


Cobh. Though you Judge my body, which is but a wretched thing, yet, I am sure,
you can do n^ harm to my Soul, no more than Satan could do to the Soul of
Job. And touching my articles before rehearse^, I will stand to them unto death.
Then ^e tur^^^ himself unto the people, casting his hands abroad, saying with
a loud voice; Good people, beware of these men, else they will beguile you, and
lead you headlong to hell with themselves. Then he fell on his k^ees before them
all and prayed for his enemies, ho^ding up his hands, saying; Lord, for thy
mercy sake forgive my pursuers, if it be thy blessed will. Th^^ he was lead
again unto the Tower.


After, the Lord Cobham escaped out of the Tower by night, and ^^ed to Wales,
where he continued more than four years after.

In this year, 1416.
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury died, who had been a heavy troubler
of Christ's Saints in his time, he was so stricken in his tongue, that neither
he could swallow, nor speak, for a certain space before his death; this was
thought of many, to happen unto him, for that he so bound the word of God, that
it should not he preached in his days, such was the death of Steven Gardner.
These may be terrible spectacles for such as occupy their tongue and brains
to stop the course of Gods word: but his tyranny dyed not with him, but
succeeded with his Office, in Henry Chichley, and in more of the spiteful
Spiritualty. They confederated with the Lord Powis, a great governor in Wales,
feeding him with large gifts, and promises, an^ being (...) with Judas, under
pretense of amity* took the Lord Cobham, and sent him to London, where he was
imprisoned in the Tower again, and after, they condemned him again of Heresy
and Treason, according to the aforesaid Act of Parliament. He rendered thanks
to God that he had appointed him to suffer for his name. At his execution, he^
was laid upon an Hurdle, as a Traitor, and drawn into Saint Giles Field,
where^s they had set up a new pair of Gallows. When he was taken from the
Hurdle, he fell devoutly upon his knees, desiring God to forgive his enemies,
then stood up, and exhorted the multitude in most godly manner, to follow the
Laws of God, written in the Scripture, and to b^ware of such Preachers that
are contrary to Christ in their conuersations, with many other special
Councels; then was he hanged by the middle in chains, and so consumed alive in
the fire, praising the name of God so long as his life lasted, and ^o commended
his Soul to God, 1418.
and departed m^st Christianlike in the sixth year of the reign of Henry the
fifth. The people showed great dolor, but the Priest blasphemed and accursed
him, requiring the people not to pray for him but to judge him damned in Hell,
because he departed not in the obedience of the Pope.

The Council of Basell.
THE Council of Basell began, 1431.
which was most troublesome, and endured longer then any other Council, almost
17. years, wherein was concluded, as in the Council of Constance, that the
general Council was above the Pope. Unto this Council came the Emperor
Sygismund. Pope Martin dyed after he had summoned This Council, and Eugenius
the 4. succeeded Pope, who would have drawn the Council unto Bonony from
Basell, pretending the Greeks would come to the Council, and be united to the
west Church, and that they would not pass the Alp^s. And he cited the Fathers
of the Council unto Bonony, and they cited him again to be at the Council,
or his Emb^ssadours: Whereupon sprung a doubtful question amongst the Deuines
some held the Pope an Heretic, because he had contemned the commandment of
the Church; others* that he was an Heret^cke and relaps, and upon long
arguments, contentions, and fallings out, and when by no means ^e would allow
the Council of Basell, he was d^priued by the Council, and Amedeus Duke of
Sau^y chosen Pope.

The rest of the Story of the Bohemians.
THe Story of the Bohemians, being in this Treatise before set forth, until it
was agreed that the Bohemians chose four Ministers to dispute upon the four
Articles, and the Council chose four to dispute against them, at the day
appointed, Rochezantus, one of the four Ministers chosen by the Bohemians,
propounded the first Article, touching the Communion to be ministered in both
kinds, and desputed thereof three days in the forenoones. Then Venceslaus
disputed upon the second Article touching the punishment of sin, two days;
after whom Vlda^icus propounded and disputed upon the third Article two days,
touching the free preaching of the word of God Last of all, Peter Pain an
Englishman, disputed three days upon the fourth Article, touching civil
Dominion of the Clergy, and after, gave Copies of their di^putations unto the
Council, with hearty thanks that they were ^eard. The three last somewhat
inueyed against the Council, commending John Hus, and John Wickliffe, for
their Doctrine.

One Ragusio answered the first point, and (...) puted eight days thereon.
Egidius Carlerius answered the second point, by the space of four days. One
Henricus answered the third Article three days. One John Pollomarius answered
the fourth Articles, three days* the Bohemians still stood to their Articles.

At length the Council and the Bohemians were agreed, and receiving the
Communion in both kinds was permitted unto the Bohemians, and Articles drawn
under the hands and Seals of the Council of one part, and the Bohemians on the
other, concerning the other Articles.

After all this, 1428.
the Bohemians put up these petitions following unto the Council.

First, for the extirpation of diverse discentions, which will follow, amongst
our people, upon the (...) of the Communion, that you would grant an uniform
order of Communion unto all men under both kinds unto our Bishops, having
charge of Souls, and to their Uicars, and flocks: for this done by your
benefit, the whole Kingdom shall be comforted without measure, and
established in brotherly love, whereby an uniform obedience shall be
perpetually attributed to holy Church.

2 That to avoid the doubtfulnesse of many, which suppose that the Council
does suffer the said Communion under both kinds unto us, but for a time, as
neither profitable nor wholesome, we desire that you would confirm and continue
it by the bulls of your Letters.

3 We beseech you for the final defense, and obse^uation of all things
compounded, and for the good order in the Spiritualties, you would provide for
us a good and lawful Pastor* which shall seem to us most meet for our
Kingdom.

4 We desire you, for the worthy (...) of our Realm, that you will direct
Letters of the sacred Council, declaring to all Princes Seculer and
Spiritual, Cities and Communalties* according to the compositions.

5 We desire you* that in the discussing of the matter of the Communion under
both kinds, that you will proceed no otherwise then according to the Law of
God, the Order of Christ and his Apostles, the general Council and minds of
holy Doctors, truly grounded upon the Law of God.

6 We^ desire, that for the great affection of our people, you will give us the
liberty to communicate to ^oung children the Sacrament of the Supper; for if
thi^ use of Communicating be taken away, which our Kingdom, being godly moved
by the wr^tings of most great and holy Doctors, and brought in by examples,
has received as Catholic, and exercised now a long time, it would rise up to
an intolerable offense amongst the people, and their minds would be
grievously v^xed and troubled.

7 We require you, that you would permit, at least, the Gospels, Epistles, and
Creed, to be read in the Church, in our vulger tongue, to move the people to
devotion, for it has been so used of old time in the Church, and in our
(...).

8 We desire, that Prebends, and collacions of certain benefices o^ Cathedral
(...) Churches, may be annexed and incorporated unto the University of Prage,
that it may be increased and pre^erred.

9 We r^quire* that with all^are and study, you will watch and seek for that
long desired, and most necessary reformation of the Church, and Christian
Religion, and effectually labor f^r the rooting out of all public e^ils, as
well in the head as in the members, as you have often promised, in our Kingdom
in the Compositio^s, and as our fourth Article, touching the avoiding all
public evils, does exact and require.

In this Council was ordained the feast of the Conce^tion of our Lady, and the
feast of the Uisitation of our Lady.

In this Council there was diligent ca^e about reformation of the Church, that
through every Church apt and meet Ministers might be app^inted, which may
shine in virtue and knowledge, to the glory of Christ, and the healthful
edifying of the Christian people, whereunto the multitude of expectatiue gifts
have been a great impediment; hereby often times, unmeet Ministers are
appointed for the Churches, and they give occasion to desire another death,
and many contentions are mo^ed a^ongst the servants of God, and the ambition
and greedy desire of pluralities maintained, and the substance of Kingdoms
consumed, poor men suffer vexations, by running to Rome* they are often by the
way robbed, murdered, afflicted with diverse plagues, and having spent their
pa^rimony, left them by their parents, are constrained ^o live in extreme
poverty. Many crave benefices which have no just title, and get the same, and
such as have most craft and subtlety to deceive, and greatest substa^^^ to
contend in the Law, do great wrongs: the Eccle^^asticall order is confounded,
whiles every man's Judgment is not preserved; and the Pope, by chalenging and
taking upon him too much, the Office of Superiors is drowned from more
weighty and fruitful matters, and intends not to the guiding and correction
of the inferiors, as public utility requires, all which things bring a
great confusion unto the Clergy, to the great prejudice of Gods true worship,
and the public salvation.

THE SIXTH SECTION OF this Ecclesiastical History.
THIS Story following, and that before confuteth the vain opinion of some,
that this Religion now used, has risen but twenty or thirty years since,
and manifests that it has been spread in England this 220. years, and often
sparkled before that time, although it flamed not so as it has done within
this 100. years and more, w^o although they were not so strongly armed in
their cause, as of late years, yet were they warriors in Christ's Church, and
although they gave back for tyranny, yet Judge the best, and refer the cause
to God, who euealeth all things according to his determinate will and time,
there has bin no realm more fertile for Marters then England. Oxford was as a
continual spr^ng of Christian knowledge whence, as out of the Troiane horse,
has come so many invincible wit^esses of the truth, amongst whom William
Tailor, Master of (...), has not deserved the least praise, being a fauorer of
Wickliffe* who because he had written cer^ain things against the invocation of
saints, and many other matters, after he had recanted nine articles, returned
unto the right way, and with a marvelous constancy, (...) bu^^t in Smithfield
the 7 of March.

John Florence, 1422.
a Turner of Shelton, in the Di^cesse of Norwich, was attached because he held
and taught that the Pope and Cardinals have no power to const^tute Laws, that
nor day is to be kept holiday, but Sunday. That there ought to be no fast, but
of the Qua^uor temporum. That Images are not to be worshipped* not lights to be
set before them. Not (...) go on Pilgrimage, nor offe^ for the dead, or with
women that are purified. That Curates should not claim Tithes by any exaction,
and that they should be divided amongst the poor. That such as swear by their
life, or power, except they repent, shall be dam^^d. He was brought before the
Chancellor, and forced to abjure, and was sworn not to hold or teach any
thing contrary to the determination of the Church of Rome, nor to help or aid
any that should so do. He was enjoined for penan^^ thr^^ Sund^ies Solemn
Procession in the Cathedral Church of Norwich, to be whipped before all the
people, and three other Sundaies about his Parish Church of Shelton, bare
f^^ted, and bare necked, his body being covered with a canu^s shirt, and
canu^s briches, carrying in his hand a Taper of a pound weight, and so was
dismissed.

Richard Belward of Erisam, in the Diocese of Norwich, was accused for
holding, and teaching, that Ecclesiastical Minist^re and Ordinaries, have no
power to excommunicate; and though the Bishop excommunicate any, God does
absol^e them. And that he held the opinion of Sir John Oldcastle. And that such
as go on Pilgrimage, offering to Images, are excommunicated, because they
ought to give to the poor which are alive, and not to the dead. And that the
Curates sell God on Easter day, when they receive Offerings, before they
minister the Sacraments. And that he councelled ^^uerse women that they should
not offer for the dead, nor with women that were puri^^^^* and for that he
called his neighbors fools for not learning his sect, and that they of (...)
sect were able to confute all others, and that we ought not to pray unto the
Saints (...) heaven, but only to God, and that he keept schools of Lolardie
in Dichingham, (...) that a Parchment maker brings him books from London,
containing (...) Doctrine. The Bishop of Norwich si^ting in Judgment upon him,
he denied his articles, and was purged by (...) of his neighbors, swearing
that he would not teach or defend any thin^ contrary to the Church of Rome, and
the aforesaid parchment-maker was likewise accused upon the aforesaid Artic^es
who d^nyed them, and was likewise purged by his neighb^urs, and sword in like
manner. Also sir Hugh Pie Chaplen of L^dney was likewi^e accused before the
said Bishop of Norwich, for holding that the people ought not to go on
pilgrimage, and that people ought not to give alms to Images, but to the poor
That the Image of the Cross, and other Images are not to be worshipped, and
that he had cast the Cross of Brom hold into the fire to be burnt, which he
took from one of Ludney, which he denied, and purged himself by three Laymen,
and three Priests and was sworn, as before.

In this year, Henry the fifth sent a most cruel Commission unto John Exeter,
1428.
and Iacolet German, keeper of the Castle of Colchester, for the apprehending
of sir William White Priest, and Thomas Chaplin of Settling in Northfolke; and
William Northamton Priest, and all other suspected of Lolardy, and to commit
them to prison, by virtue of which Commi^^ion, six persons were attached in
Bu^gay of Norwich, whose names were so defaced through antiquity, that there
remained but three names in the worn book to be red, to wit, John Teaderton
in Kent, Bartholomew Monk of Ensham in Norfolk, Corneleader* a ma^ie^ man;
these three were in the custody of the Duke of Norfolk, in the Castle of
Fremingham. We find also in the Diocese of Norfolk, and Suffolk, specially
in the towns of Bechels, Ersham, and Ludney within the space of three or four
years, 120. men and women, which sustained great vexation for the profession
of Christ's Faith, whose names are recited in the book at large; the Articles
that were generally objected against them, were; That auriculer confession is
not to be made unto a Priest, but unto God, because no Priest has no power to
absolve a sinner. That no Priest can make the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
and that material bread remains after consecation. That every true Christian
man is a Priest to God. That none is bound, under pain of damnation, to Lent,
or other days prohibited. That the Pope is Antichrist, and his Prelates
Antichrists disciples; and that the Pope has no power to bind and lose on
earth; and that it is lawful to do any work, except sin, upon the holy
days. That Priests may have wives lawfully. That the Communications of the
Prelates are not to be regarded. That it is not lawful to swear in private
causes. That men ought no go on Pilgrimage, nor give honor unto Images of the
Cross, of our Lady, or other Saints. That holy water has no more virtue then
other water. That the death of Thomas Becket was neither holy nor meritorious.
That relickes, as dead men's bones, ought not to be worshipped, or dug out of
graves, or set up in Shrines* That prayers made in all places are acceptable to
God. That men ought not to pray to any Saints, but only to God. That bells, and
ringing in the Church were ordained to fill the Priests purses. That it is no
sin to withstand the Ecclesiastical precepts. That the Catholic Church is
only the Congregation of the elect; they did so agree in uniform faith, that
whatsoever one did hold, all did maintain.

William White, being a follower of John Wickliffe, yet labored continually,
unto the glory of his spoute Christ, by reading, writing, and preaching. The
principal points of his Doctrine were these which he was forced to recant at
Canterbury.

That men should seek for forgiveness of sins only at Gods hands, that the
wicked living of the Pope, and his holiness, is nothing else but a devilish
estate, and heavy yoke of Antichrist: therefore an enemy to Christ's truth, that
men ought not to worship Images or other Idolatrous paintings, nor the holy men
which are dead. That the Romish Church is the figtree that Christ cursed,
because it brought forth no fruit of the true belief. That such as wear
Coules, or are anointed, and shorn, are the Lance-knights, and soldiers of
Lucifer, and that all of them, because their lamps are not burning, shall be
shut out when the Lord Christ shall come: after his said recantation he was
much more stronger in Christ, and confessed his error and offense, and busying
himself in preaching and converting the people to the doctrine of Christ in
Norfolk, he was apprehended by virtue of the Kings letters aforesaid, and
brought before the Bishop of Norwich, by whom he was contemned of 30. Articles
and burned the said year in Norwich, who was of so devout and holy life that
all the people had him in great reverence. One Margery wright confessed, if any
Saints were to be prayed unto, she would rather pray unto him then any other,
when he was come to the stake, thinking to open his mouth to exhort the people,
one of the Bishops servants struck him in the mouth. Thus he received the
Crown of Marterdome, to the grife of all good men in Norfolk; his wife
following his steps, by ^er teaching, confirmed many in the truth. Wherefore
she suffered much trouble and punishment that year. By the said Bishop the
same year also was burned father Abraham of ^olchester, and John Waddon
Priest, for the like Article.

Amongst them that were arrested, and caused to abjure; in this year* as
aforesaid* was Thomas Pie, and John Mendham of Aldbor^ough, who being convicted
upon diverse Articles before mentioned, were joined penance six whippings
about the (...) Church of Alborrough, before a solemn Procession, six
several Sundaies; and three whippings three several Market days about the
Market Place of (...) heads, necks, legs, and feet bare* their bodies only
covered with their (...) and breeches, either of them carrying a taper in his
hand, of a pound waigh^, which t^pe, the last Sunday after the Penance (...),
they should devoutly offe^ unto the high Altar of the Church of Alborrough, at
the time of the ^ffe^tory of the high Mass; and that going about the Market
pl^ce aforesaid, they shall make four stays* every one to receive devoutly
three whips, and if they would not obey this monition, they were to be cited to
appear before the Bishop, to show cause why they should not be
excommunicated, and to receive such punishment as Justice shall provide in that
behalf, this was their (...) of penance, howbeit some were often more cruelly
handled, and after banished out of the Dioces: and others were more stra^ly
used by l^ng imprisonment, whereof we will briefly rehearse one or two for
example.

John Beuerley, alias Bat^ile, a labourer, having lye^ long in Irons, and
having nothing proved against him, the Commissary made him swear, that every
year after he would confess is slune, once a year unto his Curate, and
receive the Sacrament at Easter, and for his penance, the Friday, and Saturday
next following, he should fast br^ad and water, and upon the Saturday be
whipped from the Bishops Palace (...) Norwich, about all the streets, and the
Market place, having in his hand a wax candle of two pence, to offer to the
Image of the Trinity, after he had done his penance; and because he had eaten
flesh on Easter day and was not shriuen in Lent, nor received on Easter day,
the Judge enjoined him he should fast Tuesday. Wednesday, and Friday, in
Whitsun week, having but one meal a day of Fish and other white meats, and
depart out of the Dioces, and never come there again.

John Skilley of Flixton Miller, was forced to abjure, for holding the Articles
aforesaid, and for receiving certain godly men into his house, had a most
sharp penance* seven years imprisonment in the Monastery of Langly. and to
fast with bread and water, every Friday, and to appear every Wednesday in the
beginning of Lent, and every Monday, and Thursday for two years after the
seven years, before the Bishop, his successor, and Commissary in the
Cathedral Church of Norwich, together with other penit^ntiaries, to do open
penance for his offense, diverse others the same year were forced to
abiuration and penance.

In this next year, 1429.
in the same Register, were sixteen, or seauenteene, that were examined, and
did penance likewise, amongst whom was John Baker, otherwise called Usher
Tunstall, who for having a book with the Pater noster, Aue, and Creed in
English, and for other Articles of Fasting, Confession, and invocation, was
constrained to abjure, and do such penance as others did before him.

Another was Margerie Ba^kster, wife of Willam Backster, against whom, one
Ioane Cliffe and was compelled by the Bishop to depose. First, that she bad her
take heed of swearing, else a Be would sting her tongue, and venime her
soul: and that she rebuked her for saying Pater nosters to the Cruci^ixe, and
Aue Mary's to our Lady; saying, you will do ill in (...), or praying to such
Images, and that God will give no more reward for such prayers, then a ^endle,
put under the foot, will give light in the night, saying, that lewd wrights
of stocks hew such Crosses and Images, and lewd Painters gleere them with
colors, and opened her arms, and told her, this is the true Cross of
Christ: And that she said, if every Sacrament were God and the very body of
Christ, then 1000. Priests and more, do every day make a 1000. such Gods, and
eat them, and void them out of their hinder parts, filthily stinking under
every hedge, where you may find many such Gods. It shall never be my God, it
was falsely and deceitfully ordained by the Priests, to induce simple people to
Idolatry. for it is only material bread. And that Thomas of Canterbury, whom
the people cal^ Saint Thomas, was a false Traitor, and damned in Hell. And that
the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and especially the Bishop of
Norwich, and others that support Heresies, and Idolatries, shall shortly have
the same, or worse mischief so fall upon them, then that cursed man Thomas of
Canterbury had, for they cursedly dec^iae the people with false m^mmetries, to
extort money to maintain their pride, riot, and idleness, and have slain the
true Preachers or Go^^ Law. And that she said, that none was bound to fast in
Lent, or other days appointed. and that it was lawful to eat flesh, and
other meats upon the said days that Pope S^luester made the Lent. And that
William White was a good man, and falsely condemned, and at his execution, when
he would have exhorted the people, a Devil, one of Bishop Caiphas his
servants, stroc^e him on the lips, that he could not declare the will of God.
And that she taught her not to go to Pilgrimage, to the Lady of Walsingham,
or any other Saint or place. And that she desired this deponent, and her maid,
to come in the night to her chamber, to hear her husband read the Law of
Christ unto them. And that she said, that the people did worship Devils which
fell from Heaven with Lucifer, and entered into the Image which stand in the
Churches, so that the people which worship Images ^ommit Idolatry. And that
holy bread and water are but trifles. And they are excommunicated that first
ordained bells, And that the Saturday after Aswednesday, she had a pot seething
over the fire, with a piece of Baken and Otmeale seething in it. Others also
were sworn, which confirmed the former depositions, but we finds no mention
in Regester what became of her.

Diverse good men, this year were accused by the deposition of one William
Wright, their names appear in the book at large. And the said William Wright
deposed that it is read in the Prophecies amongst the Lollards, that their sect
shall be, in manner, destroyed, yet at the length it shall prevail, and have
the victory against all her enemies.

John Burrell, servant to Thomas Moon of Ludney, 1430.
in the Dioces of Norwich, was apprehended, and it was objected against him,
besides the Articles before mentioned, that he held that the Catholic
Church, is the Seules of every good Christian. That Lent, and other
Fasting-dayes, were ordained of the Priests, and not of God: and that men may
eat flesh, or fish indifferently upon those days: That Pilgrimage ought not
to be made, but to the poor. That it is not lawful to swear, but in c^se of
of life and death. That Masses, and prayers for the Souls of the dead are
vain, and that the dead are either in Heaven, or Hell, for there is no
Purg^tory, but this world. He was forced to (...) and suffer like punishment as
before.

Thomas Moon of Lud^ey was apprehended, and the Articles aforesaid laid
against him, especially that he had received, comforted, and supported diverse,
upon which he being con^^ct, was forced to abjure, and receive like penance.
Robert Grigges, of Martham was brought before the Bishop for the Articles
aforesaid, especial^y for affirming that the Sacrament of confirmation by the
Bishop did avail nothing to salvation, that it was no sin to withstand the
ordinances of the Church of Rome, that holy bread and water were but trifles,
and that they were the worse for the con^urations and characters made over
them, he was forced to abjure and suffer penance as aforesaid.

John Finch of Colchester, was taken in Ipswich, and brought before the Bishop,
and being convicted of the aforesaid Articles, was enjoined penance three
whippings three several Sundaies in solemn Procession about the Cathedral
Church of Norwich, and three whippings about the Market place, three principal
market days; his head, neck, and ^eete bare, his body covered only with a
short shirt, with a taper of wax of a pound weight in his hands, which the
next Sunday after his penance, he^ should offer unto the Triuitie, and every
Ashwednesday, and Monday, and Thursday three year after, he should appear
before the Ordinary, in the Cathedral Church, to do open penance amongst other
penitontiar^es.

About the same time, shortly after the Coronation of King Henry the sixth, one
Richard Houeden a wool winder, and Citizen of London, was crowned with
Martyrdom, whenby no persuasions he could be drawn from the opinions of
Wickliffe, as Fabian writes, he burned hard by the Tower of London.

Nicholas, Canon of Eye, was brought before the Bishop of Norwich, 1431.
and many witnesses being sworn against him, they appointed one to speak for
them all. First, that on Easter day, all the Parish going of Procession, he
went the contrary way, deciding them, and meeting them. He confessed it, and
^houg^t he did well therein. And that he should say; If the Sacrament of the
Alter be very God, and very man, then God may be put in a small room, as when
it is in the Pri^sts mouth. And why may not we (...) as well upon F^^daies and
other prohibited days, as the Priests eat the flesh and blood of our Lord
every day. To which he answered, he thought he had spoken well therein.

Item, that on Corpus Christi day, at the elevation of high Mass, when all
kneeled down, and held up their hands, and did reverence to the Sacrament, he
went behind a pillar, turned his face from the Altar, and mocked them. He
affirmed, he thought he did well in so doing.

Item, when his moth^r would lift up his right hand to cross himself from the
(...) and assaults of the Devil, he mocked her. This, he thought, it was
well done.

Item upon All-ballend day, at the elevation of the Mass, when many lighted
torches, (...) them up to the Altar, and kneeled down there, in honor of the
Sacrament, he standing behind the Priest with a fozeh, turned his back to
the Priest, and would (...) no ^euerence. He said, he did well therein.

Item, that he said, he doubted whether in the Sacrament of the Altar were the
very body of Christ or no. This Article he confessed to be true.

Item, that he believed that a man ought not to confess his sins to a
Priest. This Article he also confessed. After, he was convicted, and enjoined
for penance three whippings about the Cloister of the Cathedral Church of
Norwich, before a solemn Procession, barefooted and bare headed, as the
aforesaid ponitentiaries, and to be kept in prison until the Bishop came into
the Dioces, least he should enuenoms the flock. Thus you have the troubles,
which in the aforesaid four years, happened in Norfolk and Suffolk, having
showed certain notable examples, sufficient to declare the rest, for their
opinions, neither their penance did differ, otherwise then by these examples
may be seen.

Thomas Bagley Priest, Uicar of Malden, being a valiant Disciple, and adherent
of Wickliffe, was condemned by the Bishops of Heresy, at London, about the
midst of Lent, and was disgeaded, and burned in Smithf^eld.

The same years was Paul Craws a Bohemian, taken at Saint Andrews, by the
Bishop, and delivered to the Seculer power, to be burned, for holding contrary
opinions touching the Sacrament of the Altar, the worshipping of Saints,
auriculer confession, with other of Wickliffes opinions.

Thomas Rhedon a Frenchman, 1436.
a Carmelits Friar, which take their name of Mount Carmelus, came with the
Uenitian Ambassadors into Italy, trusting that he should find there some, by
whose good life he might be edified, but the success of the matter did
frustrate his hope, for he found nothing but hypocritie, and gold and silver
in stead of heavenly gifts; pomp and pride reigned in place of godliness, in
steed of learning and study, flo^h^ulnesse and superstition, and for
Apostlolike simplicity tyranny and hautinesse; they did so pass all measure
and patiencs, that he could by no means refrain his tongue, in so great
corruption of the Church, and by continual preaching, got great envy and
hatred. The Rulers began to consult together, by what means they might
circumuent this man's life, for it is a continual custom amongst the Prelates,
that if any man displease them, and speak any thing which is hurtful so their
lucre, by and by they frame Articles of some heresy against him, ouerwhelme
him with suspicion, seek to entangle him with questions, and so condemn him,
and destroy him. This is their godl^nesse and peaceable order: they gathered
these Articles against him. That the Church lacks reformation: That it shall
be punished, and reformed: That (...), Jews, Turks, and Moors shall be
converted unto Christ in the latter days: And that abominations are used at
Rome: That the unjust excommunication of the Pope is not to be feared, and
those which do not observe the same, do not sin: Eugenius was Pope, then
this good man Thomas Rheden was taken and brought before him, and from thence
to prison, and after sundry grievous torments was brought before the Judges,
and was condemned to be burned four years after he came to Rome.

In this year the marvelous invention of Printing was first found out, by one
John Guttenbergh in Strawsborrow, and afterward by him made perfect in Ments,
our days declare how profitable this has been unto all the world: if we
consider that thereby ignorance is utterly banished, the truth declared, and
the Pope and Antichrist utterly subverted, which could never have been, if this
most worthy Science had not been found out, for before Books were so scarce,
and at such excess price, that few could thereby attain to knowledge: herein
the prophecy of the Sybils is fulfilled, that Flax and Lime should overthrow
Antichrist.

Reynold Peacock, 1457
Bishop of Chichester, was for his godliness and profession of the Gospel
afflicted and tormented, and made to recant, and after put to death in prison:
he was brought before Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth, in which
Convocation the Duke of Buckingham was present: whereas besides many other
Articles, the presence of bread in the Sacrament was laid unto Pecock; insomuch
that the Sacrament, the knot of amity, ordained by Christ, to the great
comfort of the Church, through the envy of Satan, it turned into a matter of
most grievous discord, that no matter has continued so many years more
pernicious to man's salvation: He declared many things worthy of a good Divine:
they labored for their dignity and gain, and so much the more earnestly,
because they had gotten an Adversary, whose authority the higher it was in
the Church, i^ would bring the greater ruin of their tyranny and estimation
among the people. First, the matter was attempted by private Coloquies; after
by a terrible Judgment, threatening present death, with threatening
exhortations, mingled with flattering promises, granting him further time to
consult, that the delay of death might make his life the sweeter: They gave him
hope of his life and Dignity if he would recant, till at length his mind
began to quail: by and by a recantation was made by the Bishops, the effect
whereof follows. Which when he declared unto the people, he did so pronounce
that he was carried again to prison, from whence he could not be delivered
but by death: The Articles that were mentioned in the Recantation to be
recanted were, that first it is not necessary to believe that CHRIST after his
death descended into Hell, that it is not necessary to Salvation to believe in
the Catholic Church, nor to believe the Communion of Saints, neither the body
material in the Sacrament: and that the universal Church may e^re in matters
pertaining unto Faith; and that it is not necessary to salvation to believe
the general Council.

We showed before in the latter end of the Council of Basil, how Eugenius was
deposed, and Foelix Duke of Sauoy elected Pope. Whereupon arose great discords.
Eugenius sent his Orators into Germany, to persuade them to infringe the
Council of Basil, and the Dolphin of France, set on by the said Eugenius, led
an army of five and twenty thousand men into Alsatia, and laid siege unto
Basil to disturb the Council, having there a great conflict with the
Germans with great slaughter, whereby the Council could not be kept any
longer in Germany, but in France through the pragmaticall sanction of the
French King After Eugenius brought to pass by the Emperor, and his Orators of
which Aeneas Siluius was one, that they were content to give over the Council
of Basil. Frederick of Austridge not being yet Emperor, but laboring for the
Empire, brought to pass that Foelix, which was chosen Pope in the Council of
Basil, was content to resign his papacy unto Nicholas the eight, successor to
Eugenius, of the which Nicholas, the said Frederick was confirmed Emperor at
Rome, and there crowned in the year one thousand four hundred fifty and one.

This Pope, to gather great sums of Money, appointed a Iubile in the year of
our Lord 1450. there resorted great number of people to Rome, more then at any
time before were seen there. At which time, as there were a great sort of
people going to Mount Uaticane, to behold the Image of our Savior, which they
had there to show to Pilgrims, a Mule of the Cardinals of Saint Mark coming
that way, the people for multitude being not able to void the way, one or two
falling upon the Mule, there was such a throng, that two hundred men and three
horses were strangled upon the bridge, and many fell over into the water and
were drowued: wherefore the Pope caused the small houses to be plucked down,
to make the Bridge broader. In the year 1453. Constantinople was taken by the
Turks.

In the year one thousand four hundred fifty five, when the death of Pope
Nicholas was published, the Germans bewayling their miserable estate,
persuaded the Emperor that he should be no longer under the Popes obedience,
except they first obtained certain things touching the Charter of Apeales,
showing that they were in worse case then either the Frenchmen or Italians,
and as it were their Servants, and especially of the Italians: that they alone
had not the use of their Laws, and that the French Nation had not made their
suit in vain unto their King, against the exactions of the Popes, by whom they
were defended, which also provided decrees for the liberty of his people: The
Emperor promised, he would provide for them, no less then the King of
France had done for the Frenchmen. But Aeneas Siluius brake off the matter,
saying; Though there be variance amongst Princes in weighty matters, yet peace
may be made again: but between the Prince and the Common people, there is
always mortal hatred, and because he should be Successor unto the Pope; he
concluded, he thought it better to accord to the Pope, then to follow their
desires, whose minds are led with covetousness, rather then by reason: and the
Emperor chose him Ambassador to Pope Calixtus, to swear unto him in his
Name, and to promise the absolute obedience of all Germany. Thus twice
Fridericke of Austrich contemned and derided the Germans, frustrating them of
their native ordinances, and brought them into subjection under the Pope, which
was the cause that seven years before his death, he caused his Son
Maximillian to be crowned King of the Romans, least after his death the
Empire should be transported unto another Family, as it afterward came to
pass. Whereupon Germany being in this miserable poverty, and grievous
subjection of the Popes tyranny and polling, with tears and sighs lamenting
their estate, continued so almost unto Luthers time, as those Histories
hereafter do testify.

The Ambassador of the Archbishop of Maydenburge, Henry Token, writes, that
in the Council of Basil, the Archbishop of Lions did declare, that in Pope
Martines time, there came out of France to the Court of Rome, nine millions of
Gold, which was gathered by the Bishops and Prelates, besides the poor Clergy,
which daily without number run unto the Court of Rome, carrying with them all
their whole substance.

The Arch-byshoppe of Turonne said, also at Basil, that three Millions of Gold
in his time came to Rome in fourteen years of the Prelates, besides the
poor Clergy, which daily run to that Court. Let the man which fears God,
judge what a devouring Gulf this is, a million contains ten hundred thousand.

Sir Roger Ounley followed the Lord Cobham, and Sir Roger Acton being a Knight
of like Nobility and Order, and pertaker of the like cause: a man endewed with
like valiantness and godliness, whom we read in certain Annals to be hanged
for the truth, 1441.

Although there have been many Women which have followed their spouse Christ
by torments, banishment, and death; yet the first that comes to our hands,
is Elinor Cobham, a Woman, nothing degenerating from her stock, kindred and
name, albeit we can find no other thing of her but for suspicion of heresy,
that is to say, for the love and desire of the truth, she was by the papists
banished into the I^e of Man, whom a few years after there followed a woman,
who for her constancy and virtue was greatly to be praised, being mother of the
Lady Young, 1490.
she perseuered unto the fire with a stout and manly courage, for the
profession of the Gospel, and was burned.

Hieronimus Sauonarola, being singularly well learned, and a Monk in Italy
preached sore against the evil life of the spirituality, especially of his
own order, saying they were the springs of all mischiefs, and by the help of
certain learned men, began to seek reformation in his own order.

The Pope fearing him, being in great reputation amongst all men, least he
should diminish his authority, he ordained his Uicar to reform this matter.
But the said Hierome withstood him always: wherefore he was accursed, yet he
left not off preaching, but threatened Italy, with the indignation of GOD, and
prophesied that the Land should be overthrown, for the pride and wickedness
of the people, and for the untruth and hypocrisy of the Clergy, which came to
pass when King Charles came to Rome, and besieged Pope Alexander that he was
forced to make composition with him.

Because the said Hierome would not leave preaching, he was commanded to
appear before the Pope to give account of his new learning, but he went not.
Then was he again forbidden to preach, and his learning condemned as false
and seditions, whereby he left off preaching: But when the people ^ore hungered
for Gods Word, and were instant upon him that he would preach again, 1496
he began again to preach in Florence; many exhorted him to the contrary,
but he regarded it not but went forward freely.

When the Pope and his Shauellings heard thereof they were greatly inflamed
against him, and cursed him as an obstinate heretic: yet he proceeded in
teaching the people, saying men ought not to regard such curses which is
against the true doctrine and the common Prophets; for by preaching we should
be learned and amended, Christ's Kingdom enlarged and the Kingdom of the
Devil overthrown. He desired to teach no other thing then the pure word of
God, 1498.
often protesting, that all men should certify him if they heard him teach any
thing contrary thereunto: for in his conscience he knew nothing which he had
taught but the pure word of God. What his doctrine was, may easily be judged by
his books he wrote. After that he was taken, with two Friars with him which
favored his learning, named Dominick and Siluester, and carried to prison,
where he wrote a godly meditation upon the most comfortable one and fiftieth
Psalm; wherein he excellently described the strife betwixt the flesh and
spirit. The Popes Legates came to Florence, and called forth these three good
men, threatening them maruellously, but they continued still constant. Then they
gathered Articles against them, whereupon they were condemned, and were first
hanged up openly in the marketplace, after burned to ashes, and the ashes cast
into the river of Ar^e.

This man foreshewed of the destruction of Florence, 1499.
Rome, and the revenues of the Church, and that the Turks and Moors in the
latter day should be converted to Christ, and that one like unto Cyrus should
pass the Alps into Italy, and utterly destroy it.

Philip Norice an Irishman, professor at Oxford, though he was not burned, yet
he was long time troubled with the religious rout.

Thomas Norice for the profession of the Gospel was by the Bishop condemned
and burned in Norwich. 1507.


Elizabeth Sampson was conuented in the Consistory of London for saying our
Lady of Wildesdon was a burnt arst else and stock; 1508.
and if she could help men and women which go to her on pilgrimage, she would
not have suffered her tail to be burnt: and why would she or the Lady Crome
that puppet, be worshipped? It were better to give alms to the poor then to
go on pilgrimage, and that she called the Image of S. Savior, Sin Savior
with Kite lips, and that she said she could make as good bread as that which
the Priest occupied, and that it was not the body of Christ, for that Christ
could not be both in heaven and earth at one time: wherefore she was compelled
to abjure.

One Thomas, a Priest of Norwich, was burned in the village of Eckels. When he
was in prison, 1510
by persuasions, he was led away from his former opinions, wherefore for
penance he went to be burned upon sharp hurdles made of Thorns.

Ioane Baker of S. Margets in new Fish-streete in London, 1511
for saying to the Parish Priest of Bow, that the Crucifixe was not to be
worshipped, and that she was sorry she had gone so many times on pilgrimage to
S. Savior and others, being they were but Mammots and false Gods, and that she
could hear a better Sermon at home then at Paul's Cross; and that she said,
the Lady Young died a Martire, and that Sampsons Wife was punished for saying
the truth, and that the Pope has no power to forgive sins, she was
constrained to abjure.

One Thomas Bingy, an old reverend man, was burned at Norwich, because he had
not received the Sacrament in 14. years, and abhorred the Popish kind of
administration thereof.

One Pope, 1512.
a Weauer in Eye, an old man, about the quarrel of the Sacrament, was martired.

About the same time, one Peake was burned at Ipswich, because he gave one of
the Sacrament Cakes unto a Dog, the Dog was burned in the fire with him, whereat
he laughed, saying; they did the Dog great wrong, because he was not abiured:
for it was the manner, that those which they called Heretics, might be saved
if they would recant.

Complaints of the Germans to Maximillian the Emperor, against the Popes
oppression.
FIrst, the Popes think themselves not bound to observe the Bulls and
privileges granted by their Predecessors, but will dispense with, and rebuke
the same at the instance of every vile person. That the election of Prelates is
often put back, and the election of Presidentship of mony-places obtained with
great cost: as the church of Spire and Hasels, whose Bull for the election of
their President, is made frustrate in the life of him that granted it.

That the greatest Ecclesiastical Dignities, are reserved for Cardinals and
Notaries.

That expectatiue Aduousons are granted without number, so that much Money is
laid out for such Aduousons, and in going to Law for them: whereupon is this
proverb; He that will have an Aduouson at Rome, must have 100. or 200. pieces
of Gold for the obtaining thereof, that he need no^ to prosecute Law.

That yearly Revenues are exacted without mercy, for new Offices and new
Servants: That the rule of Churches, are given at Rome to them that are more
fit to feeds Mules: That new indulgences are granted with reuocation of the
old, to scrape Money together.

That tenths are exacted, by pretense of making war against the Turk and no
expedition follows thereon; and that the causes which might be determined in
Germany, are carried unto the Court of Rome.

That it is intolerable to the Germans to pay so great A^mats for the
confirmation of the Bishops and Archbishops, where the Archbishop of Ments
was wont to pay but 10000. Florens for his confirmation, It was after augmented
to 20000. Florens, then to 25000. Florens, and at last to 27000. Florens: And
in one Popes time, this was seven times paid out of the Arch-bishopprick of
Ments, that the Archbishop has been feign to borrow it of Merchants, and to
pay them again, forced to exact a Subsidy upon his poor Husbandmen, so that
our people are brought to extreme poverty, and moved to rebellion to seek
their liberty, grievously murmuring against the Clergy. James, Arch-byshop of
Ments said at his death, he was sorry for nothing, as for that his poor
Subjects should after his death be forced again to pay a grievous exaction for
the Pall: therefore let the Pope, as a godly Father, deal more favorably with
his Children the Germans, least men follow the example of the Bohemians, and
swerve from him, especially let him be more favorable unto the Bishops, that
die so soon one after another: whereof there be fifty Bishoppricks, besides
many Abbots in Germany that are confirmed at Rome, otherwise Germany will want
treasure and Munition of war against their enemies, and to preserve peace,
and minister Justice to every man, and banish away murderers and thieves, and
repair Churches and Monasteries and Hospitals, and other necessaries.

There were besides these 100. 1522
grieuances, complained upon to the Popes Legates, in the reign of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, out of which we have but touched certain which we thought to
be most effectual.

First, that many things are commanded and forbidden by men's Constitutions,
contrary to the commandment of God, as innumerable lets of Matrimony, and the
use of meats forbidden, which are created for man's use, and are indifferently
to be received with thanksgiving: by which Constitutions, men are brought into
bondage, until by Money they obtain dispensations, so that Money makes that
lawful to the rich, which is prohibited to the poor, by which snares of men's
Laws, great sums of Money are gathered out of Germany, and it breeds private
offenses of the poor, when they see themselves entangled in these snares,
only because they have not the thorns of the Gospel, for so Christ often
calls riches.

That those that have received Ecclesiastical orders, being free from the
punishment of Secular Magistrates, do presume in sinning, and are maintained
therein by the principal estates of the Clergy. They attempt the chastity of
Matrons and Uirgins, and by gifts and flattering, they bring to pass, and by
their secret confessions, that many, which otherwise would live honest, have
been overcome and moved to sin: and often they keep wives from their
husbands, and daughters from their Fathers, threatening them with fire and sword
that require them. They offend liuewise daily, in robbery, murders, accusing of
Innocents, burning, rapine, theft and counterfeiting Coin; besides many other
mischiefs, and the Bishops cannot openly punish them, except he disgrade
them; and they are bound by their Charters, that they dare not punnish them;
therefore necessity and Justice does require, that the said privileges of the
Clergy should be abrogated, and that they should have the same judgment as
the Layty for such offenses.

That Christians are excommunicated for vain and profane causes, for desire
of filthy luker, whereby the weak in faith are burdened, and brought to
despair, where a man ought to be excommunicated only for heresy.

That there are so many holydaies, that Husbandmen have scarce time to gather
the fruits of the earth, which were brought forth with so great travel: and
upon these holidaies innumerable offenses are committed.

If any fight or shed blood in any hollowed place, it is interdicted, and
cannot have any more service done in it, until all the Citizens, with great
pomp and expenses, have caused it to be now consecrated, which charge redound
upon the Laity, and none but the Suffragans can baptize Bells, who do affirm,
that Bells so baptized, will drive away evil Spirits and T^mpests. Whereupon
many Godfathers are appointed: and such as be rich, at the baptising, hold the
Bell-rope, the Suffragan speaking for them, and they all answer, and name the
Bell, it having a new Garment upon it: then they go to sumptuous banquets, to
which the Gossips are bidden, the Suffragan and his Chaplains are sumptuously
fed, and yet he must have a reward, that in small Uillages 100. Florens are
often spent about such Christenings.

The Officialls of the Archbishops for the most part are unlearned men and of
evil conditions, taking thought for nothing but money, where they ought to
correct the offenses of the Laity, they burden them with most grievous
offenses, and spoil and rob them of their goods.

When causes belonging to the temporal Court are handled in the Spiritual
Court, the Eclesiasti^all Judges will by no means be entreated to remit them
to their ordinary Jurisdiction, but if the Temporal Court ho^d any Pley which
belongs to the Spiritual Court, the Judge shall be excommunicated, they say
they may take profane matters into their hands if the civil Magistrate be
negligent in executing justice, but contrariwise they will not suffer that the
like order shall be kept with them by the civil Magistrate if they be
negligent, and for their insatiable desire of money, they suffer and mainetaine
usury, and they take yearly pensions to suffer the Clergy unlawfully to dwell
with their Concubines and beget children by them, this none can deny except he
will make himself as blind as a mole, and if a man and his wife be long one
from another by reason of war or otherwise, the Officialls for money will
suffer them to commit adultery, calling it suffera^ce; not without great
offense and contempt of matrimony.

The Cannons Cathedral and other Colleagiall Churches, which have power to
choose their Superior and Bishop they will choose none except he swear and be
bound by deed insealed, that in no matter never so greiuous he shall be against
them, and not to punish any of them if he do offend.

The Bishops and Officials in some places do not only suffer Priests to have
Concubines, so they pay for them, but compel chaste Priests (which live without
Concubines) to pay tribute for Concubines, affirming the Bishop to be worthy of
such money, whereby it is lawful for them either to keep Concubines or no.

These and many other Articles were offered up to the Emperor, in the next
assembly of the Princes and States at Worms, the Archbishops and other States
of the Clergy, but hitherto they have not begun to amend any thing.

After Nicholas the fifth succeeded Pope Calixtus the third, he ordained at
noone and evening the bell to tole the Aues to help the soldiers that fought
against the Turks, and for that purpose ordained the Feast of the
transfiguration of Christ, solemnizing it with like pardons and indulgences as
Corpus Christi day, and contrary to the Councels of Constance and Basell, he
decreed none should appeal from the Pope to the Council, and he Canonized for
Saints S. Edmond of Canterbury, with diverse others: after him succeeded Pius
secundus, which was AEneas Siluius which wrote the two books aforesaid of the
Council of Basil, at that time he was a man of indifferent judgment, from
which being Pope he swarned, seeking by all means to abollish the books
which before he had written.

The Proverbs of this Pius.
THe divine nature of God may rather be comprehended by faith then by
disputation.

Christian faith is to be considered not by what reason it is proved but from
whom it proceeds.

A covetous man cannot be satisfied with money, nor a learned man with knowledge.

Learning ought to be to a poor man as silver, to noblemen as gold. and to
Princes in steed of precious stones.

An artificial Oration moves fools but not wise men.

Suitors in the Law be as birds, the Court is the bayt, the Judges the nets, and
the Lawyers the fowlers.

Men are to be given to dignities, and not dignities to men.

The office of a Bishop is heavy, but it is blessed to him that does well bear
it. A Bishop without learning may be likened to an Ass.

An evil Physician, destroys bodies, but an unlearned Priest destroys
souls.

Marriage was taken from Priests not without great reason, but with much
greater reason, it ought to be restored again.

He dissolved certain Nuns of the orders of Saint Bridget, and Saint Clare,
bidding them depart out that they should burn no more, nor cover a harlot
under the vesture of Religion.

The Epistle of Hulderick is abridged in this Book before: therefore omitted
now.

After this Pius secundus, succeeded Pope Paulus secundus, who was wholly set
upon his belly and ambition, void of all learning, and a hater of all learned
men: because his Daughter was reproched, for that she was gotten in
fornication Hes went about to reform the Law of the single life of Priests,
had not death prevented him.

After him succeeded Sixtus the fourth, which builded in Rome Stews of both
kinds, and thereby got great Revenues and Rents unto the Church of Rome: He
reduced the year of Iubile from fifty, to five and twenty years: he
instituted the Feasts of the Conception, and of the presentation of Mary, and
of Anna her Mother and of Joseph; he canonized Bonauenture, and Saint Francis
for Saints; he brought in Beads and made our Ladies Psalter, through Alanus
and his Order: He made two and thirty Cardinals in his time.

Petrus Ruerius was the first, who in two years spent in luxurious riot
200000. Floreines, and was left six thousand in debt: This Pope licenced the
whole Family of the Cardinals to play the Sod^mites the three hot months;
June, July, and August.

After him succeeded Innocentius the eight, as rude and unlearned as his
predecessor: at Polus he caused eight men, and six women, with the Lord of the
place, to be condemned for Heretics, because they said since Peter none was
true Uicar of Christ, but they only which followed the poverty of Christ.

He condemned of heresy George the King of Boheme, and deprived him, made his
whole stock to be rejected, and gave his Kingdom to Mathias King of Panonia.

Pope Alexander the sixth succeeded him: He received two thousand Florens for
poisoning Gemen the Turks brother at Rome. He sent for help of the Turks
against the French King: He was ungrateful to the Cardinals that chose him: He
commanded Marcinellus one of them to have his hands and tongue cut off, for
speaking against his vices. After sitting with his Cardinals, and the rich
Se^ators of Rome at dinner; his man unawares bringing a wrong Bottle unto him
he with his Cardinals about him were poisoned: In his time the Angel which
stood on the top of the Popes Church was beaten down with thunder; which thing
seemed to declare the ruin of the Pope-dome.

Pius the third succeeded Pope: after him Julius the second, passing all other
in iniquity, as he was going to war, he cast the keys of S. Peter into the
river Tybris, saying, being the keys of Peter would not serve him to his
purpose, he would take himself to the sword of Paul.

By this Julius, partly with war, partly with cursings, in seven years
200000. Christians were destroyed: he got many Cities out of Princes hands by
bloodshed: when he was made Pope, he took an oath to have a Council within two
years; but breaking his Oath, he was occupied in wars: whereupon nine of his
Cardinals departed from him, and appointed a Council at P^sa, they alleged
the cause, for that the Pope was forsworn, and that they had diverse other
crimes to accuse him of, purposing to remove him from his seat, which he had
obtained through bribes and ambition. Julius commanded under great pain that
none obeyed them; the next year he called a Council.

The French King seeing the Pope take part with the Uenetians against him,
called a Council at Thurin, in which Council they agreed, that the Pope ought
not to war against any Prince without cause: and that it was lawful for the
King to defend himself against him, and that unjust excommunications were not
to be feared. After the King sent to the Pope the decrees of the Council, who
accursed the French King, with all his Kingdom: and the next year after this
warlike Pope dyed.

The lamentable handling of RICHARD HVN, who was privily murdered in Lolards
Tower in London.
HVN had a Child died in his house, 1515
the Curate claiming the bearing-sheet for a Mortuar^, Hun answered; The Infant
had no property therein, whereupon he was cited to the Spiritual Court; he
sued the Curate in a Praemunire, and then the Priests of malice accused him of
heresy, and brought him to Lolards Tower, where he was found dead, hanging by
the neck in a girdle of silk. The Bishop of London called Richard Fitziames
and Doctor Horsey, his Chancellor said ^e hanged himself; and the Temporalty
said he was murdered: The Coronor summoned a Jury, and viewed the body, and
many times they were with the Kings Council, and heard their opinions, but in
the mean season the Bishop burnt the dead carkase in Smithfield, to the
abomination of the people: but after the matter had bee^e heard by the Kings
Judges, and after by the Kings Council, the King being present; at las^ Doctor
Horsey the Chancellor, and one Charles the Bel-ringer of Paul's, an^ Joseph the
Bishops Somner, were indicted of murder, and the said Charles being in the
Tower of London, of his own free will said; that Master Chancellor devised and
wrote with his own hand all the heresies that were laid to Huns charge, and
that when Richard Hunne was slain, John Bell-ringer bare up a Wax Candle, and
I went next to him and Master Chancellor came up last, and Hunne was lying in
his bed: and Master Chancellor said, Lay hands on the Thief, and so all we
murdered him, and I put the girdle about his neck, and John Bell-ringer and I
did heave him up, and master Chancellor pulled the girdle over the staple, and
so Hun was hanged.

The said Charles, told Julian Little his maid, he killed him by putting a Wire
up into his nose.

Before that time the Chanceller commanded to be put upon Huns neck a great
collar of Iron, with a great Chain, which is to heavy for any man or beast to
wear, and long to endure. And before Huns death, the Chanceller came into the
Lolards Tower, and kneeled down before Hunne, holding up his hands and asked
him forgiveness* of all he had done and must do to him. And on the Sunday
before the night in which he was destroyed, he caused the Penitentiary of
Paul's to go to Hun and say a Gospel, and make for him Holy Water, and Holy
bread, and give him, which was done.

The Bishop did all he could by word or writing to the King and Cardinals, and
the Council* to smother the matter, affirming that he hanged himself, and
that the Jury was forsworn, and that the said Charles spoke that which he had
done as before, by reason of durance of imprisonment: and that if the King and
Council should favor this matter, he should not be able to go abroad for
Heretics; and by the means of him, and the spiritualty, and money, the
Chancellor caused the Kings Attorney to confess on his arraignement, him not
to be guilty: so he escaped to Excester, and for shame never durst after come
to London.

The History of Doctor VVESALIANVS.
THis Wesalia was complained upon to Piorherus Archbishop of Mentz, by the
Thomists, which is an Order holding of Thomas de Aquino. The Bishop made him
answer, he should give up all his works and writings which he had made and
preached. This being done, they divided them amongst themselves, that every man
might find out what errors and heresies they could. His Articles and opinions
were these:

That all men be saved freely and through mere grace by faith in Christ Jesus:
free will to be nothing; only that we should believe the word of God, and not
the gloss of any man or fathers: that the word of God is to be expounded by
the collation of one place with another: that Prelates have no authority to
make laws or expound the Scriptures, by any peculiar right more then another:
that men's traditions, as Fastings, Feasts, long prayers, Pilgrimations, and
such like are to be rejected. Extreme unction and confirmation to be reproved,
confession and satisfaction to be reprehended: the primacy of the Pope he also
affirmed to be nothing. Upon which Articles this Wesalia by a general assembly
was condemned, and his books to be burned.

He bring required of the Council, what he thought of the Uicar of Christ in
earth? He said he believed that Christ left no such Uicar in earth: for
ascending into heaven he said, Behold I am with you etc. By which words he
declared that he would substitute under him no Uicar in earth: for a Uicar
signifies one who in the absence of the principal has to do the works of
the principal.

And being asked his opinion of Indulgences and Pardons: he said he believed
that the treasure-boxe of the merits of Saints could not be distributed of the
Pope to others, because their treasure is not left here on earth: for it is
written in the Revelation, Their works follow them; and that their merits could
not be applied to other men, for the satisfaction of their pain due to them:
and he called Indulgences and Pardons pias frauds fidelium.

And being asked the question, he said, He thought that hallowing of Altars,
Chalics, Uestments, War Candles, Palms, Herbs, Holy water, and other divine
things, made them have no spiritual power in them to drive away any Devils,
and that holy water had no more efficacy then other water, concerning
remission of veniniall sins and driving away Devils, and other effects which
the School Doctors attribute unto it.

After these Articles were condemned by the Inquisitor and his assistants, he
said, As you do with me, if Christ himself were here he might be condemned as
an heretic: but within three or four days, with much persuasions, he was
content to condescend unto them, and submit himself to their holy mother
Church.

Doctor VESELVS.
THis Veselus and the foresaid Vesalianus were great friends: and when
Vesalianus was condemned, this Veselus thought that the Inquisitor would also
examine him. He was so worthy a man, that the people called him Luxmundi. He
reprehended the Papists doctrines of the division of Repentance, and
Purgatory, and works of Supererogation, and Pardons, and Indulgences, and
disputed against them at Rome and at Paris; so that many of the Popes Court
persuaded by him, began to speak more freely and more boldly against these
matters then himself did: he disallowed the abuses of the Masses, prayers for
the dead, and the Supremacy of the Pope, and that no such supreme head over
all others ought to be in the world: and that the Pope has no authority to
command, but so far as truth goes with him, and that he ought not to
prevail by commanding, but by teaching that the Pope and the Prelates
proceeding against Christ's Doctrine, are plain Antichrists. He said those
Priests that had vowed not to marry, and were not able to be chaste might
break there vow.

He said that their forefathers before Albert and Thomas did resist the Popes
indulgences, and called them Idolatry, fraud and error: in his Book de
subditis and superioribus; he disputes against the Pope, and his Prelates:
affirming, except their Faith be sound, they are not to be obayed, and that
the Pope may err, and men ought to resist him therein, that superfluous riches
in the Clergy do not profit but hurt.

That the Pope does wickedly distribute the rents of the Church, and the Church
itself to unworthy Ministers by Symony for her own profit: whereby it
appears he cares not for GOD nor the Church: That the precepts of the Pope
and Pr^lates bind no farther then the precepts of physicians, that is so far
as they be wholesome, and stand with the truth of the word; that the Pope can
command nothing under pain of deadly sin, but what God commands: The
Kingdom of heaven, is rather shut then opened by the Popes keys, as the
Pharisees did: that the hearers ought to discern and Judge the Doctrine of the
Prelates, and not to receive all things they say without due examination.

He prophesied to John Ostendorpius, well my Child thou shall live to that
day, that the Doctrine of these new and contentious Divines of THOMAS and
BONAVENTVRE, with other of that sort, shall be utterly rejected from true
Christian Divines: And he often disputed of the righteousness of faith, and
why Saint Paul did so often inculcate that men be justified by faith and not by
works, that all men were deceived who attributed to Traditions any opinion of
GODS worship, or that they could not in any wise be violated or broken.

MARTIN LVTHER.
THus proceeding in our Story (by the aid of Christ) we approach unto the
time of Martin Luther; at what time it pleased God by his great mercy to
reform the desolate ruins of religion by the industry of this Luther, sent
and set up by the mighty spirit of Christ, to abolish the abuses and pride of
Antichrist, which so long had abused the simple flock of Christ.

Many prophesies went before of this time, as of the aforesaid prophecy of
John Hus and Jerome of Prage, that a hundred years come and gone they should
give account to God and him. This prophecy was in the year one thousand four
hundred and fifteen; so to this time one thousand five hundred and sixteen
was just an hundred years.

Philip Melancton makes mention of a Monk about fiftis years before this
time, named John Hilton, in Thuring, who was cast into prison for speaking
against certain abuses of the place and order where he lived: and being weak
and feeble, he desired the Warden of the Covent to respect his woeful case; he
rebuked him for that which he had spoken: he said he had spoken nothing
prejudicial to their Monkerie or religion, but there shall come one in the
year one thousand five hundred and sixteen, which shall utterly subvert all
Monkerie, and they should never be able to resist him.

The Angel falling from the high pinicle of the Popes Church into the River
Tybris in the year 1500. might well portend the ruin of the Pope.

And the strange sight in Germany as before in the year 1501. of the crosses
seen upon men's garments, and figures of c^ownes of Thorns, and of Nails, and
of drops of blood fell from heaven, that many days after the women carried
them upon their garments, might declare the like.

Likewise the other Dream of John Husse as before: how that some abolished the
Images of Christ in his Church of Bethelem: but next day new Painters painted
the same, and more Images of Christ, and fairer, and the Painters with the
multitude of the people said, now let the Bishops and Priests put out these
Images if they can, whereby much people reioiced, and I arising up felt my
self to laugh: he interpreted the painting of Christ's picture, his preaching
of Christ which should be destroyed, and the other Painters new Preachers,
whose Doctrines the Bishops and Priests should not be able to resist.

By these and such like prophesies it was evident, that the time of restoring
the Church was not far, as also the hearts of the people, which at that time
were inflamed so with hatred against the pomp and pride of Rome, and there
contempt and derision began to arise on every side, for there de^estable
doings were not so secret, but they were seen and abhorred. Whereupon grew
many proverbs of derision: as, what is this to see the world round about, for
that these shauelling priests none may rout.

It is a saying in Italy, as soon as a Priest receives r^sure the Devil
enters into him.

It is a saying in Germany, the nearer Rome the further from God: and that all
evil begins in Nomine Domine, alluding unto the Popes Bulls: and when
Bulls come from Rome bind well pour purses.

He that goes once to Rome sees a wicked man: he that goes twice knows
him, he that goes thrice brings him home with him.

The Court of Rome never regards the sheep without the wool.

Once were wooden Chalices, and golden Priests: now we have golden Chalices and
wooden priests.

Once Christians had blind Churches, and light hearts: now they have light
Churches, and blind hearts.

Many are worshipped for Saints in heaven, whose souls be burning in Hell.

It was a saying in France four hundred ye^res before this time, that Satan
was let loose at Rome to destroy the whole Church.

Thomas Becke^ writ to the Cardinals, that it was a common Proverb, that there
is no right in Rome.

By these and such like innumerable Sayings it does appear what Judgments the
people had in those days of the Romish Clergy, which was of GOD as a secret
prophecy, that Religion should be restored shortly, as it came to pass in
this year one thousand five hundred and sixteen: in which year Doctor
MARTINE LVTHER first began to write: before whom Picus Mirandola, and
Laurentius Valla, and last of all Erasmus Roterodamus had somewhat broken the
way before, and had shaken the Monks houses, but LVTHER gave the stroke, and
plucked down the foundation, all by opening one vein long hid before, wherein
lies the touchstone of all truth and Doctrine: as the only origin of our
salvation, which is our free Justification by our Faith only in Christ: the
laborious travels and constant preachings of this worthy man: because they are
at large in the History of John Sleydan, I need not to stand thereon.

Luther was borne in Isleben in Saxony, he was a Student in the University of
Magd^burge and Erford: where Veselus was an old man, as before is mentioned: of
whom it seems to be that Luther speaks of an Old Man there, of whom he
learned many things touching Faith, and he thus expressed unto him the Article
of remission of sins: we may now generally believe only, that sins are,
and have been remitted to some, as the Devils believe they were remitted to
Peter, or David, but that Gods express commandment is, that every man should
believe particularly his sins are forgiven: and this is confirmed by Saint
Bernard, in his Sermon upon the annunciation, add that thou beleeuest thy
sins are forgiven thee; this is the Testimony that the Holy Ghost gives
thee in thy heart: and this is that the Apostle says, a man is freely
justified by Faith: by whose words Luther said he was strengthened, and at last
by prayer and reading he perceived that Doctrine more evidently.

After he began to expound the Epistle to the Romans and the Psalms, so
Divinely that he seemed to all the faithful and learned a shining light,
which began to clear after the long cloudy sky; he showed the difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel: He confounded the error that then reigned
in the Schools and Sermons, teaching that men merit remission of sins by
their proper works, and were just before GOD by outward Discipline, as the
Pharisees taught. But Luther expressly showed that sins are freely remitted
for the love of the Son of GOD, and that we ought faithfully to embrace this
bountiful gift: His life was likewise correspondent to his profession, whereby
it appeared his words were not lip-labor, but proceeded from the heart,
whereby many notable personages consented with him in his opinions: at this
time Luther altered nothing in the ceremonies, but taught this only doctrine
as the principal of all others; to wit, the Doctrine of Repentance, of
remission of sins, of Faith of true comfort in time of adversity, every man
received good taste of this sweet Doctrine.

A Dominick Friar named Tecell, caused the Popes indulgences to be carried and
sold about the Coontre^. Luther being moved with the blasphemous Sermons of
this shameless Friar, set up certain positi^ns against Indulgences openly
upon the Temples: This Friar hoping to obtain the Popes blessing, assembled
certain Monks, and sophistical Divines, and commanded them to write
something against Luther, and in his Sermons, he taught that Luther was an
heretic, and worthy to be burned, and he burned Luthers positions, and the
Sermon he writ against indulgences: This forced Luther to entreat more amply of
things and to maintain the truth. Frederick Duke of Saxony, in the presence of
the Emperor, besought Erasmus, his opinion, if Luther had erred, he answered
his opinions were good, but he desired he would moderate his style.

Now Luther, the plainer to express the doctrine of repentance, of remission
of sins, of Faith and of Indulgences, He added also these matters; the
difference of Divine and humane Laws; the Doctrine of the use of the Lords
Supper, of Baptism and vows; touching the Question of the Popes power, Eckius
was the Author thereof, to the intent to inflame the wrath of the Pope and
Princes against Luther.

Upon this the Supper of the Lord was published to be used in both kinds:
private Mass was omitted, and the Monasteries abandoned, but this alteration
was by Carolastadius in the absence of Luther.

He held in contempt the seditious Doctors of that time, as Monetarius and the
Anabaptists, but especially the hor^ed Bishops of Rome, who arrogantly affirmed
that Saint Peter had not only the charge to teach the Gospel, but to govern
commonweals.

In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and one and twenty, 1521
Luther entered into Worms being sent for by the Emperor Charles the fifth King
of Spain, and Archduke of Austrich, who in the first year of his Empire made
an assembly of Princes in his regal City. And whereas Luther had published
three years before, certain new propositions to be disputed on at
Wittenberge, against the tyranny of the Pope, which were torn in pieces and
burned by the Papists. Whereupon, they began to tend to uproar, and yet Luther
maintained openly his cause against the Clergy: Whereupon by the solicitation
of the Roman Legates, LVTHER was sent for by the Herald of Arms, with
Letters of safe conduct by the Emperor and Princes: whereupon he came as
before and was visited of many Earls, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Priests and
the Comminaltie, who frequented his lodging until night.

He came contrary to the expectation of many, and of his adversaries; for they
thought he would not come, because his books a few days before were condemned
by public proclamations, and many persuaded him not to submit himself to any
danger: who answered, since I am sent for, I am resolved to enter into Worms, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, though I knew there were so many Devils to
resist me, as there be tiles to cover the houses in Worms.

The fourth or fifth day after he came to Worms, he was enjoined at four of
the clock in the afternoon, to appear before the Emperor, Dukes, and other
estates of the Empire, to understand the cause he was sent for. And standing
before them, he was commanded silence until he was interrogated. Then was
asked him, whether those books were his which were written in his name, a great
company of them lying before them? and if they were thine, whether thou will
recant, and revoke them, and all that is contained in them, or rather meanest
to stand to that which is written in them? Then Luthers Advocate desired that
the titles of the books might be read, which was done.

Luther answered, He could not but acknowledge those books to be his, and
that he would never recant any clause thereof: and for the justifying of them
he desired some time to consider, because there be questions of faith, and the
salvation of the soul, wherein it were dangerous, and a rash thing to
pronounce any thing without good aduisement.

After they had consulted, the Official said, Though thou do not deserve to
have opportunity given thee to determine, yet the Emperor of his mere
clemency g^anteth thee one day: to morrow at this time thou shall render
before him; conditionally, thou do not exhibit thine opinion in writing, but
pronounce the same with lively voice.

At which time, when he was appointed to answer, he answered to this effect;
All my books are not of one sort: there be some in which I have so simply and
Euangelically entreated of the religion of faith and honest conversation, that
my very enemies are compelled to confess they be profitable, and worthy to be
read of all Christians; and the Popes Bull judges certain of my books
inculpable: if I should revoke these, I should condemn that truth which
friends and foes confess.

There is another sort of my books, which contain inuectiues against the Pope
and doctrine of the Papists, as against those which have corrupted all
Christendom bodily and spiritually, with their pestiferous doctrine, and
pernicious examples: for I cannot dissemble this, when the universal
experience and common complaint of all bear witness, that the consciences of
all faithful men have been most miserably intrapped, vexed, and most cruelly
tormented by the Popes laws, and doctrine of men: and further, their substance
devoured, specially in this famous Country of Germany.

If then I should revoke these, I can do none other but augment force to their
tyranny, and not only open windows but wide gates to such an infernal
impiety, the which will extend more wide and with more liberty then yet she
durst, and by the testimony of this my retractation, their insolent and
malicious Kingdom shall be made most licentious, and less subject to
punishment, If I Luther should do this by the authority of your most excellent
majesty.

The third sort of my books I have written against private persons, such as with
tooth and nail labor to protect the Romish tyranny, and deface true religion,
which I have taught and professed; I confess, against these I have been more
violent then my profession required: if I should recant these, it would come to
pass that tyranny and impiety shall reign, s^pported by my means.

^ Nevertheless, as Christ when he was examined of his doctrine before Annas,
and having received a buffet of the Minister, said, If I have spoken ill, bear
witness of the evil. If Christ, which was assured he could not err, refused
not to have testimony given against his doctrine, how much more I that cannot
but err, ought earnestly to entreat, if any will bear witness against my
doctrine: and if any can by Scripture convince me of error, I will revoke any
manner of error, and be the first that shall consume my books with fire. I
conceive no greater delectation in any thing then when I behold dissentions
stirred up for the word of God; for such is the course of the Gospel, as
Christ says, I came not to send peace upon the earth but a sword: I came to
set a man at variance against his father.

And we must think our god is terrible in his Councels against his
adversaries, lest the condemning of the word of God turn to a huge Sea of
evils, lest the Empire of this young and bounteous Prince Charles be lamentably
and miserably begun. I could amplify this with authorities of Scripture, and
Pharo, the King of Babylon, and the Kings of Israel, who then most obscured
the bright Sun of their glory, and procured their own ruin, when they
attempted to pacify their Realms in this manner.

Then the Emperors Ambassador checked Luther, saying, he had not answered to
any purpose, and that he ought not to call in question things long time ago
defined by general Councels: therefore they required whether he would revoke
or no. Then he answered, If I be not convicted by testimonies of Scriptures and
probable reasons (for I believe not the Pope nor his general Councels) I will
not nor may not revoke any thing: for it is ungodly to do against my
conscience.

Then the Ambassador replied; if all such as impugn that which was decreed by
the Church and Councels may once get this advantage, to be convinced by the
Scriptures, we shall have nothing established in Christ^ndom.

Luther answered, the Counsels often gainsaid themselves, and that he was able
to prove that Councels have erred: and night approaching, the Lords arose; and
after Luther had taken his leave of the Emperor, diverse Spaniards scorned and
scoffed at him, hollowing and whopping after him a long time.

After, there were bills set up against Luther, and others with him: but this
was subtly done of his enemies, as it was thought, that there might be
occasion offered to infringe the safe conduct given him, the which the Roman
Ambassador with all diligence endeavored to bring to pass.

When he was sent for to the Archbishop of Triers, they protested unto him they
sent not for him for disputation, but beningly and brotherly to exhort him: and
they said, though the Councels had erred, yet their authority was not thereby
abased, neither was it lawful for every man to impugn their opinions, and
that Decrees, Traditions of men, and Ceremonies were established to repress
vices according to the qualities of times, and that the Church could not be
destitute of them. the tree is known by his fruits. These laws have much
profited.

And they alleged that Luthers books would breed great tumult and incredible
troubles, and that he abused the common sort, with his book of Christian
liberty, encouraging them to shake off their yoke, and to confirm in them a
disobedience, and that now the world was at another stay then when the
believers were all of one mind.

And albeit he had written many good things, and doubtless with a good spirit,
yet now the Devil has attempted by wily means that all his works for
evermore should be condemned: and by these last works, it is easy to know the
tree by the fruit, not by the blossoms, often repeating in his Oration that
this admonition was given of singular good will and great clem^ncie: in the
shutting up of his Oration he added menasings, that if he would abide in his
purposed intent, the Emperor would exterminate him his Empire.

Luther answered to this effect, That the Council of Constance had erred in
condemning this Article of John Hus, That the Church of Christ is the communion
of the predestinat, and that we ought rather to obey God then man.

There is an offense of faith, and an offense of charity: the slander of
charity consists in manners and life, the offense of faith and doctrine
consists in the word of God; and they commit this offense which make not
Christ the corner stone. And if Christ's sheep were fed with the pure pasture
of the Gospel, and the faith of Christ sincerely preached, and if there were
good Eclesiasticall Magistrates who duly executed their office, we should not
need to charge the Church with men's traditions.

And that he knew and taught, that we ought to obey the higher powers, how
peru^rsly soever they lived, so that they enforce us not to deny the word of
God.

Then they admonished him to submit himself to the Emperor and the Empires
Judgment, he answered he was well content, so that this were done with
authority of the word of God, and that he would not give place except they
taught sound Doctrine by the word of God, and that St. Augustine writes, he
had learned to give honor only to the Canonical books of the Scripture, and
touching other Doctors, though they excel in holin^sse, and learning he would
not credit them unless they pronouced truth, and St. Paul says, prove all
things, follow that which is good, and again, if an Angel teach otherwise let
him be accursed, finally, he meekely besought them not to urge his
conscience, captiued in the bands of the word of God, to deny that excellent
word.

After the Archbishop sent for Luther to his Chamber, and told him for the
most part that at all times holy Scriptures have engendered errors, and went
about to overthrow this proposition that the Catholic Church is the communion
of Saints, presuming of cockle to make wheat, and of bodily excrements to
compact members; Martin Luther and one Jerome Schu^ffe his companion reproved
their follies.

He was oftentimes assailed to reform the censure of his books unto the
Emperor and Empire, or to the General Council, which he was content to do,
so they would judge them according to the word of God, otherwise not, aleaging
the words of the Prophet, trust you not in Princes, nor in the children of men
wherein is no health, also, cursed be he that trusts in men: and when news
came he should return home, he said, even as it has pleased God so it is
come to pass, the name of the Lord be blessed, and said, he thanked the
Emperor and Princes that they had given him gracious audience and granted him
safe conduct to come and return, and said he desired in his heart they were
reformed according to the sacred word of God, and said, he was content to
suffer any thing in himself for the Emperor, but only the word of God he
would constantly confess unto the latter end: About a year after this, Luther
dyed, when he had lived almost three score and three years, and had been
Doctor three and thirty years, he said at his death, O heavenly, eternal and
merciful Father, thou have manifested in me thy dear Son Christ, I have
taught and known him. I love him as my life, health, and redemption, whom the
wicked persecuted, maligned, and injured, draw my soul to thee, and sa^d
thrice, I commend my spirit into thy hands, thou have redeemed me, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only Son that all that believe in him should
have eternal life, and so he dyed, whose death was much lamented:

In the year 1516. the aforesaid French King received from Pope Leo a Iubile,
and pardons to be sold, and so in England under the pretense of war against
the Turk, they persuaded the people, that whosoever would give ten shillings
should deliver his soul from the pain of Purgatory, but if it lacked any
thing of ten shillings it would profit them nothing: at that time Martin
Luther was in Germany, who vehemently inueyed against these indulgences,
against whom John Eckius put forth himself, they disputed before the people,
at last either of their arguments were sent to Paris to be judged by the
Sorbonists, the judgment was long protracted: In the mean time Pope Leo
condemned Luther for Heresy and excommunicated him, he appealed to the next
Council.

Pope Leo commanded Luthers books to be burned openly, Luther also burned the
Popes decrees and Decretalls in the Uniuersity of Wittenberge.

In the year 1517. the Pope having crea^ed one and thirty Cardinals, thunder,
and lightening so struck the Church where the Cardinals were created that it
stroke the little child Jesus out of the lap of his mother, and the keys out
of St. Peter's hands, being Images in the Church of Rome.

In the year 1519. news was brought to Pope Leo at supper, that the Frenchmen
were driven out of Italy, he rejoicing said God has given me three things, I
returned from banishment with glory to Florence, I have deserved to be called
Apostolic, and thereby I have driven the Frenchmen out of Italy, as soon as
he had spoken he was stricken with a sudden fever and dyed shortly after.

What Godly man has there ever been for this five hundred years, either
virtuously disposed or excellently learned, which has not disproued the
misordered and corrupt examples of the Sea and Bishop of Rome from time to time
until the coming of Luther, yet none ever could prevail before the coming
of this man, the cause to be supposed is this, other men spoke but against the
pomp, pride, whoredom, and avarice of the Pope, Luther went further with him,
charged him with his Doctrine, not picking at the rine, but plucking up the
root, charging him with plain Heresy, as resisting against the blood of
Christ, for whereas the Gospel leads us to be justified only by the
worthiness of Christ and his blood, the Pope teaches us to seek our
salvation by man's merits, and deseruings by works, whereupon rose all the
Religious sects, some professing one thing, some another, every man seeking his
own righteousness* but Luther opened the eyes of many which before were drowned
in darkness, to behold that glorious benefit, of the great liberty and free
justification set up in Christ Jesus, but the more glorious this benefit
appeared to the world, the greater persecution followed the same, and where the
Elect took most comfort of salvation, the adversaries took most vexation,
according as Christ said, I came not to send peace but a sword, therefore so
great persecutions in all the world followed after Luther, but in no place more
then in England as shall be declared.

In the year 1517. one Cardinal Campeius was sent as Ambassador into England,
to gather money for war against the Turk, the Cardinal of York caused him
to send to Rome that he might be joined in Legacy with him, and sent him red
cloth for his servants, that he might come mo^e gloriously; at every town he
was received with procession, accompanied with Lords and Gentlemen: at Black
heath the Duke of Northfolke, with a number of Prelates, Knights, and Gentlemen
met him richly appareled, and in the way he was brought into a Tent of cloth
of gould, where b^ put on his Cardinals Robes and took his Mule toward
London, this Cardinal had eight Mules laden, the Cardinal of York, thinking
them not sufficient for his State, sent him twelve mules more with empty Coffers
covered with red, the next day these twelve Mules were led through the City as
though they had been laden with treasure and other necessaries, to the great
admiration of all men, but passing through Cheapeside, the people pressing to
behold them, one of the Mules broke his collar and ran upon the other Mules,
and they running together, overthrew diverse of their burdens, and so there
showed the Cardinals treasure, with great laughter and scorn o^ many, and the
boys and girls gathered up pieces of meat and bread and roasted eggs, horse
shows and old store of such baggage, crying out, behold here is my Lord
Cardinals treasure, and the Mulers greatly ashamed, gathered up their treasure
as well as they could and went forward, then he was brought to the Cardinal
of York, and then to the King, this Cardinal of York, at all times at dinner
and supper was served with his Seruitoures kneeling, and many Noble men of
England waited upon him, such was his monstrous pride.

Such as were forced to abjure in King, Henry the eight his reign, after the
first beginning of Luther, because there is a great many, and nothing but their
bare name ricited, I refer thee to the book at large.

IHon Coins alias Laueland was detected for contemning the Sacrament of the
Altar, and because he received not at Easter, who after died at St. Martins.

Robert Ward Shoemaker of St. Brids Parish in Fleetstreet detected by three
witnesses for holding opinions against the Sacrament of the Altar died in the
Counter of ^redstreet.

Matthew Ward, Marchant-venturer, committed to the Counter in Breadstreet, for
that he being Priest, was married, and kept company with his wife, and because
he was a Sacramentary, and despised auriculer confession, and private Masses,
and defended the Communion to be ministered to the Lay people in both kinds,
and maintaining that Priests ought to have wives.

Herman Peterson, and James Gossen, Taylers, Duch-men, were committed to the
Counter in Breadstreete, because the said James was not confessed in Lent, nor
received at Easter, which he said came by the counsel of the said Herman,
which councelled him rather to give three or four pence to the poor then to
be shrieuen.

Thomas Lancaster, imprisoned in the Counter in the Poultry, for bringing in
prohibited books.

John Wilcocke, a Scottish Friar, committed to the Fleet, for preaching
against Confession and Holy Water, against praying to Saints, and against
Purgatory; that Priests might have wives, and that the people ought not to pray
for souls departed. Also, John Goodale was prisoner there.

Nicholas South, committed to Newgate, for not being shrieuen in Lent, nor
received at Easter.

There was apprehended for heresy in Couentry, Robert Hatchets, Shomaker, one
Wrigsham, 1519
a Glouer; one Lansd^ll, a Hosier, with three others: and one Mistress Smith, a
Widow, because they taught their children and families the Lords prayer, the
Belief, and the ten Commandments in English; they were imprisoned, some in
places underground, some in Chambers, and other places: after they were sent
to Blackstocke Abbey, where they were imprisoned whilst they were there; their
Children were sent for before one Stafford, Warden of the Gray-Fryers in
Couentry, who examined them of their belief, and what errors their Fathers had
taught them, charging them upon pain of death, which their Fathers should
suffer, that they no ways meddle with the Paternoster, Creed, and ten
Commandments in English, which is heresy. After their Fathers were brought
again to Couentry, where four years before they had borne Faggots in the
Church and Market. The Bishops and Doctors, they and the said Gentlewoman
before them, who told them they should wear Fagg^ts portraied in their
clothes, to signify they were heretics. Robert Hatchets answered, we desire
no more but the Lords prayer, ten Commandments, and Creed, in English, which I
am sure every Christian ought to have. Whereupon they were judged all to be
burned, except the Gentlewoman, who was pardoned: and because it was evening,
and her sight dim, the Somner offered to go home with her; as he led her, he
heard somewhat rattle in her sleene, and taking it from her, and looking upon
it, he found it was the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and ten Commandments in
English; so he brought her back again to the Bishop, where she was presently
condemned, and burned with the six before. There was another in Couentry,
called Robert Silks, which escaped from taking, and two years after was taken
in Kent, and sent to Couentry and burned. Then the Sheriffs went to their
houses, and took all their goods and Chattels to their own use, leaving their
wives and children nothing to live by.

Henry Voz and John Escy, two young Austen Friars, 1522
were disgraded, because they would not deny the doctrine of the Gospel, called
Lutheranisme, and they thanked God for delivering them from that abominable
priesthood, and making them Priests of his holy order, and that he had received
them as a sacrifice of a sweet odor. The greatest error they were accused of,
was, that men ought only to trust in God, because me^ are Liars. They went
joyfully to the place of execution, protesting they died for the glory of God,
and the Gospel, believing in the Son of God, saying; This is the day we long
desired, being in their shirts, they joyfully imbrased the stake, praising God,
singing Psalms, and making testimony of their Faith. A Doctor seeing their
iolity, bid them take heed so foolishly to glorify themselves: they answered,
God forbid we should glory in any thing but the Cross of Christ: Another
councelled them to have God before their eyes; they answered, We trust we carry
him truly in our hearts. When the fire was kindled at their feet, one of them
said; me thinks you strew Roses at my feet* Henry being demanded whether
Luther had seduc^d him? Yea said he, as Christ seduced his Apostles. He said
also, that it was contrary to Gods Law, that the Clergy should be exempt from
the jurisdiction of the Christian Magistrate, and that Bishops have no power
but only to preach the word of God. They were burned at Bruxels, after their
death their Monastery was dissolved at Antwerp. Their President was called
Iacobus Lutherianus, he was forced to recant, but his mind renewed by the holy
Ghost, and he fled to Luther.

A Scholar borne at Abbevile, in King Lewis his Palace, took away the Host
from the Priest at Mass and brake it in pieces, and trod it under his feet.
He was burned in the Swine-market, the pieces of the Host and the pauement
whereon it was trodden, were gath^red and laid up amongst the Treasures of the
Palace.

After Adrianus the sixth, who succeeded Julius, came Pope Clement 7. whose life
is in one verse described; Bellorum hic fomes, cunctorum lerna malorum, 1523
he was poisoned with diverse of his Cardinals and familiars with the smoke of
torches. In his time wro^e Nicholas Michiauellus, who proves; that through y^
ambition of Popes proceeds almost all evils and wars amongst Christian men,
and that before the year 500. in all politic affairs, the Bishop of Rome
ever obayed the Emperors and Kings, and that the Cardinals, in the first
beginning of them, were nothing but Popish Priests: but after they invaded the
Temporal and Spiritual Jurisdiction, usurping above Kings and Emperors. By
three manner of ways the Romain Bishops did creep up, by excommunications, by
indulgences, and force of Arms.

In this year the Turk wrote to the master of the Rhodes, to deliver up the
Isle as follows.

Solimanus Tsaccus, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, most mighty Emperor of
Constantinople and Trapezuntis, etc. Unto the Reverend Father Philip Vilerius
Liladamus, great Master of the Rhodes, to his Knights and the Communalty
there: The pity of my afflicted people, and your extreme injuries, move me. I
command your speedy surrender of your I Will of Rhodes, you may obtain Our Grace
to depart with your riches: or if you will remain in our Dominion, your
liberty shall not be diminished, either in Religion, or paying of tribute: if
you be wise, prefer peace before cruel war: if you be overcome, look for
extreme cruelty, from which neither your force, foreign aid, nor your walls
shall defend you. I swear, by God, the Maker of Heaven and Garth, by the four
Histo^^ographers of the Evangelical Histories, by the 8000. Prophets that came
from Heaven, and by our mighty God Mahomet, above all others to be worshipped,
and the Spirits of my Father and Grandfather, and by this my Sacred, Royal,
and Imperial Head, from our Palace at Constantinople. The very same year the
Island of Rhodes was lost, and yeele^d to the Turk, to the great hindrance of
all Christendom.

Henry Sudphen, 1524
was desired of the Citizens of Breame, to come thither to preach: when they
had heard him, they hired him to be their Preacher: when the religious rout
understood thereof, they desired of the Senate that such an Heretic might be
banished the Town, which preached against the Catholic Church. The Senate
sent for the head men of the Parish, and showed them the complaint of the
religious men. They answered; They knew no other but that he was a learned
honest Preacher: yet if they can prove that he taught any thing contrary to the
Word of God, they will be ready with them to persecute him, otherwise we will
not suffer him of malice to be driven away. The Senate certified the religions
of this answer, then they certified the Bishop thereof, who sent two of his
Council to Breame for the Preacher: they received this answer of the Senators;
That being he was hired of the Churchwardens, and was not convicted of
Heresy, they could not obtain of the Citizens that he should be carried
away. Wherefore they desired the Bishop, that he would send his learned men to
dispute with him, and if he were convinced he should be punished, else he^
should not depart. After when news came that he preached more and more heinous
ma^ter against the religious. Then they admonished the Citizens of Br^ame,
into what ieoperdy their Commonwealth might fall by their Preachers preaching,
contrary to the decrees of the Pope and Emperor. Further, they said, the
Preacher was the Prisoner of the Lady Margaret, and got Letters of her to
require her Prisoner, but all would not serve. Then the Bishop decreed a
provincial council to be holden at Bream^, which was accustomed to be at
Bucksted, whereunto this Henry was called, but the Citizens detained him at
home: Then Henry gathered a sum of his Doctrine into a few Articles, and sent
it with his Letters unto the Arch^bishop, offering if he were convicted of any
error by the Word of God, he would be readi^ to recant. But shortly after the
religious set upon the Church Porch the Bull of Pope Leo the tenth, and the
Decree of the Emperor, made at Worms, notwithstanding, he proceeded daily in
preaching the Gospel. The Papists sent their Chaplains to every Sermon, to
trap him in his words, whereby many of them were converted, and the greater
part of those that were sent, did openly witness his doctrine was Gods truth,
against which no man could contend, and such as in all their lives they had not
heard, and that they must believe the same, if they would be saved.

At last this Henry was sent for by Letters, by the parishoners of M^ldrophe,
to preach the Gospel to them, and deliver them out of the bondage of
Antichrist, and because he had preached two year at Breame, and that there
were men sufficiently instructed in the Gospel to build further: and that the
Papists there, were for the most part vanquished, and that their folly was
known even to women and children, and that Diedmar lived without a Pastor in
the midst of Wolves, he could not with a safe conscience deny their requests.

When he came thither he was joyfully rec^iued of the Parish Priest, and
others: The Papists hearing hereof, before he had preached, stormed and fumed,
especially the Prior of the Black Monastery, who went to the Official, to
take council what was to be done, least they lose their Kingdom, they took
council to withstand the beginning, that he might not have leave to preach,
least their crafts and wickednesses being laid open, it were folly after to
resist, remembering what happened at Breame.

The next day early in the morning, the Prior, with the Chancellor, went to the
forty eight Presidents, being unlearned men, and persuaded them what a
seditious Fellow was come from Breame* and there-withall, if they would put him
to death, what favor they should have of the Bishop of Breame, whereupon they
decreed he should be put to death. Further, they had Letters from the forty
eight Presidents unto the Parish Priest, commanding him under great pain,
that he^ should send away the said Henry without preaching. The Priest
marvelled at their meddling in such matters, being it belonged not to them, but
the Parish Priest only to receive and put out a Preacher: and showing this to
Henry, he said he was sure he must dye for the Gospel, and it was as near
to Heaven to dye there, as in another place: and being he was sent for, and was
sure it would be grateful to the people, he resolved to preach: and after the
Sermon, the whole Congregation be wayled, called together the Priors, delivered
them the Letter from the Presidents, and that they should be fined a thousand
Gildrons, if they suffered him to preach. They were moved, because it was
against the custom of their Country as aforesaid: yet they concluded to keep
Henry for their Preacher, and defend him. In the after noone he preached
again, the next day the Citizens sent Ambassadors to the Presidents,
offering to answer all causes for their Preacher, and they declared what godly
Sermons he had preached, and the Parish Priest wrote to excuse himself, that
Henry never intended sedition, but to preach the Word truly, and offered
himself ready to answer for the said Henry whenever he should be called:
most earnestli^ desiring not to credit the Monks, which being blind with
hatred and Avarice, would suppress the truth. After he Preached three
forenoones and afternoones, and taught cleerelie Justification to be only by
Faith in Christ, and not by works, they all rejoiced, and desired God that he
would send such a Preacher to continue amongst them. Finally, this Prior and
others determined to take this Henry by night, and burn him before the people
should know it.

All the Presidents and others that were in this conspiracy, assembled in the
Parish of the new Church, in the Councelors house. They assembled above 500.
men of the Country, the husbandmen would have gone back again when they kn^w
the matter, but the Presidents compelled them to stay, and to encourage them
gave them three barrels of Hamborow bear: at midnight they came in armor, the
Monks prepared them torches, they burst into the Parish Priests house, they
took away all things, they fell upon the Parish Priest, crying, kill the
thief; they pulled him by the hair of the head out into the dirt; then they
run upon Henry, drew him naked out of his bed, bound his hands hard behind
him, and drew him to and fro so unmercifully, that a cruel Persecutor of the
word cried, let him alone. When they had led him almost all night barefooted
upon the Ice, he desired a horse, because ^e was weary, and his feet sore cut,
they laughed and mocked, saying; must we hire an Horse for an Heretic.

When they brought him to the fire to be burned, a woman offered her self to
suffer 1000. stripes, and to give them much money, so they would keep him in
prison until he might plead his matter before the whole Convocation of the
Country: then they were more mad, threw down the woman, trod her under feet,
and beat Henry unmercifully; one struck him behind the head with a Dagger,
another struck him with a Mace, othersome thrust him in the back and raines,
as often as he began to to speak: The Chancellor cried, go to boldly, good
Fellows, truly God is present with us. A Franciscan Friar came to confess
him, to whom Henry said; What injury did I ever do^ you Brother? The Friar
said; never none, then he said, What should I confess unto you, that you can
forgive me? when the fire still was kindled, it would not burn, yet they
satisfied their minds on him, striking and pricking him with all kind of
weapons: then they gat a lather and bound him to it, and cast him into the
fire. When he began to pray, and repeat his Creed, one struck him with
his Fist, saying; Thou shall first be burned, after prate while thou will:
another trod on his breast, and bound his neck so hard to the Ladder, that the
blood gushed out of his mouth, and the Ladder being propped up with a Holbert,
and slipping aside, the Holbert run through him: then one struck him with a
Mace on the breast until he was dead, then they consumed the body in the fire.

Master John Castellane, 1525
Doctor of Divinity, having truly preached the Word of God at Metz in Loraine,
and many other Towns, and returning from th^nce, was taken Prisoner by the
Cardinal of Loraines men: Whereupon they of Metz took certain of the
Cardinals Subjects Prisoners, at length, by means from the Pope and otherwise,
they were discharged, but John Castellane was kept still Prisoner, and most
cruelly handled, but he perseuered very constant in the said Doctrine: so
they proceeded to the disgrading and cond^mning of him.

Every ignorant man may see the horrible blindness of these vnshamefull
beasts, by their hor^ible blasphemies and brutish subtilty, which they use in
their Process against the Children of God: the preamble whereof follows in
effect.

For as much as thou art accused before the Inquisitor, for maintaining false
and erroneous Doctrine, and of thine own good will have confessed it:
remembering also, the lamenta^le admon^^ions and charitable exhortations which
we made unto thee in the Town of Metz, which you, like the Serpent Aspis have
refused to hear, and considering thy answers to our Intergatories, in the
which by diabolical Art thou have hid and kept back the truth, and followed
the example of Caine, in denying to conf^sse thy mischeeuous offense, and
considering the great number of witnesses and worthy men that deposed against
thee, before the Reverend man, Doctor Sauin, Inquisitor, and having
communicated our purpose unto diverse most excellent Masters and Doctors, which
have subscribed thereunto. Whereby it appears, y^ thou John Castellane have
oftentimes in diverse places openly taught many erroneous propositions full of
the heresies of Luther, against the Catholic Faith, the verity of the Gospel,
and the holy Apostolic seat, and so accursedly looked back and turned thy
face, that thou art found to be a liar before Almighty God: therefore according
to the common Law, such as through the sharp darts of their venomous tongue
do pervert the Scriptures, and go about with all their power to pervert and
corrupt the souls of the faithful, should be corrected with most cruel
vengeance, to fear others to attempt the like, and that all may rejoice in
Christian concord, all take example of goodness: therefore having God only
before our eyes, and surely considering what measure we do mete unto others,
God will measure the like to us again: we therefore pronounce sentence
definitive, and Judge thee excommunicate with the great excommunication, and to
be culpable of treason against the divine Majesty, and a mortal enemy of the
Catholic Church, and verity of the Gospel, and to be a manifest Heretic and
follower of the execrable cruelty of Martin Luther, a stirrer up of old
heresies all already condemned, and so they disgraded him, and delivered him to
the seculer Judge.

This done, the Bishop, after a certain manner, entreated the seculer Judge
for him for the love of GOD, and the contemplation of the gifts of piety and
mercy, for the respect of our prayers, that you will not do any thing that
shall be hurtful unto this miserable man, or tending to his death, or maiming
of his body: then the seculer Judge condemned him to be burned quick, which he
suffered most constantly, that not only many ignorant people were thereby
drawn to the knowledge of the verity, but a number, which had some taste
thereof, were greatly confirmed.

John Oecolampadius reports, 1525
how a Prince murdered a good Pastor for preaching of the Gospel, pretending
he was in a commotion: he sent a c^uell Gentleman with a number of men to
hang this Priest: they came to the Priests house and saluted him: The Priest
made them a great banquet, and bad them eat and drink cheerfully: After
dinner the Gentleman told his followers they must hang the Priest: They said,
God forbid we should do such a crime to hang one that has entreated us so
gently, his good cheer not yet disgested in us: The Priest desired them rather
to carry him to prison to there Prince, and propounded unto him the gentleness
that he had always used to the Gentlemen of the Country in spending his goods
to entertain them, and advertised him of the eternal to^ments which would
follow an evil conscience, protesting he had faithfully taught the Gospel,
and the cause he had the ill will of some, was for sharply and openly
reproving the horrible vices of the Gentlemen: The Gentleman told him he should
gain nothing by preaching in such sort, for the Prince had commanded him to
hang him, whose favor he would not loose, to save his life, so they put him
to death.

Oecolampadius reports of another godly Priest that when he came to the true
understanding of the Gospel: O God, said he, who would have thought it that so
many learned and holy men, have wandered out of the right way, and have so long
time been wrapped in errors, or that the holy Scriptures had been defiled with
such horrible abuses, for he never understood before that the Gospel was the
vertty of God, because it contains much matter touching the cross,
persecution, and ignomy: after this good Pastor began to preach the Gospel
there, but many which repined, that the Gospel should be freely preached,
caused him in the night to be taken by certain soldiers, which bound him
hand and foot, and set him upon a horse, and led him up and down by a great
rope before his wife and children, and were not moved with their grievous
sighs and tears: after they had kept him long in prison, and that he had
endured most terrible torments, as well by his privy members, as other parts,
they judged him to death, having no other cause against him, but that he had
married a wife: when the Friars troubled him about Confession, he said he had
already confessed his sins unto the Lord Jesus, nothing doubting but that he
had received absolution of his sins; and I said he shall this day be an
acceptable sacrifice unto my Savior Jesus Christ: for I have done nothing for
which I am condemned displeasing to God, which gives me a a quiet conscience,
and let them which thirst after bl^ud, consider that they offend him, who
truly judges the hearts of men, who says vengeance is mine and I will punish:
I desire to die, I do not much shorten my time, for I am so lean that my skin
is scarce able to cover my bones, and I rejoice in nothing but the Cross of
Christ Jesus.

Some could not abide these exhortations, and made signs to the hangman to
cast him into the River: after he was cast down the River was red, which was a
token that innocent blood was shed: they that were present were greatly amazed
thereat, and returned home pensive.

An other History by Oecolampadius: an honest man, when he had wrongfully
suffered most intolerable torments, for being in a commotion, and was
condemned. A Friar being brought unto him, when he was taken out of the
dungeon, and see the Friar, He cried with a loud voice; O miserable wretch
that I am: now am I betrayed my last hour is at hand: The dream which I
dreamed this night will come to pass. The Friar plucking out a wooden cross,
said poor man confess thy sins in mine ear, and after thou have received
absolution at mine hands, doubt not but this day thou shall goo stra^te to the
Kingdom of Heaven: Who answered, thou wicked Friar get thee away from me, for
I have long bewailed my sins before the face of Christ, who has forgiven me,
I have no need of thy absolution, which thou thy self do not understand.
Thou should long since have amended thy wicked and h^pocriticall life: I
know what thou art, thou playest the Ape with me, thou have a subtle heart
which has deceived much people: if thou have any comfort out of the Gospel
let me have it: if not, get thee away with thy portas: whereat the Friar was
confused: The hangman wiser then the Friar, bid him read him something of the
Passion: whereat he would take great pleasure. The foolish Friar had no other
consolation but to hold the Crucifix of wood, before him, saying b^hold thy
Savior which died for thee; Look on him and thou shall be comforted. He
answered, get thee from me thou naughty person, this is not my Savior; my
Savior dwells in Heaven, in whom I trust that he will not deliver my soul
to eternal death: The Friar crossed himself and departed.

The Bishop of Constance caused John Howghly a priest to be burned at
Merspurge, 1526
for that he would not allow the Popes Doctrine in all points.

John Frederick, heir to the Prince, and Elector of Saxony, was contracted by
writings to the Lady Katherine, the Emperors Sister: But when Religion was
altered in Saxony, they swarued from their Covenants, and the Empe^ror^
Ambassador said, there was no promise to be kept with heretics.

In this year, being the seventeenth year of King Henry the eight his
reign, there was great commotion in Suffolk, and Norfolk, by reason the
Cardinal had sent commission in the Kings Name that every man should pay the
sixth part of his goods: but it was appeased by the Dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk, and the payment released by the King.

This year the Cardinal took upon him as the Kings chief Councellor: He
reformed the house and made new Officers in the house of the Duke of Richmond.
Also he established a Council, and established another h^ushold for the Lady
Mary, then being Princes of the Realm. He made the King believe he need take
no pains: insomuch that the charge of all things was committed unto him: he
gave the King the Lease of the Manor of Hampton Court: and the King licenced
him to lie in his Manor of Richmond, which K. Henry 7. loved so well, whereat
some grudged, saying, see a Butchers Dog lie in the Manor of Richmond: His
pride was so high he regarded no man, and was hated of all men.

He came to Paul's the eleventh of January, a number of Bishops, Abbots, and
Doctors attended him: there he sat in his Cloth of Estate of rich Cloth of
Gold, and Friar Barnes for heresy, and two Merchants for eating flesh on
Friday, bare Faggots before him.

And this day the Bishop of Rochester preached in the reproof of Martine
Luther, and in the honor of the Pope and his Cardinals, insomuch that he
forgot the Gospel he preached upon: his Sermon was much commended of the
Cardinals and Bishops.

This year the New Testament was first translated into English, and brought
into this Realm, by William Tindall.

This year the good Lodouicus King of Hungary, pursued by the Turk, was feign
to take the Marsh, where with his horse falling into a Bogge was swallowed up
and ^rowned, his body afterward found, was royally buried in Uienna.

George Carpenter of Emering was burned in Monuchen of Bauaria, 1527
for maintaining of these four Articles. First, that he did not believe that
Priests could forgive sins; neither that a man could call God out of heaven,
neither that God was in the bread that the Priests hang upon the Altar:
Fourthly, that the element of water in Baptism, does not give grace: Then one
asked him whether he feared not his Judgment, neither loved his Wife and
Children, and if he would recant he should return to them, and be pardoned.
Whereunto he answered, my wife and Children are so dearly beloved unto me,
that they cannot be bought from me for all the Duke of Bauaria his riches: But
for the love of my Lord God, I will willingly forsake them: as he was going to
execution, one bid him believe the Sacrament of the Altar, and not to believe
it to be only a sign. He answered, he believed the Sacrament to be a sign
of the body of Christ offered for us: Then he said why do thou so little
esteem Baptism, being Christ was baptized: He answered not the baptism of
Christ, but his suffering, was our Salvation: Him this day will I confess
before the world: He is my Savior in him I will believe: Then one bid him put
his trust in God, and say if I err, truly I repent: To whom he answered, God
suffers me not to err: Then one bid him not to hazard the matter, but to
choose some Christian brother not to confess thy self unto, but take Council
off: He said it would be too long: Then one said, Our Father: He answered,
truly thou art our Father, and no other, this day I trust to be with thee. The
other said, Hallowed be thy Name: He answered, my God how little is thy Name
Hallowed in this world: Then he said, thy Kingdom come: He said let thy
kingdom come this day unto me, that I may come to the Kingdom: the other
said: Thy will be done in earth as in heaven: He said for this cause, O Father
I am now here that thy will may be finished, and not mine: Then the other
said, Give us this day our daily bread: He said the only living bread Jesus
Christ shall be my food: The other said, And forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us: He answered, with a willing mind do I
forgive all men, friends and adversaries: The other said, Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: He answered O my Lord without doubt then
shall thou deliver me, for I have laid my hope onley on thee.

Then one said do thou think it necessary after death to pray for thee or
say Mass for thee: He said so long as the soul is in my body pray for me that
God would give me grace and patience, with all humility to suffer death with a
true faith: but when my soul is from my body I have no need of your prayers:
He was desired of certain to show some sign of belief when he was in the
fire: He answered, so long as I can speak, I will call upon Jesus; I have
never seen the like constancy of a man, his countenance never changed color:
he went cheerfully to the fire and said this day will I confess my God before
the whole world: when he was in the fire, he still ^ryed Jesus, Jesus; and so
joyfully yielded up his spirit.

Leonard Keyser of Bauaria was burned for the Gospel, h^ being a Student (...)
Wittenberge; was sent for by his Brothren, if ever he would see his father
(...) he should come with speed: and as he was coming, by the commandment of
the Bishop of Passaw, he was taken by his Mother and Brethren: His Articles
were first that faith justifies: secondly, that works are the fruits of faith:
Thirdly, that the Mass is no Sacrifice or Oblation: That Confession,
Satisfaction, the vow of Chastity, Purgatory, difference of days: for
affirming only two sacrifices, and invocation of Saints: He maintained three
kinds of Conf^ssion; the first of Faith, which is always necessary: the
second of Charity, which serves when any one does offend his neighbor, he
ought to reconcile himself again. Mat. 18. The third is to ask Council of
the ancient Ministers of the Church: sentence being given against him, he was
disgraded, he was rounded and shaven, and clothed in a short gown, a round Cap
set upon his head all cut and iagged, and so delivered to the seculer power; As
he was led to burning, he said, O Lord Jesus remain with me, sustain and
help me, and give me force and power: In the fire he cried O Lord Jesus, I am
thine, have mercy upon me and save me; this was the blessed end of that good
man.

In this year the Senate and people of Berne, which are most of power amongst
the Switzers, assigned a Disputation within the City, and called unto the same
the Bishops of Constans, Basil* Sed^ne, and Lozanna, warning them to come
themselves, and bring their Divines, or else lose their possessions: they
appointed that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament should only be of
authority, granting safe conduct to all that would come thither, that there
should be no chiding, that every one should speak his mind freely, and in
such sort that it might be written, and whatsoever should be there agreed upon,
should be ratified, and observed throughout all their Dominions; there were ten
Articles to be disputed upon as follows.

1 The true Church whereof Christ is head, proceeds of Gods Word, perseuereth
in the same, and hears no other man voice.

2 The same Church makes Laws without Gods word, therefore we are not bound
to men's traditions, but in as much as they be consonant to Gods word*

3 That Christ only has made satisfaction for the whole world, to say there is
any other way to salvation, or means to put away sins, is to deny Christ.

4 That it cannot be proved by Scriptures that the body and blood of Christ is
really and corporally received in the Sacrament.

5 The Mass, wherein Christ is presented and offered unto his Father for the
quick and the dead, is against the scriptures, and a cont^mely to the sacrifice
of Christ.

6 That only Christ is to be called upon as Mediator to God for us.

7 That in the Scriptures there is no place after life wherein souls should b^
purged: wherefore prayers, ceremonies, yearly Dyrges and obits, which are
bestowed upon the dead; also lamps, tapers, and such other things profit
nothing.

8 That no Images should be set up to be worshipped ^p the Scriptures, and
therefore they are to be taken down in Churches.

9 That Matrimony is prohibit^d to no kind^ of men by the word: but every
whoremonger is by the word sequestered from the Communion of the Church.

10 That single life unchaste and filthy is most unseemly for priesthood.

The Bishops would not come but sent their Divines: then the disputation was
begun by Swinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Blaurer, and diverse others
defended the Conclusions. Amongst others, Conrado Treger an Austine Friar of
great fame impugned them: who at last when he sought for help besides the
Scriptures the Masters of the Disputations would not suffer him so to do:
Wherefore he departed out of the place, the disputations ended, the foresaid
conclusions were approved, by the common consent of the most part, and were
ratified and observed in Ber^e, and proclaimed by the Magistrate in sundry
places thereabouts: and Masses, Altars, and Images abolished in all places, and
immediately after was the like reformation at Constance, and after at Geneua.

Pope Clem: 7. in this year conspired with the Uenetians, and raised a great
army, and proclaimed war against the Emperor about the possession of Italy: the
Emp^^ror sent his army to Millaine, and took the City and Castle; marching
toward Rome, took it and spoiled it, and besieged Pope Clement, with his
Cardinals in mount Adrian, and took the pope, who could not be ransomed under
40000. Floreines: This Pope bare great hatred against the Family of the
Columni, because it was imperial, and threatened the Cardinal thereof to take
away his Cardinals hat, who answered, if he so did, he would put on a helmet to
overthrow the Popes triple Crown. Our Cardinal of England hearing of the
captivity of his father the Pope, stirred up the King all he might fight with
the Emperor, and defend the Faith, and he should receive a great reward of
God. The King answered he was sorry for it: but where you would have me defend
the Faith; I assure you this war is not for the Faith, but for temporal
possessions: I and my people can by no means rescue him; but if any treasure
may help him, take that which seems to you convenient. Then the Cardinal
made out of the Kings treasure twelve score thousand pounds, which he carried
over the Sea with him: then the Cardinal sent his commission to all Bishops,
commanding fastings and solemn processions to be had, wherein they did sing
the Letany after this sort: Sancta Maria ora pro Clemente Papa: Sancte Petre,
ora pro Clemente Papa etc.

The Cardinal passing the Seas, went out of Callice with the Bishop of London,
the Lord Sands the Kings Chamberlain, the Earl of Derby, Sir Henry Gilford,
Sir Thomas Moore, with many other Knights and Esquires, to the number of one
thousand and two hundred horses, having in his carriage four score Wagons, and
threescore Mules and Sumpter Horses: he bestowed great sums of money in
hyring Soldiers, and furnishing out the French Kings army, and appointed
certain English Captains, in the K. of Englands name to go against the Emperor
to rescue the Pope: he caused Clarentius king at Arms, to join with the
French Herald, openly to defy the Emperor; whereupon ensued great troubles in
England, Spain, the low Countries of Flanders, Brabant, and Zeland: all which
his privy policies and treasons, were shortly after known to the King.

In this year a Jew in Constantinople was baptized and became Christian, 1528.
which thing vehemently exasperated the Turks against him: and fearing it
should be some detriment to their Mahumeticall law, they sought to kill him,
which they did, and cast his dead carcass into the streets, commanding that
none should bury it. Wherein the glory of Christ appeared: for the dead corpse
lying there nine days, was as fresh colored, without corruption or smell, as
if it had bin alive; whereat the Turks being astonished, took it up and buried
it.

The Cardinal having defied the Emperor, as before, and made him displeased
with the King of England, he further whispered in the Kings ear, that the
Emperor had evil entreated and imprisoned the Kings Ambassadors in Spain:
by which means the Emperors Ambassador in England was imprisoned, and his
goods seized, until Letters came to the contrary, and then he was set at
liberty. When the Ambassador complained unto the Cardinal, he laid all the
fault upon Clarentius, and that Clarentius had defied the Emperor without the
Kings knowledge, by the request of the Herald of France, and that at his
return he should lose his head at Callice.

Clarentius hearing hereof, came privily into England, and was brought unto the
King before the Cardinal knew it, to whom he showed the Cardinals commission,
and their gentle entreaty.

When the King heard hereof, and had mused a while, he said, O Lord Jesus, he
that I trusted most told me all these things contrary: well Clarentius, I will
be no more so light of credence. And from thence the King never put any more
trust in the Cardinal.

Some write that the Cardinal did bear the Emperor such malice, because when
the Pope was imprisoned, as before, the Cardinal wrote unto the Emperor to
make him Pope; and he sent him an answer that pleased him not: whereupon he
writ menacing Letters unto him, that if he would not make him Pope, he would
make such a rufling betwixt Christian, Princes as was not this hundred years
before, to make the Emperor repent, yea, though it cost the whole Realm of
England: the Emperor returned him answer, bidding him look well unto it,
lest through his doings it should cost him the Realm of England indeed.

Thus King Henry came to the Title of Defender of the Faith. When Luther had
vtterd the abomination of the Pope and his Clergy, and diverse books were com
into England. Our Cardinal to find a remedy for it, sent to Rome for this
title of Defender of the Faith. After, the Uicar of Croydon preached, that the
K. would not lose it for all London and twenty miles about it. When this
glorious title was come from Rom^, the Cardinal brought it to the King at
Greenwich: and although the King had read it, yet in the morning were all the
Lords and Gentlemen sent for that could be, to come and receive it with honor.
In the morning the Cardinal went thorough the backside to the Friar
obseruants, and some went round about, and met him from Rome: part met him half
way, and some at Court gate; and the King met him in the Hall, and brought him
into a great chamber, where was a seat prepared on high for the King and
Cardinal. Whilst the Bull was read with all pomp, wise men laughed: then the
King went into his Chapp^ll to hear mass, the Cardinal being invested to
sing mass: the Earl of Essex brought the basin of water, the Duke of Suffolk
gave the asasy, the Duke of Northfolk held the Towell, and so he pr^ceeded to
Mass. When Mass was done, the Bull was again published, the Trumpets blew,
the Shawmes and Sackbuts played in honor of the Kings new style; and in the
midst of dinner the Heralds proclaimed his new style: this was ended with great
solemnity.

Not unlike to this was the receiving of the Cardinals hat, when one had
brought it to him to Westminster under his cloak: he clothed the messenger in
rich array, and sent him back to Dover, appointed the Bishop of Canterbury to
meet him, besides an other company of Lords and Gentlemen: when it came to
W^stminster, it was set upon a cubbord with Tapers about it: the greatest Duke
in the land must curtsi^ thereto, and to him empty seat. And thus much touching
Cardinal Wolsey.

He founded a certain new College in Oxford; for furniture whereof he
gathered together all the best learned he could hear of; amongst whom were
Clerk, Tindall, Frith, and Tauerner, who after were found to be heretics (as
they call them) and were cast into a prison of the College where salt fish
lay, through the stink whereof they being infected, the said Clerk, being
singular in learning, died.

One Simon Grineus hearing a Sermon of Faber Bishop of Uienna, 1529.
after the Sermon he followed Faber, and declared unto him that of good zeal
he had somewhat to say to him, and said, he was very sorry that a man of such
learning should confirm such ^^n^^^elious errors, which might be refuted by
manifest Scripture. Polycarpus used to stop his ears when he heard any
monst^^us errors, how then do you think he would have heard you reason what
the Mouse did eat when she gnaweth the consecrated Host? who would not bewail
the blindness and ignorance of the Church? Then Faber asked his name: he told
him his name was Grineus; and he fained he was sent for by the King, and had no
leisure now to reason upon this matter, and showed that he was desirous of his
acquaintance, and entreated him, both for his own matter and the Common-welth,
he would come the next day unto him. He willingly promised him. When he was
returned to supper, a stranger, an old man of great gravity told him, the
Sergeants would by and by come unto the lodging, sent by he King, to carry
Grineus to prison, whom Faber had accused unto the King, exhorting Grineus
straight way to depart the Town without delay, and so departed. Th^n we took
Grineus and carried him unto the River Rhyne, and conveyed him over in a Boat,
and returned. In the mean time the Sergeants were at the lodging, wherefore we
judged that this cruel purpos^ was frustrate by Gods provision; therefore let
us give thanks to God, which gives his Angels to be our keepers, and with
quiet minds fulfill the office of our vocation.

P^trus Flistedius, and Adolphus Clarbachus, singular Divines, for differing
from the Papists touching the supper of the Lord, with diverse other of the
Popes traditions and ceremonies, by the Archbishop and Senate were burned in
Cullen: this was by reason some divines had preached that the punishment and
death of such as these were, would pacify the wrath of God, which at this time
plagued Germany; for the sweating sickness did then mortally rage and reign
throughout all Germany.

In this year Solymanus the Turkish Emperor passed th^rough Hungary, with an
Army of fourteen thousand fighting men, and came into Austrich, where he
exercised extreme cruelty; some he bereft of sight, some he rent and mangled
in pieces, cutting off their noses, ears, hands, arms and privy members,
deflouring Uirgins, cutting off women's paps, openings their wombes with child
and burning the young babes: then he besieged Uienna, and assayed to undermine
it, and the walls being ou^rthrowne, he assaulted it desperately; and seeing the
Soldiers within desend the breach valiantly a month, he brake up the siege,
and returned with great dishonor.

The Emperor came to Strawsborough, 1530.
and commanded the Protestants to be present at Mass which they refused to do:
and he called the Prince Elector of Saxony to bear the Sword before him at the
Mass; and the Divines resolved, because he was sent for, to bear the Sword
and not to hear Mass: therefore he might there present himself. There was
an Assembly holden, and diverse Decrees made against the Protestants; and Faber
and Eckius forged confutations against them, with diverse other troubles.

At this time the new Testament was newly translated, and imprinted by William
Tindall; wherewith the Bishop of London was grieved, and devised how he might
destroy it. The Bishop being at Antwarp, and desirous to bring this purpose to
pass, communed how he would buy the New Testaments. One Packington, which was
a favorer of Tindall, but made the Bishop otherwise believe, said, My Lord, I
can do more in this matter then most Merchants: for I know them that have
bought them of Tindall, and for money I will assure you to have every book of
them that is printed and unsold. He ^ade him get them, and he would pay for
them: for he intended to burn every book of them at Paul's Cross. He
hereupon declared the matter to William Tindall: so the Bishop had all the
books. After this Tindall corrected the same again, and had them the second
time newly reprinted; so they came abundantly into England. The Bishop sent for
Packington to know the reason thereof: he said he bought all that were there,
and these were new printed.

One George Constantine was apprehended by Sir Thomas Moore L. Chancellor of
England for heresy. My Lord asked him who it was that maintained Tindall Joy,
and a great many more of you? I know they cannot live without help; and thou
being one had thy part thereof: I pray tell me who helps them thus* My
Lord, quoth Constantine, I will tell you truly: It is the Bishop of London; for
he hash bestowed amongst us a great deal of money upon New Testaments to burn
them, which has bin, and yet is, our only succor. By my troth, quoth Moore, I
think the same: I told the Bishop so much before.

The Towns of Zurick and Berne being at contention with the Towns of the
Cantons, stopped all the Straits that there could no victuals pass unto them;
wherefore they provided a power to come against them of Berne and Zurick, and
fought a great conflict with them: in which fight Swinglius, being Minister of
Zurick, was slain, and after his dead corpse taken by his enemies and burned:
when his body was burned to ashes, his heart was found in the midst of the fire
whole, which could not be without the great miracle of God. The like happened
after to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury.

In this year the King held a Parliament at Westminster: diverse Articles were
put up against the Clergy touching their excesses and extortions, and there
was provided for pluralties and non-residents, and for buying and selling of
pardons. This so displeased the Clergy, that they called the commons heretics
and schismatics: and the Lords put a book of articles against the Cardinal,
that he procured the Legate without the Kings consent, whereby he took away the
right of all Bishops, that in all writings to Rome and other Princes he wrote
Ego and Rex meus, that he standered the Church of England to be brought into a
reprobate sense, sending to Rome to be Legate, to reform the Church, and
carried the great Seal with him to Flanders, and that without the kings
consent he sent commission to conclude a league between the King and the Duke
of Florence, and that having the French pocks, he presumed to come and to
breathe on the King, and that he had caused the Cardinals Hat to be put on
the Kings coin, that he had sent innumerable substance to Rome to obtain his
Dignities, to the great impouerishment of the Realm, with many other things.

The princely possessions and great pride of the Clergy in those days, did
not only far exceed the measure of subjects, but surmounted the estates of
Kings and Princes.

In Henry the fourth his days the Temporalties in the possessions of the
Clergy of England amounted to three hundred twenty two thousand marks by the
year. And it appears by a Libell given to Henry the eight, compiled by one
Master Fish, that the Clergy had gotten into their hands more then the third
part of the land of the Realm, and the goodliest Lordships, Manors and
Territories are theirs, besides the tenth part of corn and all things else,
and servants wages: and they look so narrowly to their tithes, that they will
have the tenth egg, or else the good wife gets no rights at Easter, and
shall be taken as an her^ticke; beside what they get by their four offering
days, proving of wills, privy tithes, offerings to pilgrimages, and at their
first Masses; every one that is buried must pay somewhat for Masses and Dirges
to be sung for them, else they will accuse their frinds and executors for
heretics. What money get they for mortuaries, by hearing confessions? and yet
will keep no Council; by hallowing of Churches. Altars, Superaltars, Chapels
and Bells, by cursing men and absoluing them again for money. What a multitude
of money gather the Pardoners in a year, by cyting men to the Court and
releasing them for money, and what abundance the begging Friars get yearly.
There be two and fifty thousand parish Churches in England, and every house in
the Realm pays a penny a quarter to every of the five s^rts of begging
Friars, which is twenty pence yearly for every house in England. And the
number of the Clergy, reckoned with men, women, and children of the Laie^ie,
are but one of four hundred; and their substance draws nigh to the half of
the whole substance of the Realm; and they do nothing therewith but exempt
themselves from the obedience of your grace, and translate all power to
themselves, and that your subjects may rebel against yon, and be under them,
as they did unto your noble predecessor King John: they then interdicted the
Realm; wherefore your Realm has stood tributarie, not to any temporal
Prince, but to a cruel devilish bloud-sucker, drunken in the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs ever since: and what do they more? nothing but apply
themselves to have to do with every man's wife, daughter, or maid: that
Cuckoldrie and baudry should reign amongst your subjects, that no man should
know his child: and that their bastards should inherit every man's possessions,
they have made an hundred thousand idle whoores in your Realm, which would
have gotten their living honestly, had not their superfluous riches enticed
them to uncleanness and idleness: they catch the p^cks, or be burnt, or the
leprosy, and bear it unto another; yea some one of them shall boast amongst
his fellows that he has had to do with an hundred women. When they have
intised men's wives unto them, they spend away their husbands goods, and make
the women run away from their husbands; and run away themselves with the
wife and goods, bringing man and wife, and children to idleness, theft, and
beggerie. Who is able to number the broad bottomless Ocean full of evils, that
this sinful generation may lawfully and unpunished, bring upon us? Who is she
that will work for three pence a day, when she may have at least twenty pence
a day to fleepe an hour with a Friar, Monk, or Priest? and who will labor
for four pence a day, that may have at least twelve pence a day to be bawd to
one of these? What a sort are there that marry Priests Lemans but to cloak
the Priests incontinencie, and that they may live of Priests for their labor?
and who is he, though he be grieved never so sore for the death of his
Ancestor, rauishment of his wife or his daughter, robbery, trespass, maime,
debt or any other offense, dare lay it to their charge by any way of action? if
he do, then by and by he is accused of heresy, and except he bear a faggot
they will excommunicate him, and then all his Actions be dashed.

Notwithstanding, the statute to Mortmayne, they do daily get into their hands
more lands: the Kingdom of the bloud-suckers is like to prevail above your
Kingdom; for to them is given daily out of you Kingdom, and that which is
once given them, never comes from them again. What Kingdom can endure, that
^uer gives and receives nothing again? All their color for their gathering
these things into their hands, is, that they pray for us, to deliver our souls
out of Purgatory: without whose prayers, and especially the Popes pardon, we
could never be delivered thence: but the truth is, there is no Purgatory, but
it is a thing invented by the covetousness of the spirituality. And if there
were a Purgatory, if the Pope can deliver them there with money, he can
deliver them without; and if he can deliver one, he can deliver all, and so
destroy Purgatory, and then is he a cruel tyrant, without all charity, if he
keep them in prison and pain until men will give him money. They will not
let the New Testament go abroad in the mother tongue, lest their cloaked
hypocrisy, and that their cruelty, uncleanness, and unmercifulness be
seeue, and that they seek not Christ's honor but their own, that remission of
sins are not given for the Popes pardon, but for Christ by true faith in him.
And except your Majesty suffer their hypocrisy to be disclosed, the people
will think you take away their liberty from them, to buy their souls out of
Purgatory by giving to the spirituality, as their predecessors have done:
therefore let their hypocrisy be uttered, and that shall be more speedfull in
this matter, then all the laws that possibly can be made.

The Author of this Book was fled to Tindall, where he wrote this Book for
fear of the Cardinal: when the King had read this, he caused his Wife to send
for him home, he was brought to the King, and after he had communed with him,
and was afraid to go home, the King delivered him his Signet for a Token, to
deli^er to the Cardinal, that he should not trouble him. The Cardinal
answered; Though this discharged him, yet he had no discharge for his Wife, and
sent for her, and had troubled her, if her^Daughter had not been sick of the
plague, of which sickness, the said Fish within half a year after dyed, and
she married one Baynham, which after was martyred, as follows in this Story.
To prevent the spreading abroad of this Libell, there was a prohibition sent
out ^y the Bishop of London, for calling in this the New Testament, and diverse
other Books translated into English: the names whereof, because they are many,
I omit, and leave you to the book at large.

King Henry, about the twentieth year of his reign, made an Oration unto his
Commons, that though it had pleased God to send him a fair Daughter of a Noble
woman, and of him begotten to our great comfort and joy: yet it has been told
us by diverse great Clarks, that neither she is Our lawful Daughter, nor her
Mother Our lawful wife, but that we live together abhominably in open
adultery: and when our Ambassadors were last in France, motion was made that
the Duke of Orleans should marry our said Daughter: One of the chief
Counselors said, it were well done to know whether she be his lawful Daughter
or no; because he begat her on his brothers Wife, which is directly against
Gods Law: Think you my Lords, that these words touch not my body and soul,
and that it does not daily and hourly trouble my Conscience: I doubt not but
every one of you would seek remedy when the peril of your soul, and loss of
your inheritance is laid unto you. For this cause I have asked Council of the
greatest Clerks in Christendom: and for this cause I have sent for this
Legate, as a man indifferent to know the truth, and settle my conscience; and
if the Queen be adjudged by the Law to be my lawful Wife, it would be the
most acceptable thing in my life, both to clear my conscience and for the good
qualities which I know to be in her, besides her Noble parentage, as almost
this twenty years I have tried, so that if I went to mary again, and the
marriage lawful, I would choose her before all women, and if the marriage prove
unlawful, I shall sorrow the departing from so good a Lady, and loving a
companion* but much more lament that I have so long lived in Adultery, and have
no true heir of my body to inherit this Realm: Therefore I require you to
make our mind known to our Subjects that they may pray for us.

The Queen hearing thereof, answered, it was a great marvel that they would
make question of this now, after they had been married twenty years, and no
question in the mean time, and that all the learned at the time of the
marriage did conclude it was lawful, and that both their fathers, being so
wise did not foresee it, if there had been any such doubt, and the King my
father sent to Rome, and with great costs obtained a dispensation, that I
being one brothers wife procar^ally known, might without scruple of
conscience marry with the other brother lawfully, which license under lead I
have yet to show, but I may thank you my Lord Cardinal only for this
trouble, this is of malice, because I have won^red at your high pride, and
abhorred your voluptuous living, and little regarded your t^ranny, and for the
malice you bear to my Nephew the Emperor because he would not make you Pope
by force: and the Queen appealed to the Pope.

The King to try out the matter sent first to the Pope, then to most part of
al^ Uniuers^ties, first the Pope sent his two Legates, Wolsey and Campeius to
hear^ and decide the Case, they cited the King and Queen personally to
appear, or else by Proctors; at the day, the Legates with their crosses, axes
and pillars were set, the King was ready to hear the determination, requiring
to have an end, notwithstanding from month to month, they detracted the matter
until August, the King not taking it well to be so used, sent the Dukes of
Northfolke and Suffolk unto the Legates, requiring them to hasten an end and to
defer no longer, it is the manner of Rome, about the beginning of August,
during the Dog days, to have a solemn vacation, in which neither Schools
be used, nor any Term kept.

Cardinal Campeius pretending the order of Rome, whereof he was a member,
answered, he neither could nor would go against the ordinance thereof, and
before October he would proceed no further in the cause: the Dukes seeing their
pretended excuses, and that by no ways they would be entreated, burst out in
open defiance, the Duke of Suffolk clapping his hands on the table, swear by
the Mass* there never came Legate or Cardinal from Rome to do good in
England, so in anger they departed from the Cardinal: the King for quietness
was content to tarry^ until October, but before October came, Campeius was
called home by letters from the Pope, so the matter was left undiscussed, the
King seeing himself thus deluded, sent again to Pope Clement, desiring to
have an answer of the cause, the Pop^ would take a pause, and after send him
word.

Twelve Uniuersities agreed in one consent, that the marriage was unlawful, and
repugnant to the word of God, and that no man is able to dispense with it, but
nothing was heard of from Rome, wherefore the King assembling his Parliament
sent the Lord Chancellor with twelve of the upper house, to noti^^e the
determinations of the Colleages as before said, unto the lower house: And the
same year^ the King sent out a Proclamation for the abollishing of the Pope and
establishing of the Kings Supremacy, and he brake off with the Cardinal and
caused him to be attainted in Premu^ire, and to be apprehended, and the Clergy
maintaining the power Legatiue of the Cardinal, incurred the like praemunire,
wherefore the Spiritual Lords were called by process into the Kings Bench to
answer, but before the day of appearence they submitted themselves to the
King, offered him an hundred thousand pounds to pardon them by Act of
Parliament, and offered him the Title of Supreme head of the Church of England,
which they would never confess before, whereby the Pope, by the prou^dence of
God, lost his whole Iuris^iction an^ Supremacy in England.

Patricke Hamelton a Scottish man, he was of the Kings blood and family,
beei^^ of the most ancient and Noble stock and name in Scotland, was of the
Uniuersity of Marpurge in Germany, he openly proceeding so entreated and judged
of matters of the Church, with such praise as passed the expectation of his
age, that he made the common people and learned to admire him: Francis Lambert
in his Preface D^^icatory makes mention of him, then he took a companion with
him, and ret^^ned home to Scotland, he was not able to suffer the filthiness
and blindness of the Country, he was accused of Heresy, and after disputed
constantty with the Cardinal and his Band: he confessed Christ to be his only
Advocate, excluding the merits of Saints, acknowledged free ^ustification by
the merits of Christ, and denied Purgatory: At last he was condemned, and the
same day after dinner burned: The King being but a Child by the Testimony of
his blood, he left the verity o^ of God, fixed in the hearts of many.

William Tindal in his Apology against Moore makes mention of Thomas Hitten, a
preacher at Maidstone in Kent, whom the Bishops of Canterbury and Rochester
kept long in prison, and tormented him with diverse torments, yet he continued
constant, and at the las^ they burned him at Maidestone, for the constant
testimony o^ Jesus Christ, and of his free grace and salvation.

Thomas Bil^ey of the Uniuer^itie of Cambridge, a man of excellent constancy.
Cambridge taking root in him, after long barrennes did begin to flourish. He
converted many of his fellows to the Gospel: amongst whom was Thomas Arthur,
and Master Hugh Latimer, who was Crosse-keeper of Cambridge, bringing it on
procession days: at last he forsook the University, and went to diverse
places preaching, associated with Arthur: the authority of Cardinal Woolsey
was then great, but his pride ^reater, which declared the vanity of his life,
and of the lives of the Bishops and Clergy. Bilney with others, maruelling at
the incredible insolency of the Clergy, which they could no longer suffer, they
began to preach against this dignity, and against the Pope.

Then the Cardinal which did not greatly fear any power of Kings, but only
feared the Gospel of Christ to be preached, least it should detect their
Hypocrisy and deceits. Whereupon he caused the said Bilney and Arthur to be
cast into prison, then they were brought before the Cardinal and ^ number of
Bishops into the Charter House of Westminster: then the Cardinal required of
them, wherefore they had taught the people the opinions of Luther, which are
condemned, and whether he had not once made an oath, not to preach or defend
any of Luthers opinions, but to impugn the same. He said, He had made such an
Oath, but not lawfully: After he was sworn to make true answer, and not to
reveal his examinations.

1 It was laid against him that he preached, though Preachers be restrained
now adays: yet he had warranty by the Word of God, where he said; Go i^to all
the world and preach the Gospel. By which authority, every man that has the
gift may preach, and the Pope nor any other can make any law to the contrary,
which he confessed.

2 That he said, when crosses were set up against Walls in London, that men
should not piss there: When there were but few men did reverence them, but
when in every corner there was a Cross, of necessity men pissed upon the
Crosses: So that when there were but few Laws in the Church, then men were
afraid to offend them: after ward they made many laws, whereof some are
pecuniall, as they call them, and them they do observe; those that are not
pecuniall they call palea, and regard them not. To this or the like effect, he
confessed he spoke.

3 If I should suffer persecution for the Gospel, yet there are seven thousand
more that would preach the Gospel as I do now: therefore good people think
not much if these tyrants put a man to death for preaching the Gospel. This
Article he confessed.

5 That every Christian man is a Priest so offer up sacrifice of prayer: and if
they murmured against Priesthood, they murmured against themselves: and that we
should not pray to Saints nor worship Images.

6 That he should preach at Cambridge: that a Bachelor of Divinity, or any
other knowing the Gospel, should be let from preaching by no man: and if any
Bishop did accurse them for so doing, their curses should return to
themselves. All these he confessed.

Master Luther did recant, and submit himself unto the punishment and
judgment of the Church: but these Interrogatories were ministered unto Master
Bilney;

Whether he believed the assertions of Luther impugned by the Bishop of
Rochester were detestable: Whether general Counsels and Constitutions where
or ought to be observed of all men even for conscience, whether the Popes Keys
were no^ profitable, or against Gods word, whether the Catholik^ Church may
err, or whether it may be demonstrated or poynted out, or else whether it is
a spiritual Church known to God, whether Images of Saints ought to be
worshipped of all true Christian^, whether a man may believe that there is not
yet any Judgment given upon the sou^es departed, whether a man may believe
that our Lady remained not always a Uirgine? whether Holy days and fasting
days may without (...) be broken by any private man? whether we are bound to
be obedient to Bishops and Kings as unto Parents? whether the Church do
godly, in praying to Saints? whether all true Christians be Priests, and have
the Keys of binding and loosing? whether faith may be without works and
charity? whether it is more agreeable unto faith, that the people should pray in
their own tongue, or in a learned and unknown tongue? whether children should
be taught the Lords prayer without the salutation of the Uirgine? whether
beads be to be denied or no? whether Scriptures ought to be translated into
English or no? whether Organs and all manner of songs ought to be in the
Churches? whether a Bishop have any Temporal power? whether it be a godly
Constitution that no man should preach in an others Dioces without license of
the Bishop? whether vows of private men comes of the spirit of God? whether
we should pray for the dead, or that there is a Purgatory? whether Moral
philosophy help the understanding of the Scriptures? whether the Popes pardons
are to be ^eiected? whether there may be any Moral ver^ues without the grace
of Christ? whether Salvation and damnation come of necessity and nothing to be
in our own wills? whether Images ought to be taken out of the Churches?
whether preachers should exhort men to Pilgrimage or to the worshipping of
relics? he in a manner confesses them all.

He answers that he did believe the assertions of Luther, and that men were
not bound to believe Counsels and Constitutions, and St. Augustine in his tim^
marnailed, that we could live in safety amongst so many snares of
Constitutions, when Adam and Eve could not observe one.

Fourthly he said that the Catholic Church cannot err in faith, for it is the
whole Congregation of the Elect known only to God, otherwise no man could be
assured of his own or another salvation, for it is written, no man knows
whether ^e be worthy of hatred or love* yet I may truly say of the general
Council, congregated by the holy Ghost: Behold here the Catholic Church,
denominating the whole by the most worthy part: and he affirmed by the
Scriptures, that the faithful have the I^dgment of their souls as soon as
they die, and are in Heaven, and that we are bound to obey Magistrates as
Parents, and that the people should have the Lords prayer and the Creed in
their own tongue, that their denotion might be furthered by their
understanding of it, and might be more expert in their faith: I hau^ heard many
say, they never heard any speak of their resurrection, and by the knowledge
thereof became more ready to goodness, and fearful to do evil, and he would
wish that the Scripture were in our own tong^e, for St. Paul sath, he would
rather have five words in a tongue that is known etc. that the Church may be
edified, and Ch^isostome bad his hearers look upon books, that they may the
better remember that which they had heard, and Bead translated the gospel of
St. John into English, and where it is objected, it is dangerous for Heres^e,
he said good Pastors might easily help the matter by adding the
interpretation of the hard places in the margent: touching pardons, he said it
were better that they should be restrain^d, then any longer to be used as they
have been to the injury of Christ's passion.

Further these things were deposed against him, that he should preach at
Ipswich, Christ is our Meadiator betwixt us and the Father, why then should we
seek to any Saint for remedy, and to make petition to Saints is great injury
and blasphemy to Christ: and that man is so imperfect of himself, that he
cannot merit by his own deeds, that it was great injury unto our Savior
Christ, to teach that to b^ buried in Saint Francis Coull, should remit four
parts of penance: what is then left to Christ which takes away the sins of
the world: This I will justify to be great blasphemy.

And that it was great folly to go^ in pilgrimage, and that preachers in times
past have been Antichrists, and now it has pleased God somewhat to show their
errors; and that the miracles done in Walsingham, Canterbury, and Ipswich were
done by the Devil by the sufferance of God, to blind the people: and that the
pope has not the Keys that Peter had, except he follow Peter in living, and
that it was deposed against him, that he was twice pulled out of the Pulpit by
the Friars in the Dioces of Norwich: And that he ^xhorted the people to put
away their Gods of Silver and Gold, and leave offering unto them, because it
has often been known, that those things offered, have after been given to
Whoores of the Stews: And that Jews and Sarazens would have bec^me Christians
long ago, had it not bin for the Idolatry of the Christians, in offering
Candles, Wax and money to stocks and stones.

In a Dialogue betwixt him and Friar John Brusierd, he proves three points:
First, that there is but one Mediator of God and Men, which is Christ: Then our
Lady, S. Peter, and other Saints be no Mediators; and whatsoever we ask the
Father in Christ's Name we shall have, and God says not in any other name:
therefore let us ask in his name, least at the day of Judgment it be said to
us, hitherto have you asked nothing in my name.

To which the Fry^r answered: I would Master Bilney that you would search the
first Origin of the Rogation days, which were ordained by Pope Gregory, with
Fastings, Prayers, and holy Processions against the Pestilence, by the
infe^tion of the air, in which time of Procession an Image like our Lady,
Painted by S. Luke, went before them: About which Image Angels did sing Regina
coeli letare: To the which the Pope joined, Ora pro nobis Domine, etc.
Therefore being the Angels did honor the Image of the Uirgine: And Pope
Gregory with all the Clergy did pray to her: It appears mani^estly we ought
to pray to Saints, that they may say like for us, which the Disciples said in
the Gospel, serve them, and send them away, because they cry after us.

Secondly, he proves the Pope to be Antichrist, in that he exalts himself
above all that is called God. For the Pope imposes but a small punishment upon
them that break any of the ^en Commandments; But he that shall violate the
popes constitutions, he is guilty of death. What is this but the Pope to sit
and to reign in the Temple of God, that is, man's conscience as God, and the
popish miracles are not of God, but illusions of Satan; who as the Script^res
witness, have been loosed this five hundred years; As it is written, that Satan
should be loosed after a thousand years; and they are illusions, because they
make them put their Faith in our Lady and other Saints, and not in God alone.

The third is, that no Saint, though his suffering were never so great, and his
life most pure, deserved any thing for us with God, as you may see by the
answer of the wise Uirgins, unto the foolish Uirgins, when they craved oil of
them: No say they, least peradventure we have not sufficient for our selves and
you, get you rather to them that sell, and buy, where be then the merits of
Saints, whereby they may deserve for themselves and others.

After he was brought again before the Bishops at the Charter House before
said; where he was admonished to abjure and recant: who answered, he would
stand to his Conscience: but being many times sent for and persuaded, he did
abjure: But God not willing to loose such a worthy instrument of his Church
raised him again after his fall, as h^re follows to be seen.

These Articles were objected against GEFFREY LON, for which he was abiured.
FIrst for having and dispersing abroad books of Luther, for affirming and
believing that Faith only justifies, and that men be not bo^nd to observe the
constitutions of the Church; That we should pray only to God, not to Saints:
That pilgrimages are not profitable to man's soul: That we should not offer nor
set up lights to Images: That no man is bound to keep the Fasts of the Church:
That Popes pardons profit not a man: and Thomas Garnet Master of Art. Curat of
all Hallowes in Honey Lane, for having and distributing Luthers Books, and them
of that sect: For affirming Faith only justifies: That Pardons profit neither
the dead nor living: That the Constitutions of the Church bind us not: for
calling Bishops Pharisees: That fasting days are not to be observed: That
every man that is able may preach the Word and no Law to the contrary: for
these and such like he was abiured before Cutbert Bishop of London.

But the aforesaid Bilney, notwithstanding his recantation: He abated not any
part of his desire and study to preach, but was the more vehement against the
Bishops corrupt life: but whilst he was occupied in that godly enterprise, to
allure all men to salvation, Thomas Moore, and Richard Nickes, the blind Bishop
of Norwich, who was as blind in body as Soul, they laid hands on him, and
condemned him of heresy, and judged him to the fire; because he had preached
since his abiuration, and because he taught Saints should not be worshipped,
nor called upon as Mediators. He would many times prove the pain of the fire
by holding his finger near the Candle: but the night before he suffered
martyrdom he held his finger so long that he burnt off the first joint. He
was burned in Lollards yet in Norwich, with great joy falling down before the
stake, and rising kissed it, and bound himself with the Chain, confessing his
Faith, and animating the people to stand fast in the truth of Gods Word, and to
suffer for it.

Sir Thomas Moore being Chancellor of England; when those, should burn
Bilney, required of him a Letter of his hand, whereby they might ^ee discharged
after his death: He said go too fellows burn him first, then come to me
after for a Bill of my hand.

The Story of the valiant Martyr Master BAYFIELD.
THis Bayfield was a Monk of Bury, and for his Religion he was (...) in the
prison of his house, and whipped with a gagge in his mouth, and then ^^ocked
and continued in the same torments three quarters of a year; and then he was
committed to Doctor Barnes to go^ to Cambridge with him: when he had been the^e
a whole year, he tasted good learning so well that he never returned unto his
Abbey again, but went to London to Maxwell and Stacy, and they kept him secret
a while, and conuayed him beyond Sea. Doctor Barnes being in the Fleet for
Gods Word; This Bayfield mightily prospered in the knowledge of God, and was
veneficiall to Master Tindall, and Frith, for he brought substance with him,
and sold their works for them. And at last coming to London to M. Smithes
house in ^^cklers Bury, he was betrayed and dogged to his Book-^inders house in
Mark Lane, and there taken and carried unto Lolards Tower, and from thence
taken and carried to the Cole-house; because one Patmore Parson of Much-Haddam
in Essex, then living in Lolards tower, was confirmed in the Doctrine of Christ
by him; there he was tied by the neck, middle and legs, standing vp^ight by
the walls, diverse times manacled to accuse others that had bought his Books,
but he accused none, but stood in his Faith unto the end: He was in the
Consistory of Paul's put to his trial, whether he would abjure or no: he said
he would dispute for his Faith, and so did to their great shame. Stokesley
being their Judge with others, he was condemned for bringing over and selling
heretical Books, and because before time he was accused to the Bishop of
London for affirming certain Articles contrary to the Church: and especially
that all land should be given to God, and not to Saints or Creatures; and that
every Priest might preach the Word of God, by the authority of the Gospel,
and need not to run to the Pope or Cardinals for license; and that he
ab^ured, and has since preached the like Doctrines: When they asked him what
he had to say, why he should not have his Judgment; He said with a vehement
spirit to the Bishop of London, your living of the spiritualty is so evil,
that you be heretics, and you maintain evil living, and let that true living
may not be known: and that their living, neither their belief, is according
to Christ's Gospel: Then the Bishop read the sentence against him, and
disgraded him* he kneeling upon the highest step of the Altar in Paul's; He
took the Crosie^ staff, and smote him on the breast, that he threw him down
backwards and brake his head, and he sounded: and when he came to himself
again, he thanked God that he was delivered from the malignant Church of
Antichrist, and that he was come into the true Church, and that he trusted anon
to be in heaven with Jesus Christ, and the triumphant Church for ever: Then he
was led again to Newgate, and continued there in prayer an hour, and thence
went to the fire ioifully, and was three quarters of an hour alive in the
fire, and when the left arm was burned, he rubbed it with his right hand, and
it fell from his body, and he continued in prayer to the end without moving.

The History of Mr John Tewxbury Citizen and Lether-Dresser of London.
IN all points of Religion, and the point of justification, he disputed most
openly in the Bishops Chapel, with such prompt and expert answers that
Tunstall and all his learned men were ashamed: This disputation continued a
senight, then he was sent to my L. Chancellor, Sir Thomas Moore to Chelsey, and
there he lay in the porters Lodge, hand, foot, and head in the stocks six
days. Then he was carried to Jesus Tree in the Garden, where he was whipped,
and also twisted in his brows, with small ropes, that the blood start out of
his eyes, and yet would accuse no man. Then he was racked in the Tower, and
there promised to retant at Paul's Cross. After he came to S. Austens with a
new Testament in his hand, and stood up before the people in a Pew, and
declared openly with tears that he had denied God, and prayed the people to
forgive him, and to beware of his weakness not to do as he had done: for if I
should not turn again to this truth, having the New Testament in his hand, he
said, this Book Gods Word would damn me body and soul, and he prayed every
body to do as he had done: for he would not feel such a hell again as he
had done not for all the worlds good: and immediately he was carried to the
Bishop of London; and after he was burned in Smithfield, and died a glorious
Martyr.

In his Disputations, the Bishop proposed these Articles out of the Book
called the Book of the wicked Mammon: and he affirmed them.
TEwxbery, A man should do good works for the love of God only, and for no
hope of reward higher or lower in heaven, for if he should it were presumption,
and being asked whether faith only justifies: he said if he should desire
heaven by works he were greatly to blame, for works follow Faith, and Christ
redeemed us by his death: the devil holds our hearts so hard that it is
impossible for us to consent to Gods Law: and that the Law of God suffers no
merits, nor any man to be Justified in the sight of God: and that the Law of
God commands things impossible; and as the good tree brings forth good
fruit: so there is no Law to him that believes and is justified by faith, and
all good works must be done without respect of any profit thereby, for they
deserve no reward of God, and that the Devil is not east out by the merits of
fasting and prayer.

Item, We cannot love God, except we see first his love and kindness to us:
whilst we are under the Law, we see nothing but ^inne and damnation, and the
wrath of God, and cannot but hate him as a tyrant, and flee from him as Cain,
and that we are damned by Nature as a Toade, and a Serpent are so by Nature.

Item, Love in Christ puts no difference betwixt one man and another.

Item, The sects of Saints Francis, Saint Dominick and others be damnable: Then
the Bishop asked him whether he would renounce these heresies, and he prayed
the Bishop to reform himself: Then the Bishop gave him respite, and when he
came before him again.

First, he affirmed that Christ and all his merits were his, and that he was
knit to him so inseperably that he could not be damned, except Christ were
damned.

He that seeks by his alms more then to be merciful, and to succor his
brother^ and neighbors need he is blind, and sees not Christ's blood, so God
is honored on all sides in that we count him righteous in all his laws, and
to worship him otherwise is Idolatry: he concluded to them all, he found no
fault throughout all the book, but it is all good, and has given him great
light of conscience.

The next Sessions he was intised to recant* but shortly after he was moved by
the example of one that was burned in Smithfield, and after did constantly
abide in the testimony of the truth, and suffered in Smithfield.

Lastly for these Articles he was condemned.
1 THat Faith only justifies which lacks not Charity. 2 That Christ is a
sufficient Mediator for us, therefore no prayer to be^ made to Saints. 3 That
Christ is our sufficient purgatory; and that there is no purgatory after this
life. 4 That the souls of the faithful departing this life rest with Christ.
5 That a Priest receiving orders, receives more grace, if his Faith be
increased, or else not.
Lastly, he believes that the blood and flesh of Christ is not in the
Sacrament: whereupon he was condemned and burnt as aforesaid.

JOHN RANDALL.
THis JOHN RANDALL was of Christ's College in Cambridge, and for the love that
he had to the Scriptures, and sincere Religion, he was suspected and hated;
the young man being studious and about one and twenty years old was long
lacking of his companions, and through the stench of his corpse, his study door^
being broken up, he was found hanged with his own girdle within the study, in
such manner, that he had his face looking upon the Bible, and his finger
pointing to a place of Scripture: whereas predestination was entreated of,
surely this matter lacked no singular policy, of some old naughty man, that it
should seem for fear of pred^stination, he was driven to despair, that it
might keep their young men from the study of the Scriptures as a thing most
perilous.

In this year an old man in the County of Buckingham, for eating of Bacon in
Lent, 1531
was condemned to the fire and burned.

EDWARD FRESE.
EDward Frese, a Painter, was hired to paint certain clothes for the new Inn
in Colchester, and in the upper boarder of the clothes, he wrote certain
sentences of the Scripture: then some of the Town which had seen his work,
apprehended him, and brought him to London to the Bishop, where he was cruelly
imprisoned, with others of Essex. One Johnson and his wife, and one Willy, his
wife, and his son, and one Father Bate of Rowshedge, and they were fed with
fine Manchet, made of sawdust, or the most part thereof: the said Frese being at
the Bishops at Fullam, his wife being desirous to see him, came to the gate
being big with Child, the Porter kicked her on the belly, that on the same she
died, and the child died immediately: after for writing against the wall, his
hands were manacled, that the flesh of his arms were higher then the Irons:
and they kept him three days without meat, when he should come to his answer,
he could say nothing, but looked on the people like a wild man, and if they
asked him any question, he could say nothing, but my Lord is a good man: an^
when they had spent his body and wits, they sent him to Bearsie-Abby, but he
would not tarry there, but he never came to his wits again, until his death:
And his brother Valentine Frese was burned for the testimony of Christ in York.

Also the wife of the aforesaid Father Bate, made a Supplication to the King,
and delivered it unto him, who appointed her to go to one M. Seliard, of him
she gat a letter to the Bishop, she hoped some good should come to her Husband,
but some of her friends would needs see the contents of her letter, which was
to this effect: look what you can gather against Father Bate, send me word,
that I may certify the Kings Majesty: but shortly after he gat out of prison
in a dark night, and was caught no more.

In this year Friar Roy was burned in Portugale, what his doctrine was, may
easily be gathered by his testimony that he left here in England.

The History of Master JAMES BAYNHAM, a Lawyer.
THis Master Baynham was accused to Sir Thomas Moore, Chancellor, and arested
with a Sergeant at Arms, and carried out of the middle Temple to his house at
Chelsey, and when he saw he could not prevail with him, he whipped him at a
tree in his garden, then racked him at the tower before himself, until they
had almost lamed him, because he would not accuse Gentlemen of the Temple, nor
tell where his books lay, and because his wife denied they were at his house,
she was sent to the fleet, and his goods confiscate. When they had often used
him upon the tortures, then he sent him to the Bishop of London, who cast him
into Lolards tower, until he had bin diverse times before him examined, and
they were not able to resist him. He was both mighty in Scriptures and
Arguments, that he was able to confound them with their own Arguments: so he
condemned him, and the Bishop sent one Doctor Symons to pervert him, and wait
upon him to the stake, and after much communication between the Doctor and
him, he prayed the Sheriffs to deliver him from Satan, for he was content to
confirm his faith with his blood. At the stake he lay down flat and prayed,
then rising up, he embraced the stake: then he said, Good people, I am come
hither, accused and condemned for an heretic: these be the Articles I dye for.

I say it is lawful for every man or woman to have Gods book in their Mother
tongue.

That the Pope is Antichrist, that he knows no other Keys of heau^n gate,
but the preaching of the word, and that the^e is no other purgatory, then the
purgatory of Christ's blood, and that the souls of the faithful imediatly go
to heaven, and r^st with Christ for evermore. That Thomas Becket was no Saint,
but a Traitor, and a shedder of innocent blood: th^n one M. Pauey answered,
Thou lie thou heretic, thou deniest the blessed Sacrament of the altar: He
answered; I do not deny the Sacrament as it was instituted of Christ, and used
of his Apostles, but I deny transubstantiation, and your Idolatry to the bread,
and that Christ, God, and Man should dwell in a piece of bread; but that he is
in heaven, sitting at the right hand of God: but it is an Idol as you use it
in the abominable Mass, making it a sacrifice propitiatory to the quick and
the dead, and robbing the Church of one kind: then Pauey bid, Burn him
Heretic: then he said, God forgive thee, and show thee more mercy then thou
show me, and God forgive Sir Thomas Moore: and prayed the people to pray for
him, and so praying died.

The next week after, M. Pauey went up into a Galery, where he had a Roode
before him and prayed, and bitterly wept, and his Maid finding him so doing, he
^ad her take a rusty sword and make it clean, and not trouble him, and
immediately he tied up a rope and hung himself.

There was an Idol named the Rood of Douer-Court, 1532
many resort^d unto it, for it was blown abroad, that the power of it was so
great, that none could shut the Church^doore where it stood, whereupon sour
men came ten miles thither, and took the Idol from the Shri^e, and a quarter
of a (...) from the place fired him, who burned so bright, that he lighted them
homeward one mile. After, three of them were indicted of felony, and hanged in
Chains; one at Dover Court, called N^cholas M^^sh, Robert King in Dedham,
Robert Debnam, at Cottaway: which three persons a^ their death, did more edify
the people in godly learning, then all the sermons preached there a long time
before: the fourth escaped: the same year many Images were cast down.

The Martyrdom of John Frith.
WHen Cardinal Wolsey prepared to build a College in Oxford, which now is
called Christ's Church, 1533
whence he was sent for to the King, being accused of certain crimes: in the
way by immoderate purgations he killed himself, and so left a most glorious
piece of work; part but begun, part half ended, and but a small part fully
finished. He appointed to that College all such as were found to excel in any
kind of learning: amongst whom this John Frith was one, and William Tindall,
and Tauernar of Bostone, and John Clark, and many others. These were accused of
heresy by the Cardinal, and impri^oned in a deep Cave in the same College,
where they were all infected through the stink of Fish: and John Clarke, wi^h
other good men, whose names are not kn^wne, died; but Frith escaped, and
departed out of England for four years, and returning home, Sir Thomas Moore
promised great rewards to them that could take him, and laid all the havens for
him. At length he was taken at Reading for a Uacabound, and being put in the
stocks, he sent for the Schoolemaister, and began in the Lattine tongue to
bewail his captivity, the Schoole-maister being overcome with his eloquen^e,
took pity on him, and loue^ his excellent wit: then they fell to the Greek
tongue, wherewith he so inflamed the love of the Schoole-maister, that he went
to the Magistrates and got him to be set at liberty without punishment: but
after he was traitorously taken and sent to the Tower, where he had many
conflicts with the Bishops, but especially in writing with Sir Thomas Moore,
who wrote against certain writings of Frithes, against the Sacrament of the
Altar, which came to Sir Thomas Moors hands, and Frith having gotten a Copy
of it, wrote against it. Cranmer, Archbishop, in his Apology against the Bishop
of Winchester, seems to have collecte^ Friths reasons abundantly. What
Articles were objected unto him, appears by a brief Commentary, written and
sent to his friends out of prison, as follows.

First, the whole matter of the examination was two Articles, to wit;
purgatory, and the substance of the Sacrament.

Touching purgatory, they asked whether I believed that there was any place to
purg^ the spots of the dead after this life: I denied there was any, because
the nature of man consists but of two parts, the body and mind: one Christ
purges in this world by laying afflictions upon us, and death the reward of
sin is laid upon it, but our souls are purged with the word of God, which we
drink in through Faith, to the salvation both of body and soul: If you will
show a third part of man, I will grant you a third place, which you call
Purgatory, otherwise I must deny unto you the Bishops shop of Purgatory.

Secondly, it was required of me, whether the very body of Christ were in the
Sacrament of the Altar.

I answered, it is both Christ's body and ours, for as of many corns is made one
loaf, so we being diverse, are but one body in Christ, therein it signifies
our body: so of the Wine that is made of many clusters, one liquor.

But the same bread again, in that that it is broken, signifies the body of
Christ, declaring his body to be broken and put to death for our redemption;
and in that it is distributed the fruit of his Passion is signified: the
communication whereof equally redounds to all Christians.

And again, when it is received to be eaten, it is the signification of the
body of Christ, admonishing us, that our inward man is refr^shed by the merits
of Christ, even as the bread is received with our mouth, to the outward
nourishment of the body.

Then said they, do thou believe the very body of Christ to be contained in
the Sacrament really, without trope or figure? He answered; No surely, I do
not so think, and when by no means he could be persuaded to recant, he was
condemned to be burned.

When he was tied to the stake in Smithfield, there it dot^ significantly
appear with what constancy he suffered: he willingly embraced the fag^^ts and
fire, the wind blowing away the fire to his fellow that was tied at his back
and b^rned with him, made his death the longer, but God gave him such strength
and patience, that as though he had felt no pain in that long torment: he
seemed rather to rejoice for his fellow, then to be careful for himself.

The examination of ANDREW HEVVET, that was burned with JOHN FRITH.
HE was a Prentice in Watling-streete, to a Tailor, when he was asked what he
thought touching the Sacrament of the last Supper: he answered, even as John
Frith does: Then one of the Bishops said, Do thou not believe that it is
really the body of Christ, borne of the Uirgin Mary? He said, that I do not
believe why said the Bishop; he said Christ commanded me not to give rash
credit to them which say, Behold here is Christ, and there is Christ, for many
false Prophets shall rise up, says the Lord. Then Stokly, Bishop of London,
said, Frith is condemned for an heretic, and except thou revoke thine opinion,
thou shall be burned with him: he said, he was content. The Bishop used many
perswasi^ns to alure him to recant, but could not, wherefore he was burned with
Frith as before. When they were at the stake, one Doctor Coke admonished all
the people, that they should in no wise pray for them no more then they would
for a Dog, whereat Frith smiling, desired the Lord to forgive him, and so
departed.

About this time High Latimer was inhi^ited by the Bishop of London to preach
in his Dioces, and yet after he preached in the Precin^t of the Friars
Augustines of London.

The Lady Anne of Bullen, although she was not yet married to King Henry, yet
she was in great favor, and daily she inclined the Kings mind more and more
against the Papists, so that the same year the King and certain of his Lords
came into the Parliament house, and he complained of the Clergy, that they
were but half his Subjects, yea and scarce our Subjects: for their oath to the
Pope at their consecration, is clean contrary to that which they make to us:
and he deliu^r^d to the Parliament the coppies of both their oaths. These Oaths
being thus received and ^pened to the people, were the occasion that the Pope
lost al his jurisdiction in England shortly after. The matter falling out more
and more against the Pope, Sir Thomas Moore, a great maintainer of the Pope,
was driven to resign his Chancelorship, ^ deliver up the great seal into the
Kings hands. After whom, succeeded Sir Thomas Audley, keeper of the great
seal, a great fauorer of Christ's Religion.

Lady ANNE of Bullen.
WIthin short time after, the King married the Lady Anne Bullen, Mother to
Queen Elizabeth, who was the secret ayder and comforter of all the Professors
of the Gospel, and her alms showed her life was accordingly, which was a
hundred gowns weekly, and other apparel yearly before she was married, both
to men and women, she also gave much private alms to the widows and poor
ho^sholders continually, until she was apprehended. And she ever gave three or
four pounds at a time to them, to buy them Kine, and sent her Sub-almner about
to the Towns where she lay, that the Parisheners should make a b^ll of all the
poor householders in their parish: and some parishes received 7. 8. or 10.
pounds to buy Kine withal: Also, she maintained many l^arned men in Cambridge,
so did the Earl of Wiltshir^ her Father, and the Lord Roch her Broth^r, and
she brought them in favor with ^ing Henry. She carried always about her a
little purse, out of which she was wont daily to scatter abroad some alms to
the needy, thinking no day well spent wherein none had fared the better for
her. She kept her Maids, and such as were about her, employed in making shirts
and smocks for the poor, but the Lady Dowager being deuorced, made the Pope
to curse the King, and interdict the realm: In the mean time Queen Anne
being great with child, in the next year following was crowned with high
solemnity at Westminster, and not long after brought to ^ed at Greenewich, 1534
of the fair Lady, Elizabeth: The Lord Mayor of London and his Brethren, with
forty chief Citizens, were commanded to be present, with all the Nobles and
Gentlemen: The Kings Palace, and all the walls to the Friars were hanged with
Arras, ^^d the Friars Church. The Font war of Silver, and stood in the midst of
the Church, three steps high, which was covered with fine linen, and diverse
Gentlemen with aprones and towels about their necks, gave attendance about it:
Over the Font hung a fair Canopy of Crimson Satin, fringed with Gold.

The holy Maid of Kent.
Certain Monks put into the heads of many of the Kings Subjects, that they
had R^uelation of God and his Saints, that he was highly displeased with king
Henry, for the diuorcement of the Lady Katherine, and surmised that God had
revealed unto a Nun, called Elizabeth Barton, whom they called the Holy Maid of
Kent, that if the King did divorce her, he should not be King of this Realm
one month after, and not one day nor hour in Gods favor. She would show
marvelous alteration of her visage and body, as if she had been wrapped in a
trance, and inspired of God. She spoke against sin, and reproved the
Gospel, which she called heresies, and spoke diverse things to the reproach of
the King and Queen, and to the establishing of Idolatry, Pilgrimage, and
derogation of Gods glory. The Archbishop* the Lord Cromwell, and Master Hugh
Latimer, with great labor found out her naughtiness, and condemned her and
put her to death, with certain of her council.

WILLIAM TRACY Esquire.
A Little before this time William Tracy of Todington in Gloster-shire made his
Will, that he would have no funeral pomp at his burying, nor Mass; and said
that he trusted in God only, and hoped by him to be saved, and not by any
Saint. His Executor brought the Will to the Bishop of Canterbury that then was,
to prove it; which he showed to the Convocation, and they judged him to be
taken up and burned as an heretic, and sent a commisson to Doctor Parker
Chancellor of Worcester, to execute their sentence, who accomplished the same.
The King hearing thereof, sent for the Chancellor, who laid the fault on the
Bishop; yet it cost him three hundred pount er^ he could have a pardon.

The story of twenty four burned at Paris.
IN this year^ were diverse writings set up in Paris, upon the Porches and
gates, against the Mass and other papisticall superstitions, whereupon many
were apprehended and cast into prison: but twenty four were executed in
several places of the City of Paris.

The bearer of the Popes curse and interdictment against King Henry and the
Realm, 1535.
durst not come into the Realm with it, but set it up in Dunkerk in Flanders:
the king hearing thereof, took great displeasure against the said Princess
Dowager, and so stomacked the matter, that the next year he called a
Parliament, and caused it to be provided by sufficient Acts, that the Pope
should be utterly abol^sht, and himself to be established supreme head of the
Church: at which thing Sir Thomas Moore and the Bishop of Rochester grudged,
and would not consent unto it, but openly resisted the same; wherefore they
were condemned of treason, and headed at Tower Hill. Likewise three
Charter-Monks were hanged, drawn and quartred at Tyburne, for speaking
traiterous words against the Kings Majesty.

This year the King set forth a Proclamation for the abolishing of the usurped
power and jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, wherein is declared, that not
only the secular men granted him this jurisdiction, but all the spiritualty in
the Convocation house, under their seals; wherein also he signified, that he
had addressed Letters vnthe Bishops of the Diocese, straightly commanding them
that forthwith the sincere word of God should be preached every Sunday and
Holy Day unto the people, and Our style and jurisdiction of supreme head
appertayning only to our Crown and Dignity royal to be published, and that
the Popes usurped name should be put out of all prayers, masses, or other
books, except it be to his reproach.

The life and story of M. William Tindall.
FIrst, he was Schoolmaster to one Master Welsh, and for translating certain
religious books into English, and for arguing with a certain Priest that often
used to his Masters house, and confounding diverse points of their religion by
the word of God, he was pursued and glad to go out of the Realm into Germany,
and there translated the Bible into English, and compiled diverse other books,
and s^nt them into England; whereby the door and light unto the Scriptures was
daily more and more opened, which before was many years closed in darkness:
from thence he went to A^twarp, and had his abiding there, and was lodged about
a year in the house of one Thomas Poynets an English man, which kept a house
of English Merchants: then came thither one Henry Philips, having a servant
waiting on him. M. Tindall became acquainted with him, and had great confidence
in him, and had him often to dinner and supper with him, and got him a lodging
in M. Poynets house.

At length Philips w^nt to the high Court of Bruxelles to betray M. Tindall and
procured to bring from thence with him the Procurator general, with other
Officers, which was not done with small charges, from whom soever it came.
After, Philips returning, would have M. Tindall* to dine with him: then he
desired M. Tindall to lend him forty shillings, which he did: he told Philips
he could not di^e with him, for he was bid forth to dinner, and he should go
with him. And going forth to d^nner, Philips having appointed the officers in
the way, he gave them a sign that this was he they should apprehend: then they
took him and brought him to the Procurator general* who sent him to the Cas^le
of Filford, and the Procurator general went to Poynets house, and sent away
all that was there of M. Tindals.

The said Poynets and certain Merchants went over into England, and got letters
from the Co^ncell for M. Tindals delivery; upon the delivery whereof to the
Council of Bruxelles, M. Tindall should have bin delivered unto him: which when
Philips understood, he accused Poynets ^o be an heretic, and a receiver of
such, and caused him to be apprehended and kept 13. or 14. weeks in prison; but
he escaped by night and got into England: but M. Tindall was condemned; and the
same morning as he was had to the fire* he delivered a letter to the chief
Keeper of the Castle, which the Keeper himself brought to Poynets house, who
compared him to be fellow to the Apostles being in prison, both for his
conversation and converting and preaching to the people.

M. Tindall hearing by certain Merchants what wonderful feats a Iugler did,
he desired them that he might be present also at supper to see him play his
parts: accordingly the supper was appointed, and the Merchants, with Tindall,
were there present. The Iugler being desired to vtt^r his cunning, showed all
that he could do, but all was in vain: at last, with his labor, sweating and
toil, he saw nothing would go forward, he confessed there was some man present
at supper which dis^urbed his doings. For his letters that he wrote, I refer
thee to the book at large if thou dispose to see them.

The Lord Cromwell, 1536
keeper of the Kings privy Seal, Uicegerent of all the Kings jurisdiction
eccl^siasticall, sent out certa^n iniunc^ions by the Kings authorit^, for the
preaching the word of God, for the b^tter publishing of the kings suprema^^^,
against idols, and (...) on pilgrimage* and trus^ing in saints, and to abrogate
diverse holy days* and for reformation to be had in diverse other ecclesiastical
matters.

In the begi^^g of this year the most noble and worthy Lady Queen Anne of
Bullen, 1537 28. He^. 8
after she had lived Q^^^ne three ^ears, was cast into the Tower, together with
her brother the Lord Rochford, and diverse others which shortly after were
executed.

The words of the Queen at the time of her death.

Good Christian people, I am come hither to die; I am judged thereto by the
law, therefore I will not speak against it: I pray God preserve the King, for
there was never a gentler Prince, and to me he was ever a good sovereign: and
I r^quire every one to judge the best of my cause; so ^ take my leave of the
world, and of you all, desiring you to pra^ ^or me. Then she kneeled down, and
said, Into thy hands I commend my soul, Jesus receive my soul, diverse times,
until her head was stricken off.

Five burned in Scotland.
Seven years after Patrick Hamelton aforesaid, there were five burned in
Edenborough the chief City in Scotland; two were Dominican Friars, one Priest,
one Cannon, and one Gentleman, adjudged by the Archbishop of S. Andrews,
Petrus Chappe^anus, and the Franciscan Friars, whose labor is never wanting in
such matters.

The murder of ROBERT PACKINGTON.
He was a rich Mercer dwelling in Cheap side, and was one of the ^urgesses of
the Parliament for the City of London, and had spoken against the
covetousness and cruelty of the Clergy; wherefore he was had in contempt with
them, therefore one Doctor Vincent Deane of Paul's hired a stranger for sixty
crowns to kill him, which he did in this manner: this Packington used by four
of the clock every morning, to go to a Church near Cheap Side; and in a
mistie morning the hired stranger shot him and killed him with a gunne as he
crossed the street. This could not be known until the death of the Deane:
then he repented the fact at his death, and confessed it to his ghostly father.

In this year the Kings Majesty by his Uicegerent the L. Cromwell sent out
again certain Injunctions unto the Spiritualty, 1538.
for the reformation of religion, for the maintenance of reading the Bible in
English, and for taking down of Images, with such other like.

The history of John Lambert, alias Nicolson.
BEing beyond Sea by reason of the persecution here, he returned, hoping the
time had bin amended, by the means of Queen Anne and Cromwell, and the
abolishing of the Pope; he became a Schoolmaster: and being present at a
Sermon preached by Doctor Tailor, one that was a Bishop in K. Edwards time, and
died in the Tower in Queen Mary's time, after the Sermon he uttered diverse
arguments to the Preachers, and desired to be resolved: Tailor alleged
business, and desired him to write his mind, which he did.

The first was upon, The cup is the new Testament: and if these words do not
change neither the cup nor the wine into the new Testament, by like reason the
words spoken of the bread, should not turn it corporally into the body of
Christ.

The second, it is not agreeable to a natural body to be in ^wo or more places
ot one time: therefore Christ having a natural body, cannot be in heaven on
the right hand of his father, and in the Sacrament.

Thirdly, a natural body cannot be without his form and conditions, as he
cannot be without substance: i^ the Sacrament there is no form and condition
of the body of Christ, no, not any appearance of flesh, therefore there is no
transubstantiated body of his in the Sa^rament: and on the contrary, the form
and condition that you see in the Sacrament pertains to bread, which cannot
be there without the subject, therefore of necessity we must confess bread to
be there.

Tailor put up the writing to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury; so he
was forced to defend his cause openly in the Court: the Archbishop had not yet
sanored the doctrine of the Sacrament, which he afterward was an earnest
teacher of Lambert was feign to appeal from the Bishop to the King.

Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester, as he was most cruel, so he was most
subtle, gaping to get occasion to hinder the Gospel. He privily admonished
the King, what great hatred he had gotten of al men for abolishing the Bishop
of Romes authority, and for subuerting the Monasteries, and for the
di^orcement of Queen Katharine: and now the time served, if he would take it,
to remedy all these matters, and pacify their minds that be offended; if on
this man Lambert he would manifest how st^utly he would resist heretics,
whereby he shall discharge himself of all suspicion of being a favorer of new
Sects; whereupon the King appointed a day for argument before him: when the
time was come, the Bishop argued the foresaid points against Lambert, which he
answered most effectually; but the King and the Bishops would not suffer him to
conclude his arguments. When the King minded to break up his counterfeit
disputation, he said to Lambert, What say thou now to the reasons and
instructions of these learned men? Art thou satisfied? Will thou live or die,
thou have yet free choice? Lambert answered, I submit my self to the will of
your Majesty: the King said submit thy self to the hands of GOD, not to
mine; then said Lambert, I commit my soul to the hands of GOD, but my body I
submit to your clemency. Then said the King, if you commit your self to my
clemency you must die: for I will not be a patr^n unto heretics. Then he bade
Cromwell read the sentence of condemnation against him; which he did, though
he was the chief friend of the Gospellers: this was by the po^icie of Cranmer,
that if Cromwell should have refused to do it, he might incur the like
danger. And in the sentence was contained a decree, that the same should be set
upon the Church porches, and be read four times every year in every Church
throughout the Realm^, whereby the worshipping of the bread should be the more
fixed in the hearts of the people.

The Answers of JOHN LAMBERT to diverse Articles administered to him.
Where you ask me of free will, ^ree-will.
whether a man have free will that he may deserve joy or pain: we deserve
nothing by doing the commandments of God, as it appears by the Parable of
the Master, which when his servant is come from work will make him wait on
him until he has eaten, and after give him leave to eat, and yet thanketh
him not, because he has done but his duty: so should you say you are
unprofitable servants when you have done that which you were bound to do;
therefore when we have done well, we should not magnify our own free will,
but his grace by which we did it.

And though ^race be promised in many places to the keepers of Gods precepts,
yet such reward shall neu^r be attained of us, but by the grace and benefit of
him which works all things in all creatures.

We should not do works for love of reward, nor for dread of pain, but
because they do please God: and if we only aim at the contenting of his
pleasure, reward undoubtedly would ensue good deeds, as heat inseparably
follows fire. Thus we should serve God for love, as children, and not for
reward and dread as servants.

We have no free will nor ability of our selves to do the will of God, but as
Esaias says, We are subject and thrald unto sin: and Paul says, By the grace
of God we are set at liberty.

Touching eare^ co^^ession; it was not ordained of God b^t of man: in the book
called Historia tripa^tita, you shall find how it was first instituted, and
after undone again, because of a huge vil^anie committed by a Minister upon a
woman, through con^ession.

And touching their power to forgive sins; I say only Christ loses a
sinner which is contrite, by his promise, and the Priest can but declare the
promise: neither does the declaring of the promise by the Priest benefit any
one, vn^esse he be loosed from his sin, by credence in the promise ministered.
And Chrysostom in his book, in opere imperfecto, affirms that the keys of
heaven are the doctrine of the word of God.

Ministers do bind and loose after a sort, as Christ told Paul, Thou shall
open their eyes that they may be converted from darkness unto light. Here Paul
is said to open the eyes of men's hear^s, yet to speak properly, it is God that
does it: therefore David prays* Reuela oculos meos: and it is said of John
Baptist, That he should turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and
the unbelievers unto the wisdom of the wise, although to turn men's hearts only
belongs to God; but so we use to speak Metonomi^^.

Touching inioyning of penance; I know none that men need to admit, neither
ought you to ini^yne any, except casting away the old vice, and taking the new
virtue, which every ^rue penitent intends, or ought to intend.

Touching the question, whether grace be given only by the Sacraments; God
sends his grace where it pleases him, either with them or without them, and
when he pleases: and many lewd persons receive the Sacraments that are
destitute of grace, to their confusion; yet in due receipt of the Sacraments God
gives grace.

Where you ask, In opere imperf.
whether all things necessary to salvation are in Scripture; S. Chrysostom
says he would have a true preacher of Gods law not to swerue therefrom,
neither on the right hand nor the left: for he that should thereunto add or
withdraw, should enterprise to be wiser then God.

And Saint Cyprian in his Epistle ad Cicilium fratrem, teaches how we ought to
hear Christ only, not regarding traditions of men, like as he does in diverse
other places. And this agrees well with Scripture, which is called the word of
salvation, the administration of righteousness, the word of truth, the rod
of direction, our spiritual food, the spiritual sword that we ought to fight
withal against all temptations and assaults of our glostly enemies, the seed
of God, the kingdom of heaven, the keys of the same, the power of God, the
light of the world, the law of God, his wisdom and Testament: every one of
which words will give sufficient matter of argument, that following the same
doctrine only shall have sufficient safeconduct to come unto the inheritance
promised, though no other way or mea^s were ann^xed unto the same. In the
hundred and eighteen Psalm, David says, The word of God is true and his way
verity; every man is vanity and lying: and Christ says, Every one that hears
my words and does them, is like one that builds his house upon a sure
foundation; and that there is none other foundation by S. Paul: and he would
have us follow one doctrine of Christ to a unity of faith, that we may be
perfect men; not carried about with every wind of doctrine, brought up by the
slights and wilines of men that ^tudie to deceive us.

Touching the question, that there are many things to be believed upon pain of
salvation, that are not in the Scripture: I say laws ordained for the civil
regiment of the body, and all other Laws, so they be not hurtful to Faith or
Charity, but help to the same, we ought to keep them not only for fear of
punishment, but for Conscience sake, although such ordinance be not expressly
in the Scripture; but I say there is nothing that is not expressly in the
Scriptures, that is to be believed upon necessity of salvation.

Touching your Question of purgatory, and whether souls departed be there in
torment and purged: I say there is a purgatory in this world, which is the fire
of tribulations, through which all Christians shall pass, as S. Paul says:
All that live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution: In this purgatory I do
reckon my self now to stand, God send me well to persevere unto his honor.

Other Purgatory do I know none, neither can any be proved by any place of
Scripture: And S. August: de ebrietate, says, let no man deceive himself; for
there be two places, the third is not known: He that with Christ has not
deserved to reign, shall perish with the Devil, and in his Book de vanitate
seculi, he says, know you that when the soul is departed from the body, it is
incontinent for the good deeds put into paradise, and else thrown headlong
into the Dungeon of hell for the sins; and to this all Scripture agrees.

Touching your question, whether Martirs, Apostles, and Confessors departed,
ought to be honored and prayed unto.

Saint Augustine in his Book de vera religione, would have that we should
worship no men departed, be they never so good and holy, no nor yet an Angel,
nor to honor them, but only in imitating their good living as they followed
God, not building Churches to them; no, the Angels would not have us build
Churches to them, but would with them we should honor the Maker of all things.
They refuse all honor, saving honor Charitatis, which love we should
express, in helping the poor and helpless: And the Scripture teaches, that
there is but one Mediator, and we are exhorted in all places of Scripture to
call upon God in need, but in no place to call upon any Saint.

Touching your demand, whether Oblations and Pilgrimages, may devoutly and
meritoriously be done unto the Sepulchers and Relics of Saints.

Moses when he died, would be buried where no man should know which was his
grave: and it was, because the Jews, which were prone to new fangled
worshipping, should not fall into Idolatr^, worshipping him as God, for the
great and many miracles that were wrought by him when he was alive. It is no
point of my belief, to think that Oblations and Pilgrimages at Saints graves
and Relics, are meritorious works, neither is there any devotion at all in
doing of them.

Touching fasting days and time I say they are good for diverse respects, but
it is no deadly sin to break them, for they are but the traditions of men.

Touching your question whether Images ought not to be in the Churches for a
remembrance of Christ, and his Saints. I know no Images made with hands that
ought to be worshipped; For the Psalm says, Confusion be unto all such as
worship carved Images and glory in pictures.

And S. Augustine in his Book de vera religione, let us not be bound to worship
the works of men, for the workmen are more excellent then the things that
they make; whom notwithstanding we ought not to worship: and if Christ's
Doctrine were so opened, that people might understand it, as Prelates chiefly
ought to do by teaching, we should have no need of Images, for nothing is so
effectual to excite the remembrance of Disciples, as the lively voice of good
teachers.

Touching your demands, whether men forbidden to preach as suspected of Heresi^
ought to cease from preaching, Christ and his Apostles were counted heretics,
and the Apostles were forbidden oftentimes of the High Priest and others to
preach any more, and were imprisoned and scourged for it, yet they would not
leave preaching, but told them to their faces they must obey God which bad them
preach, rather then men which forbad them; yea, the Angel delivering them out
of prison, bad them go preach again. This is for our instruction, doubt not,
for such practice is showed in all ages, so you may see when men be wrongfully
infamed of heresy, and so prohibited by Bishops to preach the Word of God:
they ought not to stop for any man's commandment.

Touching your question of having the Bible in English, in England. In my
opinion, I say it was not well done to inhibit it: and worse, that the Bishops
have not sithence amended it if they could, that the people might have it to
use virtuously. And I will add one reason, the Scripture is the food and
sustinance of man's soul, as it appears by many places of the Scripture, as
other meat is the food of the body: then if he be an unkind Father that
keeps away the bodily meat the space of a week or a month from his
Children, it should seem that our Bishops be no gentle Pastors or Fathers,
that keep away the food of men's souls from them, both months, years, and ages,
especially when others offer the same.

Touching you question, whether faith only justifies. I answer with S.
Augustine, Good works make not a man justified, or right wise: but a man once
justified, does good works.

These Articles being directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, which was not
Cranmer but Doctor Warham: whereby it may be gathered, that this godly learned
man was long before he disputed before the King, or was condemned to death:
upon the day that was appointed for him to suffer, this holy martyr of God was
brought out of prison unto the house of the Lord Cromwell, and carried into his
inward chamber, where it is reported Cromwell asked him forgiveness for what
he had done. And being admonished of his hour of death, he was greatly
comforted; and coming into the hall, he saluted the Gentlemen and sat down to
breakfast, showing no manner of sadness or fear; after breakfast he was carried
to the place of execution, where he should offer himself a sacrifice of sweet
savor unto the Lord, who is blessed in his Saints for ever and ever. Amen.

The story of one COLLINS.
ONe Collins a Gentleman was burnt at London, 1538.
for that being besides his wits, by chance he came into a Church where a
Priest was saying mass, and was come to the holding up and showing the
Sacrament, Collins in like manner took up a little Dog, holding it over his
head, showing him unto the people; wherefore he was condemned and burned, and
the Dog with him.

LEYTON and PVTTEDVE.
LEyton was a Monk of Aye in Suffolk, and was burned at Norwich, for speaking
against a certain Idol, which they of Aye were wont to carry about in
processions, and for affirming both kinds in the Sacrament: and Puttedue
coming into a Church merrily taunted the Priest, that after he had drunk up
all the wine alone, he blessed the hungry people with the empty Chalice:
wherefore he was condemned and burned.

Cowbridge.
THis Cowbridge came of a good stock, his ancestors even from Wickliffes time
hitherto, had been always favorers of the Gospel, 1539
and addicted to the setting sorth thereof in English: He was borne in
Colchester; his Father was head Bailey thereof; he was burned at Oxenford, for
affirming that every poor Priest, being never so poor and needy, being of a
good con^ersation, has as great power and authority in the Church of God, and
ministration of the Sacraments as the Pope or any other Bishops: they
almoststerued him whilst he was in prison in Bocardo: and a little before his
examination they promised him meat, if at his execution he would say such
things as they would minister unto him, which he promised to do: whereupon he
was well cherished, and recovered some part of his sense. When he was come to
execution, contrary to their expectation, often times calling upon the Name of
the Lord Jesus, with great quietness and meekness he yielded his spirit into
the han^s of the Lord.

This year one Peter a German, and another with him, constantly endured
death by the fire at Colchester, for the Lords Supper.

Friar Forest hanged for Papistry.
HE was an obseruant Friar, and had secretly in confessi^ns declared to
certain of the Kings Subjects in confessions: that the King was not supreme
head of the Church, and being examined how he could say the King was not
supreme head, being sworn to the contrary: he answered; he took his oath with
his outward man, and his inward man never consented thereto: he was further
accused of diverse damnable Articles and convicted, after he was hanged in
Smithf^eld alive in chains, by the arme-holes and middle, and fire made under
him, and so he was consumed to death. There was a scaffold prepared for the
Privy Cauncell and the Nobles to sit on, to grant him pardon if he repented:
there was also a Pulpit, where M^ster Hugh Latimer Bishop of Worcester declared
his errors, and con^uted them by Scripture, with many exhortations to repent;
but he would neither hear nor speak. A little before the execution, a great
Image was brought out of Wales to the gallows, which was called Daruell
Gatheren, whom the Welch-men much worshipped, and had a prophecy amongst them,
That this Image should set a whole Forest on fire; which took effect: for he
set this Forest on fire, and consumed him to nothing. When the Friar saw the
fire coming unto him, he took hold on the ladder, and would not let it go,
but died so impatiently as never did any that put his trust in God.

Certain Injunctions given out in the thirtieth year of King HENRY'S reign.
AGainst printing and bringing from beyond Sea any books, 1539.
and offering to sell them without acquainting the King, or some of his
Council first, upon pain of forfeyting their goods and chattels, and their
bodies to be imprisoned at the Kings pleasure.

That there shall none argue about the Sacrament of the Altar, upon pain of
death and loosing their goods, except it be the learned in Divinity, in their
schools and appoy^ted places for such matters.

And that holy bread, holy water, and procession, creeping to the Cross,
setting up of lights before the Corpus Christi, bearing of candles on Candlemas
day, Puri^^cation of women delivered with child, off^ring of Chrisomes,
keeping of the four offering days, paying their Tithes, these to be observed
until the King do abrogate any of them.

Married Priests to be counted Laymen, and loose their Spiritual promotion.

That all Clergy men, should diligently in their cures, preach, and teach the
people the glory of God, and the truth of his word, declaring the difference
betwixt the things that God commands, and the rightes and ceremonies then used,
least the people thereby grow into further superstition.

And that Thomas Becket was a tray^or and not a saint, and his Images to be
plucked down in every place, and his holy days not to be kept, and that the
Anthiphens, Collects and prayers to him be not read, but raced out of the
books.

Lancelot, John a Painter, Gyles German.
John Painter and Gyles German were accused of Heresy, and whilst they were
(...) examination at London before the Bishop and other Judges, by chance
there came one of the Kings guarde one Lancelot, a tall man and of as goodly a
mind, he standing by, seemed by his gesture to favor the cause and the poor
men, whereupon he was appr^hended, examined, and condemned with them, and the
next day at ^^ue of the clock in the morning was burned in St. Giles in the
fields.

Sir John Bortrucke, a 540.
Scottish Knight, his confutation, of certain Arcicles upon which he was
condemned by the Cardinal and most of the Nobles and chief of Scotland.
FIrst touching the Popes Supremacy, these holy ones magnisse their Lord as
common the^ues pre^erre their Captains, calling them every where most honest
men, for it is evident that none in the whole world is given to more riot, no^
seeks more greedily to all kind of delicates and wantonness, and abounds
with all vices: as treason, murder, rapine, and all kind of such evils as He.

And where they affirm him to be Christ Uicar on earth, it shall appear,
that he cannot exercise more power then other Bishops: for whereas they say
Peter had power over the Apost^es, and consequently over the whole Church, the
which power succeeds to the Bishop of Rome, but by the Scriptures we may
easily see how (...) they lie in the Council: in the 15. of the Acts Peter
heard them speak their minds, received their Judgment, and followed their
decree, is this to have power over others, and in his first Epistle, writting
to the Bishops and Pas^ors: he says, ^ beseech the Bishops and Pastors which
are amongst you, for so much as I my self (...) also a Bishop and witness of
the afflitions of Christ and partaker of the glory which shall be revealed,
that they diligently feed the flock committed unto them: why then do they
challenge the authority of S. Peter which he never acknowledged in himself? I
doubt not but it Peter were here he would rebuke their madness, as Moses did
Joshua which was so zealous toward him.

And in the eight of the Acts he is commanded by his fellows, To go with John
to Samaria, he refused not so to do: and being the Apostles send him, they
declare that they do not ^ount him as their superior; and by his obedience he
confesses a fellowship with them, but no Emperor over them. But the Epistle
to the Galathians puts us sufficiently out of all doubt, whereas S. Paul
proves himself to be equal with him, and how when Peter did not faithfully
execute his office, he was by him rebuked, and not obedient to his correction,
all does evidently prove, that there was equality betwixt Paul and Peter, and
also that he had no more power ever the residue of the Apostles then over him,
the which Paul does purposely entreat of, least any should prefer Peter or John
before him: wherefore I cann^t acknowledge Peter head of the Apostles, nor the
Pope over other Bishops, but I acknowledge Christ the only head of the Church;
And I say with S. Gregory, that whosoever calls himself an universal
Bishop, he is the fore-rider of Antichrist. And whereas they allege the high
priesthood of the old law, I say the right of that high priesthood is only
transported unto Christ, for this Priesthood does not only consist in
learning but in the propitiation and mercy of God, which Christ has fulfilled
by his death, and in the intercession by the which he does now entreat for us
unto his father.

Whereas they allege out of the 16. Chapter of Matthew, Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock, etc. If they do think that this was particularly spoken unto
Peter, S. Cyprian and S. Augustine shall sufficiently answer them, that Christ
did it not to prefer one man above the residue, but that he might set forth
the unity of the Church, he says: if this were spoken only unto Peter, the
Church has not the Keys, and if the Church have them, then Peter when he
received the Keys did figurate the whole Church.

Touching their Arguments, that these words were spoken to none but Peter, this
will easily be dissolved, if we know why Christ gave this name Peter to him,
whose name was Simon, having respect only to the constant profession which he
made of Christ, as God changed the name of Abraham from Abram, which took the
name of the multitude, which should come forth of his seed: so Peter took his
name of the constant confession of Christ, which indeed is the true Rocks upon
which the Church is builded, and not Peter, no otherwise then Abraham was not
the multitude himself, whereof he took his name: and the Church if it had
been builded upon Peter, should have been builded but upon a weak
foundation, who was overcome with the words of a little wench, so constantly to
deny Christ, so any man may understand how these Romish builders do wrest the
scriptures to their pleasures. And when they allege out of the 20. chapter of
S. John, feed my sheep, it is a childish Argument, for to feed sheep, is not to
bear dominion over the whole Church: and Peter exhorts all Bishops, to feed
their flocks; therefore there was no authority given unto Peter more then to
others, or that Peter did equally communicate the authority which he had
received unto others, and did not reserve it to himself, to be transported to
the Bishops of Rome.

2 Touching pardons or indulgences: they say, that the merits of Chirst, and of
the Saints, Apostles and Martyrs, which they impudently affirm to have merited
more at Gods hands, then was needful for themselves, and there did so much
superabound, that might redound unto the help of others: and they affirm,
that their blood was mixed with the blood of Christ, and the treasure of the
Church was compounded of them both, for the remission of sins, and that the
keeping of this treasure is wholly committed to the Pope, and in his power
consists the dispensation thereof, and that he himself may bestow these
treasures, and give power to others so to do.

Hereupon rises the pleanary indulgences and pardons, granted by the Pope, for
as many years as he will by Cardinals for 100. days, they have such power,
and bishops but for forty days, and no body but Satan taught this doctrine, who
would utterly extinguish the merits of Christ, which he knows to be the only
remedy of salvation. Christ in the 17. of Luke says; When you have done all
that you are commanded, count your selves but improfitable servants. And the
46. of Esaias. All the merits of man's righteousness is compared to menstruous
cloth: by the Scripture the corruption of our nature is so manifest, that in
our most perfect works there lacks not imperfection. The Parable of the ten
Uirgines in the twenty five of Matthew, puts this out of all controversy,
where the wise virgins said, They had not sufficient oil for themselves and
others.

This they ground upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Collossians, I fulfill the
afflictions of Christ which were wanting in my flesh, for his body which is the
church: But Paul refers to those afflictions wherewith the members are and
shall be afflicted, so long as they live in this world, even as Christ was
afflicted: and whereas S. James adds this word, for the Church: he does not
mean for the Redemption of it, but for the edifying of the same, as in the 2.
to Timothy, he says; He suffers for the elect sake, for by his constancy and
stedfastnes in troubles, he shows he contemns this life, in hope of a
better life: whereby he does confirm and establish the faith of the Church for
great fruit, by the afflictions and martyrdom of the faithful, arises to the
glory of God, in that they subscribe and bear witness unto the truth by their
blood, and being the Popes pardons are nothing else then such as he faineth, he
is a manifest deceiuer, and a Simonist in selling such merchandise as can in no
place help.

Touching the marriage of Priests, it is against the word of God, and against
Justice to forbid Priests to marry in the 13. to the Hebrews, The band of
marriage is undefiled and honorable amongst all men: And in the 1. Cor. 7.
chap. For avoiding of whoredom, let every men have his own wife: and in that
they say, this is meant of others, and not of Ministers: That is disproued by
the 1. Tim. 3. Chapt. Bishops and Deacons ought to be the husbands of one wife.
And what can be more spoken against them herein, then in the fourth Chapter of
the said Epistle; In the latter days shall come deceivers, and wicked spirits,
which shall forbid to marry; they excuse themselves, that this was fulfilled in
the heretics called Tatians, which did condemn matrimony, but we do only
forbid Churchmen to marry, but this, notwithstanding this prophecy of the
holy Ghost, redoundeth upon them. They interpret S. Paul's saying, that a Bishop
shall have but one Wife: That a Bishop ought not to be chosen that has
married the second Wife; but this interpretation appears to be false: in that
he presently declares what manner of women Bishops wives ought to be. S. Paul
reckons matrimony amongst the principal virtues of a Priest, and these men
call it in the Canons, the poluting of the flesh: God instituted matrimony,
Christ sanctified it with his presence, and the turning water into wine, and
would have it the Image of his love to the Church. They aleadge the Leuiticall
Priests, which as often as they came to minister, were bound to be apart from
their wives, and being our sacraments be more excellent then theirs, and daily
used, it would be very uncomely that they should be handled by married men. The
Priests of the old Law were forbidden all outward uncleanness of the flesh
when they ministered, to signify the holiness of Christ whom they did prefigure,
but our holiness cons^steth of the inward cleanness of the spirit: and S. Paul
is witness, that the Apostles did both keep their wives, and carry them about
with them.

3 Touching that he should say that the Scottish nation and their Clergy be
altogether blinded, no man will deny that people to be blind that neither hear
Christ nor his Apostles, such is the people of Scotland, in that they call the
Pope supreme head of the Church, whith belongs only to Christ, and contrary
to the word, they forbid Priests to marry in the tenth of John, Christ is the
door, they affirm they must enter by the Uirgine Mary and S. Peter, Christ
would have us worship him in Spirit and truth: The Scots build Temples and
Chapels for Idols, in which they commit Fornication: In the tenth to the
Hebrews, Christ, By one sacrifice, has made those perfect for ever which are
sanctified: And to this effect Christ said on the Cross, It is finished,
showing that by his death all Sacrifices for sin ended; yet the Scottish
Churchmen daily offer Christ for sins, both of them alive, and them that be
dead: God commands not to worship any Graven Images, the Scots fall flat to
them, and offer them: Incense. Paul teaches, that Christ is our wisdom,
righteousness, satisfaction, and redemption: the Scots prefer the traditions of
men before the law of God, they stablish righteousness in their own works, and
Sanctification in holy water, and other outward things, and Redemption in
pieces of Lead, which they buy of their great Antichrist.

Touching the possessions temporal, and jurisdiction in temporalities, in the
18. Chapter of Numbers, God said to Aaron, Thou shall have no portion amongst
the^, I am thy portion and heritage, thou and the Leuits shall have all the
tithes of Israel for their ministry; but what heritage is pr^uided for them I
do not say but they may possess, but all temporal jurisdiction should be
taken from them: when twice there rose a contention, which of Christ's disciples
should be greatest: he told them they should not have dominion one over
another, like the Kings of the Nations, and Christ in the 12. of Luke, answered
him that desired him to divide his Brothers inheritance unto him, Who made me a
Judge. And in the 8. of John, he refused to give judgment upon the
Adulteress: whereby it appears, Christ rejected the office of a Judge, as a
thing not agreeable to his office. When Moses took upon him the civil
government and the priesthood, he was commanded to resign the Priesthood to
Aaron, for it was against nature one man should suffice both charges, and as
long as the face of the true Church did continue, no Priest did usurp the
right of the sword. S. Ambrose says, Emperors rather desired the Office of
Priesthood, then Priests any Empire, then sumptuous Palaces belonged to
Emperors, and Churches to Priests. And S. Barnard says, Peter could not give
that which he had not, but he gave to his successors that which he had,
carfulness over the Congregation, for this cause the kingdom of heaven is
given unto you, why do you invade other men's bounds?

They were ignorant of all judgment that did fat with their possessions these
belly-beasts, all they which do indow such filthy sinkes with their revenues,
they follow the steps of Iezabell, for what do they daily but bleat and bow
before their Images, burning Incense, and falling flat before the altars, as
the Prophets of Baall did, and if Daniell and Elias were Heretics, when they
would destroy the Priests of Baall, so am I: We do but desire, that their
riches wickedly bestowed upon them, might be taken from them, but Elias was
more rigorous, for he cast the Prophets of Baall into the brook Kidron.

The Pope cannot make laws according to his own mind and will, and say they
are spiritual, and pertain to the soul, and are necessary to eternal life:
for the word of God gives them no such authority, in the 23. of Joshua, Thou
shall not swerve from my law to the right hand, nor to the left: And in the 12.
of Deuteronomy, Thou shall neither add to, nor take from my Commandments:
Therefore in the second of Malachy; The Priest shall maintain wisdom, and the
law shall they require at his hands. And where he speaks of hearing them, he
puts this condition, that they answer according to the Law of the Lord,
then these are couenant-breakers, that bind the consciences of men with new
laws: And in the 33. of Ezekiell, Thou shall hear the word out of my mouth,
and declare it unto my people, So he could not speak any thing of himself,
and God by Jeremy, calls it Chafe, whatsoever does not proceed from
himself: The Prophets speak nothing but the words of God, therefore they so
often used these words; The word of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, the
vision of the Lord, thus says the Lord: The Apostles must not teach their own
devises, but that which God commanded them. Paul in the second to the
Collosians, denies he has any dominion over their Faith, though their
Apostle. And in the ^^nth to the Romans, Faith comes by hearing the word of
God, and not by hearing the dreams of the Pope: and Christ himself says for
our example, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me; to teach Ministers
what to do: The power of the Church is not such, that it may teach new
Doctrines, frame new Articles of Faith, and new laws, but is subject to the
word of the Lord included in the same.

They defended their Constitutions by these reasons, if it were lawful to the
Apostles to make a decree besides the commandment of Christ, that the people
should abstain from things offered to Idols and blood, it is lawful for their
successors as often as need requires to do the same: but the Apostles made no
new decree, but to warn them how to rule themselves amongst their Brethren,
least they should abuse their liberty to the offense of others: and contrary,
Peter in the same council pronounces God to be tempted, if any yoke be laid
upon the neck of the Disciples: and S. James says, the Gentiles that are
converted unto God, are not to be troubled with externe decrees, and outward
Elements.

And by the 23. of Matthew, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair,
whatsoever they command to observe, keep; but do not after their doings. Christ
taught his Disciples, that he saw nothing in the doing of the Scribes and
Pharisees to be followed, yet they should not refuse to do those things which
they did teach by the word, but not what they taught of their own head.

Being accused for having the New Testament, and other Books of heresy, he
called them blasphemers and Romish Swine, and their stomachs rankered, and
tongues most venomous, which durst note the New Testament of heresy, as they
were the greatest murderers that murdered Christ, so these men filled the
measure of all other Heretics and blasphemies: how shall these Serpents and
s^^cke of Uipers escape the judgment of eternal fire.

And being accused that he was so obstinate, that none of his friends could
persuade him: he said he knew not why he should call them friends, which so
greatly labored to convert him, nor will more esteem of them then of the
Madianits, which called the Children of Israel to do sacrifices to their Idols.

Then they condemned him for an Heretic, and his goods to be forfeited, and
because they could not appr^hend him, they made a picture of him and burned it,
and cursed every one that should show any intertainment, favor, or help
toward him, and their goods likewise to be confiscated.

The six Articles agreed upon in the Parliament House.
1 THe blessed Sacrament of the Altar, 1540
by the efficacy of Christ's words being spoken by the Priest, is present really
under the form of Bread and Wine, the natural body and blood of Christ,
conceived of the Uirgine Mary, and that there remains no substance of bread
and wine, but only the substance of Christ, God, and Man.

2 Secondly, that the Communion in both kinds are not necessary, ad salutem
unto all persons: and it is to be believed, that in the flesh, under form of
Bread, is the very blood; and with the blood, under form of wine, is the very
flesh, as well apart as both together.

3 That Priests after orders, may not marry by the Law of God.

4 That vows of Chastity or widdowhood, by man or woman made to God, advisedly
ought to be observed by the Law of God, and that it exempteth them from other
liberties of Christian people which without that they might enjoy.

5 That it is meet that private masses be continued, as whereby good people
ordering themselves accordingly, do receive both godly and goodly consolations
and benefits, and it is agreeable to Gods Law.

6 That auriculer confession is necessary to be retained and used in the Church
of God.

Then they caused it to be enacted, that if any the Kings Subjects, after the
12. of July next coming, by word, writing, or any otherwise, preach, argue, or
h^ld any opinion against the real presence as aforesaid, or against the
Sacrament under one kind as aforesaid: they and their assistants to be
condemned for heretics, and to be burned without any abiuration, and Clergy of
Sanctuary to be allowed them, and all their goods and lands forfeited unto the
King, as in case of high treaso: The like offense against any of the other
Articles to be felony.

The History of THOMAS CROMWELL, Earl of Essex.
THomas Cromwell became the most secret and dear Councelor unto the King,
after he was made Earl of Essex: He alone through the singular dext^ritie of
his wit and Council brought to pass that which no Prince or King throughout
all Europe, dare or can bring to pass: For whereas Brittany was most
superstitious of all Nations: he brake off and repressed all the poli^ies and
malice of the Fr^ers, Mon^es and Religions, and subverted there houses
throughout all the Realm; and brought the Archbishops, and Bishops; yea
Cranmer and the Bishop of Winchester to an Order, though he were the Kings
chief Councelor, preventing their enterprises and complaints, specially in
those things which tended to the decay of good men, which favored the Gospel,
unto whom Cromwell was ever a shield against the pestiferous enterprises of
Winchester, between^ whom there was continual emulation both being great with
the King; one much feared, the other beloved; but Winchester seemed such a man
to be borne only for the destruction of the good, and Cromwell by thy Divine
providence appointed a help to preserve many, it were to tedious to declare how
many good men through this man's help have been relieved; whereof a great n^mber
being deprived of their patron by his fall perished, and many yet alive which
are witness of these things: Iehu, the sharp punisher of superstitious Idolatry
was not much unlike this man.

For this purpose this man seemed to be raised up of God, to subvert the dens
of sloth and idleness, where if they had remained, the Pope could not be
excluded out of England; for there was an incredible number of Monasteri^s in
England: There riches and possessions were so great, that they vpbraided even
unto Kings and No^les beggary: and there houses were no less sumptuous, which
for the most part were plucked down to the ground, and their revenues and
substance the King partly converted unto his own Coffers, and partly
distributed amongst his Nobility; but many repr^hend the subversion of these
Abbeys and say they might have been converted to other good uses which indeed
would have been good and godly, if in this Kingdom there should be
continually a succession of good Princes: but if it should happen to be a King
of a contrary Religion, it would have been otherwise, as we may see by the
example of Queen Mary: If the Monasteries had been left standing until her
superstitious days, they should have been restored again, and filled with
Monks and Friars. For if the goods and possessions of the religious, being in
the hands of the Dukes and Nobility, could scarce withstand the Queens power,
how should the meaner sort have retained them. Wherefore no doubt Gods great
providence did f^resee these things in this man: Whereupon as often as he sent
any man to suppress any Monastery, he would charge them that they should
subvert their houses from there foundation.

When the Pope was abolish^d out of England, and that there was diverse tumults
about Religion, and it seemed good to the King to appoint a Conuo^ation to
which Cromwell came, and found all the Bishop^ attending his coming, and all
did obeisance unto him, as to their Uicar general; and he saluted them every
one in their degree, and sat down in the highest place. Then Cromwell in the
name of the King, spoke words to this effect.

The King thanks you ^o: your diligence, the cause why he has willed you to
assemble, is that you should estab^sh certain controversies touching the state
of Faith, and Christian Religion, which are now in controuersi^, not only in
this Realm: but also amongst all other Nations of the world, for he wills
not that there should be any public change in this Realm of Religion, except
by the consent of you and the whole Parliament, wherein you may easily perceive
his profound wisdom and great leave toward you: Wherefore he desires you in
Christ's name, that leaving blindness, contentions* you would discuss those
things amongst you which pertain to religion; and the Church having only
respect unto the Scriptures, neither will he any longer suffer the Scriptures
to be wrested by any one of you; neither to be oppressed with the Popes
Decrees, or authority of the Doctors or Councels; neither will he allow any
Doctrine grounded only upon Antiquity and Custom, having no other foundation
in Scriptures, such as you call unwritten verities, you owe this duty chiefly
to Christ; and next of necessity unto the Church, and yet you shall not be
unrewarded at the Kings hands if he perceive you do your duty as you ought in
establishing concord in the Church: The which to bring to pass the only
method is to discuss all things according to the Canons of Gods word:
whereunto the Kings Majesty does exhort you, and heartily desire you: the
Bishops gave thanks unto the King for his zeal unto the Church, and his
exhortation worthy so Christian a Prince.

Then Bonner Bishop of London, the most earnest Champion for the Pope, defended
the unwritten verities, and maintained the seven Sacraments of the Church, and
others resisted him: Touching whose Arguments because there is no great matter
in them, I refer thee to the Book at large, where also thou may see the
number of Idols in England, to which in great devotion they use to go on
pilgrimage unto.

At length he was apprehended and committed to the Tower, and then he was
attainted by Parliament for heresy, for supporting Barnes and Clarke heretics
and many others; And by his authority and Letters rescued them, and delivered
them out of prison, and for evulgating a great number of Books, containing
heresy: and caused Books to be translated into English, comprising matter
against the Sacrament of the Altar, and for commending the Books after, and
that he should speak words against the King, which they would never suffer him
to answer unto, which were not likely to be true, in that the King so shortly
after his death, wished to have his Cromwell alive again; by reason of which
Act of Parliament, the Noble Lord Cromwell was oppressed with his enemies, and
condemned in the Tower: He was beheaded upon Tower Hill, where he patiently
suffered the stroke of the Axe by a Butcherly miser, which very ungodly
performed the office.

The History of Thomas Barnes, Thomas Garard, and William Hierome Divines.
WHen as Cromwell was dead, Gardener Bishop of Winchester, being at liberty to
exercise his cruelty, it is to be wondered what troubles he raised, and least
he should loose his occupation by delays: He first assaults Robert Barnes,
Thomas Gerrard, and William Hierome, whom he caused to be put to execution two
days after Cromwell; and first of Barnes Doctor of Divinity.

There was sent down a Sergeant at Arms to Cambridge, who arres^^d Doctor
Barnes in the Convocation house: and they determined to make privy search for
Luthers Books, and all the Germans works, but they that were suspected had
word thereof, and the Books were conuayed away before they came, and he was
brought to Cardinal Wolsey in Westminster: At last he spoke with the Cardinal
in his Chair of State, kneeling on his knees: Then said the Cardinal, What
Master Doctor* had you not scope sufficient in the Scriptures to teach the
people: but my golden shows, my pollaxes, my pillars, my golden Cushions, my
crossee did so much offend you, that you made us Ridiculum caput amongst the
people, we were iollily that day laughed to scorn: Uerily, it was a Sermon
more fitter to be preached on a Stage, then in a Pulpit: At last you said, I
wore a pair of red Gloves, I should say bloody Gloves, that I should not be
cold in the midst of my Ceremonies: He answered, he spoke nothing but the
truth, according to the Scriptures, and the old Doctors: Then he delivered the
Cardinal six sheets of Paper to coroborate his saying: He receiving them
said, we perceive you intend to stand to your Articles, and show your learning:
Yea said Barnes, by Gods Grace, and your Lordships favor: He answered, such as
you bear us and the Catholic Church, little favor: whether do you think it
more necessary that I should have this royalty, because I represent the Kings
person in all High Courts of this Realm to the terror of all rebellions,
Treasons, and all the wicked members of this Commonwealth, or to be as simple
as you would have us to sell these things, and giu^ them to the poor, which
shortly would piss it against the walls, and pull his Majesty from his
dignity: He answered, I think it necessary to be sold and given to the poor,
for it is not comely for your calling, and the King is not maintained by your
pomp, and pollaxes, but by God, which says per me Reges regnant: Then the
Cardinal said to Doctor Gardener, and Master Fox, Lo Master Doctors, here
is the learned and wise man that you told me of: Then they kneeled and desired
his Grace to be good unto them, for he would be reformable: Then said he for
your sakes, and the University, we will be good unto him: Master Doctor^dost
thou not know that I am legatus de latere, and that I am able to dispense with
all matter in this Realm as much as the pope may: He answered, I know it:
Then he bad him be ruled by him and I will do all things for thy honesty, and
the honesty of the university: he thanked him, and said, he would stick to
the Scriptures according to his little Talent: Then the Cardinal told him he
should have his learning tried, and have the Law, and commanded him to the
Tower: But Gardener and Fox, became his sureties: After he was twice brought
before the Bishops, and the Abbot of Westminster, in the Chapter House at
Westminster: Then he was put to have the Council of Gardener, and Fox, and
they persuaded him rather to abjure the^ burn, and that he might do more in
time to come, and with other persuasions, mighty in the sight of reason and
foolish flesh: whereupon he abiured, and bore a faggot: the Bishop of Rochester
preaching at the abiuration of him and others, stood up and declared unto the
people, how many days of forgiveness of sins they had for being at that
Sermon; yet he continued half a year after in prison, and then he was
committed to be free prisoner in the Augustine Friars in London: when these
Caterpillars and bloody beasts had undermined him, they complained on him again
to my Lord Cardinal: Then he was delivered to the Friars of Northampton to be
burned: Then Master Horn heard that a writ should come shortly to burn him;
then he councelled him to feign himself desperate, and writ a Letter to the
Cardinal, signifying that he would drown himself, and to leave his clothes
there, and another Letter to the Mayor of the Town to search for him in the
water, because he had a Letter written in parchment, wrapped in wax about his
neck, for the Cardinal which would teach all men to beware of him: upon this
they were seven days a searching for him, but he went to London in a poor
man's apparel, and thence to Anwerpe to Luther, and there answered all the
Bishops of the Realm, and made a Book called acta Romanorum pontificum, and
another Book with a supplication to King Henry: When it was told the Cardinal
he was drowned he said, perit memoria eius cum sonitu, but this lighted upon
himself, for shortly after he poyso-himselfe.

In the beginning of the Reign of Queen Anne, he and others came again into
England, and continued a faithful Preacher in the City of London, and in her
Graces time well entertained and promoted; and after sent by King Henry the
eight, Ambassador to the Duke of Cleave, for the marriage of the Lady Anne of
Cleave, between the King and her; and was well accepted until Gardener came
out of France: but then neither Religion nor the Queen prospered, nor
Cromwell, nor the preachers: Then followed alteration in marriage until he
had grafted the marriage into another stock, by the ^ccasion whereof he began
his bloody work. Soon after Doctor Barnes, and his Brethren, were carried to
the King to Hampton Court to be examined: But the King seeking means of his
safety, bad him go home with Gardener, and confer with him: they not agreeing*
Gardener sought opportunity to dispatch Barnes, and the rest, as he had done
by the Que^ne the Lady Anne of Cleue, and the Lord Cromwell: and he appointed
them three to preach three Sermons at the Spittle, which were baits to
minister just occasion of their condemnations: A hen they were sent for to
Hampton Court, and from thence carried unto the Tower, and came not thence but
to their deaths. Then the Protestants went beyond Sea, Priests were divorced
from there Wives, certain Bishops deposed, and other good men denied Christ,
and bore Faggots: then they were put to death without judgment; a Papist and a
Protestant were laid upon one hurdle and drawn to Smithfield: This was
Winchesters devise to color his tyrany: Then Barnes hid the Sheriff bear him
witness he died Christianly, and Charitably, and prayed them all to pray for
him, and if the dead may pray for the quick we will pray for you, so they
forgave their enemies, and kissed one another, and stood hand in hand at the
stake until the ^^re came, and so rested in Christ.

The same day one Powell, Fetherstone, and Abel, were hanged, drawn, and
quartered in the same place, for denying the Kings Supremacy, and maintaining
the Kings marriage with the Lady Katherine Dowager: The reason was because as
one half of the Council being Papists called upon Barnes, Garet, and Hierome,
to be executed: so the other part of the Council called upon these three
Papists to be executed.

In this years a Boy, one Richard Mekins, but fifteen years old was burned in
Smithfield, for speaking somewhat against the Sacrament of the Altar.

In like manner Richard Spencer Priest, leaving his papistry, married a Wife,
and got his living by day-labour; He was burnt in Salisbury, because he was
thought to hold opinion against the Sacrament, and one Andrew Hewet, was burned
with him.

About this time Cardinal Poole, Brother to the Lord Mountegew, was attainted
of high treason, and fled to Rome, where he was made Cardinal of Saint Mary
Cosmoden, where he remained until Queen Mary's time. Stokely, Bish^p of
London, and Tunstone, Bishop of Duresme writ to him, to persuade him to abandon
the Supremacy of the Pope, and to conform himself to the Religion of his
King, which Letter thou may read in the Book at large, which sufficiently
proves the Pope not to be supreme head of the Church, but because this
Doctrine is as sufficiently proved in other places, I omit to abridge it.

In this year the King by the advice of his Council, sent forth a Decree for
the setting up the Bible in the great volume in every parish Church in England.

This year John Porter a Tailor, 1542.
a lusty young man, was by Bonner Bishop of London cast into Newgate, for
reading in the Bible in Paul's Church, where he was miserably famished to death.

About this time John Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, burned two upon one day:
one Thomas Barnard, and the other James Morton, the one for teaching the Lords
Prayer in English, and the other for keeping the Epistle of Saint James in
English.

In this year the Kings Majesty understanding that all Idolatry, and vain^
pilgrimages were not utterly abolished within these Dominions: directed his
Letters unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the speedy amendment of the same.

Anthony Pierson Priest, Robert Testwood singing man, Henry Finmore Tailor,
and John Marbeck singing man, were burned at Windsor. 1543.

THese Articles were objected against Pierson, that he had said, Even as Christ
once hanged between two thieves, so when he is holden up betwixt the Priests
hands, he hangs betwixt two thieves, except the Priest sincerely preach Gods
word.

That he preached that Christ should not be eaten as he did hang upon the
Cross^ with his flesh torn, and the blood running about their mouths, but he
was to be eaten this day, that we might also feed on him to morrow, and next
day, and continually, and that he was of more power after his resurrection then
he was before.

That Christ sitting amongst his Disciples, commended the Scriptures unto them
when he said, This is that bread, this is that body of Christ; so when he
brake bread and bade them divide it amongst them, and eat it, for it was his
body, and likewise the cup, saying, This is my blood; he signified to us that
we should receive the Scriptures, and distribute them unto the people.

It was objected against Finmore, that he had said that the Sacrament of the
Altar was but a similitude, and that if it were God he had eaten twenty Gods in
his life.

He condemned Testwood for jesting with the Priest when he lifted up the host,
saying, Ho, take heed that he fall not.

That Marbeck with his own hands had writ notes out of certain Authors, which
were repugnant to the mass and sacrament of the Altar: and that he said, The
Mass was impure and defiled with much ungodliness, and it spoyleth God of his
honor; and that the elevation of the sacrament represents the Calves of
Jeroboam, and is worse Idolatry then those were, and that therein Christ was
counted a mocking-stock.

There was a fifth man named Bennet, unto whose charge it was laid that he
should say, the daily Masses used in the Church were superfluous, and that it
were sufficient the seventh day were kept holy. Bennet and Marbeck were
pardoned by the King; the other three stoutly suffered martyrdom.

We will pass over the Priest which was hanged in the Porters lodge of
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and one Henry his servant burnt at Colchester,
and one Kerby a Tailor, burnt at London, because we have no certainty of the
time.

Doctor London Prebend of Windsor, and one William Simonds, which were the
accusers of the foresaid five of Windsor: they went about to trouble four
Gentlemen of the Kings privy Chamber, that they forced the^ to plead their
cause in open Court: they declared to the King what danger they were in,
whereupon they themselves were called in question; being convicted of manifest
perjury, they were adjudged to wear papers, signifying their periuries, in
the open market of Windsor: then they were cast in prison at London, where the
said Doctor London died.

About this time was one Rogers, a Layman of Northfolk, burned by the Duke of
Northfolke, for the true affirmation of the Sacrament: half a year after the
Duke lost his eldest son, and himself was committed to prison, who then
acknowledging his error, became more meek to such kind of men.

John Athee was indicted for saying, He would not believe that which the knave
Priest made and Longs wife sold; meaning the Host. And when it was told him
1544.
God could make it flesh and blood, he said, He might put into it a Chicks
leg.

This year John Heywood was attached for treason, for denying the Kings
supremacy, but he recanted, and confessed to the people, that the Pope had no
more authority then other Bishops, and that the King was supreme head by the
Law of God.

The destruction of Merindall and Cabriers.
IN the year 1218. as is aforesaid, God raised up one Waldo, a rich Merchant
of Lions in France, which having attained perfect knowledge by the word of God,
discovered the naughtines of the Ecclesiastical Ministers, many joined
themselves unto them, which were called Waldenses, and being by persecution
dispersed into di^ers Countries, there were two towns remaining of their
Religion in France, to wit; Merindall and Gabriers.

Certain of the chief of Merindall, were commanded to appear at the
Parliament of Prouence, they would have retained Advocates to answer for them,
who told them, it was not lawful for them to give council to them, because
they were but Lutherans, but one told them secretly; That they should not
appear before the said Court, except they were fully determined to be burned
by a little fire made of Chafe, without any further judgment: for the Court
had already determined the matter against them; whereupon, and because they had
seen many good men served so, having no other cause of condemnation, but that
they were reported to be Lutherans, for these causes they did not appear at
the day appointed: whereupon, the Parliament gave out an arrest, whereby not
only they of Merindal, that were appointed to appear, were condemned to be
burned, as attainted of heresy and high Treason, and their goods confiscate
unto the King, but also all the inhabitants of Merindall, wherein was
fourscore houses to be burned, men, women, and children, and the town to be
rased, and the trees cut up 500. paces round about.

A little after there was a great banquet at Ayx, at which was the president
Cassane, and many Counselors and Nobles, and the Archbishop of Arles, and the
Bishop of Ai^, with their Ladies and Gentlewomen: One that was the Bishop of
Aixis Concubine, said, My Lord president will you not execute the arrest that
is given out against the Lutherans of Merindall? And she recited the manner of
it, forgetting nothing the Lord Alenson said; Gentlewoman, you have learned
this of them that would have it so, or else it was given out by a Parliament of
women. Then the L. of Senas said it is true, and you do not well to call the
parliament a Parliament of women, he answered, he did not believe it, for it is
a thing that the and ^ueliest tyrants of the world, would judge most inhumane
and detestable, and many of Merindal which seem to me to be very honest men:
the^ the gentl^woman lifting up her eyes with a great chafe, said, O that it
pleased God that all Lutherans had horns growing on their foreheads. Then said
my Lord Bewieu, I would all Priests harlots chattered like Pies: she said, My
L. you ought not to sp^ak against our holy mother the Church; for there was
never any dog that bar^ed against the cross, but he waxed mad: the Bishop of
Aix laughed and clapped her on the back, saying, By my holy orders my minion, you
have don me great pleasure, remember me the lesson she has taught you. The
Lord answered, I will not learn of her, nor of thee, neither honesty nor
honor; for the most part of the Bishops and Priests are Adulterers, Deceivers,
Thieves, Seducers: I should not speak against the holy Church, but I speak
against a flock of Wolves, Dogs, and abominable Swine. Then said the
Archbishop, My L. you must give account of these words in time and place: he
answered, I would it were now; for I will be bound to prove more naughtines in
Priests then I have spoken. When Christ called the Priests deceiving Hypocrites,
blind Seducers, and robbers, did he them any wrong? They answered no, for the
most part of them were so. Then said my Lord Bewieu, Even so is it with the
Bishops and Priests; for they are such kind of men and worse. Then he said,
A^ant thou Herodias, thou vnshamefac't and dishonest harlot, is it thy part to
speak in this company? thou should not desire the innocent blood to be shed,
then she said, if I were a man I would offer you combat, to prove that I desire
not to shed innocent blood, do you call the blood of these wicked men of
Merendoll innocent blood? I do desire and offer with my who^e power, that such
as they should be destroyed, from the greatest to the least: and to see the
beginning of this work I have not been wanting to employ all my credit and
frien^^* and do not spare neither body nor goods to make the utter ruin and
destruction of them, and to deface their memory from amongst men, I had rather
meet ten di^els then one Lutheran.

After the Bishops and Clergy met again to consult about the executing of the
said Arest, and they had a banquet at the Bishops house of Ruda: to this banquet
the ^ayrest and best Ladies of A^inion were invited to solace these good
Prelates: after they had dined, danced, and used their pastime, they walked
until supper, and as they passed the streets leading every one a Gentlewoman
upon his arm, they saw a man that sold dishonest Images to stir up the
people to whoredom and knavery, and all these pictures the Bishops bought,
which were as many as a Mule could carry: a little further a Booke-binder had
set out Bibles of lattin and french to se^l, then the Bishops said, who has
made thee so hardy to set forth these Merchandise to sell? do not thou know
these Books are forbid? the Book binder answered, is not the holy Bible as
good as these goodly pictures? the Bishop of Air said, I renownce my part of
Paradise if he be not a Lutheran, let him be tried what he is: then the
Book-binder was carried into prison, and a company of ruffins cried, a Lutheran
to the fire with him, and own struck him with his fist, another pulled him by
the beard, so that he was al imbrued with blood, the morrow he was brought
before the Bishops, he justified the selling of the Bibles, and said; There
was no Nation but had the Bible in their own language; Will you forbid and
hide that which Christ has commanded to be published? Did not Christ give
power to his Apostles, to speak all manner of tongues to the end that his
Gospel might be taught to every Creature in every language? And why do you
forbid this Book, and buy such profane painting? What cruelty is this, to
take the nourishment from poor souls, but you shall gi^e account hereof,
which call sweet sower, and sower sweet: you be rather the Priests of
Bacchus and Venus, then Pastors of the Church: Then he was condemned to be
burned the same day, and to have two Bybles hang, one before, and another
behind, to signifi^ the cause of his death.

The Bishops twice raised an Army at their own charges, to execute the
aforesaid arrest, but their enterprises were let by one means or other: and
the King hearing the confession of this Faith of Merindole, and finding that it
did agree in all points to the Word of God, gave them their pardon: Some of the
Bishops resort to them to get them to recant, but they proved their Religion
so agreeable to the Word, that many Doctors were converted to their opinions,
and confessed they never learned so much in all their time, as by hearing them:
Their Children were so well taught, and they questioned and answered one
another so divinely; that the Doctor^ confessed, they had not heard Arguments,
so well answered in the divinity Schools.

Yet notwithstanding in this year, the twelfth of April, John Miners,
President of the Council of Aygues, called the Senate and read the Kings
Letters* which the Cardinal had obtained for that purpose, and commanded them
to execute the sentence: Now every where he had mustred men for the English
Wars, but he used them for this purpose, and took up more Soldiers out of
every Town, and they had aid sent them out of the Popes Dominions. First they
set upon the Uillage about Merindoll, and destroyed and burned them, the
Merindolins seeing their cruelty, left their houses and fled into the Woods,
carrying their Children upon their Shoulders and Arms: then it was showed unto
them, that Miners came with all his whole power to destroy them: then the men
went away and left the women and children, with some to look to them, hoping
they would show mercy to them; whom when the soldiers found, they abstained
from slaughter: but when they had spoiled them of their money and victuals,
they lead them away. Their purpose was to handle them more shamefully, but that
they were let with a Captain of horsemen; so they left the women and drove
away the booty: there were five hundred women. Miners burned Merindoll; and
finding there but one young man, he ^aused him to be tied to a tree, and shot in
with Dagges: then he went to Cabriers, and persuaded the townsmen to open the
gates, promising they should have no hurt; but when they were let in, they slew
both man, woman, and child. Miners shut forty women into a ^arne of straw,
set it on fire and kept them in till they were all burned. The number slain
within the town and without, were eight hundred: the infants that escaped
their fury were baptized again of their enemies. Then they took the town of
Costa and served it so, and many maids and women being lead into a Garden of
the Castle they ravished them all: and when they had kept them a day and a
night, they handled them so beastly, that the mayds and them with child died
shortly after. In the mean time the Merindoles and diverse others that wandered
in the woods and mountains, were either sent to the Galleys or were slain.
Many also died for hunger: five and twenty hid themselves under a rock, and
they smothered and burned them; so that no kind of cruelty was omitted:
notwithstanding diverse which had escaped came to Geneua and other places near.

The persecution in Callice, with the martyrdom of George Bucket, alias Adam
Damlip.
THis Adam Damlip had bin a great Papist, and Chaplain to the Bishop of
Rochester: he iournyed to Rome, thinking to have found all godly and sincere
religion, where he found, as he confessed, such blasphemy of God, contempt of
Christ's true religion, looseness of life, and abomination and filthiness,
that he abhorred to tarry there any longer, although he was greatly requested
by Cardinal Poole, to continue there to read three Lectures every week in
his house, offering him great entertainment, which he refused; and returning
home, the Cardinal gave him a French crown. And waiting at Callice for
passage into England, William Steuens and Thomas Lancaster desired him to read
there two or three days, and got him license of the Lord Lisle the Kings
Deputy of the town, and the license of John Butler the Commissary.

When he had preached three or four times he was well liked, so that they hired
him to preach there; and twenty days or more, every morning at seven of the
clock, he preached learnedly and plainly the truth of the blessed Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood, mightily inueighing against all Papistrie, but
especially against transubstantiation and the propitiatory sacrifice of the
mass, declaring how popish himself was, and how by the detestable wickedness
that he did see universally in Rome, he was returned and become an enemy to
all Papistre. He came at last to speak against the Pageant or picture set
forth of the resurrection, in Saint Nicholas his Church, that it was mere
Idolatry and illusion of the Frenchmen before Callice was English.

Then there came a commission to the Lord Deputy, the Commissary, and others,
to search whether there were three Hosts lying upon a Marble stone besprinkled
with blood, as was put in writing under a Bull and Pardon; and that if they
found it not so, that immediately it should be pulled down, and so it was; for
they breaking up a stone in the corner of the Tomb, in stead of three Hosts
found souldred in the Cross of Marble lying under the Sepulcher, three plain
Counters, which they had pointed like unto Hosts: and above that was the tippe
of a Sheeps tail, which Damlip showed to the people the next day, which was
Sunday, out of the Pulpit. And after they were sent by the Lord Deputy to the
King. Then the Prior of the white Friars, and one of the Lord Lisle his
Chaplains, contradicted his Sermons, and caused him to be sent for to Cranmer
and Steven Gardener, and others, before whom he did so constantly defend the
doctrine which he had taught, that Cranmer being yet but a Lutheran, marvelled
exceedingly at it, and said, that the Scripture knew no such term of
transubstantiation. Then the other Bishops threatened him, to whom he promised,
the next day to deliver them all in writing which he had formerly preached in
Callice. In the mean time he had secret intimation given him by Cranmer, that
if he appeared the next day, he should be sure to be committed: whereupon he
sent them his Faith with the arguments thereupon in writing, and he went aside
into the West country.

Then the King was certified that there were many diversities of opinions in
Calice, tending to the danger thereof: Whereupon Doctor Champion and M. Garnet,
who after was burned, were sent over to preach to them, where he preached the
same true Doctrine which Adam Damlip had done. After them, one William Smith,
Curate of our Ladies Parish in Callice, preaching earnestly inuaying against
Papistry and wilful ignorance, exhorting them to embrace the word, and not to
contemn it, least Gods wrath fall upon them, which follows the contempt of
his holy word.

At length the said Lord Lisle, which was Bastard to King Edward the fourth,
which maintained Damlip as before, by the intising of his wicked wife, the Lady
Honora, she being thereunto provoked by Sir Thomas Palmer, and John Rockwood*
Esquire: these, with seven others, wrote very heinous Letters unto the King
and Council, against diverse of the Town of Calice. Whereupon, diverse of them
were often punished in Callice, and many of them sent for over into England,
and were ^orely imprisoned and punished, and had not escaped the fire, but by
the Kings pardon.

The aforesaid Adam Damlip taught School about some two years in the West
Country, after he was apprehended and brought unto Stephen Gardener, who
committed him to the Marshalsie, where he continued two years: and for his
honest behavior he was beloved of the whole house, and especially of the
keeper, and he did much amongst the common sort of the prisoners in reproving
vice: Then being resolved rather to loose his life, then not to suffer his
talent to be used to Gods glory by being detained in prison.

Whereupon he sent an Epistle to Gardener: And then by the Bishops commandment
he was had to Callice, where first he laid unto his charge heresy; but
because all such offenses before such a day were pardoned by an Act of
Parliament: then for the receiving of the aforesaid French Crown of Cardinal
Poole, as you heard before he was condemned of Treason in Callice, cruelly put
to death, being hanged, drawn and quartered: At his death Sir Raph Ellerker
Knight Marshall there would not suffer him to declare his Faith or cause he
died for, but bad the executioner dispatch the Knave: and said, he would not
away before he saw the Traitors heart out: but shortly after in a skirmish with
the Frenchmen at Bullen he was slain, and his enemies cut off his members, and
cut the heart out of his body and so left him a terrible example of the Justice
of God, upon all bloody persecutors.

The said Lord Lisley with the others as before unjustly charging them of
Callice with sedition and heresy, were all shortly after either greatly out of
the Kings favor, and committed unto prison, or else by desperate deaths died.
I will recite but Rockwood the chief stirrer of the afflictions aforesaid, who
at the last breath staring and raging cried he was damned; and being bid to
ask God mercy, he cried out, All too late, for I have sought maliciously the
deaths of a number of the Town, which in my heart I thought to be honest men:
which words he used when thirteen were carried in Irons into England; when one
told him he never saw men of such honesty so sharply corrected, and taking it
so joyfully* Rockwood then leaping, scoffingly said, All too late: and the
under Marshall suddenly fell down in the Council Chamber, and never spoke.

A laboring man having heard Damplip, said, He would never believe that
Priests could make the Lords body at their pleasure: whereupon he was
condemned by one Haruy a Commissary, who said he was an heretic, and should
die a vile death. The poor man answered, he was no heretic, but in the faith
of Christ, and said, Whereas thou say I shall die a vile death, thou shall
die a viler death shortly; and so it came to pass: for within half a year
the said Haruy was hanged, drawn, and quartred in Callice for treason.

DODDE alias SCOT.
He was taken in Callice, with certain Germane books about him, and being
examined thereupon, and standing constantly to the truth, he was condemned and
burned there.

WILLIAM BVTTON.
He being a soldier of Callice, merrily asked a Papist, Whether one that were
suddenly taken might not occupy one of the Popes pardons in stead of a broken
paper: and another question, Whether the world might better want Dogs then
Popish Priests, and answered it, that if there were no Dogs, we could make no
more, but if there lacked ignorant Priests, we might soon make too many of
them.

There came a black Friar to Callice with the Popes pardons, who for 4. pence
would deliver a soul out of Purgatory; this Button asked him, if the Pope
could deliver souls out of Purgatory: the Friar said, there is no doubt of
that: then he said, Why does he not of charity deliver all the s^ules thereout?
for which cause he was accused unto the Commissary, who chafing, called him
heretic: then said Button, If the Pope can deliver souls out of Purgatory,
and will not of chariti^ do it, then would God the King would make me Pope,
for surely I would deliver all out without money. Whereupon the Commissary made
him bear a Billet, and procured his wages, which was six pence a day, to be
taken from him: then he went unto the King, and declared the whole matter, who
after gave him eight pence a day.

In November, 1545.
after the King had subdued the Scots, and joining with the Emperor, had
invaded France, and had got the Town of Bullen, he summoned a Parliament, in
which was granted him, besides subsidies of money, all Colleges, Chanteries,
Free Chapels, Hospitals, Fraternities, Guilds and perpetuities of stipendary
Priests to be disposed at his will and pleasure.

They being thus given to him by act of Parliament in December, the next Lent
Doctor Crome preached in the Mercers Chapel: amongst other reasons to induce
the people from the vain reasons of Purgatory, he said, It Trentalls and
Masses could avail the souls in Purgatory, then did not the Parliament well
in giving away Monasteries, Colleges, and Chanteries, which served principally
to that purpose: but if the Parliament did well, as no man could deny, then it
is plain that such Chanteries and private masses confer nothing to relieve
them in Purgatory. This Dilemma was insoluble, but at Easter next they brought
him in question for it, and so handled him, that they made him to recant, or
else they would have dissolved him and his argument in the fire.

ANNE ASKEW.
AFter she had bin many times examined, and she had answered so wisely, that
though she had affirmed the truth of the Sacrament, yet none could touch her
for her arguments by the law. Then she wrote her mind of the Sacament, as
follows:

I perceiu^, dear friends in the Lord, that you are not yet persuaded of the
truth in the Lords Supper, because Christ says, Take, eat, this is my body:
but he giving the bread as an outward sign to be received with the mouth, he
meant in perfect belief they should receive his body which should die for the
people; and to think his death the only salvation of their souls. The ^read
and Wine were left us for a Sacramental communion of the benefit of his
death; and that we should be thankful for the grace of redemption. And in the
closing thereof he says, This do in remembrance of me so often as you eat
and drink; or else we should have been forgetful of that we ought to have in
daily remembrance, and also been unthankful: therefore we ought to pray to
GOD for the true meaning of the Holy Ghost touching this communion; for the
letter slays, and the spirit gives life. In the sixth of John all is applied
unto ^aith: and in 1. Cor. 4. The things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are everlasting: and in the third of the Hebrews,
Christ rules over his house, whose house we are, if we hold fast the
confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the end: and the dead Temple is not his
house, Wherefore to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

Her confession in Newgate.
CHrist took the bread, saying to his Disciples, Take, eat, this is my body
which shall be broken for you, meaning his body the bread, but a sign and
Sacrament: and so he said, He would break down the Temple, and in three days
build it up again, signifying his body by the Temple, although there be many
that cannot perceive the true meaning thereof; for the veil that Moses put
ever his face before the children of Israel remains to this day: but when
God shall take it away, then shall these blind men see. For it is plainly
expressed in the History of Bell; O King, says Daniell, be not deceived, for
God will be worshipped in nothing that is made with hands of men. O what
stiff-necked people are these, that will always resist the Holy Ghost, as
their fathers have done. Truth is laid in prison, Luke 21. The law is turned
to wormwood, Amos 6. and there can no right judgment go forth, Esaias 59.

Her condemnation.
THey said I was an heretic, and condemned by the law, if I would stand to my
opinion; I said, touching my Faith I said and wrote to the Council, I would
not deny because I knew it true: then they would know whether I would deny
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood; I answered yea: for the same Son of
GOD that was borne of the blessed Uirgin Mary, is now glorious in the heavens,
and will come again at the last day as he went up: and that which you call
your God is a piece of bread, and for more proof thereof, let it lie in a box
but three months and it will be moldy and turn to nothing that is good,
therefore I am persuaded it is no God.

Then they willed me to have a Priest and then I smiled, then they asked me if
it were not good, I said I would confess my faults unto God, for I was sure
he would hear me with favor, and so we were condemned by the quest.

This was my belief which I wrote to the Council, that the Sacramental bread
was left us to be received with thanksegiuing in the remembrance of his death,
the only remedy of our so^les recovery, and thereby we also receive the whole
benefit of his passion, then they would needs know whether the bread in the
box were God or no, I said God is a spirit and will be worshipped in spirit
and truth, then they said, will you plainly deny Christ to be in the
Sacrament? I answered I believe the eternal son of God, not to dwell there,
in witness whereof I recited again the history of Bell and the 7. and 17. of
the Acts and the 24 of Matthew concluding I neither wish death nor fear it, God
have the praise thereof with thanks, then she wr^te to the Lord Chancelour and
the King but it prevailed not.

After she was sent from Newgate to the Tower, then Master Rich and one of the
Council charged me upon mine obedience, to show unto them if I knew any of my
Sect, I answered I knew none, they asked me of my Lady Suffolk, my Lady
Sussex, my Lady Hereford, my Lady Denny, and my Lady Fitzrallins. I said if I
should pronounce any thing against them I am not able to prove it, they said
the King was informed I could name if I would a great number of my sect, I said
the King was as well deceived in that behalf as dissembled with in other
matters.

Then they commanded me to show how I was maintained in the Counter, and who
willed me to stick to mine opinion, I said there was none did strengthen me
therein, and I was maintained in the Counter by the means of my Maid, for she
made moan unto the Prentises, and they by her did send me money, but who they
were I know not.

Then they said diverse Gentlewomen gave me money, but I know not their names,
then they said many Ladies sent me money, I answered, there was a man in a blew
cote delivered me ten shillings and said my Lady of Hereford sent it me, and
another in a Uiolet cote gave me eight shillings, and said my Lady Denny sent
it me, but I am not sure who sent it me, then they said there were of the
Council which did maintain me, and I said no.

Then they put me upon the Rack and kept me there a long time, because I
would not confess any Gentlewomen or Ladies on my opinion, and because I did
not cry, my Lord Chancellor and Sir John Baker took pains to rack me with
their own hands until I was nie dead.

Then the Liefetennant caused me to be loosed from the rack and incontinently
I swounded, and they recovered me again: after I sat two hours reasoning with
my Lord Chanc^llor upon the bare flower, where with flattering words he
persuaded me to leave my opinions, but God gave me grace to persevere and will
do I hope, then I was brought to bed with as painful bones as ever pacient
Job: then my Lord Chancellor sent me word if I would leave mine opinions, I
should lack nothing, if I would not I should to Newgate and be burned: I sent
him word again I would die rather then break my faith,

She was borne of such a kindred, that she might have lived in great
prosperity, if she would rather have followed the world then Christ: at the day
of her execution she was brought into Smithfield in a chair, because she could
not go on her feet by means of her torments, she was tied by the middle with
a chai^e that held up her body, then Doctor Shaxton began his Sermon: Anne
Askew hearing and answering again unto him, where he said well, she confirmed
the same, where he iaid amiss, she said, he speaks without book. There
was at the same time three burned with her: One Nicholas Belemy a Priest of
Shropshire, John Adams a Tailor, and John Lacels, Gentleman of the Court and
Kings household.

Wrisley Lord Chancellor, the old Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Bedford, and
the Lord Mayor: Wrisle sent Anne Askew the Kings Pardon, if she would recant:
she said the came not thither to deny her Lord, and master; Then were the
Letters likewise offered unto the others, who in like manner followed the
constancy of the woman: Whereupon the Mayor commanded the fire to be put unto
them.

Sir George Blage of the Privy Chamber was imprisoned, condemned, and should
have been burned, but that the King pardoned him: For saying the Mass auail^th
neither quick nor the dead, being asked what then it was good for, he said
belike to keep a horse from stumbling.

The troubles of Katherine Parre, Henry the eight his last Wife, for the
Gospel, by the means of Gardener and others.
A Year after the King came from Bullen, he was informed that the Queens
Katherine Parre, was much given to the reading and study of ^he Scriptures; and
that she had retained diverse godly learned Preachers to instruct her therein,
with whom she used privately to confer, and in the afternoones one of them
made collation to her: her Ladies and Gentlewomen and others disposed to hear,
in which Sermons they oftentimes touched the abuses in the Church, and often
she would debate with the King touching Religion, and persuade him as he had
to the glory of GOD, and his eternal fame b^gunne a godly work in ban^shing
that monstrous Idol of Rome, so he would purge his Church from the dregs
thereof, wherein was yet great superstition: And though the King in the later
end grew opp^nionate, and would not be taught nor contended withal by
Argument yet toward her he refrained his accustomed manner, for never
handmaide sought more to please her Mistress, then she to please his humor;
and she was of such singular beauty, fau^ur, and comely personage, wherein the
King was greatly delighted: but Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Wrisley Lord
Chancellor, and others of the Kings Privy Chamber, practiced her death, that
they might the better stop the passage of the Gospel: and having taken away
the patroness of the professors of the truth, they might invade the remainder
with fire and sword, but they du^st not speak to the King touching her,
because they saw the King loved her so well.

At length the King was ^^cke of a sore leg, which made him very froward, and
the Queen being with him did not fail to use all occasions to moo^^ him
zeal^usly to proceed in the reformation of the Church: The King showed some
tokens of mislike, and broke off the matter, and knit up the Arguments with
gentle words, and after pl^asant talk she took her leave: The Bishop of
Winchester being there; the King immediately upon her departure used these
words; It is a good hearing when women become such Clarks, and much to my
comfort to come in mine old age to be taught by my Wife.

Then the Bishop showed a mislike that the Queen would so much forget her
self to stand in Argument with his Majesty, whose Judgment and Di^initie he
extolled to his face above Princes of that and other ages, and of Doctors
professed in Divinity, and that it wss unseemly for any of his Subjects to
argue with him so malapertly, and that it was grievous to all his Councelors
and Servants to hear the same: inferring how perilous it has ever been for a
Prince to suffer such insolent words of a Subject, who as they are bold against
their Sovereigns words, so they want not will but strength to overthwart them
in deeds.

Then the Religion by the Queen so stiffely maintained, did dissolve the
politic gouern^ment, and made the peoples opinions so odious, and perilous
unto the Princes estate, that they da^e aff^^me that the greatest Subject in
the Land, defends those arguments which they do: yet he said he would not,
neither durst without good warranty from his Majesty, speak his knowledge in
the Queens cause, though many apparent reasons made for him: and such as his
duty and zeal to his Maies^ies preservation would not license him to
conceal, though the uttering thereof through her, and her faction, might be
his d^struction and there is which tendered his Majesty's safety, without his
Majesty would be his protector, which if he would do, he with others of his
faithful Councelors, could disclose such Treasons, cloked with heresies, that
his Majesty should cas^ly perceive, how perilous a matter it is to cherish a
Serpent within his own bosom, and he crept so far into the King at that
time, that he and his fellows filled the Kings mistrustfull mind, with such
fears, that the King gave them warrant to consult together, about drawing of
Articles against the Queen, wherein her life might be touched.

Then they thought it best at first to begin with such Ladies as she most
esteemed, and were privy to all her doing, as the Lady Harbert, after Countess
of Pembro^ke the Queens Sister; and the Lady Jane, and the Lady Tirwit, all of
her Privy Chamber: and to accuse them upon six Articles, and to search there
Closets and Coffers, that they might find somewhat to charge the Queen, and
that being found, the Que^ne should be taken and carried in a Barge by night
to the Tower: of which advice the King was made privy by Gardener, and the Lord
Chancellor, to which they had the Kings cons^nt, and the time and place
appointed.

This purpose was so finely handled, that it grew within few days of the time
appointed, and the poor Qu^ene suspected nothing, but after her accustomed
manner visited the King, still^^^ deal with him touching Religion as before:
After the King brake the whole practice to one Doctor Wendy, one of his
Physicians, telling him that he would no longer be troubled with such a
Doctresse as she was, but charged him upon his life, not to utter it to any.

But it came to pass that the Bill of Articles drawn against the Queen, and
subscribed with the Kings own hand, falling from the b^some of one of the
Council was found of some godly person, and brought to the Queen; who seeing
it, fell into a great agony and Melancholy.

The King hearing what peril of life she was in, sent his Physician unto her;
and the said Doctor Wendy perceiving the matter by her words, brake with her
touching the said Articles, devised against her, and gave her warning of that
mischief which hanged over her head: beseeching her to be secret, and to
conform her self to the Kings mind, and no doubt she should find him
gracious: After the King came to her himself, unto whom after she had uttered
her grief, how it was for fear his Majesty had forsaken her, he so
refreshed her with comfortable words, that she began to recover.

Then she commanded her Ladies to convey away her Books which were against
the Law, and then she went to the King: he courteously welcomed her, and entered
into talk of Religion, seeming desirous to be resolved of the Queen of
certain doubts.

The Queen perceiving to what purpose this his talk tended, your Majesty
does well know (quoth she) and I am not ignorant of what great weakness by
our first Creation is allotted to us women, to be subject unto man as our
head: from which head all our direction must proceed, and as God made man after
his own Image, that being endued with more special gifts of perfection, might
be stirred to meditate heavenly things, and obey his commandments, so he made
woman of man, of whom, and by whom, she is to be commanded and governed, whose
womanly weakness ought to be tolerated and aided, that by his wisdom such
things as be lacking in her might be supplied: Therefore your Majesty being so
excellent in ornaments of wisdom, and I so much inferior in all respects of
Nature: Why does your Majesty in such defuse causes of Religion require my
Judgment, which when I have uttered and said, what I can, yet I must and will
refer my Judgment in this and all causes to your Majesty's wisdom, as my
only Anchor, supreme head, and the governor here in earth next unto God.

Not so by Saint Mary said the King, you are become a Doctor late to instruct
us.

She answered, your Majesty has much mistaken me, who have ever thought it
preposterous for the woman to instruct her husband, but rather to learn of him;
and where I have been bold to hold talk with your Majesty, wherein there
has seemed some difference in opinion, I have not done it to maintain
opinion, but to minister talk that your Majesty might with less grief pass
the pain of your infirmity, being attentive to your talk, and that I might
receive some profit by your Majesty's learned Discourse: wherein I have not
missed any part of my desire, always referring my self in such matters to
your Majesty.

^hen said the King* tends your Argument to no worse end, then we are now as
perfect friends as euere we were, and he embraced her, and kissed her; saying
it did him more good to hear these words, then if he had heard news of a
hundred thousand pound fallen to him.

On the day that was appointed for the aforesaid Tragedy: the King went into
his Garden, whether the Queen being sent for came, only the three Ladies
above named waiting on her; with whom the King was as pleasant as ever he was
in his life: In the midst of his mirth the hour appointed being come, the
Lord Chancellor comes into the Garden, with forty of the Kings guard at his
he^les, with purpose to take the Queen with the three Ladies to the the Tower,
whom the King sternely beholding, called him to him, who on his knees whispered
to the King: the King called him knave, arrant knave, and beastly fool, and
commanded him to auant out of his presence; which words the Queen heard,
though they were low spoken: then he departed with his train, the whole mould
of his device broken.

The Queen seeing the King so cha^ed, spoke for the Lord Chancellor: Ah poor
soul quoth he, thou little know how evil he deserves this grace at thy
hands, he has been toward thee sweet heart an arrant knave, and so let him
go.

If King Henry had lived, he and the French King had been at this point,
within half a year after to have changed the Mass in both their Realms into
a Communion, as we now use it, and also utterly to have extirped the Popes
usurped power; out of both their Realms: and they meant to exhort the Emperor
to do the like in Flanders, and his other countries, or else to break off
from him: and herein quoth the Archbishop Cranmer, the King willed me to pen a
form thereof to be sent to the French King, but that it was letten by the
death of King Henry.

When the Bishops had brought ANNE ASKEVV and her fellow Martyrs to death,
being now in their triumph, as the Pharisees were when they had killed Christ:
they devised how to ever read the truth for ever: whereupon they made a strait
Proc^amation authorized by the Kings (...) for abolishing of the Scripture, and
all other English Books which mi^ht g^^e light to the setting forth of Gods
Word, and the grace of the Gospel, which thou may see in the Book at large,
which no doubt had done much hurt in the Church amongst the godly, in bringing
them to danger, or keeping (...) in blindness, had not the shortness of the Kings
days stopped the malignant purposes of the Pr^lat^s, causing the King to leave
that to the people by his death, which by his life he would not grant, for
within four months after the proclamation, 1547
he deceased the eight and thirty year of his reign.

The History touching the Persecutions in Scotland: Deane, Thomas Forret.
THis Deane, Thomas Forret, preached every Sunday in his parish upon the
Epistle and Gospel, which was nouel^y in Scotland to see any preach but the
Black Fri^r, or the Gray. Wherefore the Friars envied him, and accused him to
the Bishop of Donkelden as an heretic, which showed the mysteries of the
Scripture unto the vulgar people, to make the Clergy detestable: The Bishop
sending for him said: my Joy, Deane Thomas, I leave you well, ^ am informed you
preach the Epistle and Gospel every Sunday, and that you take not the Cow for
mortuarie, nor the upper Cloth for Crisome of your parishioners, which is very
prejudicial to the Church men: My joy Deane Thomas, take your Cow and your
upper Cloth, and preach not every Sunday, for in so doing, you will make the
people think we should preach likewise: But when you find a good Epistle or a
good Gospel that sets forth the l^bertie of the Church, preach that and let
the rest be.

Thomas answered, my parishioners pay me my dueti^s willingly, and w^e agree
well: and where your Lordship says it is too much ^o preach every Sunday, I
think it too little: and also would wish that your Lordship would do the
like: nay, nay, we are not ordained to preach M. Forret: and where your
Lordship speaks of a good and an evil Epistle, I could never find none but
good.

Then spoke my Lord, I thank God I never knew what the Old and New Testament
meant: (Whereupon, grew a proverb, you are like the Bishop of Dunkelden, that
kn^w neither new nor old Law) therefore said the Bishop, I will know nothing
but my portous, and my pontifical: if you forgo not these fantasies you shall
repent it. Thomas said, my cause is just before God, and I pass not what
follows thereon.

After he was summoned by the Cardinal of Saint Andrews, and the said Bishop
of Dunkelden, and with him were summoned Friar John Kellow, Friar Beuarage,
Duncane Simson Priest: Robert Foster, a Gentleman, with three or four other
men of Striueling, who at their day of appearance were condemned to death
without any place of recantation, because they were chief heretics, and
teachers of heresies: and because many of them were at the marriage of the
Priest of Twybody, and eat flesh in Lent at their Bridal, and they were all
together burn^d upon the Castle Hill of Edenbrough, where they comforted one
another merueilously.

The Persecution of certain in the town of Perth.
THere was an Act of Parliament in the government of the Earl of Arrai, giving
privilege to read the scriptures in their mother tongue, but secluding al
conference thereof, whereby y^ eyes of the elect of God, were opened to see the
truth, and abhor Papisticall abominations, at which time Friar Spencer
preached, that Prayers made to Saints were necessary, and without it no hope of
salvation: Then Robert Lamb, a Burges of Perth, accused him op^nl^ in the
Church of erroneous Doctrine, and adjured him in Gods name to utter the truth,
whereupon trouble and tumul^ of people arose, so that the said Robert with
great danger of his life escaped, even the Women addressed themselves to great
cruelty against him.

Shortly after the Cardinal and the Earl of Argile sat about the matter,
before these persons were brought; Robert Lamb, William Anderson, James
Hunter, James Rauelson, James Fouleson, and Hellen Sirke his Wife, and the next
day were condemned to death by an Assize, for violating the foresaid Act of
Parliment by conferring together of the Scripture, and for that the said Robert
Lamb, William Anderson, and James Raueleson, hanged the Image of Saint Francis
in a cord, nayling Rams horns to his head, and a Cowes rump to his ta^le,
and for eating a Goose of Alhollow Eve: and James Hunter for keeping company
with them: He^len Sirke, for saying Mary merited not by works to be the Mother
of Christ, and to be preferred before other Women, but Gods free mercy ^xalted
her to that estate: John Raueleson for setting up in his house a triple Crown
of Saint Peter, which the Cardina^l took to be done in mockage of his
Card^nals ha^.

At the place of execution Robert Lamb exhorted the people to fear God, and
to leave the leaven of Papisticall abominations, and prophesied of the ruin
of the Cardinal, which after came to pass: and comforting one another, that
they should sup together in the Kingdom of heaven. The Woman desired to die
with her Husband, but was not suffered, then she kissed him, saying; We have
lived together joyful days, but this day is most joyful, because we must have
joy for ever. I will not bid you God night, for we shall all this night meet
with joy in heaven.

The condemnation of GEORGE VVISHARD Gentleman, and his Articles before the
Cardinal of Scotland, and others.
1 TOuching Preaching when he was forbidden, he answered; I have read in the
Acts of the Apostles, that it is not lawful to desist from preaching the
Gospel for menaces of men, therefore it is written, we must rather obey God
then men, and I believe that the Lord will turn your cursings of me unto
blessings: and as in the second of Malachy; I will curse your blessings, and
bless^ your cursings.

2 He affirmed the moving of the body outward of the Priest at Mass, without
the inward moving of the heart, is but the playing of an ape, and not the
serving of God, who must be honored in spirit and verity.

3 That auriculer confession has no promise of the Euangell, and therefore it
cannot be a Sacrament, but there are many testimonies of confession made to God.

4 As none will make merchandise with one of a strange Language, except that he
do understand the promise made by the Stranger: So I would that we understood
what we promise in the Name of the Infant to GOD in Baptism: then said one
Bleiter a Chaplain; The^ have the Devil and Spirit of error: then said a
Child, the Devil cannot speak such words as he does.

5 The lawful use of the Sacraments is most acceptable unto God, but the great
abuse is very detestable unto him: I once met with a Jew as I was sailing on
the Sea, I inquired of him what was the cause of his pertinacy, that he did not
believe the true Messiah was come, being that he saw the prophesies of him
fulfilled, and the Prophesies and the Scepter of Judah was likewise taken away:
He answered me; When the Messiah comes, he shall restore all things, and he
shall not abrogate the Law given unto our forefathers as ye do: for we see
the poor almost ready to perish for hunger amongst you, and you pity them
not, and amongst us Jews, though we are poor, there are no beggars found.

And it is forbidden by the Law, to feign an Image of any thing in Heaven or
Earth, but only to honor God, but your Churches are full of Idols, and ye
adore a piece of Bread baked upon the ashes, and that it is your God, then the
Bishops shook their heads, and spitted on the earth.

6 He reproved coniurings and exorcismes of holy Water, and said that they were
contrary to Gods word.

7 Saint Peter says, God has made us Kings and Priests: and again, he has
made us a kingly Priesthood; therefore I affirm, that any man cunning in the
Word of GOD, and the Faith of Christ, he has power from God, by the Word of
God to bind and lose: and a man that is not conversant in Gods Word, nor
constant in Faith, what estate or order soever he be of, has no power to bind
or lose, being he wants the word of God, the instrument to bind and lose
with.

8 Touching freewill, he said; as many as firmly believe in Christ, have
liberty, as in the 8. of John, If the Son make you free, then verily shall
you be free, but as many as believe not in Christ, are bond servants of sin,
he that sins is bond to sin.

9 Touching praying to Saints, he said; it is certain in Scripture, that we
should worship and honor one God, but for honoring of Saints it is doubtful,
whether they hear our invocation made to them; therefore I exhort all men,
that they would leave the unsure way, and follow that way which our Master
Christ taught us: He is our only Mediator, and makes intercession for us; he
is the door, he that enters not in by this door, but climbeth in another
way, is a Thief and a Murderer; he is the verity and life, he that goes out
of this way, is fallen into the mire.

10 Touching Purgatory, he never found any place of Scripture appliable thereto:
then he said to Master John Lander his accuser, if you have any testimony of
Scripture, by which you can prove such a place, show it before this Auditory:
but he had not a word to say for himself.

11 Touching the Uowes of the religious, he said; some be gelded by nature, and
some are gelded of men, and some are chaste for the Kingdom of Christ: these
are blessed, but as many as have not the gift of chastity* neither have
overcome the lusts of the Flesh for the Gospel, and yet vow chastity, you have
experience (though I hold my peace) to what inconvenience they have vowed
themselves, whereat they were angry, thinking better to have ten Concubines
then one Wife.

12 Touching general Councels, he said he would believe them no further the^
they agreed with the word of God: then one John Graysend bad John Landers have
to read the rest of the Articles, and not to ^arry for his answer, for we
may not abide them (quoth he) no more, then the Devil may abide the sign of
the Cross.

Then the Cardinal and Bishops pronounced their sentence* definitive against
him, and as he went to execution, two Friars said to him; pray to our Lady,
that she may be a mediatrix for you to her Son: to whom he said, Tempt me not
my Brethren: when he came to the fire, he said thrice upon his knees, O thou
Father of heaven I commend my spirit into thy hands, O thou sweet Savior of the
world, have mercy on me.

Then he said, I beseech you Christian Brethren and Sisters be not offended in
the word of God, for the torments you see prepared for me, but love the word,
and suffer for it, it being your salvation and everlasting comfort, and pray
them that have heard me, that they leave not off the Word of GOD, which I
taught them for no persecutions: for my Doctrine was no Wives Fables, after the
Constitutions of men. If I had taught men's Doctrine, I had gotten great
thanks, but I suffer this for teaching the Gospel, and I do it gladly:
consider my visage, you shall not see me change my color for fear of this
grim fire, and so I pray you for to do, if any persecution come unto you for
the words sake: some have said of me, that I taught that the soul of man
should sleep until the day of Iudgem^nt, but I know surely my Soul shall sup
with my Savior Christ this night within this six hours. I beseech you exhort
your Prelates to the learning of the Word of GOD, that they may be ashamed to
do evil, and learn to do good, and if they will not convert from their
wicked errors, the wrath of GOD shall hastily come upon them: then the Hangman
asked him foregiuenesse, and he kissed him and said; My heart do thine office,
I forgive thee, then he was hanged by the middle and neck, and burned: the
people pitiously mourned for his great torments.

Within two months after the martyrdom of this blessed man, George Wisehard,
David Beaton, the blooddy Archbishop and Cardinal of Scotland, was by the just
judgment of God ^laine by one Lech, and other Gentlemen, who suddenly brake
into his Castle upon him, and murdered him in his bed, crying out, alas slay
me not, I am a Priest: and so like a Butcher he lived and eyed, and he lay
seven months unburied, and at last like a Carrion was buried in a dunghill.

ADAM WALLACE in Scotland.
IN the year one thousand five hundred forty nine, John Hamelton was made
Archbishop of S. Andrews and Cardinal, not inferior to his Predecessor in
cruelty: in the next year he condemned Adam Wallace, and one Feane, for these
Articles following.

1 That the Bread and Wine on the Altar, are not the body and blood of Jesus
Christ after consecration.

2 That the Mass has no ground in the word of God, and is very Idolatry and
abominable in the sight of God.

3 That the God which they worship, is but Bread sown of Corn, growing out of
the Earth, baked of men's hands, and nothing else: Then he was asked whether he
would recant; He said he had answered nothing but that which agreed with the
Word of God, so GOD judge him and his conscience, wherein he would abide unto
death, and if you condeme me for holding Gods Word, my innocent blood shall
be required at your hands, then they gave forth sentence against him: the
night after he spent in singing and lauding God, having learned the Psalter of
David without book, being besides the fire, he lifted by his eyes three or
four times, and said to the people; Let it not offend you that I suffer death
for the truth, for the Disciple is not above his Master: then he said; They
will not let me speak, so the ^ire was lighted, and he departed to God
constantly.

A schism in Scotland for the Paternoster.
ONe Richard Marshall preached at S. Andrews, that the Paternoster should be
said only to God, and not to Saints: the Friars had great indignation, that
their old Doctrine should be repugned, and stirred up Toittis a Gray-Fryer to
preach against it, who preached the Lords Prayer might be offered to Saints,
because every Petition therein appertained to them, as we call an old man
Father, much more may we call Saints our Father, and because they are in
Heau^n, we may say our Father which art in Heaven, and because they are holy,
we may make their Names holy, and say hallowed be thy Name; and because the
Kingdom of Heaven is theirs by possession, we may say to every one of them
thy Kingdom come; and because their will is Gods will, we may say, thy will be
done to any of them: but he confessed, Saints had no power to give us our daily
bread, but that they should pray to God to give it unto us, and so he glosed
the rest to the end: and he affirmed, that Paul's Napkin and Peter's shadow, did
miracle^, and Eliseus Cloak divided the Waters, attributing nothing to the
power of God.

Upon this there was a dangerous Schism in Scotland; some affirming one thing,
and some another: Whereupon rose this Proverb; To whom say you your
Paternoster, and the people called the Friar, Friar Paternoster, so that for
very shame he left the Town. At length there was a disputation about it at the
University: The Popish Doctors affirmed, it should be said to GOD formaliter,
and to Saints materialiter; others Vltime and non vltime, Others, that it
should be said to GOD principaliter, and to Saints minus principaliter: Others,
that it should be said to God primarily, and to Saints secundarily; Others, to
God it should be Capiendo stricte; and to God Capiendo large: by which subtle
Sophistry, the people were more doubtful then before.

The Doctors said, because Christ, who made the Paternoster, never came into
Britta^ne* and so understood not the English tongue; therefore the Doctors
concluded it should be said in Latin.

WALTER MILL.
AMongst the rest of the Martirs of Scotland the constancy of Walter Mill, is
not to be passed in silence, out of whose Ashes sprang thousands of his
opinion* who chose rather to dye, then to be any longer ouer-trodden with the
cru^^l, beastly, and ignorant Bishops, Abbots, Monks, and Friars: and scone
after his Martyrdom, the Congregation began to debate true Religion against
the Papists.

He climbing up into a Pulpet to be examined before the Bishops, they seeing
him so weak, partly by age, and partly travel, and evil intreatment, that
he could not climb up without help: they thought they should not have heard
him, but when he spoke he made the Church sound with great stoutnesse, that the
Christions rejoiced, and the Adversaries were ashamed: At first he kneeling,
praying long, and was commanded to rise and answer his Articles, calling him
Sir Walter Mill, He said, he ought to obey God more then Men, and where you
call me Sir Walter, call me Walter; for I have bin over long one of the Popes
Knights.

Oliphant. What think you of Priests marriage?


Mill. I hold it a blessed band: for Christ made it free to all men, but you
abhor it, and take other men's wives and daughters: you vow chastity and
break it. Paul hade rather marry then burn: the which I have done, for God
never forbade marriage to any estate or degree.


Oliph. Thou say there is not seven Sacraments.


Mill. Give me the Lords Supper and Baptism, and take you the rest: and if
there be seven, why omit you one of them, to wit marriage, and give your selves
to whoredeme?


Oliph. Thou art against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.


Mill. If a King bid many to a feast, and when they sit down to eat, he turn
his back to them and eat up all himself, does he not mock them? even so do
you mock the people, eating and drinking the Sacrament, and giving them none:
the Sacrament of God is not to be taken carnally but spiritually, and stands in
faith only. Your mass is wrong, for Christ was once offered upon the Cross
for man's trespass, and will never be offered again.


Oliph. Thou deniest the office of a Bishop.


Mill. I affirm, those which you call Bishops do not the works of Bishops,
but live after their sensual pleasures, and take no care for the flock, nor
yet regard the word of God, but desire to be honored and called Lords.


Oliph. Thou speak against pilgrimages.


Mill. I say it is not commanded in Scripture, and that there is no greater
whoredom in no places then at your pilgrimages, except in common
Brothell-houses.


Oliph. Thou preachest privately in houses, and openly in fields.


Mill. Yea man, and in the Sea also, sailing in a ship.


Oliph. If thou will not recant I will pronounce sentence.


Mill. You shall know that I will not recant: for I am corn and not chafe, I
will not be blown away with the wind, nor burst with the flaile, but I will
abide both.


When sentence was pronounced, and he to be delivered to the temporal Judge,
his constancy so moved the hearts of many, that the Provost of the Town
Patricke Learmond, though he were Steward of the Bishops regalitie, refused to
be his temporal Judge: and the Bishops Chamberlain being therewith charged,
would not take upon him so ungodly an office: the Bishops servants could get
never a cord in the whole town for money to tie him to the stake withal, nor
a Tar barrel to burn him when he came to the stake. He said to Oliphant,
Put me up with thy hands, and take part in putting me to death, for by Gods law
I am forbidden to lay hands on my self. Then he put him up with his hands; and
he ascended gladly, saying, Introibo ad altar Dei, and desired he might speak
to the people, which was denied him, they saying he had spoken too much
already. Then some of the young men committed the burners, and the Bishops their
Masters to the Devil, and bade him speak what he pleased.

Then after he had prayed, standing upon the coals, said, I die only for the
defense of the faith of Christ, for the which the faithful Martyrs have
offered themselves gladly before, being assured after the death of their bodies
of eternal felicity. And I praise God he has called me of his mercy,
amongst the rest of his servants, to seal up his truth with my life; therefore
as you will escape eternal death, be not seduced with the lies of Priests,
Monks, Friars, and the rest of that Sect, but depend only upon the death of
Jesus Christ and his mercy, that you may in the time to come be delivered from
condemnation. All the while the multitude greatly mourned, perceiving his
mighty patience, constancy and boldness; whereby their hearts were so much
enkindled and inflamed, that he was the last Martyr that died in Scotland ever
after for religion.

After this by Gods just judgment, in the same place where Walter Mill was
burned, the Images of the great Church of the Abbey, which passed in number and
costlines, were burned in time of reformation.

Here follows in the book of Martyrs the names of diverse which were omitted
by him in King Henry the eighth his time, and an instrument of the Popes
definitive sentence against Henry the eighth for his divorce with Katharine
Dowager, and the instrument of the Bull of Pope Leo against Martin Luther, and
his answer to it; in which for brevity sake I leave thee to the book at large
if thou be disposed to see them, and also the last Will and Testament of King
Henry, and the manner of his death.

A Story of certain Friars in France in the City of Orleance in the year
1534.
THe Mayors wife of the City provided in her Will that she should be buried
without any pomp or solemnity: for the Bell did use to warn every one to
pray for the dead corpse; and when it is carried forth all or the most part of
the begging Friars go before it with Torches and Tapers, and the more pomp is
used, the greater is the concourse of people; but this woman would none of this
gears, the which burial of hers, her husband performed according as she
required in her Will.

Then one Colman and Steven Arras Doctors of Divinity: and the first a
Coniurer, set a young man, which was a nouice, over the Uault of the Church,
and when they came according to their use to Mattins at midnight, he made a
wonderful noise and shrieking: then this Colman went to crossing and
coniuring, but the other above would not speak; and being charged to make a
sign whether he were a dumb spirit or no, he ratled and made a great noise
again.

Then they told some of the chiefest of the City what a heavy chance had
happened, and entreated them to come to their service at night. When they were
there, and the service begun, he aloft made a great noise: being demanded
what he would, he made signs he could not speak: then he was commanded to
answer Intergatories by signs, and when any question was asked he struck upon
the Table so that he might be heard: then he was demanded whether he was any
that were buried there; then they reckoned up diverse, and at last the Mayors
wife: here he made a sign that he was the spirit of that woman; then he was
asked whether he was damned for Covetousness, Pride, Lechery, or not doing
works of Charity, or else for Lutheranisme; then by striking twice or thrice
upon the Table gave them to understand that Luthers heresy was the cause of
her damnation: and being asked whether the body buried in holy ground should
be dug up and carried ^hence, he made signs it should be so: then the
Friars desired the Citizens to set their hands to a writing, testifying that
which they had seen, but for fear of the Mayor, they refused to subscribe:
then the Friars took the Pixe, with the Host, and the Lords body, and all the
relics of Saints, and carried them to another place, and there they said
their masses: then the official came thither, and would feign have seen the
spirit coniured, and one should go into the vault and see if any spirit
appeared: but he could not get them to disturb the spirit any more.

^ Then the Mayor informed the King of the whole matter, and the King sent
certain to know whether it were so, or no: then they put the d^ers thereof
into several Prisons, and examined them apart, and a great while they would
confess nothing: at length, the Judges promising the nouice that he should
have no harm, nor come no more into the Friars hands, he declared to them the
whole matter in order: whereupon they were committed to Orleance to prison. And
it was certainly reported, that the King would have plucked down the House: but
even at the same time chanced a persecution against the Lutherans, and they
feared the punishment of these men should have bin a reproach unto the Order,
and a cause of much rejoicing to the Lutherans. These were Francis^an Friars.

A Story of certain Monks of Sueuia.
GVnrame, a noble Baron, in the year 1130. builded an Abbey in Sueuia, called
Salmesuille, of Cistercian Monks. Amongst many Benefactors to the said House,
the Earls of Montfort had bestowed upon that Monastery many new Liberties and
Privileges, upon condition, that they should receive with free hospitality
any stranger, Horseman or Footman, for one night: but this hospitality did
not long continue, through a subtle devise of one of the Monks, who would
counterfeit the Devil, rattling and raging in chains at the lodgings where the
strangers should lie: and so continued this a long space. At length, an Earl
of the house of Montfort was lodged at the Monastery: when the Earl was at
his rest, in the night the Monk, after his wonted manner, began to play the
Devil, roaring, thundering, spitting of fire, and making a noise: the Earl
hearing thereof, took a good heart, and taking his sword, slew the Monk. And
thus the Devil of the Abbey was coniured, which stopped the guests from
coming to the House. Who lift to see more and worse pranks of Friars and
Monks, played in their Houses and Cloisters, let them resort to the Epistle of
Erasmus, and he shall find enough to infect the air.

JOHN BROWN, a blessed Martyr, burned at Ashford in the second year of
Henry the eighth, Anno 1511.
THe said John Brown passing to Graues-end in a Barge, a Priest began to swell
and stomach that he should sit so near him, at length said, Do thou know
who I am, thou fittest so near me and upon my clothes? No sir, said the other.
I tell you, said he, I am a Priest. What sir, are you a Parson or Uicar, or
some Ladies Chaplain? No, said he, I sing for a Soul. I pray you, said the
other, where find you the Soul when you go to Mass? I cannot tell, said he. I
pray where do you leave it when you have done Mass? I know not; said the
Priest. How then, said the other, can you save the Soul? I perceive thou art
an Heretic, said the Priest. Within three days after, by virtue of a Warrant
from the Archbishop, with a Baylife and two of the Bishops men, they came
suddenly into the house of the said Brown, as he was carrying a dish of meat
to his guests (for his wife was that day Churched) they laid hands on him, and
carried him to Canterbury, where they kept him forty days: in which time he
was so pitifully entreated by Warram the Archbishop, and Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, that he was set barefooted upon hot burning coals, to make him
deny his Faith; which he bare patiently, and continued in maintaining the
Lords quarrel unremovable: then he was sent to Ashford, where he dwelt, the
next day to be burned: where he was set in the Stocks all night; his wife sat
all the while by him, to whom he declared the whole Tragedy of his handling:
how they burned his ^e^t to the bones, that he could not set them to the
ground, to make him deny his Lord here: which if I should have done, he would
deny me hereafter; therefore good wife, continue as thou have begun, and bring
up thy children in the fear of God: where the next day he was burned. This
John Brown bare a Faggot seven years before this, whose sonn^, named Richard
Brown* for the like cause of Religion, was imprisoned at Canterbury in the
later time of Queen Marie, and should have been burned, with two more: but
the next day after Queen Marie died, and they escaped by the Proclamation of
Queen^ Elizabeth.

THE NINTH BOOK, Containing the Acts and things done in the Reign of King
EDWARD the sixth.
AFter the death of Henry the eight, succeeded King Edward the sixth, his
son, being of the age of nine years. Touching his commendations, I leave you
to the Book at large: who, because he was so young and tender, was committed
to sixteen Governors, amongst whom, especially the Lord Edward Semer, Duke
of Somerset, his uncle, was assigned as Protector of him and the Commonwealth:
a man of noble virtues, especially for his favor to Gods (...); thro^gh the
industry of whom, that monstrous Hydra with six heads, the (...) Articles,
which devoured so many, were abolished; whereby the proceedings of Gardner
began to decay: who storming thereat, wrote to the Lord Protector in the cause
thereof.

He restored the Scriptures to the Mother tongue, and extinguished Masses, and
by little and little greater things followed in the reformation of Churches:
such as fled for the danger of the Truth, were again received to their
Country, the most part of Bishops were changed, dumb Pr^lates were compelled
to give place to such as would Preach, and learned men were sent for out of
other Countries, as Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius, the first
of whom taught at Oxford, and the other two at Cambridge, with great
commendations.

Bonner, Bishop of London, was committed to the Marshalsie, and for his
contempt and misdemeanor deposed: Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, with Tunstall
Bishop of Durham, were cast into the Tower for their disobedience.

In this time of King Edward, under this noble Protecto^, this one commendation
is proper unto them, that amongst all the Popish ^ort; of whom, some privily
st^le out of the Realm, many were crafty dissemblers, some open adversaries
^ yet there was not one that lost his life during the whole time of the Reign
of this King, for any matter of Religion, Papist or Protestant, except lone of
Kentan English woman, and one George a Dutchman, who died for certain Articles
not necessary to be rehearsed.

THOMAS DOBBE.
THis man, in the beginning of King Edwards Reign, coming from S. John's
College in Cambridge to London, as he passed through Paul's Church, there was
a Priest at Mass at the South side of the Church: being at the elevation, this
young man, repleate with godly zeal, pitying the ignorance and Idolatry of the
people, in honoring that which the Priest lifted up, he exhorted the people
not to honor that visible bread as God, which was neither God nor ordained of
God to be honored; 1543.
wherefore he was apprehended by the Mayor, and accused to the Bishop of
Canterbury, and was committed to the Counter in Bread-streete, where shortly
falling sick, he died; whose pardon was obtained of the Lord Protector, if he
had lived.

JOHN HVNNE.
IN the first year of the Kings raig^e one Master Lewnax of Wresell and his
wife, sent this John Hunne their servant, unto the Bishop of Canterbury for
denying the flesh and blood of Christ to be really in the Sacrament of the
Altar, and saying he would never veil his Hatte to it if he should be burned
for it: and that if he should hear mass he should be damned. But because I
find nothing done therein, I leave it.

When this godly young Prince was peaceably established in his Kingdom, and had
a godly, wise, and zealous Council about him, especially the Duke of
Sommerset, he earnestly desired the advancement of the true honor of God, and
planting of sincere Religion, and the s^ppressing of all Idolatry,
Superstition, and hypocrisy throughout his Dominions: Following the good
example of the good King Josias, and being he found most of his Laws repugnant
to his zealous enterprise: He by the advice of his wise and Honorable Council,
of his own regal authority, did prosecute his godly purpose, until by
consent of the whole estate of Parliament he might establish, a more free and
uniform order, and those certain wi^e, learned, and discreet personages for
Commissioners, generally to visit all the Bishoprics of this Realm, to
understand and redress the abuses of the same: and divided them into several
companies, and assigned them several Diocesses to be visited, appointing to
every company, one or two godly Preachers which should preach to the people at
every Sessions, the true Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, and exhort them to
all love and obedience of the same: and earnestly dehort them from their old
superstition, and wonted Idolatry: and that they might the more orderly be
directed in this their Commission, there were delivered unto them certain
injunctions, and Ecclestasticall orders drawn out by the Kings learned
Council, the which they should both inquire of, and also command in his
Majesty's behalf, to be thenceforth observed of every person to whom they did
severally appertain within their several circuits: the which Injunctions if
thou be disposed for to read, I leave thee for brevity to the Book at
large.

Now during the time the Commissioners were in their circuits, 1544.
about diligent execution of their godly and zealous orders of the King and
Council, de^iring a further reformation, as well in Ecclesiastical as in
Civil government, appointed a Parliament to be summoned on the fourth of
November, in the first year of his reign, which continued until the twenty
four day of December then next following.

Whereby he caused to be enacted, that all Acts of Parliaments and Statutes,
touching, menci^ning, or any wise concerning Religion, or opinions, to wit; the
Statute of the first year of Richard the second, and the statute made in the
second year of the reign of Henry the fifth, and the statute mad^ in the
fifteenth year of the reign of Henry the eight, concerning the punishments
and reformation of Heretics and Lolards: and the six Articles made in the
thirty one year of Henry the eight, and the statute made in the thirty three
year of Henry the eight, against the books of the old and new Testament in
English, and the printing and uttering of English or books writings, and
preaching the Scriptures, an another Statute in the 35. year of Henry the
eight touching the qualification of the Stat^te of six Articles, and a^l and
every other Act or Acts of Parliament concerning Doctrine or matters of
Religion, should from thenceforth be repealed and of none effect, by occasion
whereof all his godly subjects abiding within the Realm had free liber^y to
profess the gospel, and those beyond Sea were not only licensed to ret^rne
home but encouraged bouldly and faithfully to travel in their calling, so that
God was much glorified and the people edified.

And in this Parliament it was enacted, that the Sacrament should be ministered
in both kind, and letters missiue were sent from the Council to the Bishops
of the Realm, concerning the communion to be ministered in both kinds, and
from Bishop to Bishop, as thou may see in the book at large.

Another Parliament was assembled in the second year of his Reign, beginning
upon the forth day of November 1548. continuing until the 14. day of March,
wherein a book in English entitled the Book of Common prayer and
administration of the Sacraments and other Rightes and Ceremonies of the
Church, after the use of the Church of England, was concluded upon by the
Clergy, which his highness receiving with great comfort, did exhibi^^ it unto
the Lords and Commons of the Parliament, who for the honor of God and great
quietness which by the grace of God should ensue upon that one uniform right
and order in such Common prayer, rites and externe Ceremonies to be used
throughout England, Wales, Calice and the Marches of the same, authorise^ the
said Book by Act of Parliament, and set great penalty upon them that wo^ld be
disobe^ient thereto, as is to be seen in the book at large.

Also the marriage of Priests was authorized by the said Parliament by these
proceedings, and the Injunctions, which thou may see in the book at large:
thou may well perceive the great zeal of the King and the Lord Protector,
in reformation of true Religion, and also the lingering slacknesse on the other
side of others, especially of the Bishops and old Popish Curats, by whose
cloked contempt and wilful winking, the Book of Common prayers was long after
the publishing thereof very irreuerently used throughout many places of this
Realm, which when the King by diverse complaints understood, he wrote
speedily to all the Bishope of the Realm for the speedy redress thereof: and
because Bonner was one of the backwardest, he was peremtor^ly admonished under
pain of deprivation to preach the next Sunday three weeks after the date
there of at Paul's Cross, none but such Doctrine as was appointed him in the
said Iniuntion, and should preach the same Doctrines every quarter of a year
yearly, ^f sickness or some reasonable cause did not let.

Secondly, you your self in person, shall from henceforth celebrate the
Communion at the high Altar in Paul's every such days as your Predecessors
were wont to sing Mass.

The Popish Priests grudging and mourning to see their old Pop^sh Church of
Rome to decay, ceased not by all subtle and sinister means; first under Gods
name and the Kings, and under color of religion, to persuade the people to
rebellion. This first burst out in Cornwell and Devonshire, of whom the chief
Gentlemen Captains were Humfrey Arundell Esquire, James Rosogan, John Rosogan,
John Walkock, John Pain, Thomas Underhill, John Soleman, and William Segar.
There were e^ght Priests governors of the Camps and principal stirrers,
beside^ ^ multitude of other Popish Priests, there was ten thousand stout
traitors in this rebellion.

Commotions likewise began to broyle in Oxfordshire, Yorke-shire, and
especially in Northfolke and Suffolk, these aforesaid hearing thereof, took
courage, hoping they should well ^aue forti^ied the same quarrel: their intent
was to invade the City of Exeter, and twice they burned the gates thereof, but
gained thing but shot, being put from Exeter, they fell on spoiling and
robbing, where or howsoever they might catch, then laying their heads
together, they consulted of certain Articles to be sent up to the King as
follows.

First they would have that their Curats should minister the Sacrament of
baptism, at all times of need as well in the week days as on the holidays,
and their Children confirmed of the Bishop whenever we resort to him.

Secondly because they did constantly believe that in the Sacrament, after
consecration there is the very body and blood of Christ, and no substance of
bread and wine remains: therefore we will have the Mass celebrated as in
times past, without any man communicating with the Priests, because many
presuming vnworth^^y to receive the same, put no difference betwixt the Lords
body and other bread, and we will have the consecrated body of our Lord
reserved in our Churches.

Thirdly we will have holy bread and holy water, in remembrance of Christ's
body and blood.

Fourthly we will that our Priests shall sing and say with an audible voice,
Gods service in the Quire of the Parish Churches, and not to have it set forth
as a Christmas play.

Fifthly because Priests be men dedicated to God to celebrate the blessed
sacraments and preaching of Gods word, we will that they shall li^e chaste
without marriage.

Sixthly we will the six Articles shall stand in force.

To which Articles the King did particularly answer and set forth reasons
against them in writing, and showed that he would spend his life and all that
he had to maintain the Godly reformation which was begun, yet he offered them
pardon if they would desist from the deceitful counsel of the seekers of
dissension who sought for nothing else but to vnd^e them, their wives and
children: and if they would not be moved to repentance with his fatherly
kindness showed unto them, he would proceed against them as against the Heathen
with force and Arms.

And because they would not accept mercy, Sir John Russell Knight, Lord privy
seal, was sent by the King and council against them, and next to him were
joined Sir William Harbert, Sir John Paulet, Sir Hugh Paulet Sir Thomas Speck
with the Lord Gray and others.

Thus the Lord Privy seal accompanied with the Lord Gray advancing his power
against the rebels, yet by Gods providence they gave them the repulse, who
recovering themselves again, encountered the second time the Lord privy seal,
but by Gods help they with their whole cause of false religion were utterly
vanquished, the popish rebels not only lost the field, but a great part of
them lost their lives lying slain the compass of two miles; diverse were taken
as Humphry Arundell, Berry, Thomas Underhill, John Soleman, William Seger, and
two Priests Tempson and Barret, and two Mayors Henry Bray and Henry Lee with
diverse mo, all which afterward were executed.

These rebels to make their part more sure by the presence of their
consecrated God, brought with them unto the Battle the pixe under his Canopy
riding and in a Cart, neither was there lacking Masses, Crosses, Banners,
Candlestickes, with Holy-bread and Holy Water plenty to defend them from
Devils, and all enemies which could not save them from their enemies: but both
the consecrated God and all the trumpery about him was taken in the Cart,
lea^ing a Lesson of better experience how to put their confidence in such vain
Idols.

Like unto this was the field of Musclebrough fought in Scotland the year
before this when the Scots incamping themselves against the Lord Protector and
the Kings power sent into Scotland, they likewise brought into the field the
Gods of their Altars, with Masses, Crosses, Banners, and all their popish
stuff, having great affiance therein, to have a great day against the English
army, as to man's indgement might seem not unlike. The number of the Scots
army far exceeded ours: but the arm of the Lord so turned the vi^tory, that
the Scots in the end with all their Masses and Trinkets were put to the wors^,
of whom were slain between thirteen and fourteen thousands, and not passing
a hundred English men: The cause of this war was because the Scots had
promised King Henry the eight, that the young Scottish Quee^e should marry with
King Edward, which promise they afterward brake and paid therefore: and this
victory was the same day and hour, when the Images were burned openly in
London.

There was the like commotion in Oxford, and Buckingham, but that was soon
appeased by the Lord Gray, of whom two hundred were taken, and twelve of them
ringleaders delivered to him; where of certain were executed.

In Norfolk and the parts thereabouts the Marquess of Northampton, was sent to
repress the rebellion, who was appointed to keep the field and passages, to
stop them from victuals, whereby they might the sooner be brought to
acknowledge their fault, and seek pardon, who pined himself within the City
of Norwich, but the Rebels pressed upon the City, and at length obtained it,
yet there was but a hundred on both sides slain, and the Lord Shefield, then
the Earl of Warwick was sent against them, by whom the confused rabble was
ouerthrown, to the number of four thousand, and both the Kets, chief stirrers
of that Commotion* were put to death, and one of them hanged in chains.

In this year likewise the like commotion began at Semer in the North Riding
of York shire, 1549.
and continued in the East Riding of the same, and there ended. The principal
doers thereof were William Ombler, Thomas Dale, with one Steuenson.

They intended to stir in two places at one instant, seven miles from the
other, and at the first rush to destroy such Gentlemen and men of substance as
favored the Kings proceedings, and to set the Beacons on fire to bring the
people together: and having the ignorant people assembled, then to pour out
their poison, beginning with such as they thought were pinched with poverty,
and unwilling to labor, therefore the more ready to follow the spoil of rich
men's goods, blowing in their ears that Gods service was now quite laid aside,
and new inventions, neither good nor godly, put in their stead, feeding them
with fair promises, to reduce into the Church again their old ignorance and
abominable Idolatry.

Putting this practice in execution, they took one M. White, and one Clopton,
and one Savage a Merchant of York, and one Bery, and cruelly murdered them, and
took^ away all that was about them: then they ranged from Town to Town and
enlarged their ^and, leaving in no town any men above the age of 16. years,
until they had gathered about 3000.

Then came the King^ pardon to them, which Ombler con^umelio^sly refused, and
persuaded others so to d^e, and some excepted thereof; but shortly after,
Ombler as he was riding from town to town, to charge all the Constables and
Inhabitants in the Kings Namo, to resort to Humumby, he was taken and
imprisoned at ^orke. After him, Thomas Dale and Henry Barton, John Dale, Robert
Wright, William Peacocke, Wetherell, and Edmund Buttry, busy stirrers in this
sedition, as they traveled from place to place to draw people unto their
faction, were likewise apprehended and committed to Ward, and after executed at
York.

The King of France bearing of the Insurrections of the Kings Subjects in
diverse places, supposing to take the time, he made invasion against the Isles of
Iersey and Gernesey, and thought to have surprised the Kings Ships in the said
Isles, with his shipp^s and Galleys, but he was so hotly saluted with the Kings
Ships in the Island, that the Frenchmen lost at least a thousand men, and their
Ships and Galleys were so spoiled, as they were forced to return home, and
not able to come out again: and they brought into one Town in one vessel, at
least sixty Gentlemen to be burned, and the King gave out a special
inhibition, that none should speak of the success of that journey, so the
arm of God mercifully fought for King Edward his Servant, to defend and
deliver him from so many hard dangers, all in one year, which is worthy of all
posterity to be noted.

The examination of Bonner.
THE King sent forth his Commission under his broad Seal, to the Bishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of Rochester, and other trusty personages and
Councelors, appointing and authorizing them, to examinine the Bishop of
London, and to proceed against him according to law and Justice, either to
suspention, excommunication, committing to prison, or deprivation, if the
quality of the offense so required.

At Bonners first entering into the place, within the Archbishops house at
Lambeth (where the Archbishop and the other Commissioners sat) to be examined:
he kept his hat on his head, making as though he saw them not, until one bad
him reverence the Commissioners, then laughingly he said; What my Lords are you
there, by my troth I saw you not: No said the Archbishop you would not see;
well (quoth he) you sent for me, have you any thing to say to me; Yea, said the
Commissioners, we have authority to call you to account for your Sermon you
made lately at Paul's Cross, because you did not preach to the people the
Articles you were commanded to preach upon.

Then said Bonner; In good Faith my Lord, I would one thing were had in
me^ereuerence then it is, What is that said the Archbishop, The blessed Mass
(quoth he) you have written well of the Sacrament, I marvel you do no more
honor it: The Arch-bishoppe said; If you think I have wrote well of it, it is
because you understand it not. Bonner said, I think I understand it better
then you that wrote it: The Archbishop replied, he would easily make a Child
of ten years old understand therein as much as you.

And when they had called forth Master Latimer, and John Hooper, Preachers, to
propound such matter as they had to say against him, he hearing them speak,
fell to scorning and taunting them, calling one Goose, and the other Woodcocke,
and denying their accusation to be true. Whereupon the Arch-Byshop asked him
whether he would credit the people there present, and because many of them
that were there, were at his Sermon. The Arch-Bishoppe stood up and read the
Article of the Kings authority during his young age, saying unto them; How say
you my Masters, did my Lord of London preach this Article, they answered, No,
no: Then Bonner deridingly said; Will you believe this fond people.

Then was showed forth a ^ill of Complaint, exhibited unto the King by the said
Master Latimer and John Hooper, which was read; Then Bonner prayed that the
Bill of Complaint should be delivered unto him, which when he had perused, he
said; it was so general, as he could not directly answer unto it: The
Archbishop said, the special cause was, because he had transgressed the
Kings commandment, in not setting forth in his last Sermon at Paul's Cross,
the Kings Highness Royal power in his minority: and for the proof thereof,
he called Master LATIMER and JOHN HOOPER, to whom BONNER said; As for this
Merchant Latimer, I have wincked at his evil doings a great while, but I have
^ore to say to him hereafter: But as touching this Merchant Hooper, I have not
seen him before, howbeit I have heard much of his naughty preaching; Then he
said, Ah my Lord, now I see the cause of my trouble is not for the matter you
pretend, but because I did preach in my late Sermon the true presence of the
most blessed body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, to be in the
Sacrament of the Altar: And as for these my accusers, they are notorious evil
persons, and notable Heretics and Seducers, especially touching the Sacrament
of the Altar, and most of all this Hooper: for whereas I preached, that after
consecration of the Sacrament, there is the self same body and blood of Christ
in substance, that was hanged upon the Cross: he in the afternoon having a
great rabblement with him of his damnable Sect, did preach to the people
erroniouslie against it, and untruly expounded my words: for whereas I said
the same substance that was hanged upon the Cross, he like an Ass, (as he is
an Ass indeed) turned the word That, into As, saying; That I said, as it
hanged upon the Cross: Then the Arch-Bishoppe demanded of him, whether Christ
were in the Sacrament, Face, Nose, Mouth, Eyes, Arms, and Lips, with other
lineaments of the body; whereat Bonner shook his head, and said; I am right
sorry to hear your Grace to speak those words which you have done.

He appeared seven times before the said Commissioners, and ever used very
vnreuerent, uncomely, and frowar^ words and behauiours toward the
Commissioners and others, and he still shifted off the matter by subtle
dilatories, and frivolous cauiling about the Law, and with facing and railing
upon the Denouncers, that he thought to countenance out the matter before the
people. But to conclude, for all his subtle, crafty, cautels, and
tergiuersations, he was justly imprisoned, and in the end most lawfully
deprived.

The first trouble of the Lord Protector, 1549
was presently after the deprivation of Bishop Bonner, but shortly after he
was delivered out of the same by the mighty working of GOD, the tractation
whereof shall be delayed, until the time of his second trouble, which was two
years after. The vulgar people hearing of the apprehension of the Lord
Protector, they began to brute abroad, that now they should have their Latin
Service, the holy Bread and holy Water, and their other Ceremonies again:
Wherefore strait commandment was sent to the Bishops of the Dioces, to warn
the Parsons, Uicars, Curats, and Churchwardens of every Parish, to deliver up
all Antiphoners, Missalls, Grayles, Processionals, Manualls, Legends, Pyes,
Portuasies, Iournals, and Ordinals, and all other Books of Service: the having
whereof, might be any let unto the Service that now is set forth in English,
commanding all such persons as should be found disobedient in this matter, to
be committed to ward.

And because many refused to pay toward the finding of Bread and Wine for the
Communion, whereby the Communion in many places was omitted: the Bishops had
charge for the redress hereof, and to punish such as refused so to do.

In this year Letters were sent for the taking down of Altars in Churches,
1550.
and setting up a Table in the steed thereof, unto Nicholas Ridley, who being
Bishop of Rochester before, was made Bishop of London in Bonners place.

The Story of STEPHEN GARDNER, Bishop of Winchester.
Whereas the Kings Majesty made a general visitation, as before is said,
and appointed certain injunctions to be generally observed, they were
obediently received, and reverently executed of all men of all sorts, saving
only of the Bishop of Winchester, who by conference with others, by open
protestations and Letters also, showed such a wilful disobedience therein as
might have bred much trouble: Wherefore he was sent for before the Council,
before whom he denied to receive the said Articles, and so misused himself
before them* that he was sent to the Fleet: but upon promise of conformity,
he was set at liberty again, then he set forth such matters as bred more
contention in that Shire, then in all the Realm again, and he caused all his
Servants to be secretly armed and harnised, to withstand such as he thought to
have been sent by the Council into those parts, and when Preachers were sent
into that Country by the Council to preach the Word of GOD, the Bishop to
disappoint and disgrace them, and to hinder his Majesty's proceedings, did
occupy the Pulpit himself, and in his Sermons would warn the people of such
new Preachers, and to embrace no other Doctrine then that which he had taught
them. Wherefore being sent for again before the Council, yet in the end upon
his second promise of conformity, they left him at liberty, willing him to
remain at his house at London, yet he began afresh to ruffle and meddle in
matters that touched the Kings Majesty.

Whereupon being once again admonished, be promised again conformity, and
that he would declare his conscience to be well satisfied with the Kings
proceedings, to the satisfaction and good quiet of others; but at the day
appointed he did speak of certain matters contrary to express commandment
of the King: and in the Articles whereu^to he had agreed before, he used such
a manner of utterance, as was v^ry like there presently to have stirred a great
tumult, and in great matters touching the policy of the Realm, he so handled
them, that he showed himself a very seditious man, and that in the presence of
his Majesty, the Lords of the Councel^, and of such an audience, as the like
thereof has not been seen: whereupon he was committed to the Tower, and
after justly deprived for his obstinaey therein.

He wrote a Letter unto Master Vaghan, in defense and praise of Images, which
the Lord Protector answered very learnedly, as thou may see in the Book at
large.

He wrote another Epistle, wherein he first rayled and finds fault with the
Paraphrase of Erasmus, which he calls a Book of abomination: secondly, he
shows, that he can in no case away with the Homily of salvation* set out by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, which Article marue^lously vexes his Spirit.

His third purpose whereunto his Letters cheefely draw, is to insinuate the
Lord Protector, that no alteration should be made of Religion, during the time
of the Kings minority, but to let all things stand as King Henry had left
them.

The judgment of Doctor REDMAN on his deathbed, touching certain points of
Religion.
1 THE Sea of Rome in this last days, 1551
is a sink of all evil.

2 Purgatory, as the Schoolmen used it, was ungodly, and there was no such
kind kind of Purgatory as they phantasied.

3 That the offering up of the Sacrament in Masses and treutals for the sins of
the dead, is ungodly.

4 That the wicked are not partakers of the body of Christ, but receive the
outward sacrament only.

5 That the sacrament ought not to be carried about in procession, for it is
taught what is the use of it by these words, Take, eat and drink, do this in
remembrance of me.

6 That nothing which is seen in the sacrament, or perceived with any outward
sense, is to be worshipped.

7 That we receive not Christ's body corporally, that is to say, grossly like
other meats, and like as the Capernayts did understand it.

8 That we receive Christ's body so spiritually, that nevertheless truly.

9 Touching transubstantiation, there is not in any of the old Doctors any
good ground and sure proof thereof, or any mention of it, as far as ever he
could perceive; neither that he does see what could be answered to the
objections made against it.

10 Being asked of Master Wilkes what that was which was lifted up betwixt the
Priests hands, he answered, that he thought that Christ could be neither lifted
up nor down.

11 That Priests may by the law of God marry wives.

12 That as only faith does justify, so that does signify a true, a lively,
and a faith resting in Christ, and embracing Christ: and this is true, godly,
sweet and comfortable doctrine, so that it be so taught that the people take
non^ occasion of carnal liberty.

13 That works had their reward and crown, but they did not deserve eternal
life and the kingdom of God, no not the works of grace; for everlasting life
is the gift of God.

The history of WILLIAM GARDNER an Englishman, who constantly suffered in
Portingall for the Truth.
He was borne at Bristow, 1552.
and gave himself unto the trade of Merchandise, he was sent into Spain by
Master Paget, being six and twenty years old, the ship arrived by chance at
Lishborne the chief City of Portugal, he tarrying there about merchandise,
became a profitable servant to his Master and others, yet he reserved his
religion in that popish country: there were also besides him diverse good men
in the same City, neither lacked he good books nor the conference of good and
honest men, to whom he would often bewail his weakness, that he was not
sufficiently touched with the hatred of his sins, nor inflamed with the love
of godliness.

There was a solemn marriage celebrated between two Princes, the son of the
King of (...), and the daughter of the King of Spain, to which marriage there
was great resort of nobles, and there lacked no Bishops with Miters, nor
Cardinals with Hats, to set out this royal wedding. William Gardner was there
when they went forward to the celebrating of the Mass, for that alone did
serve for all purposes: the Cardinal did execute it with much singing and
Organ-playing: the people stood with great deu^tion and silence, praying,
looking, kneeling, and knocking, their minds fully bent upon the external
sacrament, which did grievously prick and mo^e this young man, to see so many
noble personages and others so seduced with this Idolatri^, that if the prease
of people had not hindered him he would that day have done some notable thing
in the Kings presence: he came home and made up all his accounts of that was
due to him, and that which was owing to others, that no man could ask any
thing of him, he fell to prayer and meditation of the Scriptures: The Sunday
came again to be celebrated with like pomp and solemnity: The said William
was early present, and stood as near the Altar as he could: When the King
with all his Nobles were come the Mass began, which was solemnized by a
Cardinal, when he began to ^osse the Host too and fro round about the
Chalice, making certain circles, The said William Gardener not able to suffer
any longer, he ran to the Cardinal in the presence of the King, Nobles, and
Citizens, with the one hand he snatched away the Cake and tr^de it under his
feet, and with the other hand overthrew the Chalice: Whereupon rose great
tumult, and one wounded him with a Dagger in the soulder: The King commanded to
save him, whereby they abstained from murdering him.

When he was brought before the King: he demanded what country man he was, and
how he durst work such a contumacie against his Majesty, and the Sacraments
of the Church: He answered he was an English man, by birth and Religion, and
am come hither for traffic of Merchandise, and when I saw in this famous
assembly so great Idolatry committed, my conscience neither ought nor could any
longer suffer, but must needs do that you have seen me do, which was not
done for any contumacy of your Majesty, but of purpose, as before God I do
confess to seek the salvation of this people: then understanding that king
Edward had restored Religion in England, and thinking he had been set on by
some others: they would know who set him on; He answered he was not moved
thereto by any man, but by his own conscience, but that he owed this service
first unto God, and secondly unto their salvation, and they ought to impute the
act only to themselves, which so irreverently used the holy Supper of the Lord
unto so great Idolatry, to the peril of their own souls, except they
repented. He was like to faint with the abundance of blood that ran out of
his wound, and Surgeons were sent to cure it, then all Englishmen were
committed unto Prison, and one Pendigrace, because that he was his Bedfellow,
was gree^ously tormented and examined, and scarce delivered after two years
imprisonment.

Then they caused a Linen Cloth to be sowed round like a Ball, which they
violently put down his throat to the bottom of his belly, tied with a small
string which they held in their hands; and when it was down they pulled it up
again with violence, so plucking it too and fro through the meat pipe. When
all torments and tormentors were wearied, they asked him if he did not repent
his wicked deed, he answered, if it were to do again he thought he should do
it, but he was sorry it was in the presence of the King: the fault ought to be
ascribed to the King and not to him, in that he having power would not prohibit
so great Idolatry used amongst his people.

Three days after they brought him to execution: when they had used all kind
of torments against him, then they cut off his right hand, which he took up
with his left and kissed it; then they cut off his other hand, which he,
kneeling down, kissed, and so he was carried to the place of execution, where
was an Engine, from the which a great rope coming down by a pullie, was
fastened about this Christian, which first pulled him up: then there was a
great pile of wood set on fire beneath him into the which he was by little and
little let down, not with the whole body, but so that his feet only felt the
fire: then he was hoysed up and so let down again; in the which torment he
continued with a constant spirit, and the more terribly he burned the more
vehemently he prayed.

When his feet were burned the tormentors asked him whether he did not yet
repent, and exhorted him to call upon our Lady and other Saints; he answered
he had done nothing whereof he did repent, and needed not our Ladies nor Saints
help, and what torments soever they used: he remained always one, desiring
them to leave off such vanities and follies, for when Christ ceased to be our
Advocate, then he would pray our Lady to be his Advocate: and when they sought
to stop his prayers, he said Judge me O Lord, and revenge my cause against the
unmerciful people, before he had ended the Psalm, pulling him up and down in
the fire for the more torment, the rope was burned, he fell into the midst
of the fire, where he changed his Temporal pains, for eternal quietness: Thus
GOD by this message did provoke the Portugales to the sincere knowledge.

But this cruelty was not unrevenged, for with a spark from the fire of his
burning, one of the Kings Ships was burned, and the Kings Son that was
married died half a year after, and the next year the King himself dyed.

The Clergy appointed a solemn Fast certain days for penance to purge that
fact: there be some yet as I have heard diverse report, out of whose remembrance
this constant Martyr can never be pulled, and is so fresh yet amongst them as
if it were but lately done, his death as fruitful seed has taken such fruit
in some that it is yet a linely, and diligent preaching unto some against
superstition and Idolatry used in their Churches.

The tragical History of the worthy Duke of Sommerset.
KIng Edward had three uncles by his mothers side: Edward, Thomas and Henry
Semer: Edward was made protector of the Realm, and Thomas was made high
Admiral of the same, so long as they were joined together in amity, they
preserved themselves, and the King, and the Commonwealth: Sir Thomas Semer
high Admiral, married Queen Katherine, late wife of King Henry, as you have
heard; betwixt the said Queen, and the Duchess of Somerset, there fell great
displeasure: And thereupon in the behalf of their wives grudge began between
the brethren, after it was laid unto the Lord Admirals charge, that he
purposed to destroy the young King^ and trans^ate the Crown unto himself, and
for the same he was attainted and condemned, and did suffer at Tower Hill the
twentieth of March, one thousand five hundred forty and nine, many reported that
the Duchess of Sommerset had wrought his death: whereby it came to pass,
whether by Gods just judgment or no, In October after, that there was great
consultation amongst the Lords, in the house of Master York, and at Baynards
Castle, and in the Lord Mayor of Londons house, against the Lord Protector,
remaining then with the King at Hampton Court: The King with his Council
hearing thereof, first Secretary Peter with the Kings message was sent unto
them, whom the Lords retained still with them, making no answer: whereupon the
Lord Protector writ unto them, that the King was informed of your assembly:
wherefore we sent Master Secretary Peter unto you: His Majesty, and we of
his Council here do not a little marvel, that you stay here ^he said M.
Peter, and have not answered his Majesty, and we are sorry to see your doings
bent with violence to bring the King and us to these extremities: which if you
will take no other way, we intend with violence to defend with death, and to
put it in Gods hand, who gives victory as it pleases him: as touching private
matters ^o avoid the effusion of Christian blood, and to preserve the Kings
Majesty's person, his Realm and Subjects, you shall find us agreeable to any
reasonable conditions that you will require, for we esteem^ the Kings wealth,
and tranquillity of the Realm, more then other worldly things, yea then our
life; praying them to send their determinate answer by Master Peter, or some
other.

Notwithstanding this Letter, the Lords persisted still in their purpose, and
took advice to keep themselves in the City of London, as strong as they might,
and willed the Mayor and Aldermen to provide a substantial watch by night, and
by day, for the safeguard of the City and gates.

Then they demanded five hundred men to aid them to fetch the Lord Protector
out of Windsor from the King: and they published a Proclamation against the
said Protector to this effect.

First that the Protector by his evil government was the cause of all the
sedition, that of late happened within the Realm: and of the losses of the
Kings ordinance in France: and that it appeared by the building of his
sumptuous houses in the time of the Kings war, that he sought his own glory:
that he esteemed nothing the grave counsel, of the Counselors, that he had
sowed divisions between the Nobles, Gentlemen, and Commons.

That the Nobles assembled themselves only to cause the protector to have lived
within limits, and to have put such order for the surety of the King as was fit.

That the protector slandered the Council unto the King: and that he was a
great traitor, and therefore the Lords defired the City and Commons to aid
them to take him from the King.

Then the King sent a Letter unto the Mayor and Citizens, commanding them to
aid him with a thousand men out of their City, well armed, and to send them
with all speed unto the Castle of Windsor.

These contrary commandments coming both at one instant unto the Mayor and
Citizens of London: it seemed very doubtful to them which way to take: at the
last stepped up a Citizen George Studlaw, and said. I remember in the time of
Henry the third; the Barons as the Lords do now, demanded aid of the Mayor
and Citizens of London, and the City aided them against the King, and it came
to an open battle, and the Lords prevailed against the King, and took the King
and his son prisoners, and upon certain conditions, the King and his Son were
restored again, and the King openly granted his pardon to the Lords and
Citizens, and it was ratified by Act of Parliament, but it was never forgotten
during the Kings life: the Liberties of the City were taken away, and
strangers appointed to be our governors, and the Citizens given away body and
goods, and from one persecution unto another were most miserably afflicted,
such it is to enter into the wrath of a Prince: for Solomon says, the wrath of
a Prince is death: Therefore I would council the Lords with us, to make suit
to the King, that he would please to hear the complaints that may be justly
proved against the L. Protector, and I doubt not but this matter will be
pacified, and that the King, nor yet the Lords have cause to seek for further
aid, neither we to offend any of them both.

Then the Lords sent Sir Philip Hobby, with their Letter of credence unto the
King, beseeching him to give credit to that which he should say: who so handled
the matter, that the Lord Protector was commanded from the Kings presence: and
shortly committed to ward in the Castle of Windsor: The same day the Lords of
the Council resorted unto the King, and the next day they brought the Lord
Protector unto the Tower.

Shortly after the Lords resorted unto the Tower, and there charged the Lord
Protector with sundry Articles; the effect of them is contained in the
proclamation aforesaid: and although these purposes of man intended the
spilling of his life; and the Lord so ordered the matter by the means of the
Kings so laboring for his uncle, that in short while he was let out of the
Tower, and continued at liberty two years and two days.

After he was again apprehended and committed again to the Tower, after he
was brought to Westminister Hall to be arraigned, and there was charged with
felony and treason: he put himself to be tried by his Peers, who discharged
him of treason, but they accounted him guilty of Felony, for purposing the
death of the Duke of Northumberland and others, and was returned unto the Tower
again.

When he was brought to his execution upon tower Hill, he came with the same
gesture which he used, changing neither voice nor countenance, and kneeling
down he commended himself to God, and his prayers ended, he turned toward the
people, as it were with a certain fatherly love to children, and said:

Dearly beloved friends, I am brought hither to suffer death, albeit I never
offended against the King in word nor deed: and have always been as faithful
as any man unto this Realm: but because I am by Law condemned to die, to
testify my obedience which I owe unto the Laws, I am come hither to suffer
death: Wherefore I thank God that he has given me this time of repentance,
who might so suddenly have been taken with death that I could not have
acknowledged God, nor my self.

I would something put you in mind of the Christian Religion, which so long as
I was in authority I did always diligently set forth, and I rejoice therein,
since now the state of Christian Religion comes most near to the order of the
Primative Church, which I esteem as a great benefit of God to me, and unto
you: most heartily exhorting you all, that you will most thankefully embrace
it, and set out the same in your living, which if you do not, no doubt great
calamity will follow.

Upon these words there was heard a terrible noise, as it had been of some
great tempest from above, as if a great deal of Gunpowder, being enclosed in
an armory, having caught fire, had violently broke out: or as if a great
company of horsemen had been running together upon them, whereby the people
were so amazed, that they ran away; some into Ditches and Puddles, and some
into the houses; others with their Halberts fell unto the ground: Crying out,
Jesus save us, Jesus save us: and those which tarried in their places knew not
where they were: It happened here even as when the officers of the High
Priests came to take Christ: They run back and fell to the ground, in so
great slaughter of Dukes within this few years, there were never so many
weeping eyes at one time, and the people seeing Sir Anthony Brown ride to the
Scaffold: they coniectured that the King had sent his Uncle pardon, therefore
with great rejoicing they cast up their caps, and cried out pardon, pardon, is
come, God save the king. Thus the good Duke, although he was destitute of man's
help, yet he saw before his departure in what great love and favor he was
with all men.

Then said the Duke, dearly beloved friends, there is no such matter as you
vainly believe: Therefore I pray you be contented with my death which I most
willingly suffer; let us join in prayer for the King, unto whom I have always
showed my self a faithful Subject, and have been most diligent to seek the
commodity of the whole Realm; at which words all the people cried out and
said, it was most true: And praying for the King and Council, and exhorting
the people to obedience, forgiving all his enemies, and desiring forgiveness of
them which he^ had offended, and praying them to bear witness, he died in the
faith of Christ.

Then he kneeled down and prayed, and rising again without any trouble of
mind, he took them all on the Scaffold by the hand, and bid them all
farewell: when he lay upon the block he called thrice on the name of Jesus,
saying, Lord Jesus save me: And as the name of Jesus was repeating the third
time, in a moment, he was bereft both of head and life.

The Lady MARY.
THe King and his Council had much travel by Letters and messengers, to
reduce the Lady Mary to obedient con^ormitie of Religion: yet she would not be
reclaimed from her own singular opinion, fixed upon custom, to give any
indifferent hearing unto the word and voice of verity, the which set will of
the said Lady Mary, the young King, and also his Father King Henry, right well
perceiving they were both much displeased against her, insomuch that not only
her brother did sequester her in his Will, but also her own father considering
her inclination, did conceive such a hate against her, that for a great space
he did seclude her from the title of Princess, yea, and seemed so greatly
incensed against her, that he was fully purposed to have proceeded further with
her, as it is reported, had not the intercession of Thomas Cranmer the
Archbishop reconciled the King again to favor and pardon his own daughter.

And about the eighth of September 1552. Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, went
to visit the Lady Mary, and was gently entertained of Sir Thomas Wharton, and
other her officers. About eleven of the clock the Lady Mary came forth of her
chamber of presence: then the Bishop saluted her Grace, and said he was come to
do his duty unto her Grace; she thanked him, and for a quarter of an hour
talked with him pleasantly, and said, she knew him when he was Chaplain to her
father, and remembered a Sermon that he made before her father, at the Lady
Clintons marriage, and so dismissed him to dine with her officers.

After dinner the Bishop being called, resorted again unto her Grace: then
said the Bishop, Madam, I come not only to do my duty to see your Grace, but
also to offer my self to preach before you on Sunday next, if it please you to
hear me: she said, I pray make the answer your self, for you know the
answer well enough: but if I must make answer, this shall be your answer,
The door of the Church shall be open for you if you come, but neither I nor
none of mine shall hear you. The Bishop said, Madam, I trust you will not
refuse GODS word. She answered, I cannot tell what you call GODS word; that is
not GODS word now that was GODS word in my fathers days. The Bishop said, GODS
word is one in all times, but it has been better understood and practiced in
some ages then in others. She said, you durst not for your ears have avouched
that for GODS word in my fathers days that now you do: as for your new books,
I thank GOD for it, I never read none of them, nor never will do.

After many bitter words against the form of Religion then established, and
against the government of the Realm, and the laws made in the young years of
her brother, which she said she was not bound to obey until her brother came
to perfect age, and then affirmed she would obey them. Then she asked him
whether he were one of the Privy Council; he answered no: you might well
enough, quoth she, as the Council goes now-a-dayes: so she concluded, that
she thanked him for his gentleness to come and see her, but for your offering
to preach before me, I thank you never a whit.

Then was the Bishop brought by Sir Thomas Wharton unto the place where he
dined, who desired him to drink: after he had drunk he looked very sadly, and
brake out in these words, Surely I have done amiss, in that I have drunk in
that place where GODS word has been offered and refused, whereas indeed if I
had been mindful of my duty, I ought not to have stayed, but to have
departed immediately, and to have shaken off the dust of my feet for a
testimony against this house.

Touching the disputations of Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius,
because they are only touching the Sacrament, which is so often handled in this
book, for brevity I refer thee to the book at large.

The decease of King EDWARD.
ABout a year and a half after the death of the Duke of Sommerset, 1553.
King Edward died, entering into the seventeenth year of his age, and in the
seventh year of his reign. As the time approached that it pleased Almighty
God to call this young King from us, which was on the sixth day of July, about
three hours before his death his eyes being closed, speaking to himself, and
thinking none had heard him, he made this prayer as ^olloweth.

LOrd God deliver me from this miserable and wretched life, and take me amongst
thy chosen, howbeit not my will but thy will be done, for I commit my spirit
unto thee. O Lord thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee, yet
for thy chosens sake send me life and health, that I may truly serve these. O my
Lord GOD, bless thy people and save thine inheritance: O Lord save thy chosen
people of England: O my GOD defend this realm from Papistrie, and maintain thy
true religion, that I and my people may praise thy holy name, for thy Son
Jesus Christ's sake.

Then he turned his face, and seeing who was by him, he said unto them, are you
so nigh? I thought you had been^ further off: then smilingly he said; I was
praying to God. The last words he spoke were these: I am faint, Lord have
mercy upon me, and take my spirit. And thus he yielded up the Gh^st, leaving a
woeful kingdom behind unto his sister.

THE TENTH BOOK, WHEREIN is contained the most memorable things done in the
Reign of Queen MARY.
KIng Edward by his Testament did appoint Lady Jane, 1553.
daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whose mother was Mary, second sister of King
Henry, who was first wife to the French King, and after to the said Duke, to
succeed him in his Kingdom; all the Council and chief Nobility, the Mayor of
London, and all the Judges and chief Lawyers, saving Judge Hales, subscribed
thereto, who stood for Q. Mary.

The matter thus concluded, King Edward died when he was sixteen years of
age; then the said Jane was proclaimed Queen at London, and other Cities: she
was about the age of King Edward; in learning and wit she might be compared
with the University men which have taken many degrees of the schools.

Then Queen Mary wrote to the Council that they should proclaim her Queen, and
she would pardon them for that which was done: they answered her, that by the
Divorce betwixt King Henry and her mother, she was made illegitimate and
vnheritable to the Crown.

Then she speeded her self far from the City, hoping upon the Commons,
whereupon the Council sent forth the Duke of Northumberland, with other Lords
and Gentlemen with an Army, the Guard assisting the Duke.

Mary withdrew her self into Northfolke and Suffolk, where she knew the Duke
was hated; and there gathering such aid of the Commons as she might, kept her
self in Fremingham Castle, to whom Suffolk-men resorted, and promised her
their aid if she would not alter the religion which her brother had
established, to which she agreed, with such promises as no man could have
misdoubted her: and thus being guarded with the power of the Gospellers, she
vanquished the Duke and all that came against her.

But after, the Suffolk-men making supplication unto her Grace for performance
of her promise, she answered, You shall one day well perceive that members must
obey their head, and not look to rule the same: and one Dobbe a Gentleman for
aduertising her of her promise by humble request, was three times set in the
pillorie, to be a gasing-stock to all men; others delivered her books and
supplications out of the Scripture, to exhort her to continue the doctrine then
established, who were sent to prison.

The Council at London, understanding that the Lady Marie increased in
puisance, and the peoples hearts mightily bent unto her, they turned their
song, and proclaimed for Queen, the Lady Mary, eldest daughter of K. Henry the
eight, and appointed by Parliament to succeed King Edward, dying without issue:
the Duke of Northumberland with some of his sons, were left destitute at
Cambridge, as also the Earl of Huntingdon, who were arrested and brought to
the Tower as Traitors.

Then the Queen came to the Tower, where the Lady Jane and the Lord Gilford her
husband were imprisoned five months, but the Duke within a month was beheaded,
with Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer: the Papists promised the Duke pardon
if he would openly recant upon the Scaffold, which in hope of pardon he did,
and yet he was beheaded; whose recantation the papists published not a little,
rejoicing at his conversion: but Sir Thomas Palmer confessed his faith in the
Gospel, and was sorry that he had not lived more Gospell-like.

Steven Gardner was released out of the Tower, and made Bishop of Winchester
and Lord Chancellor, and Poynets displaced; and Bonner restored to his
Bishopric again, and Ridley displaced; and Day made Bishop of Chichester, and
Story put out; and Heath made Bishop of Worcester, and Hooper committed to the
Fleet; and Vesie to Exeter, and Couerdale put out.

Doctor Ridley Bishop of London had preached against Queen Mary in Queen Ianes
time: shortly after the Sermon Queen Mary was proclaimed; then he went to the
Queen to salute her, who dispoyled him of his Dignities, and sent him to the
Tower upon a halting horse.

Then Queen Mary directed forth an inhibition by proclamation, that no man
should preach or read openly in Churches the word of God.

One Bourne, who after was Bishop of ^ath, preached at Paul's Cross so much in
the praise of Bonner being there present, and in dispraise of King Edward, that
his words sounded evil to the hearers, which caused them to murmur and stir,
insomuch that the Maror and others feared an uproar: one hurled a dagger at the
Preacher, who for fear pulled in his head. Master Bradford stood forth and
appeased the people, and after he and Rogers conducted the Preacher safe into
the Grammer-schoole, but shortly after they were both rewarded with burning.

The next Sunday the preacher at the Cross was guarded with the Queens Guard;
then men withdrew themselves from the Sermon, and the Mayor took order that the
ancients of al Companies should be present, lest the Preacher should be
discouraged with his small auditorie.

Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted with Peter Martyr and a few
others, offered to defend the doctrine of the book of Common Prayer by the
Scriptures and Doctors; but whilst they hoped to come to disputation, the
Archbishop and others were impris^ned, but Peter Martyr was suffered to return
from whence he came.

The first day of October the Queen was crowned, and the tenth day a Parliament
began, where Tailor Bishop of Lincoln, and Harley Bishop of Herford after they
saw the mass begin, not abiding the sight thereof, withdrew themselves from
the company, wherefore Tailor was commanded to attend, but shortly after died,
and Harley because he was married was ex^^nded from the Parliament and his
Bishopric. Then all statuts in K. Hen. the eight, and K. Edwards time, which
were against papistrie were repealed.

Sir James Hales Justice of the Common pleas, notwithstanding he had ventured
his life for Queen Mary in not subscribing to King Edwards Will, as before; for
giving charge upon the Statuts against Papistrie, at the Assizes, he was
committed to diverse prisons, and so terrified, that he wounded himself, and
meant to have killed himself with a knife, and after was contented to say as
they willed him; whereupon he was discharged, but he never rested until he had
drowned himself.

Then, according to the Queens commandment, there begun a disputation in the
Convocation house about the Sacrament, which continued six days, wherein
Doctor Weston was the chief on the Popes side, who behaved himself
outragiously in checking and ^aunting: the matter of the disputation was only
of the Sacrament, and the reasons no other then shall and have been set forth
in this book, wherefore for brevity I omit them. In conclusion, the Queen to
take up the matter, sent her commandment to Bonner to dissolve the
Convocation, and such as disputed on the contrary part were driven some to
fly, some to deny, and some to die, though in most men's judgments that heard
the disputation, they had the upper hand.

In which Parliament also communication was moved of the Queens marriage, which
was very evil taken of the people, 1554.
and of many of the Nobility, who for this and for religion, conspiring
amongst themselves, made a rebellion, whereof Sir Thomas Wyat was chief. News
coming to London of this stir in Kent, the Queen caused Wyat and the Duke of
Suffolk, who was fled to Warwickshire and Leister-shire, there to gather a
power, and the two Carewes of Devonshire, to be proclaimed Traitors; and Thomas
Duke of Northfolke was sent into Kent against Wyat, but about Rochester Bridge
the Duke was forsaken of all his men, and returned to London.

The Earl of Huntington was sent post to apprehend the Duke of Suffolk, who
entering the City of Couentrie before the Duke disappointed him, and one
Underwood his man betrayed and bewrayed him, so that he was brought to the
Tower of London.

In time Sir Peter Carew hearing what was done, fled into France, but the other
were taken: and the Queen hearing of Wyats coming toward London, she came
into the City to Guild Hall, where she made a vehement Oration against Wyat,
and to encourage them to stand with her.

Two days after the Lord Cobham was committed unto the Tower; and Wyat coming
to Southwark, being he could not enter that way into London, he went with his
Army by Kingstone, and came through the streets to Ludgate, but returning he
was resisted at Temple-barre, and there yielded himself to Sir Clement Parson,
and was brought to the Court: the residue of his army were taken, and a
hundred killed; for Sir George Harper and almost half his men ran away from
him at Kingstone Bridge, and they which were taken were had to prison, and many
of them hanged, and he himself executed at Tower Hill and quartered: his head
was set upon Hay hill, and after stolen away, but there was great search made
for the same.

Then the Lady Jane was beheaded, two days before whose death Fecknam was sent
to her by the Queen to reduce her to papistrie.

The communication betwixt the Lady Jane and Fecknam.
Feck. MAdam, I lament your heavy case, but I doubt not but you bear it
constantly.


Jane. I little lament my own case, but rather account it a token of Gods favor
unto me, more then ever he showed to me before, being a thing profitable for my
souls health.


Feck. I am com from the Queen and Council to instruct you in the faith, though
I trust I need not travel over much in the performance thereof.


Jane. I heartily thank the Queen that she is not unmindful of her humble
subject, and I hope you will do your duty according to the message that you
were sent on.


Feck. What is then required of a Christian?


Jane. That he should believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three
persons, and one God.


Feck. What is there nothing else to be required of a Christian, but to
believe.


Jane. Yes, we must also love him with all our heart, soul, and mined, and our
neighbor as our self.


Feck. Why then Faith instifieth not.


Jane. Yes verily, Faith as Saint Paul says, only iustifyeth.


Feck. Why Saint Paul says, if I have all Faith, without love it is nothing.


Jane. True it is, for how can I love him whom I trust not: or how can I trust
him whom I love not: Faith and Love goes both together: yet love is
comprehended in Faith.


Feck. How shall we love our neighbor?


Jane. To feed the hungry, cloth the naked, and give drink to the thirsty,
and to do to him as we would do to our selves.


Feck. Why then it is necessary to salvation to do good works, and not
sufficient only to believe.


Jane I deny that: and affirm Faith only saves, but it is meet for a
Christian to follow Christ in good works: yet we may not say that they profit
to salvation: for when we have done all that we can, we are unprofitable
servants: and faith only in Christ^ blood saves us.


Feck. How many Sacraments are there?


Jane. Two: the one of Baptism, the other of the Lords Supper.


Feck. No, there are seven, but what are signified by your two Sacraments?


Jane. By Baptism I am washed with Water, and regenerated by the Spi^t, and
the washing is a token I am Gods Child. The Lords Supper offered unto me, is a
sure seal, that by the blood of Christ I am made partaker of the everlasting
Kingdom.


Feck. Do you not receive the very body and blood of Christ?


Jane. I neither received flesh nor blood, but Bread and wine; which puts me
in remembrance, that for my sins his body was broken, and his blood shed, and
with it I receive the benefit of his Passion.


Feck. Does not Christ say plainly, This is my body.


Jane. So he says, I am the Vine and the door; and Saint Paul says, He
calls things that are not, as though they were: God forbid I should say I
eat the body and blood of Christ, for then I should pluck away my Redemption,
else there were two Christ's: for if his Disciples eat his body, it was not
broken upon the Cross, and if it were broken upon the Cr^sse, his Disciples
did not eat it, except he had two bodies.


Feck. Could not Christ as possibley make his body to be eaten and broken, as
to be borne of a Woman without Man, and as to walk on the Sea and do other
miracles.


Jane. If God would have done a miracle at Supper he could, but he then minded
no miracle, but to suffer for sin. Was not Christ at the Table and alive when
he said so, and suffered not until the next day and he took bread, brake
bread, gave bread, and they eat bread, and all this while he was alive with
them, or else they were deceived.


Feck. You ground your Faith on them that say and unsay, and not upon the
Church.


Jane. I ground my Faith on Gods word and not on the Church, for the Faith of
the Church must be tried by Gods word, and not Gods word by the Church: shall I
believe the Church that takes from me the half of the Lords supper, and s^e
deny the Laymen part of their salvation, and I say that is not the spouse of
Christ, but the spouse of Devil, he will add plagues to that Church, and
will take from it their part out of the book of life: do they learn that of
Paul when be ministered to the Corinthians in both kinds.


Feck, That was done to avoyde an heresy.


Jane. Shall the Church alter Gods will for a good intent, how did King Saul.


Then Feckham took his leave, and said he was sorry for her, and said he was
sure they two should never meet.

Jane, that is true, if God turn not your heart you are in an ill case, I pray
God send you his spirit, he bath given you a great gift of utterance if it
please him to open your eyes.

She wrote a letter to her father to comfort him, and to show how joyful she
was to die, and she wrote another letter to one Master Harding, who was late
Chaplain to her Father, and fell from the truth of Gods word, and rebuked him,
that he put his hand to the plow^ and looked back, and lost the comfortable
promises that Christ makes to them that forsake themsel^es to follow him, thou
did^st seem to be a lively member of Christ, but now an impe of the Devil,
once tho beautiful Temple of God, now the filthy kennell of Satan, once the
vnspotten spouse of Christ, now the unshamefast Param^^^re of Antichrist, once
my faithful brother, now an Apostata, once a floute Christian soldier, now a
cowardly runaway: thou seed of Satan and not of Judah, the Devil, the world,
and desire of life, has made thee of a Christian an Infidel, thou have taught
others to be strong, and thy self do shamefully shrink, thou have taught
others not to t^cale, and thy self have committed most heinous sacrilege, and
robbest Christ of his right members and of thine own body and soul, thou
chosest rather to live miserably with shame in the world, then to die
gloriously to ^aygne with Christ, in wh^m in death is life, how dare thou
refuse the true God, and worship the invention of man, the goulden Calfe, the
Whore of Babylon, the Romish Religion, the ab^ominable Idol, the most wicked
Mass, will thou tear again the pretio^s body of our Savior with thy fleshly
teeth, and she exhorted him that the ^ft falling of th^se Heavenly showers
might pearce his stony heart, and the two edged word of Gods word sear asunder
the sinnewes of wordly respects that thou may once again forsake thy self
and embrace Christ.

The night before she suffered, the sent a new Testament to her sister
Katherin, and wrote a letter to her in the end thereof, that though it were not
outwardly trimmed with gould, yet inwardly it was more worth then precious
stones. It was the last will that Christ bequeathed to us wretches, it will
b^ing you to eternal life* teach you to live, and learn you to die: you shall
gain more by it, then by the possession of your woeful fathers lands: think
not that your young year^s will lengthen your life, for soon, if God call,
goes the young, as the old, deny the world, despise the Devil and the flesh,
rejoice in Christ as I do, I exhort you that you never swerve from the
Christian faith, neither for hope of life nor fear of death, if you deny
Christ, he will deny you and shorten your days, put your whole trust in God:
she made a prayer full of faith, which thou may see in the book at large.

When she cam^ upon the Scaffold, she protested her innocence in the cause she
was to die for, and prayed them to bear her witness that she dyed a true
Christian woman, and that she looked to be saved by no means, but by the
mercy of God in Christ, and my negligence of the word of God, and loving of the
world brought this punishment upon me, and I thank God that he has given me
a time of repentance, then she prayed them whilst she was alive to assist her
with their prayers: then she said the one and fifti^h Psalm in devout manner,
then she made her self ready, and gave her things to her Maids, and caused a
handkerchife to be tied about her face: the hangman asked her forgiveness,
and she forgave him most willingly, and prayed him to dispatch her quickly:
then she laid her head upon the block, and said, Into thy hands I commend my
spirit, and so finished her life. With her also was beheaded the Lord Gilford
her husband.

Judge Morgan, who gave the sentence of condemnation against her, shortly after
fell mad, and continually cried to have the Lady Jane taken from him, and so
ended his life.

Not long after her death was the Duke of Suffolk, her father, beheaded at the
Tower Hill: about which time also were condemned many Gentlemen and Yeomen,
whereof some were executed at London, and some in the country, and Thomas Gray
brother to the said Duke was executed.

The four and twentieth of February Bonner sent a Commission to al Pastors
and Curats of his Diocese, to take the names of all such as would not come the
1554
Lent following to auricular confession, and to the receiving at Easter.

The fourth of March following the Queen sent certain Articles to Bonner to
^e speedily put in execution: that the Canons in King Henry's time should be
used in England, that none exact any oath of any Ecelesiasticall person
touching the supremacy, that none, defamed with heresy, he admitted to
ecclesiastical benefice or office, that Bishops and other officers diligently
travel about for repressing of heresies, unlawful books and ballads, and that
Schoolmasters and Preachers teach no evil doctrine; that they deprive all
married Priests, except they renounce their wives: but if they return to their
wives to be divorced both from wife and benefice: that for want of Priests the
parishi^ners go to the next parish to service or one Curate serve diverse
places: That processions in Latin be used after the old order: for the
observing of Holy days, and Fasting days, that the ceremonies of the Church
be restored, that Ministers which were ordered in King Edwards time should be
new ordered: that the parishioners be compelled to come to their several
Churches: that Schoolmaisters be examined and if they be suspected, to place
Catholic men in their room, and that they instruct the children to answer the
Priest at Mass.

She sent likewise a commandment to the Lord Mayor of London, with the
foresaid Articles to be careful with all his power for the performance
thereof.

Then the Queen sent forth a Proclamation, that the strangers which in King
Edwards time were received into England for Religion, should (...) driven out
of the Realm. Whereupon Peter Martyr, Ioannes Alasco, uncle to the King of
Poland, and many others, were banished, and many English men also fled into
Germany* and were scattered in diverse places, where by Gods pro^idence they
were sustained, and entertained with great favor, to the number of eight
hundred persons.

The twenty five of March, the Lord Courtney and Lady Elizabeth were susspected
to consent to Wiats conspiracy: and thereupon apprehended and commit^to the
Tower. This was a politic practice of Steven Gardener, which always was an
enemy to Lady Elizabeth, Wyat at his death protested to the people, that the
Lord Courtney and Lady Elizabeth were clear from all suspicion of Commo^ion,
but Doctor Weston cried to the people, believe him not, ^or he confessed
otherwise before unto the Co^^cell. The same day it was told in the Parliament
house, that Wiat desired the Lord Courtney to confess the truth, as he had
done before.

One Cut a Prentice of London, was sent for by Gardener unto the Star Chamber,
for that he should say that Wiat was constrained by the Council to a^cuse the
Lady Elizabeth and the Lord Courtney, to be consenters to his ris^ng. When the
Mayor brought him thither, Gardener began to declare how miraculously God had
brought the Queen to the Crown: the whole Realm in a manner being against
her, and it was that she might reduce this Realm, overwhelmed with heresies
to the Catholic faith: and where she l^ued the Lady Elizabeth tenderly, and
delivered the Lord Courtney out of prison, yet they conspired traitorously
against her with Wyat, as he confessed; yet there are some in London which
reported that Wyat was constrained by the Council to accuse them, yet you, my
Lord Mayor, have not seen the same punished. The party is here, said the
Mayor* Gardner said, punish him according to his deserts, and take heed to your
charge: the City of London is a whirle-poole of evil rumors.

The Londoners not favoring the Queens proceedings to their displeasure,
summoned a Parliament at Oxford, because they would be forward in the Queens
business, but after it was holden at Westminster, where her marriage with king
Philip was agreed upon.

Bonner being Uicegerent of the Convocation, in his Oration said that Priests
were like the Uirgin Mary; as she by five words conceived Christ, so the Priest
by five words loath make the very body of Christ: and as immediately upon the
consent of Mary Christ was all whole in her womb, so immediately after the
consecration the bread is transubstantiated into the very body of Christ; and
as the Uirgin laid Christ in the ^anger, so the Priest lifts up the body of
Christ, and carries it; and as Mary was sanctified before she conceived, so
the priest is ordained and anointed before he do consecrate; for a layman
though he be never so holy, and do speak the same words, yet he cannot
consecrate: Therefore the dignity of Priests passes the dignity of Angels,
for no Angel can make the body of Christ, whereby the least Priest can do
more then the greatest Angel: therefore Priests are to be ^onoured before
Kings and Princes, and Nobles: for a Priest is higher then a King, happier then
an Angel, and maker of his Creator.

The effect of the communication between Doctor Ridley, and Secretary Bourne,
and others at the Lieutenants table at the Tower.
Feckham. WHo so does not believe that which Scripture does affirm is an
^eretick: as in the Sacrament of the Altar: Matthew, Mark, Luke and Paul
affirm there to be Christ's body, and none denies it: therefore to hold the
contrary is heres^e.


Ridley, Whereas is a multitude of affirmations in scripture, and where is one
affirmation, all is one in scripture, that which is spoken by one of the
Evangelists is as true, as that which is spoken by all: for it is not in
Scripture as in witness of men, where the number is credited more then one,
and where you speak of so many, affirming without negation of any, if you take
their words and leave their meaning, they affirm, that you take.


Feck. What circumstances can you show, that should move to think of any other
sense, then as the words plainly say.


Rid. By the next sentence; Do this in remembrance of me: and you may as well
say, the Bread is turned into Christ's mystical body, as that it is turned into
his natural body, for Paul speaking of the mysticail body says: Many are one
Bread and one body, because they are partakers of one Bread.


Feck. This is conf^rmed by antiquity, unity, and universality, for none before
Beringarius did ever doubt of this: then said Master Secretary, these be great
matters, what say you to that?


Feck. As for Unity, I do believe it, if it be with verity, and as for
Antiquity at the first, Christ's Faith was truly taught by Christ and his
Apostles, and by many good men which did succeed next them, and touching the
Sacrament I am persuaded these old writers, before the usurping of the Sea of
Rome do all agree, if they be well understood in this truth, as for
universality if may have two meanings, one that from the beginning in all ages
has been allowed, or it may be understood for the multitude of our age, or of
any other singular age.


Master Secretary: What authors have you of the Sacrament to make a figure.


Ridley. Tertullian says, This is my body, that is to say a figure of my body:
And Gelasius says the substance of bread remains: And Origin says, that
which is sanctified as touching the matter passes away in the draught: and I
marvel Fecnam will allege Melancton, for we agree there is in the Sacrament
but one material substance: and he says there are two.


Master Secretary: You say truth, but we read that in the old time the
Sacrament was so reverenced: that the Catecumeni and many more were forbidd^n
to be present.


Rid. Truth Sir, there were some called Audients, some Penitents, some
Catechumeni, and some Euergumeni, which were commanded to depart.


Master Sectetarie: How then can you make but a figure of the Sacrament as the
Lord of Canterburies book does.


Rid. Me thinks it is not charitably done to bear the people in hand that any
man does so lightly esteem the Sacrament, as to make it but a figure, which
that book does deny, as appears by that book most plainly: And as for me
I say whosoever receives the Sacrament, receives with it life or death: as S.
Augustine says, manduca vitam, bibe vitam.


Master Pope. I do believe the real body of Christ is in the Sacrament, and
I pray God I may ever so believe; and how can it bring life or death, if
Christ's body be not there.


Rid. When you hear Gods word truly preached; if you do believe you receive
life: and if you believe not, it brings unto you death, yet Christ's body is
not carnal in every preachers mouth.


Pope. How answer you this: which shall be given for you, was the figure of
Christ's body given for you.


Rid. No Sir; but the very body it self whereof the Sacrament is a figure.
Tertullians exposition makes it plain: For he says the body is a figure of
the body, now put too which shall be given for you, and it agrees exceeding
well.


Master Secretary: You know well that Origin and Tertullian were not
Catholic, but erred.


Rid. There is none of the Doctors but are thought to have erred in some
things, but I never heard that Tertullian, or Origin, were thought to have
erred in the Sacrament.


Feck. Forty years agone all were of one opinion of this matter.


Rid. Forty years ago all held that the Pope was supreme head of the
universal Church.


Master Secretary: That was but a positive Law.


Rid. It is in the Decrees that the Pope challenges his supremacy not by any
Council, nor any way else, but by Christ's own words; saying to Peter, thou art
Peter: And in another place thou art Cephas, that is the head: and his Decree
is that we must be obedient to the Bishop of Rome, upon necessity of salvation.


Thomas Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer
Bishop of VVorster, were sent to Oxford, to dispute with the Divines of Oxford
and Cambridge.
THere was three questions, First, whether the natural body of Christ be
really in the sacrament after consecration: secondly, whether any other
substanc^ does remain after consecration then the substance of the body and
blood of Christ: thirdly, whither in the mass there be a sacrifice
propitiatory for the sins of the quick and the dead. Thirty three
Commissioners being set in the Quire of S. Mary's Church in Oxford before the
Altar, Cranmer Archb. was brought to them with a number of Bill-men. When he
had read over the Articles, he said they were all false and against Gods holy
word. Then was Doctor Ridley brought in, who hearing the Articles read,
answered they were all false, and that they sprang out of a bitter root. Then
came in Latimer: when he had denied the Articles, he said he had read over the
new Testament seven times, and yet could not find the mais^ in it, nor the
mary-bones nor sinews of the same.

All their arguments were of nothing but the real presence in the Sacrament,
which point is already sufficiently argued in many places of this book, and
will (...) more hereafter. If thou desire to see the disputations, resort to
the book at large; for the Commissioners were so clamorous that they could not
be suffered to speak, as it appears by the report of Bishop Ridley.

Bishop RIDLEY his report.
Never did I see a thing done more vainly and contumeliously then the
disputations with me in the Schools in Oxford: I thought it had not been
possible to have been found amongst men of learning and knowledge, any so
brazen faced and shameless, so disorderly and vainly to behave themselves,
more like to Stage Players then Divines. The Sorbonicall clamours, which in
times past I have seen in Paris, when Popery most reigned, might be thought
modesty in respect of them, yea, and the chiefest did as it were blow the
Trumpe unto the rest, to rail, rore, rage and cry out, whereby it appears
they never sought for the verity but for their own glory and bragging
victory. Much time appointed for Disputations, was vainly consumed in
opprobrious checks, taunts, hissings, and clapping of hands. Whenever I would
make an end of my probations, they would ever cry out Blasphemies,
blasphemies. I never heard or read the like, but by Demetrius the Siluer-smith,
and them of his occupation, crying but against Paul, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians: and except it be a disputation of the Arrians against the
Orthodoxes, where it is said that such as the Presidents of the disputations
were, such were the rest, all were in a hurly-burly; and the Arrians cast out
such great slanders, that nothing could quietly be heard; and he concludes,
thus ended this glorious disputation of the Sacrificers, Doctors, and Masters,
which fought manfully for their God and goods, their faith and felicity,
country and Kitchen, and for their beauty and belly, with triumphant
applauses and favor of the whole University.

After several disputations with every one of them, the Commissioners sat in
Saint Mary's Church, and Doctor Weston, used particular persuasions with every
one of them, and would not suffer them to answer but pe^emptorily to say
whether they would subscribe or no: He told the Bishop of Canterbury, he was
overcome in Arguments, which he said was false, for he was not suffered to
oppose as he would, nor answer as he would, unless he would have brauled
with them, all denying to subscribe: then sentence was read over them, that
they were no members of the Church, and therefore condemned for heretics.

Then the Archbishop Cranmer answered, from this your sentence I appeal to the
just judgment of God, trusting to be present with him in heaven, for whose
presence in the Altar I am thus condemned.

Bishop Ridley answered, though I be not of your company, yet my name is
written in another place, whither this sentence will send me sooner then we
should by nature have come.

Bishop Latimer. I thank God most heartily that he has prolonged my life to
this end, that I may in this case glorify GOD by that kind of death.

After they were all three called to behold a solemn procession, wherein
Doctor Weston carried the Sacrament, and four Doctors carried the Canapie over
him.

In the last year one thousand five hundred forty and three, it is showed how
the Duke of Northumberland was apprehended by the Guard, and brought to London
by the Earl of Arundell and others, these were committed to the Tower with the
Duke, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Huntington, Lord Ambrose, and Lord
Henry Dudley, Lord Hastings, who was delivered the same night: Sir John Gates,
Sir Henry Gates, Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir Thomas Palmer, and Doctor Sands
Chancellor of Cambridge, many were committed to diverse prisons about the same
time.

About this time Master Bradford, Master Beacon, and Master Veron were
committed unto the Tower, and Master Sampson was sought for, and because he
could not be found the Bishop of Winchester fumed.

About this time Doctor Weston preached at Paul's Cross, he willed the people
to pray for the souls departed, that be neither in heaven nor hell, but in a
place not yet sufficiently purged to come to heaven, that they may be relieved
by your devout prayers: he named the Lords Table an Oyster board: he said the
Catechism lately set forth was abominable heresy, and likeneth the setters
forth of the same to Iulianus Apostata, and the book to the book of Iulianus
Apostata, wherein Christ and Pilate were the speakers, which Sermon was
learnedly confuted in writing by Master Couerdall.

About this time a Priest of Canterbury said Mass on the one day, and the next
day he came into the Pulpit, and desired all the people to forgive him, for he
said he had betrayed Christ, but not as Judas, as Peter, and made a long
Sermon against the Mass.

In February one thousand five hundred fifty and four, before the coming of
King Philip, upon the fifteenth day, about nine of the clock in the forenoone,
there was seen two Suns both shining at once: and that time was also seen a
Rainbow turned contrary, and a great deal higher then it was wont.

About this time at Saint Pancrase in Cheap, the Crucifixe with the Pixe were
taken out of the Sepulcher before the Priest rose to the resurrection: so that
when he put his hand into the Sepulcher, and said very devoutly surrexit non
est hic, he found his words true, for he was not there indeed, whereupon being
dismaide, and debating amongst themselves whom they thought likest to do it:
they laid it to one Marsh, which a little before had been put from that
parsonage because he was married, but when they could not prove it, being
brought before the Mayor, they burdened him to have kept company with his wife
since they were divorced: He answered that the Queen had done him wrong to
take from him both his living, and his wife: whereupon he and his wife were
committed several Counters.

About this time there was a Cat hanged upon a Gallow^s at the Cross in
Cheap, apparelled like a Priest, ready to say Mass with a shaven Crown: her
two fore-feete were tied over her head, with a round paper like a Wafer Cake
put between them, where on rose great evil will against the City of London:
the Queen and the Bishops were very angry, and there was a proclamation in the
afternoon, that whosoever could bring forth the party that hanged up the Cat
should have twenty Nobles, which after was increased to twenty Marks, but none
would ^ar^e it, the occasion of this was, because the Bishop of Winchester had
preached before the Queen for the strait execution of Wyats Soldiers:
Whereupon there was twenty Gibbets and Gallows set up, in and about the
streets of London, which there remained for the terror of others from the 13.
of February, until the fourth of June, and at the coming of King Philip were
taken down.

One Master Walter Mantell, one of them which rose with Wyat, being prisoner
in the Tower, the Queen sent unto him Doctor Bourne, to convert him: he
answered Bourne that he believed in the holy Catholic church of Christ,
grounded upon the Prophets and Apostles, but he took exception to the
Antichristian popish Church: and he said, he thought the Mass not fit, both
for the occasion of Idolatry, and also the clear (...) of Christ's institution:
and said it was not a propitiatory sacrifice for sin: for the death of Christ
was only that sacrifice, and certain Collects therein are blasphemous. Then
said the Doctor, see how vaineglory touches you; then I found fault it was not
a Communion: Yes said he one Priest saying Mass here, and another there, and
the third in an other place is a Communion: Then he desired God to receive him
to his mercy, that he might die undefiled in his truth, at utter defiance with
all papisticall and Antichristian Doctrine: and to defend all his chosen, from
the tyrany of the Pope and Antichrist and from his subtilties: at his first
casting off the Gallows the rope broke, then they would have had him re^ant,
and received the Sacrament of the Altar, and then he should have the Queens
Pardon: but Master Mantell, like a worthy gentleman, refused their serpentine
Council, and chose rather to die then to live for dishonouring of God.

Master Bradford, Master Sanders, and diverse other good preachers hearing
that they should be brought unto a Disputation at Cambridge, sent a Declaration
out of prison, to the effect as follows; That they did not purpose to dispute
otherwise then by writing, except it be before the Queens Highness and her
Council, and before the Parliament houses, because we shall dispute against
the things which already they have determined, whereby it appears they seek
not the derity* but our destruction, and their glory; otherwise they would have
called us to show our consciences before their laws were so made: and again
the Censors and Judges are manifest enemies of the truth, before whom Pearls
are not to be cast by the commandment of Christ, and by his example: and
because some of us have been in prison eight or nine months, where we have
had no Books, paper, nor Ink, and because we shall be stopped of our
Arguments, as the Bishops were at Oxford: and because the Notaries that shall
write our Arguments shall be such as either do not, or dare not favor the
truth, therefore must write to please them, or else they will put to, or take
from, at their pleasure, as it appeared at Oxford: Yea if any man was seen
there to write, he was sent for and his writings taken from him.

If they will write, we will answer by writing, and prove by the word of God
and most ancient Fathers, this our faith and every piece thereof, and we are
ready to seal it with our lives: First we confess and bele^ue all the
Canonical books of the Old Te^^ament and the New, to be truth written by the
Spirit, and to be the Judge of all Controversies of Religion: and we believe
the Catholic Church is the Spouse and beloved Wife of Christ, and to embrace
the doctrine of these books in all matters of Religion, and therefore to be
heard accordingly, and those that will not hear her, are Heretics and
Schismatics, according to the saying: He that will not hear the Church, let
him be an Heretic; and we believe the Symbols of the Creed of the Apostles,
and of the Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and of
Toletum, before the four hundred fifty four year, and the Symbols of
Athanasius, Ireneus, Tertullian, and of Damasus, which was in the year three
hundred seauenty six. We believe that Justification comes only from the
mercy of GOD through Christ, and it is had of none of discretion but by Faith:
which Faith is a certain persuasion wrought by the Holy Ghost, and as it
lightneth the mind, so it suppleth the heart, to submit it self to the will of
God.

By this we disalow Papisticall Doctrines of free will, of works of
supererogation, of merits, of the necessity of auriculer confession and
satisfaction: And we believe, that the exterior service of God, ought to be
according to the word, in such a tongue as may be most to edify and not in
Latin, where the people understand not the same: And we believe, that God
only by Jesus Christ, is to be prayed unto, and we disalow invocation to
Sa^nts departed; and we believe, as a Man departs this life, he is either
blessed, or damned for ever; by reason whereof we affirm Purgatory, Masses of
Scala Caeli, Trentals, and such suffrages as the popish Church does obtrude, as
necessary, to be the Doctrine of Antichrist. And we believe two Sacraments of
Christ, Baptism and the Lords Supper, and that they ought to be ministered
according to the institution of Christ, and that they be no longer Sacraments
then they were in use, and used to the end for which they were instituted, and
the mutilation of the one kind from the Lords Supper, from the Lay people, is
Antichristian; and so is the transubstantiation; and so is the adoration of the
Sacrament, and the reservation and carrying about of the ^ame, and so is the
Doctrine of the Mass, it to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and
dead, or a work that pleases God: and so of the inhibition of marriage in any
state as unlawful; we doubt not but we shall be able to prove all these our
verities by Gods word, and the Church which has followed Gods word and Spirit:
and we heartily desire all men to be obedient with us unto all that be in
authority, and not to cease to pray to God for them, that he would govern them
with his Spirit of wisdom, and not to consent in any kind of rebellion
against the Queens Highness, but where they cannot obey, but they must disobey
God, there to suffer with all patience the pleasures of the higher powers, as
we are ready to do, rather then we will consent to any doctrine contrary to
this which we here confess, we shall be justly convinced thereof. The Lord
indue us with his Spirit of truth, and grace of perseverance.

Upon the twentieth day of July, the Prince of Spain landed at Southampton: He
was the first that landed, and presently he drew his Sword, and carried 1554.
it naked in his hand a pretty way, the Mayor of the Town met him, and
delivered him the Keys, which he received in his right hand, and put his sword
into his left, then met him the Earl of Arundell, and Lord Williams, and
brought him to his lodging.

The twenty five day, He and Queen Mary were married at Winchester, by the
Bishop there, then they came to Windsor, and from thence to Southwarke, and
from thence through the City of London to White Hall: by the way, many
Pageants and glorious sights were made. Upon the Cunduit in Gracious-street,
was painted King Henry the eight ^n harness, with a Sword in one hand, and in
the other hand a Book* whereon was written Verbum Dei, delivering the Book to
his Son Edward painted by him: Whereupon the Bishop of Winchester sent for
the Painter, and called him ^naue, rank Traitor and villain, for painting a
Book in King Henry's hand, and writing Verbum Dei thereon, he should rather to
have put the Book in Queen Mary's hand, that was there also pictured, for
that she had reformed the Church and Religion.

Against this time Bonner in his Royalty, and all his Prebendaries about him,
the doors of Paul's being shut, a new Roode being laid upon the Pauem^^ts, they
sung diverse Prayers by the Roode, then they anointed it with Oil in diverse
places: After they crept unto it and kissed it, after they wayed it up into
his accustomed place, and the while the whole Quire sang Te D^um, and then the
Bells rang for joy.

From White Hall they went to Richmond, then all the Lords had leave to depart,
and there remained no English Lord at the Court, but the Bishop of Winchester,
from thence to Hampton Court, where the Hall door was continually kept shut,
that no man might enter, unless his arrand were first known, which seemed
strange to Englishmen.

Upon the fourth day of November, ^^ue Priests did pe^^ance at Paul's Cross,
which were content to put away their Wives, and take upon them again to
minister: every one of them had a taper in his hand, and a rod, wherewith the
Preacher did disple them.

The twenty seven day of November, Cardinal Poole being but a little before
come into the Realm, came to the Parliament House, the King and Queen sitting
under the Cloth of Estate, and the Cardinal sitting on the right hand.

The Cardinal made a long Oration, showing first how this Realm had ever
been forward to receive Religion: first in the time of the Britains, and
then in the time of the Saxons, and that the means came from Rome, in the
Faith of which Church we have ever since continued; and showed what devotion
this Island has had to Rome, that King Offa and Adulphus thought their
obedience to the Sea not sufficient, but in their own persons went to the
place where they received so great grace.

And when Carolus Magnus founded Paris, he sent into England for Alcui^us,
which first brought learning to that Uniuersity.

I will not rehearse the benefits this Realm has received from Rome, nor the
miseries this Realm has suffered by swaruing from that Unity, so all Countries
that have refused the Unity of the Catholic Faith, has had the like plagues,
as Asia, and the Empire of Greece, by swar^ing from Rome, are brought into the
subjection of the Turk: And Germany by swaruing from this unity, are afflicted
with diverse Sects and factions: then he pra^^ed the King for his greatness
and riches, and the Queen, as one in whose heart God had preserved the Catholic
truth, when all light of the truth seemed utterly to be extinct, whom GOD had
most miraculously brought unto the Crown, being a helpless Uirgin, naked and
unarmed, had the victory of all policies and armed powers, prepared to destroy
her, and God has appointed her to reign over you, for the restitution of true
Religion, and exterpation of errors and Sects.

God has divided his power unto two parts hear in Earth, that is; into the
Imperial and Ecclesiastical power, the Seculer Princes and Ministers of God
to execute vengeance upon transgressors, and to preserve well doers, which is
represented in these two most excellent Princes, the King and Queen.

The other power, is the power of the Keys, which belongs by prerogatiu^ to
the Sea Apostlike of Rome, from which Sea I am deputed Legate, having the Keys
committed to my hands, I confess I have the Keys not as mine own Keys, but
as the keys of him that sent me, but certain impediments in you to receive
it must be taken away before my Commission can take place. I came to reconcile,
and not to condemn, and not to compel, but to call again: My Commission is
of Grace and clemency, to all such as will receive it: touching the matter^
past, they shall be as things cast into the Sea of forgetfulness.

the means whereby you shall receive this benefit, is by reuoking the laws,
whereby you have disseuered yourselues from the unity of Christ's Church,
therefore you, as provident men for the weal of your souls and bodies, powder
what is to be done in this weighty cause. The next day the three estates
sitting in the Parlament-house, all on their knees exhibited a Supplication to
their Highnesses, the King and Queen, that their humble suit, by their Graces
intercession and mean* might be exhibited unto the Cardinal, declaring
themselves sorry and repentant for the Schism committed in this Realm against
the Apostolic Sea, promising, in token of their repentance, to be ready unto
the uttermost of their power, to do their endeavor for the repealing of the
said laws: and we desire that your Majesty's will so set forth this our humble
suit, that we may obtain from the Sea Apostolic, by the said most Reverend
Father, as well particular as universal absolution, and that we may be
received into the bosom of Christ's Church, so that this whole Realm may in
perfect obedience unto the Sea Apostolic serve God and your Majesty's, to the
furtherance of his honor and glory. The king and Queen delivered it unto the
Cardinal, who perceauing the effect thereof to answer his expectation, he
received it most gladly: and after he had thanked Almighty God for the
prosperous success of his coming from Rome, by the Popes authority he gave
them full absolution: Then they went to the Chapel and sung te Deum with
great joy of the reconciliation: the report of this was sent to Rome with great
speed, as well by the King and Cardinals Letters, which thou may see in the
Book of Martyrs: Whereupon the Pope caused Processions to be made with great
joy for the conversion of England, and praising the Cardinals deligence, and
the devotion of the King and Queen, on Christmas Even by his Bulls he set
forth, a general pardon to all such as did truly rejoice for the same.

The Sunday following the second of December, Gardener Bishop of Winchester and
Lord Chancellor preached at Paul's Cross: Upon the third to the Romans: It is
time that we should awake out of sleep, for our salvation is nearer then when
we believed: First he showed how the saying of Saint Paul was verified upon the
Gentiles, which had long time slept in ignorance: therefore to stir up their
dulnes he desired them to wake out of sleep: then he compared our time to
theirs.

As the sacraments of Christ did declare Christ to come, our Sacraments declare
that he is come: now that he is come the Jews sacrifices be done away, and
ours only remain, they had him as a sign, but we have his very body in our
Sacrament: wherefore it is time that we now also awake who have slept and
rather dreamed this twenty years, as shall be declared by the properties of
sleep or dream.

As we going to sleep, separate our selves from company, so we have separated
our selves from the Sea of Rome, no Realm in Christendom like us, and as
Shepherds dream sometimes of killing, mayning, or drowning, and sometimes of
beastliness, so we have not only dreamed of beastliness, but also done it:
and as in sleep, all ones senses is stopped, that he cannot see, not smell,
nor hear; so the Ceremonies of the Church being to move our senses, are taken
away, whereby our senses are stopped: and further, when a man would sleep, he
will put out the Candle, least it wake him. So lately, all such Writers as did
hold with the Apostolic Sea, are forbidden to be read, and Images, which were
Lay men's Books, were cast down and burned.

We have been this twenty years without a head, for when King Henry first
took upon him the head of the Church, it was then no Church at all. After whom
King Edward could not be head, but was only a shadow of a head: and in our
Queens time we had no head, for she alone could not be head, and her two
Arch-bishoppes were both convicted of one crime, and deposed in Henry the
eights time, when the tumult was in the North, the King would have given the
supremasie again to the Pope, but the hour was not then come, least it had
been said he did it for fear. After Master Kneuet and I were sent Ambassadors
to the Emperor, to be a means to reconcile the King to the Pope, but the time
was not come, for it might be said it was done for policy: the matter was
likewise moved in the beginning of King Edwards reign, hut the time was not
yet come; for it might have been said, the King was bought and sold in his
infancy, neither was the hour come in the beginning of the Queens reign, for
it would have bin said it was done in weakness, and if it had been done when the
King first came, it might have been said it had been done by violence, but
now, hora est, when nothing can be objected, but that it is the providence of
God. Now Pope Julius the has sent unto us this most reverend Father the
Cardinal, not to revenge injuries done, but to give his benediction to those
which defamed and persc^uted him.

And that they may be the meeter to receive it, let us acknowledge our selves
of^enders against his Holiness, I do not exclude my self of the number: I
will weep with them that weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice. The King
and Queens Majesty's have restored the Pope to his supremacy, and the three
Estates of Parliament have also submitted themselves to his Holiness, and his
successors for ever, therefore let us no longer stay.

And as S. Paul says to the Corinthians, He was their Father, so may the Pope
say, he is ^ur Father; for we received our doctrine first from Rome, therefore
he may challenge us as his own; he has prevented us before we sought him, he
has sent one of our Brethren to speak unto us, not as unto strangers: and now
let us awake, which so long have slept, and in our sleep don so much
naughtiness against the Sacraments, and pulling down the Altars, which thing
Luther would not do, but reproved them which did.

In his prayer, he prayed for the Pope and Cardinals, and for the souls
departed, living in pains of Purgatory.

Upon Newyeares day at night, 1555
thirty Men and Women, and one Master Rose a Minister, were taken in a house
in Bow Churchyard at the Communion, and committed to prison, and Master Rose
was examined before Cranmer, and committed unto the Tower.

Near Lancaster in Lankishire, at Cockram, the Churchwardens and Parishoners
made bargain with one for the framing of their Roode, who made them one, and
set it up in their Church, but they misliked his workmanship; and refused to
pay him: the matter was brought before the Mayor of Doucaster* they showed the
Mayor, that the Rood they had before was a welfauoured man, and he promised to
make us such another, but this is the worst favored thing that ever was seen,
gaping and grinning that none of our Children dare look on him and come near
him: the Mayor concluded the poor man must be paid, for if it will not serve
for a God, put a pair of Horns on his head, and it will make an excellent
Devil: This the Parish took well a worth, and the poor man had his Money.

On New-yeares day at night, was a great stir betwixt the Spaniards and
English men, the occasion was about two Whores, which were in the Cloister of
Westminster with a sort of Spaniards, whilst some played the knave with them,
others kept the entry of the Cloister with Dags in harness, they discharged
their Dags at the Deanes men that came into the Cloister, and hurt some of
them, at length almost the whole town was up, by reason of a Spanish Friar
which got into the Church and rung Alarm, so that many were afraid.

At was publicly noysed, that Quee^e Mary was with child, there were diverse
prayers made in every Church, and processions for her deliverance with a man
child, and that it should be beautiful, comely, and wise: And there was an Act
of Parliament made, that if the Queen should die in the infancy of the child,
that the King should have the government of it and the Realm, until it came
of full age: ^^uers were punished, for saying the Queen was not with child.
About Whitsontide the time was thought to be nigh, and mid-wiues, rockers, and
nurses, with tradle, and all were prepared in readiness, and a rumor was
blown in London of the prosperous deliverance of the Queen, so that the bells
were rung, bon-fires and processions made, not only in the City, but in most
parts of the Realm* and in Antwarp guns were shot off in English ships, and
the Mariners were rewarded with an hundred Pistols by the Queen of Hungary.
The Parson of S. Anns within Aidersgate, and diverse other Preachers took upon
them to describe how fair and beautiful the child was: at length the people
were certified the contrary, that the Queen was not delivered, nor in hope to
have any child.

The two and twentieth of January all the Preachers in prison were called
before Gardnor, at his house in S. Mary-Oueries: after communication, they were
asked whether they would convert and enjoy the Queens pardon, or stand to that
which they had taught: they answered they would stand to that which they had
taught: then they were committed to a straighter prison then before, with
charge that none should speak with them. James George the same time died in
prison, and was buried in the fields.

Upon the five and twentieth of January, on the day of the conversion of S
Paul, there was a general and solemn procession through London, to give God
thanks for their conversion to the Catholic Church, wherein were four score
and ten crosses, and a hundred and sixty Priests and Clerks, who had every one
Copes on, singing lustily: there followed eight Bishops, and last of all Bonner
carrying the Pixe under a Canopie, and there was the Mayor, Aldermen, and all
the Liuerie of every occupation, and the King and the Cardinal came to Paul's
Church the same day, and after returned to Westminster: at the steps going up
to the Quire all the Gentlemen that were set of late at liberty out of the
Tower, kneeled before the King, and offered unto him themselves and their
services: after the procession there was commanded bon-fires to be made at
night.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK, wherein is discoursed the bloody murdering of Gods Saints.
The martyrdom of John Rogers.
THe fourth of February suffered M. John Rogers. 1555.
His examination before the Lord Chancellor, and the rest of the Council, the
two and twentieth of January.

Lord Chan. Will thou return to the Catholic Church* and unite and knit thy
self with us, as all the Parliament house has don?


Rog. I never did nor will descent from the Catholic Church.


L. Chan. But I speak of receiving the Pope to be supreme head.


Rog. I know none* other head of the Catholic Church but Christ; neither will
I acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to have any more authority then any other
Bishop has either by the word of God or the doctrine of the Church four
hundred years after Christ.


L. Chan. If Christ be the only head, why did thou acknowledge K. Henry
supreme head of the Church?


Rog. I never granted him supremacy in spiritual things, as forgiveness of
s^nnes, and giving of holy Ghost, and to be a Judge above the word of God.


L. Chan. There is no inconvenience to have Christ supreme head and the Bishop
of Rome also. I was ready to have answered, that there could not be two heads
of one Church: but he said, make us a direct answer, whether thou will be one
of this Catholic Church, or no.


Rog. I do not believe that your selves do think in your hearts that he is
supreme head in forgiving of sins, etc. being this twenty years you have
preached, and some of you have written to the contrary.


L. Chan. Tush, that Parliament constrained men by cruelty to abolish the
primasie of the Pope.


Rog. Then you do wrong, by cruelty to persuade men's consciences: if that
cruelty did not persuade your consciences, how would you have your cruelties to
persuade our consciences?


L. Chan. They were driven by force to consent to that act, whereas in this
Parliament it was uniformly received.


Rog. It goes not by the more or lesser part which condiscended unto it, but
by the wiser, truer, and godlier part: then he interrupted me, and bade me
answer him, for we have more to speak with then with you; for there were ten
persons more. Then he asked me whether I would enter into the Church with the
whole Realm: I said I would see it proved the Church: then I undertook, if I
might have pen and ink, prove the contrary; but he said that should not be
permitted, and told me I should be sure never to have the Queens mercy, if I
would not acknowledge the Pope supreme head of the Church, and said, Paul
forbids me to contend with heretics.


L. Chan. Do^^ thou not say in the Creed, I believe in the Catholic Church?


Rog. I find not the Bishop of Rome there: it signifies the consent of all
true teaching Churches of all ages. And the Church of Rome cannot be one of
them, which teaches so many doctrines against Gods word; can that Church that
does so be the head of the Catholic Church?

When he would have me prove wherein the Pope taught against the word. I said,
to speak with strange tongues is against the scripture.


L. Chan. Thou can prove nothing by the Scripture: it is dead, it must have a
lively expositor, for all heretics have alleged Scriptures.


Rog. The Scripture is alive: all heretics have alleged Scripture, but they
were overcome by it. Then he bade away with me to prison: then I stood up, for
I had kneeled all the while. Then Sir Richard Southwell said, I know well thou will not burn in this gear. I said I trusted in God yes.


When they touched me with marriage being a Priest: I said the true Catholic
Church did ever allow marriage to Priests.

His second examination.
L. Chan. TEll me, will thou return to the Catholic Church (...) all the
Realm, and receive mercy?


Rog. Before I could not tell what this mercy meant, but now (...) it is a
mercy of the Antichristian Church of Rome, which I utterly refuse: and your
rising from error which you speak of, is a very falling into error. I can prove
the doctri^e which I preach by the Scriptures, and the fathers that lived
until four hundred years after Christ: he answered, I was a private man, and
was not to be heard, nor to be permitted to prove whether the whole realm had
done right or wrong, when the Parliament had concluded a thing: I answered, no
laws of man must rule the word of God, but they all must be judged thereby, and
obey thereto; and neither my conscience nor any Christian man's conscience could
be satisfied with such laws as did disagree from that word.


Then I was asked of the real presence in the Sacrament: I said I could not
understand really and substantially, but corporally, and corporally Christ is
only in heaven, and cannot be corporally in the sacrament also.

When definitive sentence was read against him, the Lord Chancellor said. I was
in the great curse; what a vengable dangerous matter it were to eat and drink
with us accursed, or to give us any thing: for they that so did should be
partakers of the same great curse.

Well my Lord, quoth I, I never willingly taught false doctrine, and therefore
have a good conscience before God and men, and I shall be found a true member
of the Catholic Church of Christ, and everlastingly saved: you need not
excommunicate me from your Church, the Lord be thanked I have not been in ^t
this twenty years: now you have done what you can* I am sure you and I shall
appear before Christ, and then I shall be as good a man as you.

Then I earnestly desired my wife might com to me whilst I lived: for we have
ten children, and ^ would counsel her what is best for her to do, which he
would not grant, saying that she was none of my wife.

Then I have tried all your charity, said I: you make your self highly
displeased with marriage of priests, but you maintain open whoredom; in Wales
every Priest has his whore openly, and so the Pope suffers all the Priests
in the Low Countries and France to do the like.

He prophesied truly of the destruction of Papistrie shortly in England, and
the dispersed English flock of Christ shall be brought again into their former
estate, or better then in K. Edwards time, and the bloody Babylonicall Bishop,
and the whole crown-shorn company brought to utter shame and destruction: for
God will not suffer their abominable lying and false doctrine, bloud-thirst,
whordom, idleness and poisoned stomachs which they bear toward poor and
miserable Christians: some of them shall have their judgment in this world,
and they that do escape in this world, shall not escape in the world to come
everlasting damnation: this shall be your sauce, O ye wicked Papists, make
merry as long as you may; and he exhorted the faithful to be careful then to
displace Papists, and to put good ministers into cures, or else your end will
be worse then ours.

As he came to the fire he sang Miserere by the way: all the people wonderfully
rejoiced at his constancy: whilst he was burning he wash: his hands in the
flame: his pardon was brought him at the stake, which he refused: he was the
first martyr in Queen Mary's time that gave first adventure upon the fire.

The martyrdom of Laurence Sanders.
He was parson of All-hallowes in Breadstr^et, and being minded to give over
another Church which he had in Leichestershire, called Churchlangton: about
that time came the broile about the claim that Q. Mary made to the crown; by
reason whereof he could not accomplish his purpose. In this trouble he preached
at Northampton, and boldly uttered his consci^nce against popish doctrine, and
Antichrists damnable errors, which were like to spring up again in England, as
a just plage for the little l^ue which the English nation did bear to Gods word,
which had been so plentifully offered unto them: the Queens men which were
there and heard, were highly displeased with him for his Sermon, and kept him
amongst them as a Prisoner, but for the love of his Brethren and Friends, which
were chee^e do^rs for the Queen, and because there yet was no Law against him,
they dismissed him.

He being inflamed with the fire of godly zeal, preached with diligence at
both his Benifices, as time could serve him, until the Proclamation was put
forth as aforesaid: at which time he was at his Benefice in the Country, where
contrary to the proclamation, he ^aught diligently Gods truth, confirming the
people therein, and arming them against false Doctrine, until he was
commanded to cease, and with force re^^sted* then he returned toward London,
to visit the flock which he had there in charge: and as he was coming nigh to
the City, Sir John Mordant, a Counceller to Queen Mary, ouertooke him, and
asked him whether he went: I have, said Sanders, a Cure in London, and I go to
instruct my people according to my duty. If you will fo^low my council (quoth
Master Mordant) let them alone, and come not at them, Sanders answered: How
shall I then be discharged before GOD? Did not you (quoth Mordant) preach such
a day in Breadstreete? Yes said he, That is my Cure, I heard you (quoth
Mordant) and it please you, said he, you shall hear me again in the same
place to morrow, where I will affirm by the authority of Gods word all that I
then said, and whatsoever I have formerly taught them. I would counsel you
not to preach, said he. If you can or will forbid me by law I must obey. Nay,
quoth he, I will not forbid you, but give you counsel, and so they departed.
Mordant told Bonner that Saunders would preach in his cure the next Sunday.

One that was about Saunders perceiving by him that he was troubled, asked him
how he did: indeed, said he, I am in prison until I be in prison, meaning he
was unquiet until he had preached, and then he should be in quiet though he
were put in prison.

The next day he preached upon the second to the Corinthians, and the eleventh
Chapter.

I have coupled you a pure Virgin to Christ, but I fear as the Serpent
beguiled Eve; so your wills should be corrupted from the singleness which you
had toward Christ Jesus.

He rejoiced in the sum of that true doctrine whereby we are coupled so
Christ, and saved by free justification by his blood: he compared the
papisticall doctrine to the Serpents deceauing; and left they should be
deceived by it, he made a comparison betwixt the voice of Christ and the popish
Serpent, wherein he showed the difference betwixt the Service set forth by King
Edward in the English t^ng, and the popish service then used in the Latin
tongue. And that the first was good, because it was according to the word of God,
and the order of the primate church. The other is evil, because though some
good Latin words be in it, yet was it but as it were a little honey and milk
with a great deal of poison to drink up all.

In the afternoon he being ready to preach again to the Bishop* where was Sir
John Mordant. Boner said unto his charge the breaking of the proclamation, and
also heresy: but his Charity was content to let alone the Treason. But he
would prove him an heretic, and all such as taught the administration of the
Sacraments, and the order of the Primitive Church are most pure that come
nearest to the order of the Primative Church, for the church was then in her
infancy and could not abide that perfection, which was after to be furnished
with ceremonies,

Sanders answered: Saint Augustine says ceremonies were at first ordained for
the weak infirmity of man, therefore it was a token of the more perfection of
the primative Church, that it had ^ew ceremonies, and a token of the (...) of
the Church papisticall, because it had so many ceremonies, (...) blasphemous,
some unsavory, and some vnpro^^table.

Then the Bishop bade him write what he believed of transubstantiation, which
he did, saying, My Lord, you seek my blood and you shall have it: I pray God
you may be baptized in it, that you may after loath bloud-sucking, and become a
better man: this writing the Bishop kept to cut his throat with. Then the
Bishop sent him to the Lord Chancellor, who kneeling before him, the Lord
Chancellor said, How happens it that you have preached contrary to the Queens
Proclamation? Saunders answered, as he was admonished by Ezechiel, because he
saw perrilous times at hand, he exhorted his parishioners to persevere in those
things which they had learned, for by the example of the Apostles we must obey
God before man: we do only profess the sincerity of the word, which although
it be now forbidden us to preach with our mouths, yet our blood hereafter
shall manifest the same. The Bishop said, carry away this frenzy fool to
prison. Saunders answered he thanked God he had given him a place of rest,
where he might pray for the Bishops conversion.

Saunders told one that lay with him in prison, that in the time of his
examination he was wonderfully comforted, and received a taste of the communion
of Saints: a pleasant refreshing did issue from every part of his body to his
heart, and from thence into all parts again. He continued in prison a year
and three months, and then he was sent for before the Lord Chancellor, who
offered him his pardon if he would recant; which because he refused, he was
condemned upon his opinion against the Sacrament, with his hand in writing unto
Bonner, as before is related.

Then he was carried unto Couentrie, and one night he was put into the common
Jail amongst other prisoners, where he slept little, but spent the night in
prayer and instruction of others: the next day he was led to execution into
the Park without the City, going in old gown and a shirt, barefooted, and
as he went he oftentimes fell flat on the ground and prayed. When he was come
nigh to the place* the officer told him he was one of them that marred the
realm with heresy, wherefore thou have deserved death, yet if thou will
revoke thine heresies the Queen has pardoned thee.

Then answered Saunders, It is not I nor my fellow Preachers that have hurt the
realm* but it is your-selfe and such as you are which alter Gods word, for I
hold no heresies, bnt the doctrine of God and Christ unto everlasting life; and
so full sweetly he slept in the Lord.

He wrote many godly letters to Divines during the time of his imprisonment,
which thou may see in the book at large.

The martyrdom of JOHN HOOPER Bishop of Worcester.
ABout the beginning of the six Articles in the time of King Henry the eighth,
being in danger for religion, he went beyond Sea, where he was lovingly
entertained at Basil and at Zurick of Master Bullinger his singular friend,
where he married his wife, which was a Burgundian; and in the reign of King
Edward he repaired home, amongst many other English exiles: who being come to
London, used to preach twice, or at least once every Sunday: and at his Sermons
the Church would be so full that none could enter further into the doors
thereof: he was in tongue eloquent, in Scriptures perfect, in pains
indefatigable: after he was called to preach before the King, and soon after
made Bishop of Gloucester: in that office he continued two years, and behaved
himself so well, that his very enemies, except it were for good doings, and
sharp correcting of sin, could find no fault with him: and after that he was
made Bishop of Worcester, he sustained much vexation about his inuesting,
because he would not wear the Priestly vestures.

In his Bishops palace in every corner there was favor of honest conversation
and reading of the Scriptures, there was no Courtly roysting or idleness, no
pomp at all, no dishonest word nor swearing; every day he had to dinner a
certain number of poor folk of the City by course, and before dinner they
were examined by him or his Deputies of the Lords Prayer, the Articles of their
Faith, and ten Commandments.

In Queen Mary's time he was one of the first that was sent for to London by
a Purseuant: The Bishop of Winchester received him very approbriously railing
and rating him, accused him of religion, and committed him to the fleet.

The next year he was sent for before the Bishop of Winchester, of London, of
Durham, of Landaffe, and of Chichester; where after he had suffered many
checkes, taunts and mockes, that he could not be suffered to make any answer:
because he said he would not go from his Wife, and that he believed not the
corporal presence in the Sacrament, he was deprived of his Bishoprics.

By his committance he was to have the liberty of the Fleet, and when he had
paid five pound for his liberty* the Warden complained to Gardener and made
him to be committed close prisoner a quarter of a year, then he had liberty
to come to dinner and supper, and presently to return to his Chamber without
speaking to his friends: the Warden, and his Wife, would ever be picking
quarrels with him, and after one quarter of the year fell out with him about
the Mass: Then the Warden obtained of Gardener that he should be put into the
Wards, where he continued a long time, having nothing to lie on but a rotten
Covering with few Feathers in it: On the oneside was the stink and filth of the
house, on the other side, the stinking Town ditch, so that the stink infected
him with diverse diseases, and being very sick he cried for help: but the
warden, when he has known me ready to dye, and poor men have called to help
him, he has commanded the door to be kept fast, and charged none of his men
to come at him, saying; let him alone, it were a good riddance of him.

Until he was deprived, he paid him twenty shillings a week for his table,
and since as the best Gentleman, and yet used worse then the veriest Slave: he
imprisoned and stripped his man, to find Letters, but could find none, but a
remembrance of their names that gave him Alms, and to undo them, he delivered
the Bill unto STEPHEN GARDENER, there he continued almost eighteen^ months.

The twentieth of January he was brought to Gardiners house, 1555.
at Saint Mary-Oueries, where the Bishop of Winchester with other Bishops,
moved M Hooper earnestly, to forsake his evil and corrupt doctrine, preached
in King Edwards days, and to return to the unity of the Catholic Church, and
to acknowledge the Popes Holiness the supreme head thereof, according to the
determination of the whole Parliament, promising that as he himself and other
his Brethren, had received the Popes blessing, and Queen Mary's mercy, even so
mercy was ready to be showed to him, and others, if he would arise with them,
and condescend to the Popes Ho^^nes.

Master Hooper answered, for so much as the Pope taught doctrine contrary to
Christ's doctrine, he is no member of Christ's Church, much less the head
thereof, therefore he could not condescend to any such usurped Jurisdiction,
neither does he esteem that Church to be the Catholic Church of Christ, for
the true Church hears only the voice of Christ her Spouse, and flies the
voice of Strangers. I desire the Queens mercy, if mercy may be had with
safety of conscience, and without displeasure of GOD: answer was made, that
the Queen would show no mercy to the Popes Enemies, then he was sent to the
Fleet again for six days: then he was brought again before the Bishop of
Winchester and other Commissioners in Saint-mary-Oueries Church, and the next
day condemned, together with Master Rogers, and then they were carried to
Newgate, where he remained six days. Bonner and others resorted thither to
him diverse times, to persuade him to be a member of Antichrist, and when they
could not, Bonner disgraded him: then he was carried to Gloucester to suffer
death, whereof he did greatly rejoice that he should there confirm his
doctrine that he had instructed so many in, with his blood.

Sir Anthony Kingston, which was one of the Commissioners to see him executed,
came to him and lamented his case, and desired him to consider that life is
sweet, and death is bitter, therefore seeing life may be had, desire to live;
hereafter you may do good: who answered, though death be bitter and life
sweet, yet death to come is more bitter, and life to come more sweet;
therefore for the desire and love I have to the one, and the terror of the
other, I do not so much regard this death or esteem this life, but have
settled my self by the strength of Gods spirit rather to suffer any torments
then to deny the truth of Gods word, desiring you and others to pray for me.

He answered, Well my Lord I perceive there is no remedy: I thank God that
ever I kn^w you; for whereas I was an adulterer, and a fornic^tor, God by your
good instructions, has brought me to the forsaking and detesting of the same.

The same day a blind boy got leave to speak with Master Hooper: the boy a
little before had been imprisoned at Gloucester for confessing the truth. After
Master Hooper had examined him of his faith, he said unto him, Ah poor boy*
GOD has taken from thee thy outward sight, but he has given thee another
sight much more precious: for he has endued thy soul with the eye of
knowledge and faith. When he was burned he was not suffered to speak to the
people. He wrote many godly letters to diverse whilst he was in prison, which
thou may see in the book at large.

Doctor Rowland Tailor.
THe Town of Hadley was instructed by Thomas Bilney so well, that you might
have found there many, 1555.
as well men as women, that had often read over the Bible, and could say a
great part of Saint Paul's Epistles by heart, and give a godly learned sentence
in any matter of controversy, and there Children and Servants were trained up
in the knowledge of Gods Word, that the town seemed rather to be an
University, then a town of clothing. In this town the said Rowland Tailor
was Parson: He most faithfully endeavored himself to fulfill his charge: No
Sunday nor Holiday passed, nor other time that he could get the people
together, but he preached to them the Word of GOD; there was none so rich but
he would tell him his fault, with such earnest and grave rebukes as best
became a good Pastor: He was ready to do good to all men readily forgiving
his enemies. H^e was a Father to the poor. Thus this good Shepherd continued
all the time of King Edward.

In the beginning of Q. Mary's reign he retained in his Church the Service
which was used in King Edwards time* and faithfully preached against Popish
corruptions, which had infected the whole Country round about. One Foster and
one Clerk hired one John Au^rth Parson of Aldam, a Popish Idolator and a
whoremonger, to set up Mass again at Hadly, and builded him an Altar: in the
night their Altar was beaten down, and they builded it again and watched it;
then the Priest came thither with all his implements and garments to play his
Popish Pageant and was guarded with weapons lest he should be disturbed from
this (...) sacrifice.

Doctor Tailor seeing him, said, Thou Devil, who made thee so bold to profane
this Church of Christ with abominable Idolatry? To whom Foster said, Thou
Traitor, why do thou disturb the Queens proceedings? He answered, I am no
Traitor, but the Shepherd that Christ has appointed to feed this Flock. I
command thee thou Popish Wolf in the name of the GOD of heaven, that thou
avoid hence, and presume not to poison Christ's Flock with thy Popish
Idolatry. Then Foster with his armed men took Tailor, and violently carried
him whether he would or no out of the Church, and thrust his wife out after
him, because she knee^led down and made humble supplication unto God, to be
revenged of one of them, and then they shut the door, least the people should
^aue rent their sacrificer in pe^ces, some that were without threw in stones,
an^ miss^d him but little.

Upon complaint to Gardener, he sent for Tailor, and though his friends and
acquaintance persuaded him by all means possible they could to the contrary:
yet he was resolved to go to the Bishop, and to his Beard to tell him he
does naught. I am old, though I suffer GOD will raise up Teachers for his
people: I shall n^uer do GOD so good service as now I may, what Christian
would not gladly die against the Pope and his adherents, for I know the papacy
is the Kingdom of Antichrist, and leaving one Richard Yeoman a godly Priest in
his cure, which after was burned at Norwich, He took his journey with one John
Hull his servant.

There was in the town of Hadley one Alcocke, who after Richard Yeoman was
driven away used daily to read a Chapter out of the Bible, and to say the
English Letany in Hadley Church, they sent him up to London, and there he died
being in prison in Newgate.

When Gardener saw Doctor Tailor, according to his custom, he called him
knave, traitor, heretic, with many villainous reproaches.

My Lord, quoth he, I am neither Traitor nor Heretic, but a true Subject and
faithful Christian: My Lord, you are but a Mortal man, I trow, if I should be
afraid of your Lordly looks. Why fear you not God? How dare you look any
Christian man in the face, seeing you have forsaken the truth, denied Christ
and his word, contrary to your own oath and writing? With what countenance
will you appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, to answer your oaths to
Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth.

Gardener answered, that was Herod's oath, unlawful, and therefore worthy to
be broken, I have done well in breaking it, and I thank God I am come home
unto our Mother the Catholic Church, and the Pope has dispensed with me, and
so I would thou should do.

Tailor, Should I approve those lies, errors, superstitions, and Idolatries,
that the Pope and his company this day approved: nay, God forbid, let the Pope
return to Christ and his word, and leave Idolatry, and then will we turn to
him, the Pope nor no man else can assoyle you of that oath*

I see, quoth Gardener, thou art a very knauish fool.

Tailor said, leave your reyling my Lord, it is not seemly for you.

That art a married man quoth the Bishop.

Tailor said, I thank GOD that I am, and I have nine Children, and I thank
GOD for the ordaining of Matrimony, that we should not live in Adu^tery.

Gardener, Thou would not suffer Mass in Hadley.

Tailor. I am parson of Hadly, and it is against law and reason, that any
should infect my flock with Popish Idolatrous Mass.

Then said the Bishop, thou art a blasphemous heretic, to blaspheme the
blessed Sacraments, and put off his Cap, and against the Mass, which is a
Sacrifice for the quick and the dead.


Tailor. Christ dyed for our Redemption, which is a sufficient propitiatory
Sacrifice unto salvation for all believers, and no Priest can any more offer
him, and we need no other propitiatory sacrifice; therefore the Fathers called
the Communion Eucharistia, which signifies thanksgiving.


Then said the Bishop, thou shall confess it a Sacrifice propitiatory for the
quick and the dead, ere thou and I have done, and commanded him to be sent to
the Kings Bench.

Then Tailor kneeled down and said; Good Lord I thank thee, and from the
tyranny of the Pope, and all his detestable errors, Idolatries, and
abominations, good LORD deliver us, and GOD be praised for King Edward: so he
was carried unto the Kings Bench, where he lay in Prison almost two years.

Being in Prison, he spent his time in Prayer, Preaching, and Writing, with^in
few days after, were diverse learned and godly^men, in sundry Conn^rie^ in
England, committed to prison for Religion: so that almost all the Prisons in
England were right Christian schoole^ and Churches, so that there was no
greater comfort to Christian hearts, then to come to the Prisons.

Now were placed in Churches blind Masse-m^ngers, with their Lattine babbling
and apish ceremonies, who like cruel Wolves, spared not to murder all such
that did but whisper against Popery: the godly Preachers were other fled, or
committed to Prison, where as Lambs they waited when the Butchers should call
them to slaughter.

Master Bradford, that devout and vertuons Preacher, who was a miracle or our
time, was in the Kings Bench, Tailor exhorted him to constant perseverance unto
the end: Master Bradford praised God he had such a comfortable Prison-fellow.

Tailor told his Friends that came to see him, that GOD had graciously
provided for him, for to send him where he found such an Angel of God to be
his comforter.

After Tailor had line in Prison a while, he was sent for and deprived,
because he maintained Priests marriage, and would not be separated from his
Wife.

And after a year and three quarters, when they had gotten the laws put down
that were made by King Henry the eight, and King Edward, against the Pope: They
sent for Tailor before my Lord Chancellor, and either Commissioners, the effect
of whose communication with him, he described himself as follows.

First, my Lord Chancellor said, you amongst other, are sent for to enjoy the
King and Queens mercy, if you will rise again with us from the fall, which
we ge^erallie have received in this Realm, from the which we are delivered
miraculousli^: If you will not, you shall have Judgment. To this I answered,
That so to rise, should be the greatest fall that ever I could receive, for I
should fall from Christ unto Antichrist: I will not decline from the Religion
which was in King Edwards dai^s, which is according to the word of God, as long
as I live.

My Lord Chancellor asked me, whether I had read his ^ooke upon the Sacrament,
I said I had read it: He asked me how I liked it; My Lord said I, there are
many things far (...) from GODS truth in that Book* then he called me varlet;
I said that was as bad as fool, then he called me ignorant Beelebrow.

I said, My Lord, you wrote a Book De vera obedientia, I would you had been
constant in that, for you never did declare a good conscience, as I heard of,
but in that Book.

How like you that said my Lord, I wrote against Priests marriage but y^
pleases not such as thou art. I answered their proceedings now against Priests
marriages, is against natural Law, Civil Law, Canon Law, general Councels,
Canons of the Apostles, ancient Doctors, and Gods Laws.

Then because I would not turn, I was sent to prison again.

After Doctor Tailor, Master Bradford, and Master Sanders, were called to
appear before my Lord Chancellor, and other Commissioners, where because they
would not yield to papistry, they were condemned, and sentence was read against
Tailor.

They rejoiced that they were worthy to suffer for Christ* Word and truth, and
they stoutly said unto the Bishops, GOD the righteous Judge, will require our
blood at your hands, and the proudest of you all shall repont this receiving
again of Antichrist, and the tyranny you show against Christ's flock.

So Tailor was sent to the Clinke, he said unto the people that flocked about
to see him as he was going; GOD be praised good people, I am come away from
them undefiled, and will cenfirme the truth with my ^^oud. And at night he was
carried unto the Counter in the Poultrey, where he lay seven nights.

Bonner came to the prison to him, to disgrade him, he said; Master Doctor, I
would you would remember your self, and turn to your holy Mother the Church,
and I will sue for your pardon.

Tailor answered, I would you and your fellows would turn to Christ, as for
me, I will not turn to Antichrist.

Then Bonner had him put on the Uestures to be disgraded, but he would not,
when they were put upon him, he put his hands by his side, and said; How say
you my Lord, am not I a goodly Fool: How say you my Masters, it I were in
Cheape-side, should I not have Boys enough to laugh at these apish toys and
toying trumperie; and when the Bishop should strike him upon the breast with
his Crossier Staff: his Chaplains said; Strike him not my Lord, for he will
surely strike you again, That I will said he, for it is our Savior Christ's
cause, so the Bishop laid his curs^ oll him, but struck him not.

When he came to Master Bradford, for they both lay in one Chamber, he told
him laughinglie, how he had made the Bishop afraid to strike him: that night
his Wife, his Son Thomas, and his man John Hull, were suffered to sup with
him, after Supper, he thanked GOD, that he had given him strength to abide by
his holy Word: Then he said unto his Son; My dear Son, God give thee his
Spirit, truly to serve Christ, to learn his word, and to stand by it all thy
life: my Son, fear God, fly sin, pray to him, and apply thy book, and see
thou be obedient unto thy Mother, cherish the poor, and count that try chief
riches, is to be rich in a^mes.

Then he said, my dear Wife, be steadfast in the ^eare and love of God, be not
defiled with Popish Idolatries: we have been faithful yoke-fellowes
together, the Lord will reward you for your faithfulness toward me, I now
must be taken from you; and I would advise you to marry with some honest man
that fears GOD, he will provide such a one for you, and he will be a
merciful Father to you, and your Children, whom I pray bring up in the fear
of God and learning, and keep them from Romish Idolatry, then with weeping
fears they prayed together, and kissed each other.

The next day he was carried away toward Hadley, to be burned there, diverse
Gentlemen and Justices came to him there, who labored him to return unto the
Romish Religion, showed him his pardon and promised him great promotions, yea a
Bishopric if he would, but all was vain, for he had not builded his Rock
upon the sands, in peril of every wind, but on the sure Rock Christ. When
he went through Hadley to execution, the streets being full, they cried out
with lamentable voices: Ah good Lord, there goes our Shepherd from us, that
has so faithfully taught us, so fatherly cared for us, and so godly governed
us, what shall we poor scattred Lambs do? What shall become of this wicked
world? good Lord comfort him: wherefore the people were fore rebuked, and
Doctor Tailor ever said to the people; I have preached unto you Gods word and
truth, and am come this day to seal it with my blood.

Coming against the Almes-heuses, he cast to the poor people all the Money
which remained of that which good people had given unto him in Prison, for his
Living was taken away from him so soon as he was put in Prison, so that he
was sustained during the time of his imprisonment, by the charitable Alms of
good people. When he saw the place of execution, and the multitude of people
that were gathered together, then said he; thanked be God, I am even at home.

They had clipped his head ill-fauoredly, like a Fools head, by Bonners
persuasions, when he was disgraded: when he came there, all the people said;
God save thee good Master Doctor Tailor, Jesus strengthen you, the Holy Ghost
comfort you. When he would have spoken unto the people, one or other thrust a
tipstaffe in his month: then he desired license of the Sheriff to speak, but
he denied him, and had him remember his promise made unto the Council. It was
a common fame, that the Council sent for such as were condemned, and threatened
them they would cut their tongues out, except they would promise them, at their
deaths to keep silence, and not to speak unto the people.

When he was in his Shirt, he was set in a Pitch Barrel to be burned, then
he said with a loud voice; Good people, I have taught you nothing but GODS
Word, and those Lessons which I have taken out of GODS blessed Book, I am
therefore come hither this day to seal it with my blood, then one Homes, a
Yeoman of the Guard, who had used him very cruelly all the way, gave him a
great stroke on the head.

The Sheriff called one Richard Doningham a Butcher to set up the Faggots, but
he would not, then he got others, and one of them called Warwick, cruelly
cast a Faggot at him and brake his face, that the blood ran down. Doctor
Tailor said; Ah friend, I have harm enough, what needs this? When the fire
was set to him, he said; Merciful Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ's sake,
receive my Soul into thy hands, and so stood still, without either crying or
moving, with his hands folded together, until one Soyce struck him upon the
head, that the Brains fell out, and his Corpse fell into the Fire and was
burned.

The foureteenth of February, 1555.
the Lord Chanceller and the Bishops, caused the Image of Thomas Becket to be
set up over the Mercers Chappe^l door in Cheape-side in London, in the form
of a Bishop, with Miter and Crosier: within two days after his two blessing
fingers were broken away, and the next day his head was stricken off. Whereupon
many were suspected, and one Master Barnes, Mercer, being a Professor of the
truth, was charged therewith, and he and three of his Servants were committed
to Prison, and though it could not be proved against him, he was bound in a
great sum, to build it up again, now, and as often as it should be broken
down, and to watch and keep the same. The next day after that it was set up
again, the head was the second time broken off, then there was a Proclamation
set forth, that he that could tell who did it, he should have an hundred
Crowns, with thanks, but it was not known who did it.

The virtuous and godly King Christianus, King of Denmark, hearing of the
captivity of Miles Couerdale, whom he knew, by reason he was in Denmark in
King Henry the eight his time, and lamenting his dangerous case, made
intercession by Letters to Queen Mary, desiring the said Miles Couerdalo to be
sent unto him: after the King had written two letters, Queen Mary after long
delay, made full answer to the King of Denmarkes Letters; by which providence
of God, Miles Couerdale was delivered.

ROBERT FARRAR Bishop of Saint David's in Wales.
THis Bishop, by the favor of the Lord Protector, was first promoted unto that
Dignity: 1555
he may well be said twice mar^ired; first, for diverse injuries and
mollestations which he suffered most unworthily of his enemies, in King Edwards
time, after the fall of the Duke of Somerset, and of his martydome in Queen
Mary's time. His Adversaries in King Edwards time, were ^ames Constantine, his
Register, to whom he gave the Office by Patent, and a Doctor of the Law, and
Canon of the Cathedral Church of S. David's, and a Chanter of the same.

They did exhibit to the Kings Council certain Articles, to the insent to
blemish the Bishops credit, and utterly as they thought, and made their boasts
to pull him from his Bishopric, and bring him in a praemunire.

The chief effect of their Articles, which were fifty six, was, that he did
not in his Proce^ that he made write the King supreme head of the Church, and
that he tolerated other superstitions and Idolatries.

After these wrangling Articles were given up, then the Bishop was called to
answer, the hearing whereof was committed unto Sir John Mason, Knight, and
Doctor Wo^ton.

Then they had a Commission into the Country, where they examined sixscore and
seven witnesses, and during the time of the examination of these witnesses,
the said Bishop was stayed at London, because his adversaries said, if the
Bishop should go into his Dioces, he would let them of their proves.

During which trouble King Edward died, and in Queen Mary's time another named
Henry, was made Bishop of S. David's, who sent for the said Robert Farrar, and
committed him to prison, and afterward declared unto the said Robert the great
clemency, that the King and Queens Highness pleasure was to be offered unto
him, if he would submit himself unto the Laws of this Realm, and conform
himself unto the unity of the Catholic Church, and seeing the said Robert
made him no answer, he ministered unto him these Articles.

First, whether he believe the marriage of Priests to be lawful by the law of
God and holy Church.

Secondly, whether he believed the very body and blood of Christ is really and
substantially in the Sacrament, without the substance of bread and wine. Bishop
Farrar would not answer, until he saw a lawful Commission, so he was
committed again: then he was called again after, and would answer no
otherwise then as before; whereupon he was pronounced Contu^nax, and for
punishment thereof, to be counted Pro confesso, and committed him again. The
next day of appearance, the said Bishop Farrar craved time to answer, and at
the time did answer.

Then the foresaid pretensed Bishop, gave him a writing of certain Articles to
subscribe unto: adding to the Articles before, that the Mass was a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead, and that the general
Councels never erred, neither (...) err: that a man is not justified by Faith
only, but by Charity also; and that the Catholic Church only has authority
of interpreting of the Scriptures, and to compound Controversies, and also to
appoint such things as appertain to public discipline, and that the Church is
visible, as a city upon a hill known unto all men, and not obscure and
unknown, as the heretics of our age do teach.

To these Articles he refused to subscribe: affirming that they were invented
by man, and pertain nothing to the Catholic Faith: Then he assigned him a day
to assign them affirmatively, or negatiuely, which he would not do^, but
appea^ed unto the Cardinal: notwithstanding they gave sentence against him.

When they had put the priestly vestures on him to disgrade him; he called
them rags and relics of Rome: When he was brought to ex^cution in the Ci^ie
of Carmarden, he was burned with Turffes and Soddes, which was to him a more
grievous torment, but praised be God he suffered it patiently.

The next month a godly man named Rawlins White, was burned in Cardiffe in
Wales.

THOMAS TOMKINS.
THomas Tomkins of Shordich in London Weauer, was brought before Boner, for all
hitherto were condemned by Steven Gardener Lord Chancellor; but he being weary,
put off the rest unto Boner, of whom this Tomkins was the first; who when by no
means he could be driven from the truth, Boner caused a burning Candle to be
brought to him: Then said he, come on naughty knane, if thou likest the
torments of the fire so well; I will make thee feel in this flame what it is
to be burned: then if thou be wise thou will change thy mind: Then he
commanded his right hand to be put into the fire, but he endured the burning;
yet was not Bonet therewith contented, but never rested until he had consumed
the whole body to ashes in Smithfield.

He was condemned upon these points: First, that his belief ^, that the body
of Christ is not truly and verily in the Sacrament of the Altar, but only in
heaven, and so in heaven that it cannot be really in the Sacrament: and
although the Church a^ low the Mass a wholesome and profitable sacrifice; yet
my belief is that the Mass is full of Superstition and Idolatry, and
unprofitable for my soul: and the Sacrament of Baptism ought to ^ee only in
the vulgar tongue, and without such ceremonies as are used in the Latin
Church: and being exhorted to leave his opinions: He answered he was brought
up in ignorance until now of late years, and now I know the truth, wherein I
will continue unto death: and he said my Lord you would have me forsake the
truth, and fall into error and heresy: Then he was condemned and delivered
unto the Sheriff; who carried him to Newgate, where he remained most ioifull
and constant, until he was conuayed to Smithfield, and there sealed up his
Faith in the flaming fire.

The constant suffering of Higbed and Causon.
THese two were descended of worshipful stock in Essex, which of all Shires
was most fruitful of Martyrs; the one called Thomas Higbed of Horneden Hill;
the other Thomas Causon of Thunderst, they were both in flourishing estate in
riches, and much more flourishing in godliness.

They were diverse times examined before Bonner, and defended the truth
valiantly, and he and his fellows did much labor to make them to recant, but
could not prevail: The substance of all their Arguments appears in a
Confession that they wrote with their own hands, which was read in the Court
of Paul's, before the Mayor and Sheriffs, and all the people, not without
great sure, before it could be licenced to be read.

First we believe and profess in Baptism to forsake the Devil and all his
works, and all the vanities of the world, and the lusts of the (...).

2 We believe the Articles of our Faith, and that we are bound to walk in
Gods Commandments all the days of our life.

3 We believe the Lords Prayer contains all things necessary for soul and
body, and that we are thereby taught only to pray to our heavenly Father, and
is no Saint nor Angel.

4 We believe there is a Catholic Church, even the Communion of Saints,
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ being the head
corner stone: for which Church Christ gave himself to make it a glorious
congregation without fault in his sight.

5 This Church of it self is sinful, and must needs say Father forgive us our
sins, but through Christ and his merits she is freely forgiven.

6 He is our only Mediator as Saint Paul says, there is one God, and one
Mediator betwixt God and Man Jesus Christ: Therefore no other Mediator.

7 We believe this Church is, and has been persecuted according to the promise
of Christ: as they have persecuted me, so shall they persecute you, for the
Disciple is not above his Master. And Paul says it is not given to you only
to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake: for all which will live
godly must suffer persecution.

8 The true Church teaches the Word of God truly, not adding thereto, nor
taking therefrom; and Ministers the Sacraments according to the Primitive
Church, and it suffers all men to read the Scriptures: as Christ says:
Search the Scriptures: And when Paul preached, the audience searched the
Scriptures; whether he preached truly: David teaches to pray with
understanding: Saint Paul says, when the people understand not what is said,
how can they say Amen at giving of thanks: And Saint Paul says, true Faith
comes by hearing the word.

9 The Church of Christ teaches God ought to be worshipped according to his
word, and not after the Doctrine of men: as Christ teaches us, likewise Christ
says, you shall forsake Father and Mother and follow me, whereby we learn if
our elders, teach otherwise then God commanded in that point we must forsake
them.

10 The Supper of our Lord ought not to be altered, because Christ the wisdom
of the Father did institute it: For it is written, cursed is he that changes
my ordinances, or takes any thing from them.

This Supper is sorely abused, it is given in one kind, where Christ gave it
in both: it is made a private Mass, where Christ made it a Communion: He gave
it to all his Apostles in the name of the whole Church, and not to one alone:
Christ ordained it for a remembrance of his everlasting sacrifice upon the
Cross once for all; and not again to be a daily sacrifice both for them that
are alive, and them that are dead: And Saint Paul says, where there is no
remission of sins, there is no more sacrifice for sin: and in that it is
worshipped, where as nothing is to be worshipped that is made with hands: and
in that it is given in an unknown tongue whereby the people are ignor^nt of
the right use thereof: besides this it is hanged up and shut in a Box, many
times so long that worms breeds in it, and so it putrifieth, they that abuse
it bring up the slander thereof and not we.

12 Concerning Christ's words, This is my body, the mind of Christ must be
searched out by other Scriptures: for the Apostle says no Scripture has any
private interpretation, and the Scriptures are full of such figurative
speeches: as the Cup is the New Testament, the Rock is Christ: whosoever
(says Christ) receives a Child in my Name receives me; which sentence must
not be understood after the Letter, as the Capernaites did which taught that
Christ's body should have been eaten with their teeth; when he spoke of the
eating thereof, to whom Christ said, the Spirit quickens, the flesh profits
nothing, for my words are spirit and life: so we see Christ's words must be
understood spiritually, and not literally: he that comes to this worthy
supper must not prepare his iaw but his heart: neither tooth nor belly, but
believe, says Saint Augustine, and thou have eaten it: so we must bring with
us a Spiritual hunger, and examine our selves whether our Conscience do
testify that we do truly believe in Christ according to the Scriptures,
whereof if we be truly certified, being newborn from our old conversation,
in heart, mind, will and deed, then may we boldly with this marriage garment of
Faith come to the feast.

And that there is no change but bread still remains, Christ says, Do this
in remembrance of me: And Saint Paul, As often as you shall eat this bread and
drink this Cup, you shall remember the Lords death until he come: here is
no change but bread still: And Christ says, except I go to my Father the
Comforter cannot come: And Saint Peter says, heaven shall keep him until the
last day: in that he is God he is every where, but in that he is Man he
cannot be but in one place, as his body was not in all places at once when he
was here: He was not in the grave when the women sought him as the Angel
said: neither was he at Bethania when Lazarus died by Christ's own words: and
thus we conclude that the Christ is in the holy Supper sacramentally and
spiritually, in all them that worthily receive it: and corporally in heaven
both God and Man.

When they would not turn from the truth by no p^rswasions the sentence was
read against them: In the reading whereof Higbed said, you speak blasphemy
against Christ's Passion, and go about to trap us with your subtilties and
snares; and though my Father, Mother, and other my kindred do beleeu^, you say
yet they were deceiu^d in so believing: And whereas you say Cranmer and others
in the said Articles were heretics, I wish I were such an heretic as they
were and be. Then the Bishop asked him whether he would turn from his ^rrour:
To whom he said, would ye would recant, for I am in the truth and you in
error.

Then they were delivered unto the Sheriff and sent to Newgate, where they
remained not so much in afflictions, as in consolations: Fourteen days after
they were carried to Essex: And Thomas Higbed burned at Hornden on the Hill:
and Thomas Causon at Rayly, where they died most constantly.

The Martyrdom of WILLIAM HVNTER.
THe said Hunter was at all times brought before the Bishop of London, with the
aforesaid Thomas Tomkins, and had the same Articles, Reasons and persuasions
objected as the said Thomas Tomkins had and they made both the same answers,
saving that Boner used these words only to Hunter: Will you abjure and return
to the Catholic Church: He answered, I will stand to that which I have said:
And further he said it is false Doctrine and belief, to believe that Christ's
true body is in the Sacrament, which is only in heaven, and that his friends
and kindred were deceived if they otherwise believed, I will continue in the
truth that is taught me as long as I live, ^or if I do otherwise I shall
perish both body and soul, and I had rather my body perish, then my soul.
Whereupon he was condemned, and after carried to Burnt-wood, where he
suffered most ioifully. He was a very young man, borne of good parents, of whom
he was not only instructed to godliness, but confirmed unto death, a rare
example to be had in admiration of all parents, where the natural affection of
parents were overcome with godliness, w^o like the holy mother in the Machabees,
encouraged their son as much as they could to go through valiantly,
reioicing with wonderful gladness, and either of them drank unto him,
confirming him in the Lord, I cannot tell whether I should praise the virtue of
the Son or of the Parents.

William Pygot, Steven Knight, and John Lawrence.
AT the same time that Tomkins and Hunter were examined as before these three
likewise were examined before Boner; the same reasons, Articles and persuasions
that were used to them, were used unto these also, and they made all answers
al^ke: and when by neither flattery nor threatening they could be brought from
the truth, they were cond^mned, and were carried into Essex to be burned:
William Pigot burned at Braintree.

Steven Knight was burned at Mauld^n, who at the stake kneeled down and said
this prayer: O Lord Jesus, for whose love I ^eaue this life, and desire bitt^r
death, with the loss of all earthly things, ^ather then to abide the
blasphemy of thy name, or to obey men breaking thy Commandments, where I
might live in wealth to worship a false God, I chose rather the torment of this
body, and have counted all things but dung that I might winns thee: which death
i^ dearer to me then thousands of Gold and Silver: such love have thou laid up
in my breasts that I hunger for thee* As the wounded Dear des^reth the soy^^,
s^nd ^hy holy comforter, to aid, comfort, and strengthen me^ a weak piece of
earth, empty of all strength of it self, of thy great love thou ^ast bidden me
to this banquet, accounted me worth^ to drink of (...) own cup, amongst
thine ele^t^giue me strength against this ^hine elem^nt which is most irksome
to my sight, that it may be sweet and pleasant to my mind, that I may pass
through this fire into thy ^oso^e according unto thy p^omi^e: accept this
sacrifice, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, for whose Testimony I
offer it with all my heart; forgive me my sins as I forgive the world: sweet
Savior spread thy wings over me: O holy Ghost by whose inspiration I am come
hither, conduct me to everlasting life: Lord into to thine hands ^commend my
spirit, Amen.

John Lawrence was brought to Colchester, and not b^eing able to go, for his
legs were so sore worn with his Irons in prison, and his body so weakened
with evil keeping, he was feign to be brought unto the fire in a chair: At
his burning the young children came about the fire, and cried Lord strengthen
thy servant, and keep thy promise: which manifests Gods glory, which writ
this in the hearts of these little ones, and their parents are to be
commended, that brought them up from their youth, in the fear and knowledge of
God.

Gods Judgment upon the Parson of Arundell.
Upon Shroue-Sunday the Parson of Arundell besides Canterbury, declared unto
the people all such Articles as were set forth by the authority of the pope,
and commandment of the Bishops of this Realm, and when he had done he thanked
God that ever he had lived to see that day, and straightway he fell sudde^ly
out of the pulpit, and never spoke after.

The history of Judge Hales.
SIr James Hales as before, took Queen Mary's part, and would not subscribe
to have any other Queen, though all the rest had subscribed to Edward the
sixts Will. He was an upright and conscionable Judge. To these his gifts and
qualities were linked sincere affection to the Gospel of Christ, showing
himself a true Gospeller by word and deed.

At the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, the mass not being restored by law,
diverse Priests presumed to say mass, and they were indicted at the a^^ises
before Judge Hales, and he gave order therein as the law required: wherefore
when the term came, he coming to do his office, was sent for by Gardner Lord
Chancellor, to whom he justified that he did it both by the justice of the law,
and of his conscience, wherein he was fully bent to stand in trial to the
utmost that can be objected: and it therein I have done any injury, let me be
judged by the law; for I will seek or desire no better defense for my self,
considering chiefly that it is my profession.

Ah Sir, said the Chancellor, you be very quick and stout in your answers, it
seems that which you did was more of will, favoring your opinion of Religion
against the service now used, then for any occasion of zeal of justice, seeing
her Highness does set it forth as yet, but withing all her subjects to embrace
it accordingly.

My Lord, quoth Hales, I do but show my self as I am bound in love to God and
obedience to the Queens Majesty, in whose cause willingly for justice sake, I
did of late, as your Lordship knows, adventure as much as I had: and as for
my religion, I trust it is such as pleases God, wherein I am ready to
adventure both my life and substance, if I be called thereto; and for lack of
mine own power and will, the Lords will be fulfilled.

Shortly after he was committed unto the Kings Bench, then he was committed to
the Counter in Breadstreete, and from thence he was conuayed to the Fleet,
where he endured most constantly for the space of three weeks: and when thus in
diverse prisons being tossed and wearied, he could in no wise be subdued, there
was in the prison where he was a Gentleman of Hampshire called Foster, who,
^^ing suborned by the Bishops, used all kind of persuasions whereby he might
draw him from the truth, which at length he brought to pass; then next morning
early the Bishop of Chichester came to him into the prison, to comfort him
therein, and after Judge Portman came to him: but as soon as he had yielded to
them he ^rew into such an extreme desperation by the worm of his conscience,
that he eat little meat that night. When supper was done he gate him straight
to bed, where he passed the night with much anxietie of mind: about six of
the clock in the morning he sent his man for a cup of beer; his man was no
sooner gone but with a penknife he wounded himself in diverse places, and
would have killed himself, but that his man meeting the Butler at the chamber
door, returned presently into the chamber, and let his Master from destroying
himself.

Upon this Cranmer straightway took occasion to call the doctrine of the
Gospel openly in the Star Chamber the doctrine of desperation. M. Hales being
within a while after delivered, gets himself home to his house, whether it
was for fear that if he should again profess the Gospel he should be
imprisoned again and burned, and beggar all his posterity, or if he should go
to hearing of masses he should do worse: having all things set in order a good
while before that pertained unto his Testament, desperately he cast himself
into a shallow River, and was drowned in the year 1555.

JOHN AWCOCKE.
THis year the second of April, one John Awcocke died in prison, who was
buried in the fields, as the manner of the Papists was, for they de^ied them
Christian burial to such as died out of their Antichristian Church.

Pope JULIUS the third.
THis year, about the end of March died Pope Julius the third, whose deeds to
declare it were not so much tedious to the Reader, as horrible to good ears.

Johannes de Casa was Deane of this Popes chamber, Archbishop of Beneuentanus
and chief Legate to the Uenetians, who well declaring the fruit of that filthy
Sea, did not only play the filthy Sodomite himself, but in Italian meetre set
forth the praise of that beastly iniquity, and yet his book* was printed at
Uenice by one Troyanus Nauus, and the Pope suffered this beastlines under his
nose in his chamber, which could not abide the doctrine of Christ.

This Pope delighted greatly in Porke flesh and Peacocks: by the advice of his
Physicians, his Steward ordered that he should set no Porke flesh before him;
missing it* where, said he, is my Porke? the Steward answered, his Physician
had forbidden any Porke to be served, the Pope in a great rage, said, Bring me
my Porke in despite of God.

Another time he commanded a Peacocke at the Table to be kept cold for his
Supper: when Supper came, amongst hot Peacocks he saw not his cold Peacocke,
the Pope after his wonted manner, began horribly to blaspheme God: one of his
Cardinals said, Let not your Holiness, I pray you, be moved in so small a
matter. Then said he, if God were so angry for one apple that he cast our
parents out of Paradise, why may not I, being his Uicar, he angry for a
Peacocke, which is a greater matter?

This was he under whom Popery was restored in England in Queen Mary's time;
and the affection that was borne unto him here may be seen by the Dirgs,
Hearses, and Funerals commanded to be had and celebrated in all Churches by
the Queen and her Council. At his death a woman seeing a Hearse and other
preparation in Saint Magnus Church at the Bridge foot in London, asked what it
meant: it was told her it was for the Pope, and that she must pray for him;
nay, quoth she that I will not, for he needs not my prayers, seeing he could
forgive us all our sins, I am sure he is clean himself: by and by she was
carried unto the Cage at London Bridge, and bade to cool her self there.

GEORGE MARSH.
THis Marsh was an earnest letter forth of true Religion, to the defacement of
Antichrists doctrine, 1555.
in the parish of Deane, and elsewhere in Lancas^ire, and he most faithfully
acknowledged the same in Queen Mary's time, whereupon he was apprehended and
kept in straight prison within the Bishop of Chesters house four months,
not permitting him to have comfort of his frinds, but the Porter was charged to
mark them that asked for him, and to take their names and deliver them to the
Bishop: shortly after he came thither, the Bishop sent for him, and communed
with him a long time in his Hall alone, and could find no fault with him, but
that he allowed not transubstantiation, nor the abuse of the Mass, nor that
the Lay people should receive under one kind: with which points the Bishop
went about to persuade him, but all was in vain, then he sent him to Prison
again. Afterward diverse were sent unto him, to persuade him to submit himself
unto the Church of Rome, and to acknowledge the Pope to be the hand thereof,
and to interpret the Scriptures no otherwise then that Church does.

George answered, he does acknowledge one holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church, without which is no salvation: and this Church is but one, because it
has and believes in but one God, and him only worshippeth, and one Christ,
and in him only trusts for salvation; and it is ruled only by one Spirit,
one Word, and one Faith: and that it is universal, because it has been from
the beginning of the world, and shall be unto the end of the world; having in
it some of al Nations, kindreds and languages, degrees, ^^ates, and conditions
of men. This Church is builded only upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ being the Head-corner-stone, and not on the Romish Laws
and Decrees, the Pope being not the supreme head, and that it was before any
succession of Bishops, general Councels, or Romish Decrees, neither was bound
to any time or place, ordinary succession, general Councels, or Tradition of
Fathers; neither had any supremacy over Empires and Kingdoms.

But that it was a little (...) flock dispersed abroad as sheep without a
Shepherd in the midst of Wolves: or as a flock of fatherless Children,
assisted, succored, and defended only by Christ Jesus their supreme head;
from all assaults, errors, troubles and persecutions, wherewith she is ever
compassed about.

He proved by the flood of Noah, the destruction of Sodom: The Israelites
departing out of Egypt by the parables of the sower: by the Kings sons
marriage: of the great Supper: and by other sentences of the Scriptures, that
this Church was of no estimation, and little in comparison of the Church of
hypocrites and wicked worldlings.

After the Bishop caused him to be brought to the Chapel of the Cathedral
Church of Chester, where the Bishop with diverse others were set: After he had
taken his oath for a true answering, the Chancellor charged him that he had
preached heretically, and blasphemously in diverse places against the Popes
authority and Catholic Church of Rome: the blessed Mass, the Sacrament of the
Altar, and many other Articles.

He answered, that ^e neither heretically nor blasphemonsly spoke against any
of the said Articles, but simply and ^^uely as occasion served according to his
conscience, maintaining the truth touching the said Articles, as it was taught
in King Edward the sixth his time, whereupon they condemned him at the next
appearance. And when he would have persuaded them otherwise by the word of God,
the Bishop told him he ought not to dispute with heretics. Then he prayed the
people to bear him witness, he held no other opinions then were by Law most
godly established, and publicly taught in King Edwards time, wherein he would
live and die.

As he came on the way toward the place of execution, some folk proffered him
mo^ey and looked that he should have had a little purse in his hand, as the
manner of (...)* was at their going to execution, to gather money to give to a
Priest to say trentalls of Masses for them after their death* whereby they
might be saved: but Marsh said he would not be troubled with money, and hade
them give it to the prisoners and poor people.

When he came to the ^^re his pardon was offered him: he answered, being it
tended to pluck him from God, he could not receive it upon that condition.
They would not suffer him to speak to the people. He was somewhat long a dying
by reason of the ^lacknes of the ^^re, which he bare wondrous patiently, in so
much as the people said he was a Martyr, which caused the Bishop shortly after
to make a Sermon in the Cathedral Church, wherein he affirmed that George
Marsh was an heretics, burned like an heretic, and a firebrand in hell: in
short time after the just judgment of God appeared upon the said Bishop,
through his adulterous behavior he was burned with a harlot, and died thereof.

William Flower, alias Branch.
THis William was borne at Snow-hill in the County of Cambridge: after he owelt
at Lambeth, and coming over the water to Saint Margarets Church at
Westminster, where he seeing a Priest at mass, being greatly offended in his
conscience, he wounded him on the head. whereupon he was apprehended and
laid in the Gate House at Westminster ^and from thence being brought unto
Bonner, and being examined, he said he came of purpose to do it, and when he
saw the people to kneel down and give the honor of GOD unto a piece of
Bread, he could not possibly forbear any longer, but drew forth his Hanger
and smote the Priest: the Witnesses proved, that he smote him on the head,
arm, and hand, and that he bled abundantly, and that having a Calice full of
consecrated Hosts, the Hosts were besprinkled with the blood: The Bishop
offered that he should be pardoned, if he would recant his opinion of the
Sacrament, and return to the holy Church: He answered, Do what you will, I am
at a point, for the heavens shall as soon fall, as I will forsake mine opinion.
He was often called before the Bishop, but when neither by flatteries nor
threatening he would not (...)* he was condemned.

At his burning he was most cruelly handled, his right hand was hold against
^he stake and stricken off, at which striking he in no part of his body did
once shrink: to his burning little wood was brought, not sufficient to burn
him, but they were feign to strike him down into the fire.

John Cardmaker, alias Taylour, and John Warn Vpholster of Saint John's in
Walbroke in London.
THese two were condemned by Boner, for holding that there was no
transubstantiation in the Sacrament, and denying the carnal* real, and
corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

This Cardmaker was one of the Prebendaries of the Cathedral Church of Wells:
He was apprehended and taken by the Bishop of Bathe, and committed prisoner
unto the Fleet in London, the laws of King Edward being yet in force: but
afterward when they had restored their old popish laws by Act of Parliament,
these two, namely, Cardmaker and Warn were brought to (...) Lord Chancellor,
who offered them the Queens pardon, if they would recant: Whereupon they made
such an answer as the Lord Chancellor and his fellows allowed them for
Catholic, but it was but for a further advantage, and that they might have
some forged example of a shrinking brother to lay in the (...) of the rest
which were to be examined: and to all that after were examined: they commended
Cardmaker, and one Barlow for soberness, discretion, and learning; which
Barlow was, for all his good answers, led to the Fleet, from whence being
delivered, did by exile constantly bear witness to the truth of the Gospel.

Cardmaker was conuayed to the Counter in Breadstreet: the Papists having a
certain hope that Cardmaker was become theirs, diverse of them conf^rred with
him; in the end he required them to put their reasons in writing, and then he
would answer them in writing, which was done, but they never came unto our
hands.

When Warn and he were brought together to Smithfield to be burned, the
Sheriff called Cardmaker aside, and talked with him secretly so long, that
Warn had made his prayers, and was chained to the stake, and wood and ^eeds
set to him. The people thought sure Cardmaker would have recanted: but when
they saw him put off his clothes, and go boldly to the stake and kiss it, and
shake Warn by the hand, and did him be of good comfort, they cried out for joy,
with so great a shoute as a greater has not been heard, saying, God be
praised, the Lord strengthen thee Cardmaker, the Lord receive thy spirit; thus
they both through the fire passed into the joys of heaven.

William Tooly Poulterer of London.
He was hanged for robbing a Spaniard at S. James, and in his prayer at the
Gallows, which was near Charing-crosse, he prayed God to deliver us from the
tyranny of Rome and all the Popes detestable enormities: to which all the
people said Amen. And being hanged and buried, the Mitred Priests took this
grievously: and after consultations what was best to be done, there was a
Mandate of Bonner set up at Charing-crosse, on Paul's Church door, and at
Saint Martins in the Fields, for the citing of Tooly, hanged a little before,
to appear before the said Bishop for heresy; where, after many witnesses
examined, he was suspended, excommunicated, condemned, and committed to the
secular power, to wit, the Sherifes of London, who dug him up, laid his
dead body on the fire and burned it.

THOMAS HAVKES.
He was sent to London to Bonner for not suffering of his child to be
christened in three weeks: he told the Bishop the reason was because their
baptizing was against the word of God, 1555.
there being in it so many things which have (...) invented by men, as Oil,
Cream, Salt, Spittle, Candle, and coniuring of water, etc.

Bonner. The Catholic Church has taught it, and your fathers and the whole
world have been contented therewith: he answered, I have nothing to do what
they have done, what God commands me, to that stand I.

One said I was too curious, for ye will have nothing, said he, but your little
pretty* Gods book. I asked if it were not sufficient for our salvation. Yes,
said he, but not for our instruction. I said GOD send me the salvation and you
the instruction.


Bonner. Would you be content to have your child christened after the Order
set forth in K. Edwards time?


Hawks. Yes said I, that is my desire: then he said, you are a stubborn young
man, I must take another course with you. I told him he was in the hands of
God, and so am I. Then the Bishop would have had me to Euen^song with him. I
told him I would not pray in that place nor in none such. One of his
Chaplains said, let him go, my Lord, and he shall be no pertaker with us in
our prayers. I told them, I thought my self best when I was farthest from them.


The Bishop sent for me, and Harpsfield was with him; then the Bishop said,
this is the man I told you of, that would not have his child christened, nor
will have no ceremonies.

Harps. Christ used ceremonies when he took clay and spittle and made the
blind man see.


Hawks. Christ used it not in Baptism: if you will needs have it, put it to
the use that Christ did.


Harps. Admit your child die vnchristned, you are in a heavy case, your
child being damned and you also, seeing you would not christen him when you
might; for he is borne in original sin.


Hawks. The deliverance of sin stands in the faith of the parents: he
asked me how I proved it; Paul in 1. Cor. 7. says, The unbelieving man is
sanctified by the believing woman, and the unbelieving woman by the believing
man, else were your children unclean.


Harps. Your great learned men at Oxford, in whom you put your trust, will be
against you. I said if they do it by the Scriptures I would believe them.


Bonner. Recant, recant; for Christ says, Except you be baptized you cannot
be saved.


Hawks. I a^ked him whether Christianity did stand in outward ceremony? He
said, partly it does. I said, S. Pet says, Not the washing of water that
purges the filth of the flesh, but a good conscience consenting unto God, is
acceptable to him.


Bonner. How say you to the mass sir?


Hawks. It is detestable, ab^minable, and profitable for nothing. Then he
said, what say you to the Epistle and Gospel? I said it was good if it were
well and rightly used.


Bonner. What say you to the Consite^r?


Hawks. It is abominable and detestable, and a blasphemy against God and his
son, to call upon any, to trust in any, or to pray to any, save only to
Christ Jesus.


Bonner. To trust to any we bid you not, to pray to them we bid you; for you
pray to God by them, as you cannot speak to the King and Queen but by the
means of one of the priui^ chamber.


Hawks. You say we must not trust in them; and S. Paul says, How should I
call on them in whom I trust not?


Bonner. Would you have no body pray for you when you are dead? I said, so long
as we are alive the prayers of the righteous are a^ailable; but when we are
dead they profit not* for David faith, No man can deliver his brother from
death: and Ezechiel ^aith, Though Noe, Daniel, and Job dwelt amongst them, yet
can they exceed no further then them selves. Then he said to Harpsfield, you
see this man has no need of our Lady, nor of any blessed Saints.


An old Bishop that lost his living for ^arrying a wi^e, came to Bonner with a
gift, and he sent for me, and told him how that I had a child and would not
have it christened. I said I de^ie not baptism. Then he said angerly, Thou
^oole, thou cann^st not tell what thou would have. I said a Bishop must be
(...) not given to anger. Thou iudgest me angry, (...) by my faith I am not.
Then said the old Bishop, Alas y^ng man, you must be taught by the Church, and
by your ancients, and do as your fathers have done.

Bonner. No, no, he will have nothing but Scripture, he will have no ceremonies
in the Church. But what say you to holy water?


Hawks. I say to it as to the rest, No, said he, that is proved by the
Scripture, in the book of Kings, when Elizeus threw salt into the water. I
said the waters were corrupt, and by this he made them sweet and good; so when
our waters be corrupt, if you by putting in salt can make them sweet, clear,
and wholesome we will the better believe your ceremonies.


Bonner. How say you to holy bread? I asked, what scripture have you for it? he
said Christ sed five thousand men with five loa^es and three fishes.


Hawks. Will you make that holy bread? there Christ dealt fish with his holy
bread: then he said, look how captions he is: and I said, Christ did not this
miracle because you should do the like, but to cause us to credit and believe
his word and doctrine.


Bonner. You will believe no doctrine but that which is wrought by miracles. I
said no: for Christ says these tokens shall follow them that believe me, they
shall speak new tongues and cast out devils, and if they drink poison it
shall not hurt them. Then he asked with what new tongues we speak.


Hawks. When I knew not Gods word I was a blasphemer and filth^e talker, but
since I knew Gods word, I have given laud, praise, and thanks to God with the
same tongue. Then he said, how cast ye out Devils? I said, whosoever does
credit and believe Gods word shall cast out Devils. Then he asked me if ever I
drank any deadly poison. I said yea forsooth, I have drunken of the pestilent
traditions, and ceremonies of the Bishop of Rome.


Bonner. Thou art an Heretics, and thou shall be burned if thou continuest
this opinion: you think we are afraid to put you to death, there is a
brother-head of you, but I will break it I warrant you.


Hawks. Christ nor his Apostles never killed any for their Faith: he said,
Paul did excommunicate, I said, There is difference betwixt excommunicating
and burning: he said, Peter destroyed the Man and his Wife in the Acts. I said,
They lied against the Holy Ghost, which served nothing for his purpose: Then he
said, well, you grant one. I said, If you will have us grant you to be of
God, then show mercy, for he requires mercy: so he went to dinner. The next
day Fecknam talked with me.


Feck. Are you he that will not have your child christened, but in English, and
will have no Ceremonies. I said, I refuse not that which the Scripture
commands: he said, Cer^monies are to be used by the Scriptures, how say you
to Paul's breaches.


Hauks. I have read, that there went Partlets and Napkins from Paul's body, is
it that you mean? he said, yes, what say you to those Ceremonies: I say
nothing to the Ceremonies; for the Text says, It was God that wrought, and not
the Ceremonies.


Feck. How say you to the woman that touched the hem of Christ vesture, did not
her disease depart by that ceremony: I said there went virtue from Christ as
himself said: whether was it his virtue, or his besture that healed the woman:
He said both, I said then is not Christ true: For he said, Thy Faith has made
thee whole.


Feck. How say you Sirrah, Christ took bread and brake it, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body: is it not so: I said I do not understand it so: Then
he said Christ is a liar: I said, I think you will prove him so: for every
word that Christ spoke is not to be understood as he spoke it: For he said,
I am a Door, a Vine, a King, a Way, etc. He said he spoke this in parables.


Hawks. No forsooth, then Christ would have said, I am like unto a Door, to a
Uine, to a King, to a Way: He said these pla^es make nothing for you: but I
perceive you build upon Latimer, Cranmer, and Ridley: I said they be godly
learned men.


Feck. Will thou trust to such dolts, one of them has written in his book
that the real presence is in the Sacrament* Ridley preached at Paul's Cross
that the Devil believed better then you, for he believed Christ is able to
make of stones bread, and you will not believe Christ's body is in the
sacrament, yet thou buildest thy faith upon them.


Hawks. What they have done I know not, but what they do I know: I build my
faith upon no man. If these and many more should recant, yet will I stand to
that which I have said, and then they departed. The next day Doctor Chadsey
coming to the Bishop, I was sent for into the Garden.


Bonner. He thinks there is no Church but in England and Germany. I said, and
you think, there is no Church but at Rome.


Chad. How say you to the Church of Rome? I said it is a Church of a sort of
vicious Cardinals, Priests* Monks, and Friars, which I will never credit nor
believe: then he said* what say you to the Pope?


Hawks. From him and all his detestable enormities good Lord deliver us: he
said so we may say, from King Henry the eighth and all his detestable
enormities, good Lord deliver us.


Bonner. He will not come into the Chapel, he cannot abide the mass, nor the
sacrament, nor any service but in English: then Chadsey said, Christ never
spoke English.


Hawks. Neither spoke he in Lattine, but always in such a tongue as they
understood. And Saint Paul says, Tongues profit nothing, if a Pipe or a Harp
make no certain sound, who can prepare himself to battle: So if we hear a
tongue that we understand not, we receive no profit.


Bonner. The Catholic Church ordered, that the Latin service should serve
through the whole world, that they might pray in one tongue, that there be no
strife. I say, this did your Councels of Rome.


Chad. You are to blame to reprove the Counsels through the whole World.


Hawks. Saint Paul reproves them, saying; If any preach any other Doctrine
then that which I have taught, do you hold him accursed: Then he said, has
any preached to you any other Doctrine. I said yes, since I came into this
house, I have been taught praying to Saints, and to our Lady, and to trust in
the Mass, holy Bread, and holy water, and in Idols: he said they taught him
not amiss in that: I said, cursed be he that teaches me so, and I will not
credit him nor believe him.


Chad. What be those Idols you are offended with; I said the Cross of wood,
Silver, Copper, or Gold, etc.


Boner. I say every Idol is an Image, but not every Image an Idol: if it be
an Image of a false God it is an Idol: but if an Image be made of God himself
it is no Idol but an Image.


Hawks. Lay your Images of your true God, and of your false God together, and
both your Image and Idol have hands and feel not, eyes and see not, feet and
go not, mouths and speak not; so there is no difference.


Chad. God forbid I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of Christ: I
asked him whether he understood Paul: so he answered me not.


Boner. When can we have a godlier remembrance when we ride by the way then to
see the Cross: I said if it were such profit, why did not Christ's Disciples
take it up, and set it on a pole, and carry it in procession, with Salua festa
dies. Chadsey said it was taken up.


Hawks. You say Elenor took it up, and she sent a piece of it to a place of
Religion, where I was with the visiters at the dissolution, and we called for
the piece of the cross, which was so esteemed, and had robbed so many, and
made them commit Idolatry; and it was but a piece of a Lath covered over with
Copper, and double gilded, as it had been clean gold: Then the Bishop cried
fie on him, and hey left me: And Chadsey said, it was pity I should live, and
I said I had rather die, then live in this case.


The Bishop after writ somewhat that he should set his hand too, and there was
in it, that I Thomas Lankes had talked with mine Ordinary, and with certain
good, godly and learned men: He answered, he would not grant them to be
good, godly, and learned men: After also he told the Bishop, as for your
cursings, raylings, and blasphemings, I care not for them: for I know the
mothes and worms shall eat you, as they eat Wool or Cloth, and at length
with diverse others in the month of June he was condemned, and being carried
into Essex, at Cophall, by martyrdom, he changed his life: His friends privily
desired him, that in the midst or the flame, he would show some token that
they might be certain whether the pain were so great that one cannot keep
his mind constant therein, which he promised to do, and if it were tolerable
to hold up his hands over his head, and when his breath was taken away, his
skin drawn together, his fingers consumed in the fire, and all men looked that
he would give up the Ghost, He mindful of his promise^ made did lift up his
hands half burned, and burning with heat above his head to the living God,
even on a sudden, and with great reioicing, strikes them three times
together: by which thing, contrary to all men's expectation being seen, there
followed so great rejoicing, and cry of the multitude, as though heaven and
earth would have come together, and presently he sunk down, and gave up the
Ghost.

THOMAS WATS.
HE was of Billerica in Essex, being brought to the Bishop of London* he put
certain Articles to him: The effect of the answer whereof follows.

That he has and does believe that Christ's body is in heaven, and no where
else: and that he will never believe that Christ's body is in the Sacrament,
and that the Mass is full of Idolatry and abomination, never instituted by
Christ, and that he never did nor does believe that a Priest can absolve him of
his sins: but he believes it is good to ask council at the Priests mouth:
and he confessed that he said openly in the sessions, that all that is now used
and done in the church is abominable, heretical, and scismaticall, and
altogether naught.

And he does believe, that the Pope is a mortal enemy to Christ, and his
Church: and that he prays as Tooly did, that we may be delivered from the
tyranny of the Pope and all his enormities.

And after he had been many times brought before Boner, and his company, and
the Bishop perceiving, neither his threatenings, nor flattering promises,
nothing to prevail: he condemned him, and after he was carried to Chemes-ford,
and there most patiently and constantly sealed his faith with his blood, by
most cruel fire.

The morning before he died, he said words to this effect to his Wife and
Children. Wife and good Children, I must now depart from you; henceforth I know
you no more, but as the Lord has given you to me, so I give you again unto
the LORD, whom I charge you to obey and fear, and beware that you turn not to
this abominable papistry, against the which I shalll ano^e by Gods grace give
my blood. Let not the murdering of Gods Saints be any cause for you to relent:
but take occasion thereby to be stronger in the Lords quarrel, and I doubt not
but he will be a merciful father unto you, and then I kissed them all, and
was carried unto the fire.

When he came to the stake he kissed it, and then he said so my Lord Rich,
beware, beware, for you do against your conscience herein, and without you
repent, the Lord will revenge it, for you are the cause of my death.

Thomas Osmond, Fuller, William Bamford, alias Butler, Nicholas Chamberlain,
John Ardley, and John Simpson.
THese were sent out of Essex unto Boner, to be examined, they had the same
Articles ministered unto them, and agreed all in the same answers in substance,
that Thomas Wats next aforesaid made, and when by no means they could be
persuaded from their constancy, being many times sent for, they were at last
condemned, and burned in several places in Essex, Chamberlain at Colchester,
Thomas Osmond at Maning-tree, William Bramford at Harwidge.

John Ardley told Boner, my Lord neither you nor any of your Religion is of the
Catholic Church, for you are of a false Faith, and shall be deceived at
length, bear as good a face as you can, you will kill the innocent blood, and
you have killed many, and* o^ gee about to kill more, if every hair of my head
were a man, I would suffer death in the Faith that I am in.

At ^he Examination of Simpson and Ardley, there were a great multit^de of
people assembled in the Church of Paul's round about the Consistory: The Bishop
being angry with their bold answers, cried alowd, have him away, have him
away: When the people in the Church heard these words, thinking the prisoners
had their judgments, they severed themselves to make way, which caused such a
noise in the Church, that they in the Consistory were amazed: The Bishop asked
what was the matter: The standers by said there was like to be some tumul^, for
they were together by the ears: The Bishop with the rest of the Court ran
away to the door that goes into the Bishops house, but the rest being lighter
footed then the Bishop, recovered the door first, and thro^ging hastily to get
in, kept the Bishop out: and cried save my Lord, save my Lord: whereby they
gave the standers by good matter to laugh at, whereby th^se were a little while
stopped of (...) Judgment: but not long after they were called to the fire:
John Simpson suffered at Rochford, and John Ardley at Rayby.

JOHN BRADFORD.
HE was borne at Manchester in Lan^aster: 1555.
On the 13. day of August, in the first year of Qu^ene Mary: Master Bourne,
Bishop of Bathe, made a beastly Sermon at Paul's Cross to set up popery, as
before is said: Boner being present, the people were ready to pull him out of
the Pulpit, and a Dagger was hurled at him, and being put from ending his
Sermon, he entreated Bradford being with him, to speak and appease the people,
when he came into the place of the Preacher, all the people cried Bradford,
Bradford, God save thee Bradford: And after they heard his godly exhortation
they left off their raging. Bourne thought himself not yet sure of his life,
until he was safely housed, th^ugh the Sheriff and Mayor were ready to help
him. Wherefore he desired Bradford not to depart from him until he was in
safety, and ^radford went at his back shaddowing him with his Gown: Amongst
whom one G^ntleman said: Ah Bradford, Bradford, thou sauest him that will help
to burn thee: I give thee his life for if it were not for thee, I would run
him through with my sword, within three dares after Bradford was sent for to
the Tower, and there the Council charged him with sedition for this matter,
and committed him to the Tower, and from the Tower to the Kings Bench in
Southwarke, and after his condemnation unto the Counter in the Poultry, whilst
he remained in these two prisons he preached twice a day continually almost
two years.

After he was brought with Bishop Farrax as a^oresaid, before the Lord
Chancellor, and the Queens Commissioners: after the Lord Chancellor had laid
unto his charge the aforesaid sedition at Paul's, and Boner had bore witness
against him, and Bradford had showed his innocence, and affirmed that
notwithstanding Boners seeing and saying, yet the truth I have told, as at the
day of Judgment will appear, in the mean time because I cannot be believed,
I am ready to suffer what God will license you to do to me.

Chan. To leave this matter, will thou return again, and do as we have
done, and thou shall receive the Queens mercy and pardon.


Brad. My Lord, I desire mercy with Gods mercy, but mercy with Gods wrath God
keep me from: Well said he, if thou will not receive mercy offered unto thee,
know for a truth, that the Queen is minded to make a purgation of all such as
thou art. Bradford answered, I would be glad of the Queens mercy, to live as a
subject without a clogge of Conscience, otherwise the Lords mercy is better to
me then life, and I commit my life into his hands that will keep it, that none
can take it away without his pleasure: There are twelve hours in the day as
long as they last no man shall have power thereon; therefore his good will be
done: Life in his displeasure is worse then death, and death in his true favor
is true life.


And after he had been three times called before the Lord Chancellor, at all
which times there was no arguments of divinity but about transubstantiation:
For denying whereof, and affirming that the wicked do not receive Christ,
though they receive the Sacrament he was condemned: after this the Archbishop
of York and the Bishop of Chichester came to him, and argued this point* and
after them two Spanish Friars, and diverse others at other times: The sum of
his Doctrine herein follows.

Reasons against Transubstantiation, gathered by JOHN BRADFORD.
1 TErtullian says that which is former is true, that which is later is false.
Transubstantiation is a late Doctrine; for it was not generally defin^d until
the Council of Laterane, about the year one thousand two hundred and
fifteen, under Innocent 3. before it was free to believe it, or not believe
it: Ergo, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false.

2 That the words of Christ's Supper be figurative: the Circumstances of the
Scripture: the proportion of the Sacraments: the sentences of all holy Fathers:
For a thousand years after Christ do all teach: It follows there is no
Transubstantiation,

3 The Scriptures do witness that the Lord gave bread to his Disciples, and
called it his body: He took bread in his hands: he gave thanks over bread, he
brake bread, and gave bread to his Disciples: As Ireneus, Tertullian, Origene,
Cyprian, Epiphanius, Augustine, and all the Fathers of antiquity do affirm:
but in as much as the substance of bread and wine is another manner of thing:
then the substance of the body and blood of Christ, it is plain there is no
Transubstantiation.

4 The bread is no more transubstantiated then the wine: CHRIST calls that
the fruit of the Uine, saying, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine:
Therefore by Christ's words it was not Blood but Wine: therefore it follows
there is no Transubstantiation: Chrysostom upon Matthew and Cyprian, do
confirm this reason.

5 The bread is called as well Christ's mystical body, as his natural body:
for the same spirit that says the bread is my body; says also, we being many
are one body, but it is not the mystical body by transubstantiation, no more
is it his natural body by transubstantiation.

6 The words over the Cup are not so effectual as to transubstantiate it into
the New Testament: Therefore the words spoken over the bread, are not so mighty
to make Transubstantiation.

7 The Doctrine of Transubstantiation does not agree with the Apostolic and
mother Churches, which received there Doctrine of the Apostles, who received it
of Christ, and Christ of God: as of Greece, of Corinthus, of Philippos,
Collosia, Thessalonica, Ephesus, which never taught Transubstantiation: yea, it
agrees not with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, taught in times past, for
Gelasius the Pope does manifestly confute the error of transubstantiation, and
reproves them of sacrilege, which divide the mystery, and keep the Cup from
the lay people: Therefore the Doctrine of transubstantiation agrees not with
the truth.

Communication betwixt the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of Chichester,
with BRADFORD in prison.
York. HOw know you the word of God but by the Church?


Brad. The Church is a mean to bring a man to the more speedy knowledge of the
Scriptures, as the woman of Samaria was a mean that the Samarita^s knew
Christ: but when as they had heard him speak, they said now we know that he
is Christ, not because of thy words, but because we our selves have heard him:
so after we come to the hearing and reading of the Scriptures, showed unto us
by the Church: we believe them, and know them as Christ's sheep, not because
the Church says they be the Scriptures, but because they be so, we being
assured thereof by the spirit which wrote and spoke them.


York. In the Apostles time the word was not written.


Brad. True, if you mean it for some books of the New Testament: but for the
Old Testament, Peter tells us it is a more sure word of Prophecy, not that
it is so simply, but in respect of the Apostles, which being alive and
compassed with infirmities: by reason whereof men might perchance have found
fault with their preaching, they attributed unto the Prophets more firmenes, as
wherewith no fault could be ^^und: albeit in verity no less obedience and
faith ought to be given unto the one, then the other; both proceeding of one
Spirit of truth.


York. Ireneus and others do magnify much, and allege the Church, and not
the Scriptures against the heretics.


Brad. They had to do with such-hereticks as did deny the Scriptures, and yet
did magnify the Apostles: so that they were enforced to use the authority of
those Churches wherein the Apostles had taught, and which did still retain the
same Doctrine: then the alleging of the Church cannot be principally used
against me, which am so far from denying the Scriptures, that I appeal unto
them utterly as to the only Judge.


York. A pretty matter that you will take upon to Judge the Church: where has
your Church been hitherto? for the Church of Christ is Catholic and visible,
hitherto.


Brad. I do not Judge the Church when I discern it from the congregation,
which is not the Church, and I never denied the Church to b^ Catholic, and
vi^^ble; although at some times it is more visible then at other times.


Chichest. Where was your Church forty years agone, which allowed your
Doctrine: I said I would tell him, if he would tell me, where the Church was
in Helias his time, when Helias said, he was left alone: he said, that is no
answer.


Brad. If you had the same eyes wherewith a man might have espied the Church,
then you would not say it was no answer: The fault why the Church is not s^^ne
of you, is not because the Church is not visible, but because your eyes are not
clear ^^ough to see it.


Chich. You are much deceived in making this collation betwixt the Church then
and now: York said, it was very well spoken, for Christ said, I will build my
Church, and not, I do, or have built it.


Brad. Peter teaches me to make this collation, saying: As amongst the people
there were false Prophets, which were most in estimation before Christ's
coming, so shall there be false teachers amongst the people after Christ's
coming, and very many shall follow them: and as for your future tense, you
will not conclude Christ's Church not to have been before, but rather that there
is no builder in the Church but by Christ only, in that he says; I will build
my Church, for Paul and Apollo be but waterers.


York. He takes upon him to judge the Church, a man shall never come to
certainty that does so.


Brad. I speak simply that which I think, and desire reasons to answer my
Objections: assuredly you did well to depart from the Romish Church, but you
have done wickedly to coupple your selves to it again, for you can never prove
it, which you call the mother Church, to be Christ's Church.


Chichest. You were but a Child then, I was but a young man, come from the
University, and went with the World, but it was always against my conscience.


Brad. I think you have done evil, for ye are come, and have brought others
to that wicked man which sits in the Temple of God, which is the Church, for
it cannot be understood of Mahomer, or any out of the Church, but of such as
bear rule in the Church.


York. See how you build your Faith upon the most obscure places of the
Scripture to deceive your self, as though you were in the Church which are not.


Brad. Well my Lord, though I might by truth judge you and others, yet will not
I utterly exclude you out of the Church, but I am not out of the Communion of
the Church, for it consists in Faith.


York. Lo, how you make your Church invisible, for you would have the
Communion of it to consist in Faith.


Brad. To have Communion of the Church, needs not visiblenesie of it, for
Communion consists in Faith, and not in exterior Ceremonies, as appears by
Paul, which would have one Faith: and by Ireneus to Victor, saying; disagreeing
of fasting should not break the agreeing of Faith.


Chichest. That place has often wounded my conscience, because we disseuered
our selves from the Sea of Rome.


Brad. God forgive you, for you have done evil to bring England thither again.


York. He read a Paper of Common places, how many things held Saint Augustine
in the Church, consent of people and Nations authority, confirmed with
Miracles, nourished with hope, increased with Charity, established with
antiquity: the succession of Priests from Peter's Seat, to this present Bishop:
lastly, the very Name of a Catholic does hold me in. Paint me but your
Church thus.


Brad. This makes as much for me as for you, but all this, if they had been
so firm as you would make them, might have been alleged against Christ and
his ^postles, for there was the Law, and the Ceremonies, consented on by the
whole people, confirmed with Miracles, Antiquity, and continual succession of
Bishops from Aaron.


Cich. You make to much of the State of the Church before Chrs^s coming.


Brad. Therein I do but as Peter teaches, and Paul very often; you would
gladly have your Church here very glorious, and as a most pleasant Lady, but
as Christ says, so may the Church say; Blessed are they that are not offended
at me.


York. You think none is of the Church but such as suffer persecution.


Brad. Paul says, All that will live godly in Christ, must suffer persecution:
sometime Christ's Church has rest here, but commonly it is not so, especially
toward the end her form will be more unseemly.


York. Where is your Church that has consent of people and Nations, as S.
Augustine says.


Brad. Even all people and Nations that be Gods people, have consented with
me, and them in the Doctrine of Faith.


York. Saint Augustine speaks of succession from Peter's Seat.


Brad. That seat then was nothing so much corrupt as it is now.


York. Well, you always judge the Church.


Brad. No my Lord, Christ's sheep discern Christ's voice, but they judge it not
so: they discern the Church, but not Judge her, yet full well may we judge
the Romish Church, for she obeys not Christ's voice, and Christ's true Church
does. He asked me wherein: I said, in Latin Service, and robbing the Laity of
Christ's Cup in the Sacrament, and many other things, in which it commits
most horrible sacrilege.


York. Latin Service was appointed to be sung and had in the Quire, where
only were those that understood Latin: The people sitting in the body of the
Church, praying their own private prapers, and this may well be yet seen by
making of the Chancell and the Quire, so that the people could not come in or
hear them.


Brad. In Chrysostomes time, and S. Ieromes time, all the Church did answer
with a loud voice, Amen. Whereby we may see, that the prayers were made so,
that the people both heard and understood them.


York. We leese our labor, you seek to put away all things that are told you
for your good, your Church no man can know: I said, yes that you may: He said,
I pray whereby.


Brad. Chrysostom says only by the Scriptures, and this he speaks very
oftentimes, as you know.


York. That is or Chrysostom, In opere imperfecto, which may be doubted of
the thing, which the Church may be best known by, is succession of Bishops.


Brad. Lira well writes upon Matthew, that Ecclesia non consistit in homi^^bus
ratione potestatis secularis, aut ecclesiasticae, sed in hominibus in quibus
est notitia vera, and confessio fidei and veritatis. And Hilarious writes to
Auxentius, that the church is rather hid in Caves, then eminent in chief
seats: then after they had been there three hours, they were called away.


John Leaf burned with Master Bradford.
THis John, was an Apprentice with a Chandler in Christ-Church in London,
eighteen years old, borne in Kirkley M^^eside, in the County of York, he
was examined before Bonner: he said, that after the words of consecration in
the Sacrament of the Altar, over the Bread and Wine, there was not the true and
natural body and blood of Christ in substance: and as it is now used and
believed in the Realm of England, it is abominable Idolatry: And he believed,
that after consecration, it remains Bread and Wine as it was before, and it
is received in the remembrance of the death and passion of Christ, and so
spiritually in Faith they receive Christ's body and blood. And he affirms,
that Auriculer confession is not necessary to be made unto a Priest, and it is
no point of souls health to believe that the Priest has any authority by the
Scriptures, to remit sins.

And being asked if he had been Master Rogers his Scholar, he granted it so
to be, and he did believe the Doctrine of the said Rogers, and the Doctrine of
Bishop Hooper, Cardmaker, and others of their opinion, which of late were
burned for Christ, and that he will die in that Doctrine: and the Bishop
moving of him to unity of the Church, He said, My Lord, you call mine opinion
Heresy, it is the true light of the Word of GOD, and he would never forsake
his well grounded opinion whilst breath was in his body: Whereupon he was
condemned.

When these two came to the stake in Smithfield to be burned, Master Bradford
lay prostrate on the one side of the stake, and the young man on the other,
praying a space, until the Sheriffs man bad Master Bradford arise, then they
both rose. Master Bradford desired the Sheriff that his man might have his
apparel, which he granted him. When he was unready, he said; O England,
England, repent thee of thy sins, beware of Idolatry, beware of false
Antichrists, that they deceive thee not. Then the Sheriff bad tie his hands,
if he would not be quiet: He said, I am quiet, God forgive you this. One of the
Officers that made the Fire said; If you have no more learning then that, you
are but a fool, and were best to hold your peace: Then Master Bradford
answered no more, but asked the world forgiveness, and forgave all the world,
and prayed the people to pray for him, and ^id the young man be of good
comfort, for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord this night, then he
embraced the Reeds and said: Straight is the way, and narrow is the gate that
leads to eternal salvation, and few there be that find it: In the Book at
large thou may see many godly Letters of his.

This Master Woodroffe, Sheriff, as he would not suffer Master Bradford to
speak, but bad his hands to be tied: so, or worse, he served Master Rogers,
and all that were burned, where the other Sheriff would weep at their
burning, he would laugh at it, and would restrain and beat the people, who
were desirous to take them by the hand. In fine, the foresaid Master
Woodroffe, after the burning of Master Bradford, as soon as he came home, was
taken lame both arm and leg, so that after he could never stir out of his
house, nor scarce move himself.

WILLIAM MINGE.
THe next day after Bradfords death, William Minge, Priest, died in Maidstone
Iayle, being in bonds for Religion, and had suffered martyrdom if he had
lived, for he died in great constancy and boldness.

John Bland, John Frankesh, Nicholas Scheterton, Humphrey Middleton.
THE twelfth of June 1555
John Bland, John Frankesh, Nicholas Scheterton, and Humphrey Middleton, were
all four burned at Canterbury together: Frankesh and Bland were Ministers of
the Church there, and Preachers of Gods word.

Bland was twice or thrice cast into Prison before for preaching the Gospel,
and was delivered at the suit of his friends, and yet preached the Gospel
again as soon as ever he was delivered. His friends would again have
delivered him, if he would have promised to abstain from preaching: he stood
in it so earnestly, that he would admit no such condition, expressing the
example of Saint Paul, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall
tribulation, or anguish, or hunger, or nakedness, or danger, or persecution, or
the sword, etc.

These were tumbled and tossed from prison to prison, from sessions to
sessions, a year and almost a half, and at the last they were condemned for
denying the real presence in the Sacrament.

The substance of a letter, written by Nicholas Scheterton to his mother: These
are to wish you, increase of grace and wisdom, that you may see the crafty
bewitching of Satan, our mortal enemy, which does not only openly, but under
color of devotion, deceive them which keep not a diligent eye upon him, but
having confidence in man's traditions, and customs of the world, leaving the
commandments of God and testament of Christ, do grow more into superstition
and hypocrisy, then into wisdom and true holiness. Satan by his Ministers,
makes many believe, that those things which they compel us unto for their
bellies sake, have many godly significations, although they be most contrary
to Gods will: as the Serpent in Paradise said to Eve; has God commanded you
not to eat of the tree of knowledge, but you shall not die: so say our
ministers, has God commanded you that you shall not make any Image. Tush say
they, what harm can they do, may we not remember God the better when we see
his Image, for they are good books for Laymen, (but indeed they are better for
the Priests, because they receive the offerings) and as true as the promise of
the Serpent was kept with Eve; so is the perswas^on of the Priests found unto
us: for as Adam and Eve did become like GOD in knowing of good and evil, so
are we in remembering God by his Images. For Adams eyes were so opened, that he
lost both innocence and righteousness, and became most miserable of all
Creatures; so we, by remembering Christ by Images, have forgotten his
Commandments, and counted his Testament, confirmed with his blood, for stark
madness or heresy. We have so miserably remembered him, that of all people we
are most blind, and this is because we will presume to remember God by breaking
of his Law, therefor except we repent, God will remember us in his wrath: They
will say, where went he to school, is he wiser then our great Doctors, that
have studied all their life? and they say it is good hay, although we our
selves smell it musty, yet we must believe it is sweet, and then pay them well
for their so saying, and then all is safe. But I may say to them, what Sir; you
be wiser then Christ, and God the Father, or the Holy Ghost? what, wiser then
the Prophets or the Apostles, and all holy Martyrs? where had you your high
learning, it is a very strange learning, that neither God the Father, nor
Christ, nor his Apostles could reach to the knowledge of it, but vain men are
never without some shift, peradventure they will not be ashamed to say; that
Christ coming on his Fathers message, did forget half his arrant by the way:
for it is hard to find one thing in the Church as he left it, so Rumishlie has
Antichrist turned the Church vp-side-downe for lucre sake. Some will say, why
should we condemn our Fathers that lived thus? they did according to their
knowledge, therefore we condemn them not, but let us take heed they condemn
not us: for if they had heard the word and been warned as we are, it is to be
thought they would have more thankfully received it, then we; yea, they were
more faithful in that which they knew, then now many are, therefore they shall
condemn us, if we do not embrace this grace now offered: our disobedience is
greater then their ignorance, wherefore if we will meet our Fathers in joy,
let us not refuse the mercy offered more largely to us then to them, God will
not bear it at our hands, to turn^ back being we are delivered. Remember Lots
Wife.

James Treuisam.
He was of the parish of Saint Margarets in Lothburie: he was lame and kept
his bed, and could not rise out of it a long time; one John Small his servant
read to him on the Bible; in the mean time Berd the Promoter came into the
house, and went up the Stairs, where he found four persons besides Treuisam
and his wife, which he carried to the Counter, where they remained a fortnight,
and he brought a Cart to the door to have the lame man to Newgate, but that
his neighbors entreated for him, and put in sureties for his appearance. One
Master Farthing the parson came to him, and communicated with him, and they
agreed well. Then one Toller meeting the Priest, said, if you be agreed I will
accuse you, for he denies the Sacrament of the Altar: then the parson went to
him again, and then they could not agree; whereupon the parson told Bonner,
and he said he should be burned, and if he were dead he should be buried in a
Ditch; so when he died he was buried in More-fields, the same night he was
dug up, and his sheet taken away, and he left naked upon the ground, then
the owner of the field buried him again, and fortnight after the Somner came
to his grave, and summoned him to appear at Paul's before his Ordinary; but
what more was done, I have no certainty of.

Nicholas Hall a Brick-layer, and Christopher Wayde of Dartford.
THese were condemned by Maurice 1555.
Bishop of Rochester for denying the real presence in the Sacrament, and
saying the Mass was abominable, Hall was burned at Rochester, and Wayde at
Dartford.

Margerie Polley widow.
SHe was wife of Richard Polley of Pepingbery, and was condemned by the said
Bishop of Rochester for saying he neither allowed the Deity of the sacrament
nor the absurdity of their mass, and was burned at Tunbridge.

Derick Caruer, John Launder.
CAruer was of Brighthamsted in Sussex, and Launder was of Godstone in Surrey,
that together with Thomas ^ueson and William Veisie, with others to the number
of twelve, being together at prayers, and saying the service as in King Edwards
time, in the house of Dericke, they were apprehended by one Master Edward Gage.

Dericke was condemned by Bonner for saying that after consecration of the
Sacrament there remains Bread and Wine, and not the flesh and blood of Christ
naturally, and that there is no sacrifice nor salvation to a Christian in the
Mass, except it were said and used in the mother tongue, and likewise also
that the ceremonies of the Church are not profitable for a Christian. And as
touching Auricular confession, he said it was necessary to go to a good Priest
for counsel, but the absolution and laying hands on a man's head by the
Priest, as it is now used, is not profitable, and that the faith and doctrine
now taught is not agreeable to GODS word, and that Hooper, Cardmaker, and
others of their opinion which were late burned, were good Christians, and did
preach the doctrine of Christ.

John Launder was coudemned by the said Bonner for affirming that whosoever
does teach or use any other Sacraments then the Lords Supper and Baptism, or
any other ceremonies, he believes that they were not of the Catholic Church,
but abhors them, and that he himself is a member of the true Catholic
Church: he denied the real presence in the Sacrament, but he believes that
when he receives the material Bread and Wine it is in remembrance of Christ's
death, and that he eats Christ's body and blood by faith, and no otherwise, and
that the Mass is naught and abominable, and directs against Gods word, and
that the gloria in excelsis, the Creed, Sanctum, Pater noster, Agnus and other
parts of the mass be of themselves good, yet being used amongst other things,
are naught also, and that auricular confession is not necessary to be made to a
Priest, but to God, and that none but Christ has authority to absolve sins.

Derick being asked whether he would recant: your doctrine, quoth he, is poison
and sorcerie: if Christ were here you would put him to a worse death then he
was put to before. You say you can make a God, you can make a Pudding as well:
your ceremonies in the Church are beggerie, and poison, and auricular
confession is poison and against Gods word: so they were condemned and burned.
Derick was rich, but the ra^eners made such havoc thereof, that his poor
wife and children had little or none thereof: he was old and past learning,
yet when he was put into prison being ignorant of any letter in his book, he
could before his death read perfectly.

When he was burned they threw his book into a barrel that he was burned in
to be burned with him, but he threw it amongst the people, and the Sheriff
commanded upon pain of death, in the King and Queens name to throw it into
the fire again: then he said, Dear brethren and sisters, as many as believe
in the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost unto everlasting life, see you do
thereafter; and you that believe in the Pope or any of his laws, you believe
to your utter destruction, for except the great mercy of God you shall burn in
hell continually.

The Sheriff said, if thou do not believe in the Pope thou art damned,
therefore speak to thy God that he may deliver thee now, or else to strike me
down to the example of this people; but he said unto him, The Lord forgive you
that which you have said.

THOMAS IVESON.
THis Iueson was condemned by the said Bonner for saying the Sacrament of the
Altar is a very Idol, and detestable before GOD as it is now-a-dayes
ministered, and that the Mass is naught, and that auricular confession is not
necessary, for that a Priest cannot forgive sins, that baptism is a token of
Christ, as circumcision: he believes his sins are not washed away thereby,
but only his body washed, and his sins washed only in Christ's blood, and that
there is but two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, which now are not
rightly used in England, and that all the ceremonies now used in the Church are
superfluous and superstitions: and being earnestly labored withal to recant,
said, he would not forsake his belief for all the goods in London. I do
appeal to Gods mercy, and will be none of your Church: and if there came an
Angel from heaven to teach me other doctrine then that which I have now, I
would not believe him, whereupon he was burned.

JOHN ALEWORTH.
He died in prison at Reading for the testimony of the truth, whom the
Catholic Prelates, as their use is, did exclude out of Catholic burial.

JAMES ABBES.
THis Abbes being examined by the Bishop of Norwich, he relented at their
naughty persuasions: now when he was dismissed, and should go from the Bishop,
he gave him some money; but after he was pittiously vexed in conscience, he
went again to the Bishop and threw him his said money which he had received,
and said, it repented him that ever he had consented to their wicked
persuasions: then the Bishop and his Chaplains labored a fresh to win him
again, but in vain, and so he was burned at Berry.

John Denley Gentleman, John Newman, Patricke Pachington.
AS Edmund Tyrell, a Justice of Peace in Essex, came from the burning of
certain godly Martyrs, he me^ with John Denley and John Newman, both of
Maidstone in Kent, and upon the sight of them (as he bragged) he suspected and
searched them, and finding the confessions of their faith written about them,
he sent them to the Queens Commissioners, who sent them to Bonner: the effect
of the writing follows;

In the Sacrament Christ's body is figuratively in the Bread and Wine,
spiritually he is in them that worthily eat and drink the Bread and Wine, but
really, carnally, and corporally he is in heaven, from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.

Then Bonner ministered articles unto them and unto Patrick Pachington, who all
answered alike, to this effect following.

The Catholic Church is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Christ being the head corner stone: it is the Congregation of the
faithful dispersed through the whole world; and two or three gathered together
in Christ's name are the members thereof. This Church does preach GODS holy
word and minister the blessed Sacraments truly: the Church of England using
the Faith and Religion which now is used is no member thereof, but is the
Church of A^tichrist, the Bishop of Rome being the head thereof; for they have
altered the Testament of GOD, and set up a Testament of their own devising, full
of blasphemy and lies, Christ's Testament being that we should have all things
done for the edifying of the Church.

The Mass now used is most abominable idolatry and intolerable blasphemy:
Christ ordained his Sacraments to be eaten together in remembrance of his death
until he^ come, and not to be worshipped and to make an Idol of them; for
GOD will not be worshipped in his creatures, but we must remember to praise him
for his creatures: what is kneeling, holding up your hands, knocking of the
breast, putting off the cap, and making curtsie, with other superstition to the
bread, but Idolatry?

You object you worship not the Bread and Wine, but the body of Christ, borne
of the Uirgin under the form of Bread and Wine: but that is a very lie, for
Christ's body that was borne of the Uirgin is in heaven.

Auricular confession is not good: if I have offended God I must seek to him
for remission of sins by Christ: if I have offended my neighbor, I must
reconcile my self to him again: if I were a notorious sinner, after the first
and second adm^nition it ought to be declared to the Congregation, and the
Minister has power by the word to excommunicate me, and I am to be taken as a
heathen, not for a day or for forty days, but until I openly in the
Congregation acknowledge my fault, and then the Minister has power by the word
to preach to me remission of sins by Christ.

Touching Baptism, John Baptist used nothing but preaching the word and water,
as appears by Christ's baptism and others: the Chamberlain said to Philip*
Here is water, what lets me to be baptized? he asked not for Cream, nor
Oil, nor Spittle, nor coniured Water, nor coniured Wax, nor Crysome, nor
Salt; the like is to be said of the rest of the ceremonies of the Church.

And he said there were but two sacraments, except they would make the Rainbow
a Sacrament, for there is no sacrament but such as has the promise annexed
unto it.

Bonner seeing their immovable constancy, after all means they could were
used, they were condemned, and Denley was burned at Uxbridge: he sang a psalm
in the fire; then cruel Doctor Story commanded one to hurl a Faggot at him,
which made him bleed on the face, whereat he left his singing and clapped his
hand on his face: Doctor Story said to him that flung the Faggot, truly thou
have marred a good old song; then Denley put his hands abroad and sung again.

Not long after him Patrick Pachingham was burned at Uxbridge, and John Newman
was burned at Saffron Walden in Essex.

RICHARD HOOK.
He near about the same time and for the same matter that those formerly
spoken of died for^gaue his life at Chichester.

William Coker, William Hopper, Henry Lawrence, Richard Colliar, Richard
Wright, William Steer^.
THese being examined before the Bishop of Dover, and Harpsfield the Archdeacon
of Canterbury and others, Henry Lawrence denied auricular confession, and would
not receive the sacraments because the order of the Scripture is changed in the
order of the Sacrament; and when the Suffragan made mention of the Sacrament,
and put off his cap, he said, you need not reverence the same, and he said the
Sacrament of the Altar is an Idol, and being required to subscribe his hand,
he wrote, Ye all are of Antichrist, and him ye follow. William Steer of
Ashford being commanded of the Judge to answer, bade him command his dogs,
and not him, and said Dicke of Dover, meaning the Bishop, had no authority to
set in judgment against him, alleging that the Bishop of Canteburie that was
in prison was his Dioccesan, and he said he found not the Sacrament of the
Altar in the Scripture, therefore he would not make any answer thereto.

The Judge speaking of the Sacrament put off his cap; he said he needed not
reverence that so highly, saying withal that the Sacrament of the Altar was
the most blasphemous Idol that ever was.

The other also denied the Sacrament, wherefore they were all condemned, and
burned all in one fi^e at Canterbury.

Elizabeth Warn, George Tankerfield, Robert Smith, Steven Harwood, Thomas
Fust, William Hall, Thomas Leyes, George King, John Wade, Ioane Leyshford.
THe Prisons of London being replenished with Gods Saints, and still more and
more coming in, wherefore these ten were sent for of Bonner to be examined, and
rid out of the way. The chief point he examined them of, was touching the
corporal presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, as the
profitablest foundation for their Catholic dignity. Many other things were
objected against them, as not coming to Church, for speaking against the
Mass, and for dispising their Ceremonies and Sacraments. Elizabeth Warn
answered unto them, I deny them all, and if Christ was in an error, then am I
in an error, wherefore she was condemned. Doctor Story was of some alliance
unto her, who delivered her once by his earnest suit, before he was
Commissioner, but after he was Commissioner, he caused her, John Warn her
Husband, and her Daughter, to be apprehended, never leaving them, until he
had brought them all to Ashes.

George Tankerfield of London, Cook, borne in the City of York, he utterly
denied aur^culer Confession, and Transubstantiation, and affirmed that the
Mass was naught, and full of Idolatry and abomination: and affirmed that
there were but two Sacraments. He told the Bishop he cared not for his
Divinity, for you condemn all men, and prove nothing against them, and he said
the church whereof the Pope is supreme head, is not Christ's Church; and
pointing to the Bishop he said to the people beware of him, and such as he is,
these be they which deceive you: Whereupon he was condemned.

ROBERT SMITH being asked by Boner when he was Confessed: He answered, not
since the time he had discretion: I am not commanded of God to show my sins
to any of that sinful number whom ye call Priests: He was a Painter, and he
told the Bishop he had used his vocation better then he had used his
Bishopric: He said he never used the Sacrament, nor never would, because it
has not Gods ordinance, but rather it is directed to mock GOD: I count it a
detestable Idol, and not GOD, but contrary to GOD and truth: Then the Bishop
said, he should be burned: He answered, he must not think thereby to quench
the Spirit of GOD, nor make your matter good for your sore is too well seen to
be healed so privily with blood, even the Children have all your deeds in
derision: so that though you patch up one place with authority, yet it shall
break out in forty to your shame: Then the Bishop said by my truth if thou will be shrieuen, I will tare this paper of thy examination: I answered, it
would be too much to his shame, to show it unto men of discretion.

Boner. Do you not confess there is a Catholic Church on earth.


Smith. Yes verily: and it is builded upon the Prophets and Apostles Christ
Jesus being the head Corner stone, which Church maintains the word, and
brings the same for her authority, and without it does nothing nor ought to
do, and I am fully assured I am a member of the same Church.


Boner. If my brother do offend, and will not be reconciled, I must bring him
before the congregation, where may a man find your Church to bring his brother
before the same.


Smith. In the Acts of the Apostles, when the tyranny of the Bishops was so
great against the Church of Iewry, they were feign to congregate in privy
places as they now do: yet they were the Church of God.


Boner. There Church was known full well, for Paul writ to the Corinthians to
have the man excommunicated that had lien with his Fathers wife.


Smith. As the Church of Corinth was manifest to God and Paul, so is this
Church in England, else you could not persecute it as you do.

I being conuayed into the Garden, Doctor Dee, being one of the Bishops
Chaplains, came to me, and after much ado about his God, I compelled him to
say that it must needs enter into the belly and so fall out unto the draught:
then he said, What derogation was it to Christ, when the Jews spit in his
face? and I answered, If the Jews his enemies did but spit in his face, and
we being his friends throw him in the draught, which of us have deserved the
greater damnation?


Doctor. Then he would have Christ's humanity incomprehensible, bringing to
serve his turn which way Christ came amongst his Disciples the doors being
close shut.


Smith. I have as much to prove that the doors opened at his coming as you
have to prove that he came through the doors: for God that opened the prison
doors for his Disciples, was able to do the like for Christ; but that makes
not for your purpose, for they saw, heard, and felt him, and so cannot you do
in your sacrament. Then I was called for before Bonner, and my Lord Mayor was
with him, and my articles were read, then said Bonner:


Bonner. My Lord, they call me bloody Bonner, where I never sought any man's
blood, I have stayed him from the Consistory this day, whither I might have
brought him justly: and here before you I desire him to turn, and I will
with all speed dispatch him out of trouble.


Smith. Why do you put on this visard before my Lord Mayor, to make him believe
you seek not my blood? Have not you burned my Brother Tomkins hand most
cruelly, and after burned his body, and the bodies of a number more of Christ's
faithful members. Then he questioned with me about the Sacrament, and I said,
as the body is dead if the blood be gone, so their Sacrament is a dead God,
because they take away the blood of Christ from his body, being the Cup is
taken from the Layty: for if the Br^ad be his body, the Cup must be his blood.
Then Bonner rose, and my Lord Mayor desired me to save my soul: I said, mine
was saved by Christ, desiring him to pity his own soul, and remember whose
sword he carried: so with many foul farewels, we were sent to Newgate
again, and Boner gave the Keeper charge to lay me in Limbo.


The second Examination.
Boner. THou saest there is no Catholic Church on earth: I said I have
answered you the contrary, and it is written he said yea: but I must ask you
this Question.


Smith. Must you begin with a lie, it seems you determine to end with the
same: but no liar shall enter into the kingdom of God: I have con^essed a
church of God, as well in earth as in heaven, and yet all one Church, and one
man's members, even Christ Jesus.


Boner. Well what say thou by auricular Confession.


Smith. It is needful in Christ's Church, but if it be needful in your Church.
it is to pick folks purses, and such pick^purse matters is the whole
rabblemene of your ceremonies, for all is but money matters that you maintain:
he said thou may be ashamed to say so: I said I speak by experience, for I
have heard and seen the fruits of Confession, it has been a betrayer of
Kings secrets* and others who b^ing glad to be discharged of their sins have
given to Priests great sums of money to absolve them, and sing Masses for
their so^les health.


Boner. By the Mass if the Queen were of my mind, you should not talk
before any man, but should be put in a S^ck, and a Dog tied unto the sam^, you
should be thrown into the water.


Smith. You and your predecessors have sought by all means to kill Christ
secretly, as appears by Master Hunne, whom your predecessor caused to be
thrust into the nose with ho^e burning needles, and then hanged him, and said
he hanged himself: and another of your predecessors, when he could not
overcome an innocent man by Scripture, he made him privily to be snarled, and
his flesh to be torn away with pincers, and told the people the rats had eaten
him.


Bonner. Then came in M. Mordant, and then he said, How say thou Smith to
the seven Sacraments?


Smith. I believe that in Gods Church there be but two Sacraments, Baptism and
the Lords Supper: as for your Sacrament of the Altar, and all your other
Sacraments, they may well serve your Church, but Gods Church has nothing to do
with them.


Bonner. Why, is Gods order changed in baptism?


Smith. Yes, in hallowing the water, in coniuring of the same in baptising
children, with anointing and spitting in their months, mingled with salt, and
with many other lewd ceremonies: then be said, by the mass I was the shamelest
heretic that ever he heard speak: I said well sworn my Lord, you keep a
good watch.


Bonner. Well M^ister Controller, you catch me at my words, but I will watch
thee as well I warrant you: then quoth Mordant, I never heard the like in my
life. I pray my Lord mark well his answer for Baptism, he disaloweth therein
holi^ ointment, salt, and other lawdable ceremonies.


Smith. It is a shameful blasphemy against Christ, to use such mingle mangle
in Baptism.


Boner. I believe if a child die without Baptism, he is damned.


Smith. You shall never be saved by that belief, I pray are we saved by water
or by Christ: he said, by both. I said then, the water died for our sins? and
must you say that the water has life, and it being our servant, and created
for us, it is our Savior. This is a good doctrine, is it not.


Bonner. How understand you these words, Except a man be borne of Water and
the Spirit, and Christ says; Suffer little Children to come unto me, and if
thou will not suffer them to be baptized according to the lawdabl^ order, thou
let to come unto Christ.


Smith. Paul to the Galathians, asheth whether they rec^iued the Spirit by the
deeds of the law, or by the preaching of faith, and concludes that the Holy
Ghost accompanies preaching of faith, and with the word of faith enters into
the heart; so if Baptism preach unto me the washing in Christ's blood, the holy
Ghost does accompany it: and Christ says Suffer little children to come unto
me, and not unto water; then if you suffer them not to com to Christ without
the necessity of water, but condemn them if they die before baptism, you
condemn both the merits and the words of Christ.


Bonner. Thou make the water of no^^ effect, and then thou may put away
water.


Smith. Peter says It is not the washing away of the filth of the flesh, but
in that a good conscience consents unto God: and only water brings not the
Holy Ghost, for Simon received water, but would have given money for the Holy
Ghost, and John had the Holy Ghost in his mothers womb before Baptism, and
Cornelius, Paul the Queen of Candaces servant, with many others, received the
holy Ghost before baptism: and although your generation have set at naught the
word of God, and turned it vpside down, yet must his Church keep the same
order which he left them, which his Church dares not break: and to judge
children da^^ed dying without baptism is wicked.


Bonner. What say you to the Sacrament of Orders?


Smith. You must call it the Sacrament of misorders, for all orders are
appointed of GOD, but your shauing, anointing, greasing, poling, and rounding,
no such things are appointed in Gods book: and my Lord, if you had grace or
intelligence, you would not so disfigure your self as you do.


Boner. What say you to holy bread, and holy water, the Sacrament of
anointing, and the rest of such Ceremonies of the Church.


Smith. They be bables for fools to play withal, and not for Gods children:
then Boner and Mordant departed, then certain Doctors baited me half an
hour: of whom I asked, where were all you in the days of King Edward, that
you spoke not that which you speak now? they said, they were in England: I
said, but then you had the faces of men, but now you have put on Lions faces;
you have for every time a visar: if another King Edward should arise, you would
then say, down with the Pope, for he is Antichrist, and so are all his Angels,
then I was all to reuil^d.


Doctor. You allow not Auriculer confession; I said, it is, because the word of
GOD allows it not: He said, it is written, Thou shall not hide thy sins. I
said, no more do I when I confess them to God: He said, you cannot hide them
from God; therefore you must understand, it is spoken to be uttered unto them
that do not know them.


Smith. Then must the Priest confess himself to me* as I to him, for I know
his faults no more then ^e knows mine: but if you confess to a Priest, and
not to God, you shall have the reward that Judas had: for he confessed
himself to the Priest, and yet went and hanged himself, and those that
acknowledge not there faults to God, are said to hide them.


Doctor. What did they that came to John Baptist, I said that they confessed to
God; he said, and not to John: I said if it were unto John, as you cannot
prove, yet it was to God before John and the whole congregation: he said John
was alone in the wilderness.


Smith. Yet he made many Disciples, and many Saduces, and Pharisees came unto
his Baptism: therefore if they confessed themselves to John, it was unto all
the congregation, as Paul confessed openly in his Epistle to Timothy, that he
was not worthy t^ be called an Apostle, because he had been a tyrant, but as
for ear Confession you never heard it allowed by the Word of God: For as David
says, I will confess my sins unto the LORD, so all his Children do and
ever did: Then they called me Dog, and said I was damned: Then I said you
are Dogs, because you will ^^ay your friends for offering unto you all
things. I may say with Paul, I have fought with beasts in the likeness of men,
for I have been baited this two days of my Lord, and his great Bulls of Basan,
and in the hall I have been baited with the rest of his band.


Bonner. Then he came and asked the Doctors whether they had done him any good,
and they said no. And I said, How can an evil Tree bring forth good fruit: He
said, Will thou neither hear me nor them? Thou shall be burned in Smithfield.


Smith. And you shall burn in hell if ye repent not, I perceive you and your
Doctors will not come unto me, and I am not determined to come to you: then
with many railing sentences I was sent away.


The last examination.
Smith. THen I with my Brethren were brought into the Consistory, before
Bonner, the Lord Mayor, and the Sheriffs.


Bonner. By my faith my Lord Mayor, I have showed as much favor as any man
living might do: but I perceive all is lost ^n him, and all his company. I
said, My Lord you must not swear; then he said, I was Master Controller, and
pointed to my Brother Tankerfield, and said, This is Master speaker.


Mayor. Thou speak against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.


Smith. I deny it to be any Sacrament, and I stand here to make probation of
the same: if my Lord or any of his Doctors can prove the name or usage of the
same, I will recant then. Then spoke my Brother Tankerfield, and defended the
probation which they call heresy.


Bonner. By my troth Master speaker, you shall preach at a stake: Then I said,
well sworn my Lord, you keep a good watch; he said, well Master Controller I
am no Saint.


Smith. No my Lord, nor yet a good Bishop: a Bishop says Saint Paul, Should be
faultlesse, and a dedicate vessel to God: and are you not ashamed to sit in
i^dgment, and be a blasphemer, condemning Innocents. My Lord Mayor, I would
require you in Gods Name, that I may have Justice: we are hear to day a great
many of Innocents, wrongfullie accused of heresy. I require but the favor
that Festus and Agrippa, Heathen men, showed to the Apostle, which gave him
leave to speak for himself, and heard the probation of his cause: then the
Lord Mayor hanging down his head, said nothing.


Bonner. Thou shall preach at a stake, and so Sheriff Woodroffe cried with the
Bishop, away with them. Thus came I in four tim^^ before them, desiring
Justice to be heard, but could have none: at length, my Friends required with
on^ voice the same, and could not have it, so we were condemned, because they
all ten held the same opinions in effect.


Smith. When the sentence began to be read in Dei nomine. I answered he began
in a wrong name, for he could not find in Scriptures to give sentence of death
against any man for his conscience. He was burned at Uxbridge, when he was
come to the stake, he mightily comforted the people, and told them; he doubted
not ^ut God will show you some token that I die in a good cause: at length he
being ^ell-nigh half burned all black with fire, clustered together in a lump
like a black ^^le, all men thinking him dead, suddenly he arose upright,
lifting up the stumpes of his arms, clapping them together, declaring a
rejoicing heart to them, and so di^d. He also wrote many godly Letters, as you
may see in the Book more at la^ge.


Stephen Harwood was burned at Stratford, and Thomas Fust was burned at Ware.

When William Hayle of Thorpe in Essex was condemned: O good people said he,
^eware of this I^olater and Antichrist, pointing to Bonner. He was burned at
Bar^et.

George King, Thomas Leyes, and John Wade, sickned in Prison and dyed, and were
cast into the fields, and buried by night of the faithful, when none durst do
it in the day.

Ioane Lashford, the Daughter of John Warn, and Elizabeth Warn Martyrs, was
repreeued to a longer day: her martyrdom was next year.

William Andrew.
HE was sent out of Horsie in Essex by the Lord Rich, and Sir Richard
Southwell, and being twice examined before Boner, he stood manfully in the
defense of his Religion: at length, through straight handling in the Prison in
Newgate, he died, and after the Popish manner he was cast into the fields, and
in the night secretly buried by the faithful.

Robert Samuel.
Justice Foster of Cobdocke in Suffolk, a deadly hater of the Professors of
the truth, amongst many others that were also troubled by him, this Robert
Samuel, a godly Preacher in King Edwards days, was one: He was Minister of
Barford in Suffolk, and being put from the Ministry, as others were, he
taught privily, and when that the order came up, that Priests should put away
their Wives, and be compelled to single life, Samuel would not agree thereto.
Master Foster sent out espials to apprehend him, and carry him to Prison if
he were found to come unto his Wife: whereby he was taken, and put into
Ipswich Iayle, from thence he was carried to Norwich, where Doctor Hopton the
Bishop, and Doctor Donnings his Chancellor, exercised great cruelty against
him. They kept in him strait prison, where he was chained bolt upright unto a
great post, that he was ^aine to bear all his body on tip-toe, and kept him
without meat and drink, only he had every day two or three mouthfuls of
Bread, and three spoonefuls of Water. He would often have drunken his own
Water, but his body was so dried up, that he was not able to make water. When
he was brought forth to be burned, he reported, that after he had been famished
with hunger two or three days together, he fell into a slumber, at which time
one clad all in white, seemed to stand before him, which said; Samuel,
Samuel, be of good cheer, for after this day thou shall never be hungry or
thirsty, which was performed: for speedily after he was burned, and from that
time until he suffered he felt neither hunger nor thirst: and he said, he
declared this, that all might see the wonderful works of God. He said, he
could utter many such comforts, as he had of Christ in his afflictions, which
modesty would not suffer him to utter.

As he was going unto the fire, a Maid named Rose Notingham, took him about
neck and kissed him, who being marked, the next day was sought for to be had
to Prison, and burned, yet by Gods goodness the escaped: yet two honest Women
fell into the rage of that time; the one a Brewers wife, the other a
Shoe-makers Wife, who were burned the next day after Samuel: the one was
called Anne Potten, the other Ioane Trunchfield.

The report of them which saw Samuel burned, is, that his body in burning did
^hine as bright and white as new tried Silver in the eyes of them that stood
by. In the book at large thou may see a godly Letter of his, and a godly
confession of his Faith.

William Allen.
HE was a laboring man, sometimes Servant to John Houghton of Somerset, he was
burned at Walsingham: he was imprisoned, for saying he would never follow the
cross on procession. The Bishop bad him return unto the Catholic Church: he
answered, he would turn unto the Catholic Church, but not to the Romish
Church; and said, if he saw the King and Queen, and all other follow the
Cross, and kneel down to the Cross, he would not.

Roger Coo.
HE was of Melford in Suffolk, a Sheare-man, an aged Father: after his sundry
conflicts with his Adversaries, he was burned at Yexford in Suffolk, for
denying the Sacrament of the Altar, and when the Bishop said he must obey the
King, whether his command agree with the word of God or no. He answered: If
Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednago had done so, Nabuchadnezzer had not confessed
the living Lord: and when the Bishop said he had charge of his Soul, he
answered, if you go to the Devil for your sins, where shall I become.

Thomas Cobbe.
LIkewise Thomas Cobbe of Hauehill, 1555.
Butcher, was burned by the said Bishop of Norwich, for denying the real
presence in the Sacrament, and for saying he would be obedient to the King and
Queens commandment, as the Law of God would suffer, and no further.

George Catmer, and Robert Streater of Hyth, Anthony Burward of Calete, George
Brodbridge of Bromfield, James Tutty of Breachley.
THese were brought before Thorton Bishop of Dover, 1555.
where they being examined, they did all affirm the Sacrament of the Altar to
be an abominable Idol, and George Brodbridge said, he would not be confessed
of a Priest, because he could not forgive his own sins. And moreover, as for
holy Bread and holy Water, and the Mass, I do (quoth he) utterly defy them,
therefore they were all five burned as Heretics at Canterbury.

Thomas Heyward, and John Gorway.
WE find they were condemned and burned at Lichfield, in the Dioces of
Lichfield and Couentry.

Robert Glouer, and John Glouer his Brother, and William Glouer another Brother.
John was the eldest brother, 1555
a Gentleman of the Town of Mancetor, he was endued with fair possessions and
worldly goods, but much more enriched with heavenly grace: He with his two
brethren not only embraced the light of the Gospel, but most zealously
professed the same.

In King Henry's days, this John fell into a despair of himself, upon the
occasion of these words in the 7. to the Hebrews, For it cannot be, that they
which were once illuminated and have tasted the heavenly gift etc.

The Bishop sending a warrant for this John, the Mayor of Couentry sent him a
privy watchword, who with his Brother William conuayed himself away, but the
Sheriff found Robert lying sick in bed, and although the Sheriff would feign
have dismissed him, saying; He was not the man for whom they were sent, yet
fearing the stout words of the Officer, he put him in Prison until the Bishops
coming.

Robert. Being brought before the Bishop of Couentry, he asked me wherefore I
wou^d not come to Church, I said I would not come thither as long as Mass was
used in their Churches, though I had 500. lives and might save them all by
going: and I asked if they could find any thing in the Scriptures, whereby
they could defend the Mass.


Bish. He asked who should be judge of the holy word, I said Christ.


Robert. He refused not to give his doctri^e to be examined of the people, by
searching of the Scriptures, and so did Paul, and if that would not suffice, I
said I would stand to the judgment of the Primitive Church, which was next
after the Apostles time, and that should be judge betwixt them* He answered he
was mine Ordinary, and therefore it was my part to believe as he did. I said,
what if he should sa^^ black is white, or darkness light.


Bish. Thou art gone from the Catholic Church, where was thy Church before
King Edwards days? I asked, where was the Church in Elias his time, and in
Christ's time? He said, Elias only complained of the ten Tribes. I said there
was no Prophet at that time in the other two Tribes, then the Bishop commanded
me to be carried unto a more strait Prison, declaring that he would find a
means at his return, to weed such wolves out of the way.

After the Chancellor, a Prebendary called Tensea came to him, and exhorted him
by all means possible to submit himself unto the Church.


Robert. I would gladly submit my self unto the Church, which submits it
self to Gods word: but how (quoth he) can you come to the knowledge of the
word of God, but as you be led by the Church. I answered, the Church is not
above the word of God, because it declares it, no more then John Baptist is
above Christ, by showing Christ's coming unto the people, or if you should tell
one this is the King, and therefore you should say, you were above the King.


Bish. after he was sent for again before the Bishop, he persuaded him to be
a member of his Church.


Robert. I told him I was a member of the true Church that was founded upon the
Apostles and Prophets, the chief and principal pillar being Christ Jesus.
This Church was from the beginning, and no marvel though according unto the
course of this world, it does not show forth the external light, for it is
afflicted with continual crosses, that it has no respite from fear and
tirannicall usage: the Bishop contended that he was of the Church; so said I,
the whole congregation once cried against the Prophets, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord; but when I said any thing for my self, the Bishop
commanded me upon my alleagiance to hold my tongue, calling me proud and
arrogant Hypocrite.


After for denying that there were any more then two Sacraments, and that the
Mass was neither Sacrament nor Sacrifice, because it differs from the true
institution of Christ, and takes it clean away, and that he denied Confession
to a Priest: he was condemned and burned at Couentree.

Cornelius Bungey.
IN the same fire which the said Robert Glouer was burned, Cornelius Bungey a
Capper of Couentry* who was condemned by the said Bishop: First, for that he
did maintain that the Priest had no power to absolve a sinner from his sins,
and that there be but two Sacraments: Baptism, and the Lords Supper: And that
there was not the Lords body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of their
popish Altar: And that the Pope is not head of the Church.

WILLIAM WOLSEY, and ROBERT PYGOT Painter.
THese were condemned and burned by the Bishop and Chancellor of Ely, and both
in one fire at Ely were burned.

NICHOLAS RIDLEY, Bishop of London, and HVGH LATIMER Bishop of Worcester.
NIcholas Ridley came of a gentle stock, borne in Northumberland; he was first
Bishop of Rochester, and after Bishop of London, in which offices he so
occupied himself in preaching the wholesome Doctrine of Christ, that never child
was so dearly beloved of his parents, as he was of his flock: he preached
every Holiday or Sunday in some one place or other, to whom the people swarmed
like Bees.

He did carefully instruct his Family: he gave them every one a New Testament,
and would give them money to learn certain principal Chapters by heart, being
marvelous careful over them, that they might be a spectacle of virtue and
honesty to others.

He called Mistress Boner Bishop Boners Mother, his mother, and when he was at
his house at Fulham, the dwelling there, he ever sent for her to meals, and
placed her in a Cha^^e at the Tables end, and she was never displaced of her
seat, though the Kings Council were there, but he would tell them that this
place of right and custom is for my mother Boner: but he was well recompensed
therefore by Boner, who was the destruction of him and his.

He was immediately after the coming of Queen Mary committed unto prison and
carried to Oxford like a most heinous traitor and heretic with Cranmer, and
Latimer, accompanied with a band of Soldiers, as is before mentioned.

The Conference of RIDLEY and LATIMER, upon the objection of ANTONIAN.
Antonian. ALL men marvel why you go not to Mass, which is a thing much
esteemed of all men, and of the Queen her self.


Ridley. Because no man that lays hand on the plough, and looks back is fit
for the Kingdom of God. Saint Paul would not suffer Titus to be circumcised,
that the truth of the Gospel might remain with us vncorrupt, and if I build
again the things which I destroyed, I am a trespasser: And another cause is
least I should seem to allow that which I know to be contrary to sound
Doctrine, and to be a stumbli^g stock to the weak, so w^ should be to me by
whom of^ence comes: it were better we were cast into the Sea with a Millstone
about our necks.


Anto. What is it in the Mass that so offends you, that you will not hear
nor see it: have you not in times past said Mass your self.


Rid. I am sorry therefore, and I trust God has forgiven me, for I did it
ignorantly, and these things in the Mass are contrary to Gods Word and offend
me. The strange tongue, the want of showing the Lords death, the Sacrament is
not communicated unto all under both kinds: the sign is worshipped for the
thing signified: Christ's passion is injured, by affirming the Mass to purge
sins, and there are manifold superstitions, and trifling fondnes in the same.


Anto. It is a great crime to separate from the Communion or fellowship of the
Church and make a Schism: you hated the Anabaptists, and impugned them: This
was the error of Nouatus, and of the heretics called ( Catheri) that they
would not communicate with the Church,


Rid. I take not the Mass for the Communion of the Church, but for a popish
device, whereby the institution for the remembrance of his death is eluded* and
the people of God deluded: The sect of the Anabaptists, and the heresy of
Nouatus are to be condemned, they separat themselves from the Communion without
any ^ust cause, for they did not allege that the Sacraments were unduly
ministered, but always reproving something, either in the Ministers, or in the
communicants with them: for the which they abstained from the Communion, as
from an unholy thing.


Lat. Calvin says, the name of peace is beautiful, and the opinion of unity
is fair: But Saint Paul when he requires unity he ^oynes strait with all,
according to Jesus Christ, and no further Piotrephes, now of late did much
harp upon unity, unity, Yea Sir (quoth I) in verity, and not in popery.


Anto: Admit there be somewhat in the Mass that might be amended: Cyprian and
Augustine say, Communion of Sacraments does not de^^le a man, but consent of
deeds.


Rid. If it were a trifling ceremony, or indifferent, for the continuance of
common quietness, I could be content to bear it: But the Mass tends openly
to the overthrow of Christ's institution, I ought by no means in word or deed
consent thereto: That of the Fathers, is meant of them that suppose they be
defiled, if any secret vice be either in the Ministers, or in the Communicants
with them, and is not meant of them which abhor Superstition, and wicked
traditions of men, and will not suffer them to be in steed of the Gospel.


Lat. The Mary bones of the Mass are detestable, and by no means to be borne
with all, it cannot be amended, but by abolishing it for ever, for if you take
away ^blation, and adoration, which hang upon Consecration, and
transubstantiation, the Papists will not set a button by the Mass, only for
the gain that follows therein, for if our English Communion were a gainefull
unto them, as the Mass, they would strive no more for the Mass.


Anto: If you refuse to go to Mass, you forsake the Church, for the Mass is
the Sacrament of unity: without the Arc there is no salvation, the Church is
the Arc, and Peter's ship: Augustine says, he shall not have God his Father,
which acknowledges not the Church his mother: And he also says, be thy life
never so well spent out of the Church, thou shall not inherit the Kingdom of
heaven.


Ridley. The Catholic Church is the Communion of Saints, the City of GOD, the
spouse of Christ, the body of Christ, the pillar of truth, this Church I honor
in the Lord, but the rule of this Church, is the word of God: as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be upon them and upon Israel that pertains to
God: the guide of this Church is the Holy Ghost: the marks of this Church are
these: The preaching of Gods word, and due administration of the Sacraments:
Charity and observing of Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to the word of
God; these are the heavenly Jerusalem, which consists of those which are
borne above: This is the mother of us all, I will live and die the child of
this Church, forth of this there is no salvation, it is only known by the
Scriptures which is the true Church: indeed the bread which we break according
to the institution of Christ is the Sacrament of the unity of Christ's mystical
body, for we being many are one bread and one body, because we are partakers of
one bread, but in the Mass the Lords institution is not observed: for there we
are not all partakers of one bread, but one deuoureth it all.


Lat: Yea, what fellowship has Christ with Antichrist; it is not lawful to
bear the yoke with Papists; Seperat your selves from them, says the Lord, it
is one thing to be the Church indeed, and another thing to counterfeit the
Church: not all that he covered with the Title of the Church are the Church
indeed: When S. Paul says, Separate your selves from them: He adds, if any
man follow other doctrine, he is puffed up and knows nothing: For it is
ignorance to know many things and not Christ, but if thou know Christ thou
know enough, though thou know no more: Therefore he would know nothing but
Christ and him crucified, as many as be Papists and Masse-mongers, may well be
said to know nothing; for they know not Christ, they take much away from the
merit of Christ.


Anto. That Church which you describe is invisible, but Christ's Church is
visible and known: For he says, tell it to the Church, which is in vain to
go to the Church, if a man cannot tell which it is.


Rid. If we cannot see the true Church, that is not the fault of the Church,
but either of our own blindness, or of Satan's darkness, but the word is a Candle
unto us, and a light unto our steps to show the true Church.


Anto. The Church of Christ is universal dispersed through the whole world,
the great house of GOD good and evil mingled together: Goats and Sheep,
Corn and Chafe; it is the net which gathers all kind of Fishes: it cannot
err, for CHRIST JESUS has promised it his good Spirit, to lead it in all
truth, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, he will be with it
to the end of the world: What it shall bind or lose in earth shall be
ratified in Heaven, it is the truth: Augustine says, I believe the Gospel,
because the Church bids me believe it: this Church allows the Mass,
therefore it must be followed.


RidI. The Church is taken three manner of ways in the Scripture: sometime for
the whole multitude of the professors of Christ, but as every one is not a Jew
which is a Jew outwardly: nor all that be of Israel, are counted the seed: So
every one that is a Christian outwardly is not so indeed: For he that has
not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. The Church that Christ Jesus is head
of stands only of living Stones: Christians in heart and truth, and not in
word only: The multitude of the good are the true Church, the multitude of
the evil is the malignant Church, and Synagogue of Satan: These be the three
takings of the Church: and though there be seldom mention in Scriptures in this
interpretation, yet in the greatest assemblies of the world, this Church has
borne the greatest swing.

But* if any will affirm, that universality does so appertain unto the
church, that Christ's promises to the Church must needs be understood of that;
where was that universal Church, in the times of the Patriarks, and Prophets:
Of Noah, Abraham, and Moses, (when they would have stoned him) of Helias, of
Jeremy, in the times of Christ, and the dispersion of the Apostles in the time
of Arius When Constantius was Emperor, ^and Felix Bishop of Rome succeeded
Lyberius, Lyra upon Matthew says, the Church does not stand in men by reason of
their power and dignity, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Seculer, for Princes
and Popes and other inferiors have fallen away from GOD: Therefore the Church
consists in those persons in whom is true knowledge, and Confession of the
Faith, and truth: evil men are in the Church in name, but not in deed.


Latimer. Touching the vehement saying of Saint Augustine: I would not believe
the Gospel, but for the Church. Melancton upon this says, the Church is not a
Judge, but a witness, there were some that lightly esteemed the Judgment of the
Church, and preaching, and rejected the outward word, and stuck only to there
inward revelations: This drove Saint Augustine into that vehemency, in which
he seems to them that understand not his meaning, to prefer the Church before
the Gospel, and that it had authority over the same, but that godly man never
thought so.


Anto: General Councels represent the universal Church: and Christ has
promised to be in the midst, where two or three be gathered together in his
name: Therefore much more where there is so great a multitude, but in general
Councels Mass has been approved and used, therefore it is good.


Ridley. It is true, that where so many be gathered together in Christ's name,
it is not credible, but two or three be gathered together in his name, but if
there be an hundredth good, and two h^ndreth bad, being the Decrees and
Ordinances go according to most voices, what can the less number of voices
prevail: It is a common proverb, often the greater part overcomes the
better: but it is impossible that any such Council of good men allowed such a
Mass as ours was of late, in a strange tongue, and stuffed with so many
absurdities, errors, and superstitions: for as there is no agreement betwixt
light and darkness, Christ and Beliall: so superstition and sincere religion,
will worship, and pure worship in spirit and truth, can never agree together.


Latimer. Touching general Councels, I refer you to your own experience in
our Parliaments, and Conuocations: the most part in my time did bring forth the
six Articles, because then the King would so have it: After the most part did
repeal the same, because our good Josias would so have it: The same Articles
now again the most part has restored, because the Queen will have it; after
this sort most commonly are men's proceedings.


Anto. If in general Councels men should not follow most vo^ces, then should
the church have no certain rule to determine weighty matters, but it is not to
be believed that Christ would leave the Church destitute of so necessary a help.


Rid. Christ the most loving spouse of his espouse the Church, did give unto it
abundantly all things necessary to salvation, but so that the Church should
keep her self within the obedience of his commandments, and not to seek any
thing as necessary to salvation which he teaches not: and for determination of
all controversies in Religion, Christ has left unto the Church* Moses, and the
Prophets, which he wills the church to ask council of, and all the New
Testament, and that which is hard in Moses and the Prophets, is revealed in
them: so that we have no need to say, who shall clime up to heaven, or who
shall go down into the deep to tell us what is needful to be done: Christ
has done both, and commanded (...) (...) the word of Faith; and if we walk
diligently therein, by his spirit we shall (...) out the truth* and obtain
everlasting life: As in Esaias 8. Shall men-aske (...) of the dead for the
living? Let them go unto the Law and the Testament: (...) Christ Ioh. 5.
bids us Search the Scriptures: And Hierom says, Ignorance (...) scriptures
is mother of errors upon the 25. of Matthew, and in another place he says the
knowledge of the scriptures is the food of everlasting life, and we read not
that Christ in any place has said so great a burden upon the members of his
Church that he has commanded them to go unto the universal Church: it is true
that Christ gave unto his Church some Apostles, and some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Shepherds and Teachers to the edifying of the Saints, until
we all come unto the unity of Faith. But that all, out of all parts of the
world, should meet together in Council, to define the Articles of faith, it is
not commanded of Christ.


Lat. There is diversity betwixt things pertaining to God or Faith, and
politic and civil matters: for in the first we must stand only to the
scriptures, which are able to make us perfect unto salvation: if by study and
prayer we understand them, and the most prudent men of the world are least apt
to understand them: but in civil matters being we know not otherwise how to
maintain common peace and quiet, they do ordain that the most part shall
take place.


Anto. It is perilous to attempt any new thing in the Church, unto which the
example of the Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles, are contrary: for in
their time all things were most corrupt, the people were miserably given to
superstition, the Priests despised the law of God, yet we never read that the
Prophets made any schisms, and Christ haunted the Temples and taught in them
daily, Peter and John went into the Temple at the ninth hour of prayer, Paul
after the reading of the law desired to say some thing unto the people: neither
Christ nor his Apostles did refuse to pray with others, to sacrifice or be
partaker of Moses law.


Ridley. The Prophets, Christ, nor the Apostles did not communicate with the
people in any kind of worshipping forbidden by the law, or repugmant to the
word. Saint Aug^stine in his Epistle Ad Ianuarium, speaking of the ceremonies
of the Jews, he says, They were burdens of the law which were delivered by
the word of God, and not by the presumptions of men; but now the ceremonies are
of men, and contrary to the word of God, and therefore not to be borne. In the
story of Tobias, when all other went to the golden calves of Jeroboam to
worship, he alone went to the Temple of the Lord to worship In the third of
Kings the man of God threatened terrible plagues to the Priest of Bethell, and
to the Altar which Jeroboam had made, which came to pass by King Josias. The
Prophets vehemently rebuked the people still for going a whoreing with their
Hill-Altars: and this was the chief cause wherefore the false Prophets ceased
not to malign the true Prophets, therefore they beat them, and banished them.
How otherwise can you understand the saying of S. Paul, What concord has
Christ with Beliall, the believer with the Infidel, and the temple of God with
Idols: for we are said to be Gods temple because God dwells in us: wherefore
we are bidden to come out and seperat our selves from them, and to touch no
unclean thing, and God will receive us and be our Father, and we shall be his
Sons and Daughters. In the 12. of Judith, she would not defile her self with
the meats of the wicked. The Machabees died manfully in the defense of the Law:
S. Augustine says, If we praise the Machabees for their stoutnesse for the Law
of Moses, how much more ought we to suffer all things for our baptism and the
Lords supper, which the Mass utterly abolisheth and corrupts.


Anto. I perceive you are so obstinatly wedded unto your own opinion, that no
wholesome counsels can draw you to a better mind, therefore you must be handled
by the laws, and be either compelled thereto, or suffer the punishment of the
Law: he that refuses to obey the laws of the realm, is an enemy to his
Country. This is the readiest way to stir up civil wars, it is better you
should bear your own ^^nne, then the common quiet to be disturbed: how can
you say you will be the Queens subjects, when you openly profess you will
not keep her laws.


Ridl. It is true, he that will not obey the Gospel, must be forced thereto by
the law, but this ought not to be against them which cannot bear superstitions,
nor the overthrow of Christ's institutions, but detesteth such proceedings for
the glory of God, and they that love their Country in God, will rather obey
God then man, and they that obey man's laws against Gods laws, in pretense of
the love of their country, they make their country fight against God, in whom
consists, the very stay of the country: such are the most deadly eeemies and
traitors of their country, for they go about to bring upon the^r country a
present ru^^e. Satan had ever this dart in readiness to hurl against Gods
children, so accuse them of sodition that he may bring them in danger of the
higher powers, so he has up his ministers always charged the Prophets: Acab
said to Elias, Thou art he that troubles Israel, and the false Prophets
complained to their Princes of Jeremy, that his words were seditious and not
to be suffered* the Scribes and Pharisees accused Christ as a seditious person,
that spoke against Caesar, and at length ^ryed, If thou let him go thou art
not Caesar's friend: Tertullian accused Paul before Felix, that he was a
pestilent fellow and a stirrer of sedition. But these men were not so, but of
false men falsely accused, only because they openly reproved their guiles,
superstitions and deceits.


A man ought to obey his Prince, but in the Lord, and never against the law of
the Lord: for he that lovingly obeys his Prince against God, is a deceiuer of
his Prince, and helps him to work his own destruction: we must give unto
the Prince that which is his, and unto God that which is his. Valentinianus the
Emperor choosing the Bishop of Millan, said, He set him in his seat for this
cause, that if we do offend we may submit our selves unto him. Polycarpus the
most constant Martyr, when he ^^ood before the chief Ruler, was commanded to
blasph^me Christ, and to swear by the fortune of Caesar; we are taught (quoth
he) to give honor unto Princes, but such honor as is not contrary to Gods
Religion.

HVGH LATIMER.
THis constant Martyr was the son of one Hugh Latimer of Thirkesson, in the
County of Leicester, a husbandman of wealthy and good estimation: he studying
Divinity in Cambridge, at the first was zealous in the popish Religion, and so
scrupelous (as he himself confesses) that being a Priest, and using to say
Mass, he did so observe the Romish Decrees, that he thought he had never
mingled enough his massing Wine with water, and he was of the opinion that he
should never be damned, if once he were a professed Friar, with diverse such
superstitious fantasies, and in his blind zeal he was a very enemy unto the
professors of the Truth, and when he took the degree of proceeding Batcheler
of Divinity, he made his oration against Philpot, Melancton, and his works:
Then Master Bilney, as before is said, persuaded him to forsake his former
study of the School Doctors, and such fooleries, and to become a true
scholar in true Divinity: so that where before he was an enemy, and almost a
persecutor of the Gospel of Christ, he was now an earnest seeker after CHRIST
JESUS, and became both a public preacher, and a private instructor of his
brethren in the University two years, but Satan never sleeps when he sees
his Kingdom decay: he raised his Children to trouble him.

Latimer in his Sermons before Christmas gave the people certain Cards, out
of the fifth, sixth, and seventh of Matthew: Whereupon they might occupy the time,
for the chief Card he limited the Heart, as the principal thing they should
serve GOD with, and thereby he overthrew all hypocritical, and external
Ceremonies, to that end he wished the Scriptures to be read altogether in the
English tongue, that the common people might thereby learn their duties to
GOD and their Neighbors: hereby he wrought in the hearers much fruit, to the
overthrow of Popish Superstition, and setting up of true Religion.

The Sunday before Christmas day, in his Sermon he delivered his Cards as
aforesaid, making the heart the chief Card, inuiting all men to serve the
Lord with inward heart and true affection, and not with outward ceremonies,
that in the seruic^ of the heart consists true religion, and not in the
outward deeds of the letter, or in the glistering show of men's traditions, of
pardons, pilgrimages, ceremonies, vows, devotions, voluntary works, and
works of supererogation, foundations, oblations, the Popes supremacy: you may
see two Sermons of his to this effect in the book at large.

Doctor Bucknam about the same time of Christmas, to deface Master Latimer,
brought forth his Christmas Dice, casting to his audience Cinque and Quater,
whereby to prove that it were not expedient that the Scriptures should be in
English, lest the vulgar people by the occasion thereof should be brought to
leave their vocation, or to run into some inconvenience; as the Plowman, when
he hears that, No man laying his hand unto the Plough and looking back, is
meet for the Kingdom of heaven, might perhaps cease from his Plough: likewise
the Baker, when he hears that a little leaven corrupts a whole lump of
dough, may perchance leave our bread unleavened, and so our bodies shall be
unseasoned: and when the simple man hears, If thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out and cast it from thee, may make himself blind, and so fill the world full
of beggars. These, with other more, he brought to the number of five: yet Master
Latimer, notwithstanding all his adversaries (which were man^) together with
Master Bilney, continued in Cambridge a certain space: they used much to
confer and to walk together in the fields: the place of their conference was
long time after called by the name of Heretics hill.

These two did often visit the prisoners, relie^e the needy, and feed the
hungry. There was a woman laid in prison for suspicion of murdering her
child, she denying it, they searching into the matter found that her husband
loved her not, and therefore sought to make her away. The matter was thus: her
child having bin sick a whole year, died in harvest, then she went to have
her neighbors to help to bury it* but all ware at harvest; whereby she was
enforced to prepare the child to burial her self: her husband coming home
accused her of murdering the child.

Master Latimer thinking in his conscience that she was not guilty, and being
called to preach before King Henry the eighth, after the Sermon the King sent
for him, and talked with him; at which time Master Lati^er kneeled down and
opened the whole matter to the King, and begged her pardon, which the King
granted, and gave it him when he went home. In the mean time the woman was
brought a bed in prison, and Master Latimer was Godfather, but he told her
not of the pardon, but labored to have her confess the truth. When the time
came that she looked to suffer, she greatly lamented that she should not be
purified before she did suffer, thinking she should be damned if she died
vnpurified. Master Bilney and Master Latimer told her that the law was made for
the Jews, and not for us, and how women be as well in the favor of God before
purification as after. And when they had brought her into a good way, they
showed her the Kings pardon, and let her go. Many more like good matters were
wrought by him, but the more his virtues and good doings began to be known,
the more his adversaries began to spurn against him.

One Doctor Redman, of great authority in Cambridge, seeing the boldness of
Master Latimer, in setting abroad the Gospel, he wrote to him earnestly,
requiring him for charities sake not to stand so much in his own conceit, nor
to prefer his singular judgment in matters of religion and controversies,
before so many learned men and the whole Catholic Church, having neither the
word of God, nor the testimony of any authentike writer to make for you:
consider you are but a man, therefore lying and vanity may quickly bleare your
eyes, which does sometime transform it self into an Angel of light: suffer
not the Church to take offense by the hardness of your heart, let not the unity
of Christ's coat without seame be torn asunder, trust not in your own wisdom.

To which he answered, it is enough for me that Christ's sheep hear no man's
voice but Christ's: you have no voice of Christ against me: for my part I have a
heart that is ready to hearken to any voice of Christ's that you can bring me;
so fare you well, and trouble me not any more from the talking with the Lord my
God.

At length M. Latimer was called before the Cardinal for heresy, by the
procurement of his adversaries, where he was content to subscribe to such
articles as were propounded unto him.

After he was appointed for one of them that labored for the Kings supremacy,
and remaining at Court, he preached often in London: after, at the suit of the
Lord Cromwell, he was benef^^ed at West-Kingston in Wilshire, where he was very
diligent in teaching: his diligence extended also to all the country round
about, but there also he could not escape without enemies. It so chanced that
he preaching upon the Uirgin Marie, he proved that Christ was her Savior.
Certain Popish Priests being therewith offended, drew Articles against him
concerning the matter of our Lady, of praying unto Saints, and of Purgatory:
to which Articles he answered in effect as follows;

1 To reprove certain Priests and beneficed men which give so much to our
Lady, as though she had not bin saved by Christ, which is the savior of her
and of all that be or shall be saved. I did reason that either she was a sinner
or no sinner; if a sinner, then she was delivered from sin by Christ, or if
she were no sinner she was preserved from sin by him, so he was her Savior
which way soever you take it.

2 Images of Saints are called Saints: to pray to these Saints is Idolatry.
Saints in heaven do of Charity pray for us, but we are not commanded to pray
to them, for Christ only is a holy Mediator for them and us.

3 The scurfe must be taken away from pilgrimage before it be good, to wit
superstition, Idolatry, false faith, and trust in the Image, debts must be
paid, restitutions made, wife and children provided for, duty to our poor
neighbors discharged, and when it is at best, be^fore it be vowed it need not
be done, for God commands it not.

4 I said the Aue maria was a greeting which the Angel brought from God to the
Uir^ in Marie, but I said it was not a prayer, as the Pater noster, which our
Savior Christ made, and bade us say for a prayer, not adding that we should say
ten or twenty Aue Mariaes with it.

5 The torment of hell is not a material fire, no more then it is a material
stinging of a worm or snake, but a metaphor signifying the pain, torment,
anguish, grief, misery, sorrow, and heaviness inexplicable and intolerable,
whose nature and condition none can tell.

6 That the souls that are not in hell, are in as great joy as souls can be,
and cannot be put from eternal joy, and suffer no pain, of charity they pray
for us, and have no need that we should pray for them, and besides this there
is no other Purgatory. I had rather be there then in the Bishop of Londons
prison, though they call the fire thereof never so hot, yet if the Bishop with
his two fingers can put away some of the fire, and a Friars Cowle the fourth
part thereof, and Scala Coeli altogether, I will never found Abbey, College,
or Chauntery for that purpose.

Provision for Purgatory has brought thousands to hell, debts have not been
paid, nor lands and goods evil gotten restored, poor people are suffered to
perish for want, and all to build religious houses to deliver out of
Purgatory, and to pay for Dirges, Masses, and ringing of Bells to carry us to
hell withal; who can purge pilgrimage from Idolatry, and Purgatory from
robbery, but he shall be in suspicion of heresy?

As for Pilgrimage, you would wonder what iugling there is to get Money
withal, I dwell by the way, and you would admire how they come by flocks out
of the West Country to many Images, but cheef^ly to the blood of Hayles, and
they believe verily it is the blood of Christ's body, shed upon Mount Caluarie
for our salvation, and that the sight of it does certify them out of doubt,
that their sins are forgiven, and they are in state of salvation. If you
should common with them coming and going what faiths they have, you would
wonder, they cannot away with forgiving their enemies, and reconciling
themselves unto their Brethren, for the sight of that blood does quite them for
the time; they that did violently and miraculously pluck the blood out of
Christ's body, by whipping and wounding him, saw his blood, and yet were not
thereby in clear life. Christ does suffer the Devil to use his crafty
fashion for our probation: it were very little thank to believe well, if
nothing should move us to believe superstitiously; it was not in vain, when
Christ had taught us truly, that he had us beware of false Prophets.

These points following his Adversaries preached, y^ Christ's blood is not
sufficient without the blood of Martyrs, Magdalene did not know Christ to be
God before his Resurrection, there can be now no Idolatry: Rome cannot be
destroyed, the Pope is Lord of all the World, whatsoever he does, is well done:
Pater noster is to be said unto Saint Peter: Pater noster is but a beggarly
prayer, Aue Maria is infinitely better, there must be twenty Aue Mariaes for
one Pater noster, Aue Maria was before Pater noster, and shall be after: it
was not necessary that the scriptures should be written: Christ saying, he that
leaves father or mother, praueth our pilgrimage, with many more.

Many dangerous hazards he suffered amongst the Popes friends and Gods enemies,
for the Gospel sake. When there was a Proclamation set forth for the calling
in of the Bible in English, and many other good books, he hazarded himself to
write to King Henry the eight to dissuade him therefrom, which Letter thou
may see in the book at large: at length by the means of Doctor Butts and of
good Cromwell, he was made Bishop of Worcester and continued so a few years,
instructing his Diocese according to a diligent Pastor, but (as before) both
in the University, and at his Benefiee he was tossed and turmoyled by the
wicked, so in his Bishopric some sought his trouble, insomuch that he was
accused to the King for his Sermons. Thus he continued in this laborious
function of a Bishop for certain years, until the coming up of the six
Articles, and altering of Religion, so when he could not keep his Bishopric
with a good conscience, of his own free will he resigned the same: at which
time Shaxton Bishop of Salesburie resigned also with him his Bishopric. These
two remained a great space vnbishopped, keeping silence until the time of King
Edward. A little after Latimer had renounced his Bishopric, he was sore
bruised with the fall of a tree, and coming to London for remedy, he was
troubled of the Bishops, and at length was cast into the Tower, where he
continued prisoner until the Reign of King Edward, then the golden mouth of
this preacher, shut up long before, was opened again, and beginning a fresh to
set forth his plough again, and continued all the time of the said King,
laboring in the Lords harvest most fruitfully: he preached for the most part
twice every Sunday to no small shame of unpreaching prelates, which occupied
great rome, to do little good: he did most evidently prophes^e of all these
kind of plagues which after ensued: so plainly that if England ever had a
Prophet, he might seem to be one, and he did ever affirm, that the preaching
of the Gospel would cost him his life, and he was certainly persuaded that
Winchester was kept in the Tower, to be his death, which fell out right, for
after the death of King Edward, and Queen Mary proclaimed, a Purseuant was sent
down unto him (by the doing no doubt of Winchester) Latimer had warning thereof
six hours before the Purseuant came, whereby he might have ^scaped, but he
prepared himself toward his journey before the Purse^ant came, who marvelled
to see him so prepared for his journey, he told the Purseuant, he was a welcome
guest, and be it known unto you and the whole World; that I go as willingly
to London at this present, being called of my Prince to give a reckoning of my
Faith and Doctrine, as ever I was to go unto any place in the world: and I
doubt not, but that God which has made me worthy to preach to two most
excellent Princes, so he will able me to witness the same to the third, either
to her comfort or discomfort eternally. When the Purseuant had delivered his
Letters, he departed, affirming that he was not commanded to tarry for him:
whereby it appeared, they would not have him appear, but rather to have fled
out of the Realm: they knew his constancy would deface them in Popery, and
confirm the godly in the truth. When he came through Smithfield, he said
merrily, Smithfield bad long groned for him: after he had been before the
Council, he was sent to the Tower, and from thence he was transported to
Oxford, with Cramer Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ridley Bishop of London,
there to dispute, as before is said: Of the order of the disputations, and bow
they were condemned, thou may see before, where they continued until this
time in continual prayer, godly conference and writing. Latimer sometimes
continued so long kneeling at prayer, that he was not able to arise without
help: three things especially he prayed for in his Prayers: First, as God
has appointed him to preach his Word, so he would give him grace to stand to
the same until his death: Secondly, that God would restore his Gospel unto
England again once more: which once more he inculcated oftentimes into the
ears of the LORD, as if he had spoken unto him face to face: Thirdly, he
prayed for the preservation of Queen ELIZABETH, then but Lady ELIZABETH, whom
with ^eares he still named, desiring God to make he a comforter to this
comfortles Realm, the Lord most graciously granted al these things which he
requested.

The twentieth day of September, a Commission was sent from the Cardinal to the
Bishops of Lincoln, Gloucester, and Bristow, to examine Doctor Ridley, and
Master Latimer, upon the points they were condemned for at Oxford: and if they
would not recant there opinions, to disgrade them, etc. The first point was
whether the real presence of Christ was in the Sacrament: D. Ridley first
appeared before them; when the Commission was read, he standing bare-headed,
as soon as he heard the Cardinal named, and the Popes Holiness: he put on his
cap, the Bishop of Lincoln reprehended him for it, and told him if he would
not of himself put off his cap another should do it for him: He answered,
that it was not done for any contumacy that he bare unto their own persons, nor
for any derogation of the Cardinal in that he was borne of the Blood Royal,
and was endued with much le^rning and excellent virtues ^ut in that he is
Legate to the Pope, (and with that he put on his cap) whose usurped supremacy
I utterly renounce, which I will not only denounce in words, but in gesture,
be^auiour, and all my doings express the same: whereupon by the commandment
of the Bishop of Lincoln his cap was taken off: he appeared twice, and thus he
did at both times, their answers were both to one effect in substance.

First they made their protestation, that notwithstanding their answers, it
should not be taken thereby that they would acknowledge any authority of the
Pope, but that they answered as subjects to the king and Queen: to the first
point they did confess that in the sacrament, by spirit and grace, is the very
body and blood of Christ, because that every man receiving bodily the bread and
wine in the Sacrament, spiritually receive the body and blood of Christ, and
thereby is partaker of the merits of his passion, but they denied the natural
body and blood of Christ to be really in the outward sacrament.

The second question was, whether after consecration of the sacrament of the
Altar there did remain any substance of bread and wine: to that they answered,
there was such a change in the bread and wine, as no man but God can make,
being the bread had that dignity to exhibit Christ's body, yet the bread is
still bread, and the wine still wine, for the change is not in the nature but
in the dignity, because that which was common bread has the dignity to
exhibit Christ's body, for now it is an holy bread sanctified by Gods word.

The third question was, whether the mass were a lively and propitiatory
sacrifice for them alive, and for them that be dead: this article they denied
to be true, because Christ made one perfect sacrifice for the whole world;
neither can the Priests offer up Christ again for the sins of man; neither
is there any propitiation for our sins, but his Cross only. And because
neither for fear nor flattery they could be made to recant, at their second
sitting they were condemned, disgraded, and delivered to the secular power.

Upon the North-side of the town of Oxford, in the ditch, over against Baliol
College, the place of execution was appointed, Doctor Ridley came unto the
stake in a fair black gown, such as he was wont to wear when he was Bishop,
with a tippet of sables about his neck; M. Latimer came in a poor frize frock,
in one they might behold the honor they sometimes had, in the other the
calamity whereunto they were now descended: after Doctor Ridley had prayed,
seeing the cheerfulnes of M. Latimer he ran unto him, embraced him, and kissed
him, saying, be of good heart brother, for God will either assuage the fury of
the flame, or else strengthen us to abide it.

Then Doctor Smith began his Sermon upon 1. Co. 13. If I give my body to the
fire to be burned, and have not charity, I shall gain nothing thereby: wherein
he alleged that neither the holiness of the person, nor the manner of the
death, but the goodness of the cause made a martyr; this he pr^ued by the
example of Judas and many others, which then might be counted righteous because
they desperately sundred their lives from their bodies (as he feared these men
that stood before him would do) and still he cried unto the people to beware of
them, for they were heretics and died out of the Church: at last he exhorted
them to recant and come home again unto the Church, and save their lives and
souls, which else were condemned. They would have answered him, but some ran
to them and stopped their mouths with their hands, and would not suffer them to
speak. Then Doctor Ridley said, Heavenly father, I give thee most hearty thanks
that thou have called me to be a professor of thee, even unto death: I beseech
thee be merciful to this Realm of England, and deliver the same from all her
enemies. When the fire was kindled he cried, Into thy hands I commit my spirit,
Lord receive my spirit, crying often, Lord, Lord receive my spirit: M. Latimer
crying as vehemently on the other side, O Father of heaven receive my soul.
Latimer died quickly, but Ridley was long a (...) by reason of the bad making
of the fire, yet he remained constant to the end.

The death of Stephen Gardner.
IN November, the next month after the burning of Ridley and Latimer, in which
month the Queen died: three years after, Stephen Gardner a man hated of God
1555
and good men, ended his wretched life. He was borne in Berry in Suffolk, and
brought up in Oxford: his wit, capacity, and memory were excellent if they had
bin well applied: he was high-minded, flattering his own conceit too much
toward his superiors; he was politic and pleasant, to his inferiors fierce;
against his equals stout and envious if they any thing withstood him in
judgment: it was constantly reported that the nails of his toes were crooked
and sharp downward like the claws of a beast: his death happened so
opportunely that England has a great cause therefore to praise God, not so
much for the great hurt it had done in times past, in perverting his Princes,
in bringing in the six Articles, in murdering GODS Saints, and in defacing
Christ's most true Religion, but especially for that he had thought to have
murdered our noble and religious Queen Elizabeth; for he was the cause of
all her danger: and if it be certain which we have heard that a Writ came
down from certain of the Council to the Tower where the Lady Elizabeth was,
for her execution: it is sure this vile wily Winchester was the only Dedalus
and framer of that Ingine; but M. Brigs Lieutenant of the Tower certified the
Queen of the matter, and there by prevented Achitophels bloody devices, as
Bonner, Story, Thornton, Harpsfield, Downing, with others, were occupied in
putting the branches to death; so Gardner bent his devices in assaying the
root, in casting such a plot to build up his Popery, as he thought it should
stand for ever: whether he died with his tongue swollen out of his mouth, as
Arundell Bishop of Canterbury did, or whether he stunke before he died, as
Cardinal Wolsey did, who after he had used coniuration before, so after he had
poisoned himself by the way; at his burial he was so heavy that they let him
fall, and he gave such a savor that they could not abide him, with such a
sudden tempest about him, that all the Torches went out, and could bear no
light, or whether he died in despair, I refer all this unto their reports,
of whom I heard it. A great doer about Winchester reported that the Bishop of
Chichester coming unto Gardner, began to comfort him with Gods promises, and
with free Justification in the blood of Christ: he said, what, my Lord, will
you open that gap now, then farewell altogether? to me and such other you may
speak it, but open this window to the people, and then farewell altogether.

John Web Gentleman, George Roper, and George Park.
THese were condemned by the Bishop of Dover, 1555
and Harpsfield, for de^ying the real presence in the sacrament of the Altar,
and were burned in one fire at Canterbury, abiding most patiently their
torments, and counting themselves blessed that they were worthy to suffer for
the Gospel.

William Wiseman and James Gore.
THis Wiseman died in Lollards Tower, being there for religion: the holy
Catholic Church cast him out into the fields, and commanded that no man
should bury him* according as their devout manner is to all that die in that
sort, whom they account not worthy of burial, but to be cast to dogs and
birds, yet good men buried him in the night.

James Gore being in the prison at Colchester for the truth of Gods word, died
much about this time.

JOHN PHILPOT.
He was Sir Peter Philpots son in Hampshire, brought up in new College in
Oxford: going from Oxford into Italy, coming from Uenice to Padua he was in
danger through a Franciscan Friar accompanying him in his journey, who coming
to Padua accused him of heresy. In King Edwards time he had diverse conflicts
with Gardner Bishop of Winchester: after he was made Archdeacon of Winchester,
where he continued during King Edwards time, to no small profit of those parts:
in Queen Mary's time he being one of the Convocation, with a few other
sustained the cause of the Gospel manfully against the adversary part, as is
before recited, wherefore he was called to account before Gardner, and examined
by him, and then he was removed to Bonner and other Commissioners, with whom
he had diverse conflicts, as in his examinations hereafter following may
appear, when he had lien a year and a half in the Marshalsey, being twice
examined, but no point of Religion handled: then he was committed to the
Bishop of Londons Cole-house, where he found a married Priest of Essex named
Thomas Whittle, This Minister greatly lamented his own infirmity, for that
through imprisonment he was constrained by writing to yield to the Bishop of
London, and was set at liberty, and after felt such an hell in his conscience
that he could scarce refrain from destroying himself, and could not be at
quiet until he having got the Bishops register to see his Bill, he tore it in
pieces, and after he was as ioifull a man as any could be: When Boner heard
thereof be sent for him, and buffeted him, and plucked off a piece of his
Beard, but now he is joyful under the cross.

He was thirteen or fourteen times in private and publicly examined, his
answers that concern any point of Religion here follow.

The third examination.
Boner. YOu must be of the Church for there is but one Church.


Phil. I am sure I am in the Church, and I know by the Scriptures that there is
but one Dove, one Spouse, one beloved congregation, out of the which there is
no salvation: This Church is builded upon the word of God.


Bon. You are not in the same Faith, in which you were baptized.


Phil. I was baptized into the Faith of Christ, which I now hold.


Bon. You were twenty years agone of another Faith.


Phil. I was then of no Faith, a wicked liver, neither hot nor cold.


Bon. Do you not think we are of a true Faith?


Phil. I am sure Gods word thoroughly, with the primitive Church, and all
ancient writers do agree with this Faith that I am ^ff.


Bon. I marvel you are so merry in prison, singing and rejoicing in your
naughtines, you should rather lament.


Phil. The mirth we make is but singing of Psalms, as S. Paul wills us to be
merry in the Lord, singing together in Hymns, and Psalms, we are in a dark
comfortles place, therefore it becomes us to be merry, as Solomon says,
least sorrowfulnes eat up our hearts: Then I was carried to the Cole-house:
where I with my six fellows rouse together in the straw as cheerfully we
thank God as others do in their Down beds.


The fourth Examination.
Worcest. BEfore he begins to speak, it is best for him to call to God for
grace to open his heart that he may conceive the truth.


Phil. Then I fell upon my knees, and said, Almighty God, the giver of wisdom,
I beseech thee of thine infinite goodness in Christ, to give me, most vile
sinner, the spirit of wisdom, to speak and make answer in thy cause, to the
content of the hearers, and to my better understanding, if I be deceived in any
thing.


Boner. May my Lord of Worcester, you did not well to exhort him to prayer,
for they have a singular pride herein: they are herein like certain
heretics that Pliny makes mention off: they did ^ing daily praises to God,
before the dawning of the day.


Phil. God make me and you such heretics, for they were right Christians, with
whom the tyrants of the world were offended for their well doing.


Col. Where can you prove that the Church of Rome has erred at any time:
Eusebius says, the Church was established at Rome by Peter, and Paul, and
Peter was Bishop there 25. years.


Phil. I know Eusebius says so, but if you compare him with Saint Paul to the
Galathians, it will appear manifestly to the contrary: He lived not past five
and thirty years after he was called to be an Apostle: and S. Paul makes
mention of his abiding above eighteen years, and I am able to prove by
Eusebius and others, that the Church of Rome has manifestly erred, because
she agrees not with that which the primitive Church did use according to the
Gospel in their time as they write, there need no other proof, but compare the
one with the other.


Bon. Ought we to dispute with you of our Faith: Justinian in the Law has a
Title, De fide Catholica to the contrary.


Phil. That is true, but our Faith must not depend upon the civil Law: Ambrose
says, not the Law, but the Gospel has gathered the Church together.


Worcest. You are to blame, you cannot be content to be of the Church, which
has ever been of that Faith full of Antiquity.


Phil. I have been at Rome, where I saw your Lordship.


Worcest. I am sorry you have been there, for the wickedness which you saw there
peradventure causes you to do as you do.


Phil. I am taught otherwise by the Gospel, not altogether to refuse the
Minister for his evil living, so that he bring forth Doctrine according to
Gods word.


Worcest, Do you think the universal Church may be deceived?


Phil. Saint Paul prophesies that there shall be an universal falling away
from the Faith in the later times.


Col. That is not meant of Faith but of the empire, the Greek word (...) so
signifies.


Phil. The word (...) is properly a departing from the Faith, and thereof
comes Apostata, which signifies one that departs from the Faith.


Worcest. I am sorry you should be against the Christian world.


Phil. The world commonly and such as be called Christians (for the multitude)
hated the truth and be enemies unto the same.


Worcest. Do you think the universal Church has erred, and you only to be
of the truth.


Phil. The Church that you be of was never universal: for two parts of the
world, Asia, and Africa, never consented to the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, not to this day, neither follow his Decrees.


Glo. Yes in Florentines Council they did agree.


Phil. It was so said by false report, after they were gone home, it was not so
indeed, as the sequel of them all hitherto does prove the contrary.


Glo. By whom will you be judged in matters of controversy, which happen
daily.


Phil. By the Word of God: For Christ says in S. John, the word that he spoke
shall be Judge in the latter day.


Glo. What if you take the word one way, and I another way, who shall be Judge.


Phil. The Doctors of the Primitive Church.


Glo. What if you take the Doctors in one sense, and I in another.


Phil. Then let that be taken which most agrees to Gods Word.


Worcest. It is wonder how he stands with a few against a great number.


Phil. We have almost as many as you: We have Asia, Africa, Germany, Denmark,
and a great part of France, and daily the number of the Gospel does increase,
and a multitude does daily come out of France through persecution, that the
cities of Germany are scarce able to receive them: Therefore your Lordship may
be sure the word of God will one day take place, do what you can to the
contrary.


The fifth Examination.
Couen. Do you not believe your Creed, I believe in the Catholic Church.


Phil. Yes, but I cannot understand Rome to be the same, nor the like to it. S.
Ass. S. Peter builded the Catholic Church at Rome: And Christ says thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the succession of Bishops
can be proved in Rome from time to time, as it can be of no other place so
well, which is a manifest proof of the Catholic Church, as diverse Doctors do^
write.


Phil. You cannot prove the Rock, that Christ would build his Church on, to be
Rome; and though you can prove the succession of Bishops, it is not sufficient
to prove Rome the Catholic Church, unless you can prove the succession of
Peter's Faith? where upon the Catholic Church is builded to continue in his
successors at Rome: and at this present to remain there.


Couen. What means this word Catholic?


Phil. The Catholic Faith or Catholic Church is not that which is most
universal or of men received, whereby you d^e infer your Faith to hang upon the
multitude, which is not so: We judge (says S. Augustine) the Catholic Faith,
of that which has been, is, and shall be: so that if you can prove your
Catholic Church and Faith, has been taught from the beginning, and is, and
shall be, then may you count your selves Catholics, otherwise not: Catholic
in Greek is compounded of ^ which signifies according and (...), a sum, or
principle, or whole, so that Catholic Church or Faith, is as much to say as
the first, hole, sound, and cheifest faith.


Boner. Do you think the Catholic Church has erred, until within these few
years some have swarued from the same.


Phil. I do not think the Catholic Church has erred: but I require you to
prove the Church of Rome the Catholic Church.


Curtop. Ireneus, who was within a hundred years after Christ, came to Victor
Bishop of Rome, to ask his advice about excommunication of certain heretics,
which he would not have done if he had not taken him to be supreme head, and
Couentry bad him mark this Argument.


Phil. This fact of Ireneus proves no more for the supremacy then mine has
done, for I have been at Rome as well as he, and could have spoken with the
Pope and if I would: yet would there were none in England favored his
supremacy more then I: And it is not like that Ireneus, or the primative
church so take him, for I can show 7. general Councels after Ireneus time:
wherein he was never so taken in many hundred y^eres after Christ: These be the
Councels; the Nicentine, Ephesine, the first, and second: Calcedone,
Constantinopolitane, Carthagenense, Auilence.


Couen. Wherefore will you not admit the Church of Rome to be the Catholic
Church.


Phil. Because it follows not, nor agrees with the Primitive Church, no more
then an Apple is like a Nut: it were too long to name all the disagreements: I
will name but two: The Supremacy, and Transubstantiation.


Curtop. Although transubstantiation were decreed for an Article of the Faith,
not above 300. years, yet it was always believed. Boner said, that was well
said.


Phil. It is true, it was but lately planted by the Bishop of Rome, and you
cannot show any ancient writer that the primitive Church did believe any such
thing, with that Master Curtop shrunk away.


Couen. Can you disprove the Church of Rome, not to be the Catholic Church.


Phil. Yes that I can, but I desire rather to hear you prove it: First it does
not agree with the Primitive Church, neither in Doctrine, nor in the use of
Sacraments: And as you describe Catholic to be universal; the Church of Rome
was never universal: For the world being divided into three parts: Asia,
Africa, Europe: Two parts Asia, and Africa, professing Christ as well as we,
did never consent to the Church of Rome, and the most part of Europe does not
agree nor allow the Church of Rome: As Germany, Denmark, the Kingdom of Pole,
a great part of France, England, and Zeland, which is a manifest probation that
your Church is not universal,


Doctor Sauer. I am sorry to see you commune with so many learned men, and are
no more conformable unto them then you be.


Phil. I will be conformable unto them that be conformable to Christ and his
word: I pray (Master Doctor) be not so conformable to please men more then God,
contrary to your learning for worldly estimation, you are led away from the
truth for promotion sake as many Doctors be now adays.


Sauer. Saint Cyprian, (an ancient Writer) does allow the Bishop of Rome to be
supreme head of the Church.


Phil. I am sure he does not, for he writing to Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
called him his companion and fellow Bishop, and calls him not Pope nor any
other usurped terms, which are now ascribed unto the Bishop of Rome. Then they
brought forth Cyprian, and turned unto the third Epistle, where he says it
goes not well with the Church, when the High Priest is not obayed, which
supplieth the steed of Christ, after Gods word, and the consent of the Bishops,
and the agreement of the people.


Sauer. How can you avoid this place which makes so plain for the Bishop of
Rome his Supremacy.


Phil. It makes not so plain: First hear you may see that he calls
Cornelius his fellow Bishop, as he does also in other places, you do
misconstrue that same to make the high Priest only for the Bishop of Rome, and
otherwise then it was in his time: for there were by the Nicen^ Council four
Patriaches appointed: The Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the Patriarch of
Constantinople: The Patriarch of Alexandria, and the Patriarch of Rome: of
which four the Patriarch of Rome was lowest placed in the Council, and so
continued many years for the time of seven or eight general Conncels:
Therefore Cyprian writes unto Cornelius, Patriarck of Rome, because certain
heretics, as the N^uatians which were excommunicated by him, went from his
Dioces* to the Patriarcks of Rome, or of Constantinople, and there were
received in the Communion of there congregation in derogation of good
discipline, and maintaining of schisms: in that obedience is not given unto
the Priest of GOD, being in Christ's steed, not meaning the Patriarck of Rome
only, but every Patriarck in his precinet, who had every one of them a
Cathedral Church of learned Priests, in hearing of whom by a Convocation of
all his fellow Bishops, with the consent of the people, all heresies were
determined by the Word of GOD, and this is the meaning of Cyprian.


Sauer. I wonder you will stand so steadfast in your error to your own
destruction.


Phil. I am sure we are in no error, by the promise of Christ to the
faithful, that he will give them such a spirit of wisdom, that the
adversaries thereof should be never able to resist, and by this we know we are
of the truth, because neither by reasoning nor writing your Synagogue of Rome
is able to answer one of the learned Ministers of Germany, who has disclosed
your counterset Religion, which of all you is able to answer Caluins
institutions: Then Doctor Story came in, to whom I said you have done me great
injury, without Law you have imprisoned me more like a dog then a man, and you
promised me I should be judged the next day after.


Story. I am come now to keep my promise with you, was there ever such a
fantastical man as he is; may he is no man but a beast: yea these heretics
be worse then beasts, for they will take upon them to be wiser then all men;
being very asseheads, not able to maintain that which they stand in.


Phil. I am content to abide your railing Judgment, God forgive you: yet I am
no heretic, neither you nor any other can prove that I hold any jot against
the Word of God.


Story. The Word of God: whom will thou appoint to be a judge of the word?


Phil. The word it self.


Story. Do you not see the Ignorance of this beastly Heretic, he wills the
word to be judge of the word, can the word speak.


Phil. Christ says in S. John, The word which I have spoken, shall Judge in
the last day: therefore much more it ought to judge our doing now, and I am
sure I have my Judge on my side, which shall absolve and justify me in another
world, howsoever you judge me and other unrighteously, sure I am in another
World to judge you.


Story. What, you purpose to be a stinking Martyr, and to sit in judgment with
Christ at the last day, to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.


Phil. Yea, I doubt not thereof, I have the promise of Christ if I die for
righteousness sake, which you have begun to persecute in me.


Story. When the Judge in Westminster hall gives sentence, does the word give
sentence, or the Judge, tell me.


Phil. Civil men have authority by the word of God, to be Judges of civil
matters: but the word of God is not subject to man's judgment, but ought to
judge all the wisdom, thoughts, and doings of men; therefore your comparison
disproueth nothing which I have said, nor answers thereto.


Story. Will thou not allow the interpretation of the Church upon the Scripture.


Phil. Yes, if it be according unto the word of the true Church.


Story. And not we in possession of the Church, and have not our forefathers
this many hundred years, taken this Church for the Catholic Church, and if we
had no other proof, this were sufficient, for presumption of time, makes a
good title in Law.


Phil. You do well to allege prescription, for it is all that you have to
show for your selves, but you must understand, that presciption has no place
in matters appertaining unto GOD, as I can show you by the testimony of many
Doctors.


Story. Well Sirs, you are like to go after your Fathers, Latimer and Ridley,
who had nothing to allege for himself, but that he had learned his heresy of
Cranmer, where I came unto him with a poor Bacheler of Art, and he trembled as
though he had had the Palsy, as these heretics have always some token of
fear, whereby a man may know them, as you may see this man's eyes to tremble in
his head, but I dispatched them: and I tell thee, that there has yet been
never a one burned, but I have spoken with him, and been a cause of his
dispatch.


Phil. You have the more to answer for, you shall feel it in another world,
howsoever you do now triumph thereof.


Story. I will never be confessed thereof, I cannot tarry to speak with my
Lord, I pray one of you tell my Lord, my coming is to signify unto him, that
he must put of hand rid this Heretic out of the way, and going he said unto
me; I tell thee thou must thank no other man but me for this.


Phil. I thank you with all my heart, and God forgive you.


Story. What do thou thank me, if I had thee in my study half an hour, I
think I should make you sing another song.


Phil. No, I stand upon to sure a ground to be overthrown by you now.


The ninth examination.
Harps. MY Lord has sent you S. Augustine to look upon, I will read you an
Epistle where you may hear the celebration of the Mass.


Phil. Here is nothing that makes for the proof of the Mass: Saint
Augustine means of the celebration of the Communion, and the true use of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and not of your private Mass, which
you lately have erected in the stead thereof, for this word ( Mass) has bin
an old term attributed to the Communion, even from the Primitive Church. I
pray you tell me what Missa does signify, I think many that say Mass cannot
tell, but then Cousins and the Mass Priests were dumb.


Harps. You think it comes of the Hebrew word Massah, as though none were
seen in the Hebrew but you.


Phil. I take the communion to be called Missa, a mittendo, of such things as
were sent by the rich to the relief of the poor, always when the communion
was celebrated: for this cause was it called Missa, as learned men do witness,
at the which celebration of the Mass, all that were present did communicate
under both kinds, according to Christ's institution, as they did in S.
Augustines time: so being you cannot prove the Mass used at that time as you
now use it, you can never prove it a Sacrament by the name of the Mass, which
name was given to the communion.


Harps. What do you deny the Mass to be a Sacrament, it is a sacrifice which
is more then a Sacrament.


Phil. You can never make it a sacrifice, but first you must make it a
Sacrament, for of the Sacrament you deduce your Sacrifice.


Harps. Does not Christ say, This is my body, and does not the Priest pronounce
the same.


Phil. The pronuntiation of the words is not enough, except they be applied
unto the use that Christ appointed them: for though you speak the words of
Baptism over the water, yet if there be none baptized, it is no Baptism.


Harps. That this is not like, for this is my body is an Indicative
proposition, showing the work of God in the substance of bread and wine.


Phil. It is not only an Indicative proposition, but an Imparatiue, or
commanding; for he that said, This is my body, said also, take ye, eat ye;
and except it be taken and eaten, the words ( This is my body) can have no
verification.


Mass Chapl. Will you make the Sacrament to stand in the receiving, and that
the receiving makes it a Sacrament.


Phil. I say the common receiving must needs be concurrant with the true
Sacrament, without which it cannot be a Sacrament, because Christ has made
this a principle part of the Sacrament, Take ye, eat ye; which you do not in
your Mass, wherefore it can be no Sacrament, because it wants Christ's
institution.


Cosins. We forbid none to come to it, but as many as list may be partakers
thereof with us at Mass, if they require it.


Phil. Nay, you will minister but one kind unto them, which is not after
Christ's institution, and ye ought to exhort them that be present, to make a
sacrifice of thanksgiving for Christ's Passion, and to be partakers with you,
and by preaching show the Lords death, which you do not.


Mass Priest. If the Sacrament of the Mass be no Sacrament, unless all do
receive it, because Christ says, Take ye, eat ye, then the Sacrament of
Baptism is no sacrament, where there is but one baptized, because Christ said
to his Apostles, Go preach the Gospel to all creatures, baptizing all Nations.


Phil. Baptizing all Nations, is meant of all sorts of Nations, and to exclude
none that believe, whether Jew or Gentile, not meaning all at once, for that
were impossible* and Christ alone was baptized of John, and the Eunuch baptized
Phillip, with many more such like, but you have no such example of the body and
blood of Christ: but S. Paul commends to us, to use it in a Communion and
participation of many together, in the sixth to the Corinthians, As often as you
come together to eat the Lords supper, tarry one for another. And the Minister
speaks to all in Christ's behalf, to communicate with him, saying: Take ye,
eat ye, therefore all that be present and do not communicate, break Gods
commandments, and he is no just minister that does not distibute the Sacrament
as Christ did, to all that are present, where Gods word is transgressed, Christ
is not present, and therefore no Sacrament.


Harps. Will you have it no Sacrament except it be a Communion.


Phil. Gods words teaches so: Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Ephesians,
says, The oblation is in vain where none does communicate with the Priest,
therefore your Mass, where none eats thereof but the Priest alone, is a
vain Oblation, and a vain standing at the Altar. I pray tell me what the
Pronoune This, in the words, This is my body, does demonstrate.


Harps. It does demonstrate the substance of bread, which by the omnipotency of
God, and the words of the Priest, is turned into the substance of Christ's body.


Phil. Why, then Christ's body receives daily a great increase of many 1000.
pieces of bread into his body, and his body is become that which it was not
before: so you would make an alteration in Christ's glorified body, which is a
wicked thing to do.


Harps. The substance of bread after the words spoken by the Priest, is
vanished away by the omnipotency of God.


Phil. This is another song, here you may see how contrary you are unto your
selves: your schoolmen hold, that the very substance of bread is really turned
into the substance of Christ's body, and now of late you perceive the
inconvenience of that opinion: you imagine a new shift, and say the substance
of bread is euacuated, contrary to that your Church has believed and taught,
and all is to deface the sincere truth.


Harps. Is not God omnipotent, and can he not do as he has said?


Phil. But his omnipotency will not do contrary to his word and honor, it is
not Gods honor to include him bodily in a piece of bread, and of necessity tie
him thereto: and for to make a piece of bread God and man, which you see before
your face, does putrify after a time, God is as able to give his body with the
Sacramental bread, and it is contrary to the Scripture, which calls it bread
many times after consecration, you take away the substantial parts of the
Sacrament; as Take ye, eat ye, drink ye all of this, do this in remembrance
of me: and place in their steeds, hear ye, gase ye, knock ye, worship ye,
offer ye, sacrifice ye, for the quick and the dead: Is not this blasphemy to
God and his Sacraments, and contrary to the mind of all ancient Writers, and
contrary to the example of Christ and his Apostles; and this is the substance
of all his examinations and Arguments. He did often tell them they were blind
guides of the blind, and as I am bound to tell you, you are very Hypocrites,
tyrannous^y persecuting the truth: your own Doctors and evidences you bring,
be directly against you; you must bear with me s^^ing I speak in Christ's
cause, and because his glory is defaced, and his people cruelly and wrongfully
slain by you, because they will not consent to the dishonor of God, and to
hypocrisy with you, if I told you not your fault, it should be required at my
hands in the day of judgment; therefore know you (ye Hypocrites) that it is
the Spirit of God that tells you your sin: I pass not I thank God of all
your cruelty, God give you grace to repent.


Being brought to Newgate after he was condemned, when Alexander the keeper
came in; Ah said Alexander, Have thou not done well to bring thy self hither:
Master Philpot said, I must be content, it is Gods appointment, and I shall
desire you to have your gentle favor, for you and I have been of old
acquaintance: Well said Alexander, if you will recant I will show you any
pleasure that I can^ Nay said Master Philpot, I will never recant that which I
have spoken, for it is most certain truth, in witness whereof I will seal it
with my blood: Then h^s commanded him to be set upon the block, and as many
Irons put upon his Legs as he might bear. Then the Clarke told Alexander, that
Master Philpot had given his Man Money; Alexander said to his man, what money
has he given you^ And he searched him, and took money from him: Then said
Master Philpot, Good M. Alexander be so much my friend, that these Irons may
be taken off, He said, Give me my fees and I will take them off, if not thou
shall wear them still; Then said he, what is your fees? He said four pounds,
Ah said Master Philpot, I have not so much, if you will take twenty shillings
I will send my man for it, or I will lay my Gown to gage, for the time is not
long I am sure that I shall be with you: then Alexander commanded him to be
had into Limbo, and so he was; Then his man took an honest man with him, and
went and showed the Sheriff, one Master Michaell, how master Philpot was
handled in Newgate, then the Sheriff took his Ring from his finger, and
delivered it unto the honest man which came with Master Philpots man, and bad
him command the Keeper, by that token, to take off his Irons, and handle him
more gently, and to give his man again that which he took from him: when they
told their message to Alexander, he said, I perceive Master Sheriff is a
bearer with Heretics, to morrow I will show it to his betters, yet he went to
Master Philpot at ten of the clock and took off his Irons, and gave his man
that which he took from him. He gave God thanks when news came he should be
burned the next day: when the Sheriff called him to go^ to execution, he came
down most joyfully; when he came to Smithfield the way was soul, so two of
the Officers took him up and carried him unto the stake: Then he said merrily,
what will you make me a Pope, then he kissed the stake and said, Shall I
disdain to suffer at this stake, seeing my Redeemer suffered vile death upon
the Cross for me, in the midst of the flames he yielded up his soul unto
Almighty God, and like a Lamb gave up his breath.

Thomas Whittle Priest, Bartelet Green Gentleman, John Tudson and Thomas Went
Artificers, Thomas Brown, Isabell Foster wife, Ioane Warren, alias Lashford,
Maid.
THe Papists having this last years, murdered the learned and princi^all members
of Christ's Church, ^556.
whereof there were now very few, which either were not consumed with fire, or
compelled to fly their Country, they continued this year likewise no less
cruelty toward the inferior sort of people; whereof these seven were burned in
Smithfield the 27. day of January at one fire, and they were condemned all in
one day upon one manner of Articles: the special points were for denying the
Sacrament of the Altar, and the Mass.

This Thomas Whittle was the Priest that Philpot makes mention of, where you
may see how he recanted, and then became desperate, and could not be at quiet
in conscience, until he had gotten to see the Bill again which he had
subscribed and torn off his name; wherefore Boner buffeted him, and plucked
off a piece of his beard, but after he had torn it he was in great peace of
conscience, and stood out manfully for the faith, and sealed to the truth with
his martyrdom. In an Epistle of his, he calls the Bishops and Priests the
sworn Soldiers of Satan, the arch-enemies in whom so lively appear the
very visage and shape of Satan, that a man may well affirm them to be Devils
incarnate, as I by experience do speak; wherefore who so shall for conscience
matterscome into their hands, had need of the wiliness of the Serpen^^e save
his head, and to take heed how he, consents to their wicked writings: sore
did they assault me, and craftily tempt me to their wicked ways.

Bartlet Green was borne in the Parish of Bassinghall in London, being a
Student in Oxford at the first he was an utter enemy to the truth, until God
of his mercy opened his eyes by coming unto the Lectures of Peter Martire,
Reader of the Uniuersity Lecture in the said Uniuersity, whereof when he had
once tasted, it came unto him as the Fountain of living Water, so that he
never thirsted any more, but had a Well springing unto eternal life; and
though he were called by his Friends from the Uniuersity unto the Temple in
London, to study the Common Laws, yet be continued in his earnest study and
profession of the Gospel. He writing a Letter unto one Goodman, who was fled
beyond the Sea for Religion, containing a report of certain Articles of
questions which were cast abroad in London, and an answer to a Letter that
Goodman wrote unto him, in which he required to have the certainty whether the
Queen were dead, as it was reported beyond sea. Whereupon Green answered,
that she was not dead. The bearer of this letter, and many other letters from
others, was apprehended by the way, and the letters brought to the Council.

These words, The Queen is not yet dead, seemed heinous to some of the
Council: yea, they would have made treason of them if they could by Law; but
when they could not make it treason, they examined him upon points of Religion;
and after they had long detained him in prison, as well in the Lower, as
elsewhere, they sent him at last to Bonner, to be dealt withal according to
the Ecclesiastical Laws: And being presented to Bonner, his Archdeacon and
diverse others sitting at the Table with him, who demanded of him the cause of
his imprisoning; which when he had showed him, he asked him if he had not since
written, or spoken against the natural presence in the Sacrament. Then he
desired to be charged according to the order of the Law to hear his accusers.
Then Doctor Chadsey was sent for, who reported that before him, M. Mosly, and
the Lieuetenant of the Tower, he spoke against the real presence, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and affirmed our Church to be the Church of Antichrist,
which he confessed, and said he would continue therein, and maintain it. Then
M. Wel^h arose, and desired to talk with me alone: and having taken me into
another Chamber, he said he was sorry for my troubles, and would be glad to see
me at liberty: and he maruailed that I, being a young man, should stand against
all the learned men of the Realm, against the determination of the Catholic
Church from Christ's time. I promise you, quoth he, I have read all Peter
Martyrs, and Cranmers, and all the rest of their Books, and have conferred
them with the contrary, as Roffensis, and the Bishop of Winchester, and the
rest, and could not perceive but that there was one continual truth, which
from the beginning had been maintained; and those that any time severed from
this unity, were answered and answered again. This was the sum of his talk,
which lacked neither wit nor eloquence.

I answered, I am young, and lack both wit and learning, but God is not bound
to time, wit, or knowledge; but rather chooses the weak things of the world to
confound the strong: neither can men appoint bounds to Gods mercy: For he
says, I will have compassion on whom I will: He has no respect of persons,
whether old or young, rich or poor, wise or foolish, Fisher or Basketmaker, God
gives knowledge of his truth through his free grace, to whom he lists,
James. 1. And I believe Christ has his universal Church, his Spouse,
scattered through many Realms, where he list: the Spirit inspireth where it
will, he is no more adicted to any one place, then to the person and quality of
any one man of this Church. I know I am a member trusting to be saved by the
faith that is taught therein: But how this Church is known, is the end of all
Controversies; the true marks of this Church, is the true preaching of his
Word, and ministering of his Sacraments: these marks were sealed by the
Apostles, and confirmed by the ancient Fathers, until the wickedness of Men
and the Devil, these marks were sore worn, and almost taken away, but God
has ^enued the Print, that his Church may be known in many places: I would
all that were of contrary opinion, would seek the knowledge of the truth with
prayer and tears, as I have done. Now I am brought before a many of Bishops,
and learned men to be made a fool and laughing stock; but I weigh it not a
rush. For God knows that my whole study is to please him, and I care not for
man's pleasure or displeasure.

Then we fell again in long talk of the Church, wherein his learning and wit
was much more then mine* and being diverse times examined by the Bishop and
others, standing stiff in his opinion, and neither by flattery nor fear, could
be won from the truth, he was condemned, and burned, as before.

He being in Prison in Newgate, having persuaded many of the common goal to
repentance and faith; he, the day before he was executed, wrote to diverse
Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, of his acquaintance in commendation of the
true spiritual love of Gods children, how that it is the chief fruit of the
spirit, where it is the only line that tieth Christ's members to him, and one
to another: and that neither prison, nor distance of place, nor time, can
break this love, nor death it self: For Faith and Hope have finished their
course when we are come to heaven; but our love to Gods children does remain
there they in heaven love us, and pray for us; and we love them. Now for this
love sake he charge ye said Gentlemen his acquaintance, by all menes to seek
the deliverance of these prisoners that he had converted, and to help them
with necessaries.

Thomas Brown was borne in the Parish of Histon, in the Diocese of Ely, and
after dwelt in the Parish of S. Brides in Fleetstreet, and was brought to
Bonner by the Constable, and was condemned, as before.

John Tudson was borne in Ipswich, in the County of Suffolk, and after he was
prentice at London in the Parish of S. Buttolph, and was sent by Story to
Bonner, and was condemned as before.

John Went, borne at Langham in Essex, a Shere-man; he was likewise sent by
Story to Bonner, and condemned, as before.

Isabell Foster was wife to one John Foster, a Cutler, of the Parish of S.
Brides in Fleetstreet, she was sent to Bonner for not coming to Church, and
condemned, as aforesaid.

Ioane Lashford, Alias Warn: there is mention before of Elizabeth Warn, with
John Warn her husband, were apprehended at a Communion in Bow-Church-yard, and
both were burned for the same: and now the daughter followed the Parents in the
same Martyrdom. Doctor Story procured their death, and after their deaths he
was charged with forty pounds that he owed them: she confessed and protested
there was no real presence of Christ's body and blood in ^ Sacrament of the*
Altar, and that auricular confession and absolution, after the popish sort, was
not necessary, nor the Mass good, or according to the scriptures, and says,
that these and all other supertiuous Sacraments, ceremonies, and divine service
now used in this realm of England, was most vile, and contrary to Christ's
words and institutions, so that they neither were at the beginning, nor shall
be at the latter end. The Bishop exhorting her to return to the holy mother
Church, she said boldly to him again: If you will leave your abomination, so
I will return, and otherwise I will not. These seven were all burned together
in one fire as aforesaid.

John Lomas, Anne Albright, Ioane Catmer, Agnes Snoth, Ioane Sole.
John Lomas of the parish of Tenderden in Kent, 1556.
was cited to appear at Canterbury, being examined upon diverse Articles, he
answered still that he believed as it was contained in Gods Book; and being
examined whether he believed the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament of the
Altar really under y^ forms of bread and wine after consecration: he answered
that he believed no realty of Christ's body in the Sacrament, neither under
foorme nor trestle: wherefore he was condemned the 18 day of January.

Agnes Snoth, Maid, of the parish of Smarden in Kent, was likewise examined
before the Pharisaical Judges; and for denying auricular confession, and for
saying none could receive y^ Sacrament of the Altar, as now it is used, without
danger of damnation; and for denying penance to be a Sacrament, and for saying
the popish absolution was not co^sonant to Gods word, she was likewise
condemned,

Anne Albright, alias Champnes, being examined, denied to be confessed of a
Priest, saying, you Priests are the children of perdition, and can do no good
by your confession; and told the Judge and his assistants, that they were
subuerters of Christ's truth; and she said, the Sacrament of the Altar was a
naughty and a^ominable Idol, wherefore she was likewise condemned.

Ioane Sole of Horton in Kent, was condemned of the same Pharisees and Priests
for not allowing Auricular confession, and for denying the real presence in
the Sacrament.

Ioane Cormer of the parish of Hithe in Kent, the fifth and last of these
heavenly Martyrs, she denied Auricular confession; she said, the Sacrament of
the altar was now made a very Idol, she was likewise coudemned: these five
were bu^ned at two stakes in one fire together at Canterbury the 31. of January.

Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Cauterbury.
HE was borne in Nottingham shire, his fathers name was Thomas Cranmer his
ancesters were worthy Esquires, 1556.
his mother was a gentle woman named Agnes H^tfield, he was of Cambridge in the
time when good Authors were neglected, and filthy barbarousnesse embraced in
all schools and universities, only the names and number of liberal Arts did
remain, the arts themselves were clean lost. Logic was gone into
sophistical trifles, Philosophy both morrall and natural was miserably
defaced with infinite questions and subtilties: the use of tongues and eloquent
learning, was either small or none at all: and divinity was so laden with
articles and definitions, that it served rather for the gain of a few, then
for the edification of many. So he was constrained to spend a part of his
youth until he was twenty years old, in the peevish questions of Duns and
other masters of that sort, at length the tongs and other learning began a
little to spring, and the books of Erasmus began to be much esteemed, with a
number of good Authors besides, on which Cranmer rubbed away his old
ruf^inesse as upon a whetstone, then Luther rose, the happy day of Gods
knowledge, who wakened men's minds to the clear light of the truth. At thirty
years old he gave his mind wholly to discuss matters of religion on both
parts, and having performed the same, he spent three years in the study of the
Scriptures, then he read the old writers, despising not the new, weighing all
men's opinions with secret judgment, he neu^r read any writers book without pen
and ink^, in all controversies he gathered every authors sentence briefly: at
35. years old he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, he was chosen one of the 12
that should decide y^ matter of kings Henry's divorce, and by his arguments,
learning, and means it was brought to pass, then he was sent to Paris with
diverse Noble men and Bishops, where he behaved himself in that case, that he
was commended by the Ambassadors to the king for his singular wisdom,
gravity, and learning, that he won such great credit that he was alone sent
Ambassador to the Emperor to debate this business, but the Emperor refused
to determine the matter, but remitted the whole question to the Popes court:
after he was sent to Rome Ambassador to the Pope, where he behaved himself
with ^o less diligence, that he compelled the Popes chief divines by
arguments to grant the marriage to be against the law, but yet by the
dispensation of the Pope it might be made lawful. Warram Archbishop of
Canterbury dying, he was sent for by king Henry and made Archbishop of
Canterbury, then came in the question of the Popes supremacy, and all the
weight of the business was chiefly laid upon Cranmers shoulders; he therefore
alone received, answered, and confuted all the objections of the Papists, he
proved that the Popes Lordship was not brought in by any authority of
Scriptures, but by ambitious tyranny, and that the chiefest power on earth,
belonged to the Emperor, to kings and Potentates, to whom the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, Priests, by Gods commandment were no less subject then other men,
and therefore it were best by the consent of the king, and other estates, the
ambitious Lordship of the Pope, being driven out of England, should keep it
self within his own Italy, as a river is kept within his banks, which was
performed by act of Parliament, then by little and little he reformed the
Church into a more wholesome discipline of Christ, and labored to banish the
Popes errors, heresies, and corruptions, and he obtained of the king, that
certain learned men should make a book of Ecclesiastical institutions, which
was called the Bishops Book: then the abolishing of Monasteries began to be
talked of, the kings desire was, that all the Abbey lands should come unto his
coffers, the Archbishop and others would have them employed to other good uses,
whereby the king being bent against Cranmer, especially by the instigation of
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, which sought all occasions to hinder the Gospel,
he set forth the 6. Articles by full consent of Parliament, which contained the
sum of Popish religion. What slaughter by the space of 8. years these
Articles made, is already declared: but after, he forgoing his anger with the
Archbishop: seeing he stood against him, in conscience, not in stubburnesse, he
began to favor him, and thought to have taken away the 6. Articles, and
reformed other matters if he had lived; but Cranmer and the Lord protector
brought it to pass in king Edwards days: his story how he was used in Queen
Mary's reign is mentioned before, and his disputations at Oxeford, and how he
was condemned there and left in prison until this time.

And because the sentence was void in law, because it was given by persons
excommunicated, (for they were not then absolved by the Pope nor his authority
received in the realm) therefore there was a new commission sent from the Pope
for the conviction of Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, and the Bishop of Gloucester
was appointed the Popes delegate, and after they had condemned Latimer and
Ridley, as before is said. The said Legate and his company being set in Saint
Mary's Church apparelled in his Pontificalibus as if the Pope in person had
been there: the Bishop of Canterbury was brought before them, putting off his
cappe he did obeisance to the king and queens proctors, then looking in the
Legates face, he put on his bonnet again, making no obedience toward him,
wherefore the Bishop said unto him, that it might beseem him well, waying the
authority which he did represent, to do his duty to him: he answered, he
had sworn never to admit the Pope into this Realm, and therefore he would
commit nothing by sign or token which might argue his consent to the re^eiuing
of him, and that he did it not to any contempt of his person.

Then the Legate made an eloquent oration, to put him in remembrance, that from
a mean gentleman he was raised to be a Princes Ambassador, and further to be
Archbishop and Primate of the Realmealmost 30, years, and s^ far in trust
with the king, that he made him president of his council, and after left him in
special trust for the government of the young Prince during his minority,
such blessing God had given him whilst he continued in the Catholic faith.

He exhorted, him on the other side, to consider how he was now fallen from his
dignities and officices, and in high displeasure of the King and Queen, judged
to die for high treason; and all these things to have happened unto him, only
because he had severed himself from the Sea of Rome, and was become a father of
new devised religion, and although your estate is so miserable, that the
meanest in this assembly will not change his condition and calling with you:
yet further he was like to fall by the just judgment of God into hell and
everlasting damnation, if he did not repent of his errors and schisms,
whilst he had time of repentance, whereunto he exhorted him earnestly,
repeating many places of Christ's mercies to them that repent, and showed that
to return to the Church was the only way to save both body and soul, and I
doubt not but the King and Queen will perdon your condemnation of treason if
you will return unto the Church and forsake your opinions, which I desire you
to do.

Then Cranmer desired license to speak, which was gently granted him: first he
made protestation that he did not answer to him as to a lawful Judge;
because he was deputed for the Pope, but to give a reason of his faith, which
God has commanded him to do to every one that shall demand a reason thereof.

Then he said, My Lord you have learnedly put me in remembrance of many things
touching my self, which I will not answer: I acknowledge Gods goodness unto
me, and thank him as heartily for this estate that now I am in, as ever I did
for the time of my prosperity, showing that his greatest grief was, to see the
Popes Jurisdiction restored to England again: Alas! what has the Pope to do
in England, whose laws are so far different from the Laws of this realm,
that whosoever swears to both, must needs incur perjury in the one? And I
am heartily sorry to think that her grace, the day before her Coronation,
took an oath to observe the laws of this realm; and also took an oath to
the Bishop of Rome, promising to maintain that Sea, which was impossible but
she must needs be forsworn in the one.

And as for the matter of Heresy, wherewith you charge me, I call God to
witness I know none which I maintain: but if it be heresy to deny the Popes
authority, and the religion which the sea of Rome has published unto the world
these latter years, then all the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church, the
Apostles, and Christ himself, taught heresy: And he desired all them present
to bear him witness, that he took the Traditions and Religion of the Pope to
be most erroneous, false, and against the doctrine of holy Scriptures, which
he had often proved by preaching and writing; and the Pope to be very
Antichrist, so often preached by the Apostles and Prophets, in whom most
evidently does concur all the signs and tokens whereby he was painted unto
the world to be known by: for he aduanceth himself above all Emperors and
Kings of the world, whom he affirms to hold of him, and to be at his
commandment: and the stories make mention of his intolerable pride and
tyranny used to them, as no King would have done to his subjects, nor a good
master to his servants, setting his feet upon Emperors necks, and making
others to hold his stirrops, and removed others from their Empires; and has
not only occupied the highest places in the world above Kings, but has
presumed to fit in the seat of Almighty God, which is the conscience of man,
and to keep the possession thereof, he has promised forgiveness of sins, he
has brought in Gods of his own framing, and invented a new religion full of
lucre, quite contrary to the Scriptures, only for maintaining of his kingdom,
displacing Christ from his glory, and holding his people in miserable servitude
of blindness, to the loss of a number of souls which God at the latter day
shall exact at his hands; boasting in his Canons and decrees, that he can
dispense against Peter, Paul, the old Testament, and New: and that in his
fullness of power he can do as much as God. If any man can be advanced above
him, let him be judged Antichrist.

This enemy of God and our redemption is so evidently painted out in the
Scriptuers, with such manifest tokens which all see clearly appear in him,
that except a man will shut his eyes and heart against the light, he cannot
but know him; therefore I will never give my consent to the receiving of him
into the Church of England: and my Lord sand you that be here, examine your own
consciences, you are sworn against him, you are learned and can judge the
truth, I pray God you be not wilfully blind, I have discharged my conscience to
the world and I will write my mind to her grace, which letter you may see in
the book at large.

Story and Martine diverse times interrupted him, saying, he spoke blasphemy,
and would feign have the Bishop put him to silence, who notwithstanding
suffered him to end his speech.

Then they charged him that he was sworn unto the Pope when he was made
Archbishop; but he denied it, and said: It appears that he did not, by the
record of the country, which one of them confessed. Many marvelled that in so
perilous a time he had so sincerely proceeded, choosing rather to venture the
loss of his life, and all his glorious pomp, then to do any thing that might
spill his conscience.

Then they objected, that he was married; which he confessed: Doctor Martine
said, his children were bondmen to the Sea of Canterbury. At which he smiled,
saying: If a benificed Priest had a Concubine, and had bastards by her, they
are not bondmen to the benifice, I trust you will make my childrens cause no
worse.

Then D. Martine demanded of him who was the supreme head of the Church; he
said, Christ: Martine said, you made K. Henry supreme head of the Church. He
said, of the people of England, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, and not of the
Church: for Christ is the only head of the Church, and of the Faith and
Religion of the same.

The Articles of religion, touching the Sacrament, denying transubstantiation,
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the real presence, he affirmed as he taught in
his Book. Then they cited him to appear 80, days after at Rome, and then
sent him to prison; where thou may see their visored face of Justice, as
though the Court of Rome would condemn no man before he answered for
himself: but the same time the Pope sent letters executory unto the King and
Queen to disgrade and deprive him, which was done before twenty days were
done: And though he were kept in prison, at the end of the 80 days he was
decreed Contumax, and thereupon condemned.

Upon S. Valentines day next after, the Archbishop was disgraded, and condemned
by Bonner, and Thurlby Bishop of Ely, who sometimes was Cranmers Chaplain, and
preferred by him: at which time Bonner, which a long time had borne great
malice toward him, and rejoiced greatly see this day wherein he might triumph
over him at his pleasure, made an Oration to the people in this sort:

This is the man who has ever despised the Popes holiness, and now is to be
judged by him: this is the man that has pulled down so many Churches, and now
is come to be judged in a Church: this is the man that contemned y^ blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, and now is come to be condemned before the said
Sacrament, hanging over the Altar: this is the man, that like Lucifer, sat in
the place of Christ, upon an Altar, to judge others, and now is come before the
Altar to be judged himself. Thus he continued half an hour heaping up a
number of lies together, beginning every one with, This is the man, so
lothsomly, that he made every man weary. When they had disgraded him, they
stripped him of his gown, and put upon him a poor yeoman Bedles gown
thrid-bare, and as ill-fauouredly made as could be, and a Townsmans cap upon
his head, and so delivered him to the secular power: in this filthy gown he
was carried unto prison.

The Queen and Bishops having kept the Archbishop now almost three years in
prison, seeing by no means they could prevail with him all this while, to turn
him from his religion, they suborned certain men which should, by entreaty,
and fair promises, or any other means, allure him to recantation: so the wily
Papists flocked about him, laboring to draw him from his former sentence to
recantation, especially Henry Sidall, and Friar John, a Spaniard, they showed
him how acceptable it would be to the Kings and Queen, and how gainful it
would be both bodily and spiritually, they added that the Council and
Noblemen bare him good will, promising him both his life and ancient dignity,
saying the matter was but small, the setting of his hand to a few words; but if
he refused, there was no hope of pardon: for the Queen was purposed that she
would have Cranmer a Catholic, or else no Cranmer at all. By these and such
like prouocations, they at last w^nne him to subscribe: It may be supposed
that it was for hope of life and better days to come: But it appears by a
Letter of his to a Lawyer, that the most cause why he desired his life to be
delayed, was, that he might make an end of a Book against Marcus Antonius, a
Papist, which he had begun; but it is manifest that it was against his
conscience: it pleased God that so great virtues in this man should not be
without some blemish; and that y^ falsehood of the Pop^sh generation by this
means might be the more evident, and that we should have the less confidence
of our own strength, presently this recantation was put in Print and
published, notwithstanding it was decreed that Cranmer should be burned out of
hand, and the Queen commanded a funeral Sermon to be made for him by Doctor
Cole; and having his lesson given him, he went speedily to Oxford to play his
part. The morning before he should be executed Cole gave him 15 crowns to
give to y^ poor. The Archbishop surmised whereabouts they went, after the
Spanish Friar came unto him with a paper of Articles which Cranmer should
openly profess in his recantation before the people, desiring him to write his
name unto it: then he prayed him to write a Copy of it, and keep it with him,
which he did, and knowing whereunto their devices tended, he put secretly into
his bosom his prayer with his exhortation written in another paper. Cranmer
was brought from prison to S. Mary's Church betwixt two Friars, which mumbled
certain Psalms in the streets as they went: when they came unto the Church
they sung Nunc dimittis: then they brought him to his standing, where they left
him, there he stood all y^ Sermon in a bare ragged gown, and ill-fauouredly
clothed with an old square cap, exposed to the contempt of all men. In this
habit when he had stood a good while upon the stage, he turned unto a pillar,
and kneeling and lifting up his hands to heaven, he prayed unto God once or
twice. After a while Cole came and began his Sermon, altogether to the disgrace
of Cranmer, showing that he was the only man that began this heresy and
schism from the Catholic Church, that he was the cause of the divorce
betwixt the Queens father and mother: and that for these and other maine
causes, the Queen and Council did think fit that he should be burned,
although he had recanted.

At the end of his Sermon he brought many scriptures to comfort him, that such
as die in Gods faith, he will either abate y^ fury of y^ flame or else give him
strength to abide it, he glorified God much in his conuersi^n, because it
appeared to be only his work, showing what great means was used to convert
him, but none could prevail until God reclaimed him, saying; whilst he flowed
in riches and honor, he was unworthy of death; but lest he should carry with
him no comfort, he promised, that immediately after his death there should be
Dirges, Masses, andFunerals executed in all the Churches in Oxford for ^uccour
of his soul. But Cranmer, during the Sermon, lifted up his hands and eyes to
heaven: the very shape of forrow was lively expressed in him, more then twenty
times: he shed abundant tears from his fatherly face, but especially when he
made his prayer before the people. After Cole had done his Sermon, he had
Cranmer perform his promise, to express your faith, that you may take away
suspicion from men, that they may vnvnderstand you a Catholic indeed.

I will do it said the Archbishop with a good will: then he desired y^ people to
pray for him, that God would forgive him his sins: and one offense does trouble
me more then all the rest, whereof in process of my talk you shall hear; and
after he had made a very pithy prayer with y^ people, which you may see in y^
book at large, then he said, every man at the time of his death, desires to
give some god exhortation unto others: so I pray God at this my departing, I
may speak somewhat whereby God may be glorified, and you edified. His first
exhortation was, that we should not set our minds too much upon this glozing
world, but upon God, and the world to come. His next exhortation was to
obedience to y^ King and Queen^. His third exhortation was, that they should
love together like brothers and sisters. The fourth was, that rich men would
weigh three sayings in y^ scripture: First Christ says, it is hard for a rich
man to enter into y^ kingdom of heaven. Secondly, S. John says, he that has
this worlds goods, and shuts his compassion upon his needy brother, how can
he say he loves God. Thirdly, Saint James bids them weep and howl for the
miseries that shall come upon you, your clothes be moth-eaten, your gold and
silver cankred and rusty, and the rust shall witness against you, and consume
you like fire: you hoord up treasure of Gods indignation against the last day.
Let them that be rich ponder well these three sentences: for if ever they had
occasion to show their charity, it is now, the poor being so many, and
victuals so dear.

Now being I am come to the end of my life, whereupon hangs my life past, and
my life to come, either to live with my Master Christ for ever in joy, or else
for ever in pain with the Devil: Therefore I will declare my faith unto you
without dissembling.

I believe all the Articles of the Creed, and all the Doctrine of Christ, his
Apostles and Prophets in the new and old Testament; and now I come unto the
great thing that so much troubled my conscience more then all that ever I did
in all my life; and that is in setting abroad a writing contrary to truth,
which now I renounce, as written with my hand, contrary to my heart, for fear
of death; and that is all such Bills and Papers which I have written or signed
with my hand since my degradation; and because my hand writ contrary to my
heart, it shall be first burned. And as for the Pope I refuse him, as Christ's
enemy, and Antichrist, with all his false Doctrine. And as for the Sacrament, I
believe as I have taught in my Book, and my Book shall stand at the last day,
before the judgment of God, when the Papisticall doctrine shall be ashamed to
show her face.

It was a world to see the Doctors beguiled of so great a hope, I think there
was never cruelty more notably deluded; and when he began to speak more of the
Sacrament, and of the Papacy, Cole cried to stop the Heretics mouth: then
the Friars pulled him from his seat, and led him to the fire: then they cried
to him; What madness has brought thee again into this error, by which thou will draw innumerable souls with thee into hell. He answered them not, but
directed his talk unto the people: But the Spanish Barker raged, and foamed
almost out of his wits; and he and the other Spanish Friar began to exhort him
afresh, but all in vain. When the fire began to burn near him, he put his
right hand into the flame, which he held so steadfastly, that it was burned
before his body was touched, he abode the fire with such constancy, that he
stood always in one place without moving of his members, with his eyes upward,
he off repeated his unworthy right hand, saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit,
and so gave up the Ghost.

Agnes Potten, and another woman.
ONe was the wife of Robert Potten of Ipswich in Suffolk, 1556.
the other the wife of Michael Trouchfield of the same town shoemaker, they
were burned at Ipswich the 16. of February, for denying the sacrament of the
Altar: their constancy in burning was wonderful, they earnestly exhorted the
people to credit and lay hold upon the word of God, and to despise the
institutions of the Romish route, with all their superstitions and rotten
religion.

Robert Spicer, William Coberley, Maundrel.
THese three were burned at one stake in Salisbury, 1556.
what their confessions were, and by whom they were condemned it appears not.

Robert Draks Minister, William Tims Ioyner, Richard Spurge Fuller, John Cauell
Weauer, George Ambrose Fuller, and Thomas Spurge Fuller.
THese six were burned at one fire in Smithfield the four and twentieth day
of April: they were all of Essex, and sent at diverse times by the Lord Rich to
Gardner, who sent them to prison, where they remained a year almost, and then
they were sent to Bonner, to whom they all denied the real presence in the
Sacrament of the Altar: after they were all sent for unto the Consistory;
first Tims was sent for, and exhorted to conformity: he answered, we have been
brought hither this day for Gods word, which we have been taught by the
Apostolic Preachers in King Edwards time, whom you have murdered because they
preached the truth, and they have sealed their doctrine with their blood, whom
I will follow. Then Bonner persuaded them not to stand to the litterall sense
of the Scriptures, but to use the interpretation of the Fathers. Then Tims
said, what have you to maintain the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
but only the bare letter? We have (quoth Bonner) the Catholic Church: no, said
he, the Popish Church of Rome, for which you be perjured, and the Sea of Rome
is the Sea of Antichrist, therefore to that Church I will never consent; I
confess Christ is present with his Sacraments, but with your Sacrament of the
Altar he is neither present corporally nor spiritually, for as you use it, it
is a detestable Idol. Then the Bishop seeing his constant boldness, condemned
him.

Then Robert Draks was called, and being exhorted to return to the Church of
Rome, he said, he utterly defied it and all the works thereof, even as I defy
the devil and all his works; then was he likewise cond^mned.

Then Thomas Spurge was demanded if he would return to the Catholic Church:
and then he called the rest, and upon the like demands he received the like
answers: so they had all their judgments, and delivered unto the Sheriff, and
after burned, as before.

John Hullier Minister.
He was bur^ed at Cambridge upon the second day of April for the professing
of Christ's Gospel, under Thurlby Bishop of Ely and his Chancellor: only a
Pra^er and a Letter of his are recorded; his Letter is to prove the Romish
Church Antichrist, and exhorts from dissembling with God and the world, in
coming to mass.

Christopher Lister Minister, John Mace, John Spencer, Simon Join, Richard
Nicoll, and John Hamond.
THese six were burned together at Colchester in Essex, where the most part of
them did inhabit: the eight and twentieth day of April: Bonner now waxing
weary, made a very quick dispatch with these; for as soon as they were
delivered by the Earl of Oxford and other Commissioners, unto John Kingstone
the Bishops Register: Bonner caused them to be brought unto his house at
Fulham, where, in the open Church he ministered unto them articles, to which
they answered alike, as follows:

That the Church of Rome is the malignant Church, and no part of the
Cathotholike Church, and that they believe not the doctrine thereof, and that
they believe there be no mo but two Sacraments in the Church of Christ, to wit,
Baptism and the Lords Supper; that they learned the truth of their profession
by the doctrine set forth in King Edwards time, and therein they would continue
as long as they lived; they refused to be partakers of the Sacrament of the
Altar, because it was used contrary to Gods word and glory; they said the
Popes authority was usurped, and that he was an oppressor of Christ's Church
and Gospel, and that he ought not to have any authority in England, and that
they utterly abhorred the Sea of Rome, for putting down the book of God, and
setting up the Babylonicall Mass, with all the rest of Antichrists
merchandise; and that after consecration there remains in the Sacrament Bread
and Wine as well as before; and that the real flesh and blood of Christ is not
in it; and that the Mass is not propitiatory, neither for the quick nor for
the dead, but mere Idolatry and abomination. And in the afternoon, when they
would not recant, they were condemned and burned, as before.

Margaret Ellice, Hugh Lauerock an old lame man and John Apprice a blind man.
SHe was of great Bursteed in Essex, 1556
and was sent to Bonner by Sir John Mordant Knight, and Edmund Tyrrell Esquire:
she died in Newgate the thirteenth of May, being condemned to be burned before.

Hugh Lauerocke an old lame man, and John Apprice a blind man; when they were
examined, answered in effect as Christopher Lister, John Mace, and others
before mentioned had done: after they were brought to the Consistori^, and
being persuaded to recant their opinions of the Sacrament, Hugh Lauerock said,
I will stand to my answer, I cannot find in the Scriptures that the Priests
should lift up over their heads a cake of bread: then Bonner asked John Apprice
what he would say; he answered, your doctrine that you set forth is so
agreeable with the world, and embraced, of the world, that it cannot be
agreeable with the Scriptures; and ye are not of the Catholic Church, for ye
make laws to kill men, and make the Queen your executioner, whereupon they
were condemned and sent to Stratford the Bow, and there burned, the ^ifteenth
of May: at their deaths Hugh Lauerock comforting John Apprice, said, be of good
comfort, my brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physician, he will heal
thee of thy blindness, and me of my lamenesse.

Katharine Hutte widow, Elizabeth Tharnell, and Ioane Horns.
IN the year 1556. these were burned in Smithfield, and were sent to Bonner,
with Margaret Ellice and the blind and lame man, for denying the real
presence in the Sacrament of the Altar, and for calling the Mass an Idol.
Katharine Hutte being required to recant, and say her mind of the Sacrament,
said, I deny it to be a God, because it is a dumb God, and made with men's
hands. Ione Horns said, if you can make your God to shed blood, or to show
any condition of a lively body, then will I believe you: but it is bread, and
that which you call heresy, I trust to serve my Lord God in. And touching the
Romish Sea, she said, I forsake all his abominations, and from them all good
Lord deliver us: they died more joyfully in the fire then some that burned them
did in their beds.

John Harpole and Ioane Beach widow.
THese two were burned at Rochester for their constant perseuering in Christ's
truth, 1556
about the first of April.

A blind boy and another suffered martyrdom at Gloucester: one of them was the
blind boy which came unto Bishop Hooper, whom the said virtuous Bishop
confirmed in the Lord, and the doctrine of his word, as is before mentioned,
whose examinations are not come unto our hands.

Thomas Spicer, John Deny, and William Pole.
THese were bro^ght before Dunnings, Chancellor of Norwich, and Minges his
Register: the Chancellor persuaded what he could to bring them from the truth:
and being he could not prevail he burst out in tears, entreating them to
turn again unto the holy mother Church. As he was thus laboring them, and
seemed unwilling to give judgment, the Register said, in what do you make
such ados? they be at that point they will be, therefore read sentence and
dispatch the knaves; whereupon he condemned them with tears, and the next day,
being the one and twentieth of May, they were burned at Beckles by Sir John
Silliard high Sheriff, without any writ from my Lord Chancellor. As the fire
burned about them, they praised God with such an audible voice, that it was
wonderful to all those that stood by. One Robert Bacon, and enemy to the
truth willed the tormentors to throw on ^aggots to stop the knaves breaths, but
they confessed the truth, and gave their lives for the testimony thereof very
gloriously and joyfully. Thomas Spicer was a labourer dwelling at Wenson in
Su^^olke.

The persecution of the towns of VVenson and Mendleson in Suffolk.
AT the commandment of Sir John Silliard High Sheriff, and Sir John Tyrrill
Knights, these, whose names follow, were persecuted out of the said towns. From
Wenson Alice Twayts and two of her servants, Humfrey Smith and his wife,
William Kachpoole and his wife, John Mauling and his wife, Nicholas Burlingham
and his wife, and one Rought and his wife.

From Mendleson Simon Harlstone and Katharine his wife with five children,
William Whiting and Katharine his wife, Thomas Dobson and his wife, Thomas
Hubbard and his wife, John Poncon, Thomas Woodward the elder, one Rennolds
wife, and a poor widow, and one mother Semons maid, besides those that were
constrained against their consciences, by the help of John Brodish the Parish
priest: the points of religion that they held, for which they were persecuted,
were these;

1 They held the word of God to be sufficient doctrine unto salvation.

2 They denied the Popes authority, and said their Church was Antichrist, and
Christ's adversary, they refused the abused Sacraments, defied the mass, and
all Popish service and ceremonies, saying they robbed God of his honor, and
Christ of his death and glory, and would not come to Church, except it were to
the defacing of that they did there.

3 That Ministers of Gods Church might lawfully marry.

4 That the Queen was chief head, and wicked Rulers were a great plagus of
God sent for sin.

5 They denied man's free will, and the Popes Church did err, and many other in
that point with them, rebuking their false confidence to be justified by works
and man's righteousness: when they were rebuked for talking so freely, they
would answer, they acknowledge, confess and believe, and therefore they must
speak: they acknowledged that tribulations were Gods prouidences, and that his
judgments were right, to punish them and others for their sins, and that
their troubles were of his faithfulness and mercy, and that one hair of their
heads should not perish before the time, but all things should work to the
best to them that love God, and that Christ was their only life and
righteousness, and that only by faith in him, and for his sake, all good
things were freely given them, as also forgiveness of sins, and life
everlasting. Many of these persecuted were of great substance, and had
possessions of their own.

William Slech died the thirtieth of May 1556. being imprisoned for the
doctrine of the Gospel, and the profession of the truth, in the Kings bench,
and was buried in the backside of the same prison, because the Papists thought
him not worthy to be laid in their Pope-holy Churchyards.

Thomas Harland MillWright, John Osward, Thomas Reed, and Thomas Auington.
T They were long prisoners in the Kings Bench for the confession of the truth,
and were burned together at one fire the sixth of June, in Jews in South-sex.

Thomas Wood Minister, and Thomas Miles were burned likewise at Jews in
South-sex the twentieth of June, for resisting the erroneous and heretical
doctrine of the papisticall and fal^^y pretended Catholics.

William Adherall Minister, and John Clement-Wheele-wright*
THese died in the Kings Bench the three and twentieth of June, 1556
and were buried in the backside, being imprisoned for the profession of the
truth.

A Merchants servant the next day was burned at Leicester for the like
godliness, by the cruel persecution of the Papists.

About this time there were thirteen burned in one fire at Stratford the Bow
by London eleven of them being men and two of them women, whose dwellings were
in sundry places in (...), and whose names f^llow: Henry Adlington, Lawrence
Parman, Henry Wye, William Hallywell, Thomas Bowier George Searle, Edmond
Hurst, Lion Cawch, Ralph Iackson, John Perifall, John Roth, Elizabeth Peper,
and Agnes George Their points of Religion does better appear by a Certificate
under all their hands, which I have here inserted, then by their examination
which follows.

Be it known unto all to whom this our Certificate shall be feene, that
whereas upon Saturday the thirteenth of June, sixteen of us were condemned to
dye, by the Bishop of London, for the sincere truth of Christ's verity, which
truth has bin continually defaced from the beginning by the wicked
adversaries, as it is slandered now by the Devil and his Imps, which
constrains us to manifest our belief, and the articles, wherefore we were
condemned for avoiding the slanders that might happen by occasion of the
flanderous Sermon lately preached at Paul's Cross by Doctor Fecknam Deane of
Paul's, where he defamed us to be of sixteen sundry opinions.

1 We believe by Baptism we were made members of Christ's Church, and although
we erred for a time, yet the root of Faith was preserved in us by the Holy
Ghost, which makes us certain of the same, and we do and will persist by
Gods assistance unto the end: And though the Minister were of the malignant
Church, yet he did not hurt us, because he baptized us in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; there was the word and the element;
Godfathers, and Godmothers, renouncing for us the Devil and all his works,
and confessing the Articles of the Christian Faith.

2 There are but two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, in these are
contained the two Testaments: the effect of the Law is Repentance, and the
effect of the Gospel is remission of sins.

3 There is a visible Church wherein the word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments truly ministered: Uisible to the wicked world, although it be not
credited, and by death of Saints confirmed: as in the time of Elias as well as
now.

4 The Sea of Rome is the Sea of Antichrist: The Congregation of the wicked,
whereof the Pope is head under the Devil.

5 God is neither spiritually nor corporally in the Sacrament of the Altar, and
there is no other substance but bread and Wine.

2 The Mass is not only a profanation of the Lords Supper, but a most
blasphemous Idol.

We affirmed to believe all that the Bishop or any could prove by Scriptures:
but he said he would not stand to prove it with heretics, but said, they
themselves were the holy Church, and that we ought to believe them, or else to
be cut off like withered branches.

When they were brought to Stratford the Bow they were divided into two parts,
and put into two chambers: then the Sheriff came to the one part and told them
that the other had recanted and were saved, and exhorted them to do the like,
and not cast away themselves: they answered, their faith was not builded on
man, but Christ crucified: When he could do no good with them, he went to the
other place, and told them their Fellows had recanted, and were saved, and
counseled them to do the like, and not willingly to kill themselves: unto
whom they answered as their fellows had done. When he saw he could not
prevail, he lead them to the fire, they joyfully kissed the stake: the eleauen
men were tied to four stakes, and the two Women loose in the midst, and so
they were burned all in one fire, with such love one to another, and constancy
in our Savior Christ, that it was wonderful.

Thomas Freeman, William Stannard, and William Adames.
THese were also condemned to dye with the other at the same time, and being
in the hands of the secular power, Cardinal Poole sent his dispensation for
their lives, and by that means they were kept from mart^rdome.

The fourteenth of June John Colstoke of Wellington in Liechfield Dioces, for
holding against the real presence and auricular confession, was compelled to
recant and to bear a faggot before the Cross bare-headed, having in one hand
a Taper, and in the other a pair of Beads.

The seventeenth of June Thomas Barnes and Ellice Birth were accused that one
wished to the other, in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, his dagger in
the belly of him that sung to the Organs ^he denied not but he spoke these
words, and that he then thought the mass abominable; and though he submitted
himself he was condemned to bear a faggot, with beads and his taper before
the cross.

The seven and twentieth of June Thomas Paret, Martin Hunt, and John Norrice
died in the Kings Bench, and were buried in the backside: they were imprisoned
for the profession of the truth.

Robert Bernard, Adam Foster and Robert Lawson.
THe 30. of June Hopton B of Norwich called Robert Bernard Heretic, because he
said he would never be confessed of a Priest: he answered, it greeueth me not
to be called heretic at your hand* for so your forefathers called the
Prophets and Confessors long ago: then the B: ^ad him follow him, and went and
kneeled before the Sacrament of the Altar: and as he was at his prayers, he
looked back and asked Barnard why he did not as he did, He answered, I cannot
tell why you should do so, the Bishop asked him, whom see you yonder, pointing
to the Pixe hanging over the Altar? Do you not see your maker there? He said,
No, I see nothing but a few clothes hang together in a heap: then the Bishop
commanded him to the Iayle, and ^ad put Irons enough upon him.

After one of the Guard had him to a Tavern where many Priests were, when they
could not persuade him, they threatened him with whipping and stocking, and when
they could pervert him by no means, then they carried him to the Bishop, who
immediately condemned him: He was a labourer, dwelling in F^an^den in Suffolk.

Adam Foster was a Husbandman, dwelling in Mendlesam in Suffollke: He was
apprehended by Thomas Mouse, and George Reuet Constables, at the command^ment
of Sir John Terill, because he would not hear Mass: He was cast into Aye
dungeon, from whence he was sent to Norwich, and condemned by the aforesaid
Bishop: Mouse presently after fell sick, and pined away to death: the ^ther
came to the like end not long after.

Robert Lawson a Linen Weauer, was likewise apprehended at the commandment of
Sir John Terill, and sent to Aye Dungeon, because he would not come to Church,
nor receive their Popish Idol.

When they were carried to their deaths, they most triumphantly ended their
lives in the fix.

John Careless of Couentry Weauer.
ABout this time he died in the Kings Bench, having been long imprisoned
there, he was examined before Doctor Martine, one of the Masters of the
Chancerie, a jolly stirrer in those matters: in which examination I find no
matters of religion, but that he answers a popish opinion of election, that
we are elected in respect of our good works, and so long elected as we do
them, and no longer, but he believed that God of his infinite goodness
(through Jesus Christ) did elect and appoint in him, before the foundation of
the earth was laid, a Church or Congregation, which he does continually guide
and govern by his grace and holy spirit; so that not one of them shall ever
finally perish, and that God has e^ernally predestined me to eternal life
in Jesus Christ. I am most certain and likewise sure that his holy spirit
(wherewith I am sealed) will so preserve me from all heresies and evil
opinions, that I shall die in none at all: I do believe that Christ did
effectually die for all those that repent, and believe, and for none other. At
his first coming into prison, his conscience was over much oppressed with the
consideration of his sins, until he had a comfortable letter of Philpot,
concerning the mercy of Christ to them that repent: and although a sorrowful
spirit be a sacrifice acceptable to God, and the earnest penny of election,
yet the end of it must be comfort and joy of the holy Ghost in assurance of the
remission of sins, therefore he ^iddeth him be careless, according to his
name, in assurance of the remission of sins in Christ.

Wherefore Carles thanketh God heartily, and confesses that Philpots sweet
exhortations had brought much glad tidings unto his tired soul, and that it
was greatly refreshed with the sweet savor of his precious Nard. I will now
according to your loving request cast away all care, and rejoice with you, and
pray God for you day and night, for now my foul is turned unto her old rest
again, and has taken a sweet na^ in Christ's lap, I have cast my care upon the
Lord, which will care for me, and will be careless, according unto my name: as
soon as I had read your comfortable Letter, my sorrows vanished away, as smoke
in the wind: I am sure the spirit of God was a^thor of it: Good M. Philpot thou
art a principal Pot indeed, filled with most precious liquor: Oh pot most happy
of the high Potter ordained to honor, which do contain such heavenly
treasure in the earthen vessel: Oh pot most happy, in whom Christ has turned
water into wine, and that of the best, whereof the Master of the Feast has
fi^led my cup so full, that it has made me drunken in the joy of the spirit:
When martyrdom shall break thee (oh vessel of honor) the fragrant savor of
the precious ointments will much rejoice the hea^y hearts of Christ's true
members.

John Gwinne, Askin, Iulines Palmer.
THe 16. of July these three godly and constant martyrs were burned at Newbery
in Barkshire. Iulines Palmer had been student in Magdalen College in Oxford,
and was Schoolemaister of Redding: all King Edwards days he was an obstinate
Papist, abhorring all godly prayer and sincere preaching, and was abhorred and
put out of the College for the same, yet after in Queen Mary's time, suffered
a most cruel death at the Papists hands. He was born in Couentry, his father
had sometimes been Mayor of the City. When Queen Mary came to her reign, he
was received into the fellowship of the College again, but his mind was ^o far
altered, that he would not come to prayers for fear of suspicion: but when he
should keep his bowing measures at the Confiteor, in turning upward and
downward, and knock his breast with Idolatrous adoration, at the lifting up
of the Sacrament, his heart rose against it, that he would get him out of the
Church, wherefore he left the College and became Schoolemaister in Redding,
and being vexed with the consideration of the cruelty that was then showed to
the Christians, he made a testimony of his Faith, and delivered it to Doctor
Geffery in his visitation, who reading the same put him in Prison, and within a
fortnight after burned him as before, where he yielded up as joyful a Soul to
God, as ever any did.

Katherine Cauches mother and Paratine and Guillimiue her Daughters.
THE said Katherine was a Widow, they were of the Isle of Garnesey, the 10. of
July they were there burned for her^ticks for professing the truth: Paratiue
being great with child, and ready to be brought a bed the womb of the said
Paratine being bu^ned, there issued from her a goodly man Child, which by the
officer was taken up, and after most spiteful manner thrown into the fire,
and most cruelly burned with her seely mother.

The cause was thi^; a woman had stolen a cup and pawned it to this Katherine
for six pence, she perceiving whose cup it was thought to have carried it home:
In the mean time the owner of the cup missed it, and charged ber with it that
stole it, who confessed it and brought the owner of the cup to the Widow who
delivered him the Cup: shortly after the Bayliff^s hearing thereof, searched
her house, they finding one Platter which had no mark, and another that had
the mark scraped out: Whereupon they brought her and her two Daughters to the
Justices, who committed them unto prison, and the Bailiffs seized upon all
their goods, and when they could prove nothing against them, the Bailiffs
accused them of heresy and caused them to be committed again; and the
Bailiffs wrote to Jacques Amy Deane of the I Will aforesaid, to desire him to
proceed against them in the cause of heresy: whereupon the said Deane,
assisted by the Curats there, did make an inquiry of the said widow and her
daughters, and condemned them for heretics, the widow and her daughters never
hearing thereof, and delivered it to the Bailiffs and Iurats, whereupon when the
Bailiffs did know that the said Deane and Curats had not examined the woman,
they would not sit in judgment that day, but ordained that the women should
first be examined of their Faith before the Deane and Curats: wherefore the
women were presented before the said Deane and Curats who answered that they
would obe^ the Ordinances of the King and Queen, and the commandments of the
Church, notwithstanding they were condemned, and thereupon burned, and the
Bailiffs had all their goods, as before, but in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign the Gern^^y men, and one Matthew Cauches, brother to ^he said
two Sisters presented a supplication to the Queens Commissioners touching that
matter, who sitting upon the cause, found the matter probable, and commit^ed
the Deane to prison, and dispossessed him of all his livings and possessions.

Thomas Dungate, John Forman, Mother Tree.
THe 18 of July these gave themselves to the fire for righteousness sake,
patiently abiding what the rage of man could say or do against them: they were
burned at Grinsted in Sussex.

Ioane Wast was of the Parish of Alhallowes in Darby, she was condemned by
Radulph Bane Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, his Chancellor, and others, for
that she did hold the Sacrament of the Popish Altar to be but a representation
of Christ's body and material bread and wine, and not his natural body,
unless it were received, and that it ought not to be reserved from time to
time over the Altar, but immediately to be received. She was burned at the
aforesaid Darby: when she suffered she made her prayer to the Lord Ies^s to
assist and strengthen her, and being bound to the stake with flames about her,
she suffered with joy and triumph, as though she had rather been going to a
banquet, then to yield up her life.

Edward Sharp was an aged man, borne in Wilshire, he was condemned the 8. of
September, where he constantly and manfully persisted in the just quarrel of
Christ's Gospel, for misliking and renouncing the ordinances of the Romish
Church. He was tried as pure gold, and made a lively sacrifice in the fire.

John Heart, Tho: Rauensdale, and two whose names we have not, the one a
Shomaker, the other a Coriar.
THese four were burned at Mayfield in Sussex the 24. of September, being at
the place where they should suffer, after they had made their Prayer, they
constantly and joyfully ended their lives, for the testimony of the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ. The next day, a young man, a Carpenter, whose name we
know not, was burned for the Testimony of Christ at Bristow: he died with much
joy, constancy, and triumph.

Thomas Horn and a woman.
THe 25. of September th^se two godly Martirs were consumed by the fire at
Watton Underhedge in Glocestershire, who died very gloriously in a constant
Faith, to the terror of the wicked, and comfort of the godly.

A Shoemaker was a true Witness and Disciple of the Lord, he renounced the
false colored Religion of the Romish Sea, wherein many a good man has been
drowned: he was burned at Northampton.

Three in the Castle of Cicester being in like bonds for the like cause of
Christ's Gospel, died in Prison, and were buried in the fields, who had been
burned if the cruel handling of Papists had not made them away before.

John Clarke, Dunstone Chittenden uncondemned, William Foster of Stone, Allice
Potkins of Staplehurst, John Archer of Cranbroke VVeauer.
THe first of November these five were macerate and pined to death by famine in
the Castle of Canterbury: they answered all to this effect, that they believe
the Articles of the Creed, but they believe no more Sacraments but two, that
prayers to Saints or souls in purgatory profit not, that faith only
justifies; they denied the Popish ceremonies in the Church: that it was as
good to carry a Dungfork as Candles on Candlemas day, and that it is as
necessary to carry the Gallows about if ones father were hanged, as to carry
the Cross; that they could not come to Church with a safe conscience. There
was fifteen of them in prison, and it seems the Bishops and Priests had
appointed to starve them al, had not a Certificate of the manner of their
cruel handling bin thrown out of the Castle window, whereby their doings were
made manifest: so the other ten were burned, as after appears.

In the Months of September, November, and December, there was a great
persecution in Couentry and Lichfield: the cruel Bishop Radulph Bane, and his
cruel Chancellor, Doctor Draycot, and nine Priests, and a number of others
were compelled to recant, and one Hoke was burned at Chester, as thou may see
in the Book at large.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF the Acts of the Church.
TOuching the process and whole discourse, concerning the condemning, taking
up, and burning the bones and books of Bucer, and Paulus Phagius, by the
commandment of Cardinal Poole, with all the rites and ceremonies thereunto
appertaining, with all the ridiculous proceeding of the Commissioners whilst
they were at Cambridge: and also the Oration of M. Acworth, Orator of the
University: at the restitution of Martine Bucer, and Paulus Phagius in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and also the dispitefull handling and madness of the Papists
toward Peter Martires Wife at Oxford, taking her up from her grau^ at the
commandment of Cardinal Poole, and after buried in a Dunghill. Concerning the
process of these things, I refer thee if thou be disposed to see them, to
the book at large.

The 18. of January the ten that remained of the aforesaid fifteen, that were
in prison in the Castle of Canterbury, whereof five of them were starued, the
^ther ten were burned, for the same points of Religion in effect as the other
five held as before is expressed; the names of these ten follow.

John Philpot of Tenderden, William Waterer of Bedingdy, Stephen Kempe of
Norgate, William Hay of Hith, Thomas Hudson of Sellenge: Matthew Bradbridge of
Tenderden, Thomas Stephens of Bedingham, Nicholas Final of Tenderden, William
Lowicke of Cranbroke, William Prowting of Thorneham.

The 8. of February a most bloody Commission was given forth by King Philip and
Queen Marie to prosecute the poor members of Christ. Whereupon twenty two
were apprehended in Essex, and brought up to London at once to Bonner, all of
them tied to a rope by two and two, and so lead in a rope through the streets
to Bonner. Now the Bishops and Council perceiving the number, and fearing to
put them to death, being so many together, least I some disturbance might rise
upon the same: they bad them make their submission and confession as they would
themselves, that they might make a color of recantation, whereupon they were
discharged: for their names I refer thee to the Book at large.

Thomas Loseby, Henry Ramsey, Tho: Thyrtell, Margaret Hyde, Agnes Stanley.
THe twelfth of April these were burned at one fire in Smithfield, Bonner
framed now Articles unto them, and confessing these points of his Articles,
they were condemned.

1 For speaking against the Faith, Religion, and Ecclesiastical service,
especially concerning the Mass and the seven Sacraments, saying they agreed
not with Gods word.

2 For being persuaded that the English service in King Edwards time, was godly
and Catholic.

3 That they did not think themselves bound to come to Church to hear the
Mattins, Mass, and Evening song.

4. That they did not think themselves bound to go a Procession, nor to bear
Tapers and Candles at Candlemas, nor take Ashes upon Ashwednesday, nor bear
Palms upon Palme-sunday, nor to creep to the Cross upon days accustomed,
not to receive and kiss the Paxe at Mass time, not to receive holy water or
holy bread, nor to except or allow the Ceremonies and vsages of the Church, as
they are used in this Realm.

5 For thinking they were not bound to confess their sins unto a Priest, nor
to receive absolution at his hand, nor to receive the Sacrament of the Altar.

6 For thinking prayers to Saints, or prayers for the dead are not lawdable,
profitable, not allowed by Gods Word, and that the souls departed go straight
ways to Heaven or Hell, so that there is no Purgatory.

7 For thinking all those that were burned in King Henry the eights time, and
in Queen Mary's time as Heretics, were no Heretics, but faithful and good
people: and for approving their opinions, and mis^iking their condemnations.

8 For thinking the Sacrament of the Altar to be an Idol, and to reserve it
to be honored, to be Idolatry: and likewise of the Mass, and ^l^uation of the
Sacrament.

After this, they were conuented again before the Bishop, in the Con^^story,
where these being asked what they had to say against judgment, Thomas Los^by
said, God give me strength to stand against you and your (...): your Law^s a
de^ouring Law, I perceive there is no way with me but death, except I will
believe in that Idol, the Mass.

Thomas Thirtle said, If you make me an Heretic, then you make Christ and all the twelve Apostles Heretics: for I am in the true faith, and I will stand to
it, for I know I shall have eternal life.

R^msey said, my opinion is the very truth, which I will not go from: There
are two Churches, and we the Martyrs of Christ are the true Church, and ye be
not.

Margaret Hide affirmed, she was in that true Faith, and would never forsake
it.

Agnes Stanly said, if every hair of her head were never so much worth, I had
rather they were reburned, then I will for sake my true faith.

Then they were put off until the afternoon, then as Loseby his answer was
reading, mention being made of the Sacrament, Boner put off his Cap, and Loseby
put on his hat: and he said, I trust I have the Spirit of truth, which you
detest, for the wisdom of God is foolishness unto you, whereupon they had
judgment.

Margaret Hide said, My Lord, I will not depart from my sayings till I be
burned: and she said, ^ would see you my Lord instruct me with some part of
Gods word, and not to give me instructions of holy Bread, and holy Water, for
it is no part of Scripture. Agnes Stanly answered, I am no ^ereticke no man
that is wise will believe as you do: I believe those that you have burned be
true Martyrs, I will not go from my faith as long as I live. Thomas Thirtle
said, I will not believe your Idolatrous ways, your Mass in Idolatry, I will
stick to my faith as long as I live. Henry Ramsey said, Your doctrine is
naught, and not agreeable to Gods word, and I will stand to my Faith as long as
I live: So they were condemned and burned, as before.

In May William Norant, Stephen Gratwicke, and one King, 1557
were burned in S. Georges field in Southwarke.

John Bradbridge of Stapleherst, Walter Apleby of Maydstone, and Petronell his
wife, Edmund Allen of Fritendid, and Katherine his wife, Ioane Mannings of
Maydstone, Elizabeth a blind Maid.
THe 18. of June these seven faithful Martyrs of Christ, were burned at
Maidstone: their answers were like in effect to the five that were famished to
death in Canterbury Castle.

The 19. of June John Fishcock, Nicholas White, Nicholas Pardue, Barbara Final
Widow, Bradbregs Widow, Bendens Wife, and Wilsons Wife, were burned at
Canterbury: their Articles were as the others, they joyfully undressed
themselves unto the fire, and all of them (like the Communion of Saints)
kneeled down and prayed, with such zeal, as the enemies of the Cross of
Christ could not but like it. Ten they arose and went to the stake, where they
yielded their souls gloriously unto the Lord.

Richard Woodman, George Stephens, William Maynard, Alexander Hosman his Man,
Tomasine Awood his Maid, Margery Moris, James Moris her Son, Denis Burges,
Ashdownes wife, Groves wife.
THese ten blessed Martyrs were burned at Jews in Sussex the 22. of June,
without a writ from the Lord Chancellor.

The first examination of RICHARD WOODMAN, before the Bishop of Chichester.
Chichester. I Am sorry for you, and so are all the Worshipful of our Country,
you have been of good estimation amongst the poor and rich; wherefore look
well to your self, your Wife and Children, and be ruled: think not your
self wiser then all the Realm.


Woodman. I will be willing to learn of every man the truth, and I know I have
given no just offense to rich nor poor, and God knows how dear I love my
Wife and Children in him: but my life, my wife and Children are all in Gods
hands, and I have them all, as I had them not, but regard the pleasing of God
more then al other things. I thought good to appeal to you mine Ordinary, for
some go about to shed my blood wrongfully, that if you can find I hold any
thing contrary to Gods word I will be reformed; and if my blood be shed
vnrighteouslie, that it may be required at your hands, because you have taken
upon you to be the Physician of souls of our Country.


Story. Thou art a perverse fellow, think thou that thou shall be put to
death unjustly? that thy blood shall be required? No, if he should condemn a
hundred such Heretics, I have helped to rid a good many of you, and will do
the best I can to rid thee.


Chich. I am your spiritual Pastor, you must hear me and I will give
spiritual Council.


Wood. You say you will give me spiritual Council, are you sure you have the
Spirit of God.


Chichest. No by Saint Mary, I dare not be so bold to say, so I doubt of that.


Wood. Then you be like the waves of the Sea tossed with the wind, and
unstable in all your ways, (as Saint James says) and can look for no good
thing at the Lords hands: You are neither hot nor cold: Therefore God will
spue you out.


Story. He has the Devil in him, he is worse then the Devil, thus all
heretics boast themselves.


Wood. The Jews said to Christ he had a Devil, and was mad, as you have said
to me: but the Servant is not above his Master: God forbid I should learn of
him that confesses he has not the Spirit of God.


Chich. Do you believe you have the Spirit of God, it is more then Paul or any
of the Apostles durst do, which is great presumption.


Wood. I believe I have the Spirit, and boast not my self, but of the gift of
GOD: as Paul did in 1. Cor. 7. He said he believed verily that he had the
Spirit of GOD, no man can believe that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost: I believe Christ is my Redeemer, therefore I have the Holy Ghost: and
he that has not the Spirit of Christ is a castaway and none of his, and we
have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear, but we have received the
Spirit of Adoption which cries Abba Father: The same Shirit testifies with
our Spirits, that we are the sons of God: Here are proofs enough that Paul
was sure he had the Spirit of God: And John says, He that believes in God,
dwells in God, and God in him: So it is impossible to believe in God, except
God dwell in us,


Chich. He bade me dine with him, and at dinner he asked me whether Priests may
marry, and whether Paul had a Wife.


Wood. Paul and Barnabas were not married, but all the Apostles else-were: For
in the 1. Cor. 9. Paul says, am I not an Apostle, am I not free, have I not
seen Christ: Mine answer to them that ask me this: Have we not power to eat
and to drink, or to lead about a Sister to Wife, as well as the other
Apostles, and the Brethren of the Lord, or have not Barnabas and I power thus
to do: So this Text proves that Paul and Barnabas were not married, but Paul
declares that the rest had wives, and they had power likewise to have wives,
but they found no need thereof: But Paul in the seventh to the Corinthians
said, that he that has not power over his flesh may marry, for it is better
to marry then to burn: wherefore to avoid fornication let every one have his
Wife, and every woman her Husband: Therefore Bishops and Priests may have
Wives, because they are men, rather then burn, and commit Fornication: Paul
declares to Timothy, the first and niuth, that Bishops and Deacons should have
wives.


The second Examination before the Bishop of Winchester and others.
Wine. LAst time you were with us you were in an heresy, in saying Judas
received bread, unless you will tell what more then bread.


Wood. I say he received more then bread, for he received the Devil, because
he presumed to eat the Sacrament without Faith: as Christ says, after he eat
the sop the Devil entered into him: Hereby appears that the Sacrament is not
the body of Christ, before it be received in Faith.


Winc. What is thy Faith in the Sacrament?


Wood. I believe when I receive the body and blood of Christ, if it be truly
ministered according to Christ's institution; If I come in Faith, that Christ was
borne for me, and that he suffered death for the remission of my sins, and
that I shall be saved by his death, and eat the Bread, and drink the Wine in
remembrance of him: Then I receive whole Christ, God and Man, mystically by
Faith.

The fat Priest. What afoole thou art, can not tell what mystically is.


Wood. God has chosen such fools as I am to confound such a wise thing as you
are.


Winch. Answer the Sacrament of the Altar, whether it be not the body of
Christ before it be received, and whether it be not the body of Christ to
whomsoever receives it; tell me, or else I will excommunicate thee.


Wood. I will not answer you, you are not mine Ordinary: Then Chichester
said, I am not consecrated: No said I* yours be all Cow Calves: meaning thereby
that he had not his Bull from Rome: Th^^ they called me all to naught, and
said I was mad. Then I said, so Festus said to Paul when he spoke sober
words and truth of the Spirit of God as I do: but you be your selves as you
judge me, you will all go to hell if you condemn me, if you have not
especial grace to repent with sp^c^.


Winch. We go about to save thy soul if thou will be ruled.


Wood. No man can save my soul, for Christ has saved it already, even before
the foundation of the world was laid.


The Fat Priest. Here is another heresy, thou can not tell what thou say,
was the soul saved before it was.


Wood. I say the truth, look in the first to the Ephesians and there you shall
find it, where S. Paul says, God has chosen us in Christ before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him
through love, and thereto we were predestined.


The Fat Priest. S James says, Faith without works is dead, and we have
freewill to do good works.


Wood. I do not disallow good works, for a good faith cannot be without good
works, yet not of our selves, but it is the gift of God, as S. Paul says, it
is God that works in us both the will and the deed, even of his good will.


VVinch. Make and and, answer to me: My Lord Cardinal has appointed the
Archdeacon of Canterbury thine Ordinary, he can appoint whom he will before the
Bishop is consecrated, and so they all affirmed.


Wood. I will believe never a one of you all, for you be turn coats and
changelings, and wavering minded, neither hot nor cold, therefore GOD will
spu^ you out: For in King Edwards time you taught the Doctrine that was set
sorth then, and now you teach the contrary, which words made the most part of
them quake.


VVinch. He is the naughtiest varlet and heretic that ever I knew, I will read
sentence against him, but I spared them not but spoke freely, they that stood
by rebuked me; saying, you cannot tell whom you speak unto.


Wood. They be but men I trow, I have spoken to better men then they for
anything I see, except they repent with speed: Then I told the Bishop of
Winchester if you condemn me, you will be condemned in hell, if you repent
not, for I am not afraid to die for Gods sake.


Winchest. For Gods sake: nay for the Devils sake: neither was Judas afraid to
die that hanged himself, as thou will kill thy self, because thou will not be
ruled: How say you will you confess that Judas received the body of Christ
unworthily.


VVood. If you can prove in all the Bible that any man ever eat the body of
Christ unworthily, then I will be with you in all things.

Then a Priest said S. Paul says, in the 11. of the first to the Corinthians:
He that eats this bread and drinks this cup unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation: because he makes no difference of the Lords body.


Wood. He says not who so eats this body unworthily, nor drinks this blood
unworthily: But he says who so eats this bread and drinks this cup
unworthily, eats and drinks his o^ne damnation: because he makes no
difference of the Sacrament, which represents the Lords body, and other bread
and drink: here good people you see they are not able to prove their sayings
true: Wherefore I cannot believe them in any thing they do: Then Winchester
read sentence of excommunication against me: when he had done I would have
spoken, but they cried away with him.


The third examination.
Chich. HOw say you to the Sacrament of the Altar: I said he meant the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, and not of the Altar of stone: He said* yes
that he did: How understand you the Altar otherwise?


Wood. It is written in the 18. of Matthew, wheresoever two or three be gathered
together in Christ's name, he is in the midst of them: whatsoever they ask in
earth, shall be granted in heaven: And in the 5. of Mat. When thou come unto
the Altar and remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave thine
offering, and be first reconciled to thy brother, and then offer thy gift. In
these two places of Scripture, I prove Christ is the true Altar, whereon every
one ought to offer his gifts: First Christ being in the midst of them that
are gathered together in his name, there is the Altar: so we may be bold to
offer our gifts, if we be in Charity, if we be not, we must leave our gift,
and be first reconciled unto our Brother: Some will say, how shall I agree with
mine adversary when he is not near by 100. miles, may I not pray until I have
spoken with him: if thou presume to pray in the congregation, and think evil
unto any, thou ask vengeance upon the self: Therefore agree with thine
adversary, that is make thy life agreeable to Gods Word; resolve in thy heart
that thou ask God and the world forgiveness, intending never to affend them
more: all such may be hold to offer their gift.


Chichest. I never heard any understand it so, no not Luther that great
heretic, that was condemned by a general Council and his picture burned. I
will show you the true understanding of the Altar and the offering: we have an
Altar said Paul, that you may not eat off: meaning that no man might eat of
that which was offered upon the Altar, but the Priest: For in Paul's time all
the living that the Priests had the people came and offered it upon the Altar:
money or other things, and when the people came to offer it, and remembered that
they had any thing against there Brother, then they left their offering upon
the Altar, and went and were reconciled unto their Brother, and came again,
and offered their gift, and the Priest had it: this is the true understanding
of it.


VVood. That was the use of the old law, Christ was the end of it; and though
it were offered in Paul's time that makes not that it was well done, but he
rebuked it, therefore you are deceived.


Chich. Who shall judge betwixt us in the matter: I said the word, as it is in
the 12. of John: And S. Peter says, the Scriptures have no private
interpretation, but one scripture must be understood by another: then he said
if you understand it one way, and I another who shall be Judge: the true Church
of God is able to discuss all doubts: He said the Church of God does allow the
sacrament of the Altar.


VVood. What do you offer now upon the Altar?


Chich. We offer up the body of Christ to pacific the wrath of God in the
blessed Sacrament, and there withal all put off their caps unto the
abominable Idol.


Wood. S. Paul says in the tenth to the Hebrews, we are sanctified by the
offering of the body of Christ upon the Cross once for all: and every Priest
is daily ministering and offering one manner of sacrifice, which can never take
away sins, and that it is the offering that you use to offer as far as I can
see you be Priests after the order of Aaron, that offer up sacrifice for their
own sins, and the sins of the people.


Chich. Aarons sacrifice was with blood, which signified the death of Christ:
but we are Priests after the order of Melchisedech, which offered bread to the
King in remembrance, and signified the giving of Christ's body in b^ead and Wine
at his last supper, which Christ gave unto his Disciples, and commanded to be
used unto the end of the world.


VVood. Me think you have made the matter very plain, that as Christ was the
end of the sacrifices, so he was the beginning of the Sacraments, willing them
to be used in remembrance of him unto the end of the world.


Chich. The word says, Take, eat, this is my body: it is not the sign only,
but the thing it self: how say you it is not his body after the words be
spoken by the Priest.


VVood. If you say the words over the water, if there be no child, is there
true Baptism: He said there must be the Water, the Word, the Child: Then I
said if the Child be baptized, in the name of ^he Father, the Son. Is it true
Baptism: He said it must be baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost: Then I said there may be nothing added or diminished.


Chich. How say you, Take, eat, this is my body, is not this Christ's body as
soon as it is said.


VVood. As the water, the word, and the Child altogether make Baptism: so the
bread, the wine, and the word, make the sacrament, and the eater eating it in
true faith makes it his body: so it is not Christ's body, but by the faithful
receiver: For he said, Take, eat, this is my body: He calls it not his body
before before eating: And S. Augustine says, creed manducasti, believe and
thou have eaten: And S. John says, he that believes in God, dwells in God,
and God in him: Wherefore it is impossible to please God, and to eat his body
without true Faith.


Priest. If the Faith of the receiver makes it his body, and not his word,
what did Judas eat?


VVood. He eat the Sacrament of Christ, and the Devil with all.


Priest. He eat the body of Christ unworthily, as S. Paul says.


Wood. S. Paul speaks not of eating his body unworthily, but of the sacrament
unworthily: For he says, whosoever eats of this bread, and drinks of this
cup unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation: because he makes no
difference of the Lords body, and not because he eats the Lords body: if
Judas had eaten Christ's body he must needs be saved: For Christ says in the 6.
of John, Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life.


Chich. Do you not believe that after the words be spoken, that there remains
neither bread nor wine, but the very body of Christ really.


Wood. I have told you my mind without dissimulation, and more you get not of
me except you will talk by the scriptures, then I will prove it more plain 3. or
4. ways.

Then they made a great laughing and said, this is an heretic indeed, it is
time he were burned: Then I said as you judge me, you shall be judged your
selves, for I serve God truly with that which you call heresy, as you shall
well know when you are in hell, and have blood to drink, and shall say in
pain, this was the man we iested on, and whose talk we thought foolishnes, and
his and without honor: now we may see how he is counted amongst the Saints of
God, and we are punished; these words shall you say being in hell if you
repent not* with speed, if you consent to the shedding of my blood.


Pries^^ You were at Baxell a tweluemonth agone, and sent for the Parson and
talked with him in the Churchyard, and would not go into the Church, for you
said it was the Idols temple.


Story came in pointing at me with his finger: I can say nothing to him but an
heretic, I have heard you talk this hour and a half, and can hear no
reasonablenes in him.

Wood. As you judge me you shallbe judged your self.


Story. What, be you a preaching? you shall preach at a stake shortly with your
fellows. Keeper, carry him to the Marshalsey again, and let no body come to
speak with him.


The fourth examination before Doctor LANGDAL.
LAngd. Your child was not Christened in a fortnight or in three weeks after
it was borne; and then the chifest of the Parish were feign to fetch it out of
your house against your will, which declares that you allow not Baptism of
Children: and if the child had died, it had been damned; because it was not
Christened: and you should have been damned, because you were the let thereof.


Wood. It was baptized as soon as it was borne, by the Midwife; and the cause
I blamed my neighbor, was, because they fet my child out of my house without
my leave, and did more to it then need was, the which was not well done. And
where you said, if a child die, and be not baptized, it is damned: be all
damned that receive not the outward sign of Baptism?


Lang. Yea that they be: For Christ says: And baptize them in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved. And he that believes not, shall be damned.


Wood. Then, by your saying, baptizing brings faith, and all that be baptized
in the water, shall be saved.


Lang. Yea, if they dye before they come to discretion, they shall be saved
every one of them: and all that be not baptized shall be damned.


Wood. You understand not the Scriptures but as far as natural reason can
comprehend: the Scriptures are plain, that they which believe not, shall be
damned: But it says not in any place, that they that are not baptized, shall
be damned. And where you say, Faith comes by the use of the material water
in Baptism, whether was Iocab baptized before he had faith? Paul says in the
ninth to the Romans, ere ever the children were borne, ere ever they had done
good or bad, that the purpose of God, which is by election, might stand, not by
reason works, but by the grace of the Caller, The elder shall serve the
younger: Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. This proves that Faith is
before Baptism: For Circumcision was before Baptism: And Saint Peter fetches
the proof of Baptism from Noes flood, saying: Whilst the Arc was a preparing
wherein but eight persons were saved by water, like as baptism now saves us;
not in washing away the filth of the flesh, but in that there is a good
conscience consenting to good. But you said, if they be baptized with water, if
they die before years of discretion, they be all saved: the which S. Peter is
clean against, unless you grant that Children have faith before they be
baptized; but what consent of conscience have Infants? you say they believe not
before they be baptized.


Lang. The children are baptized in the Godfathers and Godmothers faith; and
that is the good conscience that Saint Peter speaks of, and the Christning is
the keeping of the Law that S. Paul speaks of, saying: Neither is
Circumcision or uncircumcision any thing, but the keeping of the Law is
altogether; like as Circumcision was the keeping of the old law, so is Baptism
the keeping of the new Law.


VVood. You confess that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails not,
which you have coupled with baptism, proving that none of them prevail, but
the keeping of the law, which law you say is kept by outward signs: which is
nothing so; for Abraham believed God, and that was imputed unto him for
righteousness: and this was before he was circumcised, so the children believe
before they be either circumcised or baptized, according to my first saying,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. This shows that Jacob had faith in
his mothers womb. Also John Baptist was sanctified in his mothers womb,
therefore it was counted unto him for righteousness: and I am sure, if they had
died before they had either received circumcision or baptism, concerning the
outward deed, they had been saved: for Gods gifts and calling are such that
he cannot repent him of; but by your saying he does repent and change: for you
say, keeping of the outward law is all in all: and where you say they be
baptized in the Godfathers and Godmothers faith, what if they be unbelievers?
In what faith then is the child baptized?


Lang. If one amongst the three Godfathers and Godmothers that baptize the
child be not a believer, you would count that there were bery few believers:
If you would have none believers but them that be of your mind, then were
Christ's flock a very little flock.


VVood. In the 12 of Luke Christ says, his flock is a little flock: and
where you make a question of one amongst three, there is not one amongst three
hundred as far as I can see, else there would not be so many which would seek
their neighbors goods and lives.


Lang. If Christ's flock be such a little flock, tell me how many there be
of them.


VVood. First, the Prophet says, Follow not a multitude to do evil: for the
most go the wrong way; and Christ says, Math. 7. The way is broad, and the
gate wide that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat:
And straight is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to life, and few
there be that find it. And in the 12 of Luke Christ says; Come you little
flock, it is your Fathers will to give you a kingdom. And in the 3 of Mark,
and 7 of Matthew, Christ says; The tree is kowne by his fruits, a good tree
brings forth good fruits, and a bad tree bad fruits: And every tree that
brings not forth good fruits, shall be ^ewne down, and cast into the fire:
Christ means into hell, and your fruits declare you to be one of them.


Lang. It was time such a fellow as you were taken indeed: such a one is enough
to trouble a whole Country: you deny Original sin, and Free Will.


Wood. What free will has a man to do good of himself?


Lang. All men have as much free will as Adam had before his fall: for as by
the means of Adam all became sinners, so by the obedience of Christ, all men
became righteous, and were set as free as they were before their fall.


Wood. What an ouer-throw have you given your self here in Original sinn^,
and yet cannot see it: for in proving we have free will, you have denied
original sin. For if we be set as free by the death of Christ, as Adam was
before his fall, I am sure Adam had no original sin before his fall. If we
be so free now as he was then, I marvel why Saint Paul complained thrice to
God to take away the sting of it, GOD making him answer, My grace is
sufficient for thee.

This proves original sin, but not that it shall hurt Gods elect, but that
his grace is sufficient for his. But you say in one place it is not without
baptism, and in another place you put it away quite by the death of Christ.
And you have spoken truer then you be aware of: for all that believe in Christ
are baptized in his blood; and yet I say with David in the 51 Psalm, I was
borne in sin, and in sin has my mother conceived me: but no such sin as
shall be imputed, because I am borne of God by faith, as says Saint John:
therefore I am blessed, as says the Prophet, because the Lord imputes not my
sin: and not because I have no sin; not of mine own deserving, but of his
free mercy he saves us. Where is now your free will? If we have free will,
our salvation comes of our own selves, and not of God, and his word. Saint
James says, Every good and perfect gift comes from the Father of light: of
his own will begat he us. For the wind blows where it lists, and we
hear the sound thereof, says Saint John, but we cannot tell from whence it
comes, nor whither it goes. Even so it is with every one that is borne of
God: For Saint Paul says: It is God that works the will and the deed, even
of his good will; therefore our own will is naught at all, except it be to
wickedness.

After these and other Examinations, wherein there is no other material point
of Religion handled, he was called forth to his condemnation: and so was
deprived of his life with the other nine aforesaid, which were taken but the
same day, or the day before.


AMBROSE.
HE died in Maidstone goal, who else should have been burned for his
conscience, in the truth, as the other were.

Simon Miller, and Elizabeth Cooper.
SImon dwelt at Linne, July 13.
he came to Norwich, where he standing in the prease, and hearing the people
coming out of the Church, the Mass being ended, he asked them where he might
go to have the Communion: they maruailed to hear his boldness; and some said,
if he would needs go to a Communion, he would bring him where he should be
sped of his purpose: whereupon he was brought unto Dowing, Chancellor of
Norwich; who, after a little talk with him, committed him to prison. As he was
examined, a p^ece of paper appeared above his shoe: it was spied, and taken
out, and it was a confession of his faith. The Chancellor asked him if he would
stand to that confession of his faith: he constantly affirmed he would. The
Keeper gave him leave to go to his house, whilst he set all things in order:
and then he returned, and constantly abiding in his purpose, and defense of
Gods truth, he was by the Bishop and his Chancellor condemned and burned.

With him was burned the said Elizabeth, a Pewterers wife dwelling in Saint
Andrews in Norwich, where she had before recanted, and being troubled inwardly
for the same, she came to Saint Andrews Church, whilst they were at their
Popish Service, and said, she revoked her recantation before made in that
place, and was heartily sorry that she ever did it, willing the people not to
be deceived, nor to take her doing before for any example. Then Master
Marsham, and one Bacon of the said Parish, cried, Master Shriefe, will you
suffer this? Whereupon the Shriefe came to her house, at whose knocking she
came down, and was taken, and sent to Prison: she was condemned and burned
with the said Simon Miller.

William Bougeor, Thomas^ Benold, Robert Purcas, Agnes Siluer-side, alias
Smith, Widow, Ellen Ewring, Elizabeth Folks Maid, William Munt, John Johnson,
Allice Munt, Rose Allen, Maid.
WIlliam Bougeor was of the Parish of S. Nicholas in Colchester, he said the
sacrament of the Altar was bread, is bread, and so remains bread, and is not
the Holier, but the worse for the Consecration. To this he did stand, and
against all the rest of their Papisticall Doctrine: and so had sentence read
against them.

Thomas Benold of Colchester, Tallow-Chaundler, affirmed the like in effect,
and so had sentence.

William Purchase of Bocking in Essex, Fuller, said when he received the
Sacrament, he received bread in an holy use, that preaches y^ remembrance that
Christ died for him: he stood in this, and against other their Popish matters,
and also had sentence.

Agnes Siluer-side, alias Smith, Widow, dwelling at Colchester, said she
loved no consecration: for the Bread and Wine is the worse for it. She answered
them with sound judgment, and great boldness to all things they asked her,
and was condemned.

Ellen Ewring, the wife of John Ewring of Colchester, Widow, answered to the
like effect as the other did, denying all the laws, set forth by the Pope,
with her whole heart, she was condemned.

Elizabeth Folks, Maid-seruant in Colchester, being examined whether she
believed the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament Substantially or no,
answered, she believed that it was a substantial lie, and real lie. They
chafing, asked her again, whether, after Consecration, there remained not in
the Sacrament the body of Christ: she answered, that before consecration, and
after it is but bread, and the man the blesses without Gods word, is accursed
and abominable by the word. Then they examined her of confession to a Priest,
of going to Mass, and of the authority of the Bishop of Rome: she answered,
she would neither use nor frequent any of them, but did abhor them from the
bottom of her heart, and such like trumpery: so she was condemned, she
kneeled down and praised God that ever she was borne to see that blessed day,
that the Lord would count her worthy to suffer for the testimony of Christ: and
Lord forgive* them that have done this, if it be thy will: for they know not
what they do: And rising up, she exhorted them all to Repentance, and bad the
halting Gospellers beware of blood, for that would cry for vengeance.

William Munt of Muchbentley in Essex, said that the Sacrament of the Altar was
an abominable Idol, and that he should displease God if he should observe any
part of the Popish proceedings: and therefore, for fear of Gods vengeance he
dare not do it. He was 61 years old; he was examined of many things, but he
stood to the truth, and was condemned.

John Johnson of Thorp in Essex was condemned, who answered to the same effect
as the other did.

Allice Munt, the wife of the said William Munt, 61 years old, answered as her
husband had done, and was condemned.

Rose Allen, Maid, the daughter, of^the said Allice Munt, M. Edmond Terrell,
which came of the house of them Terrels which murdered K. Edward the fifth, and
his brother; when, with diverse others, he was come into the house of William
Munt, to search his house, and to apprehend him and his wife.

He met with this Rose Allen going with a candle to fetch drink for her
mother, and willed her to give her father and mother good counsel, she said,
they have a better counselor then I: for the Holy Ghost does teach them, I
hope, which I trust will not suffer them to err. Why, said he, art thou still
in this mind, thou naughty house-wife, it is time to look to such heretics.
She said, with that which you call heresy, I worship my Lord God. Then (quoth
he) I perceive you will burn with the rest for company. She said, not for
company, but for Christ's sake, if I be compelled. Then he took the Candle from
her, and held her wrist, and the burning Candle under her hand so long, until
the sinews cracked in sunder, saying often unto her, Thou young Whore, will thou not cry: she answered, she thanked God she had cause to rejoice, he had
more cause to weep then she: when her synowes brake, all in the house heard
them, he thrust her from him and said, Ah strong whore, thou shameless beast,
with such vile words; then she said, have you done what you will? I (said he)
if you think it be not well mend it: she said the Lord give you repentance if
it be his will, and you think it good begin at the feet and burn unto the
head also, for he that set you no work will pay you your wages one day.

She being examined of auricular confession, of going to Mass, and of the
popish seven Sacraments: she answered that they stanke in the face of God, she
said they were the members of Antichrist, and should have, if they repented,
not the reward of Antichrist. Being asked what she could say of the Sea of the
Bishop of Rome, his Sea (quoth she) is for Crows and Kites, Owls and Ravens
to swim in, such as you be; for I by the grace of God will not swim in that sea
while I live, then she was condemned.

These ten godly Martyrs were burned at Colchester, sire in the forenoone, and
four in the afternoon, when the fire was about them, they clapped their hands
for joy, and joyfully ioyed in the fire, and thousands standing by, cried
generally all almost, the Lord strengthen them, the Lord comfort them, as was
wonderful to hear.

John Thurstone.
HE was taken in the house of William Munt, with him he died in May in
Colchester castle, a constant confessor of Jesus Christ.

Thomas Moore.
HE was a Merchant dwelling in Leicester about 24. years old, for saying his
maker was in heaven and not in the Pixe, he was apprehended, the Bishop said to
him, what is yonder above the altar? he said, I cannot tell what you would have
me to see, I see fine clothes with golden tassels, and other gay gear hanging
about the Pixe, what is within I cannot see, why said the Bishop, do thou
not believe Christ to be there flesh and bone? (...) said he that I do not;
whereupon the Ordinary condemned him, who suff^red a joyful and glorious
Martyrdom for testimony of righteousness in Leicester.

George Eagles, alias Trudge-ouer.
HE wandered abroad in diverse countries, August. 20.
where he could find any of his brethren, did there more earnestly encourage
and comfort them, now tarrying in this town, and sometimes in that, certain
months as occasion served; sometimes for fear lying in fields and woods, who
for his unreasonable going abroad was called Trudge-ouer, for three years he
drank nothing but water, and when he perceived that his body by Gods
providence proved well enough therewith, he thought best to inure himself
therewithal, against all necessities: when he had profited the Church of God
by this going abroad a year or two, diverse spies were sent out for him, who
had in commandment to bring him quick or dead, wheresoever they found him;
but when they could not take him, they sent out an Edict in the Queens name
into four shires, promising twenty pounds to him that should take him, at
length he was seen at a fair in Colchester, and being pursued, he hid
himself in a wood, and from thence got into a corn field, when they could not
find him, they returned, but one got upon the top of a tree, to spy if he
could see him stir, the poor man thinking all sure, because he heard
nothing, rose upon his knees, the lurker perceiving him, came down and took
him, and brought him to prison to Colchester; notwithstanding, the Iudas-knaue
which had so much promised him, was feign to take a little reward, this George
within four days after, was conuayed to Chelmester where he was so cruelly
handled, that he had but two pound of bread and a little water measured to him,
to serve him a week together: after a while he was brought out and indicted
of treason, because he had assembled companies together contrary to the laws
in that case provided to avoid sedition, that if above six should flock
together, they should be attached of treason, which straight law was the
casting away of the good Duke of Sommerset. This George, was led to be hanged,
drawn and quartered betwixt two thieves, the one of them did nothing but mock
him, and the more he was rebuked, the more he mocked him, but when he should
die, he could not speak to utter his mind, nor say his prayers, and one said
the Pater noster to him word by word as to a child, which he could not answer
but fumblingly, many did wonder at the just judgment of God upon him for
mocking the good martyr. He that apprehended the said George Eagles, his name
was Ralph Hardin dwelling in Colchester, who in the year 1561. was condemned
at Chelmsford to be hanged, and being at the bar, ^he told the Judge and a
great multitude of people, this is most justly fallen upon me, for that I
betrayed the innocent blood of a good and just man George Eagles, who was
condemned here in the time of Queen Marie through my procurement, who sold his
blood for a little money.

Richard Crashfield of Wimondham.
HE suffered at Norwich, whose examination before Downings the Chancellor,
written by himself as follows:

Chanc. Do you believe this, that aftee the consecration there is the substance
of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament.


Crash. I believe that Christ's body was broken for me upon the cross, and his
blood shed for my redemption: wherefore the bread and wine is a perpetual
memory, the pledge of Christ mercy, the ring or seal of his promise, and a
perpetual memory for the faithful unto the end of the world: then he was
commanded unto prison, and the next day he was brought forth.


Chanc. Cannot you find in your heart when you come to Church, to kneel before
the Roode and pray. I answered no, alleging the commandments of God to the
contrary: he said, Have you not read that God commanded the brazen serpent to
be made* I said, I have read that God commanded it to be made, and likewise to
be broken down.


Doctor Bridges. Wherefore did God command the Cherubins and Seraphins to be
made? I said, I cannot tell, I would feign learn: he said, can you find in
your heart to fall down before the Roode the picture of Christ? I said, I
fear the curse of God, is yonder Roode the picture of Christ? It is written,
God curses the hands that made them, and the hands that made the tools which
carved them.


Chanc. When were you confessed to a Priest. I said, I confess my self daily
the eternal God, whom I most grievously offend, I take confession to a Priest
not be good but rather wicked: then he said, how say yo^ by yonder singing and
playing on the Organs, is it not good and godly: I said, I can perceive no
godliness in it: he said, is it not written in the Psalms, that we shall praise
God with hymns and spiritual songs. I said, spiritual songs must be had, but
yonder is of the flesh and of the spirit of error, for to you it is pleasant
and glorious, but unto the Lord it is bitter and odious: then he said, is it
not written, My house is an house of prayer: I said yes, it is written also,
that you made my house of prayer a den of thieves: then he said, have we done
so, then I was commanded to ward, and the next thursday sent for again.


Chanc. Are you a new man. I answered, I trust I am a new man borne of God: God
give you grace to be so, then he prayed Doctor Pore to talk with me.


Doctor. Take eat this is my body: Do you not believe it is Christ's body, what
was it that Christ gave? I said, Christ took bread and gave thanks, and gave
it, and they took bread and did eat bread, and S. Paul says, So often as you
shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you shall show forth the Lords
death until he come, S. Paul, does not call it Christ's body.


Chanc. We will have your mind more plainly, for we intend not to have many
words with you,: I said, my faith is grounded upon Christ the Easter lamb, he
has offered his body a sacrifice to God the price of my redemption, by that
only sacrifice all the faithful are sanctified, and he is our only advocate
mediator, and he has made perfect our redemption, without any of your dadly
oblations.

Doctor Bridges: You take well the litterall sense, but as Christ offered his
body upon the Cross, which was a bloody sacrifice, and a visible sacrifice, so
likewise we do offer up the self same body that was offered upon the cross,
but not bloody and visible, but invisible unto God, I said, then Christ's
sacrifice was not perfected, but Christ is true when all men be liers: then he
said, Thou shall not fear him that has power to kill the body, but thou
shall fear him (enterpreting him to mean the Church) which has power to kill
body and soul: Christ said, We should fear him (and not them) the has power
to cast body and soul into hell, meaning God, and not the Church, and if you
will presume to offer Christ's body daily, then your power is above Christ's
power: then he was condemned, and with patience and constancy entered his
blessed martyrdom, at whose burning one Thomas Carman was apprehended for
words, praying with him, and pledging him at his burning.


One Friar and the sister of George Eagles.
THese suffered the like martyrdom by the unrighteous Papists, whose tyranny
the Lord of his mercy abate and cut short, turning that wicked generation to
abetter mind. They were burned at Rochester.

JOHN CVRD.
HE was a Shoemaker of Sisam in Northamptonshire, he was imprisoned in
Northampton castle for denying the Popish transubstantiation, Septb. 20.
for the which William Bru^ter Chancelour unto the Bishop of Peterborrow did
pronounce sentence of death against him: a popish priest standing by when he
was to be burned, one John Rote vicar of S. Giles in Northampton, showed him
if he should recant he was authorized to give him his pardon, he answered, he
had his pardon by Jesus Christ.

Cicelie Ormes.
SHe suffered at Norwich; she was taken at the death of Simon Miller,
September. 1.
and Elizabeth Cooper, for that she said she would pledge them of the same cup
they drank of, one master Cobet of Sprowson took her and sent her to the
Chancelour, he asked her what she said unto the Sacrament of Christ's body, and
what is that the Priest holds over his head, she answered, it was bread, and
if you make it better, it is worse; so she was sent to prison, after she was
called and examined before the Chancelour, and master Bridges the Chancellor
offered her, if she would go to Church and keep her tongue, she should be at
liberty, and believe as she would: but she told him she would not consent to
his wicked desire therein, and if she should God would plague her: then he
told her, he had showed more favor unto her then ever he did unto any, and
when he could not prevail, he condemned her; she was borne in East Derrham and
was daugh^er unto one Thomas Hawood Tailor, she was taken a twelue-moonth
before and recanted, but was never after quiet in conscience: she had gotten a
letter written to be delivered to ye Chancellor, to let him know she repented
her recantation, and would never do the like again as long as she lived, but
before she exhibited her bill, she was taken and imprisoned as before; when she
was at the stake she told the people, I would you should not report of me that
I believe to be saved in that I offer my self here to death for the Lord
cause, but I believe only to be saved by the death of Christ's passion, and
this my death is and shall be a witness of my faith unto you all, good people,
as many of you as believe as I do, pray for me: then she kissed the stake and
said, welcome sweet cross of Christ; aft^^ the fire was kindled, she said, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit does rejoice in God my Savior: and
so yielded her life unto the Lord as quietly as if she had been in a slumber,
or as one feeling no pain, so wonderfully did the Lord work with her.

Mistress Joyce Lewis.
SHe was the wife of Thomas Lewis of Mancetter, September. 10.
in the beginning of Queen Mary's time she went to Church and heard Mass,
until the burning of Laurence Saunders in Couentry, then she inquired of such
as she knew feared God, the cause of his death, and when she knew it was
because he refused to receive the Mass, she began to be troubled in
conscience, and she reforted to master John Glouer, a very godly man, of whom
mentioned is made before, and desired him to tell her the faults that were in
the Mass, who instructed her in the ways of the Lord, approving unto her, out
of Gods holy word, that the Mass, with all other papistical inventions, was
odious in Gods sight, so she began to hate the Mass, and being compelled by
her husband to come unto Church, ^when the holy water was cast, she turned her
back toward it: whereupon she was accused unto the Bishop, and a citation was
s^nt for her and her husband, the Sumner delivered the citation to her husband,
who willed him to take the citation away with him, or else he would make him
eat it, and in the end he made the Sumner eat the citation by setting a
dagger unto his breast, and then he caused him to drink, and so sent him away,
but after they were commanded to appear before my Lord, her husband desired my
Lord to be good unto him: my Lord was content to receive his submission* so
that his wife would submit her self likewise, but she told the Bishop that she
had neither offended God nor his laws in refusing holy water: the Bishop gave
her a months respite, binding her husband in a hundred pound to bring her to
him at the months end. When the month was almost expired, her husband was
advertised by the said M. Glouer and others, not to carry his wife to the
Bishop, but to seek some way to save her; and if the worst should come, to be
content to forfeit the Band rather then to cast his wife into the fire: he
answered, he would not forfeit any thing for her sake, but carried his wife
unto the Bishop, who found her more stout then she was before: so she was sent
to such a stinking prison, that a maid that was appointed to keep her company
did sound in the said prison. She was often examined, and ever found stout; at
length she was pronounced an heretic. When the Bishop asked her, why she would
not come unto the mass, and receive the sacraments and sacramentals of holy
Church: she answered, because she could not find them in Gods word: he said, if
thou will believe no more then is in the scriptures concerning matters of
religion, thou art in a damnable case: she told my Lord his words were ungodly
and wicked. After her condemnation she continued a year in prison. Where the
Writ came to burn her, she said* as for the fear of death I do not greatly
pass: when I behold the amiable countenance of Christ my dear Savior, the
ugly face of death does not greatly trouble me. In the which time she reasoned
most comfortably out of Gods word of election and reprobation: in the evening
before she should die, two Priests came to her to hear her confession; for
they would be sorry, they said, she should die without it. She sent them word
she had made her confession unto Christ, at whose hands^ she was sure to have
forgiveness of her sins: for the cause for which she should die, she had no
cause to repent, but rather to praise God that he made her worthy to suffer
death for his word, and the absolution that they were able to give her by the
authority of the Pope, she defied it. Well, said the Priests, to morrow her
stoutnes will be tried. All the night she was wonderful cheerful and merry.
About three of the clock in the morning, Satan began to stir himself
busily, questioning with her, how she could tell that she was chosen to
eternal life, and that Christ died for her: I grant he died, but that he died
for thee, how can thou tell? She being troubled with this suggestion, they
that were about her counseled her to follow the example of S. Paul, to be
faithfully persuaded that Christ loved her, and gave himself for her: for S.
Paul was persuaded that Christ loved him; and her calling, and true belief,
and knowledge of Gods word was a manifest token of Gods love toward her, and
the operation of the spirit of God, in working in her a love and a desire to
please God: by these persuasions and the comfortable promises of Christ brought
out of the Scripture, Satan was put to flight, and she comforted in Christ.
When she came to the stake, she prayed to God most instantly to abolish the
vile mass; at which prayer all the people said Amen: then she took a cup of
drink that was brought unto her, and drunk unto all them that unfeignedly loved
the Gospel of Christ, and wished for the abolishment of papistry: a great
number of the women of the town pledged her. When the fire was kindled about
her, she neither strugled nor stirred: the Papists had appointed some of theirs
to rail upon her, and reu^le her openly as she went to execution; and whilst
she was at the stake, amongst others there was an old priest which had writing
tables, and noted the names of the women which drunk with her, and caused
Process to be sent for them, but God defended them from the hands of the
Tyrants.

Ralph Alerton, James Awstoo, Margery Awstoo and Richard Roth.
ON the 17. of September these four were burned at I^^ington near London.
Ralph Alerton coming to his parish Church of Bently, and seeing the people
sitting there idle, exhorted them that they would fall to prayer, and
meditation of Gods word, whereunto they consented: after prayer, he read unto
them a chapter out of the New Testament, and departed; In which exercise he
continued until Candlemas: and then being informed that he might not do so by
law (because he was no Priest) he left off and kept himself close in his house
until Easter: after he was constrained to forsake his house, and live in
woods, and such places until he was apprehended

After his Examination, my Lord Darcy sent him up unto the Council, who sent
him to Boner; who tempted him openly to recant at Paul's Cross, and set him at
liberty, which after wrought such a terror in his conscience: but the Lord
with his favorable chastisement did raise him up again with Peter, giving him
unfeigned repentance, and a most constant boldness to profess his name, and
glorious Gospel: Wherefore at the procurement of Thomas Tie Priest, he was
apprehended again, and sent to Boner, before whom he was diverse times
examined, which examinations written with his own hand in blood for lack of
Ink, hereafter follow.

His first Examination.
Boner. AH Sir, how chances it, that you are come hither again in this
fashion?


Rafe. Forsooth, if your Lordship remember, I set my hand unto a writing; the
Contents thereof as I remember was, that I did believe all things as the
Catholic church teaches, in the which I did not disburse my mind, but
shamefully dissembled, because I made no difference betwixt the true church*
and untrue Church.


Boner. Which is the true Church: do thou call the heretics Church, the
true Church, or the Catholics Church.


Rafe. I utterly abhor the heretics Church as abominable before God, with
all their enormities and heresies, the Church Catholic is it that I only
embrace, whose doctrine is sincere, pure and true.


Boner. By S. Augustine that is well said: Then a Priest said to my Lord, you
know not what Church it is, which he calls Catholic: Then he said by Saint
Mary he might a deceived me: Sir, which is the Catholic Church?


Rafe. That which has received the wholesome sound spoken of by Esaias, David,
Malachy, and Paul, with many others m^e, the which sound as it is written has
gone throughout all the earth in every place, and to the end of the world.


Bon. Yea thou say true before God, for this is the sound that has gone
forth throughout all Christendom, and he that believes not this Church as S.
Cyprian says does err: He says whosoever is out of the Church, is like unto
them that are out of Noah's ship, when the flood came upon the whole world: for
the Church is not alone in Germany, or here in England, in the time of the late
schisms, as the heretics do affirm: for then were Christ a liar, for he
promised the holy Ghost should come unto us, and lead us in all truth, and
remain with us unto the end of the world: So if we will take Christ for a true
sayer, then the way that is taught in France, Spain, Flanders, Italy,
Denmark, Scotland, and all Christendom over must needs be the true Catholic
Church.


Ra^e. I spoke of all the world, and not of all Christendom only, for the
Gospel has been preached and persecuted in all Nations: First in Jury by the
Scribes and Pharisees: And since by Nero, Dioclesian, and such like: and in our
days by your Lordship knows whom: your church is no more catholic then was
figured by Cain, Jeroboam, Ahab, Iezabel, Nabuchadonosor, Antiochus, Herod,
with ennumerable more the like: and Daniel, and Esdras prophesies of these
last days, and that there shall come grievous wolves to devour the flock, is
affirmed by Christ and his Apostles,


Boner. He is the rankest heretic that ever came before me, by Alhallowes
thou shall be burned, thou whor^on varlet and Pricklouse, the prophecy is of
you: what is the saying of Esdras that you speak of?


Rafe. He says, the heat of a great multitude is kindled over you, and they
shall take away certain of you, and feed the Idols with Idols, and he that
consents not to them shall be trodden under foot, had in derision, and
laughed to scorn, yea, they shall be like mad men, for they shall spare no
man, they shall spoil and wast such as ^eare the Lord.


Bonner. Esdras speaks of you heretics, declaring the hate that you bear to
the Catholic Church, making the simple people believe that all is Idolatry
that we do, and so entice them away, until you have overcome them.


Rafe. Nay, Esdras declares it more plain, saying, They shall take away their
goods, and put them out of their houses, and then shall it be known who are my
chosen; for they shall be tried as the silver or gold in the fire: and it is
come to pass as he has said; for who is not driven from house and home, and
his goods taken up for other men that never sweat for them? If he do not
observe as you command and have set forth, or else if he be taken he must deny
the truth, as I did, in dissembling, or else he shall be sure to be tried, as
Esdras says, whereby all the world may know you are the bloody Church,
figured by Caine the Tyrant, and you are not able to avoid it.


Bonner. He is an Heretic, let him be carried to London, and kept in
little^ase until I come.


Rafe. And so I was until the next morning, and then I was brought before
Bonner, the Deane of Paul's, the Chancellor, and others.


Bonner. How say you sir, will you go to Fulham with me, and there kneel
down at Mass, showing thy self outwardly that thou did it not
unwillingly but with a good will? I said I will not say so. He said, away with
him, away with him. After I was brought before the Bishop, and three Noblemen
of the Council.


Bonner. How say you sir, after consecration there remains no bread, but
the very body of Christ, God and man under the form of bread?


Rafe. Where find you that my Lord written.


Bonner. Does not Christ say, This is my Body? Will thou deny the words of
Christ, or was he a dissembler, speaking one thing and doing another. Now I
have taken you.


Rafe. Yea, you have taken me, and will keep me until you have killed me:
Christ said, Take you, eat you, this is my body; and if you will join the
former words with the latter, then I will answer you.


Bonner. Then thou must say it is his body; for Chirst says it himself.


Rafe. He is true, and all men liers, yet I refuse to take the words of Christ
so phantastically, for then should I conspire with certain heretics called
Nestorians, for they deny that Christ had a true natural body, and so do
you, my Lord, if you will affirm his body to be there as you say he is, then
you must needs aff^rme that it is a fantastical body, therefore let the^e
words go before, Take ye and eat ye, without which words the rest are not
sufficient, but when the worthy receivers do take and eat, even th^n is
fulfi^led the words of our Savior, to every man that so receives. Esaias in
his nine and fi^tieth Chapter says, He that refraineth himself from evil
must be spoiled: and Amos says the like words, for the wise must be feign to
hold their peace, so wicked a time it is, nevertheless, he that can speak
the truth and will not, must give a strait account.

A Doctor. By my Lords leave you speak like a fool: you must not judge the
Scriptures, but must stand to learn and not to teach, for the whole
Congregation has decided the matter long ago: then was I carried away.

Rochest. Were you a companion of George Eagles, alias Trudgeouer. I had him
once and he was as drunk as an Ape, and ^runk so of drink that I could not
abide him.


Rafe. I dare say it was either your self or some of your company: for he did
neither drink Wine, Ale nor Beer in a quarter of a year before that time.


After, because he misliked the mass, calling upon Saints, and carrying the
Cross on procession, with other their ceremonies, calling them Idolatry, and
for singing in (...) against the Sacrament of the Altar, and other ordinances
of the Church, so loud that the people abroad might hear them, and delight in
them, and for saying that he believed nothing that was contained in the
Council holde^ under Innocentius the third, and for affirming that those that
were burned at Colchester were Saints in heaven. He was condemned, and he and
the other three before mentioned were all burned as before.

Awstoo being in the Bishops Chapel at Fulham, the Bishop asked him if he
knew where he was; he answered in an Idol Temple: and he said he received the
very body and blood of Christ by faith in the Supper of the Lord, but not in
the Sacrament of the Altar: and his wife said, she believed that the Religion
then used in England was not according to Gods word, but false and corrupted,
and that they which did go thereto did it more for fear of the law then
otherwise; and she said that she defied the Mass with all her heart, and that
she would not come into any Church wherein was Idols.

As she was in the Bishops prison, by his procurement there was sent a stout
Champion, as appears, about twelve of the clock at night, who suddenly opened
the door, and with a knife drawn, fell upon her to have cut her throat; but
she calling to God for help, he giving a grunt, and fearing (belike) to
commit so cruel a deed, departed without any more hurt doing: the next night
they made a great rumbling like thunder over her head, to the intent to have
feared her out of her wits, but God be thanked they missed of their purpose.

The aforesaid Richard Roth affirmed that there was not the very body and blood
of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, as it was then used, but that it was a
dead God, and that the Mass was detestable and contrary to Gods word and will,
from the which faith he would not decline. He said to Bonner, My Lord, because
the people should not see your doings, you cause me and others to be brought to
our examinations by night, being affraide belike to do it by day: and being
persuaded to recant and ask mercy of Bonner; No (quoth Roth) I will not ask
mercy of him that cannot give it, whereupon he and the rest were condemned, as
before, and most joyfully ended their lives in the fire at Islington, for the
testimony of Christ and his Gospel.

Agnes Bonger and Margaret Thurstone.
THese were condemned at the same time and in the same place that the ten
before mentioned were, which suffered Martyrdom at Colchester, and for the
like cause, and answered also in their examinations the like in effect as the
other did.

When these good and godly women were brought unto the place in Colchester
where they should suffer; after they had fallen down upon their knees, and made
their most humble and hearty prayers unto God, they went to the stake joyfully,
where with great joy and glorious triumph, gave up their souls unto the hands
of the Lord.

John Noyes of Lexfield, in the County of Suffolk, Shoemaker.
THe twenty two of September, he was taken by the Constables, and brought
before Master Thurstone, 1557
Sir John Tyrell, Master Kene, Justices, and Sir John Silyerde, high Sheriff,
who cast him into Eye-dongeon: he was carried from thence to Norwich, and so
came before the Bishop, who condemned him, because he answered that he thought
the natural body of Christ to be only in Heaven, and not in the Sacrament:
as he remained Prisoner in the Guild Hall of Norwich, one Nicholas Fiske his
Brother in Law came to him to comfort him, he asked if he did not fear death
when the Bishop condemned him: he said, he thanked God, he feared not death no
more at that time then when he was at liberty. When he was bound unto the
stake, he said, fear not them that ^ill the body, but fear him that can kill
both body and soul, and cast it into everlasting fire.

When he saw his Sister weeping, he said, Weep^ not for me, but weep for your
sins: when the Faggots were set unto him, he said; Blessed be the time that
ever I was borne to come unto this, and kissed the Faggot. Then he said to the
people, they say, that they can make God of a piece of Bread, but believe them
not: Then said he, Good people bear witness, that I do believe to be saved
by the merits and passion of Christ, and not by mine own deeds, so the fire
was kindled about him: then he said, Lord have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy
upon me, Son of David have mercy upon me.

In the Dioces of Chichester, diverse were martyred for the testimony of
righteousness in Queen Mary's reign, in the number of whom were these: John
Forman of East-Grinsted, John Warner of Berne, Christian Grouer of the
Arch-deaco^^y of Lewis, Thomas Athoch Priest, Thomas Auington of Erdingly,
Denis Burgs of Bursteed, Thomas Rauensdale of Ri^* John Milles of Hellinglegh,
Nicholas Holden of Withiam, John Heart of Withiam, Margery Moris of Hethfielde,
Anne Try of East-Grinsteed, John Osward of Woodmancote, Thomas Harland of
Woodmancote, James Moris of Heathfield, Thomas Dowgate of East-Grinsteed, John
Ashdon of Retherfield.

Thomas Spurdance Queen Mary's Servant.
HE was examined before the Chancellor of Norwich, who asked him if he had
confessed his sins unto a Priest: I said, I had confessed my sins unto God,
who says: Whenever a Sinner repents, and is sorry for his sins, and
asks him forgiveness, willing no more so to do, he will no more reckon his
sin unto him, and that is sufficient for me: I deny that I should show my
sins unto the Priest.

Chancel. Have you received the blessed Sacrament of the Altar at Easter: he
answered: I dare not meddle with it as you use it, for the holy Supper of the
Lord serves for the Christian Congregation, and you are none of Christ's
Members, I dare not meddle with you, least I be like unto you, for you teach
Laws contrary to Gods Laws: then he said; Do you not believe, that after the
Sacrament is consecrated, it is the very same body that was borne of the
Uirgine Mary, and I said no, that was a bloody sacrifice, and this is a dry
sacrifice: And I said, Is the Mass a Sacrifice? a Doctor answered, it is a
Sacrifice both for the quick and the dead: I said it is no sacrifice, for S.
Paul says, That Christ made one sacrifice once for all, I believe in no other
sacrifice.

Chancel. He is an Heretic, he den^^th the Sacrament of the Altar: I said, I
believe, that if I come rightly and worthily as God has commanded me unto the
Supper of the Lord, I receive him by Faith, but the Bread being received is not
GOD, nor the Bread that is yonder in the Pixe is not God, God dwells not in
Temples made with hands, neither will be worshipped with the works of men's
hands; therefore you do very evil to cause the people to kneel down and
worship the bread: for God did never bid you to hold it up above your heads,
neither had the Apostles such use.


Chanc. Write that Article: then said I; The Servant is not greater then the
Master: your Predec^ssors killed my Master Christ; the Prophets and Apostles,
and holy virtuous men, and now you also kill the Servants of Christ: so all the
righteous blood that has been shed from righteous Abell to this day, shall be
required at your hands, then the Chancellor bad have me away.


Another Examination before the Bishop.
Bishop. SIrre, do thou not believe* that the Pope is supreme head of the
Catholic Church: I said* I do not believe that he is above the Apostles, they
disputing which of them should be greatest when their M. Christ was gone,
Christ answered their thou^hts, saying; The Kings of the earth bear dominion
above others, but you shall not do so, for he that is greatest amongst you,
shall be Servant unto you all. How is it then that the Pope will climb so high
above his fellows? you cannot prove by the Scripture^ that he is head of the
Church.


Bishop. As the Bell-wether is head of the sh^epe, so is the Pope head of the
Church, and as the Bees have a master Be to ^ring them home to the Hiue when
they be abroad, so the Pope is ordained by succession of Peter to bring us home
again unto the ^rue Church when we are gone astray: as thou good Fellow, have
wandered long out of the way ^li^e a scattered Sheep, hear therefore the
Bell-wether, and now come home with us unto thy Mother the Church again.

I answered, all this is but natural reason; and no Scripture: he said, you
are stout and will not ^e answered, you shall be compelled by Law whether you
will or no.


Spurdance. So your forefathers entreated Christ and his Apostles, they had a
Law, and by that Law they put him unto death: so you have a Law, which is
tyranny, whereby you would enforce me to believe as you do, but I trust the
Lord will assist me against all your beggarly Ceremonies, and make your
foolishness known to the world o^e day.

He told the Bishop, he never used the Ceremonies of the Church since he was
borne, at the last he interpreted it, since, he was newborn, as Christ said
to Nichodemus; Except you be newborn you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: Then a Doctor said I was an Anabaptist, for that was their opinion: I
said, I was no Anabaptist* for they deny Children to be baptized, and so do
not I.


Bishop. Why do not you go unto the Church and Cer^monies: I said; Because
they are contrary to Gods word; as you your self have taught, but now you say
it is go^d again: and I think if there were a return to morrow, you would
say it were false again which you hold now; therefore I may well say, there is
no truth in you: Then he said, I was a stubborn fellow, an Heretic, and a
Traitor.


Spurdance. There is no man I thank God to accuse me justly, that ever I was
disobedient to any Civil Laws, but I have a Soul and a Body, and my Soul
is none of the Queens, but my body one goods are the Queens, and I must give
God my soul, and all that belongs unto it, and in laws contrary to Gods
laws, I must rather obey God then man: you cannot prove by the word of God,
that you should not have any graven Images in your Churches, for laymens
books, or to worship God by them, or that you should have any ceremonies in
the Church as you have.


Bish. It is a decent order to furnish the Church, as when you go to dinner,
you have a cloth upon the table to furnish it, so at these ceremonies, a decent
order amongst Christians, and if you will not do them, seeing they are the
laws of the Realm you are an heretic, and disobedient, therefore confess
with us that you have been in error, and come home.


Spurd. The spiritual laws were never truelier set forth, then in my Master
King Edwards days, and I trust in God that I shall never forsake them whilst
so I live: He was sent to Bury, where he remained in prison.


John Hallingsdale, William Sparrow, Richard Gibson.
THese three were produced before Bonner Bishop of London: John Halingsdale
said, that neither in the time of King Edward the sixth, nor at that present he
did believe that in the Sacrament is really the body and blood of Christ, and
he would not receive the same, because he did believe that the body of Christ
was only in heaven: and he said that Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, and
generally all that of late have been burned for heretics, did preach truly
the Gospel, and upon their preaching he grounded his faith, and he said that
the saying of Saint John in the eighteenth chapter of the Revelation, That the
blood of the Prophets and Saints and of all that were slain upon the earth was
found in the Babylonicall Church, is understood of the Church whereof the Pope
is head: where upon he was condemned.

William Sparrow was charged with a submission made the year before unto the
Bishop: he said he was sorry that ever he made it, and it was the worst deed he
ever did: and being charged that he went to the Church and heard Mass; he
confessed he did so, but it was with a troubled conscience. He told the
Bishop, that which you call truth I believe to be heresy: he confessed that
since his submission he had preached against the Sacrament of the Altar,
against auricular confession, and other Sacraments, and he said, If every hair
of his head were a man, he would burn them all rather then go from the
truth: and he said, that the Ecclesiastical Laws and the Mass were naught
and abominable, whereupon he was condemned.

Richard Gibson was condemned for not coming unto confession, and for not
receiving the Sacraments of the Popish Mass, and for that he would not swear
to answer unto their intergatories laid against him: When sentence was read
against him, he boldly affirmed, that he was an enemy unto them all in his
mind, though he had kept it secret for fear of the Law, and he said he was
blessed in that he was cursed of them: so these three were burned in
Smithfield, where they yielded gloriously and joyfully their souls into the
hands of God.

John Rowth Minister, and Margaret Mearing.
IN King Edwards time he was a Preacher at New Castle, Barwicke, and Carliel.
In Queen Mary's time he fled with his Wife into Friseland, and dwelled at
Norden, and lived by knitting of caps, h^se^, and such like things, but in
October last he came over into England to buy yarne, and hearing of the secret
society of the congregation of Gods children their assembled* he joined
himself unto them, and was elected their preacher, and he taught and
confirmed them in the truth of the Gospel: But on the twelfth of December, he
with Cuthbert Simpson, and others were appr^hended at the Sarisons head in
Islington: where the congregation had appointed to assemble themselves to pray,
and hear Gods word: they were brought before the Council, who sent Rowgh to
Newgate, and writ to Boner to examine him, and proceed according unto the law,
who upon examination before Bonner, confessed that he had spoken against the
number of the Sacraments, being persuaded that there were but two: Baptism and
the Lords Supper: and that he had taught that in the Sacrament of the Altar,
there is not really and substantially the body and blood of Christ, but that the
substance of bread and wine remains without transubstantiation, and that he
thought Confession to a Priest necessary if he had offended the Priest, but
if the offense were unto another, it was not necessary, but the reconc^liation
ought to be made to the party so offended, he denied La^ine service, and
allowed the service of King Edwards time, and he commended the opinion of
Thomas Cranmer, Nicholas Ridley, and Hugh Latimer, and that they were godly
learned men.

He confessed he had been famil^ar with diverse Englishmen and women in
Frieseland, and agreed with them in opinion: as Master Story, Thomas Young,
George Roe, and others, to the number of 100. persons, which fl^d thither for
Religion, using the order set forth in King Edwards time.

He said that he had been at Rome about thirty days, and he saw no good
there, but much evil, amongst which he saw one great abomination, to wit; the
Pope being a man that should go upon the ground, to be carried upon the
shoul^ers of four men, as though he had been God and no man: also a Cardinal
to have his Harlot to ride openly behind him; and thirdly, a Popes Bull that
gave express license to have and use the Stews, and keep open bawdery by the
Popes authority.

And he confessed, that since his last coming unto England, he had in sundry
places in London read Prayers and Service as is appointed in the Book of
Communion, and had willed others to do the like: and he affirmed, that he
being a Priest might lawfully marry, and that his Children which he had by his
Wife were lawful, and he utterly detested the service then used, saying, that
if he should live as long as Methusala, he would never come unto the Church to
hear the abominable Mass, and other service then used. Whereupon he was
disgraded and condemned: he was a means to save Docror Watsons life then
Bishop of Lincoln* when he preached erroneous doctrine in the days of King
Edward the sixth; and the said Watson being with Bonner at the examination of
the said M. Rowgh, to requite his good turn in saving his life, said there,
that he was a pernicious heretic, who did more hurt in the North parts then
an hundred besides of his opinion.

M. Rowgh further said, he had lived thirty years, and yet had not bowed his
knee unto Baall: and he affirmed that he had been twice at Rome, and there he
had seen that which he had many times heard of before, that the Pope was the
very Antichrist: for he saw him carried upon men's shoulders, and the false
named Sacrament borne before him, yet was there more reverence given unto him
then unto it, which they accounted their God. Then Bonner rose up, making as
though ^e would have torn his garments, saying, Have thou seen our holy
father, and do thou blaspheme him thus? and flying upon him he plucked off
a piece of his beard, and after made speedy have to his death.

He wrote this Letter to confirm the brethren the same day that he was
condemned: The comfort of the holy Ghost make you able to give consolation to
others in these dangerous days, when Satan is let loose to the trial of the
chosen to sift the wheat from the Chafe, whosoever denies Christ* before
men, he will deny him before his Father and the Angels: and to save the life
corporal, is to lose the life eternal; and he that will not suffer with
Christ, shall not reign with Christ: Therefore I have given over the flesh,
with the fight of my Soul, and the Spirit has the victory. The flesh ere it
be long, shall leave off to sin, the spirit shall reign eternally: I have
chosen death to confirm the truth which I have taught. What can I do more,
pray that I may continue unto the end: I have in all my assaults felt the
present aid of my GOD: be not ashamed of Christ's Gospel, nor of the bonds
that I have suffered for the same: The holy ones have been scaled with the
same mark: It is no time for the loss of one man, for the camp to turn
back* up with men's hearts and blow down the dawbed walls of heresies, let one
take the banner, and another the Trumpet, and I mean not to make corporal
resistance, but pray and you shall have Elias his defense, and Helizeus his
company to fight for you, the cause is the Lords: Pray for me, and salute one
an other with an holy kiss, the peace of God r^st with you all, Amen.

Margery Mearing said that the Mass was abominable in the sight of GOD and
all Christian people, and that it is the plain c^p of fornication, and the
whore o^ Babylon; and she believed that there was no such Sacrament as the
Sacram^nt of the Altar in the Catholic Church: and she said she utterly
abhorred the authority of the Pope, with all the Religion observed in the same
Antichrists Church, and that ^he never meant to come unto the Church during
these Idolatrous days. And being demanded whether she would stand to these
answers; I will (quoth she) stand to them unto the death, for the very Angels
in heaven do laugh you to scorn, to se^ your abomination that you use in the
Church, whereupon she was condemned. They were burned both together in
Smithfield, where they most joyfully and willingly gave their li^es for the
profession of the Gospel of Christ.

Master Rowgh had excommunicated this Margerie Mearing but the Sunday before he
was taken, yet he being in prison in the Gate House at Westminster, where none
of his friends could come unto him to visit him, she gother a Basket and put a
clean Shirt in it, and fayning her self to be his sister, got into the prison
unto him, and did him no small comfort: then she went to one Sergeants house,
who betrayed Master Rowgh, and asked whet her Judas that betrayed Christ dwelt
not there: and she seeing Cluny come unto her house, she went home, and asked
him whom he sought, he said for you, you must go with me: she said, she would
go with him, the Bishop cast her into prison* and the wednesday after she was
burned with Master Rowgh.

Cutbert Simpson, Hugh Fox, and John Deuenish.
SImpson was Deacon of the said godly Congregation in London: he was faithful
and zealous unto Christ and his true flock: the Friday at night before M.
Rough the Minister of the Congregation was taken, he dreamed that he saw two of
the Guard leading Cutbert Simpson, and that he had a book about him, wherein was
the names of all them which were of the Congregation: so he told his Wife and
made her light a Candle, and fell to reading, and falling asleep again, he
dreamed the like dream.

Then he said to his Wife, that his brother Cutbert was gone, and as Master
Rough was ready to go to see Master Cutbert, he came in with the Book,
containing the names and accounts of the Congregation: then M. Rough told him
his dream, and bade him carry the book no more about him, so he left the
book with M. Rowghs wife; the next night M. Rowgh dreamed that be himself was
carried unto the Bishop, and that the Bishop plucked off his beard and cast it
into the fire, saying, Now I may say I have had a piece of an heretic burned
in my house, and so accordingly it came to pass, for shortly after they were
both taken at the Saracens head in Islington, as before. Here follows the
story of his sufferings upon the rack, and otherwise, for the Congregations
sake, as he wrote it with his own hand:

I was called before the Constable of the Tower and the Recorder of London;
they commanded me to tell them whom I willed to come to the English service, I
answered I would declare nothing, whereupon I was set in a rack of Iron three
hours, then they asked if I would tell them, I answered as before: the Sunday
after they examined me again, and I answered them as before: then they bound
my two fore-fingers together, and put a small arrow betwixt them, and drew it
through so fast that the blood followed, and the arrow brake, then they racked
me twice, and so I was carried unto my lodging again. Ten days after the
Lieutenant asked me if I would not confess, I answered I had said as much as I
would: five weeks after he sent me unto the high Priest, where I was greatly
assaulted, at whose hands I received the Popes curse for bearing witness of
the resurrection.

Bonner in his Consistory gave this testimony of Cutbert Sampson, ye, see said
he, what a personable man he is, and concerning his patience, I say unto you,
that if he were not an heretic, he is a man of the greatest patience that
ever came before me; he has been thrice racked in one day in the Tower, and
in my house he has felt some sorrow, yet did I never see his patience broken.

They all three answered Bonner, that the Church is grounded upon the Apostles
and Prophets, Christ being the head corner stone, and in that Church there is
the true faith and religion of Christ: that there is but two Sacraments,
Baptism and the Lords Supper; they said that they have and will speak against
the sacrifice of the Mass, the Sacrament of the Altar, and the authority of
the Sea of Rome, and John Deuenish said that the Sacrament of the Altar, as it
is now used, is no Sacrament at all.

These three blessed witnesses of Jesus Christ, Simpson, Fox and Deuenish, as
they were all together apprehended at Islington, so they suffered together in
Smithfield.

WILLIAM NICOLE.
He was an honest simple poor man, apprehended the ninth of April by the
Popes Champions for speaking certain words against the cruel kingdom of
Antichrist: he was butcherly burned and tormented at Hereford west in Wales,
where he ended his life in a blessed estate, and gloriously gave his soul into
the hands of the Lord.

Willam Seaman, Thomas Carman, and Thomas Hudson.
WIlliam Seaman was a husbandman dwelling in Mendlesam in the County of
Suffolk: he was taken the ninteenth of May, by one Robert Balden his neighbor,
whom he greatly trusted: as they were leading him by night to Sir John Tyrill,
there fell a light out of the Element betwixt them, and parted them: albeit
this Balden was then in his best age, yet after that time ^e never enjoyed good
day, but pined away even unto death: Sir John Tyril as^ed him why he would not
go unto Mass, and receive and worship the Sacrament: He said it was an Idol,
and therefore would not receive it: Whereupon he was sent to the Bishop of
Norwich, who condemned him: He had a wife, and three children, who because she
would not go unto Mass, all her corn and goods were taken away from her, by
Christopher Cole, being Lord of the town of Mendlesham.

Thomas Carman was apprehended for pledging Richard Crashford at his burning:
he was brought before the Bishop of Norwich, and answered no less in his
masters quarrel th^n the other, and he had the like reward.

Thomas Hudson was of Aylesham in Norffolke a Glouer: he bore so good will
unto the Gospel, that in the days of King Edward the sixth, that when he was
thirty yeareo old, he learned to read, wherein he so greatly profited, that in
Queen Mary's reign avoiding all their beggarly ceremonies of superstition, he
absented himself, and traveled from place unto place, and returning home unto
his own house to comfort his Wife and Children: When he perceived that his
continuance there would be very dangerous, he and his wife devised to make him
a place in his Faggots to hide himself in, where he remained all the day,
reading and praying, for half a year. In the mean time came thither one
Berry Uicar of the Town, and inquired of his Wife for him: She said she ^new
not where he was: Then he threatened to burn her: because she would not
bewray her husband: After this, Hudson waxed every day more zealous then other,
and the people often resorted unto him to hear his Sermons: at last he walked
abroad for certain days into the town, crying out against the Mass, and all
their trumpery: at the length one John Crouch, his next neighbor, went with
speed to the Constables to certify them that he was at home, who went about
to catch him in the break of the day. When Hudson saw them, he said now mine
hour is come: welcome friends: you be they that shall lead me unto life
everlasting, I thank GOD therefore, and the Lord enable me for his mercy
sake; Then they led him unto Berry their Uicar, being Commissar^e as before,
who asked him where he kept his Church, four years before: He answered,
wheresoever he was there was the Church: Then he asked him whether he
believed in the Sacrament of the Altar: He answered that was but worms meat,
my belief is in Christ crucified: Then he asked him whether he did not
believe that the Mass takes away sins.

Hudson. It is a patched monster, and a disguised puppit, more longer a peecing
then ever was Salomons Temple: Then Berry seemed as a mad man, and said, well I
will write unto my Lord, and thou shall be handled according unto thy deserts.

Oh Sir said Hudson, there is no Lord but God, though there be many Lords and
Gods: With that Berry thrust him back with his hand, and bound Richard Clifford
to the good behavior for saying, I pray be good unto the poor man: Then the
said Berry writ unto the Bishop, and sent Hudson bound like a Thief unto him,
who went thither with joy, and singing, as merry as ever he was, where he was
condemned: These three were burned without the Bishops ga^e in Norwich, in a
place called Lolords pit: aftor they had made their prayers they went unto the
stake, and standing with their chains about them. John Hudson being troubled
in mind, went from them, and prayed his fellows, exhorted him in the bowels
of Christ to be of good cheer. At last the Lord, according unto his old
mercies. sent him comfort, and then rose ^e with great joy, as a man new
changed from death unto life: and said now, I thank God, I am strong, and
pass not what man can do unto me: at the length they all suffered most
joyfully together, to the terror of the wicked, the comfort of Gods children,
and the magnifying of the Lords Name.

After this Berry caused two hundred of the town of Cylesham to creep to the
cross at Penticost, besides other punishments which they suffered.

This Betry upon a time struck a poor man of his parish with the swingell of
a ^laile, for speaking words that he presently dyed: And after he meeting one
Alice Oxes, going into his Hall (he as before moved) he smote her with his
fist, and the next day she was found dead in his Chamber: to write how many
Concubines and whoores he had none would believe but such as knew him where be
dwelt: He was rich, of great authority, a great swearer, altogether given unto
women, and persecuting the Gospel, and compelling men unto Idolatry, he
troubled sundry good men, burned all good books that he could get, and deuorced
many men and women for religion.

When he heard Queen Mary was dead, and the glory of his triumph quailed: On
a Sunday he made a great Feast, and had one of his Concubines there, with whom
he was in his Chamber from dinner until evening song: then he went to the
Church, and after evening song in going from Church homeward, he fell down
dead, made an heavy groan, and never stirred, and those that had his riches so
consumed with them, that they be poorer now, then when they had his goods:
which judgment the Lord executed in the eyes of all men.

At that time D^nning the cruel Chancellor of Norwich died in Lincolneshire,
as suddenly as the said Berry died.


Ioane Seaman, Mother of the said William Seaman.
SHe was threescore and six years old: She was persecuted from her house by
the said Sir John Tyrill, because she would not go unto the Mass, nor receive
against her conscience: sometimes she was glad to lie in the bushes, Groves,
and Fields: but her husband being fourscore years old, and falling sick, she
returned unto her house, to show her duty unto her husband, until he dyed:
then she fell sick, and died: and one Master Simonds the Commissary commanded
straightly that she should not be bur^ed in any Christian burial: Whereupon
her friends were feign to bury her under a mote side.

Mother Benet.
THis old woman likewise was persecuted from Whetherset by the aforesaid
Mendlesam, because she would not go unto the Mass, and other beggarly
ceremonies, and returning home secretly unto her house, she dyed most
ioifully: but Sir John Tyrill, and the said Master Simonds Commissionary,
would not let her be buried in the Churchyard, but her grave was made by the
highway side: Her husband would say unto her, that if she had been sparing,
they might have been worth a hundred marks more then they were: She would
answer, O man be content, I cannot barrel my Butter, and keep my Cheese in
the Chamber, to wait a great price, and let the poor want, and so displease
God; but let us be rich in good works, so shall we please God, and have all
good things given us.

William Harris, Richard Day, and Christian George.
THe twenty six day of May these were burned at Colchester in Essex, when they
were brought unto the stake, and had joyfully and fervently made their prayers,
the fire was set unto them, in the midst of the fire they triumphantly praised
God.

The same Christian Eagles Husband had another Wise named Anne, which likewise
suffered for the truth, with the aforesaid thirteen at Strat^ord the Bow:
after he married another Wife, and they both were laid in prison for the truth,
where they remained until the death of Queen Marie, and were delivered by
Queen Elizabeth.

Henry Pond, Reynald Estland, Robert Southam, Matthew Richarby, John Floyd, John
Holiday, Roger Holand.
THe twenty seven of June, these with others, to the number of forty Men and
Women, were assembled together in a field by Islington at Prayer, and
meditating upon the word of God: at length the Constable of Islington, with
six or seven others came unto them, and bad them deliver their Books, and
bad them stand and not depart: then they were carried unto Sir Roger Cholmeley,
by the way all saving two and twenty escaped, which were sent to Newgate, where
word was sent to them by Alexander the Keeper, that if they would hear Mass
they should all be delivered: seven of them escaped, though not without much
trouble, and two, to wit; Matthew Withers and Thomas Tyler died, the rest were
burned, as before.

They answered that they were not at Church since Lattine service was devised,
because it was against the Word of GOD, and that Idolatry was committed in
creeping to the Cross, and because the Churches were furnished with Idols, and
because they believed the Sacrament of the Altar to be an Idol, and because
the Customs, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church then used, are not agreeable
unto Gods word.

They said, that they believed that no Priest had power to remit si^s, and that
those that kneel unto the Sacrament and worship it, commit Idolatry.

Reynald Estland refused to be sworn to answer, alleging that to end a
strife an oath is lawful, but to begin a strife an oath is not lawful: thus
they standing unto their answers, and refusing to acknowledge the Doctrine of
the Romish Church, they were all together condemned.

The aforesaid Roger Holand was a Merchant Tailor of London, he was sometime
Prentice unto one Master Kempton, at the Black Boy in Watling-streete: In his
prentiship he was a Papist, and very licentious, and having played away thirty
pounds of his Masters Money, he purposed to have conveyed himself beyond Sea,
but a religious Maid in the house understanding his mind, lent him thirty
pounds to save his credit, and made him premise her to refuse all lewd and
wild company, and all swearing and ^iba^ory talk, and to leave Papistry, and
to resort every day unto the Lecture of Alhollowes, and to the Sermon of Paul's
every Sunday, and to cast away all his Papistry Books, and to pray to God for
remission of sins, and grace to fear and break his laws, and then shall
God keep thee, and send thee they hearts desire.

Half a year after God wrote such a changing in this man, that he was become
an earnest professor of the truth, and detested all Papistry and evil company:
then he repaired unto Lancashire unto his Father, and brought diverse good
Books with him, and bestowed them upon his friends, so that his father and
others began to ^ast the Gospel, and to detest the Mass, Idolatry, and
superstition: and his father giving him a stock of Money, he married the
aforesaid Maid, called Elizabeth, and having a child by her in the first year
of Queen Mary, he caused Master Rose to baptize his Child in his house, and
being ^one into the Country to convey away the Child, that the Papists should
not have it in their anointing hands: he was bewrayed, and Bonner caused his
goods to be seized upon, and used his wife most cruelly: after this he remained
closely in the City, until he was taken as before.

When he came before Bonner, who was acquainted with his friends, and for his
friends sake and his, he persuaded him what he could to Papistry, and a Kinsman
of his standing by, said; I thank your good Lordship, your Honor means good
unto my Cozen, I pray God he have grace to follow your council.

Holand. Sir, you crave of God you cannot tell what, I beseech God to open your
eye^ to see the light of his word.

Then the Bishop and others persuaded him to submit himself unto my Lord,
before he were entered into the Book of contempt,


Holand. I never meant but to submit my self unto the Magistrate, as I learn
of Saint Paul in the 13. to the Romans.


Chedsey. I see you are not an Anabaptist.


Holand. The Papists and the Anabaptists agree in this point, not to submit
themselves unto any other Prince or Magistrate, then those that must first be
sworn to maintain them and their doings.


Bonner. I perceive you will not be ruled by any good council, for any thing
that either I or your friends, or any other can say.


Holand. I may say unto you my Lord, as Saint Paul said unto Foelix, and to the
Jews, It is not unknown unto my Master, unto whom I was Prentise, that I was
of your blind Religion, until the latter end of King Edwa^ds reign, having
that liberty under your auriculer confession, that I made no conscience to
sin, but trusted in the Priests absolution, and he for money did some
penance for me; which after I had given, I cared no more what offense I had
done, no more the Priest cared after he had got my money, whether he fasted
with Bread and Water for me or no: so I accounted Letchery, swearing, and other
vices, no offtence of danger, as long as I could for my Money have them
absolved, I so frailty obserued^y our Rules of Religion, that I would have
Ashes upon Ashwednesday, though I had used never so much wickedness at night,
and albeit I could not of conscience eat flesh upon Friday, yet in swearing,
drinking, or dicing all night long, I made no conscience at al. Thus was I
brought up, and continued until now of late, that God of his Grace by the
light of his word called me unto repentance of my former Idolatry and wicked
life: for in Lanchishire their blindness and whoredom is much more, then may
with chaste ears be heard, yet these my friends, which are not clear in these
notable crinics, think the Priest with his Masses can save them, though they
blaspheme God, and keep Contubines besides their Wives as long as they live;
yea, I know some Priests very devout, yet they have six or seven Children, by
four or five several women. Now M. Doctor to your antiquity, unity, and
universality (for these, Doctor Chedsie alleged as notes of their Religion.
The antiquity of our Church is not from Pope Nicholas and Pope Ioane, but from
the time that God said unto Adam, That the seed of the Woman should break the
Serpents head, and so unto faithful Noah, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to
whom it was promised, that their seed should multiply as the Stars in the sky,
and so unto Moses, Daniell, and all the holy Fathers that were from the
beginning unto the birth of Christ, all that believed these promises were of
the Church, though the number of them were oft-times but small, as in Elias his
days, when he thought that there was none but he that had not bowed their
knees unto Baal, when God had reserved seven thousand that never bowed their
knees unto that Idol, as I trust there be seven hundred thousand that have not
bowed their knees unto that Idol your Mass, and your God Maozim, which you
uphold with your bloody cruelty, daily persecuting Elias and the servants of
God, forcing them in their chambers and in the fields to pray unto God that his
word may be once again preached amongst us, and that he would shorten these
Idolatrous and bloody days: moreover, our Church have been the Apostles and
Evangelists, the Martyrs and Confessors of Christ, that have at all times been
persecuted for the true testimony of the word of God; but for the upholding of
your Church and Religion, what antiquity can you show? yea the Mass, that
Idol and chief pillar of your Religion, is not yet four hundred years old,
and some of your Masses are younger, as that Mass of S. Thomas Becket the
Traitor, wherein you pray that you may be saved by the blood of S. Thomas
Becket.

The Laiety is never the better for your La^ine Service: he that understands
Latin can understand but few words; the Priests do so champe them and chaw
them, and post so fast that they vuderstand not themselves: and the people
when they should pray with the Priest, they are set to their Beads to pray to
our Ladies Psalter, so craf^y is Satan to devise these dreams which you
defend, with faggot and fire to quench the light of the word of God, which as
David says, should be a lantorne unto our feet, and wherein should a young man
direct his ways but by the word of God, and yet you will hide it from us in a
tongue unknown: Saint Paul had rather have five words spoken with
understanding, then ten thousand in an unknown tongue, yet you will have your
Latin service, and praying in a strange tongue to be of such antiquity.

Touching universality: the Greek Church and a good part of Christendom
besides, never received your service in an unknown tongue: nor your
transubstan^iation, nor your receiving all alone, nor your Purgatory, nor
Images,

The unity in your Church is nothing else but treason, murder, poisoning, one
another: Idolatry, superstition, wickedness: What unity was in your church,
when there was three Popes at once. Where was your head of unity, when you had
a woman Pope.


Boner said, these they words are very blasphemous, and by the means of thy
friends th^n have been suffered to speak and art over malapert to teach any
here, therefore Keeper take him away: afterward, for that he said that the
Mass, transubstantiation, and the worshipping of the Sac^^ment, is mere
impiety and horrible Idolatry, he was condemned: he prophessed before Bonner
and all the people that were there, that after this day in this place, shall
there not be any put to the trial by the fire and faggot, and after that day
there was never none that suffered in Smithfield for the testimony of the
Gospel, God be thanked for it: These seven were burned at Smithfield.


Robert Miles, Stephen Cotton, Robert Dynes, Stephen White, John Slade, William
Pickes or Pikars.
THe foureteenth of July these six were taken at Islington, with the other
seven as before, and were burned at Brainford: the Articles that were
ministered unto them were the same that were ministered unto the other seven,
and their answers the same in effect as the others were. When they were brought
unto the stake they addressed themselves, and joyfully went unto the fire, and
ye^lded their souls, bodies, and lives into the hands of the omnipot^nt Lord.

RICHARD YEOMAN.
He was the Curate of Doctor Tailor before mentioned: he was a godly and
devout old man, being of the age of threescore and ten years, and had many
years dwelt in Hadlie; with him Doctor Tailor left his cure at his departure,
but as soon as M. Newall had gotten the Benefice be drove away good M. Yeoman,
as is before said, and set in a Popish Curate to maintain the Romish Religion;
then wandered he long time from place to place, exhorting al men to stand
faithfully unto Gods word, and to give themselves unto prayer, with patience to
bear the cross laid upon them for their trial, and with boldness to
confess the truth before the adversaries, and with undoubted hope to wait for
the crown of eternal felicity: and perceiving his adversaries to lie in wait
for him, he got a Pedlers pack, and traveled from village to village, selling
such things, and thereby got somewhat to sustain himself, his wife and
children.

At last M. Moyle a Justice of Kent took him, and set him in the stocks a day
and a night; but when he had nothing against him, he discharged him, so he came
unto Hadley, and tarried secretly a year with his wife and children, spending
the time in prayer and reading the Scriptures, and carding of wool, which his
wife did spin; his wife also did beg bread and meat for her self and her
children: thus the Saints of God sustained hunger and misery, whilst the
Prophets of Baall lined in iollitie, and were costly pampered at Iesabels
table: at last Parson Newall perceiving this, came with the officers in the
night, and broke open five doors upon Yeoman, whom he found in bed with his
wife and children: then he said he thought he should find a knave and a whore
together, and he would have plucked off the clothes, but that Yeoman held them
fast, and bade his wife arise and put on her clothes: then he said, Nay parson,
no whore, but a man and his wife, according to Gods ordinance, and blessed be
God, for lawful matrimony, and I defy the Pope and all his popery: then they
led him unto the Cage, and set him in the stocks until it was day. There was
then in the Cage an old man, named John Dale, who had sitten there three or
four days for saying unto Parson Newall and his Curat, Miserable and blind
guids, will you ever be blind leaders of the blinds, will you never amend,
will you never see the truth of Gods word, will neither Gods threats nor
promises enter into your hearts, will not the blood of Martyrs nothing mollify
your stony stomachs? O indurate, hard hearted, perverse and crooked generation,
O damnable sort, to whom nothing can do good.

The said parson Newall caused them both to be carried unto Bury Jail, being
pinioned and bound like thieves, and their legs tied under the horse bellies;
where they were ^yed in Irons: and because they continually rebuked Popery they
were thrown into the lowest dungeon, where John Dale died in prison, whose
body was buried in the fields. He was a Weauer by his occupation. Then Richard
Yeoman was removed to Norwich prison, where he was straightly kept: he boldly
professed himself to be of the faith and religion that was set forth by King
Edward the sixth, and from that he would in no wise vary. Being required to
submit himself to the holy Father the Pope, I defy him (quoth he) and all his
detestable abominations; I will in no wise have to do with him, or with any
thing that appertains unto him. The chief articles objected against him were
his marriage and the mass sacrifies, wherefore when he continued steadfast in
the profession of the truth: he was condemned, and not only burned, but cruelly
tormented in the fire.

JOHN ALCOCK.
THis John was a Shereman, which came unto the aforesaid Hadley to seek work:
after Doctor Tailor was martyred, and Richard Yeoman was taken, he used to
read the Service in English in the Church of Hadley, as is touched before: at
the length, because he would not move his Cap, nor show reverence when Parson
Newall went of procession: when Newall was almost out of the Church, he run
back again and caught him, and delivered him unto the Constable, saying; he
is an Heretic and a Traitor, and despised the Queens proceedings. Wherefore
I command you in the Queens Name, to have him unto the stocks: when he was
brought unto the Parson, he asked him* Fellow, What say thou to the Sacrament
of the Altar? I say (quoth he) as ye use the matter, you make it a shameful
Idol, and you are false Idolatrous Priests every one of you: then the Parson
committed him to Ward, and the next day rode up to London, and carried the said
Alcocke with him; and after he had long been imprisoned in Newgate, after many
examinations and troubles, because he would not ask forgiveness of the Pope,
and be reconciled unto the Romish Religion, he was cast into the lower Dungeon,
where he died: His body was buried in a Dunghill.

THOMAS BENBRIDGE.
Upon the twenty nine of July he was apprehended for an Adversary of the Romish
Religion, and was examined before Doctor White, Bishop of Winchester, where he
sustained sundry conflicts for the truth: The points of Religion that he stood
upon were these:

That Baptism is not administered at this present, as it was in the Apostles
time, because it is not in the English tongue, that in the Sacrament is not the
body and blood of Christ; that he knows not whether Confirmation be a
Sacrament or not, and whether the Bishop gives Grace or not; that sins be
not forgiven by absolution pronounced of a Priest, and that it is not necessary
for a man to confess all his sins unto a Priest: that he believed that the
Bishops be not the Successors of the Apostles, for that they be not called as
they were, nor have not that Grace; that it is not the Pope but the Devil that
is supreme head of the Church which you speak of; that he will not believe
touching Purgatory as their Church does; that Matrimony is no Sacrament, but a
sacred order in sign of an holy thing; that Martine Luther died a good
Christian, whose doctrine and life he did allow, for which he was condemned. He
came unto the stake very rich in apparel, when the fire was kindled, first it
took away a piece of his Beard, whereat he nothing shranke, then it took his
legs, and his stockings being Leather made the fire to pierce the sharper,
and the intolerable heat made him cry I recent, and suddenly thrust the fire
from him, and having two or three of his Friends by, they helped to take the
fire from him: and the Sheriff being Sir Richard Pecksall, of his own
authority took him from the stake, and sent him to Prison again: wherefore
the Sheriff was sent unto the Fleet, and his friends that helped him to
prison. Before he was taken from the stake, Doctor Seaton made him to subscribe
to certain Articles touching the Pope, the Sacrament, and such other trash;
but being in prison, he wrote a Letter unto Doctor Seaton, and recanted those
words that he spoke at the stake unto which he had subscribed: whereupon the
same day seanight he was burned, where the vile Tormentors did rather broile
him, then burn him.

John Cook Sawyer, Robert Milles alias Plumer, Sheareman, Alexander Lane a
VVheelewrite, James Ashly a Bacheler.
IN August these were burned at S. Edmundsbury by the Bishop of Norwich, and
Sir Edward Walgraue.

Sir Edward said unto Cook, why come you not to Church?

Cook. Because the Sacrament of the Altar is an abominable Idol: and (sai^ he)
the vengeance of God will come upon all them which do maintain it.


Sir Edward. O thou rank Traitor, if I had as good a Commission to cut out thy
^ongue as to hear thee, thou should be sure to have it cut out: then he
commanded the Constable to have him away, saying, he was both a Traitor and a
Rebel: Then he ^sked Robert Milles why he would not go unto Church.


Miles. Because I will follow no false Gods: then Alexander Lane was asked why
he would not come to Church, he said; his conscience would not serve him so to
do. After the like manner they passed also with James Ashly; so the next day
they appeared and had their condemnations, and were burned as before.


Alexander Gouch, and Allice Driuer.
GOuch was a Weauer of Shreaden Co^erlits at Woodbridge in Suffolk, and burned
at Uxford: The Woman was Driuers Wife of Grosborough: One Master Moon a
Justice searching for them, they were compelled to hide them in a Hay-ricke,
but by gaging thereof with Pickforks, at the last they found them, and sent
them to Mel^on Iayle: from thence they were carried to Bury unto the Assizes,
and being examined of their Faith, they did boldly confess Christ crucified,
defying the Pope and all his Papisticall trash. And Driuers Wife likened Queen
Mary unto Iezabell: Whereupon Sir Clement Higham Chief Judge, adjudged her
ears to be immediately cut off, which was done, and she joyfully yielded her
self unto the punishment, and thought her self happy that she was counted
worthy to suffer for Christ: then they were sent again unto Melton Iayle, where
they were examined, as follows:

When Driuers Wife came before Doctor Spencer to be examined, she smiled: then
he said; Why Woman do thou laugh us to scorn: she said; She might well
enough to see what fools you be. Then he said, Woman, what say thou to the
Sacrament of the Altar? Do thou not believe that it is very flesh and blood
after the consecration.

Dri. I never heard nor read of any such Sacrament in all the Scripture: I will
grant you a Sacrament called the Lords Supper. I pray you tell me what a
Sacraments is?


Spens. It is a Sign: and Doctor Gascoyne confirmed the same, that it was a
sign of an holy thing.


Dri. It is a Sign indeed, and therefore it cannot be the thing signified
also.


Gascoyne. Do you not believe the omnipotence of GOD? She answered* Yes, Then
said he; Christ said to his Disciples, Take, eat, this is my body, ergo it was
his body, for he was able to perform that which he spoke, and God uses not
to lie.


Dry. Was it not Bread which he gave them? he said, no, it was his body; then
(quoth she) it was his body they did eat over night, what body was it then
that was crucified the next day, when his Disciples had eat him up over night,
except he had two bodies, as by your Argument he had. Such a Doctor, such
Doctrine, be you not ashamed to teach the people that Christ had two bodies. In
the 12. of Luke he took bread and brake it, and gave it to his disciples,
saying; Take, etc. do this in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11. Do this in
remembrance of me, and as often as you shall do it, you shall show the Lords
death until he come. Then Gascoyne held his peace, and the Chancellor
commanded the Iayler to take her away.


Dri. Now you be not able to resist the truth, you command me to prison, the
Lord shall judge our cause, unto him I leave it. I wis this gear will go for
no payment: the next day she came before them again, and their Arguments were
unto the same effect, wherefore she was condemned, so went she to prison
again, as joyful as the Bird of day, praising and glorifying the name of God.

Alexander Gouch was condemned, for that his belief was, that Christ is
ascended into heaven, and there remains, and that the Sacrament was the
remembrance of his death; and for refusing the Mass, and the Pope to be
supreme head of the Church, they were both burned at Ipswich: They ended their
lives with earnest zeal, nothing fearing to speak their consciences, when
they were commanded the contrary.

Sir Henry Dowell Sheriff would not suffer them to make an end of their
prayers: then Gouch said, take heed M. Sheriff, if ye forbid prayers, the
vegeance of God hangs over your heads: when the Iron chain was put about
Allice Driuers neck, O (said she) here is a goodly Neckercher, blessed be God
for it. Diverse shook them by the hands, the Sheriff bad lay hands on them,
with that a great number ran unto the stake, he seeing that, let them all
alone.

One Bate a Barber was a busy deer against them, who being in a freeze gown
sold it, saying; it stunk of Heretics, with other foul words, within three or
four weeks after, he died miserably in Ipswich.


Phillip Humphrey, John David, and Henry David his Brother.
THese were burned at Bury, in the same month that Queen Mary died, Sir
Clement Highama, bout a fortnight before the Queen died, did sue out a writ
for the burning of these three godly and blessed Martyrs, though the Queen was
then known to be past remedy of her sickness.

Good-wife Pressed.
SHe was the wife of one Pressed, dwelling not far from Launceston in Erecester
D^oces. She told the Bishop, that she would rather die then worship that foul
Idol, which with your Mass you make a God.

Bishop. Will you say that the Sacrament of the Altar is a foul Idol?


Woman. Yea, there was never such an Idol as your Sacrament is made of your
Priests, and commanded to be worshipped of all men, where Christ did command it
to be eaten and drunken, in remembrance of his Passion.


Bishop. Do thou not see that Christ said over the Bread, This is my body,
and over the Cup, This is my blood: she said, but he meant not carnally, but
sacramentally, if you will give me leave, I will declare the reason why I will
not worship the Sacrament.


Bishop. Mary say on, I am sure it will be good gear.


Woman. I will demand of you whether you can deny the Creed, which says,
that Christ perpetually sits at the right hand of his Father, both Body
and Soul, until he come again, if it be so, he is not in the Earth in a
piece of bread: If he do not dwell in Temples made with hands, but in Heaven,
what shall we seek him here? If he did offer up his body once for all, why
make you a new offering? If with once offering he made all perfect, why do
you with a false offering make all imperfect? If he be to be worshipped in
Spirit and Truth, why do you worship a piece of Bread: If he be eaten and
drunken in Faith and Truth: If his Flesh be not profitable amongst us, why do
you say, it is profitable both for Body and Soul: rather then I would do as
you do, I will live no longer.


Bish. I promise you, you are a holy Protestant, a foolish woman, who will wast
his breath upon thee, and such as thou art: but how chances it that you went
from your husband, and run about the Country like a Fugitive.


Woman. My Husband and my Children did persecute me, for when I would have him
to leave Idolatry, and worship god in heaven, he would not hear me, but he
with his Children rebuked and troubled me: so I went from him, because I would
be no partaker with him and his of that foul Idol the Mass, God give me
grace to go to the true Church.


Bishop. What do thou mean by the true Church?


Wom. Not your Popish Church, full of Idols and abominations, but where three
or four are gathered together in the name of God: some persuaded the Bishop
that she was out of her wits, therefore they consulted that she should go at
large; so the Keeper of the Bishops prison had her home unto his house, where
she fell to spinning and carding, and did al other work besides as his
servant, and went whether she list. Diverse had a delight to talk with her, and
ever she would talk of the Sacrament of the Altar, which of all things they
could least abide.


Then diverse Priests persuaded her to leave her wicked opinion of the
Sacrament: but she answered, that it was nothing but bread and wine, and that
they might be ashamed to say, that a piece of bread should be turned by a man
into the natural body of Christ; which bread does sennew, and Mice oftentimes
do eat it, and it does mould, and is burned, Gods own body will not be so
handled or kept in prison or Boxes: let it be your GOD, it shall not be mine,
for my Savior sits at the right hand of God, and does pray for me, and to
make it the very body of Christ and to worship it, is foolish and deuillish
deceit.

Then an old Friar as^ed her what she said of the holy Pope, I say (quoth she)
he is Antichrist, and the Devil, then they all laughed; ^ay said she, you had
more need to weep then laugh, in that you are Chaplains unto that wh^re of
Babylon: I defy him and all his falsehood: you damn souls, when you teach the
people to worship Idols, and to worship a false God of your own making, of a
piece of Bread: and that the Pope is Gods Uicar, and can forgive sins, and
that there is a Purgatory, when Gods Son has by his Passion purged all, and
say you make God and sacrifice him, when Christ's body was a Sacrifice once for
all: you teach the people to number their sins in your ears, and say they
be damned ^f they do not confess all, when GOD says, Who can number his
sins? You promise them Trentalls and Dirges, and Masses for Souls, and sell
your prayers for Money, and make them buy pardons, and trust in such foolish
inu^ntions: you teach us to pray upon Beads, and to pray unto Saints; you make
Holy bread and holy water to fray Devils, and you do make a thousand more
abominations, yet you say you came to save my soul; no, no, one has saved
me, farewell with your salvation.

In Saint Peter's Church she beheld a cunning Duch-man how he made new Noses,
to certain Images which were disfigured in King EDWARD'S time, What a mad man
art thou (said she) to make new noses, which within a few days shall all loose
their heads: thou and thine Images are acccursed: he called her whore, nay
said the thine Images are whoores, and thou art a whoore-hunter: For God says,
you go a whoring after strange Gods: Then she was clapped fast, and after had
no liberty, and not long after she was condemned: Then she said, I thank God
this day I have found that which I have long sought, and being then exhorted to
recant: she said I will never lose eternal life, for this short life: I will
not turn from my heavenly husband, to my earthly husband, from the fellowship
of Angels, to mortal Children, God is my Father, God is my Mother, God is my
Sister, my Brother, my Kinsman, God is my Friend, most faithful: she was
burned at Execester.

John Sharp, Thomas Hall, Thomas Benion.
THese were burned in the town of Bristow, for saying that the Sacrament of
the Altar was the greatest and most abominable Idol that ever was: and Thomas
Benion denied five of their Sacraments, and affirmed two: that is, the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and the Sacrament of Baptism: they
died godly, constantly and patiently.

John Corneford of Wortham, Christopher Brown of Maidstone, John Herst of
Ashford, Alice Snoth, Katherine Knight, alias Tinley.
THese were the last that suffered in Queen Mary's reign: They were burned at
Canterbury, but six days before the death of Queen Mary: The Archdeacon of
Canterbury being at London, and understanding the danger of the Queen, made
post-hast home to dispatch these.

They were condemned for not believing the body of Christ to be in the
Sacrament of the Altar, unless it be received, and for confessing that an
evil man does not receive Christ's body: and that it is Idolatry to creep to
the cross, and that we should not pray unto our Lady and other Saints: when
there sentence should be^ read against them, John Cornefield excommunicated the
Papists in these words as follow.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the most mighty God, and by
the power of his holy Spirit, and of the authority of his holy Cathothick and
Apostolic Church: we do give here into the hands of Satan to be destroyed,
the bodies of all those blasphemers and heretics, that do^ maintain any error
against his most holy word, or do condemn his most holy truth for heresy, to
the maint^nance of any false Church, or fained religion, so that by this thy
just Judgment, O most mighty God, against thy Adversaries, thy true religion
may be known, to thy great glory, and our comfort, and to the edifying of all
our Nation, good Lord, so be it.

This proceeded, as it seemed, from an inward faith, and hearty zeal to Gods
truth, and it took such effect against the enemies, that within six days
Queen Mary died, and all tyranny with her.

These godly Martyrs, in their prayers which they made at their martyrdom,
desired God that their blood might be the last that should be shed, and so it
was.

Katherine Tinley, was the mother of one Robert Tinley, dwelling in Maidestone.

The Story of Nicholas Burton, Merchant of London dwelling in little S.
Bartholomew.
THe fifth of November, he being in the City of Cadix, in the parts of
A^do^azia in Spain about his merchandise, there came one of the inquisition
unto his lodging, who fained to have a Letter to deliver unto his hands, when
he came unto him, he invented another lie; and said that he would take lading
unto London in his ships, delaying the time until the Alquisyell or Sergeants
of the inqui^ition might apprehend them, and seeking to know his ships that
they might attache them, when they had arrested him, he boldly asked them what
cause they had against him, and he would answer them: They carried him unto a
filthy common prison of the town of Cadix, where he remained in Irons amongst
thieves thirteen days: all which time he instructed the poor prisoners in
the word of God, that he had reclaimed sundry of them from superstitions to
embrace the Word of God, which being known they conuayed him thence unto the
City of Civil, into a more cruel prison called Triane, where the Fathers of
the inquisition proceeded against him secretly, that never after he could be
suffered to speak or write unto any of his Nation: And the twentieth day of
December, they brought him with a great number of other prisoners into the
City of Siuil, into a place where the Inquisi^ion sat in Judgment: they put
on him a Canuas coat, whereon was painted in diverse parts the figure of a huge
Devil tormenting a soul in fire, and on his head a long cap of the same
work: his tongue was forced out of his mouth, with a cloven stick fastened
upon it, that he should not utter his Faith and conscience unto the people: and
so he was set with an other Englishman of Southampton, and diverse others
condemned for Religion, as well Frenchmen, as Spaniards, upon a Scaffold over
against the inquisition, where they were condemned, and they most cruelly
burned him for his most constant Faith: He showed such a cheerful
countenance, patience and gladness in the flames of fire, that the tormentors
said, that the Devil had his soul, before he came unto the fire: there
suffer^d with him another Englishman, and thirteen more; One a Nun, another a
Friar constant in the Lord.

John Baker, and William Burgate.
THey were both Englishmen, and apprehended the second of November, at Cales in
Spain, and were burned at Civil.

Mark Burges, and William Hooker.
THey were both Englishmen: Burges was Master of a Ship called the Minion. He
was burned at Lysborne in Portugal. Hooker was about sixteen years old, and
was stoned unto death of certain young men in the City of Civil for the
confession of his Faith.

Franciscus Euzenas wrote to Philip Melancton, as follows. In Sant Lucar in
Spain dwelt a Brabander, called Rochus, a maker of Images: He liked not his
science, because he maintained Idolatry, yet he was ^aine to use it for
maintenance for excellent workmanship he was commended of all men. Upon a time
he had framed the Image of our Lady in wood, with singular dexterity, setting
it out to be sold: One of the Inquisitors offered money for it: He answered, he
had rather break it, then to sell it at his price: He bid him break it if he
dare. At which word he flung a tool at the Image, and blemished the face
thereof: By and by he was carried away unto prison: May I not said he make and
mar mine own work, as I think good: perhaps I did not well like the
countenance of it, and therefore did intend to make it better unto my mind:
Notwithstanding, within three days he was carried unto the stake and burned,
because he was an heretic against the blessed Lady.

Touching the Treatise and names of them who by reason of persecution, we^^
forced to forsake their houses and goods in the time of Queen Mary. I have
omitted it, and the Reader that is desirous to read them, may repair to the
book at large.

Likewise I have omitted the Treatise, concerning such as were scourged and
whipped by the Papists, in the true cause of Christ's Gospel, because all the
Stories of them be elsewhere in the Book.

Likewise touching the story of such as by the providence of God, have been
preserved from danger in the time of persecution: I refer the Reader to the
book at large.

THE ACTS THAT HAPPENED in the flourishing Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.
HAVING by the power of Almighty God truly displayed the cruel practices of
Queen Mary's Reign: now orderly coming to the flourishing and long wished
for Reign of the most virtuous, and religious Queen Elizabeth, who can number
the singular ornaments and noble graces, given of God unto this so princely a
Lady, and puisant Princess: the mildnes of her Nature, the clemency of her
Royal estate, the peaceablenes of her Reign: who a Uirgine so mildely ruled
her subjects, kept all things in order, quieted foreign Nations, recovered
towns, enlarged her Kingdom, nourishes and reconcileth amity, unites
hearts, and love with foreign enemies, helps neighbors, reformed Religion,
quenched persecution: She was feared with love, and loved with fear: how can
we but give virtue her commendations, which in all persons as Plato says,
stirs up great love, but especially in a Prince* and what cause have all we
Englishmen to render most ample thanks to the mercifulnes of God, who has
granted, conserved, and advanced unto the Seat Regal of this Realm: so good
godly and virtuous a Queen: such a chosen instrument of his clemency, through
whom we cannot deny, but that God has made amends, and recompense now unto
England, for the cruel days that were before, for as then moderation had no
place, but all was ruled by rigor: Contrary now clemency has all the
operation, as then was no end of butcherly killing: now is no b^ginning of
spilling any drop of blood: She came in like a mother, not like a st^pdame,
like a Lamb, not li^e a Lion.

First i^ begin with her princely birth be^ing borne at Greenewich, Ann^ 1534.
of the victorious Prince King Henry the eight, and of the Noble and most
virtuous Lady Queen Anne her mother* She^ was Christened in the Gray-Friers
Church of Greenewich, having unto her Godfather Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury: after she was committed unto godly Tutors, under whose
institution, her Grace did so greatly increase in virtue, and knowledge of
learning, so that she understood all tongues, and spoke all languages: she was
well learned in the liberal arts and sciences, and her noble breast was
gernished, with all virtue, council and wisdom, that none of her Council
could go beyond her majesty: it is wonderful in every man's conscience, to
behold in that age, that s^xe, in such state and fortune, in so great
occasions, so many entisements, in all these to refaine so sober conversation,
so temperate condition, such mildnes of manners, such humbleness of stomach,
such clemency in forgiving, such traveling in study. Tully says, a good man
in other places is no matter, but in Asia to keep a sober, and temperate life,
that is indeed a matter praise worthy: But she in the midst of Asia, did so
much degenerate from all Asia, as has not lightly been in Europa.

Her first schoolemaister, reported of her to a friend of his, that he learned
every day more of her, then she of him, which he expounded thus: I teach her
words (quoth he) and she teaches me things: I teach her tongue to speak, and
her modest and maidenly life teaches me to do, for I think she is the best
disposed of any in Europe, and an Italian that was her teacher, said he found
in her t^o qualities, which are never lightly y^ke-fellowes in one woman, which
are a singular wit, and a marvelous meek stomach.

But none of her princely qualities are more worthy of commendations, th^^ her
Christian patience, showed in her afflictions, and her incredible clemency
declared toward her enemies: for though she was such a high Princes, and a
Kings Daughter and a Queens Sis^er, and heir apparent unto the Crown, could
she not escape without the ^rosse: Yea her troubles were far above the
condition of a Kings Daughter: for there was no more behinds to make a very
Iphigenia of her, but her offering up upon the Altar of the Scaffold,

It was no small injury that she suffered in the Lord Protectors days by
certain venomous vipers: And after the death of King Edward, the Council
sought to defeat both her and her Sister from the natural inheritance and
right of the Crown.

And in the days of Queen Mary, into what trouble of mind, and fear of
death was she brought unto. First with ^ands of ha^nished men to be fetched up
as a great Traitor, and clapped into the Tower, and to be t^ssed from thence
from prison to prison, from post to pillar: at length also she was prisoner i^
her own house, guarded with a sort of cut-throates, which ever gaped for the
spoil^ of her.

In the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lord
Courtenay were charged with false suspicion of Sir Thomas Wiats rising, and the
Lady Elizabeth being at her house at Ashredge, Queen Mary sent her two Lords,
and Sir John Williams, afterward Lord Tame, with their retinue and troops of
horsemen, to the number of two hundred and fifty, who found her sore sick in
her bed and very feeble and weak of body: and at ten of the clock at night
they rushed into her Chamber without leave: whereat her Grace being not a
little amazed, She said, my Lords is your have such that it might not have
pleased you to have come to morrow in the morning: They answered, that they
came from the Queen for her, and that she must be at London the seventh day of
that month: she answered, that no Creature was more glad then she to come unto
her Majesty, and that she was sorry she was not able to go with them; they
answered, That their Commission was such, that we must needs bring you with
v^^liue or dead. In conclusion, they willed her to prepare against the morning
at nine of the clock to go with them, and on the next day morrow at the time
prescribed, they had her forth as she was, very faint and feeble, and in such
case, that she was ready to sound three or four times between them. From
Ashridge all sick in the Litter, she came unto Redborne, where she was guarded
all night: from thence to Saint Albons, to Sir Raphe Rowlets house, where she
tarri^d all night both feeble in body, and comfortless in mind: from thence
she came to Master Dodds house at Mimmes, where also they remained all night,
and from thence to Highgate, where she being very sick, tarried all night and
next day. During which time of her abode, there came many Purseuants and
Messengers from the Court unto the Lords, but about what I cannot tell: from
thence she was conuayed unto the Co^rt, where she was straitwaies shut up, and
kept as close prisoner a fortnight.

The Friday before Palmesunday, the Bishop of Winchester with nineteen others
of the Privy Council came unto her Grace, and b^rdened her with Wiats
Conspiracy, which she v^terly deni^d: then they charged her with the business
made by Sir Peter Carew, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the West country,
which also she utterly denied: Then they told her that it was the Queens
pleasure that she should go unto the Tower, until the mat^^r were further
tried: Then she desired them to be a mean unto the Quee^e that she would be
gracious unto her: declaring that sheee was innocent in all the matters wherein
they had burdened her, and that she was a true woman unto to the Queen, in
thought, word, and deed: that she might not be committed unto so notorious
and doleful a place: The Lords answered, that there was no remedy, for the
Queen was determined that she should go unto the Tower, wherewith the Lords
departed, with their hats hanging over their eyes, but about an hour after,
four of the aforesaid Lords of the Council with the Guard, who warding the
next chamber unto her, secluded all her Gentlemen, Yeomen, Ladies, and
Gentlewomen, and one Gentleman Usher, three Gentlewomen, and two Grooms of her
Chamber, were appointed in their rooms by the Queen to give attendance upon
her that none should have access unto her.

At which time there was 100. of Northen soldiers in white coats, watching
abo^t the Gardens all night, and two Lords with their bands and companies
watched in the hall: The next day two Lords of the Council, certified her
Grace that forthwith she must go unto the Tower: the Barge being prepared for
her, and the tide now ready, which tarrieth for no body, but she got leave of
the Earl of Sussex, which was one of the two, to tarry till day to write to
the Q. and he promised to deliver it, contrary to the will of the other: the
next day, being Palm-sonday, about nine of the clock, she took her Barge, with
the said two Lords, houering upon the water an boure, because they could not
shoot the Bridge, and when they did shoot the bridge, the st^rn of the (...)
struck upon the ground the fall was so big and the water so shallow: then her
Grace desired the Lords that she might not land at the stairs where al
traitors and offenders use to land, which they would not grant; then she
protested that here steppeth as true a subject as ever was toward the Queens
highness; and before thee, O God, I speak it, having none other friends but
only thee: when she came into the Tower she rested her self upon a cold
stone, the Lieutenant said, Madam, you were best come out of the rain, for you
sit vnwholsomly: she answered it was better to sit there then in a worse place,
for God knows I know not whether you will bring me, then her Gentleman Usher
wept, and she asked him what his meaning was in that be used her so
uncomfortably? so she went into the prison and the doors were locked and
boulted upon her: then she called to her Gentleman for her book, desiring God
in no wise to suffer her to build her foundation upon the sands, but upon the
rock, whereby all blasts of blustering winds should not hurt her: the Lords
consulting about her straight keeping, the Lord of Sussex said, My Lords, let
us take heed that we do no more then our Commission will warrant us,
whatsoever shall or may happen hereafter; for she was the King our Masters
daughter, whereunto they all agreed and departed.

It would make a strange story to recite what examinations and rackings of
poor men there were to find out that knife which should cut her throat: what
gaping amongst the Lords of the Clergy, to see the day wherein they might wash
their white Rochets in her innocent blood, but most especially Steven Gardner
Bishop of Winchester then Lord Chancellor, and then rul^r and governor of the
roast, who within few days after came unto her, with diverse of the Council,
and very strictly examined her about a purpose that she had to remove to her
house at Donnington Castle, and likewise they examined Sir James Acroft about
the same matter: She answered, what is that to the purpose, my Lords, but that
I may go unto mine own houses at all times? but my Lords, you do examine
every mean prisoner concerning me, wherein you do me exceeding great
injury: I beseech you join not me in this sort with any of these offenders.
When they were departing Sir James Acroft kn^eled down, and said, he was
sorry to be brought as a witness against her Grace, and that he had been
meru^i^ously tossed and examined touching her Highness, but I take GOD to record
before whom I stand in your honors sight, I know not any thing of that crime
that you have laid unto my charge, and will take my death thereon if I be
driven to so strait a trial.

When her officers had provided her diet, and brought it to the utter gate of
the Tower, the common rascal soldiers received it. Wherefore they complained
unto the Lord Chamberlain Constable of the Tower, and desired that her diet
might be brought in by them, which were apppointed thereunto: He answered, I
assure you for that she is a prisoner, she shall be served with the
Lieutenants men, as other ^he prisoners are: and they seeming to be offended at
this answer: He swear that if they did either frown or shrug at him, he
would set them where they should neither see Sun nor Moon; but after they
obtained their request of the Council with much ado: Then he would have had
his servants to have served with them, and he would have had his meat roasted
with her Graces meat, and that his Cook should come thither to dress it: Her
Graces Cook would suffer no st^anger to come about her diet, but her own
sworn men, neither would they suffer any strangers to come into any other of
their offices.

When she had lien a month in close prison, and was ill at ease, she requested
the Lord Chamberlain and the Lord Shandoys to have liberty to walk in some
place: they said they durst not grant it, because they had commandment to
the contrary: but the next day the Lord Sandoys obtained of the Council, but
with very much ado, that she might walk in the Queens lodging, in the
presence of the Lord Chamberlain and the Lord Shandoys, the Windows being
shut, wherewith she contented her self, and thanked him. Afterward she had
liberty for to walk in a little Garden, and the Doors and Gates being close
shut: during which time there used a man's Child in the Tower many times to
bring her Grace Flowers, but certain suspicious heads thinking to make some
great matter thereof, called the Child, promising him Figs and Apples* asked
him when he was with the Earl of Devonshire, he answered he would go by and
by thither: then they asked him when he was with the Lady Elizabeth, he
answered every day: then they asked him what the Lord of Devonshire sent by him
unto her Grace, he said; I will go know what he will give me to carry her. This
is a crafty boy (quoth the L. Chamberlain) I pray you (quoth the boy) give me
the figs you promised me: no (quoth he) thou shall be whipped if thou come any
more unto the Lady Elizabeth, or the Lord Courney, and the child's Father was
commanded to suffer the Boy to come no more unto their chambers: the next day,
as her Grace walked in the Garden, the Child peeping in at a little hole, cried
unto her, Mistress, I can bring you no more Flowers; whereat she smiled,
perceiving how the matter went.

The sixteenth day of May she was removed from the tower, where Sir Henry
Benifield being appointed her Iayler, did receive her with a company of Rake^s
to guard her, besi^es the Lord of Darbies Band: to whom the Lord of Tame was
joined in Commission: the first day they conducted her to Richmond, where she
was s^cl^ded from her Servants, and Soldiers were appointed in their rooms to
give attendance upon her person, whereby she was in despair of her life, and
desired her Gentleman Usher and the rest of his company, to pray for her.

Then the Gen^leman Usher desired the Lord of Tame, to tell him if there were
any danger meant toward his Mistress this night, saying; certainly I and my
fellows will rather dye, then she should secretly miscarry: the Lord of Tame
answered, rather then it should be so, I and my men are ready to die at her
foot also. The next day she was carried to Windsor, and by the way she saw
certain of her men, then she bad one go to them, and say these words;
Tanquam Ouis, She lay that night in the Deane of Windsors house: The next night
she was brought to Master Dormers house, where many people presented unto her
gifts. Wherefore Sir Henry troubled the poor people very sore for showing
their kindness unto her, calling them R^bels and Traitors: as she passed the
villages the townes-men* rang the Bells for Joy: Sir Henry sent his Soldiers,
and put some of the ^^^gers into the stocks, and otherwise misused othersome
the next night they came to the Lord of Tames house, where she was princely
entreated of Noble men, Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen. Sir Henry told them
that they could not tell what they did, and they were not able to answer their
doings. The Lord of Tame said he was well advised of his doings, and that her
Grace might or should be merry at his house. Then Sir Henry (whereas there was
appointed for her Grace, a Chair, two Cushions, and a foot Carpet very
Prince-like) wherein presumptuo^s^y he sat whilst his Boots were plucked
off: Wherefore the Ladies and Gentlewomen did laugh him to scorn: The next day
she was brought to Woodstock, where she was enclosed as in the Tower,
threescore soldiers every day warding within the walls and without, and
forty every night without the walls during the time of her imprisonment
there, when she went into the Garden to walk, she had five or six locks
locked upon her, betwixt her lodging, and her walks. Sir Henry himself
keeping the keys: Whereupon she called him her Jailer: He desired her not to
call him so, but her Officer: from such Officers, quoth she, good Lord deliver
me.

At the last, by earnes^ suite she was permitted to write unto the Queen, so
that Sir Henry did stand by whilst she wrote (which he straightly observed:)
when she was weary he would carry away the Letters, and bring them again
when she called for them: he would have been the messenger to cartie the
Letters, but she would not give him leave, but said one of her own men should
carry them: he said ^e ^rowed none of them durst be so ^olde: yes (quoth she)
I have none so dishonest, but w^ll as willingly serve me n^w as before, but he
would not permit her Letters to be carried four or five days after the
writing thereof, but in fine, he sent for her Gentl^man, demanding whether he
durst enterprise the carrying of the Letters to the Queen: he answered yes that
he durst and would, whereupon Sir Henry half against his stomach, gave them
him.

Doctor Owen and Doctor Wendi^e were sent for by the Queens Grace, for that she
was sickly, who ministered unto her and let her blood, tarrying with her 5. or
6. days: they reported to the Q. and Council of her Graces behauior and
humblenes toward the Q. which her Majesty took very thankfully, but the
Bishops rep^ned, and told the Queen that they marvelled that she submitted not
her self unto her Majesty's mercy.

About this time her grace was requested by a secret friend to submit her self
unto the Queen, which would be to her great commodity: she answered, she would
not submit her self unto them which she had not offended: if I have offended,
I crave no mercy but law: I would I were as clear out of the perrill of mine
e^emies, as I know my self out of the danger of the law.

About this time there was great consulting amongst the Bishops and Gentlemen
touching a marriage for her Grace, which some of the Spaniards wished to be,
with some stranger that she might go out of the Realm with her portion: then
a Lord said, that the King should never have quiet Commonwealth in England,
except her head were stricken from her shoulders: the Spaniards answered, God
forbid that their King and Master should consent to such a mischief. From that
day the Spaniards never left good persuasions unto the King, that he should
never obtain the like honor as he should in delivering the Lady Elizabeth out
of prison, whereby at length she was happily released of the same.

Shortly after she was sent for to Hampton Court, Sir Henry Benifield and his
soldiers, with the Lord of Tame, and Sir Ralph Chamberlain guarding of her:
the first night she came to Ricot, the next to M. Dormers, house and so to
Colbrook, where she lay at the George all night: as she came thither,
threescore of her Gentlemen and Yeomen met her, which had not seen her Grace a
long season before: but they were commanded in the Queens name to depart the
town, and she was not suffered to speak with them: that night al her men were
taken from her but her Gentleman usher, three Gentlewomen, and two Grooms, and
one of her Wardrop: the next day her Grace entered Hampton Court, where she lay
a fortnightere ever any had recourse unto her; at length came the Lord William
Howard to ^er, who used her Grace marvelous hanourably: she requested him to
be a mean that she might speak with some of the Council. Not long after came
to her Gardner Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Arundel, the Lord of Shrewsbury,
and Secretary Peter, who with great humility humbled themselves unto her Grace.
My Lords, quoth she, I am glad to see you; for me thinks I have bin kept a
great while from you desolatly alone, wherefore I would desire you to be a
mean to the King and Queens Majesty's, that I may be delivered from prison,
wherein I have bin kept a long space.

Then Gardner kneeled down, and requested her to submit her self to the Queen,
and then he doubted not but her Majesty would be good unto her: she answered,
rather then she would do so she would lie in prison all the days of her life,
adding, that she craved no mercy but the law, if ever she did offend her
Majesty in thought, word or deed; and in yielding I should confess my self to
be an offender, which I never was toward her Majesty, by occasion whereof the
King and Queen might ever hereafter conceive an ill opinion, therefore it were
better for me to lie in prison for the tr^th, then to be abroad and suspected
of my Prince. So they departed, promising to declare her message to the Que^n.

The next day Gardner came again unto her Grace, and kneeling down, declared
that the Queen maruailed that she would so stoutly use her self* not
confessing ^o have offended, so that it should seem the Queens Majesty
wrongfully to have imprisoned her Grace: Nay, quoth she, the Queen may punish
me as it pleas^th her: Nay, quoth Gardner, her Majesty willed me to certify
you, that you must tell her another tale ere that you be at liberty: her Grace
answered, that she had as live be in prison with honesty and truth, as to be
abroad suspected of her Majesty: this I will stand unto, for I will never belly
my self. Then he kneeled down, and said, then your Grace has advantage of me
and other the Lords for your long imprisonment: I take God to record, quoth
she, I seek no vantage at your hands for your so dealing with me: then the
other kneeled down, and desired her Grace that all might be forgotten, and so
they departed. A seuen-night after the Queen^ sent for her at ten of the clock
at night: then she desired her Gentlemen and Gentlewomen to pray for her, for
that she co^ld not tell whether she should ever se^ them again. When she came
unto the Que^ne she kneeled down and desired God to preserve her Majesty, not
in any wise doubting but that she should prove her self as true and faithful
a subject toward her Majesty as ever did any, and therefore she desired her
Majesty so to judge of her, and said she should not and other of her,
whatsoever report had gone of her: the Queen answered, you will not confess
your offense, b^t stand stoatly in your truth, I pray God it may so fall out.
It it do not, quoth she, I desire no favor nor pardon at your Majesty's hands.
Well (said the Queen) you stiffely still perse^ere in the truth, belike you
will not confess but that you have b^ene wrongfully punished. I must not say
so (if it please your Grace) to you; why then, said the Queen, belike you will
unto others: no, quoth she, I have borne the burden, and must bear it: I
humbly beseech your Majesty to have a good opinion of me, and to think me to
be your true subject, not only hitherto, but as long as life lasts, and so
they parted with a few comfortable words in English, but what she said in
Spanish God knows. It is thought that King Philip was there behind a cloth,
and not seen, and that he showed himself a very friend unto that matter. Thus
her Grace went unto her lodging again, and the seuen-night after she was
released of Sir Henry Benifield, and was set at liberty from imprisonment: she
went into the Country, and had appointed to go with her. Sir Thomas Pope one
of the Queens Counselors, and M. Gage one of her Gentlemen Ushers. And thus
straightly was she looked unto all the time of Q. Mary's reign.

Then there came unto her house Master Ierningham, and Norris Gentleman Usher,
Queen Mary's Men, who took from her Grace Mistress Ashly to the Fleet* and
three other of her Gentlewomen unto the Tower, which was no little trouble unto
her Grace; saying, That she thought that they would fetch all away in the end:
but God be praised shortly after was fetched away Gardener, whereby the life of
this so excellent a Princess, the wealth of all England was preserved: for the
said wicked Gardner had long labored his wits, and bent all his devises, to
bring this our dear Souera^gne out of the way, as by his words and doings did
well appear. After the death of this Gardner, followed the death also and
dropping away of other her enemies: whereby by little and little her i^opardy
decreased, and more gentle entertainmant did daily grow unto her, until in the
month of November, the seventeenth day. Three years after the death of
Stephen Gardner, followed the death of Queen Mary, as is before declared, the
same day Queen Elizabeth was proclaimed Queen, with as many glad hearts of
her subjects, as ever was any King or Queen in this Realm. The next day after
the death of Queen Mary, Cardinal Poole died: and shortly after Christopher
Bishop of Chichester, and Hopton Bishop of Norwich died, and Doctor Weston,
which was the chief Disputer against Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. First, fell
into displeasure with the Cardinal, and other Bishops, because he would not
depart from his Deanerie of Westminster unto the Monks: being removed from
thence, he was made Deane of Windsor, where being apprehended in aduoutry, was
by the sa^d Cardinal put from all his spiritual livings: wherefore he
appealed unto Rome, and flying out of the Realm he was taken by the way and
clapped into the Tower, where he remained until Queen Elizabeth was proclaimed,
then being delivered, he fell sick and died.

The fifteenth day of January Queen Elizabeth was crowned with triumphant and
honorable entertainment of the City of London, with such celebritie, pra^ers,
wishes, welcommings, cries, tender words, Pageants, Interl^des, decl^mations
and verses set up, as the like has not been seen: arguing a wonderful
affection of loving hearts toward their Sovereign, and many Letters
gratulatory were sent unto her Majesty, from sundry foreign places* as from
Zuricke, Geneua, Basil, Berne, Wertenberge, Argentine, Franckfort, etc.

It pleased the Queens most excellent Majesty to have a convenient chosen
number of the best learned of either part, to confer together their opinions
and reasons, and thereby to come to some good and charitable agreement:

For the Papists were appointed the Bishops of Winchester, Lichfield, Chester,
Carlisle, Lincoln, Doctor Cote, Doctor Harpsfield, Doctor, Langdall, and Doctor
Chedsey.

For the Protestants were appointed the Bishop of Chichester, Doctor Coxe, M.
Whitehed, M. Grindall* M. Horn, Doctor Sands, M. Gest, M. Aelmer, M. Iuell,
The matters which they should talk of follow:

1 It is against the word of God, and the custom of the ancient Church, to
use a tongue unknown to the people, in Common Prayer, and the administration
of the Sacraments.

2 Every Church has authority to appoint, take away, and change ceremonies,
and Ecclesiastical Rites, so the same be unto edification.

3 It cannot be proved by the word of God that there is in the mass offered by
a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead.

It was resolved by the Queens Majesty, with the advice aforesaid, that it
should be in writing on both parts, and that the Bishops should first declare
their minds touching the matters, with their reasons in writing; and they on
the other part should the same day declare their opinions in like manner, and
each of them deliver their writings unto the other to consider what were to be
improued therein, and the same also to declare in writing some other day: the
parties of this conference were to put and read their assertions in the
English tongue, before the Nobles and States of the Realm, that thereupon in
the Court of Parliament, consequently following, some laws might be grounded.

The first meeting was the last of March, in Westminster Church: the Lords and
others of the privy Council were present, and a great part of the Nobility:
the Bishop of Winchester and his Colleagues alleged that they had mistake^
that their reasons should be written, but they were ready to argue and
dispute; this seemed somewhat strange to the Council, yet it was permitted, so
Doctor Cole Deane of Paul's was appointed the vtterer of their minds, who
partly by speech, and partly by reading authorities written, and sometimes was
informed by his Colleagues what to say, made a declaration of their meanings
and reasons to the first proposition; which being ended, they were asked by the
Council if they had any more to say, and they said no: so the other part was
licensed to show their mind, which they exhibited in a book written; which
after a prayer made most humbly unto Almighty God for the induing them with the
holy spirit, and a protestation to stand to the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, builded upon the doctrines of the Prophets and Apostles: the effect of
the protestation i^ as here follows.

We refer the whole judgment of the controversy unto the holy Scriptures,
and the Catholic Church of Christ* whose judgment unto us ought to be most
sacred; notwithstanding by the Catholic Church we understand not the Romish
Church, whereunto our adversaries attribute such reverence, but that Church
which S. Augustine and other fathers affirm ought to be sought in the holy
scriptures, and which is governed and led by the spirit of Christ.

It is against the word of God, and the custom of the primitive Church, to use
a tongue unknown unto the people in the common prayers, and in administration
of the Sacraments: by the word of God wemeane the written word of God, or
Canonical Scriptures; and by the custom of the primitive Church, we mean the
order most generally used in the Church for five hundred years after Christ, in
which time lived Iustine, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Basil, Chrysostom,
Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, etc.

This assertion has two parts: first, that it is against the word of God; and
secondly, that it is against the use of the primitive Church. The first is
proved by Saint Paul in 1. Cor. 14. where he entreats of this matter, ex
professo, purposely: and though some say that he there means of preaching and
not of prayer, it appears, by the exposition of the best writers, that he
speaks of prayer and thanksgiving, and of all other public actions which
require any speech in the Church: of prayer he says, I will pray with my
spirit, and with my understanding: and of thanksgiving he says, Thou give
thanks well, but the other is not edified, and how can the unlearned say Amen at
thy giving of thanks, when he understands not what thou say? then he
concludes, that all things ought to be don to edification; and he uses the
similitude of a Trumpet, If it give an uncertain sound who can prepare to
battle? so if thou speak with unknown tongues, you speak in the air, that
is, in vain.

In the old Testament all things belonging unto public prayers, benedictions,
thanksgiuings, and sacrifices were always in their natural tongue: if they
did so in the shadows of the law, much more ought we to do the like.

S. Augustin^ in his fourth book De doctrina Christiana, and the tenth
Chapter, says, If they, for whose cause we speak, understand not our
speaking, there is no cause why we should speak.

The barbarous Heathen of all nations and sorts of men ever made their prayers
and sacrifices to their gods in their mother tongue, which shows that it is
the very light and voice of nature.

Touching the second part of the assertion, that it is against the custom of
the primitive Church: it is a matter so clear, that the denial of it must
needs proceed either of great ignorance, or else of wilful malice.

Justinius Martyr, Apol. 2. describes the order of the primitive Church,
saying, Upon the Sunday, assemblies are made both of the Citizens and
Contrymen, where the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are read as much
as may be: when the Reader does cease, the head Minister makes an exhortation
to follow honest things, then we rise altogether, and offer prayers, then
bread, wine, and water are brought forth, then the head Minister offers
prayer and thanksgiving as much as he can, and the people say Amen. He lived
about the year 160. This declares plainly that the Scriptures were read, and
prayers and administration of the Lords Supper were done in a tongue understood.

Both the Lyturgies of Basil in Chrysostom declare that the people were
appointed to answer to the prayer of the Minister, sometime Amen, sometime Lord
have mercy upon us, sometime With thy spirit and truth we have our hearts lifted
up unto the Lord, which they could not have done if they had not understood the
long the prayers were said in.

Basilius Epist. 63. says, That their Psalms which they sing, being divided
into two parts, they sing by course together, one beginning the song, and the
rest following.

Ambrose upon the fourteenth of the first to the Corinthians, says. This is
that S. Paul says, Because he that speaks in an unknown tongue speaks to
God, for he knows all things, but men know not, therefore there is no profit
of these things; and further he says, The unlearned hearing that which he
understands not, he knows not the end of the prayer to say Amen. And
again he says, If an Infidel or one unlearned come in, if he hear in a
language which he understands God to be praised and Christ to be worshipped,
he sees perfectly that the Religion is true, nothing to be done colourably nor
in darkness as amongst the heathen, whose eyes are blinded, they not perceiving
themselves to be deluded with diverse vanities, for all falsehood speaks
darkness, and shows false things for true, therefore with us nothing is done
covertly, for if there be none that he can understand he may say there is some
deceit, because they are ashamed to open it: further, thus he concludes, Let
all things be done to edifying: this thing ought chiefly to be labored for,
that the unlearned might profit, lest any part of the body should be dark
through ignorance: and further he says, He that speaks in an unknown
tongue, and has no interpreter, let him pray secretly to God, which hears
all dumb things, for in the Church he ought to speak that which may profit all
men.

And S. Hierom upon that place of Paul, Quomodo qui supplet locum idiotae, and
upon other places uses the very same arguments that S. Ambrose did; and
likewise Chrysostom upon 1. Cor. 14. uses the like arguments, and Dionysius,
Cyprian and S. Augustine agree in the same, and Justinian the Emperor, who
lived 527. years after Christ, made a Constitution that all Bishops and
Priests should celebrate their holy oblations and prayers, not speaking low,
but with a loud voice, that the minds of the hearers may be stirred up with
greater devotion, for so says the Apostle in the first to the Corinthians,
saying, If we only bless and give thanks in the spirit, how does he that
occupies the place of the unlearned say Amen? Thou verily give thanks well,
but the other is not edified: And in his Epistle to the Romans he says, With
the heart a man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation.

When this was ended, certain of the Bishops began to say contrary unto their
former answer, and that they had much more to say unto this matter, whereupon
it was agreed that upon the Monday following the Bishops should bring their
minds in writing unto the second assertion, and to the last also, if they
could, and that they should first read the same; and that the other part
likewise should bring theirs, and being read each of them should deliver to the
other the same writings, and that in the mean time the Bishops should put into
writing all that Doctor Cole had that day uttered, and whatsoever they could
more think of for the same, and that they should send it unto the other
party, and receive that which they had written.

At which day the Bishops were concluded to read that which they had to say to
the first question, and would not proceed then unto the rest; and after they
ca^elled because they should read their writings, first saying that if the
adversaries should end the talk, then should the verity on our sides not be
so well marked, for they should depart speaking last, with the rejoicing
triumph of the people, whereupon grew much contention betwixt the Bishops and
the Council, because they observed not the order which they were agreed upon
the day before: when there could be nothing done for contention all that day,
the Lord Ke^eper said, My Lords, since you refuse to read the writing after the
order taken, we will break up and depart; and for that you will not that we
should hear you, you may perhaps shortly hear of us.

Here you may perceive what the Papists be, if the sword be taken from them,
how soon all their cunning lies in the dust, or else why would they not abide
the trial of writings, and stand unto the order agreed upon?

And because they gave such an example of disorder, stubbornness and
selfe^will as has not bin seen in such an honorable assembly, whereby the
godly and Christian purpose of the Queens Majesty was made frustrate; the
Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln were committed unto the Tower, and the rest
were bound daily to make personal appearance before the Council, and not to
depart the City until further order was taken for their comtempt, and Bonner
about the same time was committed unto the Marshalsie.

About this time was a Parliament holden at Westminster, wherein a great many
of the Papists and Protestants were employed, the one to retain still, the
other to impugn the doctrine established in Queen Mary's time. Amongst
others, the words of Doctor Story, the stout champion of the Pope in the
Parliament house, are worthy to be known of posterity.

He said, whereas he was much complained of to have been a great setter forth
of such Religion, orders, and proceedings, as of Queen Mary were set forth in
this Realm: he confessed it to be true, and protested that he therein had done
nothing but what his conscience did lead him unto, and his Commission
commanded him, and that he was no less ready now to do the like, and more,
if the Queens Majesty would authorize him thereunto: and he said he was
sorry for nothing but that he had done no more then he had done, and that
they had not been more severe in executing those laws, wherein there was no
default in him, but in them, whom he both often and earnestly exhorted unto the
same, being not a little grieved with them, for that they labored only upon
the young and little springs and twigges, whereas they should have stricken at
the root, and clean have rooted it out: and he said that he was once at the
burning of an herewigge at Uxbridge, meaning Master Denley, where he tossed a
Fagget at his face, as he was singing of Psalms, and set a bush of thorns
under his feet, and he named Sir Philip Hobby, and another Knight in Kent,
with such other of the richer and higher degree, whom his Council was to pluck
at, wherein if they had followed my advice they had done wisely.

In this Parliament through the goodness of the Lord the true cause of the
Gospel, had the upper hand, the papists hope was frustrated, and their rage
abated: The proceedings in K Edwards time was reui^^d, and the bloody statutes
of Q. Mary repealed: The old Bishops were deposed for refusing the oath, in
renouncing the Pope, and not subscribing unto the Queens lawful supremacy. In
the place of Cardinal Poole, succeeded Doctor Matthew Parker, Archbishop of
Canterbury: In the place of Heath, succeeded Doctor Young; Instead of Boner,
Edmund Grindall was Bishop of London: For Hopton, Thurleby, Tunstall, Pates,
Christopherson, Peto, Coats, Morgan, Feasie, White, Oglethorpe, were placed
Doctor John Parkust in Norwich: D. Cox in Ely: Iuell, in Salisbury: Pilkinton,
in Duresme: D. Sands, in Worcester: Benton, in Couentry and Lichfield: Downam,
in Westchester: David in S. David's Ally in Exeter: Horn, in Winchester: Story,
in Lincoln: Scamler, in Peterborough: Bartlet, in Bathe: Gest, in Rochester:
Barlow, in Chichester.

The severe punishment of God upon persecutors and blasphemers.
STephen Gardener, the Arch persecutor, whom the Lord took away in the midst
of Queen Mary's Reign: of whose poisoned life, and stinking end mention is
made already: He said in his deathbed; I have denied my Master with Peter, but
never repented with Peter.

Bishop Morgan, who condemned Master Farrar, Bishop of Saint David's, and
usurped his room: not long after he was stricken in such a strange sort, that
the meat he eat would not go down, but rise up again; sometimes at his
mouth: sometimes blow out of his nose most horrible to behold, and so continued
unto his death. Also when Doctor Leyson the Sheriff had fet away the said
Bishops cattle, diverse of the Cattle would never eat meat, but lay bellowing
and roaring, and so dyed.

One Richard a Priest of Carmarthen, a little after the martyrdom of the said
B. Farrar, standing upon the top of a stayre, in one Master Downings house,
jesting at the death of the said B. Farrar, fell down suddenly, and brake his
neck.

Justice* Morgan, after he had set upon the death of the Lady Jane, fell mad,
and so died, having ever in his mouth Lady Jane, Lady Jane.

Doctor Dunning, the cruel Chancellor of Norwich, was stricken wish sudden
death as he sat in his chair.

Berry, the wicked Comissary of Norfolk, four days after Queen Mary's
death, made a feast, and had one of his Concubines; therein the afternoon
coming from Euensong, he fell down by the way and never s^irre^.

Bishop Thorneton, Suffragan of Dover, who was a most cruel tyrant: he fell
in a palsy, as he looked upon his men playing at Bowls, and so was had to
bed, he was willed to remember God: yea so I do said he, and my Lord
Cardinal, and so he dyed.

After him succeeded another Bishop or Suffragan, who was Suffragan before unto
Boner: he brake his neck down a pair of stairs in the Cardinals chamber at
Greenewich, as he had received the Cardinals blessing.

The Parson of Crundall in Kent, having received the Popes Pardon: he exhorted
the people to receive remission of sins, as he had done: And he said that he
stood now, as clear in conscience as when he was first borne, and cared not if
he should die the same hour: in so saying he was suddenly stricken in the
pulpit, and leaning back he was found dead.

Not long after the death of Queen Mary, dyed Doctor Capon Bishop of
Salisbury, and the cruel Chancellor of Salisbury: Doctor Geffrey about the
same time in the midst of his buildings was suddenly taken with the mighty
hand of God, and so ended his life: The day before he departed, he had
appointed to call before him 90. persons, to examine them by inquisition.

Cruel Master Woodroofe Sheriff of London, which rejoiced at the death of
the Saints of Christ: A week after he was out of his office the one half of
his body was stricken by the hand of God, that he was bedrid, and not able to
move himself, and so he continued seven or eight years until he dyed.

Rafe Sardine, that betrayed George Eagles, was attached himself, arraigned
and hanged.

Master Swingefield, an Aldermans Deputy in Thames street, understanding a
Midwife which absented her self from the Church to be at the labor of one
Mistress Walter at Crooked Lane end: he apprehended her being great with child,
and carried her unto Boner, who sent her unto Lolards Tower: where for fe^re
she was delivered of a child, and could have no woman to help her: after she
had lien there five weeks, she was delivered upon sureties. Doctor Story
hearing thereof, charged her with felony, and sent her unto Newgate: shortly
after the said Master Swingfield and three more that came to take her died.

One Burton a Bayliffe of Crowland in Lincolneshire, who made show to be a
great friend of the Gospel in King Edwards time, but in Queen Mary's time he
moved the parish to show themselves the Queens friends, and set up Mass
speedily, and he called on them still in the Queens name: and when he saw his
words were not regarded, he got him to Church upon a Sunday morning, when the
Curate began to say service, according unto King Edwards time: he came to him
and said: Sir, will you not say Mass, buckle your self to Mass you knave,
or by Gods blood I will sheath my Dagger in your shoulders: The poor Curate
for fear settled himself unto Mass.

But not long after, riding from home with one of his neighbors, as he
returned home a Crow flew over his head, singing after her wonted manner,
knau^, knave, and dunged upon his nose, which ran down upon his mouth and
beard; The poisoned savor thereof so annoyed his stomach, that he never ceased
vomiting until he came home, whereof within few days he dyed, without any
to^en of ^epentance.

As James Abbes was a leading to be burned, poor people asking alms, he
pulled off all his apparel unto his shirt, and gave it amongst them, to some
one thing, and to some another: and he exhorted them to stand steadfast in the
truth of the Gospel* which he (with Gods help) would seal with his blood in
their sight: Then a servant of the Sheriffs cried out, believe him not good
people, he is an heretic and a mad man, and it is heresy that he says, and
thus he did until he came unto the stake: but as soon as the fire was put
unto Abbes, this blasphemer was stricken with madness, wherewith he had charged
the good martyr, and he cast off his shoes and the rest of his clothes and
cried out thus did Abbes that true servant of God, who is saved, but I am
damned: Thus he ran about the town of Berry, still crying James Abbes was a
good man and saved, but I am damned: The Sheriff tied him up in a dark house,
but he continued his old note, and being brought to his Masters house in a
Cart, within half a year he died: And being ready to die, the parish Priest
came to him with the Crucifix, and the Host of the Altar: but he cried out of
the Priest, and defied all that baggage, saying that the Priest, and such other
as he was, were the cause of his damnation: And that James Abbes, was a good
man and saved.

Clarke, an open enemy of the Gospel, and all good pre^chers in King Edwards
days, hanged himself in the Tower of London.

The great and notable Papist called Troling Smith, of late fell down suddenly
in the street, and died.

Dal^ the Promoter was eaten in his body with Lice, and so died.

Cox a Protestant in King Edwards days, and in Queen Mary's days a Papist
and a Promoter, being well when he went to bed, he was dead before morning.

Alexander the keeper of Newgate, who to hasten the poor lambs unto the
slaughter, he would go to Boner, Story, and Colmley, and others: crying out
rid my prison, I am too much pestered with heretics, and he dyed very
miserably, being swollen and so rotten within, that no man could abide the
smell of him: and James his son being left very rich, in three years brought
it to n^ght, and shortly after as he went in Newgate market, he fell down
suddenly and died.

John Pether, son in law to this Alexander, ad horrible blasphemer of God,
and no less cruel unto the prisoners, rotted away, and so died: who commonly
when he affirmed any thing, he would say, if it be not true, I pray God I rot
ere I die.

Justice Lelon, persecutor of Ieffrey Hurst, died suddenly.

Robert Baulding, a^ the taking of William Seaman, was stricken with lightning:
whereupon he pined away and died.

Beard the Promoter, died wretchedly.

Robert Blomfield* persecutor of William Brown, consumed away miserably.

In K. Henry's time, John Rockwood, who in his horrible end cried All to late,
which were the words that he used in persecuting Gods children at Callice.

The Lady Honer a persecutor, and George Bradway, a false accuser, were both
bereft of their wits.

Richard Long a persecutor, drowned himself.

Sir Rafe Ellerker* as he was desirous to see the heart taken out of Adam
Damlip, he being slain of the Frenchmen: after they had mangled him, and cut
off his privy members, would not leave him until they saw his heart cut out.

Doctor Foxford, Chancellor to Bishop Stokely, a cruel persecutor, died
suddenly.

Pauier, or Pauie, town Clarke of London, a bitter enemy unto the Gospel,
hanged himself.

Doctor Pendleton died miserably, and at his death he repented that ever he had
yielded to the Doctrine of the Papists.

John Fisher, Bishop of Rochest^^, and Sir Thomas Moore; after they had bro^ght
John Frith, Bayfield, and Bainham, and diverse others to death: shortly after,
they themselves were made a public spectacle of bloody death at tower hill.

These persecuting Bishops died a little before Queen Mary: Coats, Parfew,
Glune, Brooks, King, Peto, Day, Holiman.

After Queen Mary, immediately followed Cardinal Poole, and these persecuting
Bishops: John Christopherson, Hopton, Morgan, John White, Rafe Bayne, Owen
Oglethorpe, Cutbert Tonstall, Thomas Raynolds: And about the same tim^ died
Doctor Weston, Master Slethurst, Seth Holland, William Copinger, and Doctor
Steward great persecutors

The residue that remained of the persecuting Clergy, and escaped the stroke of
death, were deprived, and committed unto prisons; these Bishops were committed
unto the Tower: Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, Thomas Thurlby, Thomas
Watson, David Poole, Gilbert Burn, Richard Pates, Troublefield, and John
Fecknam Abbot of Wes^minster, and John Boxell Dean of Windsor and Peterborough,
were committed with the said Bishops unto the Tower.

Gouldwell, Bishop of Saint Ass, and Maurice Elect of Bangor, ran away.

Boner, and Thomas Wood Bishops, were committed to the Marshalsey: Cutbert
Scot, Bishop of Chester, was in the Fleet: from whence he escaped to Lo^ane,
and there dyed.

These were committed unto the Fleet: Henry Cole, Deane of Paul's: John
Harpsfield, Archdeacon of London: Nicholas Harpsfield, Archdeacon of
Canterbury: Anthony Draycot, Archdeacon of Huntington: William Chadsey,
Archdeacon of Middlesex.

One John Apowell, mocke^ one William Maulden, as he was reading an English
Service Book in a Winters Evening, mocking him at every word, with contrari^
gaudes, and flouting words: Wherefore the said William checked him; saying, he
mocked not him, but God: As the said William was reading these words: Lord have
mercy upon us: Christ have mercy upon us: The other with a start suddenly said,
Lord have mercy upon me: The said William asked him wherefore he was afraid: He
answered, when you read Lord have mercy upon us: me thought the hair of my
head stood upright with a great fear that came upon me: The next day in the
morning he fell mad, and after that he lay day and night, and his tongue never
ceased crying out of the Devil of hell, I would see the Devil of hell, there
he is, there he goes, and such like words: Thus he lay six days, that his
Master and all the rest of the house was weary of the noise, and sent him to
Bedlam.

At Waltamstow six miles from London, certain children were talking what God
was, and one said he was a good Old Father: and a Maid of twelve years old,
named Denis Benifield said what he is, an old doting Fool: The next day she
was suddenly stricken by the hand of God, that all one side of her was black,
and she speechless, and so she died the same night.

Some being in communication about Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, in an house of
Abingdon in Barkeshire: One Le^ar ^ plowman, dwelling at Brightwell said that
he saw that evil favored knave Latimer, when he was burned, and that he had
teeth like a horse, at which time and hour, the son of the said Leauer most
wickedly hanged himself in Shepton, a mile from Abbington.

Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury gave sentence against the Lord
Cobham, and died himself before him, being s^ stricken in his tongue, that he
could neither swallow nor speak, a good while before his death.

When Patrick Hamelton was burned for the truth in Scotland, in the fire he
cited and appealed Friar Campbell, that accused him to appear before the High
God, to answer whether his accusation was just or not, betwixt that and a day
of the next month, which he named: The said Friar dyed immediately before the
day came.

Haruy a Commissary which condemned a poor man in Callice, was shortly after,
hanged, drawn and quartered.

William Swallow, the cruel tormentor of George Eagles, shortly after all the
hair of his head, and nails of his fingers, and toes went off, and his eyes
so closed, that he could scant see, and his wife was stricken with the falling
Sickness which she never had before.

And Richard Potto, the other troubler of George Eagles, was suddenly taken
with sickness, and falling upon his bed, like a beast dyed, and never spoke.

Richard Denton a shrinker, whilst he refused to be burned in the Lords
quarrel, he was burned in his own house with two more.

The wife of John Fetty, which was the cause of the taking of her husband
immediately fell mad.

Thomas Mouse, and George Reuet, two persecutors were strike^ miserably with
the mighty hand of GOD and so died, as is mentioned in the Story of Adam Foster.

In the same Story is mention made of Robert Edgore, for being a Popish Clarke
against his conscience, was bereft of his wits, and kept in chains and bands
many yerres after.

John Pankney, and one Hanington, fellows of New College in Oxford, both
stubborn Papists, drowned themselves, with Crucifixes about their necks.

Christopher Landesdale, a Yeoman of the Guard, dwelling in Hackney in
Middlesex, he suffered a poor man to die in a ditch in his ground, for want of
harbor and relief, having much out-hous^s to spare; but shortly after he
being drunk, died himself in a ditch.

In King Edwards time there was a lusty young Gentleman in Cornwall, wh^ riding
in the company of twenty Horsemen, began to swear and blaspheme the Name of
God most horribly, one checking him for it, he bad him take thought for his
winding sheet, and not for him: amend says he, for death gives no warning,
Gods wounds, said he, care not thou for me, raging still worse and worse in
words: They rode over a great Bridge, upon which Bridge this Gentleman swearer
spurred his Horse in such sort, that he sprang over the bridge with the man
upon his back, and as he was falling he said; Horse and man and all to the
Devil.

Henry Smith, a Student of the Law in the middle Temple, he was pe^uerted to
Popery by one Gyfford, then he went to Louane, and there was more rooted
therein, and brought from thence with him pardons, a Crucifixe, with an Agnus
Dei, which he used to wear about his neck, and he had Images in his Chamber
to pray before, with diverse other Popish trash.

After this Henry Smith, with Gyfford his companion, was returned from Louane,
he was a foul Gyrer, and a scornful scoffer of that Religion which he had
professed: at length he tied his shirt, which he had torn for that purpose,
about his privy places, and with his girdle fastened unto the bed-post, he
strangled himself: The place where he had fastened the Girdle was so low, that
his hippes well near touched the flower: his legs lying a cross, and his
arms spread abroad, having his Agnus Dei in a silver tablet, with his other
Idolatrous trash in a window by him. He was buried in a Lane called Foskew Lane.

Twyford was a busy doer in King Henry's days by Bonners appointment, to set
up stakes for the burning of poor Martyrs: When he saw the stakes consume so
fast, he said; I will have a stake, I trow, that shall hold, and so he
provided a big Tree, and set it up in Smithfield, the top being cut off, but
ere the Tree was consumed, God turned the state of Religion, and he fell into a
horrible disease, rotting alive above the ground before he died.

Foreign Examples.
HOfmester the great Arch-papist, and chief pillar of the Popes falling
church, as he was going to Ratisbone, to dispute against the Protestants, he
miserably died, horribly roaring and crying out.

Examples of what inconveniences comes by Popish desperate Doctrine.
IN the Uniuersity of Louane was one Guarlacus, after he had stoutly
main^^^ned the corrupt errors of Popish doctrine, when he was sick he cried
out how wickedly he had lived, and that he was not able to abide the iugdment
of God, and casting forth words of miserable despair, he said; his sins were
greater then he could be forgiven.

Likewise Arnoldus Bomelius, a Student of Louan he: framed himself after the
rule of the unsavory Doctrine of Papists, to stand in fear and doubt of
Justification, and to work salvation by merits, he began more and more to grow
into doubtful despair: at length, being overcome with despair, not having in
that Popish Doctrine wherewith to raise up his soul, he going a walking with
three other Students; he singled himself from them and stabbed himself, they
seeing him shrink, ran unto him, and found that he had stabbed himself with
his dagger, then they took him and brought him into a house, and he espying
one of his ^riends very busy about him, having a knife hanging at his girdle,
he got out the knife and stabbed himself to the heart.

Iacobus Latomus, a principal Captain of the Uniuersity of Louan, after he
had been at Bruxels, thinking to do a great act against Luther and his
fellows* he made such a foolish Oration before the Emperor, that he was
laughed to ^corne. After in a public Lecture at Louan, he uttered such words
of desperation, and blasphemous impiety, that the Divines were feign to carry
him away as he was rauing, and shut him into a Chamber: from that time unto his
death, he had nothing in his month but that he was damned, and that there was
no hope of salvation for him, because he had wittingly against his knowledge
withstood the truth. Ex Epist. Senarclaei.

A Dominick Friar of Munster, as he was inueighing in the Pulpet against the
Doctrine of the Gospel, was stricken with a sudden flash of lightning and so
died. Ex Pantal.

Manlius in his B^^ke De dictis Philip Melancton, reports that a Tailors
ser^ant in Lipsia, first received the Sacrament in both kinds wlth the
Gospellers, and after by the Papists persuasions, he received it with them in
one kind, and afterward being admonished by his Master to go again unto the
Communion of the Gospellers, he stood a great while and made no answer, and at
last crying out upon a sudden, he cast himself out of a Window and brake
his n^cke.

The same Manlius makes mention of a Gentleman of authority, who hearing these
words in Psalm 46. Our only hold and fortress is our God: he said; I will
help to shoot against thy stay or fortress, or else I will not live: and
within three days he died without repentance.

Sadole^us the learned Cardinal, died with great torments of conscience and
desperation.

The Commendator of S. Anthony, who sat as spiritual Judge over that godly
learned man Wolsgangus, burned in Lotheringe in Germany, fell suddenly dead
shortly after he had condemed him.

And the Abbot Clariocus his fellow, at a crack of Gunnes saddenly fell down
and died.

David Beaton* Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland, shortly after the burning
of M George Wisard, he was wretchedly slain in hi^ own Castle, as you may see
in the discourse of this Story.

Crescentius the Popes Legate, and Uicegerent in the Council of Trent; he was
sitting from morning until night writing Letters unto the Pope: at his rising
there appeared unto him a mighty black Dog, his eyes flaming li^e fire, and
his ears hanging almost down to the ground: the Cardinal being amazed,
called his Servants to bring in a Candle and seek for the Dog, and when the
Dog could not be found, the Cardinal was stricken with a conc^it, and fell
into such a sickness, as all his Physicians could not cure, and so he dyed. By
Johannes Sleida^^s in his twelfth Book, he says, his purpose was to recover
again the whole authority and doctrine of the Romish Sea, and to set it up for
ever. The Council of Trident was dissolved by the death of this Cardinal.

Two adulterous Bishops belonging unto the said Council of Trident, one
haunting unto an honest man's Wife, was slain with a Boare-speare: the other
Bishop, whose haunt was to creep through a window, was hanged in a Ginne laid
for him of purpose, and so couayed, that in the morning he was seen openly in
the street hanging out of the window, to the wonderm^nt of all that passed by.
Ex protestatione conceonatorum Germa.

John Eckius, the most vehement impugner of Martine Luther; as his life was
full of all ungodliness, uncleanness and blasphemy, so was his end miserable
hard and pitiful: his last words were these; In case the four thousand
Guilders were ready, the matter were dispatched, dreaming belike of some
Cardinalship that he should have bought. Ex John Carrion. fol 250.

John Vaueler Warfe, the next in office to Magraue, he was of Antwarpe: he was
a sore persecutor of Christ's flock; he had drowned diverse good Men and women,
for the which he was much commended of the bloody Generation, being very rich,
he gave up his office, intending to pass the rest of his life in pleasure, and
coming unto a banquet at Antwarpe to be merry, being well laden with Wine, he
rode home in his Wagon with his Wife, a Gentlewoman, and his Fool, the Horses
stood still upon a bridge, and would by no means go foreward: then he in a
drunken rage cried out; Ride on in a thousand Devils name, by and by r^se a
mighty whirlewind, and tossed the Wagon over the bridge into the Town ditch,
where he was drowned, and when he was taken up his neck was broken: his wife
was taken up alive, but died within three days: the Gentlewoman and the Fool
were saved.

Bartholomeus Chassaneus, a great Persecutor, died suddenly.

Minerius, the Bloody Tormentor of Christ's Saints, dyed with bleeding in his
lower parts: the Judge that accompanied him in his persecution, as he returned
homeward was drowned, and three more of the said company killed one another.

Johannes de Roma that cruel Monk, that devised such hellish torments for the
poor Christians at Augrowne: the Lord paid him home again with the like
torments, who rotted to death, and could find no euemie to kill him, nor
friend to bury him, he could not abide his own stinking carrion, nor any man
else that came near him could abide his stench.

The like persecutor was the Lord of Reuest, and after his furious persecution
he was stricken with the like horrible sickness, and with such a fury and
madness, that none durst come near him, and so most wretchedly di^^: The like
grievous punishment happened upon one John Martine a persecutor, as appears
in the History before.

In the year 1565. in the town of Gaunt in Flanders, one William de VVeuer
was imprisoned for religion by the Provost of S. Peter's: In Gaunt the Provost
sent for one Giles Brackelman, the principal Advocate of the Council of
Flanders, and Borough-master, and Judge of Saint Peter's, with others of the
Rulers of the Town to sit in Judgment upon him: as the said Borough-master
reasoned with the said William de VVeauer upon diverse Articles of his Faith:
And being about to pronounce his condemnation, the Borough-Master was suddenly
stricken with a Palsy, that his mouth was drawn almost unto his ear, and so
he fell down and died: The Lords that stood by shadowed him, that the people
should not see him, and commanded the people to depart, yet they burned the
said William de Weauer within three hours after the same day.

The fifth of March 1566. Sir Garret Trieste Knight, he had promised the Regent
to bring down the preaching; wherefore the Regent promised him to make him a
Grave, which is an Earl: when he had brought with him to Gaunt tidings of the
death of the Preachers; he received from the Regent a Commission, to swear the
Lords and Commons unto the Romish Religion: and being at supper, he bad his
Wife call him an hour the sooner in the morning, for that he should have much
business to do, to swear the Lords and people unto the Romish Religion: but
going to bed in good health, in the morning when he should be called, he was
found dead: and as the Lords of Gaunt proceeded to give the Oath the next day,
Master Martine de Pester the Secretary being appointed, and about to give the
Oath; as the first man should have sworn, the said Martin de Pester was
stricken of GOD with present death, and ^^uer spoke again.

These Examples were contained in a Letter written unto HENRY the second French
King, which is in the Book more at large.
THE Lord Poucher Archbishop of To^res, who sued for the Court called Chamber
Ardente, there to condemn the Protestants to the fire, who after was stricken
with a disease called the fire of God, which began at his lower parts, and so
ascended upward, that one member after another was cut off, and so he died
miserably.

Castellanus having enriched himself by the Gospel, and returning from pure
Doctrine unto his old vomit again, became a Persecutor at Orliance, but God
struck him with a sickness unknown unto the Physicians, one half of his
body burned as hot as fire, and the other half was as could as Ice, and so
most miserably crying, he dyed.

Du Prat, was the first that opened unto the Parliament the knowledge of
Herisies, and gave out Commission to put the faithful unto death: he died
swearing, and horribly blaspheming God, and his stomach was found pierced, and
gnaune asunder with Worms.

John Ruse, Councellor in the Parliament, coming from the Court, having made
report of the Process against the poor innocents, was taken with a burning in
the lower part of his belly, before he could be brought home the fire invaded
all his secret parts, and so he died miserably.

Claude des Asses, a Councellor in the said Court, the same day that he gave
his consent to burn the faithful. After dinner he committed whoredom with
one of his Servants, and in doing the act, he was stricken with a disease, that
he died out of hand.

Peter Liset Chief President of the said Court, and one of the Authors of the
said burning Chamber, fell mad and was put from his office.

John Morin, after he had been the death of many Christians* was stricken with
a disease in his legs, called the Wolves, wherewith he lost the use of them,
and died out of his wits, denying and blaspheming God.

John Andrew, the Booke-binder of the Palace, became a spy to find out
Protestants, died in madness.

The Inquisitor John de Roma in Prouence, his flesh fell from him by piece meal,
and so stinking that no man might come near him.

John Minerius of Prouence, which was the death of a great number of men,
women, and Children at Cabriers and Merindoll, died with bleeding in the lower
parts; the fire having taken his belly, blaspheming and dispising of God. Thus
far out of the Letter.

Henry the second the French King notwithstanding the aforesaid examples might
give him sufficient warning, yet would he not surcea^e his cruel persecution
against Gods Children: but being at the Parliament house, which was kept at the
Friar Augustines in Paris, because the Palace was a preparing ^or ^he
marriages of his Daughter and his Sister: and having heard the opinion in
Religion of Anne du Bourg, an eloquent and learned Councellor: he caused him
and Loys du Faur another Councellor, to be committed Prisoners unto the Count
Mongomery. The King said to the said Anne du Bourg; These eyes of mine shall see
thee burned; and a day was appointed for the hearing the cause, at which day
the King employed all the morning in examining, as well the Presidents as
Counselors of the said Parliament against the Prisoners, and other their
Companions that were charged with the same Doctrine: then they went to dinner,
after dinner the King went to running at the Tilt, and brake many staves as
well as could be; whereupon he was highly commended of the Lookers ^n, and
being inflamed with hearing his yraise, he would needs run with Montgomery,
who kneeled down and asked pardon not to run with him: the King commanded
him upon his Alleagiance to run, and himself put his staff into his hand,
and as the King and he met the vizard of his helmet suddenly fell down,
whereby the King was stricken in one of his eyes, so that his brains perished,
and it so ^estered, that no remedy could be found, so that the eleauenth day
after he dyed. He said he feared he was stricken for casting poor Christians
wrongfully in Prison, but Cardinal Lorraine said, that it was the enemy that
tempted him to think so: By this means the hall that was prepared for a place
of joy and gladness, was now a place to keep the dead Corpse, being hanged with
mourning-cloath, and there was heard mourning for the space of forty days.

In the year 1561. there were certain Gentlemen put to death at Amboyse, for
taking ^rmes against the house of Guise. The last that was put to death, thrust
his hands into the blood of the others which were beheaded, and lifting them up
unto heaven, cried with a loud voice; Lord behold the blood of thy Children,
thou will in time and place revenge it. Not long after Councellor Oliue^, the
condemner of them, through great remorce of conscience fell sick, and shriked
upon a sudden with an horrible cry, and said to the Cardinal of Lorraine: O
Cardinal, thou will make us all to be damned! and shortly after died.

Francis the second, succeeded his Father Henry the second in the Kingdom of
France: he, at the persuasion of the Cardinal of Lorraine and others,
assembled the Estates of the Realm in Orleance to maintain the Papal Sea, to
the overthrow of those that should live after the Gospel, but being sick of a
Fever through an Impostume in his left care, he died.

The Emperor Charles the fifth, being an enemy and a great terror unto the
Gospel, was cut off from doing any more hurt unto the Church. Anno 1558. but
three months before the death of Queen Mary, and ten months before the death
of Henry the second.

Not long after Anne du Bourgs death, the President Minard, who was a sore
Persecutor, and the Condemner of the said Anne du Bourg, as he returned from
the Council Chamber unto his own house, was flaine with a Dagge, and it was
never known who did it.

The King of Navarre, Brother unto the Prince of Condie, after a while
maintained the Gospel: he was persuaded by the Duke of Guise and the
Cardinal of Lorraine his Brother, in hope to have his Lands restored again
which the King of Spain detained from him, to be ^entented to alter his
Religion, and to join side with the Papists: and being in Camp with the Duke
of Guise at the siedge of Roane, he was shot in with a Pellet, after which
wound he did vehemently repent his back sliding from the Gospel, promising
earnestly unto God, that if he might escape that hurt, he would bring to pass
that the Gospel should be preached freely throughout al France:
notwithstanding within five or six days he dyed.

And the Duke of Guise himself, the great Arch-enemy of God and his Gospel,
with the whole Triumuirat of France, that is* three the greatest Captains of
Popery were cut off for doing any more hurt: The Duke of Guise before Orleance;
the Constable of France, before Paris; the Marshall of Saint Andrew, before
Drewx.

THE ABRIDGEMENT OF A Christian Dialogue, called PASQVINE in a Trance.
THE Author of this Treatise, was called Caelius Secundus Curio, an Italian, a
zealous, godly, learned man, by whom, under the witty and pleasant invention of
Pasquines going to Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell, the whole pack of the Popes
pedlary wares is laid open, that we may see what stuff it is. It was written
in the time of pope Paul the third, the chief substance whereof breefely
follows.

Superstition and Hypocrisy are the devils Rhetoric, by which Friars make the
world believe so many falsehoods and toys, for by nothing else can Faith so
easily be overthrown. The apparel of the Friars was devised of the Devil,
that by these sheeps skins they might not seem W^olues, but by the
strangeness thereof to make the simple people to think them holy.

Their Monasteries are a true representation of the qualities of the World;
their reigns nothing but passions in every one to advance themselves, and
drive out others: their pictures of Saints being Gods of stone, very much
differ from that which they were when they were upon earth. The Uirgin Mary was
not honored with so many chains, bracelets, perfumes, gold, silver, and wax,
as she is now upon the Altar, with paintings on her face, and on her head
crowns full of Jewels. She is attired with costly and many sorts of garments,
like a young gyrle, they make her most covetous and niggardly, and to give
nothing to the poor, but to bestow all that is given her, (which is
abundance) upon Cardinals and Hipocrites, to be bestowed upon Whores, Dogs,
and Horses.

The Popish manner to get Revelations.
FIrst he must fast eight days, then he must be confessed, during which time
he must not meddle with any flesh of male or female, then he must hear seven
Masses of the holy Ghost, and upon a Friday at midnight, when the Moon is in
the last degree of Cancer, he must lay himself down upon a Mat, which some
Friar in a trance has slept upon, and in such a Friars Hood, and a Stole on
his Neck foulded, with a Cross on his breast, and these words In principio
erat verbum written in Red Letters, and he must perfume the place with Holy
Perfume, having a Lamp burning by him with Holy Oil, then he must make
circles about the Mat of red earth and white: Betwixt the circles must be
written these words, Pater filius and spiritus sanctus, nox visionis, nox
reuelationis, nox veritatis, with a Cross made betwixt every Word: then he
must say a certain Charm which coniureth all spirits that are for Revelations
to be there and to tell the truth. The Spirts must be called by Hebrew names,
because they understand no other language. The name of the cheese Spirit for
Revelations, is Herusatanaell, and when all this is done he must fall on
sleep, and that which he desires to know, shall be revealed unto him.

Calamichaell, and Saint Anthony of Padua are Spirits to be sought unto for
things stolen, who appears in the shape of the Thief: and S. Helene Mother
of Constantine, is to be sought unto for love matters, who if the love be true,
appears to the fasting Friar with fair Damsels, at a table richly decked,
and eats with him: but if the love be fained, the fears him with weapons
and fires, and changes her self into a wild Boar, a Lion, and an Ass, and
cries ilfauoredly. This love is not to be trusted.

The Franciscan Friars had gotten such estimation, that they were counted GODS
Kinsmen: they only had the handling of the Gospel, they took out here and
there a piece, and mixed it with lies, false miracles and dreams of Purgatory:
they kept the people more in fear of their Commandments then of Gods: that
Town was counted unhappy where one of their Monasteries was not near: men
thought to wear their apparel, or of their color, was good against the Ague,
and other diseases, and for one to be burned in their habit, was the right way
to heaven. Longolius was burned in their habit, and so was Carpi a Noble man,
and Rodulphus Agricola, and diverse others: If thou consider their Laws with
what burdens they have laden men's shoulders, thou will swear that the Jews
Law is an hundred times more pleasant and easy then theirs. Because the
Israelits forsook the trust in God, and made themselves a Calfe to worship it,
God laded them with Ceremonies that none could bear: so now, because Man's
folly could not be content with Christ only, the divine judgment suffered
them to fall into a Sea of Ceremonies and superstitions, that except Christ had
bin gracious to defend us, and had received the truth, we should have been
drowned therein.

A Gentlewoman of Pulia hating her Husband, made her self of the order of
Saint Francis, and of the same order took a young lusty Friar unto her adopted
Son, who handled her in such sort, that he made her heart to faint, and her
purse to shrink, that she was feign to leave but half builded a Monastery to
Saint F^auncis which was building: and this being complained of unto the Lords
of Bonony, there was good laughing thereat, but she could have no remedy at
all.

Saint Katharine (as the Papists affirm) promised unto him that would remember
her Passion, to deliver him from Lightning and Thunder, and that Saint Barbara
makes Soldiers to kill their Enemies: Many devout Soldiers have her
painted upon many parts of their Armor to defend them from Gunshot.

Saint Jerome did so much (but falsely) extol virginity, that he made this
conclusion: it is good for a man to be without a Wife, therefore it is wicked
to be married unto a Wife, and that God promises heaven unto Uirgines. And
Origin mistook himself when he gelded himself, that he might be chaste for
the kingdom of heaven.

The Sorbones or Inquisitors of Paris, said; if they had S. Paul in their
hands, they would burn him.

Wheresoever a number of Nuns is, the Friars be of the one side, and the
Confessors be on the other side: the Friars teach them how to conjure the
Diuill into Hell, and to fight with him, and to be in a trance; and the
Confessors understanding all that they do, with their hands upon their heads,
and their displing Rods assail them. The Monks can bring them under when
they list.

Vastalla a Widow being very rich, ordained a sect of Women and men, who must
seek to attain unto that purity that was in Adam and Eve before their fall:
the means whereby they should attain hereunto, was long prayers, much silence,
continual fastings, to be shreeuen every day, and to receive their maker every
8. days: there means to know their perfection is, as Adam for shame grew from
^akednesse, to be more and more clothed; to these must go ^^om being clothed,
to be more and more naked, until they were not ashamed of their nakedness,
whether they were Man or Woman; then they put Adam and Eve to bed together, and
if they touch not, nor think upon the forbidden fruit, of which they must be
straightly examined, then they are Angels; but if they do otherwise, as the
virgin is for the most times sped, then are they cast out of Paradise.

S. Camella, to show that she was of high blood, said, that Lewis King of
France warring in Italy, had to do with her Mother, and begat her. She had a
Religion of her own making, she used to be accompanied with three women as
superstitions as her self. They abide in no Monastery, but in a private house,
and frequent solitary and pleasant places; her house is haunted with Women,
Gentlemen, and Lords, as unto an Oracle; sometimes she shuts her self up,
to be more familiar with Angels to talk with them: upon the Friday she will
not be seen nor speak with any, but contemplats the Cross and nails of
Christ, and thereby obtained the print thereof in her hands and feet, which
she kept covered: she has been seen to drop Malinesie into the marks. An
Ambassador thought she had the pore, she loved well the Franciscan Friars, she
got much by contracting marriages, and by making medicines.

In Bernia a Town of Switchers, certain Friars did seek to make the prints
of Christ's wounds in a simple souls hands and feet: the news whereof was
brought to Pope July the second, yet escaped they not unpunished therefore, for
four of them that were privy to this and other so great sacriledges, were
burned alive, before those of Berna had the Gospel, but they were ever e^emies
unto the knauish devises and deceits of the Friars.

A Priest of Placentia was accused unto the Pope, that he had a wife and
children, the Pope deprived him of his Benifices, and he went to Rome and
showed that she was another man's wife, and but his Concubine, and never married
unto him nor could be, and though he was a vile Adulterer, he was restored unto
his Benifices again.

If any Jew become a Christian, the Pope confiscates their goods according to a
Law of the Jews, else many Jews would become Christians.

S. Anthony is the Papists Saint to pray unto for fire, S. Rock for the plague,
S. Bastion for the pestilence, S. Apolinia for the toothache, S. Blase for the
disease of throat. S. Anthony and S. Rock were called Martires, because they
went from City to City to desire men to offer them by death, and could get
none.

Saint Christopherus.
THE Christians in old time, pictured a Christian in the form of a great
Giant, because he must be strong to bear Christ and his truth before men: they
feigned he carries men over the water: by water they mea^^ our life, which we
cannot come over to come unto heaven, except we be taught by a Christian the
truth, they pictured him with a tree in his hand to stay upon, by the which
they meant faith, without which we should often fall: after he used this tree
it grew green: to signify that Faith exercised with Charity is lively. His
name was called Christopherus, which signifies bearing Christ: He was painted
at the entrances of the Churches. The Papists have converted it unto a Saint,
and pray unto it.

Saint George.
LIkewise Saint George that killed the Dragon, to deliver the Kings Daughter
from that terrible beast which had destroyed all Capadocia: By Capadocia is
meant the world: The Dragon signifies the Devil: The Kings Daughter the
Church: And Saint George represents Christ: of which fable the Papists have
made a great Saint and pray unto it.

The Papists have trantfsormed all the heathen Gods of Rome to be their Gods
only by giving them other names. Pantheon in Rome which was the house of all
Gods, is Maria Rotunda, the house of all Saints: In the place of Cibile, mother
of Gods* is now placed to Mary. The Temple that was dedicated to Pallas Minerua
a Uirgine, is now dedicated Minerua a Uirgine. The Temple of Romulus and
Rheimes is now the Temple of Saint Cosmus, and Damian. The temple that was of
Castor and Pollux, is now of Saint Geruais and Protheys, the Heathens had
Lucian to heal their eyes: the Papists in stead thereof have Saint Lucy, and
in steed of Ceres God of Corn, now is Saint Pancras: The Heathens had Mars,
and Pallas, Gods of War: in steed of them the Papist have Saint George, and
Saint Barbera: The Heathen Sea men saw Castor and Pollux at the end of a
tempest: the papists in such case see Saint Erenius: as Vesta Virgins could
not marry, so the Nuns may not marry, in the old time they washed to cleanse
sins, and now they fillip Holy Water upon their foreheads to cleanse sins:
For the Heathens, Juno Feronia, they have Juno Lucina: For the heathens Juno
Saturnia, they have Juno Curies; For the Heathens Lady of Grace, and Lady of
Miracles: the Papists have our Lady, our Lords Mother, and our Lady of People:
The Papists fill their Churches with tables, containing vows for the help that
the Saints have done for them, as were in the old time, in the heathen
Churches, containing the miracles that their Idols had done.

Calapine, says, that Cardinal is the selfsame that Carneuale; neither the
one nor the other does attend to any other thing; then to eat, drink, sleep,
commit whooredome, banquet, and do other wicked acts, so many that no tongue
can express.

In place of the four Gospels, the papists have put the four Councels: Nice,
Const^ntinople, Ephesus, Calcedon: Then four Doctors: Ambrose, Augustine,
Jerome, Gregory: and four Books, to wit, of Decrees, of Decretals, of Sects,
of Clementines, and whosoever had a Coule, or a shaven Crown, might write what
they would and it should go for Gospel; whereby the Pope has drawn all
things to himself, and made himself above Christ. They will have Bells, carved
Images, Crosses, Lights, Wax, Uessels, and Garments to be ^o us in steed of
Evangelists.

Saint Peter was made Pope after his death, which never was Pope, nor never
could be, nor yet was at any time at Rome: so was Saint Jerome made a
Cardinal: Saint John Baptist, a Patriarck: And Saint Dominick, and Saint
Frances Patriarcks long time after their deaths.

They picture John Baptist a terrible fellow, with a fair sharp sword in his
hand, and all in armor, followed with a number of Sea Rouers called knights of
the Rhodes: they baptize no otherwise but by drowning men in the Sea: they do
not make men repent of their sins as John Baptist did, but they make them
repent that ever they were borne, and drive them for necessity to dwell in the
wilderness: They wear crosses on their breasts, because they cannot bear them
in their heart, and to show them selves crucifyers of others: John dwelt in
deserts, but they make deserts: John Baptist lived in Fasting and Prayer, but
these in pleasure like Sardanapalas, when they had the Isle of Rhodes, they did
that which Turks would not have done: Therefore they were driven thence by
Gods just judgment: they marry not like John Baptist, but they have the more
harl^ts.

Dominick, by the procurement of Innocent the third: He at Tholosa quenched
the heresy of the Lutherans with marvelous speed: He said he must not
dispute, but fell to the business with fire and sword; and for this cause he was
made a Saint

A Spaniard of the inquisition for heresies, accused certain of the best
Spaniards for Lutherans, and said he smelt them, because they gave alms unto
the poor, and not unto Friars: And because they left swearing, and blaspheming
of GOD and his Saints, and playing, whore-hunting, and other vices, applying
themselves to things grave and profitable, and all day long read in the
Scriptures.

Saint Francis was required of his Disciples to give them a rule of living, and
he gave them the Gospel: but his Friars have set forth a Book of
conformities, which is preferred before the Gospel; with the whith if thou
compare the Al^oran of Mahomet, thou will say the Alcoran is more holy,
although in many things they agree: His Friars were bold to preach, that a
Friar once desired to knew in what place Saint Francis was, and therewith ran
out of his wits, and was led about all parts of heaven and found him not: at
last he came unto the throne of Divinity: where demanding for Saint Francis
Christ rose up from his seat, on the right hand of the Father, and opened his
clothes upon his breast, and S. Francis came out of his side: Then the Friar
came to his wits again,

In the strife for the supremacy, Constantinople said to him it belonged,
because with him was the Sea of the Empire: Jerusalem would have it, because
the high Bishop Christ had triumphed there: Antioch would needs have it
alleging that Peter the Apostle there had kept his Sea, and was never at Rome,
as it may appear by the book called quod Petrus nunquam Romae fuit: He of
Rome, not regarding the saying of Saint Gregory, that he should be Antichrist,
that would be universal over Bishops, by deceits, gifts, and force, obtained
to be called the chief Bishop, the greatest, the highest, universal; most
blessed, most holy, and lawful successor of Peter and Christ.

The Friars of Dominick and Francis, dee chiefly apply themselves to sorcery,
and witchcraft, and thereby learn evil devilish Arts: A man may read that
Siluester the second, one of them, got to be Pope, by the help of the Devil,
upon condition that after his death he should be his: and in our days Paul the
third, called Pope Farnese, has not left his like in Astrology, and
divination: it is certainly said, that he believed that the soul was mortal:
so did Pope Jews, and Cardinal Chitty.

A Gentleman of Uenice and his wife, were in doubt upon a case of conscience:
The woman confessed her self in the Church of the Chittines, and opened the
matter, praying to be resolved: The Friar did it as well as he could: and
then he opened the whole matter to Cardinal Chitty, as it is their old use to
do: he commanding him to be secret, and finding the resolution of the case
in the Cannon Law, the morrow the Gentleman came unto Chitty, and opening the
matter, he commanded him to hold his peace, and took him by the hand, and put
it into the book, in the place which he before had marked for that purpose:
Then he bad him tell his tale, and when he had ended, he said, look there where
your hand is: The Gentleman read there, and found that which he sought: then
forthwith he fell down, and worshipped him, as it had been another Christ
which knew all secrets. Pasquine says, he knows ten thousand such tricks
by them.

Saint Joyce is patron of fruitfulnes of Children, she has a Church in France:
the Flemings go unto her to have Children and speed of their purpose, for
whilst they be on their voyage, she uses the Priests and Friars, as
instruments with their wives.

The Pope in policy sends flattering Courtiers to Francis King of (...), to
flatter him in all his actions, to remember him of that Title of Most Chr^^^ian
King, which his Progenitors received of the Pope, and that therefore he should
defend the Dignity of them that gave him so goodly a Title: and to exhort him,
that he should not fa^le to persecute the Lutherans, and that he should fail to
Dancing and Banqueting, and to serve Venus, and to Hunting, rather then to
savor Learning, as it seemed he would do.

In the Popes Policy it was decreed, That of all the chief Houses in Italy,
or elsewhere, there should one ever be a Cardinal, to keep them in devotion
of the Church of Rome, which they began to forsake for the Gospel, but above
all things there should be six, or four at the least, of the Uenetians
Cardinals, because a ^umber of those Senators be witty, and of profound
judgment, least they should slip their heads from the Pope.

It was decreed by the Pope concerning Spain, That the Inquisitors should not
be severe with the Marraines, who denied the Divinity of Christ, but that they
should be most cruel against the Lutherans, who deny the Divinity of the
Pope. They have made Peace with the Turk, that they may the better maintain
War against the Gospel, and to keep the Christian Princes in Wars and
Business, that they may not seek for a General Council for Reformation.

There is not one man condemned by the Uenetians, but he is adjudged by forty
Judges, and the offender may allege for himself the best he can, yet they
suffer a Legate only to condemn whom he list for the Gospel, and the person
accused cannot come unto his Purgation.

Cardinal Fernese made the lively Picture of his Sister over his Chamber door;
she was Pope Alexander Borgias his Concubine, and by her honorable means,
she made her said brother Cardinal, and after to be made Pope: Her Image
goes current for the Picture of our Lady, and the Pictures of our Lady be
made thereby.

By the Papists Tradition, the Soul for every deadly sin is to abide seven
years in Purgatory: Moses ordained many Sacrifices for the sins of the
living, but none for them in Purgatory; he chideth for weeping for the dead:
It is devised only to deceive the people with Trentals and Quarentals, and
other foolish Inventions, full of Covetousness: The Scripture bids us
remember the poor that be alive, the Papists bid us bring hither for the
Souls of your dead Friends and Parents, with cry Miseremini: These Priests
and Religious are the Prophets Sa^ke, never full; and Solomon's Horse-leaches,
and the fire that never says hoa: if thou should give them the world, they
will not be satisfied. The places of Scripture that they ground Purgatory
upon, are the fifth of Matthew: Agree with thine Adversary by the way, least
thou be cast into Prison, etc. And in the 18. of Matthew; He that owed thee
ten thousand Talents, was delivered unto Prison, etc. And in the 12. of
Matthew; The sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven in this World,
nor in the World to come. And in the 1. Cor. 13. Stubble and trash, builded
upon Christ, shall be tried by Fire. And 2. Machab. 12. Macabeus offered two
thousand drammes of Silver for the dead, which bought Beasts which were
sacrificed. And Revelation 14. 21. Those that follow the Lamb are without
spot, and no unclean thing shall enter into heaven: Therefore we must be
purged with Purgatory before we can come there. Thomas Aquine confessed he
could not find Purgatory in the Scriptures, yet he would have it believed.
The Doctrine of Purgatory is the greatest Blasphemy that is unto Christ.

Boniface the ^ eight made a Decree, That every worldly creature should be
subject unto the Pope, upon pain of Damnation.

Pope Alexander Borgias lay with his natural Daughter Lucrece, with whom also
Duke Valentine, his brother, lay.

The Friars lay with the Nuns, and with Lay-sisters, and taught them to
murder young Babes, least they should be discovered; or teaches them how they
shall not conceive with child, or to destroy it in her body: Some of them make
Women to poison their Husbands: some of them have given meat to a whole
household to make them to sleep, that he might not be seen to go to the good
wife, and thereby has killed them all: One faineth our Lady does Miracles, to
get Offerings; another persecuteth the Truth, because he would be a Bishop:
Another false knave, in Confession, caused a woman to given him her money in
keeping, and then denied it. They sit toting in the bosom of simple young maids
which come unto them to shrieue: others, in confessing the sick, cause them to
leave their goods unto the Monastery, and deprive their wives and children.

A Can^n of ^urney after his death left a Book, wherein he had noted the
Names and Houses of two hundred women of the chiefest of that City, whom he
had enio^ed at his pleasure.

A Friar in Fris^land had put into the h^ads of foolish women this opinion,
That they must give unto the Church the tenth Night, as they do unto their
Husband.

A Friar, with a poisoned Host, brought unto his death Henry, the seventh
Emperor of that Name. Thus much out of Pasquine in a ^rance; wherein, if thou
be disposed, thou shall find every thing that I have set down, and much more:
which, least I should be too tedious, I have omitted.

The Traiterous Practices of the Papists against Queen ELIZABETH, during her
Reign, and of Gods Preseruations toward her.
THe most just and apparent Judgments of God upon persecuting Papists, which
have shed the innocent blood of poor Protestants, has been declared: Wherein
not only in other Countries God has manifested his indignation against them,
but most especially in this Realm, you have seen the Uiall of Gods wrath
powered upon the most part of the Persecutors in Queen Mary's time; especially
upon the Persecuting Clergy, who all fell into the pit that they had dug
for others. As for Bonner, whose Judgment is not yet declared, he dyed in
Prison, and was buried in a Dunghill: And as for Doctor Story, as great a
Persecutor as Bonner, you may read of his just Judgment in this History
following; how he was drawn from the Tower to Tyburne, and there hanged and
quartered for Treason. Tyburne was long time after called Stories Cappe. If we
do but consider the unhappiness of Q. Mary's Reign, together with the
prosperous and long Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it is easy to see the loving
countenance of God ^uer the Protestants, and how God bends his brows against
the Papists: And as sure as God has overthrown them here in this Realm,
beyond the expectation of any man, so certainly will the Almighty God
^^nfound the whole Pope-^ome at his time appointed; how unlikely soever it
seems unto the carnall-eyed Papist, that will not see the Prophesies of the
Spirit of God, which most plainly fore-shew the same. But now touching the
History of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

In the year 1569, Pope Pius the fifth sent Nicholas Morton Doctor of
Divinity, an Englishman, into England, to admonish certain Noblemen that were
Papists, That Queen Elizabeth was an Heretic, and therefore by Law has lost
all Dominion and Power, and may freely be accounted as an Heathen and Publican,
and that her subjects are not from henceforth bound to obey her Laws and
Commandments.

Whereupon presently the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland rebelled
against the Queen in the North: but the Earl of Suffex was sent into the
North, being appointed the Queens Lieutenant general, who proclaimed them
Traitors: and he sent out to all such Gentlemen as he knew to be her Majesty's
loving subjects; which came unto him with such a number, as he was able to make
above 5000. horsemen and footmen: and being accompanied with the Earl of
Rutland, his Lieutenant; the Lord Hunsdon, General of his Horsemen; William
Lord Eure, leader of the Footmen; and Sir Raph Sadler, Treasurer; Sir George
Bows was made Marshall of the Army. When the Army was coming to Durham, the
Rebels fled to Exham* The night before they came to Exham, the Rebels were gone
to Mawarth; where they counseled with Edward Dacres concerning their own
weakness, being they were pursued of the Earl of Sussex, seven thousand
strong: and moreover, the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral of
England, and Lord Uicount Herford, with an Army of 12000. ^ut of the South,
being not far behind them at Browne-bridge.

The next night the Garles of Northumberland and Westmerland, with sundry
principal Gentlemen, fled unto Hatlew in Scotland: The other Rebels were
shortly after taken by the Earl of Sussex, and 66. of the name of Constables,
and others, executed at Durham; amongst whom was an Alderman of the Town, and
a Priest, called Parson Plomtree. Then Sir George Bows Marshall executed many
in every Market Town and other places betwixt New Castle and Wetherby, six
miles in length, and four miles in breadth.

And Leonard Dacre having raised a great number of people, the Lord Hunsdon set
upon him, and slew many of his people, and ^orc^d them to fly into Scotland.

Simon Digby, John Fulthroppe Esquire, Robert Peniman, and Thomas Bishop Gent.
were drawn from the Castle of York to Knaues^er^, and there hanged and
quartered.

Then they went with all their power into Scotland, and burnt, overthrew, and
spoiled all the Castles, Towns, and Uillages before them, above fi^tie strong
Castles and Piles, and above three thousand Towns and Uillages, and they took
many Prisoners, and returned sa^ely.

Also a Conspiracy was made by certain Gentlemen and other in the County of
Norfolk, whose purpose was upon Midsummer day, at Harlstone Fair, with the
sound of a Trumpet to have raised a number, and then to proclayme their
pretense. This matter was uttered by Thomas Kete unto John Kensey, who sent the
said Kete unto the next Instice, before whom he opened the whole matter;
whereupon Drew Drewrie apprehended John Throgmorton, and many Gentlemen of the
Citi^ of Norwich and the Country of Norfolk: at the next Sessions ten of them
were indicted of Treason, and John Throgmorton, Thomas Brook, and George Dedman
hanged, drawn, and quartered.

Doctor Sanders de visibili Monarchia, lib. 7. page 730. says, That the
purposes and endeavors of these Noblemen were to be praised, which wanted not
their certain and happy success; for though they were not able to draw the
Souls of their Brethren out of the pit of Schism, yet both they themselves
nobly confessed the Catholic Faith, and many of them gave their lives for
their Br^thren, which is the highest degree of Charity: the rest of them
rescued themselves from the Bondage both of Schism and Sin unto the Freedom
wherewith Christ has made v^ free.

And in his Book of Motives he calls these Martyrs; to wit, the Earl of
Northumberland, Doctor Story, Felton, the Nortons, M. Woodhouse, M. Plumtree,
and so many hundreds of the Northern men.

The said Nortons were Thomas Norton and Christopher Norton of Yorkshire, and
they were hanged, beheaded, and quartered for Treason, for the late Rebellion
in the North.

The said Felton was one John Felton, which this year was drawn from Newgate
to Paul's Churchyard, and hanged before the Bishops Palace Gate, cut down
alive, bowelled, and quartered, for hanging a Bull from the Pope for the
Excommunicating of the Queen, at the Gate of the Bishop of Londons Palace.

And the aforementioned Doctor Story was that cruel Story that burned so
many in Queen Mary's time: who the first of June, this year 1571. was drawn
from the Tower of London to Tyburne, and there hanged and quartered.

And in his seventh Book, page 734. he says, The fullness of the Apostolic
Power has declared the said Elizabeth an Heretic, and a favorer of
Heretics, and that such as adhere unto her, have incurred the Sentence of
Anathema: And that she is deprived of her Right of her Kingdom, and of all her
Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege, and that the Nobles, People, and Subjects
of the Realm, and all others that have made Oath unto her* are assoyled for
ever from such Oath, and all duty of Allegiance, Fidelity, and Obedience, by
the Authority of the Popes Sentence, whereby he has deprived her of her
Kingdom, and forbidden all the Nobles, People, and Subjects, and others
aforesaid, that they be not so bold to obey her or her Laws, and whosoever
does otherwise, he has bound with like Sentence of Curse.

And Bristow in his sixth Motive, fol. 31. They miserably forget themselves, who
fear not the Excommunications of Pius the fifth, in whom Christ himself has
spoken and excommunicated, with as great power as S. Paul excommunicated: and
Christ has done Miracles by him, even as S. Paul did Miracles.

And in his 40. Motive he says: When the Pope does duly discharge us from
subjection, and the Prince offender from Dominion, he does it with such grief
of heart, as if a man should cut off from his body, to save the wholesome most
principal, but rotten part thereof.

And Sanders, lib. 7. fol. 744. he calls Felton an honorable Martyr; for he
was led with the love and zeal of the Catholic Faith: when he saw that the
desperate health of his Country could not be restored but by some most bitter
medicine, would not suffer the sentence of the Pope should be hidden from his
Countrymen: And there he calls Doctor Story a noble Martyr* saying: When he
was arraigned of high Treason, for conspiring with certain of Antwarpe against
the Queen, attempting to change the schismatic Religion, which now reigns
in England, unto the Catholic Religion; being brought unto the Bar, he only
pleaded unto the Jurisdiction of the Court, denying that the English Judges had
any power over him, being no Subject to the English Queen, but rather to the
King Catholic; and he expounds his meaning to be, because he very well knew,
that the Queen of England, by the declaratorie Sentence of the Pope, was for
manifest Heres^e deprived from all Right of Kingdom, and that therefore no
Magistrate created by her, or adhering unto her, could be acknowledged by him,
least himself also should be bound with the same Curse.

And further, there were many Seminary Priests, which labored by all
persuasions that might be to justify the foresaid Excommunication of Pope
Pius, and to withdraw the Queens subjects hearts from their true obedience: of
whom, many of them were taken and committed unto Prisons, as follow:

Edmund Campion.
EDmund Campion, was a chief champion for the pope: he was committed unto the
Tower: he would neither deny nor confess the Queens supremacy nor iusti^^e,
neither deny the power and justice of the popes excommunication, nor commend,
nor discommend the doctrine of Sanders and B^istow, as before: but answered so
cunningly, that nothing could be made thereof: He was after disputed withal
touching all points of Religion, by the Deame of Paul's, and the Deane of
Windsor, and diverse other divines, but because all their arguments and reason
in this book before are moresuff^ c^ently handled many times: I refer the
Reader unto the book of the report thereof.

Thomas Forde, John Shert, Robert Johnson Priests.
THese were executed at Tyburne the 28. of May, because they were sent as
instruments, for, and in the behalf of the Pope, in the aforesaid disloyal
and tray^erous cause: they were drawn upon hurdles from the Tower unto the
place of execution: when they were come beyond Saint Giles in the field, there
approached unto the hurdle one of their fect, a Priest as himself has
confessed, who said unto the prisoners, O Gentlemen, be joyful in the blond of
Jesus Christ, for this is the ^ay of your triumph and joy: and further he said
unto the prisoners, I pro^ounce a pardon unto you: yea I pronounce a full
remission and pardon unto your souls: Whereupon he was apprehen^^d, and* the
Sheriff asked him what he was, he answered, that he was the voice of a crier
in the wilderness, and that he was sent to prepare the Lords way: wh^revpon h^
was carried to Newgate: where he confessed himself a priest, and that he had
long so dissembled, and that he would now do so no more.

When they were brought unto the place of execution, Thomas Ford, was first
brought up into the Cart: He said, he did acknowledge the Queens Majesty's
supremacy in all things temporal* but as concerning Ecclesiastical causes, I
deny her, that only belongs unto the Uicar of Christ the Pope: He granted
to nothing, but showed himself an impious and obstinate Traitor: he refused to
pray in the English tongue, mumbling a few Latin prayers, and desired those
that were ex domo Dei, to pray with him and so died.

John Shert, was brought from the ^urdle unto the gallows, as Ford hanged
there, he held up his hands unto him, and said, O sweet Tom! O happy Tom! O
blessed Tom! Then Ford was cut down, and brought unto the place where he
should be quartered: Then looking down from the Cart, unto the dead body, he
kneeled down, and held up his hands unto it, saying again: O blessed Tom: O
happy Tom: thy sweet soul pray for me: O dear Tom, thy blessed soul pray for
me. Then the Sheriff had him ask the Queen forgiveness, and he might receive
her princely mercy: He answered, what M. Sheriff shall I save this frail and
vile carcass, and damn mine own soul: No, no, I am a Catholic, in that
faith I was born, in that faith I will die and hear shall my blood ^eale it:
Then said M. Sheriff, is this the fruits of your religion, to kneel unto the
dead body of thy fellow, and desire his soul to pray for thee: What can it
profit or hinder thee, pray to God, and he will help thee: he answered, this
is the true Catholic religion, and whosoever is not of it is damned: I desire
his so^le to pray for me: The most glorious Uirgine Mary pray for me; and all
the holy company in heaven to pray for me: Then the people cried away with the
Traitor: Then the Sheriff said: O Sherte, forsake the whore of Rome, that
wicked Antichrist, with all his abominable blasphemies and tr^acheries, and
put thy whole confidence in Jesus Christ: Then he said, O Master Sheriff, you
little remember the day when as I and you shall stand both at one Bar, and I
shall witness against you that you call that holy and blessed Uicar of Christ,
Whore of Rome: then he said his prayers in Latin* and the Cart was drawn away.

Robert Johnson likewise would not ask the Queen pardon, affirmed the Pope to
be the head of the Catholic Church, and would not say his prayers in English;
and when he had said them in Latin he died.

Luke Kirbie, William Filbie, Thomas Cottom, and Lawrence Richardson.
THese were executed at Tyburne: upon the thirteenth day of May they were
brought from the Tower of London unto the place of execution: first, William
Filbie was brought up into the Cart, being asked whether he would acknowledge
the Queen supreme head of the Church of England; no (quoth he) I will
acknowledge no other head of the Church then the Pope only. He prayed that God
would incline the Queens heart to be merciful toward the Catholics, of which
societi^ he was one. They opening his bosom ^ound two crosses in it, which
were holden up and showed unto the people, and besides that, his crown was
shaven; so after a few Latin prayers, the Cart was drawn away.

The next was Luke Kirbie: one charged him, that when he was at Rome he
delivered him certain silk pictures, which he said were hallowed by the Pope;
and you told me what indulgences were allowed by th^m^ one of them, which was a
Crucifix, you gave me, the other you willed me to deliver unto your friends
at Reimes and in England, and you gave me two Iulios to go into the City to
buy more, and when I had bought them, you took three or four of the fairest
from me, promising to get them hallowed at the next benediction, which he
confessed to be true: he affirmed that the Pope had power to depose any Prince
from his Kingdom, if he fall by infidelity. He would not repent and ask the
Queen pardon though upon that condition he might have bin discharged: he would
not pray in English: the preacher desired him to say a prayer after him, and if
he could find any fault therein he should be resolved; O (quoth he) you and I
be not of one faith, therefore I should offend God if I should pray with you;
so saying his Pater noster in Latin, he ended his life.

Then Lawrence Richardson was brought up to be executed: he confessed himself
a Catholic, and that he would believe in all things as the Catholic Church of
Rome did, and he allowed the only suprema^ie unto the Pope; and after certain
Latin prayers said he died.

Then was Cottom brought up: he looking upon the body of Lawrence Richardson,
lift up his eyes and hands, and said, O blessed Lawrence pray for me, thy
blessed soul Lawrence pray for me. The Preachers and people rebuked him,
saying, that he ought to pray unto none but God; he answered, he was assured
that Lawrence will pray for him: he denied to repent and ask pardon of the
Queen. When he had said his Pater noster and an Aue Maria he ended his life.

As before is declared the rebellions in England by the seducing of wicked
spirits, so not long after followed an open rebellion in Ireland: they took
arms and came into the field against her Maies^ie, and her Lieutenants with
their forces under banners displayed, inducing many simple people to follow
them in their traiterous actions, being bent to have deposed the Queens
Majesty from her crown, and to have traitorously set into her place some
other whom they liked, yet by Gods power given unto her Majesty they were
quickly vanquished, some few of them suffered by order of the law, but the
greate^t part upon confession of their fa^lts were pardoned: some of the
principal escaped into foreign countries. These notable Traitors and Rebels
informed many Kings Princes, and States, especially the Pope, from whom they
all had first secretly their comfort to rebel, that the cause of the flying
was for the religion of Rome, and maintenance of the Popes authority, whereas
the most of them before they rebell^d, lived notoriously evil: out of England
fled Charles Neuill Earl of Westmerland, who was utterly wasted by loosenes of
life, and how afterward his body was eaten with ulcers of lewd causes all his
companions did see. Out of Ireland ran Thomas Stukely a defamed person thorough
out all Christendom: he fled out of England for P^racies, and out of Ireland
for treason: these two were the first ringleaders to the rest of the rebels,
the one for England, the other for Ireland; yet it liked the Pope to favor
their treasons, and to animate them to continue their wicked purposes, to wit,
to invade Queen Elizabeth's Realm with foreign forces: he thundered out B^lls,
excommunications* and other public writings, denouncing her not to be the
Queen of the Realm, commanding her subjects, under pain of excommunication
to depart from their alleagean^es, authorizing and provoking all persons within
both her realms to rebel; and upon this vn^hristian warrant all those that
were fled, and such as had forsaken their native country have many years
run up and down from country to country to gather forces and money for
forces, and to (...) Princes to make war upon their native country, some
practicing secretly to murder the Queen, and very many with public infamous
Libels, full of poisoned lies, did seek to uphold that Antichristian warrant
of the Popes Bulls.

And for better furtherance of these intentions, they devised to erect certain
schools, which they called Seminaries, to nourish persons disposed to
sedition, that they might become seedmen, in the ^illag^ of sedition, and to
send them secretly into England, and Ireland, under secret maskes, some of
priesthood, some of other inferior orders of the meaner sort, being called
Seminaries; and the ^ancor sort, Ies^ites, bringing with them, hallowed Wax,
their Agnus Dei, many kind of beads, and such like, laboring secretly to
persuade the people, to allow of the popes foresaid Bulls* and of his absolute
authority over all Princes and Countries: And if this traiterous and crafty
course, had not by Gods goodness been espied, and stayed, there had followed
horrible vprores in the Realms: for as many as should be persuaded to obey the
Popes warrant, must needs b^e secret traitors, and there should have wanted
nothing but power and opport^nitie to be open traitors: but God of his goo^nes
discovered some of these seditious seedmen of rebellions: and when they could
not be moved to repent of their traiterous determinations, they were justly
condemned, for adhering unto the capital enemy of her Majesty, and her
crown: The Pope who has not only been the cause of two rebellions already in
England, and Ireland: but in Ireland did manifestly maintain his own people:
Captains and soldiers under the banner of Rome against her Majesty.

And further those Traitors provoke newly other seditious persons secr^t^y to
enter into the Realm to revive the execution of the Popes Bulls, pretending
when they are apprehended, that they came into the Realm only by the
commandment of their Superiors the heads of the Ie^uits, to whom they are
bound by Ooth against either King or Country, and that their coming is to
inform, and reform men's conscience from errors, in some points of Religion as
they shall think meet: but it is manifestly proved, that their labor is
secretly to win al people, with whom they dare deal, so to allow the Popes
Bulls and Authority, and be discharged of their Allegiance, and to be well
warranted to take arms against her Majesty when they shall be thereunto
called, and to be ready secretly to join with any Foreign force that can be
procured to invade the Realm: whereof they give great comfort of success.

And because most evident perils would follow, if these virmine were suffered
to creep by stealth into the Realm, and spread their poison therein,
therefore do they most justly suf^er death as Traitors.

One of their compaine, Doctor San^ders a lewd Scholar and subject of England,
a fugitive, a principal conspirator with the traitors and rebels at Rome, was
the Popes Legate and commander and treasorer for those wars aforesaid, passing
into Ireland, openly by writing he gloriously auowed the Popes Bull, as is
before declared; but God plagued him with a strange death, who wandering in the
mon^ntaines in Ireland without succor, died rauing in a frenzy.

The miserable Earl of Desmond being a principal doer in the rebellion in
Ireland, secretly wandering without succor, as a miserable beggar, was taken by
one of the Irishrie in his Cabin, and his head cut off from his body: an e^d
due to such an arch-rebell.

James Fitz Morris the first traitor in Ireland* next unto Stukeley, was
slain by an Irish young Gentleman as he went to burn his fathers country.

Desmount brother unto the Earl a blondie faithless traitor and a notable
murderer of his familier friends, who likewise wandering to seek some prey
like a Wel^e in the woods, he was taken and beheaded, as he had used others,
being, as he thought, sufficiently armed with the Popes Bulls, and an Agnus
Dei, and a notable ring hanging about his neck, sent from the Popes ^^^ger.

John Someruile a furious young man, of Warwick shire: of late he was discovered
and taken in his way, coming with a full intent to have killed the Queen: he
confessed his attempt, and that he was moved thereunto in his wicked spirit, by
inticements of certain seditious and traiterous persons his kinsemen and
allies, and by often reading of sundry seditious vile books, lately published
against the Queens Majesty.

William Parry his treasons against Queen ELIZABETH.
He had committed a great outrage against a Gentlem^n, one M. Hare of the
Inner Temple, meaning to have murdered him in his own chamber, for which he
was justly convicted; wherefore he went beyond Sea, and subjected himself unto
the Pope, and upon conference with certain Jesuits, he conceived his
detestable treason to kill the Queen, which he vowed himself by promise,
letters, and vows to perform it, and so returned unto England in January
1583. and put in practice diverse times to execute his devilish purpose.

Pretending that he had matter of great importance to reveal unto the Queen,
he obtained secret access unto her Majesty, she having then but one
Councellor with her, who was so far distant as he could not hear his speech:
he showed her Majesty his proceedings with the ^esuits, and one Thomas Morgan
a fugitive at Parris, who persuaded him to kill her Majesty, saying that his
only intent of proceeding so far with them was but only to this end, to
discover the dangerous practices devised and attempted against her Majesty, by
her di^loyal subjects, and other malicious persons in foreign parts; but
afterward it appeared most manifestly by his own confession, and by his
dealing with one Edmund Neuill Esquire, that his intent in discovering the same
in such sort as he did, was but to make the way the easier unto his most
devilish purpose.

The Queen suffered him diverse times to have private conference with her, ^and
offered him a most liberal pension, yet notwithstanding he did vehemently
importunat the said Neuill to be an associate unto his wicked enterprise, as to
an action lawful and meritorious: but the Almighty God that was protector of
her Majesty, even from her cradle, so wrought in Neuils heart, as he was moved
to reveal the same unto her Majesty, whereupon the examination of the matter
was committed unto the Earl of Leicester, and Sir Christopher Hatton; upon the
examination whereof, when Parrie saw the said Neuill so to declare the truth,
and so constantly affirm the same, he confessed all, saying: that coming unto
the chamber of Thomas Morgan aforesaid, one greatly beloved and trusted in the
Papists side; he broke with me that I should undertake to kill the Queen, I
told him it would be easily done if it were lawfully done and warranted in the
opinion of some learned Deuines: then I was resolved by Deuines, and I went so
far by Letters and conferences in Italy, that I could not go back, but
promised faithfully to perform the enterprise, if his holiness would allow
it, and grant me remission of my sins: then I confessed my self unto a
Jesuit, and took his advice in the matter, who most lovingly embraced and
commended me: then I wrote a Letter unto the Pope to require of him absolution
of my sins, in consideration of so great an enterprise undertaken, without
promise or reward: then I went unto the Popes Nuntio, and read the letter unto
him, and enclosed and sealed it, he promised me to procure answer from the
Pope, and lovingly embraced me, wished me good speed, and promised me that I
should be remembered at the Altar. Then he said he coming to England, he got
access unto the Queen, as before: then came Letters into England unto me from
Cardinal Como, whereby I found the enterprise commended and allowed, and my
self absolved in the Popes name of all my sins, and willed to go forward in
the name of God. That Letter I showed unto some in Court, who imparted it to
the Queen, notwithstanding it confirmed my resolution to kill her, and made it
clear in my conscience that it was lawful and meritorious. When I looked upon
her Majesty, and remembered her many excellencies, I was greatly troubled, yet
I saw no remedy, for my vows were in heaven, and my letters and promises in
earth: after Doctor Collens book was sent me out of France, it redoubled my
former conceits; every word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind: it taught
that Kings may he excommunicated, deprived, and violently handled: it proves
that all wars, civil or foreign, undertaken for religion, are honorable,
whereupon he was condemned of treason, and drawn upon a Hurdle from the Tower
unto the Palace of Westminster, where he was executed.

Francis Throgmorton.
HIs confession was to this effect: When I was at Spaw in the Country of
Liege, I entered into conference with one Ienney a notorious traitor, touching
the altering of the State of the Realm here, and how the same might be
attempted by foreign invasion, and to the like effect I had sundry conferences
with Sir Francis Englefield in the Low Countries, who daily solicited the K. of
Spain to invade the Realm, and I continued practicing against her Majesty
and the State by letters betw^ene Sir Francis Englefield and my self, and I
acquainted Sir John Throgmorton my father with my traiterous practices, who
dissuaded me from any further meddling with these practices, but by my fathers
advice I made a Catalogue of all the Noblemen and Gentlemen that were
Catholics, and did discribe the havens of this Realm for landing of forces.

He confessed that he was acquainted by his brother Thomas Throgmorton with a
resolute determination for inuading of the Realm, and that the Duke of Guise
should be the principal executor of that invasion, to the intent to prepare by
force the Queens tolleration in religion for the Catholics; and if her Majesty
should refuse so to do, to remove her from her crown and state, and that the
Duke of Guise had prepared the forces, but there wanted money and assistance of
the Catholics in England, to join with foreign forces: for money
messengers were sent, both to Rome and Spain, and the Spanish Ambassador gave
out that the King his Master would not only make some notable attempt against
England, but would bear half the charge thereof; and an especial messenger
was sent into England, under a counterfeit name from the confederats in France,
to signify here the plot and preparation that was there, whereupon I took
upon me to be a follower and means for the effecting thereof amongst the
confederats in England, with the help of the Spanish Ambassador, knowing that
he being a public person might deal therein without peril, and that the
Duke of Guise made special choice to land in Sussex, about Arundell, for the
near cut from France, and for the assured persons to give assistance, and I
showed the whole plot of the havens for landing to the Spanish Ambassador, who
did encourage me therein: also there was sent over from the confederates beyond
Sea, into ^ussex, Charles Pager, under the name of Mope, alias Spring, and that
the Spanish Ambassador was made privy unto his coming, and it was to view the
havens and country for landing such foreign forces about Arundell, and to
confer with certain principal persons for assistance, and he confessed that
there was a device between the Spanish Ambassador and him, how such principal
Recusants within the Realm as were in Commission for the peace in sundry
countries, might upon the bruit of landing the foreign forces, under color
of defense of her Majesty, levy m^n to join unto the foreign forces;
whereupon he was justly condemned.

The Earl of Northumberland.
He had a hand in the rebellion in the North, as well as his brother, and
behaved himself diligently in the managing of those treasons, yet the Queen
was content to remit all, and accept him again, both in honor and favor, yet
he after entered into a new plot for the inuading of the Realm, and overthrow
of the government of religion, and to endanger her Majesty's person, and put
her from her Kingdom, being a conspirator in Throgmortons treasons: it was
concluded by the Pope that the state of Christendom stood upon the stout
assayling of England, and that it should be invaded with twenty thousand men,
at the charge of the Pope and other Princes, and that her Majesty should be
deposed, and some English Catholic elected King, and that many Priests should
come into the Realm to win a number unto the Catholic faith to join, if
opportunity served, either with foreign invasion, or with tumults at home.

The head Preacher at Narbon in Prouence, told an Englishman that England
should be invaded by a foreign King, and the Popish Religion restored, and that
Priests dispersed themselves in England for the better strengthening of the
parties.

One Pain executed for treason, confessed that this Realm could not continue
in the State wherein it was, because the Pope had a special care thereof, and
would in short time, either by foreign Princes, or by some other means, work a
change of things here.

The Duke of Guise two years did solicit the Pope and other Princes, to
supply him with forces to invade this Realm.

There was found about a Jesuit that was taken upon the Sea, a discourse that
the Earl of Northumberland, and all the Catholic Lords and Gentlemen in the
North parts will assuredly join with foreign forces, and therein it is also
affirmed that the Priests, dispersed within the Realm, can dispose of the
Catholics of the Realm, as they shall be ordered, and that the Popes
excommunication should be renewed and pronounced against her Majesty, and all
those which shall take her part, and that all such should be holden as traitors
which did not join with the Army by a day.

It was proved that the Earl had conference with the foresaid Charles Pager,
coming over about the practice and prosecuting of the said enterprise, and
that the ^arle secretly received him into the Gallery at Petworth, where the
Earl conferred with him an hour, from whence Paget was conveyed back into
the town, where he lodged all night, and the next night he was conveyed
secretly unto a Lodge in the ^arls Park at Pe^worth, where he was kept with all
secrecy eight days, and the servant which conveyed him was enjoined by the
Earl in no wise to discover him, and Charles Paget returning from Petworth,
took shipping again to go beyond Sea.

Paget told William Shelley of Michelgroue in Essex* Esquire, that foreign
Princes would seek revenge against her Majesty, of wrongs by her done against
them, and would take such opportunity as might (...) serve them, and that the
Duke of Guise would be a dealer herein, and that the Earl of Northumberland
would be an assistant unto them, willing Shelley whatsoever should happen, to
follow the Earl of Northumberland, and that the Duke of Guise had forces in
readiness for the altering of religion here in England, and that the
Catholics would all join for so good a purpose, for that it would be a means
to reform religion: he said the stir would be in the North parts* because
Sussex was not convenient in regard there was no safe landing there* and that
it was so (...) Lond^n, and that when any stir should be the Earl of
Northumberland would go into the North parts, and when the Earl perceived
that all this was come to light, he killed himself in the Tower, with a
Pistol charged with three Bullets.

Anthony Babington, with thirteen young Gentlemen more.
THese conspired the death of Queen Elizabeth: they swore they would set the
Pope in h^s former state in England, or else die the death, and they combined
and confederated themselves by vow and oath, in a most horrible enterprise, by
murder to take away the life of her Majesty, wherefore they were justly
condemned, and executed.

The story of the Spanish Fleet, Ann. 1588.
THe said Fleet was a preparing three or four years, and being in full
perfection came into our seas, with such mighty strength, as no navy of England
or Christendom could abide their ^orce. And to make the intended conquest of
this realm sure, to the same should also have joined the mighty army which
the Duke of Parma had made ready in the Low Countries, which Army should land
in this realm, and so both by sea and land this realm should be invaded, and
a speedy conquest made thereof, whereupon it was gathered that neither by sea
nor by land there could be much resistance made, and that there would be a
strong party in this realm of papists to join with the foreign forces; but
within eight or nine days of the appearance of the popish so great a navy
upon the coast of England, it was forced to flee from the coast of Flanders
near Callice, toward the unknown parts of the cold North, and all their hope
of an imagined conquest was quite overthrown. It could proceed of no reason of
man, nor of any earthl^ power, but only of God, that such a work, so long
time a framing, to be so suddenly ouerthrown.

Before this Army of Spain was ready to come forth unto the seas, there were
sundry things printed, and sent into this realm, to not^fie unto the people
that the realm should be conquered, the Queen destroyed, and all the Noble
men and wealthy that did obey her, and would withstand the invasion, should be
with all their families ^ooted out, and their livings bestowed upon the
Conque^ors, and a new Bull was published at Rome by the Pope, whereby the Queen
was accursed, and pronounced to be deprived of her Crown, and the invasion and
conquest of the Realm committed by the Pope, to the King Catholic, which was
the King of Spain, to execute the sam with his armies, both by Sea and Land,
and to take the crown unto himself, and there was a large explanation of this
b^ll, written by Cardinal Allen, calling himself therein the Cardinal of
England, and a number of them were sent over ready printed into England, most
bitterly written against the Queen, and her Father King Henry the eight, and
her Nobi^itie and Council.

In the Fleet were abundance of Princes, Marquesses, Condez, and Do^s, which
came to have possessed the rooms of all the Noble men in England, and Scotland.

Don Brnardin Mendoza, in an open assembly did say in a bravery, that the
young King of Scots, whom he called a boy, had deceived the King of Spain:
but if the Kings Navy might prosper against England: The King of Scots should
loose his Crown, when the brute was brought of the Spanish Fleet, and of the
Army of the Sea coast of Flanders, with their shippings.

Charles Lord Howard, Lord High Admiral of England, who is of the most Noble
house of the Duke of Norffolke, had the charge of the greatest company of the
Queens Ships: an other company were appointed to remain with the Lord Henry
Seymer, second Son to the Duke of Somerset, and brother to the Earl of
Hertford: these continued in the narrow Seas betwixt England and Flanders, to
attend the Duke of Parmas actions.

A third company were armed in the West part of England toward Spain, under
the conduct of Sir Francis Drake, but after it was understood, that the great
Navy of Spain was ready to come out of Li^b^ne, my Lord Admiral was
commanded to sail with the greatest ships to the west parts of England to
ioyn with Drake, whom he made Uice-admirall, and the Lord Thomas Howard, second
Son unto the Duke of Norffolke, and the Lord Sheffield, with a great number of
Knights, went with the Lord Admiral.

When the Popish Army came unto the Coasts of England, it seemed so great, that
the Englishmen were astonished at the sight of them; yet the Lord Admiral and
Drake having but fifty of the English ships out of the haven of Plymouth, they
^uriously pursued the whole Navy of Spain, being about 160. ships: so that
with the continual shot of the English one whole day, the whole Navy fled
without returning: and after the English Navy being increased to an hundred
ships, renewed the fight with terrible great shot all the whole day, gaining
always the wind of the Spanish Navy, and for nine days together forced them
to fly, and destroyed, su^ke, and took in three days fight, diverse of the
greatest ships, out of which great numbers were brought to London, besides
many that were killed and drowned, and many were brought unto other parts of
the realm* to the great dissh^nour of Spain: in which fight the Spaniards did
never take nor sink any English ship or boat, or break any mast, or took
any one man prisoner, so that some of the Spaniards let not to say, That in all
these ^ghts Christ showed himself a Lutheran. The King of Scots gave straight
commandment upon all his Sea coasts that no Spaniards should be sufferd to
land in any part, b^t that the English might be relieved of any wants.

The Popish Fleet was by tempest driven beyond the Is^es of Ork^ay, in an
unaccustomed place, for the young Gentlemen of Spain, which had never felt
storms and cold weather: about those northern Islands their Mariners and
Soldiers died daily by multitudes, as by their bodies cast upon the land, did
appear. And after twenty days and more, having spent their time in misery,
then as they returned homeward the Lord ordained the winds to be so violently
contrarious, that the Navy was disse^ered upon the high Seas, west upon
Ireland, and a great number of them driven upon sands, dangerous bays, and
rocks, all along upon the north and west parts of Ireland, in places distant
above an hundred miles asunder: whereby we may see how God favored the just
cause of Q. Elizabeth, in showing his anger against those proud boasting
enemies of Christ's peace, and she and her Realm professing the Gospel of
Christ, are kept and de^ended: according to the Psalm, under the shadow of his
wings from the face of the wicked that sought to afflict her, and compass her
round about to take away her soul.

John Weldon, William Hartley, and Robert Sutton.
John Weldon Priest, was borne at Tollerton in Yorkshire: he was indicted of
^reason in Middlesex; first he took exception to the indictment that it was
false, then to the Jury, that they were unfit men to try him, because they
were Lay men, and unto the whole Bench as unworthy to be his Judges, because
he did know them to be resolved before hand to condemn all Catholics brought
before them: He acknowledged himself to be a Priest, and therefore not
triable by the Common Laws. Whereupon persisting in that he would make no
answer, and his Treasons manifest, he was condemned to be hanged, drawn and
quartered.

William Hartly Priest was condemned for the same treasons that Welden was: it
was proved that he sent a Letter to Paris to Seminary Priests, importing the
full resolution of the said Hartly and some other of his confederats
(immediately upon the landing of the Spaniards) to have surprised the Tower of
London, and to have fired the City: he affirmed, that if the Pope do deprive
the Queen and discharge her subjects of their obedience, and send an army to
restore the Roman Religion in England, he would pray that the Roman army might
prevail in that case, and in that faith he would spend ten thousand millions
of lives, if he had them, whereupon he was likewise condemned to be hanged,
drawn and quartered.

Robert Sutton Priest was indicted for the same treasons: he said the Queen was
supreme governor within her Highness Dominions, over all persons, but not
over all causes: he was found guilty* and had his judgment as the rest. It
was proved that Welden was sent over into the Low Countries to kill the Earl
of Leicester, who apprehended him, and sent him over into England; to which he
answered he had done nothing but as a Catholic Priest ought to do by the
direction of our most holy Father the Pope, being the head of the Church, who
only has authority over all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiastical, and
in this Roman Religion. I will die. Then he prayed all Catholics to pray for
him, and so mumbling certain Latin prayers, he died. The other likewise died
as obstinate traitors as himself.

Doctor Lopez, Stephano de Ferrera de Gama, Manuell Lewis Tyuaco Portugalls.
DOctor Lopez was favorably received into the Queens house a long time, as one
of her physicians, the other two were Portugalls lately received to the service
of the King of Spain, yet colourably resorting into this Realm.

Lopez confessed that he was of late years allured secretly to do service
unto the King of Spain, and from one of his Privy Council he received a
Jewel of gold of good value, garnished with a large Diamond and a large Rubie,
and afterward he assented to take away the Qu^^ns life by poisoning, upon
reward promised him of fifty thousand crowns, for which purpose he sent a
messenger over to Callice to confer with the Count ^uents for this practice,
and that after he sent an other messenger unto Ibarra, the King of Spaines
Secretary, and to the said Count Fuentes, promising to poison the Queen, if
^hee might have the fifty thousand crowns that were offered delivered unto
him: and he confessed the other two were his messengers: in the aforesaid
messages, and conspired with him to execute the same: and they all confessed,
that the stay that it was not done, proceeded much against their minds, for
want of the delivery of the said fifty thousand crowns, which was promised by
a day: But the King of Spain finding fault that the messenger, which should
carry the money, was too base a fellow to be trusted w^^h so much deferred the
sending thereof: but after bills of Exchange were delivered by the Count
Fuentes, for the money, by the direction of the King of Spain, at the very
instant when it should have been done, it pleased God of his goodness toward
her Majesty, to suffer this conspiracy to be very happily di^couered by the
diligence of one of the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council: so all the three
offenders were taken with their Letters and writings, expressing their own
actions and Councels, and the directions of the King of Spaines Counselors,
and the other two confessed the like in effect, as Lopez had done: whereupon
they were all three condemned for treason, and executed accordingly.

Manuel Lewis, repented at his death, and prayed God that all those things that
are achieved by the King of Spa^ne, against the Queens Majesty, might take
none effect, and that all the treasons which are wrought may be discovered,
and that God would prolong the life of the Queens Majesty, as she deserves,
and her faithful subjects desire.

Edmund York, and Richard Williams.
NOt long after Lopez his treason, another like conspiracy was concluded at
Bruxells to murder the Queen, whereof Stephano Ibarra, the King of Spaines
Secretary* procuring the some to be done by the said York and Williams, and
others: and Hugh Owen an English Rebel: a Spanish Pentioner, delivered unto
the said York an assignation in writing, subscribed by the said Secretary
Ibarra his hand, for assurance of payment of forty thousand crowns to be
given unto him from the King of Spain, if he would kill the Queen: or if he
would assist Richard Williams, or any other that should have performed the
same; and the assignation was delivered unto Holt a Jesuit, an old English
Rebel, who produced the Sacrament and kissed i^, and swear in the presence of
York and other Rebels, that he would surely pay the same Money unto him as
soon as the fact should be committed: and upon this matter were three several
consultations of Englishmen, being Rebels and Fugitives, and Pentioners of the
King of Spain. The names of the principal parties of the consultations, are,
William Stanley, the said Holt a Jesuit, Thomas Throgmorton, the said Hugh
Owen, Doctor Gifford, Doctor Worthington, Charles Paget, one Tipping, Edward
Garret, and Michaell Moody, but b^ Gods good providence, the said York and
Williams were taken coming into England, and confessed the whole matter as
aforesaid. Holt said to York, many Englishmen have failed to perform this
enterprise, but if it should not be performed by you, he would after employ
strangers in it.

Patricke Cullen an Irishman
HE was likewise a Pentioner of the King of Spain, and a Fencer: he was
persuaded by William Stanley, and one Jacques who was his Lieutenant, and one
Shirwood and the said Holt to come secretly into England, and to kill her
Majesty, and he assented thereunto, and had thirty pound of Stanley and Jacques
toward his journey, with offer of great reward; and coming into England, he
was taken, and by good proofs charged there with, he confessed the same in the
manner as is before here expressed.

Richard Hesketh.
He was a Gentleman of Lancashire, well acquainted with the Lord Strange? he
was sent into England by Cardinal Allen, William Stanley, and Thomas
Worthington to entice Ferdinand, the Lord Strange, son and heir to the Earl
of Darby, to take upon himself the title to be heir unto the crown of
England, and to show him the opinion of the Cardinal and many others, that he
should take upon him the title of King, with assurance of treasure and
foreign forces, to maintain the same, which the said Hesketh did very
diligently perform, with many reasons, as he was instructed, but the Lord
Strange being at Heskeths coming newly Earl of Darbie, by the death of his*
father, was so wise and dutiful, that he stayed Hesketh, who upon the Earls
report was apprehended, and confessed the whole matter, wheupon he was
condemned, and showed great repentance, and cursed his instructors, and was
executed.

SQVIRE.
THis Uiper Squire was likewise sent by the inticement of the aforesaid
Serpentine generation, beyond Sea, to kill her Majesty: his plot was to so
poison the pummell of her Saddle, that if she did lay her hand upon it, her
whole body should be therewith poisoned, but by the sure providence of God,
which ever did preserve her, and ^oreshew unto her* all her dangers, to the
prevention of them, this practice came to light before it was executed, and the
said Squire had the same most just reward of his foresaid treason, as his
predecessors in like plots had.

The Earl of Essex Conspiracy.
LAstly, I will conclude with the conspiracy of the late Earl of Essex: for
although it is not to be doubted but that his heart, with many of his
followers, was upright unto the Queen, yet notwithstanding he had many
Papists in the plot with him, whose hearts he knew not, and by whom, if his
practice had took effect, the Queen should have been in as great trouble and
danger as ever she was in her life; but the Lord of his accustomable wonderful
mercy, delivered her Majesty from this danger likewise, who both by his holy
spirit of comfort preserved her mind, still joyful without fear of her
enemies, and also her royal person and her realm, by the safe custody of his
holy Angels, from all wicked practices and treasons whatsoever, until her old
age, and until he at his time appointed called her Majesty unto himself, out
of her bed in peace, from a blessed Kingdom, wherein she had long reigned in
great glory in this world, to reign with his Son Jesus Christ in the
Kingdom of unspeakable and eternal joy and glory in the world to come.

By this story of Queen Elizabeth, the Papists that have any eie-sight of true
understanding, may see by what wicked means the Pope and their Catholic Church
has always gotten and maintained their most unlawful supremacy over kings.
And although they have wonderfully prevailed against all superstitious
Emperors and Kings, by such like excommunications* wars, murders, and
treasons as he used against Queen Elizabeth, yet as God preserved her heart
purely to s^icke to his sincere word, and to despise all the Popes errors,
superstitions, and trash, so God mercifully preserved her and her Kingdom from
all the Popes treacherous practices four and forty years, five months, and
odd days, with such glory and peace as never Christian King had more: her
manifest protections of God were as apparent and as manifest as David's; and as
he and Solomon builded a most glorious material Temple in despite of their
enemies, most gloriously did she build up the spiritual Temple and Spouse of
Christ, in despite of the Papists and the Pope, and all kings that took their
part: her outward glory and honor was ^quall with Salomons, and she
o^^matched him in that: neither her glory in this world, nor any other means
could withdraw her from her true zeal in setting for^h the pure word of God;
wherefore all honor and glory be given unto God by this Realm of England and
all his Church world without end. Amen.

OUR MOST GRACIOUS King IAME^.
WHen the Papists triumphing that their long ^xpected hour was come by Gods
taking away the most blessed Queen^ Elizabeth, yet the Lord of his great mercy
brought their joy to naught, by p^anting our dear Sovereign, James, by his
especial grace, to succeed Queen Elizabeth in these Realms, one that is as
zealous of the word of God as she, and one whom the Lord has been as
provident over in all his ways, as over her, and endued with the like joy in
the Holy Ghost, in the assurance of Gods providence in time of danger,
wherefore no doubt but as the Lord has, so he will cover him and his Realms
with the sh^dow of his wings from all papisticall treacheries, even as he did
Queen Elizabeth. This is worthy to be recorded unto the perpetual honor of
his Majesty, that he being h^ire apparent unto Qu^ene Elizabeth, could never
be enticed by any Prince or Papist, to oppose himself against her. When the
rising was in the North, and the rebels were ^led into Scotland, he took the
Queens part, though it were to the great ruin of much of his Kingdom: he made
a Proclamation in Anno 1588. that none of the ^pan^sh Fleet should land upon
his coasts, but that the English should be relieved of any thing they needed,
and in the year 1592. he executed as traitors in Scotland, diverse for
conspiring with the King of Spain against England* and before the coming out
of the Spanish Fleet Don Barnardin Mendoza in an open Assembly did say in a
(...) that the young King of Scots, whom he called a boy, had deceived the
King of Spain, but if the Kings Navy might prosper against England, the King
of Scots should lose his crown, whereby it manifestly appears how true and
faithful his Majesty was ^u^r unto the late Queen of famous memory.

Touching GODS wonderful preseruations over his royal person; who has safely
preserved him a King almost this eight and forty years, in despite of all his
enemies, foreign and domestical, and no doubt but he^ had many, ye^ it does
most manifestly appear in some great and unheard of dangers, out of which the
Lord has most miraculously delivered him, as from Gowries Treason and the
Gunpowder Treason, and others.

GOWRIES conspiracy against his Majesty the fifth of August, being Tuesday
Anno Dom. 1600.
MA^^. Alexander Ruthwen, second brother unto the late Earl Gowrie, came to
his Majesty as he was a hunting, and told him that it chanced the night
before, as he walked about the Town of S. Iohnstone, he met a base fellow
unknown unto him, and having suspicion of him he narrowly looked to him, and
examined him, and he said he found a great wide pot to be under his arm, full
of coined gold in great quantity, whereupon he took him, no body knowing
thereof, and bound him in a privy dark house, and locked many doors upon
him, and said that he came in haste to advertise his Majesty thereof according
to his bounden duty, earnestly requesting his Majesty with all diligence and
^ecrecie to take order therewith before any know thereof, swearing that he had
concealed it from all men, yea, from the Earl his brother; whereupon the King
suspected that it had been some foreign gold, brought thither by some
Jesuits for practicing Papists to stir up some new sedition, as they had
often (...) before, and that the fellow that carried it was some Seminary, so
disguised for the more sure transporting thereof: and with many earnest
persuasions he got the Kings Majesty as soon as he had done hunting, to ride
with him to the Earl Gowr^es house to dinner, with a very small number with
him, and after dinner his Majesty being ready to rise from the table, and all
his servants in the hall at their dinner, M. Alexander standing behind his
Majesty's back, pulled him softly, rounding in his Majesty's ear, that it was
time to go, but that he would fain^ have been quit of the Earl his brother,
wishing the K. to send him out into the hall, to entertain his guests,
whereupon the K. called for drink, and in a m^rrie and homely manner said to
the ^arle, That although the Earl had seen the fashion of entertainment in
other countries, yet he would teach him the Scottish fashion, seeing he was a
Scottish man: and therefore since he had forgotten to drink to his Majesty, or
sit with his guests, and entertayne them, his majesty would drink to him his
own welcome, desiring him to take it forth and drink to the rest of the company,
and in his Majesty's name to make them welcome. Whereupon as he went forth his
Majesty rose from the table, and desired M. Alexander to bring Sir Thomas
Erskine with him: who desiring the K. to go forward with him, and promising
that he should make any one or two follow him that he pleased to call for,
desiring his Majesty to command publicly that none should follow him. Thus
the K. accompanied only with the said M. Alexander, comes forth of the chamber,
passe^h through the end of the hall, where the Noblemen and his Majesty's
servants were sitting at their dinner, up a Turnepeck, and through three or
four Chambers, the said Master Alexander ever locking behind him every door
as he passed: and then with a more smiling countenance than he had all the day
before, ever saying he had him sure and safe en^ugh kept, until at the last,
his Majesty passi^g through three or four sundry houses, and all the doors
locked behind him, his Majesty entered into a little study, where he saw
standing with a very abased countenance, not a bondman but a free man, with a
dagger at his girdle: but his Majesty had no sooner entered into that little
study, and Master Alexander with him, but Master Alexander locked to the study
door behind him, and at that instant changing his countenance, putting his
hat on his head, and drawing the Dagger from that other man's gird^e, held the
point of it to the Kings breast, auowing now that the King be hoou^d to be in
his will* and used as he list: swearing many bloody oths, that if the king
cried one word, or opened a window to look out, that the dagger should
presently go to his heart: affirming, that he was sure, that now the kings
conscience was burdened for murdering his father. His Maie^^y wondering at so
sudden an alteration, and standing naked, without any kind of armor but his
hunting horn, which he had not g^^ten leisure to lay from him, betwixt these
two traitors which had conspired his life: the said master Alexander standing
(as is said) with a dagger in his hand, and his sword at his side, but the
other trembling and quaking, rather like ^ne condemned, than an executioner of
such an enterprise.

His Majesty begun then to ^ilate to the said M. Alexander, how horrible a
thing it was for him to meddle with his Majesty's innocent blood, assuring him
it would not be left unrevenged, since God had given him children and good
subjects, and if they neither, yet God would raise up stocks and st^nes to
punish so vile a deed.

Protesting before God, that he had no burden in his conscience, for the
execution of his father, both in respect that at ^he ti^e of his fathers
execution, his Majesty was but a minor of age, and guided at that time by a
faction, which ouer-ruled both his Majesty and the rest of the country, as
also that whatsoever was done to his father it was done by the ordinary course
of Law and justice.

Appealing the said Master Alexander upon his conscience, how w^ll he all
times since had deserved at the hands of all his race, not only having
restored them to their lands and dignities, but also in now ishi^g and bringing
up of two or three of his sisters, as it were in his own bos^me, by a
continual attendance upon his Majesty's dearest bedfellow in her ^riuie
chamber.

Laying also before him the terrors of his conscience, especially that he made
profession, according to his education, of the same religion which his Majesty
had ever professed; and namely his Majesty r^membred him of that holy man Mast.
Robert Rollocke, whose scholar he was, assuring him that one day the said
Master Roberts soul would accuse him, that he had never learned of him to
practice such unnatural cruelty: his Majesty promising to him, on the word of a
Prince, that if he would spare his life, an^ suffer him to go out again, he
would never reveal to any one living what was betwixt them at that t^me, nor
never suffer him to in^ur any harm or punishment for the same.

But his Majesty's fear was, that he could hope ^or no sparing at his hands,
having such cruelty in his looks, and standing so irreuerently covered, with
his ^at on: which form of rigorous behavior, could prognosticate nothing to
his Majesty but present extremity. But at his Majesty's perswasiue language, he
appeared to be somewhat amazed, and uncovering his head again* swore and
protested that his Majesty's life should be safe, if he would behave himself
quietly, without making any noise: and that he would only bring in the Earl his
Brother to speak with his Majesty: whereupon his Majesty enquiring what the
Earl would do with him, since (if his Majesty's life were safe according to
promise) they could gain little in keeping such a prisoner. His answer only
was, that he could tell his Majesty no more, but that his life should be safe,
in case he behaved himself quietly, the rest, the Earl his brother, whom he
was going for, would tell his Majesty at his coming. With that, as he was
going forth for hi^ brother, as he affirmed, he turned him about to the other
man; saying these words unto him, I make you here the Kings keeper, tul I come
back again, and see that you keep him, upon your own peril: and
therewithal said to his Majesty, you must content your self to have this man
now your keeper, until my coming back.

With these words he passes forth* locking the door after him, leaving his
Majesty with that man he found there before. Of whom his Majesty then enquired,
if he were appointed to be the murderer of him at that time, and how far he
was upon the ^o^nsel of that conspiracy, whose answer with a trembling and
astonished voice and behavior, was, that as the Lord should ^^dge him, he was
never made acquainted with that purpose, but that he was put in there perforce,
and the door locked upon him, a little space before his Majesty's coming: as
indeed all the time of the said M. Alexanders menacing his majesty, he was
ever trembling, requesting him for Gods sake, and with many other attestations,
not to meddle with his majesty, nor to do him any harm. But because M.
Alexander had before his going forth, made the King swear he should not cry,
nor open any window, his majesty commanded the said fellow to open the window
on his right hand, which he readily did, so that although he was put in there
to use violence on the King, yet God so turned his heart, as he became a slave
to his prisoner.

While his majesty was in this dangerous estate, and none of his own servants
nor ^raine knowing where he was, and as his Majesty's train was arising in the
Hal from their dinner, the Earl of Gowry being present with them, one of the E.
of Gowries servants comes hastily in, assuring the Earl his master, that his
majesty was horsed, and away through the Insh, which the Earl reporting to the
Noble men, and the rest of his Majesty's train that was there present, they
all rushed out together at the gate in great have: and some of his majesty's
servants enquiring of the Porter when his majesty went forth? The porter
affirmed, that the king was not yet gone forth? Whereupon ^he Earl looked very
angerly upon him, and said he was but a liar: yet turning him to the Duke, and
to the Earl of Mar, said he should presently get them sure word where his
Majesty was, and with that, ran through the close, and up the stairs. But his
purpose indeed was, to speak with his brother, as appeared very well by the
circumstance of time, his brother having at that same instant left the king in
the little study, and ran down the stairs in great haste.

Immediately after, the Earl comes back, ^unning again to the gate, where
the Noblem^n and the rest, were standing in a maze, assuring them that the king
was gone long since out at the back gate, and if they hasted them not the
sooner, they would not overtake him, and with that called for his horse,
whereat they rusht all together out at the gate, and made toward the Inshe,
crying all for their horses: passing all (as it was the providence of God)
under one of the windows of that study, wherein his majesty was. To whom M.
Alexander very speedily returned, and at his in coming to his Majesty, casting
his hands abroad in a desperate manner, said, he could not mend it, his
Majesty behooued to die: and with that, offered a garter to bind his Majesty's
hands, with swearing, he behooued to be bound. His majesty at that word of
binding, said, he was borne a free King, and should die a free King. Whereupon
he griping his Majesty by the wrest of the hand, to have bound him, his Majesty
relieved himself suddenly of his gripes: whereupon as he put his right hand to
his sword, his majesty with his right hand seized upon both his hand and his
sword, and with his left hand clasped him by the throat, like as he with the
left hand claspt the King by the throat, with two or three of his fingers in
his Majesty's mo^th, to have stayed him from crying. In this manner of
wrestling his Majesty perforce drew him to the window, which he had caused the
other man before to open unto him, and under the which was passing by at the
same time the Kings train, and the Earl of Gowry with them, as is said, and
holding out the right side of his head and right elbow, cried, that they were
murdering him there in that treasonable form: whose voice being instantly
heard and known by the Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Mar, and the rest of his
majesty's train there: the said Earl at Gowry ever asking what it meant? and
never seeming any ways to have seen his Majesty, or heard his voice, they all
rushed in at the gate together, the Duke and the Earl of Mar running about to
come to that passage his Majesty came in at. But the Earl of Gowry and his
servants made them for another way up a quiet Turnepeck, which was ^uer
condemned before, and was only then left open, (as appeared) for that purpose.

And in this mean time, his Majesty, withstrugling and wrestling with the said
M. Alexander, had brought him perforce out of that study, the door whereof, for
have, he had left open at his last in-comming, and his Majesty having gotten,
(with long struggling) the said* M. Alexanders head under his arm, and himself
on his knees, his master dro^e him back perforce hard to the door of the some
Turne-pike, and as his majesty was throwing his sword out of his hand, thinking
to have stricken him therewith, and then to have shot him over the stairs, the
other fellow standing behind the kings back, and doing nothing but trembling
all the time, Sir Io: Ramsey, not knowing what way first to enter, after he had
heard the Kings cry, by chance finds that Turn-peck door open, and following
it up to the head, enters in into the chamber, and finds his majesty and M.
Alexander struggling in that form, as is before said: and after he had twice or
thrice stricken M. Alexander with his dagger, the other man withdrew himself,
his Majesty still keeping his gripes, and holding him close to him: immediately
thereafter he took the said M. Alexander by the sholders, and shut him down
the staire: who was no sooner shut out at the door, but he was met by Sir
Thomas Erskine and Sir Hew Hereis, who there upon the staire ended him: the
said Sir ^ho: Erskine being cast behind the Duke and the Earl of Mar that ran
about the other way, by the occasion of his meddling with the said late Earl in
the street, after the hearing of his majesty's, cry. For upon the hearing
thereof* he had clasped y^ Earl of Gowry by the gorget, and casting him under
his feet, and wanting a dagger to have stricken him with, the said Earls men
rid the Earl their master out of h^s hands: whereby he was cast behind the
rest, as is said: and missing the company, and hearing the said Sir John
Ramseys voice upon the Turn-peck head, ran up to the said chamber, and cried
upon the said Sir Hew Hereis and another servant to follow him: where, meeting
with the said M. Alexander in the Turn-peck, he ended him there, as is said the
said M. Alexander crying for his last words, Alas I had not the weight of it.
But no sooner could the said Sir Thomas, Sir Hew, and another servant win into
the Chamber where his majesty was, but that the said Earl of Gowry, before
they could get the door shut, followed them in at the back, having cast him
directly to come up that privy passage, as is before said: who at his first
entry, having a drawn sword in eue^y hand, and a steel bonet on his head,
accom^anied with seven of his servants, every one of them having in like manner
a drawn sword, cried out with a great oath, that they should al die as
traitors. All the which time his majesty was still in his chamber, who seeing
the Earl of Gowry come in with his swords in his hands, sought for M.
Alexanders sword which had fallen from him at his out shutting at the door,
having no sort of weapons of his own, as it is said ^ but then was ^hut back by
his own servants that were there, into (...) little study, and the door shut
upon him: who having put his majesty in safe^y, re-encountred the said Earl
and his servants, his majesty's servants being only in number ^^ure, to wit,
Sir Hugh Hereis, and Sir John Ramsey, and one Wilson, a servant of James
Erskins, a brother of the said sir Thomas, the said E. having 7. of his own
servants with him: Yet it pleased God, after many strokes on all hands, to give
his majesty's servants the victory, the said E. of Gowry being stricken dead
with a stroke through y^ heart, which the said sir Io: Ramsey gave him, without
once crying upon God, and the rest of his servants dung over the stairs with
many hurts, as ^n like manner y^ said sir Tho: Erskin, (...) Hugh Hereis, and
sir John Ramsey, were all thr^^ very sore hurt and wounded.

But all the time of this ^ight, the D. of L^nnox, the Earl of Mar, and the rest
of his Maie^ties train, ^ere striking with great hammer^ at the utter door,
wh^rby his majesty pa^^t up to the chamber with the said M. Alexander which
also he had locked in his by-comming with his majesty to the chamber: but by
reason of the strength of the said double door, ^he whole wall being likewise
of boords, and yielding with the strokes^ it did bide the^ (...) space of half
an hour and more, before they could break it ^ hau^ entre^^e: who (...) with
his majesty, found (beyond their expectation) his Majesty delivered from so
imminent a peril, and the said late Earl the principal conspirator lying
dead at his Majesty's ^eet. Immediately thereafter his majesty kneeling down on
his knees, in the midst of his own servants, and they all kneeling round
about him: his majesty out of his own mouth thanked God of that miraculous
deliverance and victory, assuring himself, that God has preserved him from so
dispai^ed a peril, for the perfecting of some greater work behind, to his
glory, and for procuring by him the weal of his people, y^ God had committed
to his charge.

In the first beginning of the Kings Majesty's reign over England, William
Watson, and William Clarke Seminary Priests, and George Brook, brother unto
the Lo: Cobham, had most traitorously devised a plot, whereby the Kings person
should have been surprised, and the whole kingdom overthrown, and they had
entised to the embracing their traiterous Machinations: Anthony Copley
Gentleman: Sir Griffin Markam Knight, the Lord Cobham,* the Lord Gray. Sir
Walter Rawleigh, and others: But before they had brought their Conspiracies
unto ^ffect: the Lord of his accust^med goodness, and carefulnes over his
Majesty made all their Conspiracies apparent unto the King and his Council,
and about the midst of July, in the first year of his Highness reign,
proclamations were made out for the apprehension of them, whereby they were
taken, and in Nou^mber after they were all condemned of High Treason: and the
nine and twenty day of November, the two Priests were executed: and sir days
after George Brook was ^eheaded, and the ninth of December Sir Griffin Markam,
and the Lord Cobham, and the Lord Gray, after they had been severally brought
upon the scaffold, in the Castle of Winchester, and had made their Confessions,
and prepared themselves likewise severally to die, upon the sudden, the Kings
warrant written with his own hand, was there delivered unto Sir Benjamin
Tichborne, high Sheriff of Hampshire, commanding him to stay execution: these
three and Sir Water Rawleigh, were returned pri^oners unto the Tower, the
fifteenth of December.

The Gunpowder Treason.
THomas Pearcy, Robert Catesby, Thomas Winter and others in the last year of
the reign of Q. Elizabeth, by the in^^igation of certain Jesuits, practiced
with the King of Spain, to send a well ^urnished Army upon England, promising
him great aid to entertain them at their arrival at Milford Haven, and to
that purpose the King promised to (...) them fif^y thousand pound for leuying
of horse and foot, and preparation of Munition in England to second them: but
whilst this was in a manner concluded, Q. Elizabeth dyed, and the King of
Spain upon certain knowledge that K. James was established, dispatch^d his
Ambassadors and Commissioners for England, ^or confirmation of a lasting Peace
between them, yet nevertheless the said Rob. Catesby sent Tho: Winter again
to the King of Spain to resolicite their former project, but the King answered
him, your old Queens is dead with whom I had wars, and you have a new King with
whom I have ever bin in good peace and amity, and for continuance thereof, I
have sent my special Commissioners, and until I see what will become thereof,
I will not hearken unto any other course whatsoever. When Winter returned, and
made this known unto Catesby, Pearcy and the rest, then they began to cast
about what they might do of themselves to advance the Romance Catholic
Religion, but first they would see the event of the first Parliament, if that
would mittigate any former Laws, and try what good the Conclusion of Peace
with Spain would do unto them before they attempted any further: but when
they perceived that neither Parliament, nor public Peace sorted in any part to
their desire, and that the Peace concluded was rather a more ready means for
the Law to proceed against them then otherwise, because the Peace concerned
only the Amity of Christian Princes, for the general good of Christendom,
without any particular or private respect: then Catesby told the rest, he had a
device in his head that should free them, and the rest of the English
Catholics from their oppressions, and when he had found out ^it Ministers for
execution of his device, after they had taken oath and Sacrament for secrecy,
he told them he had devised the mean to undermine and blow up the Parliament
house, at the instant when the King, Queen, Prince, Peers, and Commons were
all assembled, which project they presently embraced, and forthwith Pearcy
hired certain lodgings close to the Parliament house: and then they appointed
Miners, who with great difficulty dug and undermined a part of the wall,
but after a while they understood that the Ua^t right under the Parliament
house was to be let to hyre, then Guydo Fawkes went and hired it: this Fawkes
was late a Soldier in Flanders, and for this purpose was sent for, who by
consent of the rest changed his nam^, and was called John Johnson Master
Pearcies man: after they had hired the Uaut* the^ secretly conuayed into it
thirty and sir barrels of powder, and covered them all over with Billets and
Faggots.

about ten days before the Parliam^nt should begin, an unknown party in the
Evening met a servant of the Lord Mounteagles in the stre^t, and delivered him
a Letter, charging him speedily to give it unto his Lord, which he did: when
his Lord had read it, and observed the dangerous c^ntents, with a special
caveat, not to appear the first day of Parliament, he was amazed, and
forthwith delivered it to the Earl of Salisbury the Kings Principal
Secretary* a chief Counselor of Estate: when the Earl had iudiciously
observed the strange Phrase and Tenor thereof, with the terrible threats
therein against the whole State, he acquainted the Lord Chamberlain therewith,
and then they c^nioined unto them the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester
and Northampton, who instantly consulted what was fittest to be done, omitting
neither time, diligence or industry, all which no^withstanding, they could not
as yet find out the depth of this mystery, and were therefore much troubled
in mind, because the appointed day of parliament drew near, which was Tuesday
the 5. of November: upon the Saturday before, the King being returned from
hunting, the said Lords acquainted his Highness with what had past, and when
his Majesty had well noted the strange contents of the Letter, which purported
the sudden ruin of the State, the King said notwithstanding the small respect
and slight regard which might be given to Libels scattered abroad yet th^s was
more quick and pithy then was usual in Libels, and willed them to search in
all places, as well not daily frequented, as of usual repair* and concerning
any foreign disturbance or invasion, he well kn^w the present force and
preparation of all Christian Princes, and that whatsoever practice of trea^on
was now in hand, it must be per^ormed in some unsuspected place, and by some
hom^-bred traitors: thereupon new search was made in all places about the Court
and the Parliament house, but could not as yet find any thing worthy their
labors: all which ^earch^s were performed with such silence and discretion, as
there rose no manner of suspicion, either in Court or City* the Lord
Chamberlain, whose office it most concerned, never rested day nor night, and
the night before the Parliament, as Sir Thomas Kneuet with others scowted about
the parliament house, espied a fellow standing in a corner very suspitiou^ly,
and asked him his name, what he was, and what he did there so late, who
answered very bluntly hi^ name was John Johnson Master Pearcies man and keeper
of his lodg^ings. Sir ^homas Kneuet continued still his search in all places
thereabouts, and returning thither again* found him lingering there still,
searched him, and found under his cloak a close Lantern, and a burning Candle
in it: and about him other signs of suspicion, that he stood not there for
any good: then the Knight entered the Ua^^, where they found the powder covered
with Billets and Fagots as aforesaid, and then the Lord Chamberlain caused
the Traitor to be bound, and being now about three a clock in the morning ^ee
went unto the King, and with exceeding gladness told his Majesty the Treason
was discovered and prevented, and the Traitor in hold, the King desired to see
Fawkes, who when he came before the King used like traiterous and audacious
speeches, as he did at his first apprehension, affirming himself was the
only man to perform the Treason, saying, it sore vexed him that the deed was
not done, and for that time would not confess any thing touching the rest of
the Conspirators, but that himself only and alone was the contriuer and
practiser of this Treason.

Between five and six a clock in the morning the Council gave order to the
Lord Mayor of London to look to the City, and in very calm manner to set
civil watch at the City gates, signifying therewithal that there was a plot
of Treason discovered, and that the King would not go to Parliament that day:
and the same day in the afternoon, the manner of the Treason was by
Proclamation made known unto the people, for joy whereof, there was that night
as many bonsires in and about London as the streets could permit, and the
people gave humble and hearty thanks unto almighty God for their King and
Countries right blessed escape.

Within three days after two other proclamations were made, signifying unto
the people who were the chief conspirators, with commandment to apprehend
Pearcy and Catesby, and to take them alive if it were possible, which said
Pearcy and Catsby were gone to Holbach in Warwickshire to meet Winter* Gaunt,
and others: where under pretense of a great hunting* they meant to raise the
country, and surprise the Lady Elizabeth from the L. Harington, whom they meant
to proclaim Queens, and in whose name they meant to enter into Arms, being
persuaded that the King, the Prince, and Duke of York were by that time blown
up in the Parliament house: but when they knew their treason was known and
prevented, and saw the Kings forces round about the house, so as they could not
escape, Pearcy and Catesby very desperately issued forth, and fighting back to
back were both slain with one Musket shot.

Saturday the ninth of November the King went to Parliament, where in the
presence of the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of York, the Ambassadors of the
King of Spain, and the Archduke, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons of the same, he made a very solemn oration, manifesting the whole
complot of this Treason.

The 27. of January at Westminster were arraigned, Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes,
Robert Keys and Thomas Bates for plotting to blow up the Parliament house,
digging in the mine, taking oath and Sacrament for secrecy, etc. and Robert
Winter, John Grant, Ambrose Rookewood, for being acquainted with the treason
afterward, giving their full consent thereunto, and taking oath and Sacrament
for secrecy, and sir Euer^^d Digby for being made acquainted with the said
Treason, yielding assent, and taking his corporal oath for secrecy: all which
inditements were proved against them, and by themselves confessed, and
thereupon had judgment given them to be drawn, hanged and quartered, their
limbs to be set upon the City gates, and their heads upon the Bridge:
according to which sentence the thirtieth of January, Sir Euerard Digby, Robert
Winter, John Grant and Bates were executed at the West end of Paul's Church,
and the next day after the other four were executed in the Parliament yard,
six of the eight, acknowledged their guiltiness in this horrible treason, and
dyed very penitently, but Grant and Keys did not so.

Out of these and many other destructions, the Lord of his abundant mercy
has delivered his most faithful Servant, and our dread Sovereign King James:
and still will preserve him according to his promise, so long as he puts his
trust in him: and it is not to be doubted, but God having given him the Spirit
of confidence in him, and also fortified and builded up this his hope and trust
by the experience of ennumerable preseruations of his person and Stat^e and
such ones as could be attributed to no means, but only to Gods handy works:
Nay, I will conclude by the warrant of Gods word, that it is impossible for the
Devil by any temptation in the world to steal this heavenly treasure out of
his Royal heart, no more then he could steal it out of Job his heart: for
although from them that have not the true grace of God, that which they have
shall be taken from them: yet according to Christ's promise, which is truth it
self, he that has truly Gods Spirit, be it in never so little manner, more
shall be given him, and that which he has shall never be taken from him.

And touching these blessed Realms of Great Britain and Ireland, over which
the Lord has appointed him supreme head next under his Son Jesus Christ over
all causes spiritual and temporal, being that he maintains and defends
the very same Doctrines, and no other, which Christ, the Apostles, and the
Pri^^itiue Church taught: as the Lord has most wonderfully blessed and
p^ospered them by the hands of Queen Elizabeth, and his Majesty, this many
years, so undoubtedly his wings of most safe preservation shall be still over
this realm so long as no Idolatry is in Israel. I mean maintained by the
Laws of the Realm: For though there be many Idolatrous Papists, yet the Law
is against them, and though there be many sins and wickednesses in England,
yet the Laws of the Realm are most strict against them: therefore the Realm
is holy and righteous, because the laws be holy and righteous, and although
there be abundance of wicked and abominable people in this Realm yet there
be as many both holy and righteous men and women as ever were in them:
Therefore certainly the LORD will not destroy or plague this Realm for their
sakes that be wicked and profane i^ them, but most surely still bless and
preserve them for their sakes that be righteous and holy therein, as hitherto
he has done: wherefore unto him be all honor, praise, glory, power and
Dominion of all the inhabitants of this Realm, and of all his Church world
without end.

The last but not the least use of these precedent Stories is therein
diligently to mark the unspeakable cruelty, tyranny, and most subtle and
wicked practices of Papists in many ages before Queen Mary, but then it was at
the height and then papists showed their hearts truly without dissimulation,
and from them have come all the treacherous practices against Queen Elizabeth,
and all the treacherous practices against our dread Sovereign K. James: only
Gowries treason excepted, but they never devised a more ungodly and inhumane
tragedy, most abominable to God, and odious in the judgment of all men, as
their most devilish practice to blow up the Parliament house with Gunpowder,
to the destruction of his Majesty, his Queen, and all his Royal issue: with
all the Nobility, Bishops, Judges, and chief of the Commons of this Realm,
with many thousands besides, to the utter undoing of this most noble Kingdom.

Their cruelty in Spain.
LIkewise of this their cruelty which no tongue is able to express sufficient
testimony would appear by the most cruel murders upon Gods Saints committed
from time to time in innumerable abundance both upon our country men, there own
and others, by the most devilish and cruel inquisito^s of the Spaniards, but
these serpents are become so wise and subtle that there is no certain record
to be found in any writer of their doings therein, since the book of Martyrs,
but for all their subtilty they cannot hide it from Christ Jesus, at the day of
Judgment,

The cruel practices of the Papists in France.
LIkewise there hel^ish cruelty has been declared in no place in the world, so
plainly as it has been in France, by the innumerable massacres, and murders
of Gods Saints, that they have there committed. I will only recite one
massacre, and the death of their two last Kings of France, for by these and
other such like crueltyes already declared out of the Book of Martyrs, it is
easily seen that they are the Brothers of Caine, and Children of the Devil.

In the year one thousand five hundred seauenty two, the Duke of Guise by the
advice of the French King Charles the ninth, came with a great company of
Soldiers at midnight into the streets of Paris, to massacre the Protestants:
the mark of the Executioners should be a hankercheefe tied about their Arms
with a white Cross in their Hats, and the Palace Bell ringing at the break
of the day, should give the Signal: they began by knocking at the Admirals
Gate, who was a Protestant, they stabbed him that came to open the Gate, then
they entered the Admirals Chamber: one thrust him through the body, and strikes
him on the head; another shot him thorough with a Pistol, another wounded him
in the legs, and every one of them give him a blow: then the Duke of Guise
commanded them to cast him to him out of the Widow, then the Duke spurned him
with his foot, and going into the street, said; Courage Companions, we have
begun happily, let us proceed to the rest, the King commands it. One
carried the Admiralls head unto the King, and Queen his Mother, who sent it
imbalmed unto the Pope, and the Cardinal of Lorraine: for assurance of the
death of their Capital enemy, one cut off his head, another his privy members,
and three days they dragged his carkase with all indignity thorough the
streets, then they hanged it up by the feet.

They murdered all his Servants and Gentlemen in his quarter, with like fury
they murdered all the other Protestants throughout the City and Subburbs, of
all ages, conditions, and Sexes, Men, Women, and Children, rich and poor.
There was heard in Paris a lamentable cry of people going unto death, a
pitiful complaint of such as cried for mercy: the street were strewed with
carkases, the pauements, market place, and river, was died with blood: they
destroyed that day above ten thousand of innocent Protestants.

Henry the Third.
HENRY the third King of France, The History of France*
of the house of Valois, a mild and tractable Prince: courteous, witty,
eloquent, and grave, but of easy access; devout, John Serres, and Edw:
Gimston. Anno 1588.
loving, learning, advancing good wits, a bountiful rewarder of men of merit,
a friend to peace, and a Prince who deserved to be placed amongst the worthiest
of that Monarchy: was traitorously murdered by a deuillish Monk on this manner.

When as the Suisses and Lansquenets of Sansie, and Pontoise were by force
reduced to the Kings obedience: The Duke of Longuevill gathered an Army of
twenty thousand men and joined with them. Whereupon the Kings forces being
about forty thousand men, lodged about Paris, and took Saint Cloud, and made
the Parisians ready to yield; Whereat the Popish Monks and Priests of that
City were so much displeased, that they vowed revenge thereof. And one James
Clement, a Monk, an excrament of hell, a Iacobine by profession, of the age of
twenty two or twenty three years old, vows to kill the Tyrant, and to deliver
the City besiedged.

This damnable project he imparts to Doctor Bourg^ing, Prior of his Covent, to
Father Commolet, and other Jesuits, and to the heads of the League, to the
chief of the sixeteene, and to the forty Counselors at Paris. All encourage
him to do this happy design: they promise him Abbaies and Byshopprickes, and
if he chance to be made a Martyr, no less then a place in heaven above the
Apostles.

They caused the Preachers to persuade the people to patience seven or eight
days, for before the end of the week they should see a notable accident,
which should set all the people at liberty. The Priests of Orleance, Rouan and
Amiens, clatter out the like at the same time, and in the same terms.

The first of August the Monk goes out of Paris toward Saint Cloud: upon his
departure, they take above two hundred of the chief Citizens and others
Prisoners, whom they knew to have goods, friends, and credit with the Kings
party, as a precaution to redeem that cursed murderer, in case he were taken
before or after the deed. In his way he was taken by the Regiment of Coublan,
which was then in guard, telling them that he went then unto his Majesty, to
let him understand something which concerned his service. Coublan caused him to
be conducted by two Souldionrs unto the Kings quarter, which was at Saint
Cloud, commanding him that (if happily the King were not there) they should
b^ing him to some one of the Counsel: Whom the Monk gives to understand, that
the first President, and other of the Kings Servants had sent him, to
advertise him, that there is a good number of Partisans at Paris, who if it
please his Majesty to give them a day and hour, will keep him a Port open.
And to purchase the more credit unto his words, he shows a certain Paper
written in Italian Characters, the which he said was a Letter of credit from
the first President, accompanied with a Pasport from the Garle of Brienne,
signed Charles Leuxemburge; and faines that he had obtained it to go out of
Paris under color of going to Orleance, and that he had many private
instructions which he might not deliver but to his Majesty alone.

The King being advertised by La Guesle, the Proctour General, commands he
should be brought the next day, but he is examined first by Portaile.

The next day, being come to the Kings lodging, they were called by Du Iotall,
the first Gr^ome of his Chamber. At the first La Gues^e caused the Iacobin to
stay near the door, and taking his Papers, he presents them unto his
Majesty, who having read them, commands the Iacobin should approach, whom he
asked what he would say, to whom he answered; That it was a secret thing.
Some distrust made La Guesle to speak, being betwixt the King and him. Speak
aloud (said he, twice or thrice) there is not any one here but the King
trusts.

His Majesty seeing him make diff^cultie to speak, commands him again to
approach.

The Baron of Bellegard, Master of the Kings Horse, and La Guesle (who were
alone in the Chamber) retired two or three paces. The King bends his ear, but
instead of hearing what he expected, this wretch draws a Knife out of his
sleeue, made of purpose, thrusts his Majesty into the bottom of the belly,
and there leaves the Knife in the wound. The King draws it forth, and with
some striving and struggling of the Monk, strikes him above the eye: many ran
in at this noise, and in the heat of choler, killing this vile and cruel
Monster of men, prevented the true discovery and finding out of this
enterprise, and the authors and actors thereof, worthy to be noted with a
perpetual blot of disloyalty and treason.

The Physicians held that the wound was curable: and the same day the King did
write of this attempt, and of his hope of recovery, to the Governors of
Provinces, to foreign Princes, and to his Friends and confederats. But
feeling that the King of Kings had otherwise determined of his life, he did
first comfort himself in foreseeing, that the last hours of his crosses,
should be the first of his felicities. Then lamenting his good and faithful
Servants, who suruiuing should find no respect with those, whose minds had
been so abandoned to mischief, as neither the fear of God, nor the dignity
of his person could dissuade them from this horrible sacrilege.

One thing (said he) does comfort me, that I read in your faces, with the
grief of your hearts, and the sorrow of your souls, a godly and commendable
resolution, to contiu^e united, for the preservation of that which remains
whole of my estate, and the revenge which you owe unto the memory of him, who
has loved you so dearly. I seek not the last curiously, leaving the
punishment of mine enemies unto God. I have learned in this school to forgive
them, as I do with all my heart. But as I am cheefely bound to procure peace
and rest unto this realm, I conjure you all by that inviolable Faith which you
owe unto your Country, that you continue firm and constant defenders of the
Common liberty, and that you never lay down Arms, until you have purged the
Realm of the troubles of the public quiet. Thus and other such things he
spoke, as the last pangs of death carried him within few hours unto another
world.

By his death he extinguished the second parcel of the third Race of Capets, in
the branch of Valois, leaving the Crown to the third Royal branch of Burbons:
whereunto the order of the Fundamental Law did lawfully call him. And thus you
may see the damnable proiects and dissignes of these Jesuitical Popish
Spirits, against the Lord and his anointed.

The death of Henry the fourth.
HENRY the fourth King of France, John de Serres in the French History.
of the Royal Race of the Burbons, who for his famous rescues and victories,
and martial exploits, had purchased unto himself amongst his own Subjects,
the sur-name of Great, whose life and actions, Ed: Grimston. An: Christi. 1589.
future ages may read with admiration, was likewise traitorously murdered by
the disloyal and ungodly practices of the Papists.

A Parliament being holden at Paris, haning disanulled the Bulls of Cardinal
Caietans Legation, and other Bulls come from Rome the first of March, together
with their proceedings, excommunications, and fulminations, made by Marcellin
Landriano, tearming himself the Popes Nuntio: The said Bulls, and all their
proceedings an edicts being burnt in the Market place, which contained a pardon
of that most cruel paracide on Henry the third lately murdered: the King was
first therefore excommunicated by Pope Gregory the 4. of that name. Afterward
the Jesuits understanding that the King did purpose something against them, for
the cruel murder committed on the person of the late King, and for other their
exorbitant and deuillish practices daily intended and contrived, the Devil
stirs up another of his dearly beloved Sons to murder his Majesty on this
manner following.

On Friday, the day after the Queens Coronation, the King being advertised of
some omninous prediction, he went into his Chamber and fell on his knees and
prayed: and thus he did three times, in the end he went and walked in the
Gallery until dinner time. After dinner many Noblemen came into his Chamber,
and began to tell some tales to put him out of his melancholy humor, and to
make him laugh: having ^miled a little with the rest (being by nature of a
pleasant disposition) in the end he said: We have laughed enough for Friday, we
may well weep on Sunday.

Hereupon he sent to the Arcenall at four of the clock; whereupon, they say
that the Duke of Uendosme told him that he had been warned to beware of the
foureteenth day; yet making no account thereof, he went down into the Court,
whereas a man of a mean condition detained him a quarter of an hour, then he
went into his Caroch, by the Duke of Espernon (who sat^ in the first place of
the Boot, upon the Kings right hand) Montbazon, the Marshall Lauardin, La
Force, and Praulin, being followed by two Foote-men, and one of his Guard on
horseback, having commanded Mounsier de Vitry, and the rest of his Guard to
stay behind.

Being betwixt the drawbridge and the poole, this miserable wretch, who
watched his opportunity, drew near unto the Caroch on the right side, thinking
his Majesty had been there; but seeing he was on the left hand, and hearing
them command the Coachman to go on, he went the nearest way by the narrow
lanes, and met with his Majesty in the street called Ferroneire, near unto S.
Innocents Church, where staying to make way for a Cart to pass, the King leaned
down on the one side toward Mounsier Esper^^on, pressing him to read a
letter without spectacles. The Duke of Montbazon turned toward them, and one
of the footmen was busy tying up his garter on the other side: so as this
monster had opportunity to stab the King into the left pa^, but the wound was
not great, whereupon crying out: O my God I am wounded, he gave him m^anes to
give him a second blow which was mortal, the knife entering between the fifth
and sixth rib, it cut asunder the vein leading unto the heart, and the wound was
so deep, as it entered into caua vena, the which was pierc^d, wherewith the
King did presently spit blood, losing all apprehension and knowledge, for any
thing they could perceive. They had great diff^culty to save the murderer from
killing presently, yet in the end he was conuaied to the house of Retz.

The King was carried back unto the Louure, upon the way they met with the
Dolphin, who went to take the air, but they caused him to return, and be
carried into the Queens Chamber. The King was laid upon a Couch in his
Cabinet, whereas presently after he gave up the Ghoast.

In that these Papisticall and traiterous attempts, took effect unto the
murdering of these two French Kings, when the Lord of his infinite goodness
still preserved Queen Elizabeth, and our now dread Sovereign King James from
so many, and from more dangerous practices: It may certainly be concluded, that
if they had no worse feared the Papists then they did, and put their trust in
God as well as they, and had according to their example purely purged their
Realms from Papistry, the sure providence of God would have been as sure
their Castle, strong hold, and defense, as it was to them and their Realms at
all times, and in all occasions and needs.

NOw by the especial Grace of God, and the assistance of his blessed Spirit, I
have sailed unto my expected Port, al laud and praise, and thanks therefore be
given, unto the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost: And I most heartily beseech
him, that this Book may beget in the Readers a true dislike of all ceremonies,
superstitions, and false Doctrines of Papistry, and to make them truly zealous
of Gods word and commandments. O Lord convert all Papists that belong unto
thee, and hasten according to thy promises to gather all Kings together to
destroy the Popedom: in the mean time, grant all Kings, Princes, and others
Grace, to beware of him, that he corrupt not the souls of them nor their
subieces, nor hurt their persons or estates.

And lastly, I beseech thee to gather together the number of thine elect, and
hasten thy coming to judgment, that thou ma^st take thy beloved Spouse from
the miseries of this World, unto thy eternal glory prepared for her: com Lord
Jesus come quickly.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table, containing the principal matters, and all the Martyrs
that suffered for the truth, from the Primitive Church to the end of Queen
Mary.
A
AGrippa cast into prison by Tyberius. page 2 Andrew, Peter's Brother crucified.
3 Anthia martyred. 5 Ant. Pius Edict in favor of the Christians. Ibid Attalus
burned on an Iron chair. 6 Aurelius favors the Christians. 9 Affairs of the
Church of England and Scotland, beginning with King Lucius. 19 Austin with
above forty Preachers, sent into England. 22 He goes in procession to
Canterbury. Ibid. Consecrated Arch-bishoppe in France, by the commandment of
Gregory. 23 He assembled the Bishops, charging them to preach the word of
God. Ibid He baptiseth 10000. in the River Swale on Christmas day. 24 His
death. Ibid. Abbaies erected. 29 Alfride oppressed by the Danes: his misery: he
makes Dunwolphus a Swineheard, By. of Winchester: he is comforted by Gods
providence, and ouercomes the Danes, causing them to be christened. 33 Adelstane
crowned King at Kingstone, forces the Britains to pay him tribute: sends his
Brother to Sea in an old Boat, builds Monasteries for the release of his sins.
35 Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, accuses Henry the first King of England,
to the Pope: he is turned out of his Bishopric and goods. 50 Anacletus Pope.
51 Arnulphus a Priest put to death, for preaching against the Avarice and
incontinency of the Clergy. 51 Adrian the fourth an Englishman, Pope. 52
Choakt with a fly. 54 Avarice of the Popish Prelates. 80 Amadeus Duke of Sauoy,
chosen Pope. 138 Abraham of Colchester burned for maintaining the truth. 142
Alexander the sixth poisons the Turks brother for 2000. Florins. 151
Abiurations in Henry the eight his time, referred to the Book at large. 126
Adulphus Clarbachus burned, for maintaining the truth at Colen. 170 Articles
against Cardinal Wolsey. 171 Andrew Hewit a Prentise burned, for maintaining
Fr^ths opinions. 183 Anne of Bullen, her charitable and good works. 184
Articles agreed upon in Parliament. 196 Abell hanged for the supremacy. 200
Anthony Pierson burned at Windsor. 201 Adam Damlip, his persecution and
martyrdom at Callis. 205 Anne Askew, her confession, condemnation, persecution
and martyrdom. 207. 208. Adam Wallace martired in Scotland, for holding the
mass to be Idolatry. 215 Altars in Churches pulled down. 226 Anne Potten burned
the next after Samuel, for professing the truth. 290 Anthony Burward of
Callice, for saying the Sacrament of the Altar was an Idol, burned at
Canterbury. 291 Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, his cruelty to M. Philpot and
his man. 311 Agnis South, about the Sacrament of Penance, condemned and burned.
314 Anne Albright for denying the realty in the Sacrament, condemned and
burned. Ibid. Agnes Potten burned at Ipswich, 320 Adam Foster Husbandman,
Martyr. 326 Askin a constant Martyr. 327 Alice Potkins starued to death. 329
Agnes Stamley burned. 331 Alexander Horsman Martyr. 332 Ambrose died in
Maidstone Goal. 339 Agnes Siluerside, alias Smith, condemned. 340 Agnes Banger
martyred. 348 Anne Try Martyr. 349 Alexander Lane Martyr. 362 Alexander Gouch
martyred. Ibid Alice Driuers a constant Martyr. Ibid. Alice Snoth burned at
Canterbury. 365.
B
BArtholmew crucified and beheaded. 3 B^zaes Register of Martyrs under Decius.
11 Boniface the forerunner of Antichrist. 24 Beda Priest wrote 37. vollums. 27
Boniface an Englishman, Archbishop of Mentz and Martyr. Ibid. Bohemians
suppress Idolatrous Temples. 127 Basil besiedged by the Dolphi^ of France.
145 Barnes a Friar bears Fagots, for eating flesh on a Friday. 166 Bilney a
great Preacher of the truth, his articles, abiuration, and martyrdom
afterward. 177 Bayfield a Monk of Berry, a valiant Martyr, his cruel usage
and martyrdom. 179 Baynham a Lawyer whipped, rackt, and martyred for maintaining
the truth. 181 Bartrucke a Scottish Knight, confutes certain Articles of the
Papists, for which he is condemned, and his picture burried. 193. 194. 195.
Bible at large set up in every Church. 200 Bonners examination, his pride
before the Commissioners. 225 His vnreuerent and forward words: his
imprisonment and deprivation. 226 B^ner compares Priests to the virgin Mary.
240 Bradfords declaration of the manner of disputaon he meant to hold. 244
Beckets Image twice set up at Mercers Chapel and thrown down. 256 Bishop
of Chester, who condemned George Marsh, burned with a harlot, dies thereof. 268
Barlow for bearing witness of the truth, sent to the Fleet. 269 Berd the
Promoter, his cruelty to James Treuisam, and other Professors. 281 Bartlet
Green Gent. in trouble, for writing the Queen is not yet dead, meaning Queen
Mary, and afterward for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, condemned and
burnt. 313 Blind Boy martyred at Gloucester, 323 Bloody Commission granted by
King Philip and Queen Mary, to prosecute the poor members of Christ:
whereupon 22. are brought before Bonner out of Essex. 330 Barbara Final burned
at Canterbury. 332 Bradbregs widow burned at Canterbury Ibid Bends wife burned
at Canterbury. Ibid Berry a Priest and Commissary, a Persecutor of the
faithful, his sudden and fearful end. 356 Bate a Barber, a persecutor of
the faithful, his sudden death. 362
C
CAligula Caesar. 2 Commodus Son to Verus, Emperor. 7 Contention between the
East and West Church, for the observation of Easter day. Ibid Constantine the
Emperor borne in Britain. 18 His prayers to his Soldiers. Ibid. His immunity
to the ministry, his provision for liberal sciences. 19 Constantine with the
help of three legions of Soldiers out of Brittany, obtains the peace of the
universal Church. 20 Council at Sternhalt for the observation of Easter. 25
Council of Constance. 26 Carolus Magnus proclaimed Emperor. 25 Cambridge
erected by Sigisbert. 29 Chester built. 33 Cloud half blood, half fire, seen
in England. 39 Canutus succeeds Siranus, and erects the monastery of S.
Edmonsbury. 40 Council at Vercellis. 43 Council at Mentz under Pope Leo 9.
Ibid. Council at Latteran. Ibid. Council at Mantua against Priests marriages.
Ibid. Controversy between Canterbury and York for the Primacy. 45 Calixtus
the second Pope. 50 Complaints of sundry abuses in the Church. 51 Contention
between the Bishop of York and Canterbury. 68 Conclusions put up to the
Parliament. 93 Council of Constance for pacifying a schism betwixt 3. Popes,
in which John the Pope was deposed, and proved to be an heretic, a murderer,
a Sodomite, and many others: in the 8. Session John Wickliff and his forty
Articles were condemned. 112 Council of Basil send Ambassadors to the
Bohemians, with their answers. 130 Council of Basil begun. 137 Contention
between two Popes. 145 Constantinople taken. 146 Clement the seventh Pope, his
wicked life and death. 162 Collins for holding up a little Dog when the
Priest was at Mass, burned, and the Dog with him. 190 Cowbridge after he was
almost starued, martyred at Oxford. 191 Cardinal Poole attainted of high
treason, flies to Rome. 200 Commotions in Oxfordshire, Yorkshire, Norfolk, and
Suffolk. 222 Commotions in Oxford and Buckingham, appeased by the Lord Gray.
224 Commotion in the North. ibid. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury offers to
defend the book of common prayer. 235 Communication between Doctor Ridley and
Secretary Bourne in the ^ower. 240 Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury sent to
Oxford to dispute. 242 Cat apparelled like a Priest, hanged at the Cross in
Cheapside. 244 Cardinal Pools Oration in the Parlament-house 246 Christianus
king of Denmark his Letters to Q. Mary for Miles C^u^rdale. 256 Causon of
Thunderst in Essex for maintayning the truth, burned at Kayley. 262 Christopher
Wade burned at Dartford for denying the real presence in the Sacrament. 281
Cornelius Burgie burned. 295 Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury his parentage and
education he is sent Ambassador to the Emperor, he is sent Ambassador to the
Pope, he seeks to banish Popish errors, and to reform the Church, he is
charged with heresy for denying the Popes power, he is condemned and disgraded
by Bonner, Bonners Oration in disgrace of him he is allured to recant by fair
promises and entreaty, his martyrdom, from fol. 315. to 32^* Christopher
Li^^er burned. 322 Cisley Ormes burned. 343 Cuthbert Simpson Martyr. 354
Christian George burned. 357 Christopher Brown burned at Canterbury. 365
D.
DEscription of the Primitive and later times of the Church. 1 Domitius Caesar.
2 D^cius tyranny against Christians. 11 Danes enter England, and burn the I Will
of Sheppey in Kent. 30 Danes take York. 32 Dunston Abbot of Glastenbury
banished by E^^ wine. 36 Danes arrive and do much spoil. 39 Danes suddenly
slain upon S. Brices day. 40 Danes begin to be Christians. 41 Diverse Popes at
one time. 52 Dominicans or black Friars order instituted. 78 Divorce of K.
Henry the eighth, and Q. Katharine. 174 Duke of Norfolk committed. 201
Destruction of Merindall, and Cabriers in Fr. 202 ^od, alias Scot burnt at
Callice. 206 Da^id Beaton Archb. and Cardinal in Scotland his miserable end,
and burial in a dunghill. 215 Duke of Sommerset* protector his history,
proclamation against him, sent to the Tower, discharged again, committed to
the Tower again, arraigned at Westminst. and condemned, beheaded at Tower Hill,
230, 231, 232 Duke of Northumberland beheaded. 235 Dagger thrown at the
Preacher at Paul's cross. ibid. Disputations in the Convocation house about
the Sacrament. 256 Duke of Suffolk brought to the Tower. ib. Duke of Suffolk
beheaded at the Tower Hill. 239 Derick Caruer condemned. 281 Dunstone
Chittenden famished in the Castle of Canterbury. 329 Denis Burges Martyred at
Lewis. 332 Denis Brigs martyred. 349 Dunning the cruel Chancellors sudden
death. 356
E.
EVstachius a Captain, with his wife and family martyred. 4 England troubled
only with the tenth persecution. 16 Ethelbert King of Kent. 21 Edwine converted
by Paulinus, and christened at York. 25 Ethelwood conuerts the people of
South-sax. 26 Empire translated from the Grecians to the Frenchmen. 28 Egbert
sole King. 30 Ethelwolph Bishop of Winchester, succeedes K. by the Popes
dispensation, his superstition. ibib. Edw. the elder subdues Wales and
Scotland, and is always victorious. 35 Edmund expels the Danes, and is slain
at Glassenbury. 36 Edwine crowned at Kingstone. ibid. Edward succeds Edgar, and
is murdered. 39 Egelred King. ibid. Elphegus Bishop of Canterbury, put to*
death at Grenwich. 40 Eldred drives out Canutus. ibid. Edmund, surnamed
Ironside chosen King by the Citizens of London and Nobles. 41 Edricus kills
Edmund. ibid. Edward the son of Emma chosen King, and crowned at Winchester.
ibid Elinor Cobham banished into the Isle of Man. 147 Elizabeth Sampson
conuented for speaking against Pilgrimages. ibid. Elizabeth Burton called the
holy-maid of Kent, a notable imposter put to death. 184 Edward the sixth King of
England, restores the Scriptures in the mother tongue. 220 Edward the sixth
dies, his prayer at his death. 233 234 Elizabeth Warn Martyr. 285 Edward
Sharp like pure gold tried in the fire. 329 Edmund Allen and Katharine his
wife martyrs. 332 Elizabeth a blind maid Martyr. ibid. Elizabeth Hooper
burned. 339 Ellen Euring denying the laws set out by the Pope, condemned. 340
Elizabeth Falkes examined and condemned. ibid.
F.
Frederick the Emperor ouerthrown by the Venetians, and taken. 54 Franciscans
order begun. 78 Frederick the second Emperor, persecuted by Popes. 83 Four
and twenty burned in Paris. 185 Five burned in Scotland. 186 Fetherston for
denying the supremacy, hanged. 200 Friar burned at Rochest^r. 343
G.
GOdwin forswearing himself choked. 42 Gregory the eighth Pope. 50 Grosthead
Bishop of Lincoln. 84 George Carpenter burned. 167 George Constantine
apprehended for heresy. 171 Gefferey Lon for dispersing of Luthers books
forced to abiu^^. 178 Giles Germa^e burned at S. Giles in the fields. 192
George Blage Knight imprisoned, and condemned for speaking against the Mass,
but pardoned. 209 George Wisard of Scotland, his persecution and martyrdom.
214 Gardner Bishop of Winchester sent to the Tower. 220 Gernsey and Gersey
invaded by the French. 225 Gardner an Englishman cruelly tormented at Lisbon in
Portugal for maintayning of the truth. 228 Gibbets set up for Wiats soldiers.
244 Gardner Bishop of Winchester his Sermon at Paul's cross. 247 Gardner calls
the Preacher before him at Saint Mary-Oueries. 249 Gods judgment upon the
Parson of Arundell. 264 George Marsh cruelly used and burned. 267 George
Tankerfield of London Cook, condemned. 285 George King died in prison. ibid.
George Catmer burned. 290 George Broadbridge burned at Canterbury. 291 Gardner
Bishop of Winchester, his history and death. 303 George Soper burned at
Canterbury. 304 George Park burned at Canterbury. ibid. George Ambrose
Fuller, burned in Smithfield. 327 George Stephens martyred. 332 George Eagles,
alias Trudgeouer, hanged, drawn and quartered, between two Thieves. 342 George
Eagles sister burned. 343
H.
HIeraclius cuts off the Popes hands and feet. 24 Harold last King of the
Saxons. 42 Hildebrana Pope, a Sorcerer. 45 Honorious the second Pope. 51 He is
taken with whores. ibid. Henry the first king of England dies. ibid. Henry the
second his penance, for the death of Becket. 67 He diuides the Realm into
six parts, and ordaines Justices of Assizes. 68 His great fame and large
Dominions. ibid. Henry the Son of Henry the second, his disobedience and
death. 69 Hildegris is a Prophe^^sse. 79 Henry the third King of England. 81
Henry the fifth crowned. 104 Hugh Pie of Ludney, for holding sundry opinions
contrary to the Church of Rome, accused and purged before the Bishop of
Norwitch. 141 Henry the fifts cruel commition for a^taching sundry suspected
of Lolardy. ibid. Harman Peterson committed to the Counter for not being
confessed in Lent. 161 Henry Voz burned at ^^uxels, for maintaining Luthers
opinions. 161 Henry Sudphen of Breame, his piety, persecution and martyrdom.
163. 164. Henry the 8. entitled defender of the faith. 170 His solemnity at the
receiving of the title of defender of the faith. ibid. Henry Finmore Tailor,
burnt at Winsor. 201 Haruy a Commissary, a persecutor, hanged, drawn and
quartered. 206 Homes a Yeoman of the Guard, his cruel^ie to Doctor Tailor. 261
Higbed of Horden, burnt at Horden. 262 Humphry Middleton martired at
Canterbury. 280 Henry Laurence burnt at Canterbury. 284 Hugh Latimer Bishop
of Worcester, his conference with Antonian: his parentage, his godly Sermuns,
his charity to the poor and needy, accused of heresy, his subscription to
certain Articles propounded unto him, he is committed to the Tower: his prayer
for the Lady Elizabeth: his martyrdom at Oxford, with Bishop Ridley: from
folio 293. to 303. Hugh Lame Rock an old lame man, burned at stratford the Bow.
322 Hook burned at Chester. 329 Hugh Fox burned in Smithfield. 354 Henry Pond
burned in Smithfield. 362
I
Jerusalem destroyed by Tytus and Vespasian. 2 John banished to bathmos. 3
Judas Thadeus slain. ibid. Iraeneus with many others martired. 8 Ignatius
martyr. 4 Iue King of West Saxons goes to Rome. 26 Innocentius the second Pope.
51 John King of England. 71 John Claydon a Currier burnt in Smithfield. 104
John Hus his History: his Articles put to him: his answer, his constant end,
113. 114. 115. Jerome of Prag^ his hard usage and marryrdome. 125. 126. John
Wadden Priest burned. 142 John Wendham of Alborough cruelly handled for
maintayning the truth. ibid. John Beuerley whipped for the truth. ibid. John
Stelley of Flixton forced to abjure. 143 John Burrell forced to abjure. ibid.
John Finch forced to do penance. ibid. Iubilee at Rome. 145. 146. Julius the
second Pope exceedes all his predece^sors in iniquity. 151 John Coyns for
contemning the Sacrament of the Altar, and not receuing at Easter; died at
Saint Martins. 160 James Gossen Dutchman, committed for not receiving at
Easter. 161 John Wi^cock a Scottish Friar committed for preaching against, holy
water and purgatory, ibid. John Esry burned. ibid. John Athelane burned. 165
John Thewxbury burned in Smithfield. 179 John Randall found in his study,
hanged in his girdle. 180 John Frith Martyred. 18^ John Lambert martyred. 187.
188* John Painter burned. 192 Injunctions set out in the 38. year of King
Henry the eight. ib^d. John Porter a tailor famished to death. 200 Idolatry
supp^essed. (...). James Morten burned. ibid. John Marbeck condemned and
pardoned by the King. 211 John Athee indicted for speaking against the
Sacrament. ibid. John Adams burnt. 209 John Lacels a Gentleman, burnt, ibid.
John Brown burnt. 219. John Hun troubled about the Sacrament. 221 Ioh. Alasco
uncle to the k. of Poland banished. 239 Jests of a Roode at Cockram in
Lancashire 248 James George dies in prison, and is buried in the fields. 249
John Rogers, first Martyr in Q. Mary's days. 249. 250 Ihon Hooper his
martyrdom. 254. Ihon Laurence burned at Colchester. 264. Judge Hales his
History and death. 265. Julius the third Pope, his wicked life and
profaneness. 266. Ihon Awcoke died in prison. Ibid. Johannes de casa a Deane
of the Popes chamber, plays the Sodomite and defends it. Ibid. John Cardmaker
his martyrdom. 268. John Warn burned. Ibid. John Hardley his martyrdom. 274.
John Simpson suffered at Rochford for maintayning the truth. Ibid. John
Bradford, his reasons against transubstantiation, and his martyrdom. 275, to
278. John Lease a prentice, burned with Master Bradford. 278 John Bland
martyred. 279. John Franbesh martyred. 280. James Treuisam persecuted, and
after his death buried in More fields. 281 John Lanuder of Godstone, martired
for the truth. 282. John Aleworth dyed in prison. 283. James Abbs burned at
Bury. Ibid. John Denley martired. Ibid. John Newman burned. 284. John Wade dyed
in prison and was buried in the fields. 285. John Leishord Martyr. Ibid. John
Trunchfield Martyr- 290. James Tutty of Breachley burned. 291. John Gorway
martyred at Lichfield. Ibid. John Glover persecuted. 292. John Web burned at
Canterbury. 304 James Gore died in prison at Colchester. Ibid John Philpot
accused of herisie after twice examination committed to Bonners cole house, his
third examination before Bonner: his fourth examination before the Bishops:
his ninth examination: he is condemned and brought to Newgate, his patient and
constant end: from folio 304* to folio 312. John Tucson burned in Smithfield.
312 Isabell Foster burned in Smithfield* Ibid. John Warn burned in Smithfield
Ibid. John Warn of Tenterden in Kent, about the Sacrament of the Altar,
condemned. 314. Ioane Sole of Harton about the Sacrament of the Altar and
auriculer confession, condemned. 315 Ioane Cotmer burnt at Canterbury. Ibid.
John Cauel burned in Smithfield. 321. John Huillier Minister, burnt at
Cambridge. 321, John Mace burned at Colchester. 322 John Spencer burned at
Colchester. Ibid. John Hammon burned at Colchester Ibid. John Ap Rice a blind
man, burned at Stratford the Bow. Ibid. Ioane Horns martyred. 323. John
Hartpoole burned at Rochester. Ibid. Ioane Bache widow, burned at Rochester.
Ibid. John Osward martyred at Lewis. 324. John Clement Wheelewright persecuted
Ibid. John Colstocke of Wellington, for denying the real presence forced to
recant. 326. John Norres dies in the Kings Bench, and buried on the backside.
Ibid. John Careless of Couentry, after long imprisonment, and many
examinations, dies in the Kings bench. 327. John Guyn a constant Martyr. ibid
Iulines Palmer a godly Preacher in K. Edwards days, martyred. ibid. John
Forman martired. 328 Ioane West burned. Ibid. John Heart martyred 329 John
Clarke pined to death in the Castle in Canterbu^y. Ibid. John Archer of
Cranbrooke weauer, pined to death at Canterbury ibid. John Philpot of Tenterden
Martyr. 330 John Bradbridge of Staplehurst Martyr. 332 Ioane Mannings of
Maidstone in Kent, Martyr, Ibid. John Fishcocke burnt at Canterbury. Ibid.
James Morris martyred at Lewis. Ibid. John Johnson about the Sacrament
condemned. 340. John Thurston a constant confessor of Jesus Christ dyed in
Colchester Castle 341. John Cures Shoemaker of Sisam in Northamptonshi^e,
burned. 343. James A^stoo burned at Islington 345. John Joys of Lezfield in
Suffolk martired. 349 John Forman Martyr. Ibid. John Weauer Martyr. Ibid. John
Milles Martyr. Ibid John Heart Martyr Ibid. John Osward Martyr. Ibid. John
Ashdon Martyr. Ibid. John Hallingsdale burned in Smithfield. 351. John Rowth
Minister, for affirming the Pope to be very Antichrist, after many
persecutions for the truth burned. Ibid. John Deuenish burned in Smithfield.
354. Ioane Seaman persecuted for the truth of the Gospel. 356 John Floyd
Martyr. 357 John Holyday Martyr. ibid John Slade burned at Brainford. 359 John
Vale died in prison, and buried in a dunghill. 360 John Alcocke cast into a
dungeon, dies, and is buried in a dunghill. 361 John Cook Sawier burned at S.
Edmunds Bury. 362 James Asley Martyr. ibid. John David burned at Bury. 362
John Sharp burned at Bristow. 365 John Cornford burned at Canterbury. ibid.
John Herst burned at Canterbury. ibid. John Baker burned at Civil in Spain.
366
K.
KNights of Rhodes instituted. 51 Katharine Par, Henry the eighth his last
wife, her troubles for the Gospel. 209 Kathaerine Knoches and her two
daughters martyred for the truth. 228 Katharine Hut widow Martyr. 323
Katharine Knight, alias Tinley, burned at Canterbury. 365
L.
LVcan put to death. 2 Lawrence broiled. 12 Licinius joined with Constantine,
calls learning the vice of Princes, hangs Theodorus on a cross. 16 Lucius his
letters to Elutherius Bishop of Rome. 20 London burnt. 39 Lurdanes why so
called. 40 Letters between the Emperor and the Pope. 53 Jews the French Kings
son comes into England, and takes himself to be King. 77 Lodouicus King of
Hungary drowned in a bog. 167 Leyton for affirming both kinds in the Sacrament
burned at Norwich. 191 Lancelot one of the guard burned. 192 Lady Jane
beheaded. 236 Latimer Bishop of Worcester sent to dispute at Oxford. 242
Lawrence Sanders Parson of Al-hallowes in Breadstreet his examination and
Martyrdom. 252
M.
Mark the Evangelist burned. 3 Matthias stoned. ibid. Mahomets beginning and
laws. 26 Monasteries erected. 29 Martin crowned Pope: the Emperor on foot,
leading a horse on the right hand, and the Marquess of Brandenburg on the left
hand. 112 Margery Bac^ster for dissuading the people from Idolatry and
superstition sore troubled. 143 Martin Luther a stout champion of the church
against the Pope; his History. 154 Matthew Ward about the Sacrament committed
to the Counter. 161. Miracle of a Jew Christened in Constantinople 160 Mekins a
boy burned in Smithfield. 200 Mustle borow field, where thirteen or fourteen
thousand Scots were slain. 224 Mary Queen of England. 234 Morgan a Judge
troubled in conscience for sentencing the Lady Jane, falls mad and dies. 239
Marsh accused to have taken the Pixe and crucifixe out of the Sepulcher, he and
his Wife committed to the Counter. 243 Margery Polley widow, burned at
Tunbrigde. 281 Michael Trunchfields wife burned in Ipswich about the Sacrament.
320 Mantrell burned at Salisbury. Ibid. Margaret Ellis condemned to be burned,
but died in Newgate. 322 Martin Hunt imprisoned in the Kings Bench for the
truth dies, and is buried in the backeside. 326 Mother Tree martyred. 328
Matthew Bradbridge of Tenderden, martyred. 330 Margaret Hide burned in
Smithfield. 331 Margery Awstoo burned at Islington. 345 Margaret Thurstone
martyred at Colchester. 348 Margery Mearing for affirming the Mass to be
abominable burned. 353 Mother Bennet an ancient woman, persecuted for the
truth. 356 Mathe^ R^c^rby Martyr. 357 Mark Burges burned at Lisbon in
Portugal. 166.
N.
NEro Caesar. 2 Nunneries erected. 27 Normans advanced in Church and
Commonwealth. 44 Nicholas Canon pennanced and thrice whipped. 144 Nine millions
of gold levied in France of the Prelates in fourteen year. 146 Nicholas South
committed to Newgate for not being shriuen in Lent. 161 New Testament
translated into English by William Tindall. 167 Nicholas Chamberlain burned at
Colchester. 274 Nichlas Ha^^ burned at Rochester. 281 Nicholas Final of
Tenderden Martyr. 330 Nicholas White burned at Canterbury. 332 Nicholas Pa^due
burned at Canterb. ibid. Nicholas Holden Martyr. 349 Nicholas Burton Merchant
of London, cruelly persecuted and burned at Cadix in Andalousia. 366
O.
OSwald by prayer unto God ouercoms Cadwallo. 25 Ostright rauisheth the wife of
Br^wer a Nobleman, in revenge whereof he calls in the Danes 32 Otho the Emperor
puts out Pope John's eyes, and hangs Cressentius the Consul. 39 Old-Castle:
Lord Cob^am his history. 131. the King secretly admonishes him to submit
himself to the holy Church: his answer thereto: the Archbishop sends his
Sum^er to him with a sit^tion: he is arrested and sent to the Tower. 133. his
later examination and answer to the Archbishops questions, 135. 136. he is
led again to the Tower, and escapes into Wales: he is condemned of heresy and
treason, and drawn to S. Giles in the fields, hanged by the middle and burned.
137 O^colampadius testimony of diverse good men. 166 Oldman of Buckingham burned
for eating Dacon in Lent. 181 Ombler a rebel in the North refuses the kings
pardon, is afterward taken and executed at York. 224
P.
PIl^t slew himself under Tiberius. 2 Parmenias put to death. 3 Persecution,
the first by Domitius Nero. ibid. Persecution, the second by Domitian. ibid.
Persecution, the third under Trayanus. 4 Phocas Bishop of Pontus cast in a hot
Furnace. ibid. Persecution the fourth under Antonius Verus. 6 Poly^arpus his
constancy and death. ibid. Persecution the fifth under Pertinax. 7 Parmachus
with his wife and children put to death. 9 Persecution the sixth under
Maximinus. ibid. Persecution the seventh under Decius. ibid. Persecution the
eighth. 12 Persecution the ninth under Aurelian. 13 Persecution the tenth under
Dioclesian. 14 Paul^s Church in London built by Ethelbert K. of Kent. 21 Phocas
kills Mauritius the Emperor. 24 Popes work masteries against the Greek Emperors.
27 Paschalis Pope dies. 50 Popes Pall instituted. 69 Pope by his policy leuies
a great sum of money in England. 83 Prophecies of the Popes persecutions. 91
Pope Martins death. 137 Pope Eugenius the fourth. 138 Paul Craws a Bohemian,
for holding Wickliss opinions, delivered to be burnt. 144 Printing, the ruin
of the Pope and Antichrist, invented in Germany. 145 Philip Norrice an
Irishman, sore troubled for the truth. 147 Pope a Weauer in Eye martyred about
the Sacrament. 148 Peake burned in Ipswich for giving a Sacrament cake to a
Dog. ibid Pius the second Pope his proverbs. 150 Paulus secundus Pope, a hater
of learning and learned men. 151 Petrus Ruerrius in two years spent 200000.
fl^rins and, permits the Cardinals to play the Sodomits the three hot
months. ibid. Prodigies and Prophecies, showing the fall of Antichrist. 154
Petrus Flistedius burned at Collen. 170 Packington, a favorer of Tindall,
deceiues the Bishop of London. 171 Patrick Hamilton a Scottish man, of the
blood royal, burned for the truth. 175 Pauy a persecutor hanged himself. 182
Puttedue for taunting a Priest, condemned and burnt. 191 Peter a German burnt
at Colchester, about the Lords Supper. Ibid. Powell hanged for denying the
kings supremaciy. 200 Persecution in Callice. 204 Persecution in Scotland. 218
Peter Martyr banished for religion out of England. 239 Priest of Canterbury
says Mass one day, and the next preaches against it. 243 Philip Prince of
Spain lands at Southhampton: married at Winchester. 245 Priests do penance at
Paul's Cross. 246 Procession through London for their conversion to the
Catholic Religion. 249 Patrick Packington martyred. 284 Persecution at Wenson
in Suffolk: 323 Persecution at Mendlesam Suff^lke. ibid. Persecution in
Couentry and Lichfield. 329 Philip Humphreys burned at Berry. 362
Q
QVeene Mary crowned Q^arrels between the Spaniards and English, about two
whoores. 248 Queeene Mary said to be with child. Ibid.
R
RA^enna given to the Popes by Pipinus king of France. Richard Ceu^r de Lions
rebellion against his Father. 69 Richard the first King of England* 70 Richard
the second deposed. 95 Richard Turmin a Baker burned in Smithfield. 104 Rebels
overthrown and executed. 223 Ridley made Bishop of London. 226 Redman his
judgment rouching certain points of Religion on his deathbed. 227 Ridley
Bishop of London visits the Lady Mary, and offers to preach before her which
she refuses. 233 His conference in the Tower with Secretary Bourne. 240, 241
He is sent to Oxford to dispute. 242 His report of the vanity of the
disputation at Oxford. ibid. Rose a Minister, with thirty men and women taken
at communion in Bow Churchyard. 248 Rowland Tailor Doctor* his disputtation
with Gardner, his cruel usage and constant Martyrdom. 255 Robert Farrar
Bishop of ^ David's in Wales, for re^using to subscribe to certain Popish
articles, burned at Ca^rnaruan. 260 Rawlins White burned in Cardiff. 261
Richard Hook for the truth ended his life at Chichester. 284 Richard Collier
burned at Canterbury. ibid. Richard Wright burned at Canterbury. ib^d. Robert
Smith his examination and conference with Bo^ner, and martyrdom, 285. to 289.
Robert Samuel a godly preacher burned. 290 Roger Coo burned at Y^xford in
Suffolk. 291 Robert Swater of Hith burned at Canterbury. ib. Robert Glouer
Gentleman burned at Couentry 292 Robert Picot Painter, burned at Ely. 293
Ridley Bishop of London, his parentage: carried to Oxford like a traitor: his
conferenc^e with Antonian: his protestation against the Popes authority: his
prayer at his Martyrdom, from folio 292. to 303. Robert Spicer burned at
Salisbury. 32^ Robert Drakes burned in Smithfield. Richard Spurge Fuller,
burned in Smithfield for denying the real presence. Ibid. Richard Nicoll
burned at Colchester. 322 Robert Bacon a persecutor, and an enemy to the truth.
323 Robert Lawson Linen Weauer, Martyr. 326 Robert Bernard martyred for the
truth at Aye. Ibid. Richard Woodman his martyrdom. 332 Ralphe Hardin, a
persecuter of George Eagles, hanged. 342 Richard Crashfield, his examination
and martyrdom. Ibid. Ralphe Alberton his examination before Bonner, and
martyrdom at Islington. 345 Richard Roth burned at Islington. Ibid Richard
Gibson burned in Smithfield. 351 Richard Day burned at Colchester. 357 Raynald
Eastland Martyr. Ibid Robert Southam Martyr. Ibid Roger Holland Merchant
tailor, his conference with Bonner: his prophecy of the ceasing of persecution
and martyrdom. 357. 358. 359 Robert Miles burned at Brainford. 359 Richard
Yeoman persecuted and martyred. 360 Robert Miles, alias Palmer, burned at S.
Edmundsbury. 362
S
SEneca put to death. 2 Stephen martyred. 3 Simon burned. Ibid Simon Zelotes
crucified. Ibid Simon the Brother of Jude s^aine. Ibid. Sulpitius and Seruilia
martyred. 4 Simproniss^ with her seven sons martyred. 5 Seuerus the Emperor
slain at York. 8 Sands of the Sea, as easy to be numbered as the names of
those that suffered under Decius. 10 Six thousand, six hundred, and sixty
Christian soldiers martyred under Mauritius. 14 Simon Zelotes spread the
Gospel in Britain. 19 Sinode at Aquisgrane. 31 Swanus spoil and cruelty. 40
His sudden death. ibid. Steven Langhton Archbishop of Canterbury. 77
Sau^noral^a a learned Monk of Florence burnt, and his ashes cast into the
River. 147 Sixtus the fourth Pope, builds Stews of both kinds in Rome,
reduces the Iubilee from 50 to 25. years, institutes the feasts of our Lady,
canonizeth Bonauenture and Francis for Saints. 151 Scholar of Abbeuill burned
for taking the host from the Priest at mass. 162 Solimans Letter to the great
master of Rhodes. ibid. Senate of Bearne assign disputation, and propound
their Articles. 168 Soli^an the Turkish Emperor, enters into Austria with a
great Army, and besieges Vienna. 171 Schism in Holland about the
Pater-n^ster. 216 Stories of certain Friars of Orleance in France 218 Story
of certain Monks of Sueuia. 219 Sanders declaration for disputation. 244
Steven Knight his martyrdom, and his prayer at his death. 264 Steven Harwood
burned at Stratford for the truth. 289 Simon Join burned at Colchester. 322
Shoemaker burned at Northampton. 329 Steven Kemp of Norgate martyred. 330 Simon
Miller condemned and burned. 339 Steven Cotton burned at Brainford. 359 Steven
White burned at Brainford. ibid.
T.
Tiberius Caesar willed Christ might be adored as God. 2 Thomas slain with a
dart. 3 Thousands die for the faith. 4 Tribute called Dane-gilt paid. 40 Thomas
Becket Archbishop of Canterbury his history containing the contention between
him and Henry the second King of England, from Folio 59. to 65. he is slain by
4. soldiers in the Church at Canterbury. 66 Thomas Pie of Albarogh enjoined
six whippings six several Sundaies. 141 Thomas Bagley Priest burned in
Smithfield. 144 Thomas Rheydon a French Carmelite Friar, condemned to be
burned. 145 Thomas Norrice burned at Norwich. 147 Thomas a Priest of Norwich
burned. 148 Thomas Bingy burned at Norwich. ibid. Thomas Becket his proverb.
155 Thomas Lancaster for bringing in prohibited books, committed. 161 Thomas
Hittin burned in Maidstone. 175 Thomas Garnet Curate of All-hallowes in Hunnie
lane for dispersing of Luthers books, forced to abjure. 178 Thomas Cromwell
Earl of Essex his history and death. 198 Thomas Barnes Doctor of Divinity,
for preaching against the Cardinal, burned. 199 Thomas Gerrard Martyr. ibid.
Thomas Forret a Scottish Deane his troubles and martyrdom. 212 Thomas Tunstone
Bishop of Duresme cast into the Tower. 220 Thomas Dobs for inueighing against
papistry, committed to prison, and there dies. ibid. Thomas Gray the Dukes
brother executed. 239 Two Suns both shining at once. 243 Thomas Hawks for
not christening his child after the popish manner, apprehended, his conference
with Bonner, Harpsfield Fecknam and others, at Copthall in Essex, 269, 270,
271, 272, 273. Thomas Wats of Billirrikies in Essex his conference with the
Bishop about the Sacrament, and martyrdom. 273 Thomas Osmond for maintaining
the truth, burned at Maningtree. 274 Thomas Iueson burned. 282 Thomas Fust
burned at Ware. 289 Thomas Leys died in prison for the truth. 285 Thomas Cob of
Harehill Butcher, burned. 291 Thomas Heyward burned at Lichfield. ib. Thomas
Whittle troubled in conscience for yielding to the Bishop of London, gets his
Bill and tears it in pieces. 305 Thomas Whittle Priest, after conflicts with
the papists, martyred. 312 Thomas Went burned in Smithfield. ibid. Thomas
Brown burned in Smithfield. ibid. Thomas Spurge burned in Smithfield. 321
Thomas Spicer burned at Beckles. 323 Thomas Harland burned at Lewis. 324 Thomas
Reed burned at Lewis. Ibid Thomas Auington burned at Lewis. Ibid. Thomas Wood
Minister burned at Lewis Ibid. Thomas Miles burned at Lewis. Ibid. Thirteen
burned at Stratford the Bow. Ibid. Thomas Freeman condemned, but saved by
Pooles dispensation. 325. Thomas Barnes condemned to bear a faggot. 326.
Thomas Paret dyed in the Kings Bench, and burien in the backside Ibid. Thomas
Dangate Martyr at Grinsteed in Sussex. 328. Thomas Rauensdale Martyr. 329.
Thomas Horn and a woman consumed with the fire at Watton-vnderhedge in
Glocestershire. Ibid. Three in the Castle of Chichester dyed in prison for the
truth, and buried in the fields. Ibid. Thomas Hudson of Selling Martyr. 330
Thomas Steuens of Bedingham, martyred for the truth. 330 Thomas Loseb^ burned.
331 Thomas Thirtell martired. 331 Thomasine Awood martyr. 332 Thomas Perald
martyr. 340 Tyrrell one of the race of those that murdered King Edward the
fifth: His cruelty to the faithful. Ibid Thomas Moore for saying his maker was
in heaven and not in the Pix, burned at Leicester. 341 Thomas Carman for
praying with Crashfield and drinking with him when he was burned, apprehended.
343 Thomas Athoch Priest, martyr. 349 Thomas Auington Martyr. Ibid. Thomas
Rauensdale Martyr. Ibid. Thomas Spurdan examined before the Bishop and
Chancellor of Norwich sent to prison. Ibid. Thomas Carman Martyr. 355 Thomas
Hudson affirming the Mass to be a patcht monster, martired. Ibid. Thomas
Benbridge for maintayning the truth rather broyled then burned. 361 Thomas Hall
burned at Bristow. 365 Thomts Benion burned at Bristow. Ibid
V
VSkatell drives the Danes out of England. 40 Vicount of Melun his counsel to
the English. 77 Valentine Freese burned at York. 181 Usher Tunstall for having
the Paternoster and Creed in English, forced to abjure. 143
W
Winchester Church founded. 29 Westminster Abbey begun by a Citizen Ibid.
William Conqueror enters the land. 42 Received for King, and crowned on
Christmas day: drives the Danes out of the North: forces Malcolme King of
Scots to pay tribute, 44. Waldenses their beginning and progress. 55. the
Articles they held. 56. 57. Wickliffe beginning to preach the Gospel of
Christ, 85. his conclusions in a convocation at Lambeth, 86. his conclusions
condemned of herisie and error by William Archbishop of Canter^^y, 88 his
books condemned by the Council of Constance, his letter to Pope Urban the
sixth, Ibid diverse of the Nobility and University favor him. 90. 91. William
Santrey martyr 95 William Thorps examination before Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury from follio 95. to 103. William Tailor for favoring Wickliffs
opinon^ burned in Smithfield. 104. William White, a follower of Wickliffe
forced to recant. 141 William Wright a persecutor. 143 Wolsey Cardinal his
graetnesse and pride. 166 William Tracy for affirming in his will that he
trusted only in God, after his death was taken up and burned. 185. William
Button his merry Questions to Papists. 206 Weston preached at Paul's Cross to
pray for souls departed 243. Walter Mantell for constantly maintaining the
truth hanged. 244 Warwick his cruelty to Doctor Tailor. 256 William Pygot
burned at Braintree. 264 Woman put in the Cage for speaking against the Pope.
267 William flower alias Branch martyred. 268 William Tooly Poulterer hanged
for robbing a Spaniard his body oster burial taken up and delivered to the
seculer power to be burned for heresy. 269 William Bamford burned at Harwich
for the truth. 274 Wodroffe Sheriff of London, after his cruelty showed to M.
Bradford, taken lame and so continued. 279 William Minge, a constant Confessor,
dyed in Maidstone layle. Ibid. William Coker burned at Canterbury. 284. William
Hooper burned at Canterbury. Ibid. William Steer of Ashford, for saying the
Sacrament of the Altar was an abominable Idol, burned at Canterbury. Ibid
William Andrew for defense of his religion died in Newgate, and cast into the
fields. 290 William Allen for refusing to follow the Cross in procession,
burned at Walsingham. 291 William Glouer persecuted for the truth. 292 William
Wolsey burnt at Ely. 293 William Wiseman dying in Lollards Tower, cast into the
fields, but buried by good men. 304 William Times Ioyner, burned in Smithfield.
321 William Poole martyr. 323 William Sl^ch dyed in the Marshalsey, and buri^^^
in the backside of the prison. 324 William Adherall Minister imprisoned. ibid.
William Saennard condemned, but saved by Cardinal Pools dispensation. 325
William Adams condemned, but saved by Cardinal Pools dispensation, ibid.
William Fo^ter of Stone, starued to death in the Castle of Canterbury* 329
William Waterer of Bed^^gdy, martyred. 330 William Hay of Hith martyred. ibid
William Lowick of Cranbrook, martired. ibid. William Prouting of Thorneham,
martyred. ibid. Walter Appleby of Maidstone in Kent, and Petronell his wife
martyred. 332 Wilsons wife burned at Canterbury. ibid. William Maynard martyred
at Lewis. ibid William Purcas about the real presence condemned. 340 William
Munt for speaking against the Sacrament, condemned. ibid. William Sparrow
burned in Smithfield. 351 William Nichol cruelly tormented and burned for the
truth, at Hereford West in Wales. 354 William Seaman martyr. 355 William Harris
burned at Colchester. 357 William Hooker stoned to death at Civil. 366
Z
ZIsca gathers an Army to revenge the death of John Hus and Ierom of Prage.
127 Zwinglius Minister of Zurick slain, and his body burned. 171.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page lin. Errata. Correctio. 2 54 to reject not to reject 5 2 thrusting
thrusten 12 22 Fex Felix 13 37 Sapres Sapores 15 18 in Troy in Troy 360.
Rheginus. 15 22 put 360. Rheginus put out the eyes 17 5 Barla Barlaam 17 18
Grigotius Gregorius 17 33 they had. the fire had 23 52 Ethelbert Ethelfride 26
13 Haarines Agarens 27 38 Ethelbert Ethelbald 34 26 Cluniensis Cluniacensis 35
6 Binford Bainford 37 8 Pracontium Dracontium 39 39 Gregory the 1. Gregory the
5. 41 1 and 5 Eldred Egelred 43 50, 51 Carolus Cadolus 45 9 F^gamus Faganus 49
53 Iudicat Indicet 51 5 destruisti destruxisti 51 12 within hours with whores
58 5 Henry the 5. Henry the 1. 66 24 he has I have 66 39 harvest harnessed 71
28 thy my 73 6 to from 93 26 excersised exorcised 97 7 now not 102 19 Bishop
Thorp 117 29 Agnes N. 120 22 did not Christ did Christ 123 26, 30 Canonicalls
Canticles 125 7 the part the upper part 141 24 Communications Exco^munications
153 1 Wesalia Wesalianus 155 23 Domine Domini 165 14 cru^ltie heresy 168 23
without with 192 23 Bortruck Borthwich 192 55 Emperor Empire 209 5 Mayor: Mayor
were present. 213 15 Hellen Sirke Hellen Stirke 225 3 burned buried 229 16
contumacy contumely 235 25 Story Sc^ry 238 43 for soon for as soon 248 30
Cranmer Winchester 248 45 Doncaster Lancaster 252 40 primate primative 264 50
Arundell Croudall 265 46 Cranmer Gardener 272 51 Elenor Helena 273 4 Lankes
Hawks 273 10 Cophall Coxhall 278 50 Kirkley Kirkby 290 7 Horsce H^orsley 291 2
Somerset Somerton 307 32 Auilence Aquiliense 333 39 ninth third 351 3 not have
have 351 44 Rowth Rough 356 1 Cylesham Aylesham 357 7 Christian Aegles.
Christian George 365 28 Cornefield Cornford 377 23 Benton Bentam 377 25 Story
in Lincoln Scory in Hereford 378 21 Rafe Sardine Rafe Lardin 382 45 George
Wisard George Wichard 388 38 Bastion Sebasti^^

FINIS.

