THE POVVERFVLL FAVORITE, OR, The life of AELIVS SEIANVS.

By P.M.

Nec tibi regnandi veniat tam dira Cupido.

Virg. 1. Georg. Printed at Paris. 1628.

The life of AELIVS SEIANVS
By P.M.
SEeing that Princes dispose soueraignely of their hearts; The heart of the
Prince is free, and is not guided but by the hand of God.
and that they form in them love and hatred, to whom and how they please; We
had need therefore to desire that their affections to particular men might be
just and well regulated. For if they be disordered they draw with them public
ruin: Excalc^^ntur and ad staturam suam rede^nt. Sen.
they render Princes hateful, and their Favorites miserable; when the play is
done, and that they are unshod of their high shoes that elevated them above
others, they are dispoyled of the habits of these personages they represented,
they return to their first form and they come to know that we must not
measure the Statua by the basis that susteynes it, nor judge of a man by his
dignity or fortune.

The heavens being provoked against the Roman Empire, permitted this deuiating
in the mind of Tiberius, through the excess of favor which he bare to
Aelius Seianus, uniting in his person those charges which should have been
parted amongst many, and making him so great that it was difficult for him to
unmake him. In the end the ruin of the estate which was the foundation of his
greatness, was likewise the cause of his fall. He was the son of Seius Strabo,
a Knight of Rome, borne in Vulsinus, a country of Tuscany. In his youth he
served Caius Caesar the nephew of Augustus. He shared in the inordinate and
abominable vices of Apicius, The expenses of Apicius his Kitchen, amounted to
more then 2. millions of gold. H.S. Millies in culinam congessit. Sen.

Illi tam prauae mentis homini vltima potio saluberrima fuit. Sen.


that rich prodigal, that famous glutton, who having eaten up his estate, and
finding by his account that he had no more then 200000. crowns remaining,
thought himself poor, and that this sufficed not to maintain his luxury:
whereupon he conceived such an extreme apprehension, that death seemed more
supportable to him then his poverty: and took down a glass of poison, he
never drank a better draught then this last which stopped the furious course
of his dissoluteness. Seianus having attained some name in the profession of
Arms, Strabo his father presented him to Tiberius, to permit that he might
associate him in the charge of Colonel of the Pretorian Guardes; and from
henceforward the Prince began to take pleasure in his watchfulness and
viuacity, and believed that this Spirit might one day by his discipline become
an instrument apt to do any thing. He followed Drusus the Prince whom the
Emperor had made General of the Army to reduce unto obedience those who were
revolted in Austria and Hungary. Rector iuueni and caeteris periculorum
praemiorumque ostentator.


The first demonstration of Tiberius affection to him was to elect him for
Tutor to this Prince, and to give to others the example of merit to attain
rewards, and of valor to expose themselves to danger. He knew the inward
disposition of Tiberius, and conformed his own so perfectly thereunto,
Tiberium obscurum adversus alios, sibi uni incautum intectumque effecit.
Tacitus.
that both their hearts seemed to have but one motion. This conformity
entertained the affection, and from thence grew that entire confidence that
Tiberius who distrusted all men, distrusted not Seianus, nor withheld any thing
secret or hidden from him.

This favor attracted all hearts, all eyes followed this new light; the Senate
communicated to him their weighty affairs; and from his mouth received their
most important dispatches: Turba salutatrix.
every where one might see ceremonious troops which searched or attended for
him to do him reverence. The great ones held themselves honored by his
commands; if he speaks he obliges them, if he regard, they are contented:
they wayt in the morning at the gates of his house; they are there at his
rising and going to bed; others endure the affronts of his doorekeepers whom
they bribe to be at the first opening or admission. Duras fores expers somni
colit. Sen.
And when they present themselves to the Idol which they adore, happy is he
that can feign the greatest admiration to praise him, or servitude to flatter
him. To speak after the mind of some great man, to consent to all that is
said, to admire all that is done, to approve all that he will, these are the
principal pieces of complement; and admiration is ever one continual part in
the office of flattery. Incipiente potentia bonis consilijs innotescendum.
Tacit.


In the growing of his grace he was desirous to have it conceived that he was
founded in a firm resolution to advance the service of the Prince, and the
good of the weal public, and only to admit justice in his actions, Palam
compositus pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido. Tacit.
prudence in his counsel, and modesty in his fortune: he carried in outward
appearance moderation, but inwardly ambition: but he flew out in his wastefull
expenses and prodigalities, in the magnificence of his household furniture and
pictures, in the excess of his sumptuous feasts as if they had been
sacrifices, Industria and vigilantia haud minus noxiae, quoties parando regno
finguntur. Tac.
and in the pride of his Palaces gilded as if they had been Temples: he was
industrious and vigilant to attain to his ends: he had a ready understanding
to discover and to apprehend all sorts of forms, accommodating himself to
plainness or severity according to the occasions.

Being sole captain of the Praetorian guards, he caused them to lodge within a
quarter of a mile of the city, that when there was occasion he might have them
ready at his disposing, representing to Tiberius that soldiers being dispersed
lived without discipline; Lasciuit miles deductus. Tac.
and that seeing them every day assembled together in one place, the number
might breed security to themselves, and fear to others, and that keeping them
far from the debauchements of the City, they might the better be kept in
order.

Vallum statuatur procul vrbis illecebris. Tac.
This being assented unto, and a lodging assigned, he began by little and little
to gain credit and respect in the hearts of the soldiers visiting them in
their Corpse du Guard, calling them by their names, endearing the Captains and
Tribunes, Neque ambitu Senatorio abstinebat, clientes suos honoribus aut
prouincijs ornando. Tac.
feeding the one with hopes, the other with gifts, and all with good words,
whereof he was nothing covetous or sparing.

To strengthen his party he dressed his speeches and intelligences in the
Senate, and procured that his friends should be provided of Commissions, and
honored with charges and governments, knowing that it was not sufficient to
hold authority with the Soldierie, if he wanted it with the Senate and
Iusticiars, who held so great estimation among the people.

In all his designs he found in Tiberius so great facility and affection to
his desires, that he needed only to ask and give thanks; he never denied
him any thing, and oftentimes he prevented his request, and auowed that he
deserved much more. Wherefore not only in private, but also in the Senate he
called him companion of his labors, Seianus socius laborum Tiberij. Tac.

Effigies prae theatra, fora and in principia legionum. Tac.


and commanded that his pourtrayture should be honored together with his in
the streets, respected in the Theaters, and carried in the standards of his
armies. This is for a Prince to annihilate himself to please his servant: for
it cannot go well when the people perceive that favor transferreth sovereign
honors of superiors upon an inferior, and that the Prince suffers a
companion in the kingdom to assist him to govern. Firmius Herculaea ceruice
pependit. Claud.
Hercules saw well that Atlas eased him, but he made it be known that Olympus
stood more secure upon his shoulders, then upon any others. A kingdom at one
and the same time can never be divided between two.

He framed all Tiberius his actions to rigor and severity, to the end that he
might lose the affections of the people, who could not wish him well that did
nothing but entreat them ill. It was no hard matter to persuade him to cruelty,
all his inclinations running that way, and in his childehood Theodorus his
Tutor in Rhetoric called him Clay tempered with blood: so that Seianus had no
more to do then to spy and search out occasions to excite his choler, and to
exercise his cruelties which would never be appeased without sacrifice.

The charges and dignities were conferred upon his recommendation. It was
enough to approve their merit that they were near him by kindred or alliance,
and to swear by his favor; and yet notwithstanding Tiberius would it might be
known, that he considered more one then another to eschew blame, to take away
from virtue to give to Fortune. Tiberius had named two Proconsuls of Affricke,
Lepidus and Blaesus; and to free himself from the ill will of him which should
be excluded, he recommended to the Senate the election of the most capable. The
one of them was a man of excellent parts, the other was uncle of Seianus, and
in that regard alone sure to carry it. Lepidus who would not enter into
concurrence with the most powerful and most favored, excused himself through
his indisposition, the young age of his children and a daughter ready to marry,
Avunculus Seiani Blaesus atque eo praevalidus. Tacit.
the Senate took him at his word, for they followed the wind of favor;
Blaesus made semblance to refuse this charge, and all the flatterers cried,
that none but he could deserve it.

The same favor which had raised him, still supported him, and honored his
best services with greatest recompenses. After that he had not defeated but
routed the troops of Tacfarinus, Tiberius commanded the Legions to salute him
Emperor, he ordained him the triumph which never did belong to any, but to an
entire victory, and by all means declared, that this was done for the love of
Seianus his nephew. He that had Seianus his protector, Vt quisque Seiano
intimus ita ad Caesaris amicitiam validus: contra quibus* infensus esset metu
and sordibus conflictabantur. Tacit.
needed not with any great labor search for honors: he that had him his
enemy languished under disgrace and misery. None had any honor without his
favor, and none could deserve it with innocence and virtue. He caused Iunius
Otho to be admitted into the Senate, who never had been of any other
profession then a schoolmaster. He served his turn to ruin Ca. Silanus
Proconsull of Asia: he accused him of extortion, and in his government to have
given greater authority to money then to justice. This was something, but they
added other accusations, out of which the most innocent could hardly have woun
themselves. Proprius metus exercitam queque eloquentiam debilitat. Tacie.
They brought to speak against him the most famous orators of Asia, although he
was assisted by no man, nor had yet accustomed himself to speak in public,
and that fear that troubled the best speakers and the most hardy eloquence,
had disordered his discourse.

Tiberius pressed him both by voice and by gesture so lively, Saepe etiam
confitendum erat ne frustra quaes^visset. Tacit.
and by his demands so frequent and spritefull that he was as it were
astonished, neither durst he contradict for fear of provoking him; and seeing
himself constrained to confess lest he should make the demands ineffectuall.
O what misery was this! The respect of the Prince obliges the accused to
betray his own innocence.

Amongst the number of his accusers, Iunius Otho a creature of Seianus, was the
most passionate; Obscura initia impudentibus ausis propolluebat. Tacit.
for being newly entered into this charge of Senator, he sought occasions to
advance the obscurity of his beginning by the impudence and shamelessness of
his counsels, holding the most extreme the most safe: Silanus chose rather to
have recourse to the goodness of Tiberius, Excusatius accipiuntur quae siunt
ab exemplo. Tacit.
then to trust to his own defense, he presented him one request, to implore of
him; but Tiberius who meant to ruin him, declared that in this accusation, he
pursued but the intention of the law.

And forasmuch as that which is done by example, carries it is excuse, he
caused to be brought out of the Registers, a judgment given under Augustus,
against Volesus Messala, who had also been Proconsull of Asia; but if their
qualities were alike, their lives and their charges were in every thing
different. The one cruel, O rem regiam. Sen.
the other covetous; this was an inhumane man, who passing by a place where he
had caused 300. heads to be cut off in one day, called it a Royal place and of
great magnificence.

When they came to deliver their opinions for the sentence, To praise clemency
and to conclude with rigor.
Lucius Piso having cast out some clawing words in praise of the clemency of
the Emperor, was of opinion that they should prohibit Silanus from water and
from fire; and that they should banish him into the isle of Gyara. Anteire
caeteros parat, absurdam in adulationem progressus. Tac.
This opinion was pursued by others: Lentulus added, that the goods that came
by the mother should be left to the sons. Tiberius approved it. But
Cornelius Dolobella flattering more yet, and sharply blaming Silanus his
actions, said, that thencefoorth they should not give the government of
Provinces but to those which should be of vnreproachable life, and of sound
reputation; and with the judgment of the Emperor. Legibus delicta p^^^tuntur,
quanto melius provideri ne peccaretur. Tacit.
For although Law were ordained to no other but to punish offenses, yet is it
certain, that it were much better if the committing of them might be hindered,
both for those who should be honored with such charges, and for those upon
whom they should be exercised, for these should conserve their innocence,
Loquax and ingeniosa in contumeliam praefectorum provincia, in qua qui
vitaverit culpam non effugit infamiam. Sen.
and the other their quiet and repose. Tiberius hereupon made a discourse
worthy of his prudence and of his knowledge which he had of the people, who are
but too prone to deny the actions of Magistrates, as it is now said of Egypt
that it abounded in speeches and artifices to calumniate their governors; and
that though many have eschewed the punishment, yet have they not freed
themselves from the infamy, he spoke in this manner:

I am not ignorant of any thing that is now published against Silanus, Non ex
rumore statuendum. Ta.
but I must never resolve any thing upon bare reports. Many have governed
Provinces otherwise from that they have hoped or feared, Quidam ad meliora
excitantur, magnitudine rerum hebescunt alij. Tacit.
for the greatness and difficulty of affairs which present themselves,
rayseth the courage of some, and astonieth and abaseth it in others. And
forasmuch as the knowledge of a Prince cannot extend it self to all, and may
not be diuerted through the ambition of another: Laws are ordained for things
done; Leges in facto constitutae, quia futura in incerto sunt. Tacit.
for those things that are to do are uncertain. Therefore our Fathers have
ordained, that if crime preceded, punishments should follow. You ought not to
change that, Sapienter reperta and semper placita non verienda. Tacit.
which having been once sagely ordained, has been in all times allowed. The
Provinces are charged with affairs enough: they have authority enough: Non
utendum imperio, ubi legibus agi potest.
the rights diminish when the power increases; and we must not use
commandment in those matters for which the Law has provided.

This discourse was approved, Prudens moderandi animus, si propria ira non
impellitur. Tac.
and the place of the banishment changed to Cythara, because Gyara was too rude
and wild; Tiberius showed, that he was able to moderate his spirit when he was
not in choler. Prudens moderandi animus si propria ira non impellitur. Tac.

Insula Gyara immitis and sine cultu hominum. Tac.

Qui dabat olim imperium, fasces, l^giones etc. duas res tantum anxius optat
Pannum and Circenses Iuuen.

The Theater of Pompey was dedicated to Venus. Tertullian called it Arcem
omnium turpitudinum.




Seianus only disposed of Offices and Commissions: the people meddled no more
in the election of Senators; they sold no more their suffrages, nor their
canuassings; and for the right which they had to the Commanders over the
Magistrates and the Legions, they contented themselves with shows and
Circensian plays, and the cloth which was given them for their Liueries. There
was no man now living, that had seen the Common wealth, the marks of the
ancient liberty were quite defaced.

The greatest ornament of Rome was Pompeies Theater, of such extent, that it
was able to lodge 40000. men. It happened to be on fire accidentally: Seianus
quenched it, and hindered it so, that the ill of the accident could go no
further. Tiberius purposing to reedifie it, commended in full Senate the
diligence and vigilance of Seianus. The Fathers to please him, ordained, that
his Statua should be erected near the Theater.

Labor and diligentia magna vis intra vnum damnum sistitur. Tac.
But as Princes do nothing without some special drift or purpose, Tiberius in
favoring Seianus had one, and Seianus in serving Tiberius framed to himself
another: There is neither affection nor faythfulnesse without gratuity.
Tiberius desired that the good will which he bare to Seianus might oblige him
to serve him, without any condition to ascertaine his authority: Non tam
beneuolentia prouexit, quam vt cuius ministerio a^ fraudibus liberos Germanici
superueniret. Sucton.
and Seianus in serving the Emperor aspired to the Empire, and would keep
secret his ambition. This was not affection in Tiberius, but necessity; for he
desired to serve himself by the plots and devices of Seianus to ruin
Germanicus his house, and to raise his own; and Seianus purposed to rise to
the Empire by the ruin of them both: his power went not so fast as his will
that encountered with great hindrances. For Caesar's house was yet entire; the
sons young and lusty, the grandchildren great, he could not ruin so many at
once: for treason will have some space of time in its wicked proceeding: and
he thought best to begin with Drusus, at the same time that Tiberius had
resolved to make away with Germanicus. For as the spirit of a man apprehends
more dangers far off, then present, Tiberius saw no other thing that gave him
more cause of jealousy then his brother; and nothing gave him more cause to
fear the ambition of Seianus, then his son.

The worst counsel which ever he gave him was to change that which Augustus
had ordained, and hate that he had loved: for the extreme hatred which he bare
to Germanicus his house, cooled that first affection which he found when he
came to the Empire, Romae ruunt in ^^ruitium Consules, Patr^^, eques. Tac.
the people seeing him run with such fury to the ruin of their liberty, and
throwing them headlong like a huge stone into the gulf of servitude without
hope ever to get out.

Germanicus was both cherished and loved of the people, because he was the
son of Drusus, who had formerly endeavored to restore the ancient government
of the Common wealth, and had communicated the project to Tiberius his brother:
Credebatur si rerum potitus foret libertatem redditurus. Ta*
but he had bewrayed it and discovered it to Augustus. It was thought that the
son would have pursued the design of the father to have revived the liberty:
and that if he had had the sovereign authority, he would not have used them
with such rigor as Tiberius did, but sweetly as Augustus, Augustus civil
rebatur misceri voluptatibus vulgi. Tac.
who was a Prince and seemed a Citizen, and disdayned not to bear a part in
popular recreations. For this cause Germanicus reigned in the hearts, and
Tiberius but in the Provinces; and when it was advertised that he had pacified
Almaigne, that Agrippina his wife also had done all which a Chief or General
of an army could do, to show her courage to her enemies, her liberality to the
soldiers, her prudence in appeasing seditions, straightwayes he waxed
jealous, and that jealousy degenerated into a mortal hatred. Nil relictum
Imperatoribus, vbi foemina manipulos interuisat, signa adeat, largitionem
tentat. Tac.
What remained more to the Emperor (said he) then for a woman to command over
men, to visit the Corpse du Guarde, obliging the soldiers by good words, and
great rewards.

Seianus, who loved not Agrippina, and knew Tiberius his humor, who could not
brook that any should bustle with the sovereign authority, which was so
delicate and tender, that it would take hurt by the least touch, Odia in longum
iaciens quae reconderet auctaque promeret. Tac.
wanted no discourse to entertain the jealousy and suspicions; and added
defiance to suspicions, and to suspicion fear, preparing long before, hatred
against this Prince, to the end that at his determined time it might fall upon
him to his destruction.

Germanicus returning from Almaigne, all the City was in a iollity. Tiberius
commanded that only two Companies of the guardes should be sent to receive
him. Populus omnis vsque ad vicesimum lapidem se effudit. Suet.
All the people ran with great haste, to the end they might speedily enjoy
the sight of him whom they had so long a time desired and expected. Tiberius
heerupon conceived so great despite, that he resolved to make an end of this
brave Prince, who had scarcely entered into the four and thirtieth year of his
age, and had already attained so much reputation as any other could attain in
his whole life.

This let Seianus who being urged with the desire to reign, Sceleratis
ingenijs and plusquam ciuilia cupie^^ibus non do ^^^ari instar seruitutis est.
thought that this great power which he had in the managing of affairs was but
servitude, so long as he was to acknowledge any superior. Tiberius by his
advice sent Germanicus into Sclauonia, under the color of honoring him with
the most principal commands of the Empire, he appointed for his Lieutenant
Cn. Piso a malicious, proud and violent man, with power to watch over his
actions, and to thwart his designs. It is reported that Seianus gave him
charge in writing to put this poor Prince to death.

He put it in execution. Apis manum Germanici Caesaris auersatus est, haud
multo post extincti.
Germanicus went into Egypt, and being there, was desirous to see their Oxegod
Apis, to know what his fortune should be. Apis would take nothing at his hand;
and this was taken for a certain presage of his death. He was stricken with a
long and grievous sickness, and the opinion that he was poisoned, increased
the violence, for he held it incurable. The report hereof came to Rome, Fama
ex longinquo aucta. Tac.
and was made greater then the evil; for the distance of place augmented it.
Then was nothing heard but tears and complaints. Is it for this (say they)
that they have sent him to the worlds end, that Piso is made Lieutenant, these
are the plottings of the Empress with Plancina his wife. Poor Rome that can
not have them to be beloved that love thee, nor dare we murmur against those
that ruin thee. And therewith all brake forth into mortal and vehement
imprecations against Seianus.

Laetiora statim ^redita, statim vulgata. Tac.
It was advertised by some merchants of Egypt, that he began to recover. This
good news was as soon believed as published; and the streets were too narrow
for the concourse of people, which ran to the temples to give thanks unto the
gods. Pronior in tenebris affirmatio. Tac.
The night favored the rumor, and the belief thereof seems more easy and
costlesse in the dark. Tiberius himself is awakened in the night with their
joyful acclamations. No words can be heard but these: Salua Roma, salua
patria, saluus Germanicus. Suet.
Rome is safe, our Country is safe, Germanicus is safe.

After that the poison gently violent, had consumed all the heat and moisture
in this poor body, all his friends conceived that he should have no need to
have or to see a Cock to sacrifice to Aesculapius; and that the gods would not
grant him his life because they would not restore liberty to the Roman Empire.
Germanicus could not endure the crowing, nor the sight of a cock. Plut.
In this extreme weakness he expressed from his mouth these his last words,
to imprint them in the heart of his wife and his friends, that grief even
melted them to tears, and rented their hearts in sunder.

Qui praematuro exiturapitur illi etiam aduersus deos iustus dolor. Tac.
If I had died according to the course of nature, I might justly complain
against the gods, that they had snatched me away before the time of my parents,
of my children, of my country, and of the years of my youth. But now since my
course is interrupted by the wickedness of Piso and Plancina, Vltimas preces
pectoribus vestris relinquo. Tac.
I will leave within your hearts my last requests.

I conjure you to represent to the Emperor, my Father and my Vukle, how that
after I was wronged by these cruel injuries, and perplexed by these strange
disloyalties, Miserrima vita pessima morte finitur.
I finished my miserable life by a death which yet is more miserable. Those
that have followed my hopes who are of the same blood with me, and those same
that have borne me envy when I was in the world, will be grieved to see me
ruined by the treachery of a woman, then when I was flourishing, Erit vobis
locu^ que^endi apud Senatum, inuocandi leges. Ta.
and when I had escaped death in so many battles: and you also shall have a
subject to complain of to the Senate, and implore the assistance of the Law.

The chiefest duty of friends is not to follow the deceased with cries and
weeping, Non decet defunctum igna^o questu persequi. Tac.

Vendicabitis vos si me potius quam f^rtunam meam fauebitis. Tac.


which serve to no other purpose, but to be mindful of what they desired and
to perform that which they appointed. Germanicus wanted not tears; they to
whom this nothing at al apperteines and have not known him at all, will bewail
him, but you will avenge him if you loved more his person then his fortune.

Let the people of Rome see the Niece of Augustus, the wife of Germanicus and
the children which he leaves behind him, Fingentibus scelesta mandata aut non
credent homines aut non ignoscent. Tac.
Compassion will make them be of my side when they shall accuse the Authors of
my death, and if those that shall be accused shall seek to color it and to
invent some execrable commandment; (this touched Seianus who had given order
to Piso to do it) good men will not believe them, or at least will not permit
that they should remain unpunished.

All that were present swear in the hand of Germanicus to dye, or to revenge
his death, Magnitudinem and grauitatem summa fortuna retinuit, inuidiam and
arrogantiam effudit. Tacit.
every one deplored the loss of so brave a Prince who in his deportments
retained the greatness and gravity of his fortunes, and had nothing in his
words but of sweetness and of Courtesy. He turned toward his wife, he
coniured her by the love which she had borne him, by the memory she should have
of him and for their childrens sake which they had had together, Fortunae
saeuienti submitiendus animus. Ta.
to moderate and humble a little her heart, and to accommodate it to time and
to make it pliable to the rigor of fortune, waiting till she should sweeten her
self. Above all (my dear wife) take heed when you at at Rome of giving
occasion of Jealousy to those that are more powerful then you, Emulatione
potentiae validicres haud irritandi. Tac.
and imply not that good will which you shall find in the hea ts to the Senate
and people, to make any concurrence to their favor and ambition.

This was the most sound counsel that he could give her, but she should have
been held unworthy to be the Niece of Augustus the wife of Germanicus, and
mother of those children, if she had made greater account of the estate of
fortune then of virtue, Quasi rursus ereptum acrius doluit. Tacit.
and should seek to attain the favors of the Emperor by those of Seianus.

When the people of Rome knew that Germanicus was dead, Cremati cor inter ossa
incorruptum repertum est, cuius ea natura vt tactum veneno igne confici
nequeat. Suet.
their grief was so much the greater, by supposing him taken away from them,
and was nothing there seen but grief and afliction. It was doubted, whether
he were made away by poison or by witchcraft, the one they believed because his
heart did not burn; and the other was bruted abroad because they found about
him dead menes bones, Characters and Charms.

Germanicus his friends published every where that Piso had been the cause of
his Death, Piso intemperanter accepit Germanicum excessisse, caedil victimas,
adit templa, magis indolescente Plancina. Tac.
that Agrippina would revenge it: but receiving the news of his death in the
Isle of Cio, he caused sacrifices to be made, Plaucina his wife visited the
temples, he cared not for the theatnings of Agrippina, and thought of nothing
but to settle himself in the government of Syria, supposing that the service
which he had done to Tiberius was sufficient to guard him from the fear of
this vengance and to assure him of the recompense of his merit.

Upon this his resolution to go into Syria his son advised him to go to
Rome, Suspiciones imbecillae aut inania famae non perti^^escenda. Tac.
without apprehending these vain reports and feeble suspicions to infringe or
prevent the disignes of his enemies, and to gain the advantage of the first
impressions. Apud milites recens Imperatoris memoria prae^^le^. Tac.
That he should not suppose to put himself so soon in the government of
Syria, seeing that Sentius was prouiuided thereof, that he could not expect
great obedience of an Army, that as yet deplored the death of Germanicus and
conserved with bitterness his memory, That he repented himself drawing upon
him the blame of a Civil war.

Domitius Celer on the contrary side: Vtendum est euentis.
that he ought to take again the charge which he had taken away and to fill
the place that was void, That it were imprudence and peril to go to Rome at
the same time that Agrippina would be there, Relinquendum rumoribus tempus quo
senescant, plerunque innocente^ recen^^ inuidiae impares. Tac.
and that the people would be moved by her cries and her complaint; That it was
needful to leave to time these first reports to make them wax old, and that
innocence can hardly resist the violence of a new springing envy. That he ought
to go to Syria to take the Command of the army and the authority of the
government, and that he had no other way then to take arms in hand and to
justify himself in the field, Multa quae prouideri non possunt fortuito in
meltus recidun^. Tac.
and that the things which are often apprehended as dangerous, become more
secure then one can provide for, or expect, That he should fear nothing since
the Empress was interessed in his cause, and Tiberius obliged to disingage
him, Est tibi Augustae conscientia, est Caesaris favor, sed in occulto. Tac.
but that favoring him in secret he did conceive worse then if he did hasten
this affair to force him to sustain it publicly, that it was certain that
those that were most pleased with his death made show to be most afflicted
therewith.

Perisse Germanicum.

Haud magna mole Piso promptus ferocibus. Tac.


Piso whose spirit inclined more willingly to dangerous resolutions with
courage then to easy ones with prudence, followed this counsel and went into
Syria: but he found Gn. Sentius opposite unto him, who because he would neither
have nor suffer a companion in his charge, drove him out of the Province and
besieged him in a Castle of Cilicia, and constrained him to render him and to
take his journey to Rome.

Whilst this was doing Agrippina embarked upon the Sea with the ashes of
Germanicus her husband, The Tribunes and the Captains weeping, carried the
vessels wherein the ashes of Germanicus were, upon their shoulders.

Agripp. appellant Decus patriae, solum Augusti sanguinem, vnicum antiquitatis
specimen. Tac.

Tiberius and Augusta publico abstinuere, ne omnium oculis vultum eorum
scrutantibus falsi intelligerentur. Tac.


and landing was received with great honors of all the Estates of Rome, who
manifested an extreme grief for the death of her husband, and an incredibile
joy for the return of the wife and children. The people call Agrippina the
honor of the Country, the sole and true blood of Augustus, the example of the
ancient glory; and added to their cries, vows and prayers for the safety of
his widow and young children, and for the ruin of their enemies.

Tiberius was much offended with these Plaudits and would not be seen at this
entertainment, doubting that his face might bewray that contentment of mind
which he felt inwardly for the death of Germanicus, and commanded the people to
moderate this sorrow, and to bear it, as they had done the defeat of their
armies and the loss of their Captains, the ruin of their great families.

Piso arrived there presently after, regarding so little the threatenings of
Agrippina, that Marcus Vibius a friend of Germanicus telling him that he must
go to Rome to clear himself, Eludens respondit ad futurum vbi Praetor qui de
veneficijs quaereret, reo atque accusatoribus diem praedixisset. Ta^.
he answered sodeinly and in scoffing manner. You shall see me there, when the
Praetor that gives information of the witcheries shall have appointed a day for
the accused and the accusers.

He entered into Rome with a great number of Attendance magnificent and proud,
his wife brave and joyous, the Gates of his house being decked with Laurel,
whereby the people were the more provoked. The day following he was accused of
the death of Germanicus and Tiberius desired to take notice of the Cause. Piso
he desired it, Fuit inter irritamenta inuidiae domus foro imminem festo ornatu.
Tac.
because he feared the affection of the Senators to the memory of Germanicus,
and assuring himself that his warranter should be his Judge, coueted rather to
depend on the authority of one alone, then on the passion of many.

Tiberius saw himself in a straight how to condemn the guilty, and to absolve
his own Conscience, Vera aut in deterius credita iudice ab vno facilius
discernuntur, od um and inuidia apud multos valent. Tac.
for he knew the reports that truth had made current every where against him
and his mother, and that Piso was but the instrument of this Parricide. He
would handle the business with as little business as he could, and heard the
accusers, in the presence of Seianus and some of his most confident and
familiar friends, They demanded justice, Haud fallebat Tiberium moles
cognitionis, quaque ipse fama distraheretur. Ta. Paucis familiarium adhibitis,
minas accusantium and preces audit.
and added threatening to requests. We need not to doubt therefore that he was
advised to let Piso perish, rather then to permit his reputation to be wronged,
and Princes sometime serve themselves of men no longer then they have need of
them.

Facinorum omnium repertor. Tac.
But because the history names Seianus the inuentor of all these mischiefs, he
passed on further and said; That the Emperor ought not to meddle in these
affairs, by condemning Piso he should too much increase the pride of
Agrippina, and in declaring him innocent, he should show that favor would
overcome justice, he durst not say that the complice should absolve the
guilty. It is needful to walk wisely and heedfully in dangerous things, where
the reputation of the Prince runs any hazard.
That it was necessary to remit it to the Senate, and that if he were
condemned, the judgment might be attributed to the passion of Germanicus his
house, if discharged, the blame should lie on the Nobility.

Seianus went to instruct Piso what he should say, assuring him of impunity of
all other crimes, provided that he did not confess the secret of this; The
frame of the puissance of a Prince is altogether founded upon his reputation.
that the Emperor would quench the fire that was kindled, and not permit that
the sick party should die of the sickness whereof he was the cause, and that
his reputation the only frame of his authority obliged him rather to lose
himself, then not to save him.

Piso appeared in the Senate, and there were some orators assigned to speak
for the accusers, and others to defend the accused; the subject was worthy of
the eloquence of the most able, and of such as did not seek for businesses,
Eloquenti exoptat pretium litium numerus. Sen.

Quanta fides amicis Germanici quae fiducia reo, satinne cohiberet ac premeret
sensus suos Tiberius, an promeret. Tac.


but who were sought out for businesses, and who esteemed more the importance
and the quality then the number and multitude of them. Tiberius made a
discourse with such a temperament between the accusation and the accused, that
any might well perceive the contriuing thereof was premeditated. All the City
listened to know what the credit of Germanicus his friends would be, the
assurance of the accused, the countenance of Tiberius; and if he could well
conceal and keep back the sense of his passion, or that he would permit it
to break out. And the people who otherwise regarded not affairs, Popu^^s
multum (...) aut inspicatis silentij per^^tit. Tac.
in this gave themselves much liberty against the Prince, and either in secret
communication they showed their spleen, or in silence they discovered their
suspicions.

You know (my Fathers, said Tiberius) that Piso at other times has been the
friend of Augustus my Father, and Lieutenant of the Army of Spain; and that by
the advice of the Senate he was given to Germanicus my Nephew to assist him in
the government of the affairs of the East. This now considered, Integris
animis iudicandum. Ta.
it is meet you should judge him with pure and sincere spirits, if through his
arrogance or through excess of authority he has offended the mind of this
young Prince, if he has rejoiced at his death, or if he has traitorously and
wickedly been a cause of his death.

For if in this charge of Lieutenantcy he has exceeded the limits of duty,
Legatus officij terminum aut obsequium erga imperatorem non exuit. Tac.
if he has quitted the respect due to a General, if he has manifested
contentment in his death and my sorrow, nothing can hinder it, but that he must
incur my displeasure; I swear to you that I will chase him from my house,
and avenge my injury not in quality of a Prince, but as a private person.

And if you shall discover any wickedness which ought not only to be avenged
in this death, Facinus in cuiuscunque mortalium nece iudic^^^um. Tac.
but in any other you will; I conjure you to consider in this your grief, that
of Germanicus his children, and ours, who are so near to him, neither refuse
to us a just consolation.

Consider on one side how Piso has carried himself in the Army, if he has
caused any trouble or sedition, Quaes^ap^^ ambitionem studiae multum. Tac.
if he has inueagled the hearts of the soldiers to aspire to command; Falsa
in maius vulgant accusatores. Tacit.
and after that Germanicus had taken away his charge, if he did assay to gain
it again by Arms, consider on the other side, if these false and forged
matters have been vented by the Accusers for true, and of greater consequence
then they are.

As for me, I cannot conceal that I am not moved with the passion which they
have manifested. Incerta adhuc sunt scrutanda.
For if they be not as yet well assured of the cause of the death; and if they
have need to be informed thereof, to what purpose have they exposed his naked
body in the public place of Antioch, Reus cuncta proferat, quibus innocentia
eius subleuari possit. Tac.

Obiecta crimina pro approbatis non accipienda. Tac.


and have left it to be handled and viewed by the vulgar people; if this were
not done to make the speech go among strangers, that he was poisoned; and by
this report to draw forth more of bitterness then of truth. In good sooth, I
am sorry for Germanicus my son, and shall be sorry for him all my life long;
but I will not hinder that the accused shall not produce all he has to uphold
his innocence, and prove the wrong which Germanicus has done him.

Si cui propinquus sanguis aut fides sua patronos dedit, quantum quisque
eloquentia and cura valet iuuare periclitantem. Tacit.

In accusations where the grief of the Prince is joined with the cause, we
must not regard his interest.


I conjure you therefore, that you receive not these charges for proofs, under
pretext that this cause is joined to my grief. And you others, who by right of
kindred or of friendship have undertaken the defense of the accused, employ
that industry and eloquence that you have to draw his innocence out of danger:
I exhort the accusers likewise constantly to prosecute the cause: all the
fauou^ that we shall show to Germanicus above the Law shall be no other, then to
be informed of the cause of his death, rather in the Senate house, then in the
common place of judgment, rather by the Senate then by the ordinary justices.
In all other matters we shall use equal moderation. Regard not the tears of
my Brother Drufus above his sons, nor mine above my Nephews; and less all
that wicked malice can feign against us.

It was hereupon given out, Strange proceedings, where time is given to the
accused to answer that which is in his own knowledge, and to the advocates to
color their answers.
that the accusation should be framed within two days, that the parties
accused should have six days to prepare themselves to answer; and that in
three days they should make their answer. She was bold to refute the
empoysoning; her boldness bred some favorable presumption of her innocence;
but she faultred in other crimes.

In the first session Vitellius and Veranius reported to the Senate the last
words of Germanicus, which inclined their hearts to pity, Trionis ingenium
auidumque fama malae. Ta.
as affection had prepared them to favor. Fulcinius Trio, to whom it was all
one to weep and to speak eager to gain reputation by doing ill, began the
accusation: but because he produced nothing but general matters, Vetera ac
inania quae neque conuicta nova reo. Tac.
and old inquisitions of that which Piso had done, the Senate took no regard
of it; for all this could neither hurt the party accused if he should be
convicted, nor serve to his absolution if he should be cleared, if other
where he might be attainted of greater crimes.

Vitellius accompanied the vehemence and force of his discourse with a great
grace and gravity, The consideration of the quality of the accusers, renders
the accusation more strong.
speaking in this manner: Although (ye conscript Fathers) the quality of those
who lament themselves is worthy to be considered, yet is it good for none but
those who seek for aid, otherwise then by the course of justice, and the
reasons of their own complaining.

This cause carries with it favor, A cause weighty in it self needs no other
favor.
and needs no other aid then that of the Law, which is not denied to the
meanest in the world. I could say that those who now implore it, The authority
of a Prince maintains the estate, and that cannot subsist when there is a
neglect of punishing injuries.
are of such quality, that if it be denied them, the Empire have no more to do
either with the Law or the Senate. The issue of Augustus demands justice, the
people expect it, the Judges ought to administer it, and thou Caesar are
obliged both as a Prince and as a kinsman.

Pretend not to bring any favor to this accusation, since in representing the
offense as a Prodigy, Ingens luctus prouinciae and circumia centium populorum;
indoluere exterae nationes regesque. Tac.
the offender as a Parricide, the deceased for such a one as every man laments;
foreign nations have admired, the confederates have sorrowed, this city has
praised moderation in all things, except in this one so just sorrow. Germanicus
is no more; O what sorrow! we have lost; O what misfortune! Germanicus the
delight of the world, the love of the country; so bountiful toward the
citizens, so courteous toward strangers, was slain miserably and
traitorously. Illi comitas in socios, mansuetudo in hosts. Tac.
And by whom? by Piso, a wicked and ungrateful man. By whom also? by Plancina,
a fury disguised in shape of a woman. By what means? by charms and poisons.
Who are the accomplices? Sorcerers fetched out of hell. And wherefore? To avenge
the injury and to usurp Command.

The spirits of wicked ones (conscript fathers) deprave not themselves all at
once, Nemo tantum a naturali lege defciuit and hominem exuit, vt animi causa
malus sit. Sen.
neither can any espouse wickedness by pleasure alone, they form their
designs from a far off, and carry them to extremities; Piso by light faults
is ascended up to greater, by covetousness to rapacitie, from thence to
practices, then to ambition, and from ambition to the violating of the
authority of the law, to come to the dispising of the power of the Gods. He
has given to Spain the proof of his avarice, to Syria of his ambition, to
the house of Germanicus of his impiety.

As Soon as you had honored him with the charge of being Germanicus his
Lieutenant, Haud inuito imperatore ea fier^ occultus rumor incedebat. Tac.
he kept it not close that he desired that of the General, and used practices
in Rome to render him hateful to his Father and in the army to cause him to be
despised of the Soldiers. He practiced then to draw them to his devotion,
chased away the tribunes that would not depend of him, filled their places with
bold persons, and to make himself beloved of the men of war, Desidia
incastr^^ licentia in vrbibus. Tac.
permitted idleness in the camp, and disorders in the Cities, insolences in
the field: and thenceforth he was called the Father of the Legions: on the
other side Plancina went cheek by iolle with Agrippina, and enterprised things
above the modesty of women, she was found sometimes using the exercise of
knights and running courses of light horse.

And although this was rude to a spirit whose actions were all civil, Secreta
studia pati non pote^t animus ad Ciuilia erectus agendique cupidus. Sen.
yet he desired rather to cloak them, then to offend the Emperor his Father,
with importunate complaints He commanded Piso to lead a part of the Legions
into Armenia, or at least to send his son thither, but he would do neither,
the one nor the other, Si quando adsideret atrox ac dissentire manifestus. Tac.
and thereby lost the occasion of doing great service to the Emperor. When he
was in counsel near Germanicus, or in the seat of justice under him, he
stiffly and imprudently opposed all his opinions.

I will rehearse unto you an incredible insolency, but so certain that none
dare deny it, to show that sottishnes and malice were companions and sisters in
all his actions. Being at the feast of the king Nabates, when he saw that the
crounes of gold which were given him, were neither of the beauty nor the
weight of those of Germanicus or of Agrippina, he threw them on the ground, and
being no less foolish then malicious, he began to reprove the sumptuousness
of the feast, and discoursing against Luxury, said, that such expense was
proporcionable to an Emperor, and not to the son of the King of the Parthians.

Poor sot, did thou think ever after this to find credit in the heart, or
security in the following of Germanicus, whom thou had so impudentlie
offended? although he was blamed because he was too good and that he endured
too much. Think thou that there was in the world a safe retiring place, to
guard thee against the rage of a Prince of Augustus blood? Have thou heard it
said, that hearts of such breeding, have been offended and not punished? And
lo therefore Plancina, who esteemed not her self could be happy so long as
Agrippina was happy, said that she must needs either perish or revenge her
self, and pull this thorn out of thy heart, or permit that she might pluck it
out of thy breast.

It is a generous kind of revenge, to let ones enemy see that he can avenge
himself.
Ye (conscript Fathers) admire the goodness and generousnesse of this Prince,
who having been so often and so to the quick offended by Piso, was always
contented to let him know he could avenge himself and save him when he might
have ruined him. He came to find him at Rhodes, and being well advertised of
all the plots he had framed against him, Nescius quibus insectationibus
peteretur, mansuetudine tamen agebat. Tac.
yet he bare himself toward him with so much equality and moderation, that
upon the advertisement which he had received, that fortune had cast him upon
some shelues, he sent him certain Barks to fetch him off, Potest quandoque
interitus inimici ad casum referri. Tac.
although if he would have deserted him, he could have blamed none other then
chance, and that fortune had conspired for his auengment.

Germanicus visiting Egypt had the curiosity to see the heads of Nile, Nilus
cuius in narrabilis natura est, cum mundo traxit principia. Sen.
(that memorable river which had its beginning with the world) and at his
return found that Piso had changed the order in which he had left affairs at
his departure, that which he had secured was shaken, Amici accedendis
effusionibus callidi. Tacit.
and that which he had commanded was despised. He grew angry, his servants
animated him to resent it, and his dissembling kept not back his choler, but
that it was made manifest by his words, and his revenge by his threatenings,
Piso retired himself: Germanicus fell sick: Piso who knew how far the
disease would go, went not far off, and the violence of the poison hastened
his death.

Ah cruel! Hear the words of this Prince when he was dying and those dying
words which shall eternally live in the memory of the Romans. The last words of
a dying Prince increase the complaint against the authors of his death.
I dye miserably in the flower of mine age by the treason of Piso and
Plancina. I conjure you my friends to make it be seen to the people of Rome,
that these wickednesses have cut the throat of the Nephew of Augustus, and of
six small children. What hearts are these, which these words will not bray and
bruise? And do thou yet live Piso? and does the Sun yet give thee light? Thy
conscience not knowing where to hide thee, Tutum aliqua res in mala conscientia
praestat, nulla securum. Sen.
has conducted thee hither to be punished, and could not consent to the
security which thou soughtest after elsewhere, so that as she has failed thee
to dissolve this crime, she her self has betrayed thee to conduct thee to
punnishment. What have thou done after this Parricide? Subdola mora scelerum
probationes subuertit. Tac.
Thou visitedst the Cities of Asia: Thou spentst thy time at the fair houses
of Achaia. This was done to no other end but to make the proofs vain, the
witnesses to die, we must now (O ye conscript Fathers) put Piso in the estate
of a vanquished man to reduce him to that of an accused.

Mihi fasces and vis Praetor^^, mihi legiones dare. Tac.
He did not as that honest man Valerius Publicola did, who being accused
quitted his house of Velia and lodged in the village, to the end that they
might take no pains in searching for him, He that is innocent shuns not
judgment, and he that is culpable keeps himself a loofe from the judges.

When great ones are accused, they ought to suffer themselves to be found
easily.
If any man had accused him for taking Arms, he purposed to have shadowed it
under the Command which he had in Syria under Germanicus his General, if to
have meddled with the moneys of the public, he persuaded himself that that
part thereof which he should keep for his friends might save the cost. He
may free himself for a little who has stolen much.

Venenum nodo crinium occultatum, nec ulla in corpore signa sumpti exitij
reperta. Tacit.
If Martina that famous sorceresse and empoysonnesse, the great friend of
Plancina had not bin dead, she would have discovered all the secrets of this
treason. The friends of Germanicus would have had her been brought to Rome,
but when she was at Brundusium she dyed suddenly, and the poison hid in the
knots of her hair appeared not at all in her body.

Suorum insidijs externas inter gentes occidit. Tacit.
If the truth may be aided by presumptions, no man can say that this Prince,
who has sound less security among his own then amongst strangers, was
killed by any other then Piso who durst have enterprized it? he had offended no
man but him, and for the resentment of this offense, he was declared his enemy
and thrust himself into his charge, and every man knows it is hard to sever
the desire of death from that of the succession.

One once in this place of a Proscript man who to enjoy the goods of his wife,
So Leponina f^llow d (...) husband Iul^^s Sabinus in Vespasians time
told her that he would kill himself, she added that she would accompany him.
He prepared the deadly drugge but with such cunning, that he drinking first
left the poison, which by reason of the ponderousness thereof, sunk down to
the bottom for his wife to drink: she died; he was well enough and enjoyed
the goods which she had left by her testament. Seldom any escape of that poison
which is given by an heir.

Who rejoices more at the death of any then he that has procured it, and who
desires it more ardently then he that has waited for it more impatiently? How
did Piso take this? He sacrificed and slew burnt offeringes: Plancina was so
transported with this joy, Luctus laeto cultu mutatus. Ta.
that she laid a side her grief which she began to apprehend for the death of
her sister, and adorned her self in the richest and best garments she had.

This accusation abounded with so many diversities, and the resolution to make
an end of Germanicus was furnished with so many Mischiefs, that they oppressed
him, Nil ordinatur quod praecipiatur and properat. Se.
and carried him headlong into the folly of this discourse, and he had much to
do to range it into any order. I had forgotten to show how Piso sent spies to
discover the weak estate of Germanicus, and the accidents that happened
thereupon. This grieved the sick person and vexed his soul, not for fear,
for he was never afraid of death, but for anger and sorrow, apprehending that
as soon as breath was out of his body Piso would vsurp the command of his
forces, and his wife should be at his appointment. Piso also was somewhat
weary that the poison wrought so slowly and that it had no sooner wrought it is
effect, and entered into Syria, to be more near the legions and to serve
himself with them upon occasion: This was the cause why Germanicus said of his
distress: This is a very sensible grief to die in the sight of ones enemy and
to leave his wife and his children to his power.
Well then, if I must needs dye by the cunning of mine enemy and that he must
see me render up my spirit, what shall be found out for my wife? How shall she
be dealt withal? What shall become of my children, who in this accident will
not want tears to bewail me, and will have no words at all to lament
themselves? Let that come to pass which the heavens have determined, Piso has
taken away my life: but he has left me the courage, When the Romans would
break friendship with any one, they would advertize him of it and forbad him
their house. Titus Livius.
and I do not find my self brought to that weakness, that I ever will
consent that the murderer shall gain his reward by my death. Upon this he
sent a letter under his hand, importing that he held him his enemy, that he
forbad him to come into his house, and so to soiourne there in that Province.

For none doubted but that the witchcraft seconded the poison, when they saw
the bones of dead men plucked from their members and tied to the walls and
seeling of his Chamber, Maleficijs animae numinibus infernisacrae. Tacit.
the characters of charms and imprecations, Germanicus his name engraven in
plates of Lead, of ashes half burnt and made into paste with the putrifactione
of ulcers and other witchcrafts and impieties, which they use to do vote any
one to death sacrificing him to the infernal gods.

Although this Prince was dying and even at the last cast, Moderatur cursui,
qui vult proprius regredi. Tacit.
yet Piso feared and by his commandment loosed the Anchor and retired
himself: but he went not very far, that he might not have far to return
when he should have advertisement of his death. And if all this put together
serves not to convince them, where would he the truth should seek out proofs?

So that (ye conscript Fathers) you see before your eyes a man who has
brought from the womb of his mother violence and the spirit of rebellion, for
he is son of a father who followed the party of Brutus and Cassius: He is
not only an extortioner, but a thief, Cicero said the offense of Verres
constrained the Judges to condemn him.
not a quarreller but a raiser of sedition, not an enemy but a rebel, not a
murderer but an assassin; never any delinquent has given you more pressing
cause to dispatch him then he; for the accursednesse of his crime will
constrain you to condemn him, and if in despite of the gods and of men, you
pardon him, it will be impossible to save him out of the hands of the people,
who attend this business: and hearken (O ye Conscript Fathers) how they cry
in this palace, there i^ not a woman so little that does not promise to her
self to tear of some hair of his head.

Represent to your selves that the joy of the people is when they see the
chief Authors of rebellion drawn behind the triumphant Chariot, When he that
triumphs passes by the Capitol he sends his prisoners to the Magistrates
and dares not lead them to his own house.

ILictor, colligae manus, caput (...) obnubito, arbori infoelici suspendito.
Cicero.


and on the morrow after executed in reparation of the inhumanities and
cruelties they have done in the Provinces, they will be more content when they
shall see Piso go to be punished.

The people will loose their patience if you pronounce not speedily the solemn
sentence: Hangman take this Parricide, this robber, this rebel, bind his
hands, blind his eyes, tie him to a miserable gallows: And who knows if this
multitude transported with grief and sorrow will stay there; if they will
content themselves with one alone, and that they fall not upon those who favor
this wicked man esteeming them more wicked then he.

Non maius scelus in R. P. commisit reus quam ij qui eum a tam nefarijs
sceleribus sententia sua liberam. Cic.

In case of judgment of persons of quality, we must consider the time and the
reason of State.

Eloquentia nulli tota contingit. Sen.


No no: (ye conscript fathers) they will not be mocked, the matter is too
important, the consequence too great, and this man such a one that there is too
much danger to commit a fault in his case. Believe I pray you, that neither the
accused, nor the time, nor the place, nor the reason of state, nor the
qualities of the parties can consent that they should be bereaved of the
example, that he should be delivered in secret, or that he should not be
executed in public.

Marcus Lepidus who had as much eloquence as he possibly could have, for never
any man had all, speaking for Piso answered the accusers in this manner:

Great honors are burdens which tire those that bear them. Ludos facit
fortuna. Sen.
It is a great unhappiness (yea conscript fathers) for poor Piso to have
been happy. Great honors serve sometimes to the felicity of them that deserve
them not at all, and those who have first merited them shall find their ruin
by a strange extrauagancie, or a iugling of fortune, who giving to others
contentments, to this man gives nothing but trouble.

The great services performed by Piso to Augustus obliged the Emperor to make
him Lieutenant to Germanicus, Unhappy is that dignity which has no credence at
all with the Prince.
but this honor was accompanied with so many thwartings that his faithfulness
found no favor, nor his counsel any credence in the heart of this young
Prince, who being not affrighted by encountering of things impossible elevated
his thoughts above his duty, threatening the Sun of obscurity, the Ocean of
bondage, whence arose those thoughts of greatness which troubled those of the
Emperor.

His affection to his Country, his faith to his Prince obliged him to watch
over his actions, which he found always so bold and high, Nec in astra lenta
veniet vianter ruina quaeret. Sen. Tr.
that he believed that this young Hercules had not yet attempted to mount above
the Stars neither handsomely nor peaceably, and that he would enter by a
breach to the ruin of the Empire. These designs of an unbridled ambition
could not come to any happy end, and Piso was not a whit astonished, Necesse
est opprimant onera quae ferenti maiora sunt. Sen.
when the Priest of the oracle of Apollo told him at Colophon that he should
not continue there very long, for the charge which he had undertaken was too
weighty for his forces.

But as Princes love better to be flattered in their errors than advertised in
their duties, Malo veris offendere quam placere adulando. Sen.
he presently remained distasted, that Piso loved rather to displease him with
truth, than to be agreeable to him with flattery. He conceived that his
freeness was presumption, when he showed him the way from which he had
swarued and that which he ought to hold, especially when he told him that he
did wrong to the Majesty of the Empire, when he treated common men so
respectively and so courteously that sink of Athenians, Quod colluviem illam
nationum comitate nimia coluisset. Tac.
who always followed the party contrary to ours, neither was it ever without
some practice of revolt toward us, having assisted Mithridates against Sylla
and Antony against Augustus. Inter alia dominationis arcana Augustus vetitis
seposuit Aegiptum. Ta. Levi praesidioingentes exercitus coercentur. Tac.
Was it by the counsel of Piso that he went into Aeypt against the ancient
ordinance of Augustus, who left it you for a secret of estate never to to
permit great persons to go into Egypt, because reuolting against us they
might there with a few men resist a great army, and prohibiting the bringing of
corn from thence might famish Italy.

Call to your memory (O Caesar) (but let nothing of importance escape you) the
displeasure you received when Piso advertised you that this young Prince
directed all his actions to vanity and ambition; In vulgus grata, sine milite
incedere pedibus, intectus and pari cum Graecis amictu. Ta.
that to gain the hearts of the people, he gave them great gratuities of money
and of corn that he marched without guards, on foot, meanly attended, and
went apparelled after the Greek manner as at another time Scipio had done.

All the furies of hell could not invent a more detestable Calumny then of this
poison whereof Piso is accused, Tenus mendacium pellucet. Se.
but it is so minced and subtle, that falsehood may be transparently seen
through it. How is it possible that you Vitellius who have your eyes open and a
clear judgment, Non minus vitandum supervacanea dicere quam contraria. Sen.
not to speak of superfluous things, you now affirm contrary. What appearance
is there that Piso eating at the table of Germanicus who always observed him
diligently, had the leisure to take the poison to rub his fingers to waste his
victuals. Absurdum inter aliena seruitia and tot astantium visu. Tacit.
Is this easy in another man's house in the presence of a Prince to whom they
give so much trust, who has so many eyes that watch over all.

Si patrem pulsaverit, manus ei praecidatur. Se.
If this be true let Piso consent, not that the hand which has done this
Parricide may be cut off, but that the heart which has conceived it may be
plucked alive out of his breast, Offerebat familiam reus and ministrosin
tormenta. Ta.
and that to find out the truth none may hinder but that the rack may be
given to all his family and all his servants.

There is nothing so foul as an injury which returns against him that has
spoken it. Plut.
He is not altogether without fault, there is no man exempt, Diamonds have their
blemishes, the fairest visages their spots, but he is neither wicked nor a
traitor. Those that reproach him of pride are not without arrogance; if he be
choleric they are violent, he never attempted against the life of princes.

If he has exercised any severity in his charge he rather did it out of duty
then of his own inclination. It is for Princes to seek to make themselves to
be beloved, Magistrates ought to be more curious to make themselves to be
feared than to be beloved. There is nothing so natural as to hat^ those who
persecute us.
and for Magistrates to make themselves to be feared. If he failed in his
respect and affection toward Germanicus, it is also a very hard matter to be
constrained to love those who have resolved and sworn ones ruin. Germanicus,
as all great men, had written the services of Piso in the sands and all his
offenses in Marble, if we may so call those sincere and faithful aduises
which he gave unto him for his good government.

He confessed that Germanicus his death had drawn out of his heart a growing
thorn, and a wearisome fear that he was very joyful to see his house
delivered from so puissant an enemy, Tiberius from a Nephew so ambitious, the
Empire from a Prince so undertaking: Germanicus would have ruined Piso and the
heavens ruined Germanicus, and by his death made him know that there is a
Justice above, The Eagle having snatched up the little rabbets the damme
undermines the tree and throws down the Eagles nest, and the Eaglets remain
at her mercy.

Mala and impia consuetudo contra Deos disputandi, sive ex animo id fiat sive
simulate. Cic.


that auengeth the violences of the great ones upon the little ones. It is
permitted to them to spit in our faces or to set their feet upon our throats
to raise themselves above us, yet the smallest living Creatures have had
Justice over the Eagle. There is nothing so sweet as revenge, what soever it
cost, this is a viand which one may swallow down without chewing.

But Piso never attempted against his life, although he desired his death, and
being assured that it was natural, this is a great wickedness to feign that
it was violent: the gods would have it so. It is not permitted to dispute
neither with studied arguments nor by way of discourse of their power.

If he had sought to gain any credit amongst the men of war this was but
only to lessen that of Germanicus. Prompta Pisoni Legionum studia.
His ambition tended to ruin, that of Piso to conservation: the one
administered jealousy to Tiberius and the other was a bridle to Germanicus. If
he gained the goodwill of the Provinces was he forbidden to cherish it? Amor
affectus liber qui vices exigit. Plin.
Are not affections free? what harm is it then if they be rendered reciprocally.

But he affected rather to submit himself to the bounty of Caesar then
obstinatly to put himself to the defense of his innocence. He implored with
joined hands this Royal virtue which detesteth the brutish thirst of blood,
Ferina rabies sanguine gaudere. Sen.
and beseeches you great Prince to imitate the heavens which have more thunder
to make men afraid, then lightning to punish them.

If all be inexorable, and that the accusers hasten to take and snatch away
that soul which they have already so stirred and turmoyled, Nihil tam
periculosum fortunis innocentium, quam tacere adversarios. Cic.
he will dye with this Consolation, that his innocence has found no protection
and that he chose rather to perish then to offend those who might save him.

There was some obscurity in the accusation of the empoysoning, this was a
Pyramide which showed not it self all at once, for of three sides there is
always one which cannot be seen: Piso and Plancina his wife appeared, but the
third hid Tiberius and Tiberius Sejanus.

A tribuno deductus, vario rumore, custos salutis an mortis exactor. Tac.
This first audience being finished Piso came forth, and the people were so much
provoked against him, that if they had not put him into a Coach with some to
guard, it he had never returned to his house neither safe nor alive. That which
the vulgar sort could not do to his person they did to his representation
drawn to the Gibbet.

Plancina his wife who had promised him to run alike fortune with him, Portia
said, that she was not partner only at the bed and at the table of her
husband, as a concubine: but that she was companion of his good and ill fortune
as his wife. Plut.

This opinion was common and Josephus assures it. One drank in a silver
vessel a frantic love potion in stead of Greek wine and amidst Ambrosia one
took Arsenicke in a golden plate which took away his life.


forsook him to fall to lightness, a vice natural to that sex: and being
assured of her life by the favor of the Empress she cared no more for that of
Piso, and abandoned him as if she had never married him, but to partake of his
prosperity.

The Judges out of diverse respects were implacable against the accused. Caesar
would have had him put to death because he had entered into the Province in
arms, the Senate believed assuredly that Germanicus was poisoned, and amongst
violent deaths poisoning was held to be the greatest execration: so much the
rather that because thereby persons most dear and precious were snatched from
the Commonwealth: that poison entered and mingled it self more easily in
vessels of gold then of earth. There is no Antidote which is of greater virtue
or efficacy against poison, then a private Condition, which fears not that
avarice can usurp upon his goods nor envy upon his dignities. It was certain
nevertheless that this empoysoning was never clearly proved, nor confidently
affirmed by the accusers. Veneni crimen accusatores non satis firmabant. Tac.
It was neither spoken of in Antioch or in Rome but according to the affection
that men bare toward the deceased, or the hatred toward the living.

Tacitus says that it was not certain that any tokens of poison appeared upon
his death; Suetonius, Praetulerit veneficij signa, parum constitit. Tac.
that he was seen couerd over with Purple spots, a foame about his mouth and
that his heart was found whole amongst the ashes. Livores toto corpore, spumae
per os fluebant, cor inter ossa incorruptum Sue. Genere morbi defensus est
Piso. Plin. Negatur cor cremari posse in his qui cardiaco morbo obierint and
veneno interemptis. Plin.
Pliny, that Vitellius pressed Piso hard upon this who made the arrowe rebound
against them that shot it; and as some affirmed that Germanicus having been
poisoned, his heart resisted the fire, others maintained that Germanicus dying
of a disease of the heart, his heart could not be burnt. Thus the Hypothesis
always remained in question and as well the one as the other had truth on its
side, being alike true according to Pliny that the heart of those who dye of
poison or of the disease of the heart consumes not in the fire. But the worst
piece of Pisoes process was the extreme boldness of the people, who taking the
report for proof cryde out at the gate of the Palace that they would do
Justice upon Piso if it were not done. Nullo magis exterritus est quam quod
Tiberium sine miseratione sine ira obstinatum clausumque vidit. Tac.


All this astonished Piso very much, who the second day appeared before the
Senate, to see if they were any whit changed from their former severity. He
found the air quite of a contrary temper, Tiberius so cold that for fear to
discover himself he inclined neither to choler to ruin him nor to pity to
give him any hope. He conceived thereupon that he had no other refuge neither
for his innocence nor for his truth. Seianus told him nevertheless that
Tiberius would strike the stroke when it should be fit time, and that he would
not suffer him to perish. He that is convinced of one crime is punished for
many. In offenses against the State they make no recompense at all according to
the merit of the offense.
Others affright him saying that although he were declared innocent for the
death of Germanicus, they would put him to death for other crimes. For Tiberius
was so altered upon that, that he was entered in arms into Syria, that he would
make an him example, not permitting that his service should make compensation
for his fault.

Seianus cared not at all to loose Piso and provided always that he spoke not
of the secret Commandment, but he feared that seeing him condemned he might not
complain to the Senate of the Judgment, and of his punishment to the Emperor,
and that although he spoke not against Tiberius, yet he might against him. The
interest of children preuayleth above that of the parents.
The consideration of his children extinguished in his mind all the resentment
of the injury which he suffered, and seeing himself about to perish he was
desirous to perish alone. And to the end their innocence might be severed from
his punishment, he writ a letter to Tiberius beseeching him to take pity
upon them, and this being done he resolved to make an end of himself by
cutting his own throat. He dyed not for fear of death, but that he might not
die according to the pleasure of his enemies. This is a fury, to die for fear
of death.
If there be any thing irksome in a public death, it is especially for the
grief and shame of the contentment that one gives to their enemies.

When this death was reported to the Senate, Caesar flexo in moestitiam ore.
Tacit.
one might observe grief in Tiberius his countenance, but it was feined and to
stupifie these Judgments which any might make to the prejudice of this
accident, and to assure his countenance for his discourse he informed amongst
other things of that which Piso had done the day before and how he passed the
night. Pleraque sapienter quaedam incon^^^ ^s. Tac
There were some of them that answered discreetly, others more inconsideratly
as in such occasions, some there are who will not seem to know that which one
would have them ignorant of.

Upon this Tiberius read the letters that Piso had written to him in this
manner. Conspiratione inimicorum and invidia falsi criminis veritati and
innocentiae nusquam locus. Tac.
Since that (Caesar) I see my self oppressed thorough the conspiracy of mine
enemies, and the violence of a false accusation which permits not any place
in the Senate, neither for the truth, nor for my innocence, the gods are my
witnesses that I have never failed of faithfulness toward you, nor of reverence
toward your mother, and in that respect I beseech you to think upon my
children. Gn: Piso ought to have no part in my fortune whatsoever it be, for
he has not stirred from Rome. M: Piso dissuaded me from going into Syria, and
I wish that the Father had accommodated himself to the youth of the Son,
Qualiscunque fortunae meae non est adiunctus. Tac.
and that the Son had not given way to the age of the father. For this cause,
I beseech you, with great earnestness that his innocence bear not the
punishment of mine obstinacy: and seeing my self in that state that I shall
never desire any thing more of you. I conjure you by 45. years service; by the
account that Augustus your Father held of me, when I was his Colleague in the
Consulship, ^ravitatis poenas innoxius non luat. Tac.
and for the friendship which you have borne toward me to save my poor
children.

He spoke not at all of his wife, and how should he be mindful of her, who had
forgotten him in this extreme distress, and who had perhaps promised the
Empress and Sejanus to open his chamber door to let in murderers to kill
him. Nihil quicquam post hac rogaturus salutem infoelicis filij rogo. Tac.


Tiberius having read the letters said, that although Piso had deserved this
mishap whereinto he was headlongly rushed: yet he pitied him for the alone
respect of his house; that it was reasonable notwithstanding to conserve the
branches of the tree which was cut down, and not to cause his punishment to
pass upon his innocent children, Patris iussa fil^us non p test detrectare.
Tac.
that absence discharged the one and the command of the father excused the
other, and that for this cause they ought not to be comprised under the offense
of taking of arms. As for Plancina, he entreated the Senate to yield her to
the entreaties of his mother. The whole assembly was offended at the impudency
and impiety of this demand, honest folk murmured against this woman, as the
cause that Germanicus was dead and that Piso was slain. Fas aviae
interfectricem nepotis adspicere, adloqui, cripere Senatui? Tac.
Well then (said they) the Empress shall have the credit of saving the
murderer of her Grandchild to see her, to comfort her for the death of her
husband, to snatch her out of the hands of the Senate. Will not the Laws grant
that to Germanicus which they deny not to the meanest Citizen? Vitellius and
Veranius who had no correspondency which Germanicus have deeply lamented his
death, Venena and arts semel foeliciter expertae in alterius exitium facile
vertuntur. Ta.
and shall Augustus his Grandfather defend Plancina who has been cause of his
death? and who can expect other from her, then that the force of her poisons
and witcheries having had such fortunate success, she may employ them also
against Agrippina and her children, to satisfy the thirst of their Grandsire
and the Uncle with the blood of this miserable family, and to appease the wrath
of Sejanus.

The opinions being recollected Aurelius Cotta said, Nomina sceleratorum e
fastis radenda. Ta.
that the memory of Piso ought to be extirpated, and his name raced and blotted
out of the public Registers and Annals, the moity of his goods confiscate,
the other part given to Gn: Piso his son to change his name: Concessa
Plancinae incolumitas ob preces Augustae. Tacit.
that M: Piso should be deprived of his Offices, and banished for ten years
with 500. Sesterces for his entertainment, that Plancina should have her life
granted to her in regard of the requests of the Empress. Every one allowed of
this advise.

Pudore flagitij princeps placabilior fit. Tac.
Tiberius who had what he desired sweetened the rigor of this judgment, for the
hatred of the absolution of Plancina made him less severe toward her sons,
not holding it convenient that he should pardon the mother being a Murdresse
to condemn the innocent children. He said that the name of Piso should remain
in the Kalenders, as well as that of Antony who had made war against his Country.
Messalina said, that he ought to hang up a golden ensign in the Temple of Mars
the auenger and Caecinna Seuerus an altar to revenge. No (says Tiberius) that
is not fitting but only in case of victories gotten of strangers; Domestica
mala tristitia operienda. Tac.
we must cover domesticke miseries with sadness.

Fulcinius Trio who had so mightily declaimed against Piso besought him to aid
him, with his favor to arrive to his offices, he answered him. Take heed of
precipitating your eloquence through the impetuosity of your passion; Facundia
non est violentia praecipitanda. Ta.
he was angry that he had too much pressed Piso touching this poison, for all
the words which he spoke of this subject touched him to the quick: he was
desirous that he would represent Agrippinaes passion without showing himself
passionate. Rerum humanarum ubique ludibria. Tac, Audivi ex senioribus qui ad
nostramusque iuventam durauerunt. Ta.
Behold how these vanities of humane things end.

Tacitus says to this purpose: I remember that I have heard in my youth of
some of this time who had often seen certain pieces of writing in the hands
of Piso which he never published, but that his friends told every where, that
they contained the Commission and commands that Tiberius had given him against
Germanicus; and that he had resolved to have produced them in the Senate to
convince the Prince, Elusus a Seiana per vana promissa Piso. Ta.
but that Seianus had deceived him through his vain promises and that he was
not slain by him, but that he had sent one to slay him in the night.

Death freed Piso, but Tiberius and Seianus were accounted never the more
innocent, Per noct^s creberrime acelamatum est, Read Germanicum. Suet.
and one might every night hear cries about the Palace. Restore to us
Germanicus.

This death whether it were voluntary or forced, diminished the hatred of the
people against Piso and increased it against Tiberius, and so much the more in
that he had saved his wife; and having brought this miserable man into the pit
would not draw him forth again.

If Piso had left his cause to the course of justice and law, and that he had
suffered death as one who never had feared it, one would have pitied his
misery. Confidence lesseneth the infamy of punishment.
There is no life so odious that ending in public with constancy and modesty,
changes not hatred into pity, pity into favor, and leaves not some
favorable opinion of innocence.

Germanicus his death gave less contentment to Seianus than to Tiberius, for
this Prince held all their resolutions in check. Tiberius knew that so long as
he lived he should not be Emperor. Our enemies constrain us to live regularly
and to keep our life unreprovable, as it were in a thin diet. Plut.
Seianus despaired that he ever could be, and that he might dispose of the
Empire so absolutely as he did afterward, for this Prince kept him short, and
as it were in a strict diet. The great affection which he held in the hearts of
the great ones, middle ones and mean ones, mightily crossed his ambition. But
after his death fortune bare him up the wind so, that his pride and insolence
split the sails of his vessel and of his conduct.

Tiberius believed that he had more authority, but he was never the less
mistrustfull, imagining that so many friends as Germanicus had left, so many
conspirators there were and therefore he said, that he held the Empire but as a
wolf by the ears, Lupum auribus teneo.
fearing least it should escape him, and being escaped bite him; he feared that
every one had a purpose to take it from him. He caused the natiuities of the
principle men of Rome to be cast, and according as it was reported unto him
that their Stars promised some excellency above others, he suppressed,
banished and put them to death. He understood that Galba might attain
thereunto, and therefore meeting with him the day he was married, he said unto
him, and thou Galba shall one day taste of the Empire, Dion and Tac.
and yet he enterprised nothing against him, because this dignity was fatally
destined for him.

Seianus amongst the precepts of his government had this, to nourish distrust
always in the heart of Tiberius, to the end that he trusting none else might
put confidence in him. The greater housen which were descended, from those
brave and generous spirits, who were sacrificed for preserving the liberty of
their Country, were suspected of Tiberius; who desired to raise the
principality above the foundation of Augustus, and hateful to Seianus who
could not brook, that virtue should oppose his fortune. Libi Drusus being
descended by his father from Augustus, Liboni proavus Pompeius, amita
Scribonia, consobrini Caesares. Tac.
and by his mother from Pompey the great was one of the principal young men of
Rome, and as this birth giving hope to his courage, gained him respect amongst
the great ones, so the same was the cause of his fall.

His youth being forward and without judgment, Defertur mo^ri res novas. Ta.
carried him to thoughts higher then the times permitted them, and he was for
this cause always so suspected by Tiberius, that being at the sacrifices, he
commanded the Master of the Ceremonies to give to Libo one of the Sacrificers a
knife of lead, to the end that he should attempt nothing against his person.
Another time he demanding audience in secret, he caused his son Drusus to
come thither, and feining to have need to be supported in his walking, he
held fast Liboes right hand, who spoke to him, carrying his eye firmly upon
all his motions. This young man had one of the Roman Senators his entire
friend, who plotted his ruin, considering that to advance his fortune the
shortest way, Iuvenis improvidus and facili^ inanibus. Ta.
was to ruinate those that shadowed that of Sejanus. He possessed this light
spirit, that there was some great matter written in heaven for him, he lead
him to debauched courses which drew on excessive expenses, and he conducted him
into those discommodities, Hortatur ad luxum and aes alienum, socius libidinum
and necessitatum, quo pluribus indicijs indagaret. Ta.
that this naughty friend did nothing but lull him a sleep with nothing but
vain hopes. Necessity made him dream, to what he should come, and put him
into the curiosity to inform himself of Astrologers, of that which the
stars had promised him, the ordinary refuge of weak minds that seek
patronage. To know more also, his friend caused him to confer with Magicians,
who demanded of their Devils that which they knew, and who told him nothing
true; for a little after all his hopes were turned into despair.

Tib. non vultu alienatus non verbis commotior cuncta eius dicta factaque cum
prohibere posset scire malebat. Ta.
The Senator reported all this to Tiberius, who was glad to see this young man
fallen into the pit, and yet nevertheless he forbore not to show him good
countenance to give him the estate of a Praetor, and sent for him often to his
Table. Upon a sudden he causes him to be accused to the Senate as of a great
enormious and important matter. Behold him brought now into the state of an
accused man, he changes his garments, Reus obsoletius vestiebatur. Cic.
the chief Ladies of the City being a kin to him solicit for him; there is
no man will meddle with his defense, for when the question is of conspiracy
against the Prince all intercessions are suspected, and favors, It was not
permitted to sick persons to go in their Litter but to the door of the Senate.
crimes. He goes to the Palace in a Lectica, for this blow being not
foreseen had abated the vigor of his health, and sustained by the hand of his
brother, he enters the Senate house, and when he saw Tiberius a great way off,
he held up his hands imploring mercy with great humility.

This Tigre laid hold with his teeth on all the excellent Spirits of his times.
A Poet having uttered some free words against him, Quod in Tragoedia
Agamemnonem probris lacessisset. Suet.
was put to death; not for that, but because in a certain Tragedy he had
disgraced Agamemnon, and transgressed against the respect due to Kings.
Tiberius punished the offenses against Seianus, as rigorously as those against
himself; for they made him believe that he received the Counterbuffe of all
that was done against him. Princes are offended when we blame their favorites,
He that blames the favor of the Prince blames his judgment.
because it seems we accuse the weakness of their judgments in the election
of a Subject unworthy their favor. The workman is obliged to protect his
workmanship, the painter is angry if one cast dirt on the Table he has
painted, They seek out old faults to serve for new examples of severity. The
Senate had ordained that Seianus his Statue should be erected in Pompeis
theater, which Tiberius had caused to be reedified, Cordus stung with this
injury done to the memory of Pompey, cried out that that was not the way to do
but to undo, Qui non rumperetur supra cineres Gn. Pompeij constituere Seianum?
Sen.
and to place Seianus above the heads of all the Romans and to set up a simple
soldier on the Monument of a renowned Captain. He said true, but truth does
not excuse indiscretion, which beareh inconsiderately the censure of great
ones. Seianus remembered it, yet accuses him not for it, Novum ac primum
auditum crimen. Ta.
but disposes Tiberius to look into his life, of which, all the parts were
found innocent and praiseworthy: but his writings are likewise examined, and a
history which he had penned of Augustus, and which Augustus himself had read.
He was accused that he had not sufficiently extolled Caesar nor Augustus, and
that he had to much praised Brutus, Plut.
and to have termed Cassius the last man among the Romans.

Satrius Secundus and Pinarius Natta were his accusers, Seianus his creatures;
Le credit dee accusateurs, cest le desespoir del accusees.

Seiani clientes, id perniciabile reo. Tac.


and this quality made the ruin of the accused infallible, and put his
innocence into despair. The Judge himself made him perceive by his sad
countenance and terrible language, that he was set there not to hear, but to
condemn him; not to make his process but to appoint his punishment; L'
innocence des actions doit excuser le fault de parolles.

Verba mea arguuntur, adeo sum factorum innocens.


neither did Cordus move for the safety of his life, for he was sure to lose
it; but for the honor of the truth, and glory of his works, he spoke in this
manner,

My actions are so innocent, that they accuse only my words; and yet have they
not offended neither the Emperor nor his mother, who only are comprehended
within the law of Majesty. They say I have praised Brutus and Cassius, whose
actions are reported by many, Ilny a point d'historien, qui ne se passione pour
l'un ou pour l'autre.
and there is none who have reported them without honor. Titus Livius to whom
is attributed the prize of eloquence and truth, did so highly commend Pompey,
that Augustus called him Pompejan, which nevertheless made no breach in their
friendship.

Scipio personage digne de toute louange bellique. Plut. Afranius Lieutenant de
Pompeie contre les Parthes et Arabes. Plut. Cassius ennemy de tyrans de fon
infance. Plut.

Brutus bienvolu du peuple, aim des siens estime de gens du bien, hay de null.
Voy l'epigramme 30 de Catul.


He uses not the names of Robbers and Parricides which now are imposed upon
Scipio, Afranius, this Cassius and this Brutus, but he often styles them brave
and valiant men. The history of Asinius Pollio makes honorable mention of
them. Messala Corvinus extolled Cassius as being his general, and that did
prejudice neither of them, but that they were mighty in riches and honors.
Caesar the Dictator contented himself with answering in a written Oration, as
before his Judges the book which Cicero composed raising to the heavens Cato
his enemy. The Epistles of Antony and speeches of Brutus reproach Augustus with
many falls things, expressing them with much bitterness and audacity. The reading
of Bibaculus and Catullus is not given over though farced with injuries against
the Caesar's, Julius and Augustus have suffered and contemned them: Convitia
s^reta exolescunt, si irascare, agnita videntur. Ta.
and it is hard to say whether in that they have shown more moderation then
wisdom, for calumnies being despised vanishe away, but in seeking revenge are
confirmed. I do not speak at all of the Graecians, for not only their
liberty but also their temerity escaped unpunished, and if they have bin
chastized by any, words have been the revenge of words. But it was ever free
and without reprehension to speak of them whom death has infranchised, from
hate or favor: will they object that I have moved the people to stir and
take arms for civil wars, while Cassius and Brutus were armed in the
Philippian plain? there are sixty and six years past since they died, as
appears by their statues which the victorious themselves have not pulled
down. Writings also preserve their memories. Posterity renders to every one
the honor which to him appertains: and if I be condemned, there will be some
that will call to mind not only Cassius and Brutus, but also my self.

He had cause to enrich his discourse with the examples of Caesar and Augustus,
for in the world there was not any thing which may be paralel'd to their
generous bounty in pardoning obloquies. C. Calvo post famosa Epigra^mata de
reconciliatione per amicos agenti ultro ac prior scripsit. Suet.

Valor Catullus perpetuastigmat^ suis versiculis imposuit Caesari. Suet.


Caluus the Orator and Catullus the Poet had outragiously detracted from
Caesar, the truth placed shame in their foreheads, and repentance in their
conscience; Caesar contented himself with that, and seeing that Calvus desired
his friendshp, but durst not require it, he offered it unto him by an express
letter, and for Catullus he invited him to supper the same day that he had
published his poem against him.

For Augustus, I cannot find his equal, Timagenes a noble Historian, did
write against him, his wife, Timagenem Caesar monuit, ut moderatius lingua
uteretur, perseveranti domo sua interdixit: postea in contubernio Pollionis
affinis consenuit. Sen.
his daughter and all his house; he advised him both to use his pen and tongue
with greater modesty, especially in his own house, and toward his friends:
for Augustus nourished him. Extreme ingratitude! he continued his course;
Augustus being enforced to interrupt him, desired him to retire himself from
his house; Asinius Pollio esteeming more the gentleness of this spirit then
the respect of the Emperor, lodged and entertained him; Timagenes wholely
declared himself the perpetual enemy of Augustus, burnt the fair history
which he compiled of his reign, to make it known that he deserved not that
he should write of him, or that the good he spoke of him was but a lie;
Augustus disgested all this, saying only unto Pollio you nourish a serpent,
Fruere, mi Pollio, fruere.
Pollio intending to turn him away to excuse himself, he closed his lips
saying, keep him my friend, make use of him. Is it possible that Rome under
such a Prince would repine to have lost her liberty, she has well tried since,
what she has lost in the change; it was the same flock but not the same
shepherd. Subinde iactat in civitate libera linguam mentem^ue liberas esse
debere


We must needs say that Seianus has strangely corrupted the nature of
Tiberius, rendering him so severe in punishing the injuries of his predecessors,
who made so small reckoning of his own, and said that in free Cities, Satis
est, si hoc habemus, ne quis nobis male facere possit. D. Aug.
men's tongues should not be captive; Augustus gave him this counsel, for he
complaining of his dissimulation against this unbridled liberty of reproaching
him, he writ these words, Tiberius my son flatter not your youth, nor your
choler to believe there is any speaks ill of me, it is sufficient that we may
prevent that they do us no harm. Non tantum habemus otium, P.C. ut implicare
nos plurimis negotijs debeamus, si hanc fe^estram aperueritis, nihil aliud
agisinetis. D. Tib.


As for him self he did but laugh at the Satires and Buffonneries which they
had published against him, and touching that which the Senate would have given
him informations of, he told them we have not leisure to imbrake our selves in
these broiles, and if we open this window, you will be able to do nothing else,
and you shall be importuned every day with particular complaints. Si vivere
vellet, Seianus rogandus erat, si mori, filia, ut^^que inexorabilis. Constituit
filiam fallere. Sen.


Cordus having so stoutly and elegantly spoken retired himself unto his house,
very irresolute what course to take, if he desired to live, he must entreat
Seianus, if to die, his daughter, both were inexorable: his courage not
permitting him to yield unto the one, he resolved to deceive the other;
Al'issue du bain on portoit a la chamber du moust des oeufs frais.

Quaedam per fenestram, ut videretur edisse, proiecit, a coena deinde, quasi
iam satis in cubiculo edisset, abstinuit. Sen.


not to give any inkling of his resolution he bathed for some days, and the
better to amuse his daughter after the bath, retired himself to his chamber,
there to take his refection, and sending away his servants threw out of the
window some part of that they had brought him, to make them believe it was the
fragments of that which he did eat. The hour of supper being come, he told
his daughter he had no stomach to eat, and that his former collation would
serve him in stead of a supper; she did not press him further, believing all
was true, and not supposing that what she approved for his health should be for
his death. Homini non ante septimum diem letalis inedia: durasse and ultra
undecimum plerosque certum est. Plin.


He continued in this rigorous deuize until the fourth day, his weakness
displayed it self, his extreme sorrow was agreed with abstinence, which was
not violent enough to make an end of him in so few days, for famine would
dispense with many more.

His daughter being so deluded, coniured him by entreaties and tears, to live
for her sake, and for his own; these prayers came too late, It^^ mortis
ingressus sum and iam medium fere teneo: re^^care me nec debes nec potes. Sen.
his glass is almost run out, he is at the last period of his life, and then
embraced his daughter and said, Martia I am too far advanced in the way of
death to retreat, I am more then half way, thou neither ought nor can
retain me. This done, he caused the Tapers to be put out, the better to hide
himself and steal away in darkness: Et faueibus avidissimorum luporum
educitur praeda. Sen. Magna res erat in quaestione an mortis rei perderentur:
dum deliberatur, dum accusatores iterum adeunt, ille se absolverat. Sen.
his servants seeing this his resolution so strong, and so far advanced were
not a whit sorry that the wolves should miss of their prey: and then it was
that his accusers by the commandment of Seianus ran to the Consuls to tell
them that Cordus was a dying, that is to say, that he escaped them, then grew
it to a question in Court whether they might hinder an accused person from
putting himself to death, but while they dispute how to resolve this, and to
condemn him he absolues himself. Scripta actoris calamitate. Dio.


His books were burned by the Aedils. The calamity of the author and the
excellency of the style made them more famous and with greater curiosity to be
sought after and studied: Vir Romanus qui subactis iam ceruicibus, omnium and
ad Seiani iugum aductis indomitus sit homo ingenio animo, manu liber. Sen.
Praesenti poten^^a non extinguitur sequentis aevi memoria. Ta.
Martia preserved them and restored them to the world to renew the memory of
her father who had written them with his own blood, who remained firm and
invincible when every man yielded his neck to the yoke of Seianus, and had
always showed both in his discourse, writings and mind, the ancient liberty.
Princes deceive themselves in being too passionate about smothering such
writings as displease them, the forbidding them whets on men's desires, Punitis
ingenijs gliscit authoritas. Ta.
and difficulty approues curiosity; if fear suppress them during their lives,
they appear more boldly after their deaths. The punishment of the author
augments the reputation of his works, the punishment it self is odious; he
which inflicts it is blamed, and he that suffers has the honor.

And we find that this fury against books had his beginnig under Tiberius:
for what had it been, if the Triumuirs had proscribed or burnt these of
Cicero: Reip. interest ne facta quae posteritati tradantur. Sen.
Caligula, renewed these of Cordus, and thought himself interessed so to do
that posterity may know the lives and deeds of their predecessors. What
contentment is it to see the history of so good a pen, of a courage so free and
bold, of such a discourse as that he made in the Senate, and such an example
as Seneca left us upon the death of Cicero in these terms?

Antony received great contentment when one brought him the head of Cicero, Non
satiatus modo cedendis civibus, sed defectus. Sen. P.
and said that his proscription was then at an end, for he was not only
satisfied, but wearied with the massacre of so many men: he commanded it should
be exposed to the view of the people in the public place where they made the
Orations. Pijs concionibus multorum capita servarat. Sen P.
In the same place where the people drawn by the reputation of his eloquence
pressed to follow him, where they gave ear unto his serviceable speeches which
have preserved so many heads, he is now made a spectacle unto his citizens, not
with the same joy or in the same manner, they had admired him living and
entire; but the blood covering his head and disfiguring his visage, the same
head which in former time commanded in the Senate and was the ornament of the
Roman name, now serves for a recompense to him who did separate it from his
body.

All their hearts burst forth into tears and lamentations when they beheld his
right hand the instrument of his divine eloquence made fast unto his head:
Caeterorum caedes privatorum luctus exci^averunt, illa una communes.
the death of all besides himself were but particularly lamented; all did
join in mourning for this general loss, we are not only to believe the
greatness, but to admire the number of his virtues; when he saw what they
meant to Brutus, Optime meruit de posteris, ad quos veniet incorrupta rerum
fides.
Cassius, and Sextus Pompeius, he spoke these words, every thing displeaseh me
but death.

Cordus did write the history of his own time, and it may be that leaving the
truth untainted to posterity, he spoke honorably of those that suffered death
in defense of their ancient liberty, for the fear of death excuses not him
which offends against the truth to please fortune. To publish false story,
or to give false instructions unto them that write, is but to murder them that
pass through the high way of belief: retaining in his discourse the same
liberty which he had done in his writings, he contemned the pride of Seianus
and to deliver himself from the hands of so puissant a man, made it known
that he was truly a man, with drawing himself from the number of miserable
men.

This misery was not so frequent amongst the Romans while Germanicus lived,
Dion says that often opinions past against his and that he was not offended.
these two lions as yet kept in their claws: fear ruled the actions of
Tiberius and necessity bridled the insolency of Seianus: Dion says, that so
long as Germanicus lived, Tiberius did nothing of himself, he restored all
manner of affairs to the Senate, administered justice by the advice of them who
assisted him, thought good that every man should give his advise, Tiberius was
wont to say, I am Lord of slaves, Emperor of soldiers, and prince of all the
rest.
suffered himself to be contradicted, and sometimes taken up in his opinions.

He would not permit himself to be called Lord, but of slaves, and Emperor
only of the soldiers; he flatly refused the title of Father of the Country:
in speeches and petitions he passed by the name of Augustus, and in his
dispatches to Kings, and contented himself every where else with the name of
Caesar and prince of the Senate: his ordinary wishes were, that the heavens
might grant him life so long as the commonwealth should have need of his
service.

Germanicus living, All this was during the life of Germanicus, but after his
death all was changed.
his birth day was not solemnized; they never swore by his fortune, they
erected him neither statue nor temple, when he passed through the the City
there was neither Senator, Patrician, Roman Knight, nor any other Lord of
quality in his train: comporting himself in all things, as if he had lived
under a popular government, so far as to make funeral orations for
particular persons.

If he did commit any violence it was colored and cloaked with apparances of
reason or necessity, Ambition lurks for a long time after to appear great.
or if it were secret; it was so carried that it never came to light; Clement a
famous Impostor murdered his master Agrippa Posthumus the grand child of
Augustus, The Emperor Augustus to please Liuia did banish him to the Isle of
Plauesia. Vetita occultis primum sermonibus crebrescunt. Tac.
and because they were of the same years and proportion, he caused a report to
be raised secretly, as a thing dangerous, after published as pleasing news,
that Agrippa was alive: for it is true that the Emperors mother caused him to
be slain immediately after the death of Augustus. Whose memory was so dear and
venerable, that under this name he found friends in Gaul, succor in Italy,
and credence in Rome, the people crying, and believing that the Gods had
reserved him for the good of the Empire. Tiberius considering that fame and
legerity supported this fable, Veritas visu and mora, falsa festinatione and
incertis valescunt.
and that there could not so little credit be given to it, but that it might
prejudice his affairs, made means to intrappe him by some who fained
themselves to be of his plot: when he was before him he marvelled that he did
so handsomely manage this imposture, and asked him by what title do you make
your self Agrippa, Percontanti Tiberio quomodo Agrippa factus esset,
respondisse fertur, quomodo tu Caesar? Tac.
the gallant replied, by the same thou make thy self Caesar? Torments could
not wrest from him the names of his accomplices; and although Tiberius knew
well that he was assisted with money and counsel by men of the greatest rank,
Inanis credulitas tempore ipso vanescit.
yet he made no inquiry after them; he put him to death without noise, and
there was no more spoken of it.

Tiberius then had cause to reckon the death of Germanicus amongst the happiest
days of his life, and Seianus ranked it amongst the greatest strokes of his
fortunes: but the same enmity they bore toward the Father, they continued to
his Children, dissembling it nevertheless as much as they could, because it
should not appear but in convenient time, and covering it with shows of
affection toward them, Tiberius entreated the Senate to dispense with the age
of Nero, Neronem e liberis Germanici iam ingressum iuventam commendavit
patribus, non sine risu audientium. Ta. Congiarium pleb. Ta.

Vt illa secundis, ita hoc adversis animis acceptum. Tacit.. Jason tyrant of
Pheres said that he would die of hunger, if he did fail of the tyranny, for he
could not live Idiot.

Idiot is a private person.


to undergo public offices, and at fifteen years to be made a Questor,
which office was never borne before two and twenty, he was also named high
Priest, and at the day of his entry to this office he made largess of
provisions to the people, which rejoiced to see the children of Germanicus, in
a flourishing youthfulnes. For increase of joy he espoused Iulia the daughter
of Drusus, but all was converted to disdain, when they saw that the daughter
of Seianus was affianced to Drusus the son of Claudius, esteeming this great
house to be dishonored by that alliance, and that it did but give too much
confidence to one who already had gained the greatest power, and who held
himself but miserable if he did not command, not enduring to live as a private
person; heaven which would have no fruit from so bad a tree, disposed of all
otherwise. Drusus sporting himself in the town of Pompey threw a pear up
into the air, and receiving it with an open mouth was choked, and this young
maid bearing her part at the miserable end of her father, made her Epithalamium
at the foot of the gibbet, as may be seen in its proper place; their hate was
not so enraged against Seianus, as there wanted not some who spoke, that he
had made this marriage of purpose to dispatch his son in law.

This opinion could be built upon no other foundation, Miror fuisse qui
traderent a Seiano necatum. Suet.
but that this young Prince made show of great disdain of this alliance, or
too much distaste to be the son in law of a man so odious, which had no
honor in him, his predecessors had acquired him none, Vain is the praise
which comes not from a commendable man. Plut.
neither could he leave his children any; and received no praise but from
them, whom himself dare not commend.

Drusus could not endure this insolency nor that Tiberius should prefer
strange counsels and affections before natural, Secreta viri corrupta uxore
pr^duntur. Ta.
he ceased not to tell his wife who betrayed him, and his friends who deceived
him; that it wanted but a little that Seianus was not Tiberius his fellow as
well as hi coadiutor, and his children, kinsmen to Drusus: that his ambition
had some deep aim, that it was not like to rest there; for the first hopes of
rule are difficult, Prima dominandi spes in a^duo, ubi sis ingressus adsunt
studia and ministri. Ta^.
but when men have gotten up means to maintain themselves there are never
wanting, this he said often and to many, they were his ordinary complaints; an
afflicted spirit never cease to bemoane it self, and ever lay his hand upon
his sore.

According to men's natures they receive their denomination, for Dion says,
that Drusus was called Castor, and that sharp pointed swords were called
Drusians. Tribunitia potestas summi fastigij vocabatur. Tac.
This prince bore an extreme hatred to Seianus and he was so ready to strike,
that they surnamed him Castor, and being no longer able to endure this gallant
that played the companion with him, had once his hand up to strike him, and the
other also doing the like toward the blow: Drusus struck him on the face. Dion
and Zonaras write that Seianus struck Drusus, but there is no likelihood he was
so bold with the Emperors son, which was young, courageous, an associate in
the Empire, and held in the power of tribune, the greatest next to souerainty.

A stab is always due for a box on the ear, and is a correlatiue to it, but
those blows which proceed from the princes hand ought to be received, but with
patience and humility: he that may kill obliges one when he does but hurt him.
This so fresh an offense revived those which time had almost withered in
Seianus: the history notwithstanding reports not that he made any complaint
thereof, Tib. Seianum singularem principalium onerum ^diutorem in omnia habuit.
Vell.
nor that Tiberius did chide his son for having in such sort abused him whom
he had chosen above all others to aid him, to support the principal affairs
of the Empire; for it is but a bad exployt to seek occasions to provoke the
Emperor against the Prince.

Not dareing to complain thereof, he resolves to be revenged, and as revenge
is always ingenious to find the means to satisfy the offended, he found no
better wedge to cleave this knot withal than one made of the wood it self;
^ara est concordia formae atque pudititia. Iuve.
and to win the wife to undo the husband: she was fair, but her beauty agreed
not with her honor, she consented to the solicitations of Seianus, unto whom
none refused to yield any thing, seeing that Tiberius gave him all:
acquaintance begat affection, and that which at the beginning was but love,
became adultery, and the adultery witchcraft: a strange blindness that a niece
to Augustus, the daughter in law to Tiberius, the daughter of Drusus, Se ac
maiores and posteros municipali adultero foedabat. Ta.
the sister of Germanicus, the Emperors sons wife, and the mother of two
princes, capable of attayning the Empire, should stain her honor, dishonor
her house to consent to the pleasure of a plebeian: but great beauties will be
admired, and powerful favors are sought after. Seianus could do all through
his favor, Unto a question made unto Aristotle, wherefore is it that we love
that which is fair, he answered Tup^lou to erotema.
and Liuia was beloved of every one for her beauty; to demand wherefore we love
that which is fair, is the question of a blind man; but this is far greater
blindness to think that great men cannot do whatsoever they desire. Having
the body then at his pleasure, he managed the heart as he pleased; the first
limb was the bridge to all the succeeding. Foemina 'amissa pudicitia alia
flagitia non abnuit. Tac.
When a woman has lost her chastity she has no more to lose or to refuse:
love had caused the adultery, ambition procured the murder, and from the one
they passed on boldly to the other; Seianus infuseth into her spirit a desire
to be the wife of an Emperor, she believes that he could do what he said; for
Tiberius reigned not, but in his person and under his will: she harkeneth
thereunto, The fort which will admit of a parley is half rendered.
and relisheth it, and the pleasure which she shows in her attention differs
not much from her consent. Their wills which are agreed for love, are united
for marriage, and conspire to the same purpose to break all obstacles,
Magnitudo facinoris metum, prolationes, diversa interdum consilia adfert. Tac.
Seianus by diuorcing of Apicata and Liuia by the death of Drusus.

But as great mischiefs cannot be soon hatched, for fear does breed an
irresolution therein, astonishment dela, yand delay augments the difficulty
thereof; they were not so much troubled to resolve on the act, as to find the
means and the manner. The order and secrecy, which ought to be exactly
observed in matters of importance were not forgotten in this abominable act.
They resolved to poison him, and considering that if the poison were given in
his meat, some other might be overtaken and deceived; they resolved therefore
to give it in a medicine which he should take, and which should work so
slowly, that his death should be imputed unto nature and chance, not unto
violence and treachery. Eudemus amicus ac medicus Liviae specie artis frequens
secretis. Tac.

Adulteria etiam in principum domibus, ut Eudemi in Livia Drusi Caesaris. Plin.

Rumor Seianum Ligdi spadonis animum stupro vuisse. Ta.




Liuia employed herein Eudemus her physician, who in this quality, and under
favor of his profession, was ordinarily in her Cabinet. Tacitus says, he was
her private friend, and Pliny, her adulterer: Seianus seduceth Ligdus an
Eunuch, and one of the most trusty domestic servants of Drusus; and to unite
his heart more strictly to him, he most vildly abused his body; who was both
young and fair. These infamous persons combine upon an execrable attempt:
Seianus the assasin conceiues it, Liuia the adultresse gives her consent, the
ruffian Eudemus compounds the drugge, Ligdus the Ganimed presents the same.
Four persons who deserved to give their hearts, which devised and consented
unto so horrible an attempt against the only son of the Emperor, Jupiter said
unto Prometheus, that he deserved to have his heart and liver to be devoured.
to be perpetually devoured by sixteen vultures. They all of them perished
miserably, and so may those furies all of them perish which undertake against
the lives of their Princes.

Drusus without any mistrust took away from Ligdus his Eunuchs hands this
mortal medicine, and that which he believed should serve for his health,
hastened his death, but with so little violence, that the languishment and
length thereof took away all suspicion of poison; O^dosceleri^ per Api^atam
Seiani proditus, t^^mentis Eud^^^^ ac Ligdi patefactus est. Ta.
but time which discouers all things drew the truth out of obscurity, and
Apicata wife to Seianus, eight years after gave the first hint thereof. We may
wonder that a courageous woman wounded in her honor and banished from her
husbands company, by an adultresse should hold her peace for so long time; but
this discourse shall not end before we take away this astonishment. Seianus
facinorum omnium repertor habebatur ex nimia caritatem eum Caesaris. Ta.


The actions of Seianus were so notorious, and Tiberius for favoring him so
hated, that being already infamous through so many famous and notable crimes,
it was supposed that he had procured Drusus his death by the hand of Tiberius,
putting him in the head that his son (that he might reign) had resolved his
death, and that he should therefore take heed when he should dine at his house
not to drink the first draught should be offered unto him; Druso ignaro and
iuveniliter ^auriente poculum cunctis suspicio, tanquam metu and pudore sibimet
irrogaret mortem, quam patri struxerat.
that Tiberius receiving the cup from the hands of the cup bearer, had
presented it to Drusus, and that shame and fear permitting him not to refuse
it, he had swallowed the poison prepared for his father: an imposture without
any ground or likelihood at all.

For it had not been so easy for Drusus to do this mischief, He that made
the assay is called in ancient^ writings a potione or praegustator Xenophon,
oinechoo^.
because his father took nothing without assaye, and that Custom had been
brought thither from the Persian Court since Augustus his time. But let them
make Tiberius as cruel as they will, they can never take from him the honor of
being a wise Prince, subtle and mistrustfull, and he might be taxed of great
indiscretion if he determined to put his son to death upon the bare advice of
Seianus, and before he were exactly informed of the cause and conspirators of
this treason. Atrecior semper fama erga dominantium exitus. Ta.


This comes but from the malignity of reports which little favor the actions
of Princes, all that Tiberius has done, has been curiously collected and
published, and yet there were never any found so transported with hatred or
passion to dishonor his memory, Divulgata atque incredibilia avide accepta non
sunt ante habenda veris, neque in miraculum corruptis. Ta.
who have taxed him with this Parricide. We must not admit without suspicion
of all that common fame reports, nor prefer matters incredible though they be
credibly sought for, before that which is true, and are often disguised with
false apparances, and vain wonders to work astonishment in men's minds.

Simulatio habitum ac voces dolentium induit. Ta.
This death gave the hope of succession unto Germanicus his children, and
although the Senate for Tiberius his sake lamented this accident, their tears
were but fained, and their griefs without sorrow; for there was no body but
was very well content to see that by this death the house of Germanicus began
to spring again, Aselgestatos cai omotatos. Dio.
nor was Drusus beloved for the extreme hatred they bare to his father, for he
was very debauched. Solus and nullis voluptatibus avocatus moestam vigilantiam
and malas curas exercet. Ta.
And as the vices of others displease even those that are vicious themselves,
so his father chid him often for his lewd and proud carriage, which made him
very quarrelsome and cruel, but the people excused all this, saying, it was
better for him to pass the nights in feasting, Negotia pro solatijs. Ta.
and the day in the theaters, than to languish with solitary discontent in sad
watchings and bad cogitations.

Tiberius his tears being soon dried, The Consuls did sit on high in their
seats, and the Senators below, and after them the Praetors and the Tribunes.
he resorts unto the Senate, to seek for consolation in his affairs; and
seeing the Senators sitting below, caused them to come up, putting them in
mind of the reverence of the place, and of the dignity of their Offices, using
these words to comfort their spirits for the grief they sustained,

Fathers conscript, The custom of mourning was not to bouge out of their
houses nor to look upon the day. Vix dies a plerisque lugentium adspicitur. Ta.
you may blame me for coming hither in so fresh and vndisgested a sorrow; and
I know well, that such as are in heaviness cannot endure the light, nor the
condolements of their nearest friends; but as I ascribe not that unto
feebleness of courage, so I desire to witness unto you, that I have not
sought for any greater comfort in my affliction, than the embracements of the
Commonweal.

He represented unto them also, that the extreme age of the Empress took
from him all hope of further issue; that his grandchildren were very young,
that he had already run more than half the race of his life, Germanici
lib^ri unica presentium malorum levamenta. Ta.
and that he therefore prayed them to call in Germanicus his children; the
only remedy and consolation for those evils which now afflicted them. Then
sent they for Nero and Drusus. The Consuls went out of the Senate to receive
them, Egressi Consules firmatos alloquio adolescentibus deductosque ante
Caesarem statuum. Ta.
and after they had said something unto them to give them assurance, they
conducted them before the Emperor; who taking them by the hands said, My
friends, when these children lost their father, I sent them unto my son
Drusus their cosen, and entreated him although he had children himself, to
have as much care of them as of his own blood, to bring them up and conserve
them for himself and posterity. But now that Drusus is snatched away from
them, I adresse my prayers unto you, and conjure you before the Gods and our
country, that in doing that which is my duty and yours, you will take the care
and conduct of the Nephews of Augustus, which are descended from famous and
illustrous persons. And then casting his eyes upon the little ones, he said, My
dear Nero and you Drusus, these Lords you see here are your fathers: the
condition of your birth is such, that the Commonweal has intrest both in the
good and evil which you do. The Senate made no answer but by their tears,
their vows, and prayers: and this discourse had been much more for the honor
of Tiberius, if he had not added hereunto the very same promises wherewith he
had so often deluded them, that he would restore Rome to her former liberty,
and leave the government either to the Consuls or to some others. These last
words were so far from the intention of him that uttered them, and the
belief of the hearers, that they took from the fromer all the belief which
truth and honesty might have given them.

All this was but mere iugling, for this bad Prince thought of nothing more
than how utterly to ruin Germanicus his house, Vana and irrisa vero and
honesto fidem adimunt. Ta.
which Drusus his death began again to bring into credit. They performed his
funerals after the same order that those of Germanicus were, and many other
magnificences were added thereunto, for the last flatteries are always the
most liberal. Tiberius himself made the funeral Oration as Augustus made
that of Agrippa his son in law. Addit semper aliud posterior adulatio Ta.


There was a veil laid betwixt the dead and him, because he should not see the
body, for the high Priest was a sacred thing it was not permitted him to look
upon any mournful object; So Philo reports that the high Priest of the Jews
always to keep his soul pure, never saw any mournful thing.
the very Statues of the Gods were covered or transported from those places
where any punishment was inflicted; and Claudius caused the Statue of Augustus
to be taken away from the Theater of the gladiatours because it should not be
present at the murders, or it was always veiled; every one wept for him who
wept not himself at all, for that object so sad and feeling had not the power
to soften his gratuity, Flente populo non flegit vultum Sen.
observing without any preturbation the people who bewailed his loss, whereof
himself had no feeling.

Seianus who stood by him admired his constancy, but made no use of it, Seiano
ad latus stanti experiedum si dedit quam patienter posset suos perdere. Sen.
for this did notably show of what temper this princes heart was; carrying the
loss of so dear a person so patiently: did he think that this Prince who had
so little relentment of the death of his son, would care for that of his
servants; he should have been more subtle to have known the humor of his
master, who made use of him as of a cloak or gabardaine in foul weather, to
throw it away when it was past. Seianus dreamed of nothing but to ruin the
house of Germanicus, and that accomplished, Tiberius will ruin him; for then
he will have no more employment for him, he serves his turn with him now as
with a good horse, when the horseman finds him ready he spures forward, and
makes him go where he pleases, and in the end kills him.

This mighty power of Seianus was not solely managed by violence, avarice must
have her part, Quicquid non acquiritur damnum est. Sen.
and made him think all which he acquired, not to be lost. Dion says, that he
was heir to all them that died without children; this iniust cupiditie wrought
the death of Lepida a noble Roman dame; and Suetonius having declared how he
procured the death of Lentulus the Augure, that he might have no heir but him,
he adds the pursuit he made against Lepida to be for no other cause,
Ingratiam Quiri^ consularis praedivitis and orbi. Ta.
but to gratify Quirinus her husband a very wealthy man and without children.

The proceeding reported by Tacitus is strange, she kept not company with her
husband for the space of twenty years when he accused her of adultery
poisoning and faining her self to have a child: Tiberius said she consulted
with the Chaldeans against his person and his house; Exemit Drusum dicenda
primo loco sententia, ne caeteris assentiendi necessitas fierit. Ta.
he would not have Drusus deliver his mind first in her judgment, to the end
they may freely deliver their opinions and not to compel them to follow him.

There were plays to be shown during the process, Lepidae did accompany the
chiefest and most illustrious dames of the City, enjoying the privilege of
the Romans, who were not imprisoned during their accusation, nor after
judgment, if it were not capital. Entering the Theater of Pompey she turned
her eyes toward his images which were there in diverse places, Amm Marcellinus
Ranks the Theater of Pompey inter decora vrbis aeternae.

Adstantes effusi in lacrimas saeua and detestanda Quirino clamitant.


and implored his succor, from whom she was descended. This was with doleful
lamentation and abundance of tears, which moved the people and principally the
women to compassion, and to power forth reproaches against Quirinus, calling
him an unworthy man, to deal so cruelly with a woman who having been promised
to L. Caesar Augustus his son, Livia cui semper Emiliorum decus L. Sulla, ac
Cn. Pompeius proavierant. Ta.
did him a great deal of honor to marry him, as if they would feign say unto
the good man, that because he was old, had no children, and of a low degree
his wife had cause to make him carry the horns.

The process being prepared, their opinions inclined to commiseration of a
woman of a great house, living twenty years asunder from her husband, and the
accusations against her were proved but by slaves. But Rubellius Blandus
concluded with banishment, Adsensit Drusus quamvis alij minores. Ta.
Drusus was of his opinion, and reduced those which proceeded not with that
rigor. A Prince should not be the first nor the last to deliver his opinion, he
is to conclude and determine. Quo loco censebis Caesar, si primus habebo quod
sequar: si post omnes vereor no impudens dissentiam. Ta.
These words were bravely spoken by Piso unto Tiberius in the beginning of his
rigor: Caesar where will you place your self in delivering your censure, if
first, I am bound to follow you; if last, peradventure what I think you will
not; and so I may unwittingly commit a great error.

Dion observes an other way to come by the inheritance of a rich man. Sextus
Marius had a daughter young and fair, Tiberius sollicits her, her father
retired her to his country house, to cause her to return, To survive honor
is to live too long.
they accused her of incest, the daughter speaks these words unto her father:
Let us not give them the contentment to dispose of you and me at their
pleasure, and to bring us to that pass, that it shall not be permitted us to
die honestly; I was not accustomed to make my prayers unto any but the Gods, I
will not be beholding for my life unto Seianus with the loss of that which is
dearer to me than a thousand lives. Marius ashamed that his courage should have
need of the example of his daughter, killed himself first, and she followed
him.

This death was very profitable to Tiberius and Seianus, for they were heirs
to Marius, The same hand that does the injury repaires it.
a man so rich that being offended with a neighbor of his, invited him to his
house and made him good cheer for two days space, the first day he rased
down his house, the second he rebuilt it fairer and larger; the master of the
house returning the third day was astonished at the alteration: Marius then
said unto him, the one I have done to revenge my self as your enemy, and the
other as your friend for the good I wish you.

Delatores genus hominum publico exitto repertum est poenis quidem nunquam
satis coercitum per praemia eliciebantur. Ta.
There was no safety in Rome, but for slanderers a pernicious kind of people;
whom disorder has brought in credit to spoil and ruin all, who were so
supported that not only their calumny remained unpunished, but recompensed;
the more firm and stiff they were to uphold falsehood and to brave the
innocent the more they were gratified, it being no more lawful to offend them,
Vt quis destrictor accusator velut sacro sanctus erat leves ignobiles poenis
afficiebantur. Ta.
than things holy and sacred; others whose consciences would not suffer them to
be obstinate against the truth, were unregarded and punished.

Vibius Seruus Proconsull of the lower Spain, was accused by his son to have
conspired against the Emperor, Miseriarum ac saevitiae exemplum reus pater
accusator filius Tacit.
and to have sent some among the Gauls to stir and move the people. He
appeared covered with the dust and mire which he gathered in his journey, for
he was newly returned from exile; and though he saw his life in danger, yet he
carried a bold courage before his Judges, and with eyes sparkling with
indignation and threats he looked upon his son, who was there brave and well
accowtred, Multis munditijs adolescenti, alacri vultufacit.
stamping with his feet for anger, and rattling of his irons and chains; for
he was conducted by the soldiers that had him in guard, he lifted up his hand
toward heaven, and prayed the Gods to send him back into the place from whence
he came, and punish the ingratitude and impiety of bis son. Nature so
outragiously offended, permitted him these imprecations, and would not suffer
him to show himself a father toward this wretch, Whatsoever the son does,
the father should not strip himself of the office of a father, to put on that
of a judge. Pro peccato magno pa^^lulum supplicij sati^ e patri.

In silius ortas vinculus pasc^^. and dominatos scorpiones occiditis. Petr.


who had revolted from his duty. A father ought to content himself with a
slight punishment, put this disloyalty was so strange that it wrested from his
heart this prayer unto the Gods for his chastizement, every where that we find
monsters we stifle them, not asking from whence they come, we nourish the birds
which come from Forests, but we kill the scorpions which are bred in our
houses.

This his so settled countenance imprinted in the mind of the judges an opinion
of the innocence of the father, and made them deforme the malice of the son;
who affrighted with the remorse of conscience, the noise of the people which
threatened him with imprisonment, the hurling of stones, and the punishment of
Parracides, fled to Rauena, Exequi accusatione adigitur. Ta.
from whence Tiberius made him to return, constraining him to pursue his
accusation, for he would in any wise be rid of Seruus, keeping still in mind
the hatred he bore him for a letter which he had written unto him eight years
before, Haud tutum contumacius loqui apud aures superbas and offensionis
primores. Ta.
in more arrogant terms then by proud ears and tender to be offended could
be well brooked. The Senators gave their opinions hereupon, Gallus Asinius was
of opinion that he should be banished into the Isles of Gaire or Donuse,
which was not found fitting because there was no water neither in the one nor
the other, Dandi vitae usus cui vita conceditur. Ta.
and that it was reasonable they should give means to live, unto such as they
had given life unto. O cruel pity! he desired that the commodities of life
should serve for the lengthning out and entertainment of the miseries of pain.

It was lawful for the most wicked to assault and wrong the honestest men, to
speak injuriously of them and to offer them affronts; Religion has given unto
the Temple of the Gods freedom and flattery to the Statues of Princes, this
custom was put in practice in Rome since Julius Caesar's time.

Capitali circa Augusti simulacrum Seruum caecidisse. Suet.


nor durst masters reprehend their servants or correct them. There was no
excess but might be excused for such as could cover it with the image of
Caesar. The same franchise which gave assurance to the criminal, gave
assurance also, and occasion to commit the crime. The great respect which men
bore unto Tiberius was in other places then at Rome, where his Statues were as
venerable as these of Jupiter Olimpus, in such sort as the master was condemned
of impiety because he has struck his servant, carrying about him a piece of
money whereon the image of Caesar was ingraued.

Amia Rufilla was condemned of falsehood by the Senate at the pursuit of
Cestius. Enraged herewith she stayed for him at the entry of the Palace, near
unto Tiberius his Statue, The place were Theseus cursed the Athenians in the
bourge of Gargetus was called Araterian a place of malection. Plut.

Principes instar deorum sunt sed necquaquam dijs nisi iustae supplicum preces
audiuntur. Ta.


from whence as from a place of cursing, she assaulted him with all manner of
raylings and bitter speeches, which are the weapons of feeble spirits. Cestius
durst not demand reparation because she had wronged him, under the favor and
near unto the image of Tiberius, he made complaint hereof, and spoke in the
open Senate these memorable words: Princes hold the places of Gods, but the
Gods hearken only to the just prayers of their suppliants, there is none that
will run to the Capital nor unto the other Temples of the City, as to a
place of refuge, there to commit any crime. But the laws are now abolished and
overthrown from the very foundation; seeing that even in the public places,
and at the very entry of the Palace we are constrained to bear injuries, and
to hear threatenings without any hope at all to be righted, Non licet i^^
experiri ob effigiem imperatoris oppositam. Ta.
for the respect which is had unto the Emperors Statue.

If the History should have mentioned nothing also but this, to represent unto
us the estate of the miserable reign of Tiberius, it would have been enought
to discover unto us the violence and disorder thereof; wretched was then the
condition of a Roman citizen, Crimen ex silentia ex voce. Ta.
there was danger either to speak, or to behold his Peer; thoughts only were
free from tribute and danger, provided that their countenance did not make any
show either of joy for Agrippina, or of discontent against Seianus. The
absolute power he had over the goods of the Romans, made some say that it was
a good thing to dwell at Rome, and to have their estate lying out of the bounds
of the Empire.

Vacia a rich man, and who had been Praetor, Vacia nulla re alia quam ocio
notus conseruit, and ob ho^ vnus foelix habebatur. Sen.
withdrew himself to his country house, finding no other defense against the
violence of the time, than a solitary life. It was a hard thing in those times
for men to resolve themselves, for they believed that he who did it of his own
instigation, did either differ so much from nature, that either he did set
himself above her, with the Gods, or under her with the beasts: as often as
the friendship of Asinius Gallus, Agrippinaes kinsman or the hatred of Seianus
had ruined some one, the people of those times would cry out, O Vacia solus sis
vivere.
O Vacia there is none but thee that can tell how to live.

The solitary life was the most assured, Vita rustica parcimoniae iusticiae ac
diligentiae magistra. Cic.
the civil more perilous, and the country more pleasing, and indeed she is
the mistress of sparing, of diligence, of justice and simplicity; it has not
been accompanied with honor, or yielded such content as in former times,
Attilis manus rustico opere attricae salutem publicam stabilierunt. Val.
Gaudebat tellus vomere laureato. Plin.
when great Captains went from their triumphs to the plough, from their
tillage to arms, and from their farms to the Senate; the ground took delight
in those days to yield fruit in abundance, and to acknowledge the labor of
those victorious hands which manured it with a coulter crowned with laurel.

Seianus this torrent of pride and insolence ouerflowes: there is none now that
stays it, all that might keep it in is cast down. It is not safe to commit
so many and so great offices into the fortune of one alone.
Tiberius is blamed to submit the fortune of the Empire to the discretion of
one man alone, and his will to the honor of his groom.

Ambition is often gogle eyed when she has need of a clear sight and is
astray when she thinks to go right: Seianus is lost by her, his designs
fall out otherwise then he expected, Wicked interprises work the ruin of the
undertakers.
he believed, Germanicus being dead that Drusus was the only block that lay in
his way, he takes him away by poison, and now behold the succession remains
without any doubt to the children of Germanicus, to assure his tyranny he must
destroy them, Ferox scelerum quia prima provenerunt Ta.
he undertook it the more boldly because his former wickedness has had happy
success, and that the father was careless to revenge the death of his son.

He imprints in him a belief that his enemies would make their profit of this
loss, that Agrippina is resolved to reign; there needed no art to persuade
him, Non dubia Germanici liberorum successio. Ta.
he sees the succession apparent, and this woman ready to bite at the apple, he
is resolved to cut off the mother and the young ones; Seianus finds himself
much perplexed, for to corrupt Agrippina as he did Livia there was no
possibility, Spargi ve^enum in tres non poterat egregia custodem fide and
pudicitia Aggrippinae impenitrabili. Ta.
she was of an invincible and undaunted chastity, it was impossible to poison
them all three at once, and surely very difficult; so great was the fidelity
and vigilance of their servants, besides they could not deal with this
Princess or with other women, all the town is for her. The most bold and
shamelest slander dares not take hold of her, she marched upright between the
jealousy of Tiberius, and the ambition of Seianus; who found no nearer way to
ruin her then to animate the Emror against her, by causing him to apprehend
both her courage and her hopes, he lost no time in this, and encountered a
little after with a fit occasion to produce this bad design. They did use to
sacrifice in the beginning of the year, an Ox with golden horns to Jupiter,
for the welfare of the Prince, which was the welfare of the commonwealth. The
high Priests, and by their example the rest, recommended unto the same Gods
both Nero and Drusus, not so much for the love of them as to flatter Tiberius,
and to make show they desired that the Empire should continue in his house:
men's manners were then so depraved, Adulatio moribus corruptis perinde auceps
s^ nulla and ubi nimia est. Ta.
that it was no more dangerous to flatter too much, then not to flatter at all.

Tiberius was vexed to see those youths go cheek by ioule with his age, and
asked the high Priests, Primores modice perstringendi. Ta.

Mobiles adolescentium anim^ praematuri honoribus ad superbiam non extollendi.
Ta.


if they had done this by the entreaties or threats of Agrippina; and they
answering no, he checked them, but gently, for they were for the most part
either of kin to Agrippina, or the chief of the City. He went of purpose to
the Senate about this business, and made unto them a cunning speech there, to
show unto them, that from thence forwards the feeble and inconstant spirits of
young folks were not to be spurred on unto pride by those honors which were
given them before their time.

Seianus made more ado with this then Tiberius, saying that all was going to
wrack; seeing they made no difference between the Prince and his kinsemen, that
the City of Rome was divided as in the civil wars when she had three Lords,
Facta tribus dominis communis Roma. Lucan
Caesar, Pompey, and Crastus; that the authority of the Emperor was the
weakest, Nullum aliud gliscentes discordiae remedium quam unus alterium maxim
prompti subvertantur. Ta.
that Agrippinaes party was already formed, and that unless resistance were
made, the number would grow greater, that there was no better remedy for the
discord which began to gather head and grow up, than by a sudden cutting off of
one or two of them.

He threatened but two, and meant to strike many, but he believed that those
Sibius and Sabinus would be thrown from that height, that the rest should
apprehend their fall; their generous affection toward the house of Germanicus,
did not degenerate from the nature of true friendship, although to them it was
not only barren, Amicitia Germanici pernici^sa utrique. Ta. Turpe ali^^
gratificari per dede^us proprium. Ta.
but unfortunate; Varro a Consul villanously accommodating his conscience and
honor to the passion of Seianus accused C. Silius, and Sosia his wife. T.
Sabinus was reserved for another time; and although they represented this
pursuit to be violent, and that Varro should expect until he were out of his
Consulship, yet they made their process of a crime of majesty, although they
were accused but to have converted the public treasure of the commonwealth to
their own use, and that there was no man which demanded restitution: but
Tiberius was so subtle, that he gave the lightest faults the names of most
odious crimes. Silius seeing that, made no defense, Proprium Tiberio scelera
nuper reperta priscis verbis obtexere. Ta.
and if he did speak, it was but to declare that the pursuit was too
puissant: and foreseeing that there was no possibility to escape, Emine^^
damnatio voluntario fuit praevertitur. Tac.
his courage advised him to prevent an inevitable death by a voluntary, Sosia
was banished.

His imprudency and vanity did assist his ruin, he ceased not to vaunt that
Tiberius was obliged to him for the Empire, and that if the Legion which he
commanded in Almaine were revolted as the rest, he could not hold it any long
time, this reproach did prick to the quick the mind of Tiberius, for he did
overthrow all his fortunes, giving him no share in the prosperity of affairs,
and made it known it was not in his power to acquit himself of this
obligation. When the service is so great that it cannot be acknowledged,
Princes account it an offense, Clytus lost himself to have said that Alexander
held his life of the Macedonians. Plut.

Beneficia eo vsque laeta sunt dum videntur solui posse, vbi multum aure venere
pro gratia odium redditur. Tac.


hate holds the place of recompense and affronts of thanks.

It is more safe to be obliged to the Master, then to oblige him and service
that cannot be recompensed makes the servant importunate.

Amongst all this Seianus sees himself so eloigned from his hopes that he
redoubles his course to arrive unto them, and by an auengled improuidence
discouers them to Tiberius; it is true that he was compelled by the ordinary
exclamations of Liuia, who cease not to summon him with his promise of
legitimating their loves, and change the name of Mistress into that of wife,
Reason should say unto Choler that which the Nurse says to her Child, Weepo
not, and you shall have it. Plu^.
Seianus gives her words for deeds; she is angry, he appeaseth her; she weeps,
he flatters her; and although reason did persuade her as Nurses do their
children, Weep not, you shall have it, yet her patience is quite spent, his
heart is like a mine which bursts out with so much the more ruin and noise by
how much the more it is stopped up and constrained, Seianus nimia fortuna secors
and muliebre cupidine incensus. Ta.
he suffers himself to be carried away with the ambition of this woman, who
hoped to espouse with her husband the title of Augustus, and to give her
contentment discouers his design to the Emperor; beseeching him to agree to
this marriage: he presents unto him his request; and notwithstanding the high
favor he was in, he brake not the order of treating with the Prince, no
otherwise but by writing.

Caesar brought in this custom, to the end he may have time to consider of
that which was demanded; and what answer to return, and to make the
expedition of his affairs more commodious: for the affluence was so great, the
town of such extent, that it was impossible immediately to satisfy all
Augustus did write, Sermones libello habuit ne plus minusque loqueretur. Ta.
all his answers, because he may not speak more or less then that he thought
off.

The contents of his request being so hardy, he did not tremble in presenting
it; a timorous suppliant is more boldly denied. Qui timide rogat negare docet.
To entreat remisly or carelessly, is to doubt either of the merit of the
request, or of the power of him whom we request; he frames a complaint of
gratitude and remembrance, for an expert courtier should never begin with his
demand and adds an impious flattery, saying that he gave this order of
speaking of his affairs sooner to his mistress then to the Gods. Spes and
vota non primum ad principium aures quam ad deos. Ta.
It was in these terms: The good which Augustus wished me, and that which you
have done me, Caesar in many occasions oblige me not to send forth my prays
and vows sooner to the ears of the Gods then to yours. Qui excubias and
labor ut unus militum proincolumitate principis mavult haud unquam honorum
felgerem precatur. Ta.
It is to tell you that although I did never affect this glittering show of
honors, and that all my ambition was but to watch and labor as a simple
soldier for your safety and prosperity. I have notwithstanding this
contentment which I prize above all others; that I was already deemed worthy of
the alliance of Caesar's by the marriage of my daughter with the son of Claudius:
it is the foundation of my hope, Augustus in collocanda filia nonnihil de
Romany equitibus consultavit. Ta.
and because I have heard say, that Augustus proposing to give a husband unto
his daughter, had a thought to have made election of a Roman Knight; my
supplication unto you is, that if you seek for a husband for Livia the widow
of your son, you may be pleased to remember him whom you have always loved,
and who in that has no other design than the glory of your alliance, without
laying aside the offices wherewith you have honored me; it suffices me that
my house may have a proppe against the enmity of Agrippina, Satis vixit qui
vitam cum principe expleuit.
and that which I do is but for the love of my children, for mine own part I
make no reckoning of my life any longer then I may wholely employ it in the
service of such a Prince.

Tiberius having praised the zeal of Seianus and in few words put him in mind
of the favor he had extended toward him, added, Tempus ad integram
consultationem necessarium. Ta.
that the business would crave some time to give a deliberate answer, and
spoke in this manner, The interprizes of common men do ordinarily aim at
profit, but the condition of princes is far otherwise; Praecipua rerum ad
famam dirigenda. Ta.
for they ought to refer the principal of their actions and designs unto
reputation and honor; wherefore I will not make answer unto this request so
soon as I might do it: Liuia may of her self resolve whether she were best to
marry again, or continue still in my son Drusus his house, Matris and Aviae
propriora consilia. Ta.
she has more Counselors then my self, her grandmother, and mother, and for
my self, I will freely give thee mine advice concerning the rest, first
touching the malice of Agrippina, without all doubt this will the more ardently
inflame it, when she shall see the marriage of Livia divide the hearts of the
Caesar's into diverse parties. Hence we shall see and hear the noise and
strife of women's iealousies, and through their discord my Nephews shall enter
into quarrelling and what a case were it if this alliance should procure a
broile. Quid si intendatur certamen.


What will it be if they accuse you.
Thou deceiuest thy self Seianus if thou think to be able to remain still
in the same estate, or that Livia is of such a humor as to wax old with a
Roman Knight, Vix eum equite Romano senescit quis nupsit Caesari. Ta.
having married Caesar and after him Drusus, and though I should consent
thereunto, think thou that such as have seen her brothet, her father, and
our grandfathers possessed of the sovereign dignities, would endure that I
should suffer it. Thou resoluest to live in the state in which thou art, There
is not any desire so well ordered but will embrace occasions.
but the Magistrates and the chief of the State, who against their will come
to visit thee, and demand this advice in all things, know that thou art not to
stay there, that thou have raised thy self above the quality of a Knight,
Excessit equestre fastigium Seianus. Ta.
and that I have outstripped the terms of the affection my father bore thee:
they publicly dissembled this, but in private they blame my affection, for
the envy they bear thee. Thou say that Augustus had purposed to give his
daughter to a Roman Knight, and verily it is a marvel, Augusti animus in
omnes curas distrahitur. Ta.
having a spirit so wrathful over all, and having foreseen to what a degree
of power he might mount him, whom he should by this alliance raise so high
above all others: he spoke of Caius Proculeius, and of some others, Insignis
vitae tranquillitas nullis RP negotijs permixto. Ta.
which were of a notable tranquillity of spirit, and which no way meddled with
any affairs of the commonwealth. And if we be astonished at this his
resolution, how much more ought we so to be for marrying his daughtet to
Agrippa.

This is that which my friendship will not let me keep from thee, and
therefore I do assure you, that I will never cross these designs, nor those
of Livia. I will not now tell thee what I am resolved to do, before the year
come about, and with what alliance I purpose to join thee unto me; I will
only tell thee this, that there is nothing so eminent whereunto thy virtue and
the alliance thou bear unto me, may not raise this; Nihil tam excelsum quod
non mercantur virtutes. Ta.
and when any occasion of speaking hereof, either to the Senate or people shall
present it self I will not be silent.

But Seianus had greater assurance in the thoughts of Tiberius than in his
words, his mind was frantic with this ambition, he was no more capable of
reason, In the commerce of laue and ambition, reason is a coin which passes
not for curant.
he had much ado to come thus far; there is no way to pass further, the
ascent was very difficult, slippery and stubborn, and being come to the height
he shall find but shiuering, and will behold round about him but a fearful
downe-fall.

Tiberius unwilling he should perish, showed him how he did but run headlong
unto his destruction, and did rectify him: whosoever shows us the place where
we first began to fail, Vincula charitatis apud concordes, sunt incitamenta
irarum apud infensos Ta.
obliges no less then he who shows us which way we should go; he gives him
to understand that this marriage will be an original of perpetual discord in
the house of the Caesar's, and that the very same things which serve as a ciment
amongst persons which are at agreement, do form hatred in the minds of such
as are already at jar.

But Seianus was not so much in pain about the success of his marriage, as
with the suspicions which began to engender in the fantasy of Tiberius against
that great and powerful authority which he had usurped in all affairs,
which in short time causes confidence to degenerate into fear, affection into
jealousy, and liberty into necessity.

Praecipuum incidiu^ magni principis magni liberti. Ta. in cuiuscunque animo
virtus sit, ei plurimum tribuendum. Vell.
To have two great subjects is no good sign of the Princes own greatness, and
yet notwithstanding it is the true property of great Princes to raise merit and
recompense services, for wheresoever virtue is found, it will be honored; it
considers more the person then the country, industry more then birth; of all
times Rome has seen new men raised to great honors; T. Cornucanus High
Priest, Sp. Carvius Consul, Ma. Cato Censor, Municus Thriumphius and Marcus six
times Consul.

It is madness for a man to oppose himself against the will of the Prince,
Consecratus est vnicus sentiensque Euthymius nihilque adeo mirum aliud quam hoc
placuisse dijs. Plin.
when he says I will have it, he renders reason enough of his actions; men
wondered to see Euthimius to be placed amongst the number of the Gods before his
death, and that in his life time he was sacrificed unto, but they were
satisfied with this only reason, Jupiter would have it so.

Interest reipublicae quod usu necessarium, and dignitate eminere utilitatemque
authoritate inimica. Vell.
To take from the Prince the power to raise the mean conditioned, and abasing
the great ones, this is to snatch the Scepter out of his hand, to make his
power but a shadow, and to quench the lively light of majesty. The State has
intrest, that liberality should acknowledge merit, and favor should sustain
services, the condition of a Prince should be very hard, Dubium an fato
principum inclinatio in hos, offensio millos, an sit aliquid in nostris
consilijs. Ta.
if amongst so great a number of servants he might not chose some one worthy of
a more entire confidence, according the happiness of the election, or the
force of the merit.

It is no matter if this favor procure the jealousy of great ones, the envy
of equals, or the hatred of inferiors, so it trouble not the order of
affairs, that particular intrest swallow not up the public; Vt paucis
illustrentur mundus euertitur unius honor orbis excidium est. Sal.
for when this shall come to pass, and that to enrich a few of these
favorites the State is impouerished and all put in disorder, the Prince which
so indiscretly distributeth his favor, is despised as having neither
judgment, nor justice in his elections, Multum grauius supplicium odio
publico. Sen.
and the fouourite finds by experience that there is no greater punishment
than the public hatred.

If it please the Prince he may cast him down as low as he has exalted him,
Fluxa fama potentiae no suis viribus nixae. Ta.
and there needs but a blast to lay flat such powers as are not sustained by
their own forces; Tiberius was somewhat startled at this great power of
Seianus: but the good will which all the people bear to the house of
Germanicus does more afflict him, and Seianus who sees his imagination
perplexed therewithal represents the peril unto him to be more then it is,
Choler is ordained as companion to reason, and Basile calls it the nerve of the
soul.
and reuiues in the heart of the Empress the ancient rancor she bore against
Agrippina, this remembrance drives her into choler, and this anger that is the
nerve which gives the suddainest motion unto the soul, makes her think, she
shall never be any thing so long as her enemy is something.

To make this apprehension penetrat the deeper into her mind, he employes
Mutilia Prisca her confident, and to gain her he practizeth with Iul.
Posthumus, who made love unto her; Regibus aequa ne dum infirmia insolita sunt.
Ta.
the Empress was presently moved with Agrippinaes hopes, and her fear not
only of taking place beneath her, but of being equalled with her, Facilis
foeminarum credulitas ad gaudium. Ta.
furnished her with devices enough to make her yet more odious unto Tiberius
then she was before. Moreover Seianus had some suborned persons that
entertained Agrippina with vanities and infused into her mind the sweet hopes
of Government, and as pleasing things do more easily enter into women's
belief, she sought for accusations the more freely to administer jealousy
unto Tiberius and contentment to the people.

Tiberij seculo magna pietas fuit nihil impie facere. Sen.
But as that age was so corrupted, that it was then a virtue to do no evil,
and piety not to be impious. Tiberius resolved to do no good to Agrippina,
feared notwithstanding to be blamed for impiety and ingratitude, if he did her
any ill, whereupon his indignation not dareing to aim directly at her, he
first set upon her friends and kindred: Claudia Pulchra her cosen, was accused
of adultery with Furmus, and of charms, and poison against Tiberius.

Domitius Afer quoque crimine clarescere properius. Ta.
Domitius Afer who at any price would make his fortune, was the accuser, he was
one of that number which Seianus entertained, and served him as a petty
instrument to stir and move great works withal: upon this accusation
Agrippina inflamed with choler, as well for the injury as for the peril of her
cosen, came to see Tiberius, and finding him offering a sacrifice unto her
father, she said,

You should not thus imolate your sacrifices nto Augustus, and persecute his
posterity, the spirit of that great Prince is not in his dumb statues, Non in
effiigies mutas divinus spiritus infusus. Ta.
but his true image which is borne of his celestial blood, understands well
the difference by the bad usage which is offered her, being reduced to the
miserable state of one accused; there is nothing intended to Pulchra, it is to
me: I am sole cause of her ruin, she has committed no other offense, Pulchrae
sola exitij causa quod Agrippinam stulte prorsus ad cultum delegerit. Ta.
but that she made no show of affection but to the service of Agrippina, and
that improuidently; for she should call to mind that Sosia Galla was banished
for that cause.

This discourse did so incense Tiberius, that having lost his dissimulation, he
brought from the bottom of his heart a bitter speech, and strange to his
humor which was never accustomed to be so forward; for after telling her that
she should moderate her passion, he added a Greek verse, importing thus much,

Thou beleeuest daughter, that thou have wrong done thee, if thou command not.

If Agrippina did understand the Greek tongue this speech passed not without a
reply, and it is certain that Princes of her rank were learned; Augustus
quadam epistola Agrippinae neptis ingenium colla^davit and scripta. Suet:
Agrippina her daughter composed a history, Augustus commended the wit of this
Agrippina, who remained for a sufficient time in Athens, and in other Cities of
Greece with her husband Germanicus, to understand some words.

And it is without doubt that this speech pricked to the quick her ambition,
and giving fire to her choler, she could not refrain from speaking these words
immediately or in retiring, Behold we are well seeing the hopes of a woman bring
jealousy to Tiberius, and fear to Seianus; if I have any ambition it is not
for my self, my sex wrongs my courage. If I have a desire to reign, it is but
in my Children? where do they find that I should love them less then I do?
Mihi nunquam persuadebunt vt meos amari a me unius vnqua^ putem. Plin.
Agrippina semper Atrox. Tac. Pervicax irae. Tac. Aequi impatiens. Tac.
I have part in that which the heavens reserve for them, and I will that they
know, that if I affected not their greatness, I should not be a mother. Let
him call me fierce, proud, impatient, as much as he will, I cannot be otherwise
against this hare-brained man, whom he names his companion, and would be so
with my children, who is allied to the Claudians, places his Statues amongst
them of the Caesar's, pulls down those of Pompey, who carries his authority
above that of the Senate, who caused my Husbands death, persecutes my kindred
and friends; yes, I am angry that I do not command, for I would be ashamed to
command so unjustly and wickedly.

Weakness and choler do not well agree together.
But what do menaces avail where power is wanting, there is nothing so unfit
as to be weak and yet choleric. That of Agrippina did her no good, and
advanced the condemnation of Furnius and Pulchra. Domitius then, who showed
himself so eloquent in their accusation, Prosperior Afro eloquentiae quam
morum fama. Tac.
is praised by Tiberius, and placed in the rank of the chiefest Orators, but
with more estimation of knowledge how to speak well then do well, extreme old
age did much lessen the reputation of his eloquence, for having his spirit
weary and spent, he could not refrain speaking.

It is doubted whether these two Lawyers were condemned according to the law of
Iulia, ordained by Augustus against adultery, Relegation was milder then exile.
Namque relegatus tum exul. dic^r. Ovid.
for that was too gentle to satisfy the cruelty of Tiberius, and animosity of
Seianus, and more shamefully then severe, only relegating the culpable out of
Rome.

The number moderated the rigor of the pain, for if it had been capital, it
would have made whole families desolate. Seneca says, Argumentum est
deformitatis pudicitia: nunquam invenies tam miseram tam sordidam vt illi satis
sit vnum adulterorum par nisi singulis diuidat horas, and non sufficit dies
omnibus. Sen.
that this excess was so common in his time, that shamefastness was a sign
of deformity, to be wise, it behooved not to be fair; there was not a woman so
miserable and beggarly, that could be contented with a couple of servants, who
gave not each one his turn, and unto whom the longest day seemed not too
short. It was ordained that she who had to her Father or Grandfather, or to her
Husband a Roman Knight, would not profess her self a whore. Vistilia issued
from a Family, amongst whom there had been Preters, declared before the Edils,
that she would not let her youth pass away in barrenness, nor her beauty
unknown: In a word, that she was a Courtizan; Satis poenarum aduersum
impudicas in ipsa professione flagitij. Tac.
this was all the punishment which custom ordained for these disorders, to the
end that the shameful declaration of so miserable and infamous a life might be
instead of a pain or penalty. Tiberius confined her to the Isle of Seriphos.
We must believe that Seianus made him not any whit the more clement toward
Agrippina's Kinswoman his enemy, for outstripping the severity of his
Predecessors, Aquilciam qu^dquam Consul lege Iulia damnassat exilio puniuit.
Tac.
he had already caused Aquilia to banishment, although the Consul had put her
but to the penalty of the law of Iulia.

Agrippina was so incensed to see her kinswoman so unworthily handled, that
she fell sick thereupon; and after many complementall good wishes of her
recovery, her grief soon brought sighs into the mouth and tears to the eyes
of the sick person, and having deplored her misery and the ruin of her house,
she besought the Emperor, that to assuage the grief of her loveliness, Non
aliud probis quam ex matrimonio solatium. Ta.
he would be pleased to permit her to marry, her youth not being able to
continue in that solitariness; there being left no contentment for honest
women of such years, but marriage; and that it would please him heartily to
embrace the protection of Germanicus his widow and children.

The prayer you make (my father) is not that I should be weary of my solitude,
that there may be some thing which would kindle again my affection; the first
is the ashes of Germanicus, and will never be revived, there is nothing which
may content me, there remains no overplus for me; if the Gods had as yet
conferred any grace upon me, they must give me a new heart to receive it, for
they have never sent mine own but bitterness; The reason of State is a
thwarting of ordinary reason, having respect to a reason or benefit more
universal. A deliberate answer discouers neither offense nor fear. Ne
offensio aut metus prodatur. Ta. Prima semper irarum tela maledicta sunt and
quod non possumus imbecilli optamus irati Sallust.
it can neither contain nor bear delight, I have need of some one which may
comfort not my courage, but may entertain my patience.

Reason of State which goes above all reasons of ordinary laws could not
consent to this demand, for being a woman equally beloved for her chastity and
fruitfulness, she would replenish a house with Grandchildren of Augustus, who
one day would sue for the succession of the Empire.

Tiberius considering the prejudice the State might sustain by this demand,
made her no answer at all, that he might neither give notice of the offense
he took, or of his fear, and went coldly away without speaking a word; this
silence and coldness inflamed Agrippina the more, and as the first arrows of
revenge are bitter words, and what we cannot do for lack of power, we wish it
out of the heat of choler, so she powered forth all she had in her heart;
Seianus who could take his time considers all this, and by an officious kind
of disloyalty sends word to this Princess that the smouthering flames of the
designs, which Tiberius had reserved in his mind against her; were upon the
point to euaporate and break forth, that he was resolved to poison her, and
that she should take heed of taking any thing at his hand, nor any meat: Solum
insidiarum remedium si non intelligantur. Ta.
Agrippna who in discretion should have made no show of this advice, for the
peril there is to make known that we are acquainted with Princes intents,
presently drew her heart into her brow, and being one time at Table with
Tiberius she grew obstinate both in silence and abstinence; when he saw that
she had not tasted of an Apple that he had given her with his own hand, but
had given it to some that waited at the Table, he turned himself toward his
mother and rounding her in the ear, said, It is no marvel if I have been
somewhat severe heretofore toward this woman, seeing she takes me for an
impoysoner. Non mirum si princeps quid severius statuit a quo veneficij
insimulatur. Ta.
Where distrust once begins, there friendship ends; from this instant their
minds became irreconcilable, and the rumor was spread over Rome, that
Tiberius would put Agrippina to death, either openly or in secret.

Hereupon Tiberius undertakes a voyage to Naples, which design had been often
deliberated, resolved, Augustus dyed at Nola. Certus procul urbe degere. Ta.
Cum saevitiam ac libidinem factis promeret locis occultabat. Ta.
delayed and broken off. He said it was to dedicate a temple to Jupiter at
Capua, and an other to Augustus at Nola where he dyed; but he had no other
intention then to absent himself from the City. It is certain that Seianus
knowing his humor counseled this his retreat to have the means to govern
him as he listed, but because he stayed there five years after his death I
suppose that he chose out this place to cover the dissoluteness of his life.

Decrepit old age makes the Prince to be despised, Dion speaks it of Tib. and
Nerua. Dia togeras cataphro noumenon. Adrian was the first Emperor which let
his beard grow to cover the slashes over his face.
Some there are that think also that it was to cover and hide his old age,
which made him contemptible, and to avoid the beholding of his body which was
falling in pieces, and the spirit willing to come forth as from a building,
whose walls were cracked, and the beams rotten, this bad complexion of his made
him ashamed, he was tall of stature, lean and slender, his sholders crooked
and sticking out, his head bare and bald, his face full of pimples and
Fistulas, knots and bolwaies disfigured with plasters, nor did the hair of his
beard one whit cover this deformity, for the Emperors were not any, his nature
was best pleased with solitariness, and had been accustomed thereunto at
Rhodes, where he eschued much company to cover his Riots, and those of his wife.

Sovereign authority can admit no companion.
But one of the most apparrant reasons was his impatience being not able to
endure any longer near his Mother, who would do all, nor could he wrest the
authority out of her hands, for he received the Empire by them, Matrem
Dominationis sociam aspernabatur. Tac.
and upon every occasion she would reproach him, that he reigned not but by her
means, and that he was no less beholding to her for his fortune then for his
birth. It was true, for Liuia perceiving that Augustus would have declared
Germanicus his successor upon the belief he had, that his election would be
grateful to the people, who loved and extolled him, she prevailed so much by
her prayers and entreaties, that Tiberius was in the end assured to attain to
the Empire after Augustus and Germanicus after Tiberius, Liuia did put him in
mind hereof; this remembrance seemed a reproach, Qui exprobrat reposcit. Tac.
this reproach a summoning him to an acknowledgment, and the failing therein
ingratitude.

He performed this Voyage then to be far from his Mother, and was therein
accompanied but with a small train, to wit, with one Senator named Cocceius
Nerua, learned in the Laws, with Seianus, and with one Knight called Curtius
Atticus, Marino participe Seianus, Curtium Atticum oppressit. Tac.
whom Seianus ruined a little after, the residue were learned men, and most of
them Graecians, for he passed his time in discoursing with them, and delighted
in the beauty and riches of that language the which he spoke distinctly,
readily, and eloquently: this he could not do without nature, art, and grace:
many speak it, but few know how to speak it well, and to do so, their
discourse must always be to the purpose, and the current thereof without
confusion.

Besides the contentment Seianus had to possess his Master alone, he managed
the affairs with more surety and less envy, He that meddles with many
businesses gives way unto fortune, to lay more hold of him.

Qui assiduos in domum caetu^ arcet in fringit potentiam: Qui recipit facultate
criminantibus praebet. Tac. The soldiers carried the packets and were called
speculators.


but giving still leave unto fortune to fasten the surer upon him. His abode at
Rome was not so fit for estranging from his house all ordinary company, he left
his friends, but in receiving them daily, he made the number to be known, and
ministered jealousy to his Master, he reaped hereby also another commodity for
he alone receiving the packets which the soldiers of the Guard brought, he was
sole Arbiter of all dispatches. All the functions of Tiberius soul were
distracted in this hurtful leisure, and all his strength melted away in these
delights, which Seianus always seasoned with some notable example, because
this Prince believed that his authority would be lost if his severity
maintained not the reputation thereof. This solitude produced an occasion which
greatly confirmed the proof of his fidelity, for as Tiberius on a time dined
in a Cave, Hinc metus in omnes and fuga eorum qui conuivium celebrabant. Ta.
the mouth of that falling down slew foam of his Officers, and he himself had
been smothered without the help of Seianus, who covered him with his head and
hands, his Princes safety being more precious unto him then his own, Qui non
sui sed principis est anxius, cum fide auditur quanquanm exitio suadebat. Ta.
from thence forth he followed his councels, were they never so dangerous,
without any consideration either of the ground or consequence, as of a person
who had witnessed to have no other interest therein, then that of his
authority. He caused him resolve to rid himself of Nero the nearest to the
succession, whose hopes troubled his rest, and busied the minds of the people
with a desire of change: he plays the part of a Judge, and his people about
him were the accusers, and condemned him as an offender. Nero quanquam modesta
iuventa tamen quid in presentiarum conduceret oblitus. Ta.
This young Prince had modesty enough in his condition, but little judgment to
take any sudden resolution, and to weigh the councels of his servants, who
ceased not to tell him that his birth carried him to the Empire, that the
people desired it; that the legions craved it; that Seianus was wicked enough
not to wish it, but not powerful enough to hinder it. Nihil quidem prava
cogitationis sed interdum voces contumaces and inconsultae. Ta.
These words did not infuse into his soul any evil thoughts, but drew from
his mouth at unawares certain words, which being reported to Seianus, and by
him to Tiberius, were taken for a conspiracy; when he is in Court they take
heed of all that he does, they blame his words, and his silence also is blamed.
All his actions are watched, there is no safety nor assurance in his own
house, and the night it self will conceal nothing for him. If he sleeps in
his wives bosom, A Roman Senator to assay the discretion of his wife, as of a
vessel ill closed he would not pour thereunto, either wine or oil but water
only feeding her curiosity with nothing but flammes and guls of his own
inventions. Plut. Ne nox quidem secura cum uxor vigilia, somnia, suspiria,
matri Liviae atque illa Seiano patefaceret. Ta. Iam diu sopita fratrum odia
accenduntur. Ta.
even there he shall find persidious dealing, for like a vessel that leaks
she lets all run out that is put into her, she reports unto Livia the Emperors
Mother his waking dreams, and his very sighs, Livia recounts them to Seianus,
who bandies his Brother Drusus against him, giving him hope of the first rank,
when his elder Brother whom the hatred of Tiberius had already much shaken,
should be beaten down. Drusus was of a fierce spirit, for besides his desire
to command, and the emulation which is ordinarily betwixt brethren, he was
desperately jealous that Agrippina his Mother loved Nero better then him.
Seianus had no better heart, nor bore any greater affection to Drusus then to
the other, but knowing that he had courage, and durst carry himself stoutly in
danger, he supposed it would be more easy for him to lay some ambush to entrap
and ruin him.

All Germanicus friends were sought after and persecuted, one friend betrayed
another, the firmest friendship went not so far as the Altar, Multis
simulationum involueris tegitur natura vnius cuiusque frons oculi vultus
persaepe mentiuntur. Cic.
but covered such in humane disloialties as they showed how dangerous it was
for man to trust man, whose forehead is a liar, his eye a traitor, and his
countenance a deceiuer. Sabinus accused with Silius remained not any long time,
but that he saw himself to be at the same cliffe from whence he was
precipitated, but it was by a notable treason. Four Pretors followed the
Consulat, Si consulem videro aut praetorem omnia quibus ^onor haberi solet
faciam equ^ de^liam, caput aperiam semita cedam. Sen.
the supreme honor of our Roman ambition, twelve vshers marched before the
Consul, he that sat down rose up, and he that was on horseback, or in his
Coach alighted, each man was uncovered, and many put by their swords to do
them reverence. These men having no means to obtain it but by the favor of
Seianus, which could not be acquired by any just nor honorable ways, knew not
what to resolve; to give him money, he has no need of it; he has the
disposal of the riches of the Empire, and of the treasure of the Emperor,
which amounts unto more then 7200. millions, their nature is too violent and
perverse to furnish him with pleasures, and for honors he is greater then the
Emperor, Seiani voluntas nisi scelere quaerebatur. Ta.
for his will is a law to them of his faction, his Statues are raised as high
as those of Caesar's, to purchase the favor of the Oracle he makes a sacrifice
of the heads of his enemies.

Of this number was Titus Sabinus a Roman knight, who thinking that the friend
that falters was never any, continued after the death of Germanicus his
affection toward his children, The friendship that cease was never
friendship. Sectator domi comes in publico post tot clientes unus. Ta.
assisting them in their affairs at home, and bearing them company through the
streets abroad, glorying in the constancy of his fidelity, in such a time when
their most faithful friends were become fearful, and the most obliged
ungrateful.

Eo apud bonos laudatur gravis iniquis. Ta.
This being pleasing to honest men, and incensing the mischievous, was quickly
perceived by Seianus, who esteemed it a brauado and contempt, that a man of
that degree should set so little by his power, Compositum inter ipsos ut
Latiaris strueret dolum caeteri testes adessent.
as openly to declare himself for his enemy. These men have notice of the
wound in his heart, and go about to pluck out the arrow which stuck in it,
Latiaris to betray Seianus becomes the spy, and the rest witnesses, he had
some former acquaintance with him, he now renewes, improues, and reinforces it,
with a more strict familiarity, begins to praise him that he remained so
constant in his friendship toward the family of Germanicus, after that others
flinched away, Florentis domus amici ad strictam deserunt. Ta.
he spoke of this Prince with honor, of his wife with pity, and of his
children with hopes, Sabinus thinking to have found a man truly confident for
to pour into his heart his griefs, Molles in calamitate morta^um animi. Ta.
Effudit lachrimas iunxit questus audentius onerat Seianum saevitia^ superbiam
spes eius. Ta.
as men's hearts are always tender in feeling of calamities, he let drop his
tears, then his plaints followed them, and after that reproaches and injuries
against Seianus, he speaks of his cruelties, his pride, and his designs, and
as it is difficult to bridle a discourse when choler and passion have scope,
many frank words escaped him against Tiberius.

This secret passion so euaporated, Species arctae amicitiae inter eos qui
sermonibus vetita miscuere.
and his mind so freely discharged, he believed that he was well assured of
the amity and freedom of Latiaris; because they have mixed together their bold
complaints, and words dangerous and prohibited.

And as afflicted souls know and seek out one another, Sabinus went every day
toward Latiaris, still to open him some new wound in his heart, Dolores quasi
ad fidissima afferuetur.
and that so much the more confidently, by how much he held him for a most
trusty friend; the poor man should spend more time and judgment to try him.

Latiaris related this discourse of Sabinus to three other Senators; but
because the proof of one man alone was not enough to condemn him, Turpis
latebra detestanda frat^. Ta.
they agreed to hide themselves between the boards and the feeling, to hear
him; in the mean while Latiaris should make him continue and renew this
discourse: he finds him in the market place, brings him to his house, and
tells him he had news to tell him, the chamber being shut, he represents unto
him the danger past and the present miseries, wherein those times were but too
much abounding; Praeterita and instantia quorum affatim copia ac novos terrores
cumulat. Ta.
he raises upon the old plaints new fears, not so much to let him know, that
all was desperate, as to make him sing and speak to his own guise: Sabinus
who yet believed more, answered, that matters were in that state, as there can
be nothing said nor pronosticated, but ill, that there was no expectation of
any goodness in a government so tyranicall and insolent: Maesta ubi semel,
prorupere, difficilius reticentur.
and as we cannot easily retain plaints and injuries, when once they have
found a passage, and it is difficult to conceal that which hurts us, he made
Seianus the instrument of all the calamity private and public. We do hardly
retain that which hurtes us.

Missis ad Caesarem literis ordinem fraudis suumque ipsi dedecus narravere. Ta.
All this discourse came through the holes of the boards into the ears of the
three Senators, who as soon as Sabinus was departed, perfected the treason;
Tacitus says that at the very instant by express letters they certified all
unto Caesar, expressing unto him the treason and their infamy, Tosiano
charixomenos. Dion
and Dion says, that this was done to gratify Seianus: he should add
thereunto, that it concerned themselves, for besides that they would draw a
recompense of this disloyalty, and attain to the honor of Consulship in
dishonouring themselves in this manner, if any of them had betrayed his
companion there was an end of their lives.

The rumor of this wickedness being carried to Caprea, was brought again
presently to Rome, where it marueilously troubled men's minds set every man
upon his guarde. Notae ignotaeque aures vitantur muta atque inanima and
parietes circum spectabantur. Ta.
The ears of all both known, and unknown, were suspected, they suspected the
very walls and things in sensible, every where was naught but silence, sorrow
and astonishment.

Sabinus is laid hands hands upon the first day of the year. Is it thus (said
he to those that took him) that they begin the new year, must Seianus have
oblations of this quality, what assurance is there then for a Roman Citizen,
seeing that amongst our vows and sacred Ceremonies, Inter sacra and vota
verbis etiam profanis abstinere mos. Tac.
wherein we abstain from the least profane speech we may perceive Ropes to
bind and strangle withal, and that in the Temple we find Prisons.

They put him to death presently, not giving him leisure to defend or justify
himself. His Dog lay down by his dead body, Cum quidam ex corona circumstante
cani cibum obrecisset, ad os defuncti tulit. Innatauit idem in Tiberim cadauere
abiecto sustentere conatus. Plini.
brought to his mouth the bread that was given him, and when he was cast into
Tiber, he lept after him to keep him up that he might not ^nke into the
bottom. All the town wondered to see such gratitude in a Beast, during so many
ingratitudes and inhumanities which then defamed men. All his accusers dyed
miserably, and as Princes hate Traitors when they have gathered the profit of
their Treasons, so Tiberius rid them away: for when he had served his turn
with such bad Instruments, he brake them and took new ones.

The Emperor thanked the Senate for freeing the Commonwealth from such an
Enemy, Tiberius scelerum ministros vt peruerti aba^i^s nolebate ta plerumque
satiatus and oblatis in eandem operam recentibus, veteres and praegraues
afflixit. Tac.
and added, that he passed his life in fear and trembling, that the
coniurations of his Enemies held him in pain, and although he named them not,
it was easily perceived that he pointed at Agrippina and her Children.

Asinius speaking according to his accustomed freedom and liberty, said, That
it was fit the Emperor should be entreated to discover his fears, Qui metus
fatetur, eos amoveri sinat. Tac. Aegrius accipit princeps, ea quae recludit
quam quae promit. Tac.
and suffer them to remove them from his heart. Tiberius took this to be too
bold an advice, for it sent a bright beam to the bottom of his heart, which
he was not willing to discover. Seianus pacified him, not for any love to
Gallus, but to the end that his choler being restrained, Tiberius Ientus i^
medirando, vbi prorupisset tristioribus dictis atrocia facta coniungebat Tac.
his fall might be the more headlong and violent, having always observed,
that the more Tiberius meditated revenge, the more did time and delay sharpen
it, and the farther off he threatened, the heavier the stroke fell.

Asinius Gallus was of great repute in the Commonwealth, but in much more
disgrace with Tiberius, who feared his courage, hated his virtue, said that his
pride was an hereditary disease, blaming Asinius Pollio his Father, Asinius
Pollio made a Tragedy of the Civil wars. Interroga Caesar quam partem
reipublicae tibi mandari velis? Tac. Speaking to Princes we must not so much
consider that that be true which we speak, as whether they be willing to
hearken thereunto. Iulia Augusta 82. annos vitae Pucino retulit acceptos, non
alio vino vsa. Plini.
a brave captain, a very persuading Orator, an excellent Poet, a friend to
truth in a time when it was very odious.

Tiberius (who never forgot the stinging speech which Asinius had spoken to him
at his first coming to the Empire, when alleging that he was capable but of
the one half thereof, he suddenly asked him which he would have) cast him in
prison where he languished three years, in the end death set him at liberty,
but it is not known whether it were natural or forced. Princes will not be
otherwise treated withal, then thus; we must speak to them by supplication
and remonstrance; to tell them of their faults, is not to correct them, but to
offend them.

About this time dyed the Emperors Mother aged according to Dion 86. or
according to Pliny 82. who referres the length of her life to the quality of
the wine she drank.

The Senate ordained for her great honors, but her son (not out of modesty,
but out of envy) cut off some part thereof, and by his letters dissembled
nothing that he was offended at the favors of his Mother, taxing the Consul
Fuluius, whom the Empress loved: a man fit to attract the love of women, and
who had the art to speak gracefully, and could give Tiberius such close girds,
Facetiarum apud praepotentes in longum memoria est, dum acerbae sunt. Tac.
that would bite him sore, and whose sharpness he had felt: great men do
not easily forget that which never so little exceeds merriment.

Tiberius his hairs were waxen gray under the obedience of his Mother; for
neither his age nor his majesty had freed him from this duty; that wise Roman
said, Parents non amare Impietas est; non agnoscere In san^a. Sen.
That who loves not those that brought him into the world is impious, and he
that does not acknowledge them is mad. But this respect founded upon the
deuoire of nature, did not impeach the liberty of State Reason, which is
jealous of any thing that may incroach upon Authority; Iulia Tiberij nomen suo
postscripsit, Tiberius vt inferius Maiestate principis dissimula^um and graui
offensione abdidit. Tac.
he was offended that his Mother dedicating an Effigy of Augustus near the
Theater of Marcellus, did place the name of Liuia before that of Tiberius; he
thought that Majesty was wounded in that, and a Prince should not endure it to
be touched in any thing.

She was married to Tiberius Nero, father to the Emperor Tiberius, and
Augustus extremely taken with her love, ravished her from her husband,
Penatibus grauidam induxit, Tac.
and that so suddenly, that he gave her not time to lie in the house from
whence he took her. It is not known whether she consented to this change,
or whether her ignorance gave her any color; fair women which have committed
any fault by the persuasion of a Prince, Vitium autho e redemit. Ovid. Matris
in admisso fall a sub imagine Iusae error inest, pluvia t^ctus adulter erat.
Ovid.
believe that Authority excuses them: Hellen said, That her Mother offended
not, having Jupiter as a warrant for her transgression.

Scribonia wife to Augustus was repudiated for having too freely complained of
the immoderate power of this new friend: her fall assured Liuia, and her fault
taught her hus to gain the heart of her husband, she must please his humor;
wherefore being asked how she could so absolutely rule her husband; she
answered, in not prying into his actions, and in dissembling his affections.

Never did woman give better advice to her husband; for seeing that Augustus to
have reigned severely lived not secur^ly, Quid viuis si perire te tam multorum
interest? quis finis ^rit supplici rum? uis sanguinis? D. Aug.
and that Cinna did go about to kill him in a town of the Gauls, at such
time as he was to offer sacrifice, and to give him up as an oblation for the
public weal. Augustus was much di^contented with this enterprise, and wished
hi death, seeing so many men d^sired that he should die, Se^ ritate nihil
adhuc prof cisti, tenta qu^modo ti^ic^dat clementia: ignosce Cinnae;
deprehensus est, iam nocere tibi non potest, prodesse fa^ae tuae potest. D Live.
and that a man of that quality, Nephew of Pompey, should attempt to take away
his life: being in this perplexity Liuia his wife spoke unto him these
memorable words, The Remedies you have used have not prevailed, embrace their
contraries; severity hitherto has been unprofitable, essay what clemency will
do, pardon Cinna, his design is discovered, he cannot annoy your life, and
may increase your reputation. Augustus was persuaded by her, caused Cinna come
unto him, and showing him how he was informed of his enterprise, said unto
him; I have already given you life as an enemy and rebel, I give it you now as
a traitor and parricide; Contendamus vtrum ego meliore fide vitam tibi
dede^man, tu debeas.
let us speak no more of it, let us be friends, let us make it appear which
of us will do better, I, in pardoning, or you in repenting.

As Tiberius had his favorite, Liuia also had hers; to obtain any thing of
Tiberius, the passage must be through the discretion of Seianus; and he that
will purchase the favor of Liuia must sacrifice to Virgulania; whose Authority
in the City was so great, that none durst enterprise any thing against her,
how just soever it were; Amicitia Augustae Vi^gula niam extul^rat supra leges.
Tac.
for she did raise her above the Laws; moreover, she was a woman so fierce
and arrogant, that being called before the Senate, she refused to appear,
although no person was dispensed withal, not the Vestall Nuns. Vestales in
foro and Iudicio audiri, quoties testimonium dicerent, vetus mos fuit. Tac.
Virgulania monitu principis, pugionem nepoti misit. Tac.
Tiberius was constrained (for the respect he bore his Mother) to be troubled
for any thing that concerned her, in such manner, that her Nephew having
thrown his wife out of the windows, he incontinently went to visit the
Chamber, and saw that this woman did not precipitate her self as her husband
did allege, for they beheld the marks of the effect to push her, and of her
resistance to withstand.

As long as this Princess was alive, he moderated his will, submitting it
(for respect unto her) to her councels, and Seianus likewise in duty humbled
his designs to her commandments, not daring to gainsay them; Tunc veluti
fr^nis exoluti proruperunt. Tac.
but after this death, all things grew irregular and disorderly, and there was
now no more hope or refuge for innocence.

Sanctitate domus priscum ad morem, comis vltra qua^ a^^i^uis foeminis probatum
materium potius vxor facilis, and cum artibus mariti simulatione filij been
composita.
C. Caesar who succeeded in the Empire praised her publicly before the
Palace, for that she had religiously governed her household after the old
fashion, not permitting the present time to bring in again those vanities and
curiosities which had so much marred the simplicity of former ages: a
Princess, gentle and courteous, and of a higher strain of Princely carriage
then other women of her time, a mother that would not endure any thing, a wife
that had nothing in her insufferable, and so discreet that she could sagely fit
her self to the wisdom of Augustus, and the dissimulation of Tiberius.

The Senate received Letters from Tiberius against Agrippina and her children.
It was thought they had been written long before, but that the Empress had
detained them, There is nothing in man but his ambition which waxes not old
Thucid. and Plut.
foreseeing that they would cause some trouble; and although her ambition was
not grown old, yet she desired to pass the remainder of her days in peace.

They accused not Nero or Drusus of any crime against the State, nor of leuying
of troops, nor of introducing of novelties, but only to be debauched; there
could be nothing said against the Mother, but to reproach her with her pride
and stubbornenesse. The Letters being read, there was some question touching
the deliberating thereof; Queis nulla ex honesto spes, publica mal^ in
occasionem gratiae trahuntur. Tac.
and as the opinions were more or less rigorous, according to the nature of
those which were too op^ne, some Senators whose hopes could not be grounded
upon honor, who sought for occasion of grace and favor in the miseries of the
public, were of opinion contrary to the more ancient and wiser, who lifting up
their thoughts higher then these, found that there was no mind so strong and
firm but ought to be very reserved, in giving either counsel or judgment
upon the liberty or life of him who might succeed the Prince.

Tiberius had given the charge of the Acts and Records of the Senate to Iunius
Rusticus, who having never before given any proof of constancy or courage;
showed notwithstanding, that it were good to proceed slowly in this business,
that they may give the old man time and space to repent himself and revoke his
commandment, Dandum interstitium paenitentiae. Tac. Breuibus momentis secunda
verti possunt. Tac.
for things of greatest moment oftentimes change themselves on a sudden; that
nature also was strong and flourishing in the house of Germanicus, but in that
of Tiberius weak and feeble.

Upon this contention, the people who would not endure that these Princes
should be treated as criminals, detest this injustice, and casting the blame
thereof upon Seianus, carry the effigies of Agrippinae and Nero through the
City, assemble themselves about the Palace, cry out, these Letters were false
and counterfeit, F^rebantur sub nominibus consularium fictae in Seiarum
sententiae. Tao.
make Seianus his process, and faigning the opinions of the Senators, the
boldest of the company having gathered them of his companions pronounce against
him the sentence of death. And hereupon there wanted not Satyrs to be
dispersed abroad, Per occultum libido ingeniorum exc^rcetur procacius. Tac.
so much the more bitter, by how much the authors were unknown, and are the
more greedily collected and sought after, by how much the more they are sharp
and ingenious.

Seianus who should have warded these blows by his contempt of them, gives
contentment to his enemies, as to let them know that this troubles him; lets
the Emperor see that his Majesty is wronged by his injury, that the people
undertaking to raise assemblies, Facile populus duces imperatoresque diligit,
quorum imagines pro vexillis sequitur. Tac.
and pronounce sentences; there remained to them no other thing, but to take
arms, and to choose for Emperor him whose Image they carried for their
Ensigns.

Tiberius sends new letters to the Senate, continues his plaints against
Agrippina and her children, against the timerity and insolence of the people,
and against the Senate for inclining more to the cunning of one Senator, then
to the reverence of his commandment, in contempt of his pleasure, and derision
of his authority: Integra sibi cuncta postulauit.
but he adds further, that he reserues to himself the knowledge of him: the
fathers excuse themselves, protesting that they were resolved to punish them to
the uttermost, if his commandments had not stayed them.

Inestimable loss of the Annals of Cornelius Tacitus, not of some few pages
but of all things past since the year 782. unto 785.
Here all the world laments the inestimable loss of the books of Cornelius
Tacitus, by which we might attain to the knowledge of Agrippinaes fortune, of
the coniuration of Seianus, and would lighten us with the torch of truth amidst
the obscurity of conjectures. Libraries have preserved many Books, to whom we
will willingly resort, for that which is wanting of this excellent Historian,
who knew all that he should know of the affairs of the world.

Now Tiberius ceased not until such time as the Senate did content him,
Nouissime calumniatus modo ad statuam Augusti modo ad exercitus confugere
velle. Suet.
and that all his violences were authorized by their judgment. There was
nothing did so much further the condemnation of Agrippina and her children,
then the advice which Seianus gave to Tiberius, that she was determined to go
through the Temples of Rome and embrace the Statues of Augustus, to move the
people, and if that way did not prevail, to direct her course to Almaine to
seize the Legions.

Agrippina was not more mildely handled then her children, Accusauit p^ literas
amarissime congestis etiam probris, and Iudicatos tristis fame necauit. Suet.
and we must believe of her the same which Suetonius reports of them: that he
caused them to be declared enemies, and to dye of hunger: Nero was confined to
the Isle of Pontia, and Drusus a prisoner in the Palace; the bruit was, that
Nero seeing the Hangman bring a balter and a hook to make his choice of,
killed himself; Druso adeo alimenta, subducta, vt tomentum a culcitra
tentauerit mandere. Suet.
and that meat being denied to Drusus, he had eaten the stuffings of his bed:
but the death of these two Princes arrived not so soon, nor in this manner.
Suetonius related this upon report, which is fraughted as well with fables as
truths, they did their worst against Agrippina, Pandatriam relegauit. Suet.
and that worst was to banish her to the Isl^ of Pandatria in the Tirrhenian
Sea, where she expected each hour for some to come to strangle her, or that
sleeping they would join death to her slumber; Somnium morti ^ungere. Petr.
but Tiberius would have her life serve her for punishment; and as wrongs are
less supported by such as think not to have deserved them, and that the cause
is unjust; Odiorum causae grauioresquia iniquae. Tac.
so this poor Princess gave no intermission to her lamentation and bewailing
of the inhumanitie of Tiberius. Seeing we know the injury she suffered, we
may well guess the complaints she uttered; her daily discourse was this, but
it is not quickened with the grace wherewith her gravity endowed it, nor the
ardour wherewith her choler enflamed it.

And cruel, is he content, to see that with a glutted heart he may now quench
in the blood of Augustus this fervent thirst which so much tormented him; and
this disloyal Seianus, will he complain of fortune, that brought unto his
power these three heads which stopped his passage to tyranny.

Fuerim tantu^ nihil amplius doliturae domui piamentum. Sen.
The gods have chosen mine alone to bear all the miseries of my house, and the
expiation of all others: I demand of them but one favor, which is death; is it
possible that they will deny it unto the miserable? and what is more miserable
in this life, Quid miserius in vita quam velle mori? quid in morte quam
sepeliri non posse. Sen.
then to desire death, or in death to be deprived of Sepulture?

The plaints which are not prohibited to the most wretched, and which give some
ease to misery, are not permitted unto me; and yet know I not but some body
ouer-heares me, who will recount all that I speak, and I am well-pleased
therewith, it is a badge of fear and debilitie not to dare speak our
oppression.

Augustus discovered this secret to Fuluius, who told it to his wife, she to
Liuia. Augustus was angry with Fuluius, who for spite killed himself. Plut.
I will pour forth my mones to heaven and earth of the inhumanities of
Tiberius exercised upon the dead and the living; he was author of my Uncles
death, who recoiled his hopes; Augustus my Grandfather a little after
discovered his intention to Fuluius to call back Agrippa: This poor Agrippa
was the first victime slaughtred in the entry of his reign. Iulia my mother,
who for her last misfortune and her third husband had espoused this cruel man,
incontinently posted after her Son. Germanicus was impoisoned, his wife
banished, Nero exiled, Drusus a prisoner, Caligula in their power; what wish
they more?

I have been married, he has ravished away my husband from me; I could be
sped of another of the chiefest Families of Rome, he has hindered it: I have
been a Mother, he deprived me of my children; I was free, he used me as a
slave; there is nothing rests me but honor, and he seeks with impudent
calumnies to wither it away; Tiberus foedicissin is criminationibus, etc. Tac.
his obloquies taking no hold of me, he framed an Imposture which carries the
stink of the place from whence it issues: he says that Asinius Gallus bears
me affection, I do acknowledge my self beholding to him, to deem me worthy
to be beloved of a man whom Augustus held worthy of the Empire; but he is my
Brother in law, and I bear not so little respect unto my Sister Vipsania, as
to rob her of the heart of her Husband.

My precedent actions will answer the present; It is not fit a woman should
have particular friends, but to est^eme in general, these of her husband.
I never knew what it meant to love any but the friends of my Husband, and as
far as it lay in my power, I have not fixed my eyes nor thoughts upon any
other. If I had any beauty, I neither believed it, nor suffered I should be
spoken to of it, and made no reckoning of it but for decency.

They have reason to say that I was too proud: It is true, my disdaines have
served my designs, for disdainful beauties entrap not the hearts. I must
needs auow that the passion of love has given place in my mind to that of
ambition, Agrippina aequi impatiens, dominandi auida, virilibus curis
faeminarum vitia exuerat. Tac.
and that I was more delighted in employments which do only appertain to
manly courages, then to vanities, which please but the effeminate. It is long
since I have quitted the imperfections of my sex, to take male and generous
thoughts.

But these Impostures are but the smoakes of that burning desire of Seianus to
arrive unto the Empire: for seeing that Rome bears me good will, and that this
good will is sustained but by the opinion they conceive of some merit, The
property of good men is to do well, but of the wicked, to speak ill, and do
worse. Plut.
he did defame me as a wicked woman, but as he surmounted me in speaking
ill, I have always surpassed him in doing well.

Let him content himself to have reduced me to that estate, as he needs no
more to stand in fear of me; and I find consolation that he has brought me
to that point, that he can do me no worse, for I will esteem for great
favors the greatest harms he can do me. Let him not dread that I will any
more oppose his ambition, he is to stand in greater awe of fortune then of me,
I do not think she will be more favorable to a wicked design, then she has
been partial in the protection of a just and lawful cause. The Aspect of
ambition increases by satiety. Tiberius was wont to say, that a man which had
passed the age of sixty year, should not streach his hand to the people to
have voice or suffrage. Plut.


His ambition has no bounds, sacietie gives him appetite, he was wont to say
in the beginning that he did content himself with the Office of Colonel of
the Guard, he would have no more. And now, when for his old age he should only
present his hand to the Physician, he would charge it with a Tributes staff,
to be in the next degree to Sovereign command did he as^e his courage whether
he were capable of it? he never saw battle but painted, never drew sword but
for a show.

After all this, his will is, that I should live, to the end that death may
serve me as a punishment, Vici, quem vicerim qaeuris, metum mortis qui victores
gentium vicit. Sen.
not permitting me to show that a woman can overcome the terror of death,
which very victors redoubted, and seems that all the passages to come to
death, or to cause death come to me, are stopped. It must needs be that I shall
find it in my affliction, and that my courage yield unto it; I will not
resist his violence, Officium pium sed inutile. Ovid.
consolations will redouble it, I will refuse them from what part soever they
come; these of my friends are commendable in them, but unprofitable unto me.

If abstinence, affliction, solitude, and grief may not withdraw me from this
misery: Expectandus exitus quem natura decreuit. Sen.
And if it must needs be that I living dye, and dying live, I shall attend
what end the gods shall be pleased to send me; and hap what will, as I have
lived Agrippina I will dye Agrippina.

The smart of her wounds daily inflaming, He that is under the power of an
other, impaires his condition by his impatience and liberty of his complaints
she always increased and renewed without ceasing the complaints which an
exercised grief could not moderate: her words were reported to Tiberius, who
was very glad that she continually gave him occasion to make worse their ill
usage to her; for it would grieve him that her patience would oblige him to any
courtesy: he commanded the Captain, in whose ward she was, not to let pass
these bad speeches without blows; this cruel man who well perceived that to
please Tiberius he must outrage Agrippina: hearing her to persevere in her
complaints and reproaches against Tiberius, Conuitianti oculum per Ceturionnem
verberibus excussit. Suet.
did so inhumanely and brutishly beat her, that he pulled out one of her eyes.

After this barbarous outrage, she would no longer live, and no more to attend
death, but to go and meet him: she remained some days without eating, Mori
in edia destinanti per vim ore diducto infulciri cibum iussit. Suet.
but the Soldiers forcibly opening her mouth constrained her to swallow down
nutriment: she was in this more unfortunate then others, that may dye at their
pleasure, and have no impediment but their will; she would feign die, but they
will that she live; Ad moriendu^ nihil aliud in mora quam velle. Sen. Non magis
crudeles sunt qui volentem viuere occidunt, quam qui mori volentes non sinunt.
Sen.
Death is the only receipt for her evils, and they keep her by force from it:
those men are not less cruel who kill them which desire to live, then those
who do compel them to live which desire to dye.

Seianus for all this is not where he weenes: all that he did to advance his
project, recoyles it; for Tiberius being rid of the mistrust of Germanicus, of
the jealousy of Drusus, and revenged of the pride of Agrippina and her
children; thinks of nothing that might more trouble him then the arrogance and
unlimited power of Seianus, this ioynes new suspicions to old fears, and puts
in his head that he dreamed of the Empire.

Quos di^ fortuna sequnta est, eos repent velut fatigata destituit. Q Cur.
Fortune also began to be weary of following him; for he went too fast, as if
she had but raised him to cause him to fall from so high a pitch, as no body
should dare to stretch out their arm, or present their bosom to receive him.
Tiberius who loved him, began to fear him, and seeing the Senate to make more
account of him then himself, Dion says that Tiberius seeing that Sejanus was
followed and redoubted of the Senators, feared least they should make him
Emperor.
entered into some apprehension that they would make him Emperor; and from
thenceforth purposed to pluck this thorn out of his heart: but he did nothing
rashly, for it was dangerous not only to undertake to ruin him, but to make a
show thereof, he went on very slowly, and against the advice of wise men, who
are of opinion that great matters should be sooner done then consulted.

This delay proceeded from prudence and affection; for it vexed him to undo a
man, who began to serve him before he began to reign.

Notwithstanding, I do believe that if there had been but this, he would
dissemble it, The good Courtier should know the complexion of his Prince.
and would never rid himself of him; for he was very proper for his humors,
knowing them most perfectly, agreeing to his desires, soothing his opinions,
drew him so dexterously from dangers, and untwined his perplexities; he had cut
off all the principal heads which brought him either fear or jealousy, and
reposing himself on the vigilance of a servant so faithful and approved, he
did not intermeddle but with great occurrents, but lived at ease in his Isle.

And although it be difficult to found the hearts of Princes, and the motives
of sudden prosperities; See upon this subject an excellent Treatise of M. du
Refuge Counceller of State.
yet it is certain, that there is not a nearer way to purchase his good will,
then to serve him in such things as are either agreeable or profitable, to
conduct his pleasures and manage his purse: all that is honest and profitable
should please, but the passion of pleasure ouercomes the consideration of
honor and profit. Rationem felicitatis nemo reddit Auson. To be beloved of a
Prince, we must serve him in his pleasures.
Seianus was stored with all things that were befitting to entertain the Prince
with pleasures, and banish the necessity of affairs, and did so command his
heart, that he gave it what motion he listed to love, fear or hate.

He has done him great services, and although the consideration of this be not
always plausible in the minds of Princes; for there are some, who the more
they are bound the less they love; The Prince should bear respect to
services, to the end he may be the better served.
yet Tiberius would have great men understand what they may hope for in serving
him well, but there is no likelihood that if he had not great gifts both of
spirit and courage, he should not continue so long near Tiberius a Prince hard
to be pleased, severe, skillful, and mistrustfull: the History represents us
with two several portraitures, the one set forth by the pencill of Tacitus,
Seianus laboris capacissimus, sufficient vigore animi compage corporis and
actu ociosis simillimus. Vell.
who lays him down a wicked person, the other by the hand of Velleius
Paterculus who flatters him and gives him all the properties of a perfect
Courtier. He says that The vigor of his body was answerable to the strenght
of his spirit, which wrought without pain, and did all things as if he had
done nothing, and in his greatest actions seemed to be at repose, and as if he
had neither been busied nor pressed, that he ran not after occasions, nor
ascribed unto himself the honor, Infra aliorum aestimationes se metiens,
vultu vitaque tranquillius, animo ex somnis. Vell.
achieved all and yet put himself beneath the esteem that was had of him;
one that never made show of trouble or emulation in his countenance, his spirit
always watchful and who never slept.

But howsoever it was Seianus was indeed an able man, and having lasted almost
as long as Tiberius, we may believe that if fortune had not revolted against
his Counsels, he had constrained her to submit her self to his wisdom.

Only I do wonder, that having purchased so many friends, he had want of
friends; that amongst so many heads depending upon his, and could not stand
firm if his were cut off, there was none that would speak freely and
sincerely unto him to prevent his ruin. To speak to great men mildly and
pleasing, Atheneus calls the same, chariglottein.
But it is the common mishap of great ones, all the discourse we hold with
them must be grateful and soothing, they think that truth owes them all that
observance and respect does lend them; if there were Judges ordained for
flattery, they would have no doings, for there is none will complain that they
are flattered.

Seianus was so unfortunate that he had not any friend that would say unto him
sincerely and freely; Sir, moderate your spirit, despite not your fortune, play
not with your Master, this time will not last always, patience too much
wronged turns to fury. And if one would have said so much, Dion says, that if
some god were descended and had assured the ru^he of Sejanus, he would not
believe, for in that time every man swore by his fortune.
he would not have believed it, pride did dazell him, he bragged to have fire
and water in his hands, and that he would use them as he pleased.

Tiberius then perceiving, although too late, that Seianus built his hopes upon
his tomb, and that he did not only dream, but verily think, yea attempt
the Empire: Not only to attempt but to think or dream against the State, is
an offense.
he resolves to quench the fire of this ambicion with the blood of the
ambicious. The first suspicion he had thereof was for his marriage with Liuia,
Drusus widow. The second was upon this, that the house of Germanicus being
ruined, Summum ad gradum claritatis cum veneris, aegre consistes. Laber.
there was no stop for his insolency that was mounted so high, that he could
no longer stand upon his legs. The third was the excess of his power in
affairs of the Senate, of the treasure and Commandments. Improba blanditia,
non quae am ciorem sed quae deteriorem facit assentando. Alc.
The fourth, was his great train of servants and attendants, whose
obsequiousness impaired his complexion. The fifth was upon this, that he held
Drusus prisoner, and C. Caesar at his devotion, that he might upon any
occasion produce them, and in their names continue the government of the
sovereignty. Prouidebat Caesarem vrgente iam senecta, secretoque loci mollitum
munia Imperij facilius transmissurum. Tac.
The sixth was upon the tricks he used to divert the Emperor from soiourning
in the City, and keeping him as a captive under the pretext of his absence, and
of his age. The seventh, upon the great and violent pursuit he made to gain
the power of Tribune. The eighth, that Seianus should use certain words which
he desired rather to be concealed then expressed: and when of all this there
were but the only suspicion of aspiring to the State, to what end needed any
further to seek for a greater crime.

But Tiberius is blamed for two acts showing feebleness of courage: The first
for having suffered the increase of so great a power, which cannot be attained
with too much pain, nor lessened with too much severity; the tree which at
first was but a little twigge, spread its heads and branches so high that it
made him a very dangerous shade; that which might have been plucked up with
one hand when it began to sprout out, Abundance of blood drawn from the best
vein, is well employed, to defend or acquire one only drop of Authority.
took such large and deep root, that it was afterward hard to pull up with
both; that Prince who hinders not the increase of Ambition when it does but
begin to grow, receives no other profit by his sufferance but repentance and
loss; the State cannot endure two Kings no more then the World two Suns, or
the Temple two Deities. The Sovereign authority is a strong Causey, which is
not so soon destroyed by the violence of the current, After that there is once
a branch in Sovereign Authority, it falls to wrack.
or the weight of the water which it sustaines, as by some small rift or
opening which makes way for the torrent to overthrow it.

The second is, for using so much ceremony in so urgent an occasion, so much
cunning in so great power, so much trembling and fear in so great assurance;
for to rid him from him, Quintus Varus ^n^piso. Germanicus and Drusus.
he made him his Colleague in the Consulship, and never had any associate
without misfortune.

When Tiberius wrote to the Senate, he stuffed his Letters with the merits of
Seianus, and his service done to the Empire: you should find often these words
therein; Seianus my friend, my Seianus, I say my Seianus. It seems he had
limited the glory of the Empire but to the continuance of his life; his Statues
appeared every where, every one gives them presents as unto their tutelary
gods, who will refuse to yield honor unto him unto whom the Emperor gives it
so freely.

Vino debemus homines, quod soli animantium non, sitientes bibinms. Plini.
This Consulship for five years did amaze him, and as the excellency of the
Wine urges a man to drink beyond drought, so sweetness of prosperity makes
him drunk, and carries him farther then he would go; whosoever is embarked on
this Sea where there are so many perils, should never trust to calm, but have
his eyes always fixed on the heavens to conduct him to the quiet haven of his
hopes.

The solitary and voluptuous life of Tiberius was the ladder of his ambicion,
for like another Sardanapolus he boasted of nothing but his riotings. Seianus
rocked him in this shameful idleness, having maliciously accustomed him to
prefer delightful things before grave and serious: who so neglects to play
the part of a Master, shall find servants bold enough to command him; and
whosoever shows himself a Prince in his Cabinet only, may chance find
another in the field.

Impudency accompanied with pride drew from his mouth these words, which should
not have entered his thoughts; I am Emperor of Rome, and Tiberius is Prince of
the Isle: he represented Plays by bald men, which were conducted back from
the Theater by 5000. Boys all shaven, to mock at Tiberius his bald pate.
Atheneus accounts them to be 20000. and calls them ante-ambulones.
This number will not be found so strange to them that know that the Romans had
troops and legions of them, and that some have caused twenty thousand to march
before them, but that he should cause them to be shaven, for then there was
great pride taken to curle and frisle their tresses.

Tiberius was presently informed of this buffonery, Familus calamistratus.
Apul. Crinitus puer. Sen. Praecincti pueri comptique. Hor.
and made show as if he knew it not, although it pricked him to the quick; but
he would have his dissembled ignorance excuse the slownesse of his assured
revenge: so is there nothing indeed which more nearly touches the heart of a
Prince, then to see himself braued by a man whom he has raised from
contempt, and the misery of a base condition; it is not less grievous to be
reduced unto the mockery of his servants, then to the discretion of his enemies.

Upon news that the Prisons, a people inhabiting beyond the Rhyne, had broken
the peace, and defeated the Armies in battle: the astonishment was so great
at Rome, Aram clementiae aram amicitiae, effigiesque circum Caesaris ac Sejani
considere: crebrisque precibus efflagitabant visendi sui copiam facerent. Tac.
that every one ran to the Altars of clemency and friendship, adoring the
Statues of Tiberius and Seianus, which were near them, praying them to bring
them back again to Rome: Tiberius and Seianus would have the Townsmen to
judge by their absence what commodity the presence of the Court did bring them:
nor is it good that a Prince should always remain in one place; if the Sun
would never budge from some one of his twelve houses, all would not go well:
Tiberius therefore approached the City, but because he came but unto the
Suburbs, without entering into the Town, many thought that the limits of
Astrology and lying were not of so near affinity as some said; for the
Astrologians had reported that Tiberius was gone out of Rome under such a
constellation, that he would never return again; Breue confinium artis and
falsi. Tac.
and there is great likelihood, that if this fear had not seized upon his
imagination, he would never have stayed eleven years out of Rome.

These predictions did encourage the accomplices of Seianus, soliciting him not
to temporize any longer, seeing the Stars have conspired to his design: and
of the other side Tiberius would not be surprised; and as the fear of the
danger which he apprehended pressed him forward, so danger of the remedy kept
him back, but imagining that he should be prevented, if Seianus had any
inkling of it, he durst not consult but with himself of the Resolution he
was to take.

Seianus as yet mistrusted nothing, prosperity did blind his eyes, he
believed that Tiberius thought of nothing but of passing away the time at
Caprea. There is nothing spoken of him at Rome but as of a Prince that did not
Reign, and lived not but by prayers, could not hear nor see any thing but
through Seianus, The King of Persia had min sters whom they called the eyes and
ears of the King and by whom he knew of all things that were done or spoken
uery where. Apul.
who alone was his eyes and his ears, thought of nothing but his pleasure and
ease. This was the cause that moved Seianus to carry and press forward his
designs to Sovereignty with the greater violence; what blindness? he has
not life for one month, yet he frames enterprises for a whole age.

It was very hard, but that he had some suspicion of the Emperors intention;
all the Aduertisements that were sent to Caprea, or came to Rome passed through
his hands, and he harkened to all; neither should they which are employed in
great matters neglect any thing; There is not so great a liar, but will some
times tell truth.
and although very often they are informed but of fables, yet some truth
escapes, they make their profit of all, and they are well paid, if of an
hundred aduertisements any one proves true.

He held men's minds at his discretion, Men's hearts are won, either by hopes
or fear, or by benefits.
either for fear, or hopes, or for benefits, they who served Tiberius depended
upon Seianus, and they who served Seianus swore by no other name then by that
of their Master. Tiberius did nothing but was related to Seianus, and he was
no way advertised of what Seianus did against his service; he had men fit for
any thing, Seneca terms them his Dogs, which would fawn on no body but
himself, Acerrimi canes quos Seianus vt sibi vni mansuetos omnibus feros
haberet, sanguine humano pascebat. Sen.
and would barcke at any body else; for he fed them with men's blood; if they
could not take by the front, they assaulted the flank, and would embrace men
to stifle them: he caused it to be noised that he was to make him Tribune,
writes to the Senate, that without him this great body of the Empire would fall
unto pieces: in all his Letters he writes that Seianus is the Oracle of his
designs, the companion of his thoughts.

The Senate which thought not of Tiberius dissimulation, search for all sorts
of honors to raise Seianus, ordain that their names should be inserted
together in the same line in Patents and Inscriptions, their Chaires to be in
the same rank in Theaters, and in Temples, their Statues to be put up in
every place, and that coming to Rome they should go to meet them.

He that intends the ruin of any body, is glad of his ill carriage.
Tiberius was not sorry that the Senate did support the pride of Seianus, to
the end that vanity making him more insolent, his deportments would be more
hateful. In the mean while to make Tiberius believe that his Designs went
not beyond his life, he caused Germanicus to be accused to have attempted
against the person of Caesar. This man for his Justification, showed before the
Senate his Testament, He that makes another his heir, thinks to die before
him.
by which he did institute the Prince his heir, a proof of his affection,
and that he desired not to survive him; but this would not save him: and as
he saw the Questour coming to put him to death, he thrust himself into the
belly with his Knife, Nullum magis aduersarium timemus quam qui viuere non
potest, occidere potest. Sen.
and said unto him, Go tell the Senate that I dye as a man should dye: Publica
Prisca his wife being at the Palace did the like. I do marvel that among so
many men who died so freely, there was not any that did go about to kill Nero
or Seianus, for he that cares not for his life, does easily undertake to kill.

The favor of Tiberius so ardent, was not cooled at the first stroke, it
became lukewarm, and after altogether congealed, he strikes a blow this day
for Seianus, and to morrow another against him, he conferred the dignity of
High Priest upon his Son, Tiberius was accustomed to say when he beheld
Caligula: I do nourish him as a Serpent to the people of Rome, and a Phaeton
to the rest of the world. Suet.
and although he abhorred Caligula, yet he gave him the same honor, and for
this only cause that he was enemy to Seianus, he gratifies him now in yeeding
to his demands, and anon he revoked what he had granted, and keeps his mind in
such suspense, betwixt fear and hope; that he knows not where he is, and
does not any thing but Amazedly; he commanded the Senate to absolve a
proconsul whom Seianus accused.

Tiberius did publicly praise Caligula, Tiberius would have all to fall to
wrack after him, and esteemed Priamus happy in that he frighted his kingdom
with his life. Dio.
and made it known that he would declare him his Successor, not so much for
affection, as to make himself lamented, his Successor being more cruel and
wicked then himself, in his Letters to the Senate he does no more style
Seianus his friend, they find his name naked in them without addition of the
Titles and Recommendations, which he was wont to give him, as soon as the
affection of a Prince takes vent it does evaporate, and there is much a do to
keep it always in the same degree of heat.

The people did rejoice that Tiberius did begin to affect Caligula, Caligula
seeing a great company of Senators at his Table, burst into a great laughter,
and being demanded the cause, it is said he, for that it lies in my power to
have you strangled one after the other. Suet.
not for any affection they bore himself, who was of an inhumaine and violent
nature and delighted in nothing but in blood, but for the honor of the memory
of Germanicus his Father, and the desire of the Ruin of Seianus whose tyranny
they Apprehended, 1. 2. 120.

Tiberius having boiled and reboyled his project in his heart, conceived that
there was not further any danger to declare himself, and to forgo the
Councels dissimulation to put on these of Courage, he sent an Edict to the
Senate, forbidding any Sacrifice to be done to any living man, nor to ordain
any kind of honor to Seianus, not enduring to see such honors done to the
Subject, which he held not decent for the Prince.

Yam diu placebit quam diu vtilis. Sen.
It was then that these men which were friends but of his fortune, declared
themselves enemies of his dessignes; Friends of the time, who being come to
drink return when the bottles are empty, and as Thunder commonly happens
when the sky seems most clear, so Seiaianus saw himself inveloped with a
storm in one of the fairest days of his fortune, he had many presages of his
misfortune; The superstition of the Ancient thought it an ill sign, that a Cat
should go overthwart.
the Theater where he received the salutations of the Calends, break a
sunder, and a Cat past overthwart the same. Returning from the Capitol his
Guard pressing through the throng to follow and get before him, fell off from
the top of the ladders from whence they cast offenders: Tiberius Grace. going
to the Capitol, three Crows flew about him and there he was slain. Val.
Hereupon he consulted with his Auspicy to know what it presaged: but the birds
of good luck appeared not, he saw nothing but a flight of Crows, birds of
ill luck, black nightingals of hell which fluttered and croaked about him:
Vidimus non semel flammam ingentis pilae specie, que tamen in ipso cursu suo
dissipata est. Vidimus circa D. Augusti excessum simile prodigium: vidimus cum
de Sesauo actum est. Sen.
and there was a ball of fire seen in the Air, such as had been at the death
of Augustus and Germanicus, but no body believed that in this flourishing
condition he had been so near his Ruin, and for all this they forbore not
to call him Tiberius his Companion, not only in the Consulship but in the
universal Empire.

Tiberius to sound their wills and affections wrote often to Seianus and to the
Senate, one while that he was in good health, anon after that he was in the
point of death, at some other times that his strength was restored, that in few
days he hoped to see them and return to Rome; Prudenda misera^daque orat one.
P. C. precabatur mitterent alte^in conscil^bus, qu^ suu^ sed and solum in
conspectum eorum cum aliqu^ militari presidio perducere. Sen.
these fainings did profit him, for according to the joy or affliction that
these news procured; or to the hope or fear, he perceived who depended upon
him, or who upon Seianus, he entreats the Senate also to send him one of the
Consuls with some Convoy to bring him safely.

He believed that the conspiracy was so great against him, that he should not
be able to resist it, and had therefore prepared certain vessels to take his
flight withal, and caused Sentinels to be placed aloft on the rocks, who by
fires made signs of what they discovered. It must be that the Coniuration was
very great and very ready, or Tiberius very fearful and abashed, so to lay
open the trouble of his spirit, for fear should never lodge in the heart of a
Prince, who may be well lamented when they who should stand in awe of him do
deter him.

But the Favorite began to be troubled, when one told him that he saw the
smoke evaporate out of the head of one of his Images, he caused it to be
broken to know the cause, We ought not proudly to despise prodegies this
neglect lost Alexander. App. Perseus. Justin Luc. Crassus. D. Hal.
and from thence a great Serpent was seen to issue forth, he despised not
this prodigy, and made a Sacrifice to himself for he was accustomed so to
do, and there was a cord found about the neck of the said Statue.

Tiberius judged that the Destinies had conspired to ruin him with their
vengeance, but he continued his dissimulations, bruiting it abroad, that he
meant to raise him to the greatest Office of the Empire, Dion says, that to
Accuse and entrap Seianus, Tiberius caused it to be bruited in the Senate, that
he would confer upon him the dignity of Tribune.
but at the same time he sent away Nevius Sertornis Macro, with commaundment to
present his Letters to the Senate, to seize upon Seianus, and to let Drusus
being in prison at liberty, that he might gather his friends together against
the Common enemy, if then were any opposition.

Nihil no^ aggresuri sunt homines si magna conatis magna pramia proponantur.
Liu.
The place of Colonel of the Guards which Tiberius bestowed on Macro, animated
this execution: Princes that will be well served, ought always to make the
quality of the service to be seen by the Recompense thereof. He came
secretly to Rome and communicated the Cause of his arrival to the Consul
Memnius Regulus, and not to his Colleague, for he was Seianus creature; and
unto Gracinus Laco Knight of the Watch, he found them disposed to sacrifice
this wicked man to the public hatred.

The Consul Convoked the Senate for the next day to the Temple of Apollo, The
Senate did not sit but in Temples or in sacred places.
and caused these words to be fixed to one of the pillars of the Gate:

In a good hour, Memnius Regulus, This word was bonum factum, to which, may
all things prosper.
shall to morrow at break of day keep the Senate at the Temple of Apollo; Let
the fathers Conscript be there, there are matters of weight to be handled.
The penalty of the absent is no excuse.

To give example unto others he was himself one of the first that came, Pruna
luce. Cic.
he entered with the badges of his Dignity, his purple Robe, twelve Sergeants
marching before him making clear the passage, at his entry he sacrificed Wine
and Honey, takes his place in the Ivorie chair, Hocillis Curis templum. Virg.
the other Senators do the like and rank themselves in their places.

Macro meets with Seianus who was not as yet entered, Qualem quisque sortem
statumque habeat in mea manu profitum est quod cuique mortalem fortuna datum
villis, meo ore pronunciat. Sen.
and seeing him a little troubled that he brought him no Letters from
Tiberius, he rounded him in the ear, that he had some better thing for him, I
bring you the power of Tribune; this stayed him, and his friends were presently
acquainted with all, and rejoiced at it, hoping that all which Fortune would
bestow on the Romans should pass through the hands, or from the mouth of
their Master.

Macro presents his Letters and retired, causes his Soldiers to be assembled
under color of Imparting unto them the Emperors Commandments; and by this
means left for the Guard of the Temple the Soldiers of the Watch; the rest
that followed Seianus went to the Camp and to their Ensigns, being there,
he assured them of the Emperors willingness to acknowledge their services
and to gratify them with some Present. These were presents of Arms, Pikes,
Ensigns, scarfes, chains and of Crowns.
There were not any but listened hereunto and promised to be ready in all
things, he chose a competent number of them to keep the advenues and the
Temple of Apollo; this done, he presents his Letters to the Senate and told
them his charge, and withdrawing himself leaves Laco there, and goes to give
order for the other parts of the Town.

The Princes authority is at the lowest ebb when he dares not declare openly
unto his subjects the cause of his discontent.
His Letters are Read and do show the pattern of a troubled and trembling
Spirit, which dares not express but with half words, that which he
conceiues against the ingratitude and treachery of his Servant; they were
mingled with diverse affairs without order, the beginning with indifferent, the
residue with other things of greater Importance. This was pursued with
complaints of the unmeasurable power of Seianus; then he descends to other
occurrents, praying the Senate to make process of two Senators Seianus his
inward friends, and in the end commands them, This tragic end of Seianus is
well represented in the French Tiberius, of Monsiour Le Maistre chief mederin
of Monsieur.
but faintly, to watch over Seianus his actions, there was not one word of
putting him to Death, so much be feared least the Credit he had euery-where
should oppose it self, and that in case things should not succeed according to
his desire, he might always have the liberty of expressing himself.

But as fear believes all that it Imagines, Aliquisque panendo, dat vires
fama nulloque authore maloru^, quae frigen ^ment. Lucan,
Seianus his friends finding not in his Letter what they expected, separate
themselves from him as from a place threatened to be Thunder-strucke; when the
Princes favor abandoneth a man, it is dangerous to come near him, (...) grace
is Contagious.

Dion observes here how men's minds are variable, and says, that before the
Letters of the Emperor were read, there was not a Senator but did reverence
to Seianus, and asked him, Cicero reproaches the same to Cateline, Aduentu tuo
ista subsellia vacua facta sunt. Cic.
how he would employ them to do him service; but finding the mind of
Tiberius to be changed, they changed at one instant; they that were far from
him looked awry upon him, they that were near him went far off, They shrunk
from one guilty of high treason. Quis in adversis beneficiorum seruat memoria^
aut quis vllum calamitesis deberi putat gratiam quando fortuna non mutat fidem.
Vell.
they that thought it an honor to follow him, thought themselves dishonored
to sit near him, and where are those men which call to mind benefittes in
adversity, or think themselves bound to the miserable: great friendship
must not be sought for at Court, nor any moderate enmity: this is the cause,
that wise men break with no body, ill will and hatred are but sad plaints, the
fruit they bear is always bitter, it yieldes neither pleasure nor profit, if
it be not that of amendment of manners, Vsynoque sapere oportet id erit coe^u^
accrrimu^. Cic.
because the enemy may not lay hold upon the life or fortune of him, or
overthrow or ruin him.

But Seianus should not enter to the Senate when he saw that Macro brought him
no letters, providence which has his eye every where, and which is an assured
buckler against fortune, failed him; he should have retired himself, when he
had an inckling of what Tiberius wrote in this letter and had been follow^d by
them of his faction, the rest would Judge his power by his courage, but finding
nothing to be expressly against him, he believed it to be nothing but the
vapors of his way-ward disposition, Presumption despises surety.
of his distrust and vnequalnesse: and that there was none so bold in the
company, as to offend him.

The Consul Regulus calls him, he rises not, not for pride, Words of Command
are very harsh to them that are not accustomed to obey.
for he was much humbled; but because he was not accustomed to obey nor to
be commanded, he calls him the first and second time, and reaching him his
hand says; Seianus come hither? Call you me, replied Seianus: the Consul
saying, yes; Seianus advanced himself, then Laco Captain of the Watch goes
before him, and all the Tribunes encompasse him, that he may not escape.

Decretum vt 15 Call. vtriusque necis die per omnes annos donu^ Joui sacrantur.
Tac.
The day of this memorable stroke was the Eighteenth of October, It is known,
for that Tiberius ordained that the Fifteenth of the Calends of November should
be solemnized at Rome, as well for the death of Seianus, as that of Agrippina;
if we would remarke the year, it was the year of the foundation of Rome VII.
C. LXXXV. of the Empire of Tiberius the Eighteenth, and from the birth of JESUS
CHRIST, 34. There was no danger to go speedily to his trial, nor to begin his
process with his execution, S. C. actum vt poena damnat^rum in decim^ sem^^d
em differetur. Suet.
for the Law of ten days was not then made. All his life had been a course
of Insolency, pride, violence and fury.

Dion says, that in one day he was Arrested, Condemned, and Executed, and by
the shortness of the time we Judge, of the facility of proceedings, which
were at pleasure, they gave them such delay or dispatch as they pleased, they
have made the process of Lentulus in confederate of Catiline in two days,
that of Clentulus held out a long time: Seianus was dispatched in one Morning;
Aristotle disposed of the morning in studying of Philosophy, that was ergon, of
the afternoon in Eloquence, by ergon.
The day of serious affairs ended at Midday, what was done after dinner was
as much as out of work, and things agreeable and easy, rather then toylesome
and painful: and the Trumpet which served the Romans for a Clock, having
stroke the hour of ten, there was no beginning of a new Relation.

Memnius did not put the letters of the Emperor to Consulation, and that
deceived Seianus who trusted to his friends, for if he had done so, diversity
of opinions would mar the business: for length of discourse would loose
time, and dispatch must have been used that the faction of Seianus might not
stir. But to shun the blame of doing all himself, he commanded a Senator
whom he knew to be a good Citizen and well affectioned to Tiberius, to
deliver his opinion: Dion names him not, The Consul demanding the advice of
the Senator he spoke these words.
the same man spoake these words. The present occasion Fathers to conscript, is
of so great consequence, that according to the resolution, you will take the
Commonwealth is either shaken or confirmed, and we should be traitors to our
Country, The Magistrate that discouers a conspiracy and shows himself
fearful to remedy it, is as culpable as the offenders themselves. Plat.
ungrateful to our Prince, and unjust to our selves, if we did not use
sincerity and fidelity. Caesar represents unto us with one hand the
mischief, and with the other the remedy; the mischief, the coniuration of
Seianus. The Remedy, the imprisonment of Seianus; I make no question but the
evil is greater in his knowledge, then he lets us to understand in his
letters, but I think the remedy more extreme then he has considered: The
custody of Illustrious persons were given to Magistrates. Lentulus was in the
keeping of Lent. Spencer Cethagus of Q. Conisicus. Statilius of C. Caesar.
Ceparius of On. Terent.
there is no security of the person of Seianus in remitting him to a
Magistrate who would take charge of him; nor to the Guards, he Commands them;
nor in committing him to a private house, he would not remain there any long
time; or what surety to Caution, in that estate that matters are. But a Prison
is only for slaves, there is not any for a Roman Citizen, nor for a Consul or
Senator, and much less for him who commanded the people, the Senate and the
Consuls. The first prison was built by Aucu: Martius or Tarquinius: T. Liu.
Our Fathers would forsake their Sepulchers to defend this privilege, the
only token of our ancient liberty, for they esteemed, that to tie a Roman
Citizen was a great offense, Facinus vinci Ciuem Romanum, scelus verberari
parracidium ^tcan. Cic
to beat him a Crime, to kill him a parracide; the prison is holden as a place
of punishment to the Romans, and of guard to the barbarous.

They only who knew not Seianus, or were not acquainted with Caesar may doubt
but that it is necessary to pass further, it were a great wonder if he were
innocent, but extreme mishap if he did escape our hands, it is necessary he
should be made a president, and that he may not undo the Commonwealth, we
are to be sure of him, Diogenes says, that some drowned them selves in a
tempest before the ship was sunk.
he has Courage enough to drown himself in the tempest, not expecting
shipwreck: our Fathers have seen how C. Liciuius Macer, seeing himself lost
and the Judges ready to deliver their opinions, Liciuius Macer lent these
words to Cicero, non damnatus sed deu^ per^o.
having got to the top of a house, threw himself down headlong, for to have
the honor to dye not condemned but accused, he would spare the pains to
execute him, and would be his own Judge.

Here is questioned, the public safety, Val. Aliena crudelitatis
procurationis ratione^ suscipere. Sen.
the safety of the Prince, the confirmation of the State, of our alters, of
our Laws; I am ashamed to place our interest before the Commandments of
Caesar. The safest way is the most Just. In deliberatio^s we should rather
incline to that course which is safe, the^ that which is decent or profitable
Dion. Hal.
We are to think of our safety first, before our lives and honors, there is
no means to stay the mischief but in arresting of Seianus, nor any arresting
of him but in prison, the person, the time and the Crime, do oblige you to
assure your selves of him, and chase away the evil by the evil it self,
Seianus has raised himself upon the Ruins of the State, the State must raise
it self upon the ruins of Seianus.

The Senate was very slack in enduring so much, Caesar conferres a great
favor upon the people of Rome, to deliver them from this Tyranny, let us not
loose the glory to have seconded his piety, there will be more honor in
following of Seianus into prison, then there was to serve him while he was at
liberty; if he be innocent, the Gods are not

Prauidia Consilia in certo sunt.
Notwithstanding any amazement which seized upon the Company, this resolution
was Hardy, and this advice was followed, every one thinking it reasonable to
execute, not to examine the will of Caesar; they lead him to prison, and would
trust none but themselves in the event of this Conduct, to the end he may not
escape nor be rescued, Cui genua flexerant ac vt Deo sacri^cauerunt. Dio.
so the very same Senators who accompanied him to the Senate, did conduct him
to prison, they which sacrificed unto him as to their God, which kneeled down
to adore him, did skoffe at him seeing him draggd from the Temple to the Iayle,
from supreme honor, to extreme ignomy.

There were some so transported with rage against him, Pallio coceina ad rasu^
occluserat c^put. Petr.
that seeing him let fall a piece of his Robe upon his eyes, wherewith he
covered his head, (for the Romans wore no cappes but in the war or being
sick, nor no hats, but in a journey) they took it away from him, stripping
him, to do him the greater affront, and struck him over the face with their
fists.

The people laughed at his fall, detested his life, reproached his insolence,
Cried out at the thief, and if they were not hindered, he had not come whole
to the prison, for they would drag him instantly to the Sestercium, the most
infamous place that was in Rome, and whether the bodies of the Slaves were
thrown, and Judging that he was not carried to prison, to let him live: they
ran to his Statues, they are at one instant broken down, For joy Dion makes
a notable observation upon humane inconstancy.
they may be seen dragged with Ropes into the fire to be moulten, with the
pieces of the head which was adored, as the second of the world: and which made
the Senate to quake, Lex facie toto or be secunda fiun; vreeoli pelues sartago
patellae. Iuuen.
they were converted into small implements for kitching uses.

There was so small an Interuall between his exaltation, and his fall; that
he was no sooner threatened then struck. And seeing at his coming forth what
was done to his Images; Dion observes that Seianus saw his Statues beaten
down, and by that judged what would follow.
he concluded, that the original would be as ill handled, and it was his
greatest trouble that he had not bin prepared long ago for this misfortune.
An ordinary fault in those which are raised to high dignities, We must prepare
betimes for a fall, and rather go ou^ then stay to be put out.
who are men wise till after the blow, and who having the means to come down
at their ease, stay still till they be thrust headlong.

After that Seianus passed the wicket, the Consul to loose no time returned not
to the Temple of Apollo, but he entered the Temple of Concord which was near,
to make the process of the Prisoner; for we should do wrong to the reputation
of the great Justice of the Senate, Forms are necessary. Accusatio crime^
defiderat, rem vt definiat, hominem vt notet, argumento prohet, tisle
confirmet. Cic. Populus Rom: circum subscha corana^ facit, Cic. Antigenius
being entreated to adjudge a process privately, he answered, it will do better
in the palace if we would do nothing unjustly. Fl. Timor perturbatio,
suspensus, incircusque vultus, crebra coloris mutatio quae fuerunt antea
suspitiosa aperta atque manifesta faciunt. Cic.
if we did believe that it forgot any form in any affair so important, where
it was necessary that the Authority of Justice should cover the defects,
which may be in the proceeding for to have co^menced the process by Imprisonment.

The accusers, the witnesses, and the accomplices were heard in full Senate:
for the Instruction was public and the people was as in a round, about the
chaires of the Judges, which caused the authority to be greater; for the
Majesty of the Senate was in sight of all, there was nothing to cover it but
the heavens, there was more sincerity used; for as many eyes, so many Judges,
and there was more example, all passed with order and discipline.

There is no question to be made, but that he had some excellent Orator
assigned him, more for the Ceremony of his defense then for any opinion of his
Innocence, and it is certain that he was commanded to do his endeavor; for
the more stoutly he was defended, the more glorious should be the triumph of
truth; and thereupon the Judges observed the countenance of the accused and the
doubts of his Invention were often cleared by the trouble of his countenance,
the aspect of which very often holds the place of speech.

Sometimes the Senate reports to the Prince what they have decreed.
Macro spoke the word to the Consul, it was Tiberius will he should die, there
needed no other commandment, nor to send him the advice of the Senate it was
necessary for the state, and though he had not entered culpable to the prison,
his quality permitted not he should depart innocent, the Judges cannot do
amiss when they obey the commandment of the Prince who viewes his affairs
with another eye, and with another affection then his Officers.

The Judges had taken an oath to Judge according to their conscience. Damnaturi
Iurant nihil se precibus dare. Sen. P.
Neither the Consuls nor the Praetor gave their vote at all, but recollected
those of the others. The number of the Senators was great. Cicero reckoned 75.
against Piso. An expectem du^ te Septuaginta quinque tabellae diripiant. Cic.
It was diminished under the Emperors and by the Edict of Augustus, there
needed but 40. to frame a Sentence: They delivered their opinions either by
voice or by writing in a little Table which they kept in a Box, or by silence
and gesture; as at this day by the Hat or Cap, a sign of consent, or by
passing away those of one side and drawing themselves together against the
adverse party, this they called to go on one foot. Sometimes in notorious
crimes they cried, Hostis, Hostis.
Here there was no other but one voice, Let Seianus dye, let his Posterity dye,
let his memory dye, and his goods be confiscate.

The Senators were so provoked, that it is certain, that those who knew the
advantage they had above others, as Albutius in speaking loud, remained
altogether mute to gain the favor of the Prince; Albutius in a^tercatione
vires suas nouerat. Sen. P.
especially those who had most depended on the will of Seianus, and doubted not
a whit but that which they spoke amongst the people that had nothing to loose,
Nunqua^ si quod mihi credit amaui Hunc homine^. Iuuen. Seianus his friends
showed themselves most passionate against him.
they might speak amongst the Senators, who esteemed them for lost who were
now his friends.

Those were the most sharp, and faid, that if Caesar had Clemency he ought to
reserve it for men, not to use it toward Monsters.

If the Senate had not been zealous to conserve the glory of his gentleness,
in detestation of horrible punishments, they had caused him to undergo that of
Paricides, they had seared up his fundament, they had put shoes with hot
burning Coals upon his feet, or had sowed him in a sack with a Dog, a Cock,
an Ape, and a Viper, wicked living Creatures, companions of a wicked man;
afterward they would have sent him to the river in a Wagon drawn with two
black Oxen, for a note of the enormity and foulness of the Crime.

In alijs gloriari licet nul^i gentium placuisse poenas. T. Liu.
But there was never any Commonwealth more curious then that of the Romans, to
conserve the ancient glory of gentleness and fair carriage. Metius Suffetius
for his Treason was drawn in pieces by four Horses. Supplicium exempli parum
memoris legam Romanorum. T. Liu.
All the people turned away their eyes from such a horror. This was the first
and the last punishment of that severitie, which had made the Judges forget,
that the laws and punishments had been ordained, not for Tigers or for
ravenous Bears, but for men.

We must represent this execution of the Judgment against Seianus, In his
Judgment it was observed; Quo referente quo deceruente and quo primum
assentiente.
in like sort as the other, but that this was done with more pomp, through the
occasion and for example sake, and with more diligence and more Guards for
security, and that more of the Magistrates were present at it. Here may be
found, that summarily which we might seek for in diverse places, and which is
reported diversely and confusedly.

The Judgment being signed by him who had made relation of the Acts and the
Letters of the Emperor, Carnifex non modo foro sed etiam coelo hoc ac spiritu
prohibetur. Cic.
by him who had first opened the opinion which was pursued, and by the Consul
who decreed that which was resolved, they sent to find out an Executioner, who
by the law of the Censors might not dwell within the City.

The Trumpet assembled together the people, it sounded before the gates of the
Temples, before the house of the condemned person, Peruersam induit Magistratus
vestem. Sen.
in the public places. The Consul, or the Praetor mounted upon his throne,
and disrobed himself of his Purple garment or put it on backwards, or took a
black one, as in a sad and sorrowful accident; yet notwithstanding without
showing in his countenance either meagernesse or choler, Lex non irascitur sed
constituit. Sen. Fi^ a Praecone silentium. Sen.
but retaining the decency and gravity of the Law, which is never angry with
any man.

The condemned person is brought forth, the Hinshers command silence, the
Consul pronounces the Judgment, which is written in the little Tablet,
Quibus animaduertere in damna^os necesse est, non dicu^t occide, non morere,
sed lege age. ^rude itatem imperij verbo ^^tiore subducunt. Sen. Novi^ post
terga ligantur manus. Sen.
and turning himself toward the Executioner, said to him, Do according to
the Law, or more plainly, Go on. He abstained from sorrowful speeches; kill
him, bind him, hang him, and was no more moved, then if he had commanded one
of his servants to tread upon a Scorpion or a Worm.

The Executioner tied his hands behind his back the Trumpets sounded whilst he
prepared the punishment, and that the condemned person disposed himself to
death. The time was not left altogether at his discretion: Nero never allowed
but one hour for a man to make himself fit to receive the deadly stroke.
Adhibentur legitima verba, canitur ex altera part classicum Sen.
As at Funerals, there uses to be Instruments which sound with sad and
mournful tunes, with Cornets for the great ones, or with Flutes for the meaner
sort, and this they call a Harmony: in like manner at Executions, the Trumpets
sounded the battle, as the alarm, or the bonteselle, to go to death.

Quisnam delator? Quibus iudicijs? quo test probauit? Nihil horum verbosa and
grandis Epistola venit A Capris been habet nil plus interrogo. Iuven.
During this, the people being astonished at a Judgment so soon done, demanded
the cause; one asks for what crime is he condemned? who is his accuser, what
accomplices, what witnesses? nothing of all this, says another. A great and a
long letter is come from Caprea says a third, that is enough, we must know no
more, all goes well.

The form is not expressed other then that which Dion speaks, and the word
which he uses, signifies that he was condemned, or executed. This is
certain, that they found out no new manner of punishment for him. When any one
was condemned to punishment, according to the manner of the ancients, that was
to banishment, the civil death of a Roman Citizen. Supplicium more maiorum.
Tac.
The Gallows, the Impalement, the Cross, the casting to Beasts, la heart: the
beheading were to slaves and men of no account. Sunt paenae legibus constitutae
quibus fine iudicum saevitia and temporum infamia supplicia decernuntut. Tac.
Turpeis proditores hostesque publici imponantur. Sen.
It was a long time ago said Paetus Thraseas to Nero since any man spoke at
Rome of the Hangman, or of strangling; the Laws have ordained punishments
which punish the crimes without infamy for the times, without cruelty for the
Judges. Traitors, Rebels, enemies of the Commonwealth take their leap from the
Tarpeian Rock. Manlius was thrown down headlong from a great height upon the
Rock, and he had as Plutarke says, Locus idem in vno homine and eximiae
gloriae monumentum and paenae vltimae suit. T. Live.
the Capitol for a witness of his most valorous deeds, and of his greatest
calamity; this punishment was awarded him for having attempted against the
Commonwealth. A punishment of all the most fearful, because the Rock was
sharp, of an extreme height, the midst and sides sticking out with points
like to stays, Moles abscissa in profundum frequentibus asperata saxis. Sen.
and if the bodies lighted upon them, they were bruised, or rudely repulsed;
there was exceeding horror in the very sight of them; and he that once took
this leap was sure he should never take it again.

They also cut off the heads of Offenders, not with an Axe or Hatchet, as
anciently, but with a Sword, after the civil war: and this kind of
punishment was so new, that a Curtizan being at the Table of the Proconsull
Flaminius, Nondum caput erat ense rotare Lucan.
and saying that she had never seen it, he caused a prisoners head to be
struck off by the Hangman. Vt iste cum amica coenaret iucundius, homo occisus
est. Sen.
Valerius Antius gave the like contentment to a Lady which he loved. Behold
these jolly Magistrates which jest with the lives of men, and with the
authority of the Laws, to content their cruel curiosity, one of a Dame of
Plaisance; Maiestas laesa, si ex ^unti Proconsuli meretrix non summouetur. Sen.
the other of a Harlot, whose name was so odious, that if the Hinsher had met
her in the passage to the Senate house, and had not chased her away, he had
offended against the dignity of his Office.

Seianus had not his head stricken off, that punishment was too gentle in a
choler so extreme and public. Iuuenall says, Sejanus ducitur unco
spectandus, gaudentomnes quae labra, quis illi vultus erat? Iuven.
that he being drawn through the City with a long hook, the people admired
his great head, and his great lips. I imagine that he was strangled in
prison, for that was the most ordinary punishment, and Tiberius used it. After
he had caused Agrippina to be put to death at Pandatria, Iactauit Caesar quod
non laqueo strangulata, neque in Gemonias proiecta foret. Tac.
he vaunted that he had done her the favor to give command that she should
not be strangled, and desired that the Senate would thank him.

His three poor children were carried to prison, his Daughter promised to the
Son of Claudius was defloured at the foot of the Gallows by the Hangman,
Puella a carnisice iuxta laqueum compressa. Tac.
because it was not permitted to put to execution one that was a Virgin. Dion
says that she was slain by the people. Tacitus believed that his Son knew
what he would do, Puella adeo nescia vt crebro interrogaret quod ob delictum?
quo traheretur? neque facturam vltra and posse se puerili verbere moneri. Tac.
The Gemonian stairs in the 3 Region of Rome, which was the hill Auentin.
and the fortune which he ran. He had a Daughter so young and of so little
knowledge, that she ceased not still to say; What have I done? whether will
they carry me? who will pardon me? I will do so no more, there needs nothing
but rods to make me more wise.

The Hangman took these two by the throat and strangled them. The bodies of
them so slain, were tied to the Gemonian steps, which bare that name either
of the Inuentor, or of the groans which were heard there. They were like the
Pilleries, the show place of the executions, where they fasten the Portraits
and Statues of the condemned persons. The Conciergery, the Court where they
pleaded, the Treasury, where they registered the Arrests, were built near
together, the stories in the same place, and at the foot thereof Tyber, where
they cast in headlong the bodies.

Quo die illum Senatus deduxerat, populus in frusta diuisit. Sen.
Seneca and Dion do not agree in this: the one says, that they drew his body
about three whole days; and the other says, that the same day that the Senate
had accompanied him to the Senate, the same day the people cut him in pieces,
Ex eo nihil interfuit quod Carnifex traheret. Sen.
and that of a person in whom the gods and men had all that which could be
great and precious; there remained nothing for the Hangman, that he could catch
hold on with his hook, and draw it into Tyber. To accord them: I suppose that
after he was executed, they set him on the stairs purposely that the people
might see him, and that in this fury they might draw him from thence at that
instant, and having haled him upon the the bank of the River, might cut him in
pieces, and it might be in 14 parts, so many Regions as the City had, and that
these pieces were drawn three whole days through the streets.

All kinds of outrages were done to this miserable body; some through
inhumanity, others through revenge, most for example, and all to the end it
might not be believed that either they had loved or known him. Iuuenall
relates the discourse which then was at Rome, for every one gave the full
careere to his Judgment. Behold here the Prose of those Verses.

I conceive that many shall dye: Perituros audio multos Nil dubium magna est
fornacu^a: Dum iac^t in ripa calcemus Caesaris hostem, etc.
no man needs doubt thereof; the furnace wherein they are to be cast is great
enough. I met the other day my poor Brutidius near the Temple of Mars, he was
very pale and astonished; I doubt not but if Ajax were called he would slay him
with his own hand. But to the end that we may not be taken to be friends of
Sei^nus, and that we perish without defense, let us go quickly run to that
body whilst it is at the bank of Tyber, and cry out that we tread under our
feet the enemy of Caesar.

He that is a servant, let him renounce and quit his Master, let him take him
by the neck and stop his throat to draw him trembling before the Commissaries.
This is the way to save himself and also to be rewarded.

Afterward the people in secret had this discourse of Seianus. See then who
will follow thee, and who will Court thee as Seianus did? have so much wealth
as he, dispose of Dignities, give the Chaires of Iuory, command the Armies, be
esteemed the Governor of the Prince, to perform these affairs during the
time he was in the straight Grotte of Caprea, with a troop of Chaldeans and of
Astrologians?

Would thou have command over the troops which carries the Pile or the
Iauelin with three heads? Would thou command over the Cauallery, over those
brave Troops which wait at the Palace to guard the Prince? Principis Augusta
Caprearum in rupe sedentis, Cum grege Chaldaeo. Qui nolunt occidere que^quam,
posse volunt. Vt rebus laetis par sit mensura malorum. An Fidenarum Gabiorumque
esse potestas, Et de mensura vis dicere? Numerosa parabat. Excelsaeturris
tabulata, vnde altior esset: Su^mus nempe locus: Magnaque numinibus vota
exaudita malignis. Iu.


Why desire thou not this? Those who do not desire to kill any person,
desire yet the power to do it. Every one sees the honor and the riches, which
are yet notwithstanding such, that the measure of evils that follow them equals
those of the contentment that they bring.

Do thou love rather to carry the garment of Seianus, whom thou saw
drawn through the streets, then to be Ruler of the Fidenates or the Gabij, or
to be Aedile at Vlubra, which is almost uninhabited, and Judge of Measures, and
cause them to be broken which are not just? Thou must needs then confess that
Seianus never knew what he ought to have desired. For in seeking after those
great honors, and those great riches, he did no other then prepare a Scaffold
upon a high Tower, to fall down and precipitate himself from the greater
height. Who turned Crassus and Pompey vpside-downe? and who was he that tamed
the old Romans, and brought them to endure the whip like slaves? High places
which are mounted unto by cunning or deceit and great desires, which are heard
by the malign stars become the ruin of them that make them.

Few Tyrants have come quietly to the Son in Law of Ceres, and to a natural
death; their death has seldom been dry, and blood has not been spared to
temper with it.

Seneca saw this Execution, and yet nevertheless has written nothing of it,
although he were of an age that he might well have observed it: for he was at
Rome fifteen years before the death of Augustus. He was amazed that of the
body of so great and so mighty a man; there remained nothing for Sepulture.

If an ouergreat joy slew a Mother, Si ad mortem agere matres magnum, gaudium,
quid magnus dolor? Sen. Cratisiclea had desired that they would put her to
death before her children, but the executioners slew them before her face. Plut.
what ought an extreme sorrow to do? Apicata was assailed with an incredible
sorrow when she saw her children at the Gibbets foot. Cratesiclea the Mother
of Cleomones King of Sparta, whose head Ptolomee caused to be cut off, and his
body fastened to the Cross, seeing his children slain before her eyes, said,
Alas! my children, whether are you going? Apicata said to these innocents which
she saw upon this infamous place; Poor children, where are you? In this
extremity of sorrow she retired her self to her house, where she wrote a
Discourse of the death of Drusus, sent it to Tiberius, and that being done,
she slew her self.

Ordo sceleris per A^icatam Seiani prodi tus tormentis Eudemi ac Lygdi
patefactus est. Tac.
She had not so long forborne to reveal this enormous offense, if the pity of
her children had not restrained her, for she knew well, that in crimes of
treason, they bear the punishment of the Father. She accused Seianus, Liuilla,
Ligdus and Eudemus. They being put to the torture, confessed all. Tiberius
caused many to be tormented, to know who were the accomplices. Errore detecto
occidi iussit, ne divulgaret iniuriam Suet.
It was told him that a man of Rhodes was arrived, and not remembering what it
was his host had bad him do, he caused him presently to be put to the rack,
and having discovered the error, commanded that he should be slain, to the end
he should not discover the wrong he had received. This was to conserve the
reputation of a just Prince by a a notorious injustice.

Mihi vita tanti non est, vt armis tegenda sit. Tac.
The death of Seianus gave much confidence and security to Tiberius: and when
he was moved to choose twenty Senators near about him armed, he answered,
That his life was not so dear, that he would submit it to be conserved no way
but by arms. But he left not for all that his vicious and unbridled manners,
and not killing his vices before his own death, he enjoyed not that content to
see his enemies dye before him. Nevertheless he felt the remorse of
conscience so violent, that he protested to the Senate, Tandem facinora and
flagitia in supplicium vertuntur. T c Vt corpora verberibus itam saeuitia ac
libidine Tyrannorum animus dilaceratur. Tac.
that he suffered death daily. He could not naturally endure to be subject to
the judgment of men, but he remained convicted in his conscience, that
accused, condemned, and executed him. Whereupon one wise man said who lived in
those times, That if the hearts of Tyrants might be seen, they would appear
more vlcerous through voluptuousness then the bodies of those they had slain
by their cruelty would do with their wounds.

Of all his outrages the most pernicious was the death of that Architect, who
so handsomely rebuilt and repaired the Portall of Rome, which was fallen down;
and who having presented him a Glass, Ferunt Tiberio Principe excogitatum
vitri temperamentum vt flex bile esset, and totam artificis officinam ab litam,
ne ae is, argenti, auri, metalli pretia detraherentur.
brake it, and recollecting the pieces, made it up again in the same place;
having discovered the Art that this material the last work of the fire, might
be made obedient and pliable to the hammer. Pliny says that he abolished it,
to the end that Gold, Silver, and Brass might not be less prized. What an
ornament to the world would this have been, if of an herb which has neither
beauty nor smell, which is good in the taste neither of men nor beasts, one
could have made a material hard, solid and transparent?

An Invention nevertheless that precedent ages have been ignorant of, Priscis
temporibus summum c^rtamen inter homin s, ne quid profuturum seculis diu
lateret. Petr.
and that the present admired, and that ours will always bemoane: for we have
not many men that are passionate not to permit that which may profit posterity,
to remain long hidden. Tiberius spared nothing in his excessive voluptuous and
superfluous expenses. Malus Imperato^, ^ui ex visceribus prounicialium homines
non necessarios nec Reip vtiles alit. Lamp.
He entertained with the sweatings and labors of the people an infinite
number of persons, not only unprofitable but hurtful to the Common wealth,
and put them to death whose industry might bring ornament and profit. O what a
disorder both of the times and men! They repine at the recompense of an
admirable Art, and Seianus sels one of his Eunuchs for 3500. sesterces. But
this was during the miseries of this reign, and when no man was permitted to
reprove these profusions.

Tiberius rule was yet more terrible and cruel after Seianus then it had been
before. He would not admit the people by his death to repair those ils which
he had done in his life.

The most agreeable Tribute was the 20. which ^hey took of inheritances and
legatories, the kindred and poor excepted.
Augustus had ordained a Military Treasury, which he kept full with three sorts
of tributes, as with three living Springs, with the twentieth part of
Inheritances, the five and twentieth part of the Sale of Slaves, and the
hundredth part of all that which was Trafficked for.

Tiberius having reduced the Realm of Cappadocia to a Province, supposed that
by the increase of this revenue the people might be so much the more eased, and
therefore instead of the hundredth part he ordained that they should pay but
the two hundredth part. Extraneis facile, domesticis grave. Plin.
But after the death of Seianus, as if repenting himself of this favor, he
raised it to the hundredth part again. The necessity of his affairs excused
him, that could not endure that the Tributes might be touched: this is a fury
which takes the State by the throat, if it be not appeased. They which are
destinated to this charge, Da operam, vt omnes intelligant si salui esse velint
necessitat esse parendum. Cic. M. Antony in Asia, after the battle of
Phillippi So Themistocles demanding money of the Audriaus, told them that he
was accompanied with two Goddesses, Persuasion, and Costraint. Plut.
ought to make the people capable of this truth; If you will peaceably possess
your particular estates, you must needs succor the public necessities. When
Anthony the Triumuir was sent into Asia to fetch succors from thence, h^e
represented no other reason then this necessity.

To the end (says he) that you be not driven from your Towns and your Lands,
you must needs part with money for the entertainment of the Soldiers. They
demand no more then you would give them freely. You have given in two years to
Cassius and Brutus our enemies, the tributes of ten years. We need only
this to dispatch our affairs, provided that you give it at once. He raised
hereby 200000. talents, which was 20000. a year, which came to twelve Millions.

The State if it be weak cannot be maintained in Peace, nor fortified without
Arms; By the quality of the Tribute one may judge of the power of the
Tributary.

Nec quies gentium sine armis, ^ec arma fine stipendijs, nec stipendia fine
Tributis haberi queunt Tac.

Malo tondere pecus quam deglubere. Tib.


A^mes cannot be entertained without money, and money comes not but by
Tributes. But there must be a moderation, and the Prince imitating Tiberius
must sheere his Sheep without s^arri^ying them, and must render the
dispensation chas^e, sincere and pure, as of the blood of swearers, and of the
tears of the people, for profitable, necessary, and glorious expenses, not for
profusions, which bring neither contentment nor reputation.

Happy is the Prince that finds honest men in whom to repose the care of his
Exchequer, whereon depends the honor of his Designs, the Majesty of his
Crown, and the tranquillity of his Estate: for these are the sinews that give
motion, and the veins that preserve life; and as by the resolution or retyring
of the sinews the Natural body is sometimes deprived of motion and sense; so
the politic without money cannot be mou^d nor sustained: in one word, Tune
conditus imo E^ruitur templo multis intactus ab annis Romani census populi.
Lucan.
with Treasure may every thing be wrought and brought to an end. He that has
the last Crown has the last triumph: They are sacred, the custody thereof is
given to Saturn, or within his Temple.

Caesar had not known how to ruin the liberty, had he not begun by
Sacrilege, despoyling the Treasure of the Commonwealth, which was ramassed
together of all the spoils of the East, and of that which the Fabricij, the
Scipioes, the Catoes, and the Pompeys had acquired by their victories. One may
draw the first remarkable note of the desolation of an Estate from the unjust
and irregular administration of the Treasures.

It is not enough that those who have the government thereof, Res familiaris
iji rebus quae ^atura quibus ab est turpicudo. Cic.
have their eyes open to see that the expense exceeds not the receipt: the
State has great interest that the means of particular persons, may be
managed without excess, with order and modesty, as they ought to be acquired,
without base dealing. Conviviorum luxuria and vestium aegrae ciui^atis indicia
^unt. Sen.
The disorders which may be observed in Feastings in Buildings, in the delights
and superfluities of private houses are symptoms of an estate not only sick
but dying. Troubles and seditions for the most part are not fomented but by the
desperateness of forlorn people, and who have nothing to loose; Hoc in Rep.
seminarium Catilinarium.
of this quality were those that entered into the conspiracy of Catiline. Great
and excessive disorders during the reign of Tiberius, but such as were
descended from far off, for he used to say that the Romans had learned to
expend their own substance from the Civil wars, and that of others from
strangers. It was a wonder that having provided for so many other excesses he
would not correct the luxury, nor the dissoluteness which were overflowed by
reason of the disesteeming of the Sumptuary Laws. This it may be happened,
because he would not begin the example of the reformation in his own house,
Non sum offensionum auidus, graves pro Rep suscipio, inanes and irritas jure
deprecor. Tac.
which surfeited with excesses, or that disorderlinesse was fallen into a
custom and discipline; or that he would not pull upon himself unprofitably
and without effect the public hatred. His greatest reason was that he would
not expose his commands to dissesteeme, nor open the vein before he had a
swathingband ready to stay the blood.

These excellent words which he spoke to the Senate of this subject ought to
be represented to Kings ever when they make Ordinances, whereof the effects are
doubtful and difficult. Omittenda p^tius prae^^lida and adulta vitia, quam hoc
adsequi vt palam fiat quibus flag ij^^ impare^ sumus. Tac.
A Prince ought rather to dissemble an inueterate disorder, and which has a
great many followers or supporters, then to put his authority in hazard, and
make his want of power be known publicly, and that there be things which he
cannot remedy.

After the execution of Seianus, the Senate commanded that the Statua of
Liberty should be erected in the public place, and that yearly upon the same
day on which Seianus was slain, a Combat on horseback should be represented,
and that diverse kinds of living Creatures should be slain; a thing that never
was done before. It was ordained also that immoderate honors should be given
to no man, and that none should swear by any other name then that of the
Emperor.

All Seianus his friends ran the like fortune with him, and received that
which they looked for. Quam male est extra legem viuentibus, quicquid ^e^erunt
semper expectant. Petr.
The Prisons were filled, some condemned to death, others banished, all
bereaved of their places of Charge. The City resembled a field where naught
else was to be seen but bodies dismembered, or Ravens that dismembered them.

Iacuit immensa strages, omnis sexus, omnis aetas, illustres, ignobiles. Tac.
Feminae quia occupandae reip. argui non poterant ob lacrymas incusabantur. Tac.
Tiberius accustomed himself in this manner to executions, that he caused all
those to be put to death which were in the prisons accused to have any
intelligence with Seianus: they cast forth upon the p^uement a great number of
dead men of all ages and conditions, illustrious, noble, base, no man being
permitted to stay to behold them, nor to withdraw themselves to bemoane them;
for both the one and the other was a crime. Vitia was punished by death for
that she had lamented Geminus her Son; and because they could not accuse
women for attempting against the State, their tears were criminal.

Interciderat sortis humanae commercium, vt metus, qua^tunque saevitiae
glicebatur miseratio arcebatur. Tac.
They judged of grief by the countenance, and of passion by the vehemence of
the grief; in such manner, that the bodies which the River Tyber had cast up
upon her banks remained unburied; so much had fear broken the commerce
between nature and compassion.

Ausus est amplecti amicitiam quam caeterifalso exuerant. Tac.
There was none which disclaimed not the friendship of Seianus. Only one Roman
Knight Marcus Terentius being accused to be his friend, auowed it freely then
when others seemed to have renounced him. He spoke in this manner before the
Senate.

It may be I might do better for my fortune to deny the crime whereof I am
accused, Minus expedit agnoscere crimen quam abnuere. Tac. There were 7 of them
in all, in the City, and 3 in other garrisons.
then to confess it: But whatsoever shall happen I will not say but I was
Seianus his friend, that I desired to be so, and did rejoice that I was possessed
of his love. I saw that he was his Fathers companion in the command of the
Pretorian Cohorts, and that at one and the same time he managed the affairs of
the City and of the Wars. Cunctos qui nouissimi consilij expertes fuimus,
vnius discrimine defendam. Tac.

Non est nostrum aestima re quem supra caeteros et quibus de causis e^tollas
Tibi summum iudicium dij dedere, nobis obsequij gloria relicta est. Tac.


That they that were near him in friendship were powerful in the Emperors
love, and all others in continual fear and in the estate of accused persons.

I will not here allege any one for example, but I will with the alone peril
of my life defend all such as have had no part in these his last designs. For
we did not our service to Seianus of Vulsine, but we followed the party of the
House of Claudius, whereof by all ance he had made himself the chief. We did
honor (Caesar) your Son-in-Law, your companion in the Consulat, and who
exercised your function in the Commonwealth.

It belongs not to us to judge what he should be, or for what cause you raise
one man above all others. The gods have given you the Sovereign disposition of
things, and there remains only for us the glory of obedience. We consider
what we see, to whom you give riches and honor, and who may most hurt us or
profit us, and none can deny but all this was in Sei^nus.

It is not lawful to sound the depth of the Princes intentions, nor that which
he prepares in secret; Abditos Principis sensus and si quid occultius parat
exquirere inlicitum. Tac.
that is doubtful, and therefore we cannot arrive to it. Consider not the last
day of Seianus, but the sixteen years of his prosperity, in those days we
did honor unto Satrius and Pomponius his Freemen, and it was a great matter
to be known of his Servants and of his Porter. What then? Shall we make no
difference between those which have served Seianus as Servants to the
Emperor, Insidiae in Remp. consilia caedis duersum Impetraorem pun^antur. de
amici ia and officijs idem et te Caesar et nos absoluerit. Tac.
and such as have followed him in his designs against the Emperor?

It is necessary that this distinction should be reduced unto the just bounds
thereof, to the end they may punish the treasons and co spiracies against the
State, and the plotting of the Emperors death, but for the friendship and the
respect we have had of him, one and the same reason O Caesar may well excuse
both you and us.

The boldness and constancy of this discourse, which had reference to all that
other men could think, was of so great force, that those which had been
accused of being friends to Seianus, were distinguished from his accomplices, and
Tiberius was praised for having confirmed the Decree of the Senate touching the
Innocence of Terentius, who had not loved his friend, to hate him afterward or
disauowe him.

Getulicus effusae clementiae, modicus seueritate micum amorem adsecutus. Tac.
Lentulus Getulicus went yet another way then Varro. Abudius Rufus accused him
to have treated about the marriage of his Daughter with Seianus his Son: this
man was in great credit and authority in Almany, by reason of his sweetness
and modesty. He spoke a far off, and on Horseback, and near the Armies.
Tiberius therefore caused his accuser to be banished, and condemned. An Act of
the wisdom of a Prince never to threaten him that is secure from not being
hurt by his blows.

Boldness proceeds not always from courage, but from place and from the
cause Idem error Principis fine fraud, alijs exitio^ non est habendus. Tac.
Getulicus was advertised thereof, and knowing the humor of Tiberius, who was
fast to his opinion, retired not himself easily, and according to the temper
of his choler hasted or foreslowed his revenge, gave him to understand that he
was in such estate, that he would not forget his own safety for that of
another, and sent him this Letter alike proud and bold.

The alliance of which (O Caesar) I have treated with Seianus, is not
altogether of my motion, but by your Counsel. It may be I have been deceived
after you, but one and the same fault ought not to be the discharge of the one,
and the ruin of the other. My faith has been entire hitherto, and shall not
change if they do not raise some party against me, Successorem non aliter quam
inditium mortis acceptutum. Tac.
and whosoever shall come to succeed in my charge, I shall receive him as one
who has attempted upon my life. Let us agree by way of treaty, let the Empire
remain to you, to me my Government.

Nothing but the distance of place excused, Princeps caeterarum rerum potiatur
ipse prouniciam re^ine m. Tac. Publico odio and extrema aetate res principis
stant magis fama quam vi. Tac.
the inciuility of this Letter. He alone of Seianus his friends after Terentius
saved himself: Tiberius held down his head, and shrunk up his sholders, for
his matters were sustained more by reputation then by power. His decayed old
age retrenched his hopes, and public hatred increased his distrusts.

Mamercus Scaurus was one of Seianus his friends, Haud minus validum ad exitia
Macronis edium qui easdem arts occultius exercebat. Tac.
but his friendship had not so much power to ruin him as the hatred of Macro,
who was no less sharp then the other in ruining his enemies, but he went
about it more cunningly and secretly. He was worthy of the friendship of
Seianus for the conformity of his humors to his pleasures, which Seneca
reports to be so beastly, that the only thinking of them, sullies the
Spirit, he tarried not till he was condemned, but believed Sextia his wise, who
persuaded him to kill himself.

P. Vitellius who had so constantly vpheld the cause of Germanicus against
Piso, P. Vitellius aerari^ praefectus militarem pecunia^ rebus novis obtulerat.
Tac.
was accused to have offered to Seianus the moneys belonging to the
Commonwealth, for he was one of the Officers of the Treasury. His Brothers
answered for him, but perceiving that his process hung long, he grew weary
with languishing between hope and fear, and opened a vein with a launcer.
His friends stanched the blood and bound up that Spirit which was going out,
loathing to lodge in a body which being most ready to dye, stayed not it self
but with much grief and sorrow.

In custodia morbo perijt, Suet. Dum fortunam aduersam aequus tolerat, Tiberio
superstes fuit. Tac. Honoribus functus es? Numquid aut tam v^iuersis quam
Seianus? Sen.
Pomponius was sick in the same Hospital where the rest were, but his
patience made him survive, Tiberius would have him put to death because Velius
Gallus was thrown into his Garden the same day that Seianus was drawn through
the streets.

Tiberius lamented Seianus not for loss of him, but for his own interest; for
as long as he lived, whatsoever he did that was unjust or cruel, he cast all
the blame upon him, and after his death there was none took part with him in
the public hatred.

By so much as the prosperity of Seianus had been admired, by so much his fall
ministered terror and astonishment. Never any man before him had received more
great, more universal, more unlooked for honors; and all the favors and
dignities which all the Kings of Europe could heap together to raise a man,
could not be paralleld with these here. He made his power be known to all, Diu
multumque singulis quid posset ostendit. Sen.
and a long time and every where. For sixteen years space he possessed the
sovereign power of an Empire that commanded over all the world, and which
first had taken for its limits the rising and the setting of the Sun.
Euphrates shut up the frontires thereof toward the East; the Mont Atlas,
Clausam mari aut fluminibut lonquiquis imperium. Tac.
the Cataracts of Nile, and the Deserts of Afric toward the South; the Ocean
Sea toward the West and Danubius toward the North; so that whethersoeuer the
Sun went, thither went also his commands. What glory ever mounted more high,
or descended more low?

Whosoever shall behold a high Mountain peering over a great Valley to be made
level, to be dug down and swallowed up in an instant of time, To see great
ones ruined is to see great mountains levelled.
will he not be astonished? yet this is not more strange then to see those
great Colossi to be cast down in a moment. We find in it cause of
astonishment, and yet neglect the example: Every man trusts to his own
Judgment, thinking to walk the same way, but the p^ssages of some are more
secure then of others. Every man thinks to do better and to guide himself more
wisely then those that are lost.
One only Vessel which shall be prosperously returned from a long Navigations
is able to make a hundred persons resolute to vndert^ke the same voyage; and
the shipwreck of one hundred Vess ls has not the power to hinder one only;
for every one thinks that ill fortune is not ordained for him.

Macro Cap aine of the Guard, and La^o Knight of the Watch were better advised,
Great service done for the State, ought to be recompensed with honor, and not
with money.
the Senate for this great service of theirs appointed to them great honors.
To the first the Office of Praetor, with power to sit in the rank of the
Senators, clothed with a purple robe at Plays and public assemblies; and to
the second the Office of Quaestor: they refused them, and Dion attributes the
reason of their refusal, to the terror of an example so fresh in their
memories.

They supposed it would be a great impudence in them to run against the same
rock on which Seianus had perished. Optimum aliena insania frui Pl^ni. There
be some that cannot become wise by others examples, but by their own ruin.
It is much better to be taught by another misfortune then by a man's own; the
wise man make his profit out of the shame and hurt that touches not him at
all: and as Triacle is made of Vipers, and they extract healthful medicines
from poisons themselves, so from the false and miseries of bad men good men may
draw precepts for their guidance.

Nemo vnqua^ imperium flagit o acquisitum bonis artibus exercuit. Tac.
Seianus shall be ever alleged as a prodigious example of extreme insolency,
and of unfortunate ambition; and his Tragical end may teach us that no man can
ever use power well which is ill gotten; that we must not judge of a man's
happiness before his death, Aluares de Luna, told them who admire^ his fortune
with the K. of Casti e, you do wrong to commend the building, before it be
finished.
nor of the day before the evening, nor of the building that is not finished;
Death, Fortune, Time, and Course change in a moment. That favor which is
acquired by merit or good fortune is lost through insolency, and the most
confident and assured ought not to depend but upon the supreme grace of the
Prince.

FINIS.

