THE DVKE OF MILLAINE.

A TRAGAEDIE.

As it has been often acted by his Majesty's servants, at the black Friars.

Written by PHILIP MASSINGER Gent.

LONDON Prinred by E. A. for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at his shop
at the great South door of Paul's. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MVCH ESTEEMED FOR HER HIGH BIRTH, BUT MORE ADMIred
for her virtue, the Lady KATHERINE STANHOPE, wife to PHILIP Lord STANHOP, Baron
of Shelford.
MADAM: If I were not most assured that works of this nature, has found both
patronage, and protection, amongst the greatest Princesses of Italy, and are
at this day cherished by persons most eminent in our kingdom, I should not
presume to offer this my weak, and imperfect labors, at the altar of your
favor, let the example of others more knowing, and more experienced in this
kind (if my boldness offend) plead my pardon, and the rather since there is
no other means left me (my misfortunes having cast me on this course, to
publish to the world, if it hold the least good opinion of me) that I am ever
your Ladyships creature vouchsafe therefore with the never sailing clemency, of
Your Noble disposition, not to contemn the tender of his duty, who while he
is, will ever be.

An humble servant to your Ladyship, and yours. PHILIP MESSENGER:

THE NAMES OF THE ACTORS.
Ludouico Sforza. a supposed Duke of Millaine. Signior Francisco. his especial
favorite. Tiberio. two Lords of his Counsel. Stephano. Pescara, a Marquess,
and friend to Sforza. Graccho. a creature of Mariana sister to Sfozra. Charles
the Emperor. Hernando Captains to the Emperor. Medina Marcelia. the Duchess
wife to Sforza. Isabella. mother to Sforza. Mariana. wife to Francisco, and
sister to Sforza. Eugenia. sister to Francisco.
2. Posts. A Beadle. Waiters. Mutes.
UPON THIS WORK OF HIS beloved friend the AVTHOR.
I Am snap't already, and may go my way;
The Poet-Critick's come; I hear him say,
This YOVTH'S mistook, The Authors WORKE'S a PLAY.
He could not miss it; he will strait appear
At such a bait; It Was laid on purpose there
To take the vermin, and I have him here.
Sir, you will be nibling; a small bitt,
(a syllable) when yo' are in the hungry fit,
Will scrue to stay the stomach of your wit.
Fool; Knave; what is worse? for worse cannot deprave
And were the devil now instantly to have thee, (thee
Thou can not instance such a work to save thee.
Among all the ballets which thou do compose,
And what thou stil'st thy Poems, ill as those,
And void of rhyme, and reason, thy worse Prose.
Yet like a rude Iack-sauce in Poesy,
With thoughts unblessed, and hand unmannerly,
Rauishing branches from Apoll'os tree.
Thoumak'st a garland (for thy touch unfit)
And boldly deck'st thy pig-brain'd sconce with it,
As if it were the Supreme Head of wit.
The blameles Muses blush; who not allow
That reverend Order, to each vulgar brow,
Whose sinful touch prophanes the holy Bough.
Hence (shallow Prophet) and admire the strain
Of thine own Pen, or thy poor Copesmat's vain.
This PIECE too cartous is, for thy course brain.
Here wit (more fortunate) is joined with Art,
And that most sacred Frenzy bears a part
Infused by Nature in the Poe'ts heart.
Here, may the Puny-wits themselves direct,
Here, may the Wisest find what to affect;
And Kings may learn their proper Dialect.
On then, dear friend, Thy Pen thy Name shall spread;
And should thou write, while thou shall not be read,
Thy Muse must labor, when thy Hand is dead.
W. B.

THE DVKE OF MILLAINE.
Act. Prim. Scae. Pri.
Graccho, Iouio, Giouanni, with Flagons.
Gra. TAke every man his flagon: give the oath
To al you meet: I am this day, the state drunkard,
(I am sure against my will) And if you find
A man at ten, that is sober, he is a Traitor,
And in my name arrest him.

Io. Very good Sir:
But say he be a Sexton?

Gra If the bells,
Ring out of tune, as if the street were burning,
And he cry'tis rare Music: bid him sleep,
It Is a sign he has took his liquour; And if you meet
An officer preaching of sobriety,
Unless he read it in Geneua print,
Lay him by the heels.

Io. But think you it is a fault
To be found sober?

Gra. It is Capital Treason,
Or if you Mittigate it, Let such pay
Forty Crowns to the poor; But give a pention
To all the magistrates, you find singing catches,
Or their Wives dancing; For the Courtiers reeling,
And the Duke himself, (I dare not say distemperd,
But kind, and in his tottering chair carousing)
They do the country service. If you meet,
One that eats bread, a child of Ignorance,
And bred up in the darkness of no drinking,
In the true posture, though he die in the taking
His drench, it skilles not: What Is a private man
For the public honor? we have naught else to think on.
And so dear friends, copartners in my travails
Drink hard; and let the health run through the City,
Until it reele again: and with me cry:
Long live the Duchess.
Enter Tiberio Stephano.
Io. Here are two Lords; what think you?
Shall we give the oath to them?

Gra. Fie, no: I know them,
You need not swear 'em; your Lord, by his pattent
Stands bound to take his rouse. Long line the Duchess.
Exit Gra. 10.
Step. The cause of this. But yesterday the court,
Wore the sad liuerie of distrust, and fear;
No smile, not in a buffon to be seen,
Or common iester; The great Duke himself,
Had sorrow in his face: which waited on
By his mother, sister, and his fairest Duchess,
Dispersed a silent mourning through all Millaine:
As if some great blow had been given the State,
Or were at least expected.

Tib. Stephano,
I know, as you are noble, you are honest,
And capable of secrets, of more weight,
Then now I shall deliver. If that Sforza,
The present Duke, (though his whole life has been,
But one continued pilgrimage, through dangers,
Affrights, and horrors: which, his Fortune, guided
By his strong Judgment, still has overcome)
Appears now shaken, it deserves no wonder.
All that his youth has labored for: the harvest
Sown by his industry, ready to be reaped, to,
Being now at the stake; And all his hopes confirmd,
Or lost for ever.

Step. I know no such hazard:
The people well affected; And so wisely
His provident care has wrought: that though war rages
In most parts of our western world, there is
No enemy near us.

Tib. Dangers that we see
To threaten ruin are with ease prevented:
But those strike deadly, that come unexpected;
The lightning is far off: yet soon as seen,
We may behold the terrible effects,
That it produces. But I Will help your knowledge,
And make his cause of fear familiar to you.
The war so long continued between
The Emperor Charles, and Francis the French King
Have interrest'd in eithers cause, the most
Of the Italian Princes: Among which Sforza,
As one of greatest power, was sought by both,
But with assurance having one his friend,
The other lived his enemy.

Step. It Is true,
And 'twas a doubtful choice.

Tib. But he, well knowing,
And having too, (it seems) the Spanish pride,
Lent his assistance to the King of France:
Which has so far incensed the Emperor,
That all his hopes, and honors are embarked,
With his great Patrons Fortune.

Step. Which stands fair,
For ought I yet can hear.

Tib. But should it change,
The Dake's undone. They have drawn to the field
Two royal armies, full of fiery youth,
Of equal spirit to dare, and power to do:
So near entrenched, that it is beyond all hope,
Of human council, they can er'e be seuerd,
Until it be determined by the sword,
Who has the better cause. For the success,
Concludes the victor innocent, and the vanquished
Most miserably guilty. How uncertain,
The Fortune of the war is, children know;
And, it being in suspense, on whose fair Tent,
Win'gd victory will make her glorious stand;
You cannot blame the Duke, though he appear,
Perplexed and troubled.

Step. But why then,
In such a time when every knee should bend,
For the success, and safety of his person,
Are these loud triumphs? In my weak opinion,
They are unseasonable.

Tib. I judge so too;
But only in the cause to be excused.
It is the Duchess Birthday: once a year
Solemnized, with all pomp, and ceremony:
In which, the Duke is not his own, but hers:
Nay, every day indeed, he is her creature,
For never man so doted; But to tell
The tenth part of his fondness, to a stranger,
Would argue me of fiction.

Step. She Is indeed,
A Lady of most exquisite form.

Tib. She knows it,
And how to prize it.

Step. I never heard her tainted,
In any point of honor.

Tib. On my life,
She Is constant to his bed, and well deserves
His largest Favors. But when beauty is
Stamped on great women, great in birth, and fortune,
And blown by flatterers greater then it is,
It Is seldom unaccompanied with pride;
Nor is she, that-way free. Presuming on
The Dukes affection, and her own Desert,
She bears her self with such a Majesty,
Looking with scorn on all, as things be neath her:
That Sforzas mother, (that would loose no part
Of what, was once her own): Nor his fair Sister,
(A Lady too acquainted with her worth,
Will brook it well; And howsoer'e, their hate,
Is smothered for a time, It Is more then feared,
It will at length break out.

Step. He, in whose power it is,
Turn all to the best.

Tib. Come, let us to the Court,
We there shall see, all bravery, and cost,
That art can boast of.
Exeunt.
Step. I Will bear you company.
Enter Francisco, Isabella, Mariana,
Ma. I will not go, I scorn to be a spot
In her proud train.

Isa. Shall I, that am his mother,
Be so indulgent, as to wait on her,
That owes me duty?

Fra. It Is done to the Duke,
And not to her. And my sweet wife remember,
And Madam, if you please receive my council,
As Sforza is your son, you may command him,
And as a sister you may challenge from him,
A brothers love, and Favor: But this granted,
Consider he is the Prince, and you, his Subjects
And not to question, or contend with her,
Whom he is pleased to honor; Private men
Prefer their wives: and shall he being a Prince,
And blessed with one that is the Paradise
Of sweetness, and of beauty, to whose charge,
The stock of women's goodness is given up,
Not use her, like her self?

Isa. You are ever forward,
To sing her praises

Ma. Others are as fair,
I am sure as noble.

Fra. I detract from none,
In giving her, wha'ts due. Were she defor'md,
Yet being the Duchess, I stand bound to serve her,
But as she is, to admire her. Never wife,
Met with a purer heat her husbands feruer;
A happy pair, one in the other blessed:
She confident in her self, he is wholly hers,
And cannot seek for change: and he secure
That it is not in the power of man to tempt her.
And therefore, to contest with her that is
The stronger, and the better part of him,
Is more then folly; You know him of a nature,
Not to be played with: and should you forget
To 'obey him as your Prince, he will not remember,
The duty that he owes you.

Isa. It Is but truth:
Come clear our brows, and let us to the banquet,
But not to serve his Idol.

Ma. I shall do,
What may become the sister of a Prince,
But will not stoop, beneath it.

Fra. Yet be wise,
Sore not too high to fall, but stoop to rise.
Exeunt.
Enter three Gentlemen setting forth a banquet.
1. Ge. Quick quick for loves sake, let the court put
Her choicest outside: Cost, and bravery on
Be only thought of.

2. Gent. All that may be had
To please the eye, the ear, taste, touch, or smell,
Are carefully provided.

3. Genesis There Is a Masque,
Have you heard what is the invention?

1. Gent. No matter.
It is intended for the Duchess honor.
And if it give her glorious attributes,
As the most fair most virtuous, and the rest,
'Twill please the Duke. They come.

3. Gent. All is in order.

Enter Tiberio, Stephano, Francisco, Sforza, Marcellia, Isabella, Mariana,
attendants
Sfo. You are the Mistress of the feast, sit here;
O my souls comfort: And when Sforza bows
Thus low to do you honor, let none think
The meanest service they can pay my love,
But as a fair addition to those tytles,
They stand possessed of. Let me glory in
My happiness, and mighty Kings look pale
With envy, while I triumph in mine own.
O mother look on her, sister admire her:
And since this present age yields not a woman
Worthy to be her second, borrow of
Times past: and let imagination help
Of those canonized Ladies Sparta boasts of,
And, in her greatness, Rome was proud to owe
To fashion: and yet still you must confess,
The Phoenix of perfection never was seen,
But in my fair Marcelia.

Fra. She Is indeed
The wonder of all times.

Tib. Your excellence,
(Though I confess you give her but her own)
Enforces her modesty to the defense
Of a sweet blush.

Sfo. It need not my Marcelia;
When most I strive to praise thee, I appear
A poor detracter: For thou art indeed
So absolute in body, and in mind,
That, but to speak the least part to the height,
Would ask an Angels tongue: and yet then end
In silent admiration!

Isab. You still court her,
As if she were a Mistress, not your wife.

Sfo. A Mistress mother? she is more to me,
And every day, deserves more to be ^^^de too.
Such as are cloyd with those they have embraced,
May think their wooing done: No night to me,
But is a brydall one, where Himen lights
His torches fresh, and new: And those delights,
Which are not to be clothed in ayrie sounds,
^nioyd, beget desires, as full of heat,
And Iouiall feruor, as when first I tasted
Her virgin fruit; Blessed night, and be it numbered
Amongst those happy ones, in which a blessing
Was by the full consent of all the Stars,
Conser'd upon mankind.

Marc. My worthiest Lord,
The only object I behold with pleasure:
My pride, my glory, in a word my all;
Bear witness Heaven, that I esteem my self
In nothing worthy of the meanest praise,
You can bestow, unless it be in this,
That in my heart I love, and honor you.
And but that it would smell of arrogance,
To speak my strong desire, and zeal to serve you
I then could say, these eyes yet never saw
The rising Sun, but that my vows, and prayers,
Were sent to Heaven, for the prosperity
And safety of my Lord; Nor have I ever
Had other study, but how to appear
Worthy your favor: and that my embraces,
Might yield a fruitful Harvest of content,
For all your noble travail, in the purchase,
Ofher, that is still your servant; By these lips,
(Which pardon me, that I presume to kiss)

Sfo. O swear, for ever swear.

Marce. I never will seek
Delight, but in your pleasure: and desire,
When you are seated with all Earthly glories,
And age, and honors make you fit for Heaven,
That one Grave may receive us,

Sf. It Is belieu'd,
Belieu'd, my blessed One.

Mari. How she winds her self
Into his Soul!

Sf. Sit all: Let others feed
On those gross Cates, while Sforza banquets with
Immortal Viands, taken in at his Eyes.
I could live ever thus. Command the Eunuch
To sing the Dittie that I last composed,
In praise of my Marcelia. From whence?
Ent. Post
Post. From Pauie, my dread Lord.

Sf. Speak, is all lost?

Post. The Letter will inform you.

Fran. How his Hand shakes,
As he receives it?

Mari. This is some allay
To his hot passion.

Sf. Though it bring death, i will read it.

May it please your Excellence to understand, that the very hour I wrote this,
I heard a bold defiance delivered by a Herald from the Emperor, which was
chearefully received by the King of France. The battles being ready to
join, and the Vantguard committed to my charge, inforces me to end abrup^^ly.

Your Highness humble Servant, Gaspero.


Ready to join, By this, then I am nothing,
Or my Estate secure.
Marc. My Lord.

Sf. To doubt,
Is worse then to have lost: And to despair,
Is but to antidate those miseries,
That must fall on us. All my hopes depending
Upon this battles fortune; In my Soul
Me thinks there should be that Imperious power,
By supernatural, not usual means,
T'informe me what I am. The cause considered,
Why should I fear? The French are bold and strong,
Their numbers full, and in their counsels wise:
But then, the haughty Spaniard is all Fire,
Hot in his executions; Fortunate
In his attempts; Married to victoric:
I, there it is that shakes me.

Franc. Excellent Lady:
This day was dedicated to your Honor:
One gale of your sweet breath will easily
Disperse these Clouds: And, but your self, there is none
That dare speak to him.

Marc. I will run the hazard.
My Lord?

Sf. Ha: Pardon me Marcelia, I am troubled;
And stand uncertain, whether I am Master
Of ought that is worth the owning.

Marc. I am yours Sir;
And I have heard you swear, I being safe,
There was no loss could move you. This day Sir,
Is by your guist made mine: Can you revoke
A Grant made to Marcelia? Your Marcelia?
For whose love, nay, whose honor (gentle Sir)
All deep designs, and State affairs deser'd:
Be, as you purposed, merry.

Sf. Out of my sight,
And all thoughts that may strangle mirth forsake me.
Fall what can fall, I dare the worst of Fate;
Though the Foundation of the Earth should shrink,
The glorions Eye of Heaven loose his Splendour:
Supported thus, I Will stand upon the ruins,
And seek for new life here. Why are you sad?
No other sports? By Heaven he is not my friend,
That wears one Furrow in his Face. I was told
There was a Masque.

Franc. They wait your Highness pleasure,
And when you please to have it.

Sf. Bid'em enter:
Come, make me happy once again. I am raped,
It Is not to day, to morrow, or the next,
But all my days, and years shall be employed
To do thee honor.

Marc. And my life to serve you.
A Horn.

Franc. Another Post? Go hang him, hang him I say,
I will not interrupt my present pleasures,
Although his message should import my Head:
Hang him I say.

Marc. Nay, good Sir, I am pleased,
To grant a little intermission to you;
Who knows, but he brings news, we wish to hear,
To heighten our delights.

Sf. As wise as fair.
From Gaspero?
Ent. another Post.
Post. That was, my Lord.

Sf. How, dead?

Post. With the delivery of this, and prayers,
To guard your Excellency from certain dangers.
He ceast to be a Man.

Sf. All that my fears
Could fashion to me or my enemies wish
Is fallen upon me. Silence, that harsh music,
It Is now unseasonable; A tolling Bell,
As a sad Harbinger to tell me, that,
This pampered lump of Flesh, must seast the Worms.
It Is fitter for me, I am sick.

Marc. My Lord.

Sf. Sick to the death, Marcelia, Remove
These signs of mirth, they were ominous, and but vsherd
Sorrow and ruin.

Marc. Bless us Heaven!

Isab. My Son.

Marc. What sudden change is this?

Sf. All leave the room;
I Will bear alone the burden of my grief,
And must admit no partner. I am yet
Your Prince, where is your obedience? Stay Marcelia
I cannot be so greedy of a sorrow,
In which you must not share.

Marc. And chearefully,
I will sustain my part. Why look you pale?
Where is that wonted constancy, and courage,
That dared the worst of Fortune? Where is Sforza?
To whom all dangers that fright common men,
Appeared but Panicque terrors? Why do you eye me
With such fixed looks? Love, counsel, duty, service,
May flow from me, not danger.

Sf. O Marcelia!
It is for thee I fear: For thee, thy Sforza
Shakes like a coward; For my self, unmoved:
I could have heard my troops were cut in pieces,
My General slain; Ano' he; on whom my hopes
Of Rule, of State, of Life, had their dependence;
The King of France, my greatest friend, made prisoner
To so proud enemies.

Marc. Then you have inst cause
To show you are a Man.

Sf. All this were nothing,
Though I ad to it, that I am assured
For giving aid to this unfortunate King,
The Emperor incenc'd, lays his command
On his victorious Army, fleshed with spoil,
And bold of conquest, to march up against me,
And sease on my Estates: Suppose that done too,
The City taken, the Kennels running blood,
The ransick'd Temples, falling on their Saints:
My Mother in my sight, tossed on their Pikes,
And Sister ravished: And my self bound fast
In Chains, to grace their Triumph: Or what else,
An Enemies insolence could load me with,
I would be Sforza still; But when I think,
That my Marcelia (to whom, all these
Are but as Atoms to the greatest Hill)
Must suffer in my cause: And for me suffer
All Earthly torments; Nay, even those the damned
Houl for in Hell, are gentle strokes, compared
To what I feel Marcelia.

Marc. Good Sir, have patience:
I can as well partake your adverse fortune,
As I thus long have had an ample share,
In your prosperity. It Is not in the power
Of Fate to alter me: For while I am,
In spite often, I am yours.

Sf. But should that will
To be so forced Marcelia? And I live
To see those Eyes I prize above mine own,
Dart favors (though compelled) upon another?
Or those sweet Lips (yielding Immortal Nectar)
Be gently touched by any but my self?
Think, think Marcelia, what a cursed thing
I were, beyond expression.

Marc. Do not feed
Those jealous thoughts; The only blessing that
Heaven has bestowed on us, more then on beasts,
Is, that it is in our pleasure when to dye.
Besides, were I now in another power,
There are so many ways to let out life,
I would not live, for one short minute his;
I was borne only yours, and I will dye so.

Sf Angels reward the goodness of this Woman:
All I can pay is nothing. Why vncall'd for?)
Ent. Francis.
Franc. It is of weight, Sir, that makes me thus press
Upon your priuacies. Your constant friend
The Marquisse of Pescara, tired with have,
Ha h business that concerns your life and fortunes,
And with speed to impart.
Ex. Franc.
Sf. Wait on him hither;
And dearest to thy Closet: Let thy prayers
Assist my connsels.

Marc. To spare imprecations
Against my self; without you I am nothing.
Ex. Marc.
Sf. The Marquisse of Pescara; A great Soldier:
And though he served upon the adverse party,
Ever my constant friend.

Enter Francisco, Pescara.
Franc. Yonder he walks,
Full of sad thoughts.

Pesc. Blame him not good Francisco,
He has much cause to grieve: Would I might end so,
And not ad this, to fear.

Sf. My dear Pescara:
A miracle in these times, a friend and happy,
Cleaues to a falling fortune.

Pesc. If it were
As well in my weak power, in act to raise it,
As it is to bear a part of sorrow with you;
You then should have just cause to say, Pescara
Looked not upon your State, but on your Virtues,
When he made suit to be writ in the List
Of those you fauord. But my have forbids
All complement. Thus then, Sir, to the purpose.
The cause that vnattended brought me hither,
Was not to tell you of your loss, or danger;
For Fame has many Wings to bring ill tidings,
And I presume you have heard it: But to give you such,
Such friendly counsel, as perhaps may make
Your sad disaster, less.

Sf You are all goodness,
And I give up my selse to be disposed of,
As in your wisdom you think fit.

Pesc. Thus then, Sir.
To hope you can hold out against the Emperor,
Were flattery in your self, to your undoing;
Therefore, the safest course that you can take,
Is, to give up your self to his discretion,
Before you be compeld. For rest assured,
A voluntary yielding may find grace,
And will admit defense, at least excuse:
But should you linger doubtful, till his Powers
Have seas'd your Person, and Estates perforce,
You must expect extremes.

Sf. I understand you,
And I will put your counsel into act,
And speedily; I only will take order
For some Domestical affairs, that do
Concern me nearly, and with the next Sun
Ride with you; In the mean time, my best friend,
Pray take your rest.

Pesc. Indeed, I have trauaild hard,
And will embrace your counsel.
Ex. Pescara.
Sf. With all care,
Attend my Noble friend. Stay you, Francisco,
You see how things stand with me?

Franc. To my griese:
And if the loss of my poor life could be
A Sacrifise, to restore them, as they were,
I willingly would lay it down.

Sf. I think so:
For I have cuer found you true, and thankful,
Which makes me love the building I have raised,
In your advancement: And repent no grace,
I have conferd upon you: And belecue me,
Though now I should repeat my favors to you,
The Titles I have given you, and the means
Suitable to your Honors, that I thought you
Worthy my Sister, and my Family,
And in my Dukedom made you next my self:
It is not to vpbraid you: But to tell you
I find you are worthy of them in your love,
And service to me.

Franc. Sir, I am your Creature:
And any shape, that you would have me wear,
I gladly will put on.

Sf. Thus, then Francisco;
I now am to deliver to your trust,
A weighty secret: Of so strange a nature,
And 'twill I know appear so monstrous to you,
That you will tremble in the execution,
As much as I am tortured, to command it:
For it is a deed so horrid, that but to hear it,
Would strike into a Russian fleshed in murders,
Or an obdurate Hangman, soft compassion;
And yet Francisco (of all Men the dearest,
And from me most deserving) such my state,
And strange condition is, that thou alone,
Must know the fatal service, and perform it.

Franc. These preparations, Sir, to work a stranger,
Or to one, unacquainted with your bounties,
Might appear useful: But to me, they are
Needless impertinances: For, I dare doc,
What e're you dare command.

Sf. But thou must swear it,
And put into thy Oath, all joys, or torments
That fright the wicked, or confirm the good:
Not to conceal it only, that is nothing;
But whensoe're my will shall speak, strike now:
To fall upon it like Thunder.

Franc. Minister
The Oath, in any way, or form you please,
I stand resolved to take it.

Sf. Thou must do then,
What no maleuolent Star will dare to look on,
It is so wicked: For which, Men will curse thee,
For being the Instrument: And the blessed Angels,
Forsake me at my need, for being the Author:
For it is a deed of Night, of Night Francisco,
In which the memory of all good Actions,
We can pretend too, shall be buried quick;
Or if we be remembered, it shall be
To fright posterity, by our example:
That have out-gone all presidents of Villains,
That were before us: And such as succeed,
Though taught in hels black school, shall never com nere us.
Art thou not shaken yet?

Franc. I grant you move me:
But to a Man confirmed;

Sf. He try your temper:
What think you of my Wife?

Franc. As a thing Sacred:
To whose fair Name, and memory, I pay gladly
These signs of duty.

Sf. Is the not the abstract
Of all that is rare, or to be wished in Woman?

Franc. It were a kind of blasphemy to dispute it:
But to the purpose Sir.

Sf. Ad to her goodness,
Her tenderness of me, Her care to please me,
Her unsuspected chastity, nere equaled:
Her Innocence, her honor: O I am lost
In the Ocean of her virtues, and her graces,
When I think of them.

Fran. Now I find the end
Of all your coniurations: there is some service
To be done for this sweet Lady; If she have enemies
That she would have removed?

Sf. Alas Francisco,
Her greatest enemy is her greatest lover,
Yet in that hatred, her Idolater.
One smile of hers would make a savage tame;
One accent of that tongue would calm the Seas,
Though all the winds at once strove there for Empire.
Yet I, for whom she thinks all this too little,
Should I miscarry in this present journey,
(From whence it is all number to a cipher,
I never return with honor) by thy hand
Must have her murdered.

Fra. Murdered? She that loves so,
And so deserves to be beloved again?
And I, (who sometimes you were pleased to favor)
Picked out the instrument?

Sf. Do not fly off:
What is decreed, can never be recal'd;
It Is more than love to her, that marks her out,
A wished companion to me, in both fortunes:
And strong assurance of thy zealous faith,
That gives up to thy trust a secret, that
Racks should not have forced from me. O Francisco:
There is no heaven without her: nor a hell,
Where she recides. I ask from her but justice,
And what I would have paid to her: had sickness,
Or any other accident diuorc'd,
Her purer soul, from his unspotted body.
The slavish Indian Princes when they dye
Are cheerfully attended to the fire,
By the wife, and slave, that living they loved best,
To do them service in another world:
Nor will I be less honored, that love more.
And therefore trifle not, but in thy looks,
Express a ready purpose to perform,
What I command, or by Marcelias soul,
This is thy latest minute.

Fran. It Is not fear
Of death, but love to you, makes me embrace it;
But for mine own security when it is done,
What warrant have I? If you please to sign one,
I shall, though with unwillingness and horror,
Perform your dreadful charge.

Sf. I will Francisco;
But still remember, that a Princes secrets
Are balm, concealed: but poison, if discovered.
I may come back; then this is but a trial,
To purchase thee, if it were possible,
A nearer place in my affection; but
I know thee honest.

Fran. It Is a Character
I will not part with.

Sf. I may live to reward it.
Exe nt.
Actus Secun. Scae. Prima.
Tiberio, Stephano.
Ste. How? left the Court?

Tib. Without guard or retinue
Fitting a Prince.

Ste. No enemy near, to force him?
To leave his own strengths, yet deliver up
Himself, as 'twere in bonds to the discretion
Of him that hates him? It Is beyond example:
You never heard the motives that induc't him,
To this strange course?

Tib. No, those are Cabinet councels,
And not to be communicated, but
To such as are his own, and sure; Alas,
We fill up empty places, and in public,
Are taught to give our suffrages to that,
Which was before determined: And are safe so;
Signiour Francisco (upon whom alone
His absolute power is with alstrength conferred,
During his absence) can with ease resolve you.
To me, they are Riddles.

Steph. Well, he shall not be,
My Oedipus, I Will rather dwell in darkness.
But my good Lord Tiberio, This Francisco,
Is, on the sudden, stran ely raised.

Tib. O Sir,
He took the thryuing course: He had a Sister,
A fair one too; With whom (as it is rumor'd;
The Duke was too familiar; But she cast off,
(What promises socuer past between them)
Upon the sight of this, forsook the Court,
And since was never seen; To smother this,
(As Honors never fail to purchase silence)
Francisco first was graced, and step by step,
Is raised up to this height.

Steph. But how is his absence borne?

Tib. Sadly, it seems
By the Duchess: For since he left the Court,
For the most part, she has kept her private Chamber,
No visitants admitted; In the Church,
She has been seen to pay her pure devotions,
Seasoned with tears: And sure her sorrow's ttue,
Or deeply counterfeited; Pomp, and State,
And bravery cast off: And she that lately
Riuald Poppaea in her varied shapes,
Or the Egyptian Queen: Now, widow-like,
In Sable coluors (as, her Husbands dangers,
Strangled in her, the use of any pleasure)
Mournes for his absence.

Steph. It becomes her Virtue,
And does confirm, what was reported of her.

Tib. You take it right; But on the other side,
The darling of his Mother, Mariana,
As there were an Antipathy, between
Her, and the Duchess passions: And as
Sh'ad no dependence on her brothers fortune,
She never appeared so full of mirth.

Steph. It Is strange.
But see, her favorite: and accompanied,
To your report.
Ent. Graccho with fiddlers
Grac. You shall scrape, and I Will sing,
A scuruie Dittie, to a scuruie tune,
Repine who dares.

Fidl But if we should offend,
The Duchess having silenc't us: and these Lords,
Stand by to hear us.

Grac. They, in Name are Lords,
But I am one in Power: And for the Duchess,
But yester-day we were merry for her pleasure,
We now'l be for my Ladies.

Tib. Signiour Graccho.

Gr. A poor Man, Sir, a Servant to the Princes:
But you, great Lords, and Counselors of State,
Whom I stand bound to reverence.

Tib. Come, we know
You are a Man in grace.

Grac. Fie, no: I grant,
I bear my fortunes patiently: Serve the Princess,
And have success at all times to her closet,
Such is my impudence: when your grave Lordships
Are masters of the modesty, to attend
Three hours, nay sometimes four; and then bid wait
Upon her the next morning.

Ste. He derides us.

Tib. Pray you, what news is stirring? you know all.

Grac. Who, I? alas, I have no intelligence
At home, nor abroad: I only sometimes guess
The change of the times; I should ask of your Lordships
Who are to keep their Honors, who to loose 'em;
Who the Duchess smiled on last, or on whom frowned,
You only can resolve me: we poor waiters
Deal (as you see) in mirth, and foolish fyddles:
It is our element; and could you tell me,
What point of State it is, that I am commanded
To muster up this music: on mine honesty,
You should much befriend me.

Ste. Sir, you grow saucy.

Tib. And would be laid by the heels.

Grac. Not by your Lordships,
Without a special warrant; look to your own stakes;
Were I committed, here come those would bail me:
Perhaps we might change places too.
Ent. Isabella, Mariana.
Tib. The Princess;
We must be patient.

Ste. There Is no contending.

Tib. See, the informing rogue.

Ste. That we should stoop
To such a Mushrome.

Mari. Thou do mistake; they durst not
Use the least word of scorn, although prouok'd,
To any thing of mine. Go, get you home,
And (...), servants, friends, and flatterers, number
How many discents you are noble; Look to your wives too,
The smooth-chin'd Courtiers are abroad.
Ex. Tib. Steph.
Tib. No way, to be a Freeman?

Grac. Your Excellence, has the best gift to dispatch,
These Arras pictures of Nobility,
I ever read of.

Mari. I can speak sometimes.

Grac. And cover so your bitter Pills, with sweetness
Of Princely language to forbid reply,
They are greedily swallowed.

Isab. But, the purpose Daughter,
That brings us hither? Is it to bestow
A visit on this Woman? That, because
She only would be thought truly to grieve,
The absence, and the dangers of my Son,
Proclaims a general sadness?

Mari. If to vex her,
May be interpreted to do her Honor,
She shall have many of 'em? I Will make use
Of my short Reign: my Lord, now gouernes all:
And she shall know, that her Idolater,
My Brother, being not by, now to protect her,
I am her equal.

Grac. Of a little thing,
It is so full of Gall: A Devil of this size,
Should they run for a wager to be spiteful,
Gets not a Hors-head of her.

Mari. On her Birthday,
We were forced to be merry: and now she is musty
We must be sad, on pain of her displeasure;
We will, we will. This is her private Chamber,
Where like an Hypocrite, not a true Turtle,
She seems to mourn her absent Mate, her Servants
Attending her like Mutes: But I Will speak to her
And in a high Key too, play any thing
That Is light and loud enough but to torment her,
And we will have rare sport.
Song. Marcelia above in black.

Isab. She frowns, as if
Her looks could fright us.

Mari. May it please your greatness,
We heard that your late Physic has not worked,
And that breed, Melancholy, as your Doctor tells us:
To purge which, we that are born your Highness Vassals,
And are to play the fools to do you service,
Present you with a sit of mirth: what think you
Of a new Anticke?

Isab. I would show rare in Ladies.

Mari. Being inteaded for so sweet a creature,
Were she but pleased to grace it.

Isab. ^ye, she will,
Be it nere so mean: she is made of courtesy.

Mari. The Mistress of all hearts; one smile I pray you
On your poor servants, or a Fiddlers fee:
Coming from those fair hands, though but a Ducat,
We will inshrine it as a holy relic.

Isab. It Is, Wormwood, and it works.

Marc. If I lay by
My fears, and griefs (in which you should be sharers)
If doting age could let you but remember,
You have a son; or frontlesse impudence,
You are a sister; and in making answer,
To what was most unfit for you to speak,
Or me to hear: borrow of my just anger.

Isab. A set speech on my life.

Mari. Penned by her Chaplain.

Marce. Yes, it can speak, without instruction speak;
And tell your want of manners, that you are rude,
And sawcily rude, too.

Grac. Now the game begins.

Marce. You durst not else on any hire or hope,
(Remembering what I am, and whose I am)
Put on the desperate boldness, to disturb
The least of my retirements.

Mari. Note her now.

Marc. For both shall understand; though the one presume
Upon the privilege due to a Mother,
The Duke stands now on his own legs, and needs
No nurse to lead him.

Isab. How, a Nurse?

Marce. A dry one,
And vselesse too: But I am merciful,
And dotage signs your pardon.

Isab. I defy thee,
Thee, and thy pardons, proud one.

Marc. For you, Puppet.

Mari. What, of me? Pine Tree.

Marc. Little you are, I grant,
And have as little worth, but much less wit,
You durst not else, the Duke being wholly mine,
His power and honor mine, and the allegiance,
You owe him, as a Subject, due to me.

Mari. To you?

Marc. To me: And therefore as a Vassal,
From this hour learn to serve me, or, you will feel,
I must make use of my authority,
And as a Princess punish it.

Isab. A Princess?

Mari. I had rather be a Slave unto a Moore,
Than know thee for my equal.

Isab. Scornful thing,
Proud of a white Face.

Mari. Let her but remember
The Issue in her Leg:

Isab. The charge, she puts
The State too, for Perfumes.

Mari. And, howsoever,
She seems, when she is made up: As she is her self,
She stinkes above ground. O that I could reach you,
The little one you scorn so, with her nails,
Would tear your painted Face, and scratch those Eyes out.
Do but come down.

Marc. Were there no other way,
But leaping on thy Neck, to break mine own,
Rather than be outbrau'd thus.

Grac. Forty Dacats
Upon the little Hen: She Is of the kind,
And will not leave the Pit.

Mari. That it were lawful
To me te her with a Poniard, and a Pistol;
But these weak hands shall show my spleen
Ent. Marc. below
Marc. Where are you? You Modicum, you Dwarf.
Ent. Francisco. Tib. Steph.
Mari. Here, Giantesse, here.

Franc. A tumult in the Court?

Mari. Let her come on.

Franc. What wind has raised this tempest?
Seuer'em, I command you. What Is the cause?
Speak Martana.

Mari. I am out of breath;
But we shall meet, we shall. And do you hear, Sir,
Or right me on this Monster (she is three foot
Too high for a Woman) or never look to have,
A quiet hour with me.

Isab. If my Son were here,
And would endure this; May a Mothers curse
Pursue, and overtake him.

Franc. O forbear,
In me he is present, both in power, and will;
And Madam, I much grieve, that in his absence,
There should arise the least distaste to move you:
It being his principal, nay only charge,
To have you in his absence served, and honored,
As when himself performed the willing Office.

Mari. This is fine, in faith.

Grac. I would I were well off.

Franc. And therefore, I beseech you Madam, frown not
(Till most unwittingly he has deserved it)
On your poor Servant; To your Excellence,
I ever was, and will be such: And lay,
The Dukes authority, trusted to me,
With willingness at your feet.

Mari. O base.

Isab. We are like
To have an equal Judge.

Franc. But should I sinde
That you are touc'd in any point of Honor,
Or that the least neglect is fallen upon you,
I then stand up a Prince.

Fidl. Without reward,
Pray you dismiss us.

Grac. Would I were five Leagues hence.

Franc. I will be partial to none, not to my self,
Be you but pleased to show me my offense,
Or if you hold me in your good opinion,
Name those that have offended you.

Isab. I am one,
And I will justify it.

Mari. Thou art a base Fellow,
To take her part.

Franc. Remember, she is the Duchess.

Marc. But used with more contempt, than if I were
A Peasants Daughter: Bayted, and hooted at
Like to a common Strumpet: With loud noyses,
Fore'd from my prayers: And my private Chamber
(Which with all willingness I would make my Prison
During the absence of my Lord) denied me.
But if he e're return.

Franc. Were you an Actor,
In this lewd Comedy?

Mari. I marry was I,
And will be one again.

Isab. I Will join with her,
Though you repine at it.

Franc. Think not then, I speak
(For I stand bound to honor, and to serve you).
But that the Duke, that lives in this great Lady,
For the contempt of him, in her, commands you
To be close Prisoners.

Isab. and Mari. Prisoners?

Franc. Bear them hence.
This is your charge my Lord Tiberio.
And Stephano, this is yours.

Marce. I am not cruel,
But pleased they may have liberty.

Isab. Pleased, with a mischief.

Mari. I Will rather live in any loathsome Dungeon,
Than in a Paradise, at her entreaty:
And, for you vpstart.

Steph. There is no contending.

Tib. What shall become of these?

Franc. See them well whipped,
As you will answer it.

Tib. Now Signiour Graccho,
What think you of your greatness?

Grac. I preach patience,
And must endure my fortune.
Exe. omnes, preter. Fra. and Marcel.
Fidl. I was never yet
At such a hunts-vp, nor was so rewarded.

Fr. Let them first know themselves, and how you are
To be served, and honored: Which, when they confess,
You may again receive them to your favor:
And then it will show nobly.

Marce. With my thanks,
The Duke shall pay you his, If he return
To bless us with his presence.

Franc. There is nothing
That can be added to your fair acceptance:
That is the prize, indeed: All else, are blankes,
And of no value. As in virtuous actions,
The undertaker finds a full reward,
Although conferred upon unthankful Men;
So, any service done to so much sweetness,
(Howeuer dangerous, and subject to
An ill construction) in your favor finds
A wished, and glorious end.

Marce. From you, I take this
As loyal duty, but in any other,
It would appear gross flattery.

Franc. Flattery, Madam?
You are so rare, and excellent in all rhings,
And raised so high upon a Rock of goodness,
As that vice cannot reach you: who, but looks on
This Temple built by Nature to Perfection,
But must bow to it: and out of that zeal,
Not only learn to adore it, but to love it.

Marce. Whither will this fellow?

Franc. Pardon therefore Madam,
If an excess in me of humble duty,
Teach me to hope (and though it be not in
The power of Man to merit such a blessing)
My piety (for it is more than love)
May find reward.

Marce. You have it in my thanks:
And on my hand, I am pleased, that you shall take
A full possession of it. But take heed,
That you fix here, and feed no hope beyond it;
If you do, 'twill prove fatal.

Franc. Be it death,
And death with torments, Tyrants never found out:
Yet I must say I love you.

Marce. As a Subject,
And 'twill become you.

Franc. Farewell circumstance:
And since you are not pleased to understand me,
But by a plain, and usual form of speech:
All superstitious reverence laid by,
I love you as a Man, and as a Man
I would enjoy you. Why do you start, and fly me?
I am no Monster, and you but a Woman:
A Woman made to yield, and by example
Told it is lawful; Favors of this nature,
Are, in our age, no miracles in the greatest:
And therefore Lady --

Marce. Keep of. O you Powers!
Libidinous Beast, and ad to that unthankful
(A crime, which Creatures wanting reason, fly from)
Are all the Princely bounties, favors, honors,
Which (with some prejudice to his own wisdom)
Thy Lord, and Rayser has conferred upon thee,
In three days absence buried? Has he made thee
(A thing obscure, almost without a name)
The envy of great Fortunes? Have I graced thee,
Beyond thy rank? And entertained thee, as
A Friend, and not a Servant? And is this,
This impudent attempt to taint mine Honor,
The fair return of both our ventured favors?

Franc. Hear my excuse.

Marce. The Devil may plead mercy,
And with as much assurance, as thou yield one.
Burns Lust so hot in thee? Or, is thy pride
Grown up to such a height, that, but a Princess,
No Woman can content thee? And ad to that,
His Wife, and Princess, to whom thou art ti'de
In all the bonds of Duty? Read my life,
And find one act of mine so loosely carried,
That could inuit a most selfe-louing-Foole,
Set of, with all that fortune could throw on him,
To the least hope to find way to my favor:
And (what is the worst mine enemies could wish me)
I Will be thy Strumpet.

Franc. It Is acknowledged Madam,
That your whole course of life has been a pattern
For chaste, and virtuous Women; In your beauty
(Which I first saw, and loved) as a fair Cristall,
I read your heavenly mind, clear and untainted;
And while the Duke did prize you to your value
(Could it have been in Man to pay that duty)
I well might envy him, but durst not hope
To stop you, in your full carreer of goodness:
But now I find, that he is fallen from his fortune,
And (howsoever he would appear doting)
Grown cold in his affection: I presume,
From his most barbarous neglect of you,
To offer my true service: Nor stand I bound,
To look back on the courtesies of him,
That, of all living Men, is most unthankful,

Marce. Unheard Of impudence!

Franc. You Will say I am modest,
When I have told the Story. Can he tax me
(That have received some worldly trifles from him)
For being ungrateful? When, he that first tasted,
And has so long enjoyed your sweet embraces
(In which, all blessings that our frail condition
Is capable of, is wholly comprehended)
As cloyed with happiness, contemnes the giver
Of his felicity? And, as he reached not,
The master-peice of mischief, which he aims at,
Unless he pay those favors he stands bound to,
With fell and deadly hate? You think he loves you,
With unexampled feruor: Nay, dotes on you,
As there were something in you more than Woman:
When on my knowledge, he long since has wished,
You were among the dead: And I, you scorn so,
Perhaps, am your preserver.

Marce. Bless me good Angels,
Or I am blasted. Lies so false, and wicked,
And fashioned to so damnable a purpose,
Cannot be spoken by a humane tongue.
My Husband, hate me? Give thy self the Lie,
False, and accursed; Thy Soul (if thou have any)
Can witness, never Lady stood so bound,
To the unfeigned affection of her Lord,
As I do, to my Sforza. If thou would work
Upon my weak credulity, Tell me rather,
That the Earth moves; The Sun, and Stars, stand still;
The Ocean keeps nor Floods, nor Ebbes; Or that,
There Is peace between the Lion, and the Lamb;
Or that, the ravenous Eagle, and the Dove,
Keep in one Ayery, and bring up their young:
Or any thing that is auerse to Nature:
And I will sooner credit it, than that
My Lord can think of me, but as a Jewel,
He loves more than himself, and all the World.

Franc. O Innocence, abused! Simplicity cousen'd!
It were a sin, for which we have no name,
To keep you longer in this wilful error.
Read his affection here; And then observe
How dear he holds you; It Is his Character,
Which cunning yet, could never counterfeit.

Marce. It Is his hand, I am resolved often.
I Will try what the Inscription is.

Fran. Pray you do so.

Marc. You know my pleasure, and the hour of Marcelias death, which fail not
to execute, as you will answer the contrary, not with your Head alone, but
with the ruin of your whole Famely. And this written with mine own Hand, and
Signed with my privy Signet, shall be your sufficient Warrant. Ludouico Sforza.

I do obey it, every word's a Poynard,
And reaches to my Heart.
She swones.

Fran. What have I done?
Madam, for Heavens sake, Madam. O my Fate!
I Will bend her body: This is yet some pleasure,
I Will kiss her into a new life. Dear Lady:
She stirs: For the Dukes sake for Sforza's sake.

Marc. Sforzas? Stand off: Though dead, I will be his,
And even my Ashes shall abhor the touch
Of any other. O unkind, and cruel.
Learn Women, learn to trust in one another;
There is no faith in Man: Sforza is false,
False to Marcelia.

Franc. But I am true,
And live to make you happy. All the Pomp,
State, and observance you had being his,
Compared to what you shall enjoy when mine,
Shall be no more remembered. Loose his memory,
And look with cheerful beams on your new Creature
And know what he has plotted for you good,
Fate cannot alter. If the Emperor,
Take not his life, at his return he dies,
And by my Hand: My Wife, that is his Heir,
Shall quickly follow; Then we Reign alone,
For with this Arm I Will swim through Seas of blood,
Or make a Bridge, arched with the bones of Men,
But I will graspe my aims in you my dearest,
Dearest, and best of Women.

Marc. Thou art a Villain?
All attributes of Arch-Villaines made into one,
Cannot express thee. I prefer the hate
Of Sforza, though it mark me for the Grave,
Before thy base affection. I am yet
Pure, and unspotted, in my true love to him;
Nor shall it be corrupted, though he is tainted;
Nor will I part with Innocence, because
He is found guilty. For thy self, thou art
A thing, that equal with the Devil himself,
I do detest, and scorn.

Franc. Thou then art nothing:
Thy life is in my power, disdainefull Woman:
Think on it, and tremble.

Marc. No, though thou were now
To play thy hangmans part. Thou well may be
My Executioner, and art only fit
For such employment; But never hope to have,
The least grace from me. I will never see thee,
But as the shame of Men: So, with my curses
Of horror to thy Conscience in this life;
And pains in Hell hereafter: I spit at thee,
And making have to make my peace with heaven,
Expect thee as my Hangman.
Ex. Marc.
Franc. I am lost,
In the discovery of this fatal secret.
Cursed hope that flattered me, that wrongs could make her
A stranger to her goodness; All my plots
Turn back upon mv self; But I am in,
And must go on: And since I have put off
From the Shore of Innocence, guilt be now my Pilot.
Revenge first wrought me, Murther's his Twin-brother,
One deadly sin then help to cure another.

Actus Terc. Scae. Prima.
Enter Medina, Hernando, Alphonso.
Med. The spoil, the spoil, it is that the soldior fights for;
Our victory as yet affords us nothing,
But wounds, and empty honor. We have past
The hazard of a dreadful day, and forced
A passage with our Swords, through all the dangers,
That Page like wait on the success of war;
And now expect reward.

Hern. Hell put it in
The Enemies mind to be desperate, and hold out:
Yeeldings, and compositions will undo us;
And what is that way given, for the most part,
Comes to the Emperors Coffers, to defray
The charge of the great action (as it is rumor'd)
When usually, some Thing in Grace (that never heard
The Canons roaring tongue, but at a Triumph)
Puts in, and for his intercession shares,
All that we fought for: The poor Soldior left
To starve, or fill up Hospitalls.

Alph. But when
We enter Towns by force, and carue our selves,
Pleasure with pillage, and the richest Wines,
Open our shrunke-vp veins, and pour into 'em
New blood, and feruor.

Med. I long to be at it;
To see these Chuffes, that every day may spend
A Soldiors entertainment for a year,
Yet make a third meal of a bunch of Raysons;
These Spunges, that suck up a Kingdoms sat
(Batning like Scarabes in the nung of Peace)
To be squees'd out by the rough hand of war;
And all that their whole lives have heaped together,
By cous'nage, perjury, or sordid thrift,
With one gripe to be rauishd.

Her. I would be towsing
Their saire Madona's, that in little Dogs,
Monkeis, and Paraquito's consume thousands;
Yet for the advancement of a noble action,
Repine to part with a poor Piece of Eight:
Wars plagues vpon'em: I have seene'em stop
Their scornful noses first, then seem to swone
At sight of a buffe Ierkin; if it were not
Perfumed, and hid with Gold; Yet these nice wantons,
(Spurd on by Lust, covered in some disguise,
To meet some rough Court Stalion, and be leaped)
Durst enter into any common Brothell,
Though all varieties of stink contend there;
Yet praise the entertainment.

Med. I may live,
To see the tatteredst Raskals of my troop,
Drag'em out of their Closets, with a vengeance:
When neither threatening, flattering, kneeling, howling,
Can ransom one poor Jewel, or redeem
Themselves, from their blunt woing.

Her. My maine hope is,
To begin the sport at Millaine: There Is enough,
And of all kinds of pleasure we can wish for,
To satisfy the most covetous.

Alph. Every day
We look for a remove.

Med. For Lodowick Sforza
The Duke of Millaine, I, on mine own knowledge,
Can say thus much; He is too much a Soldior,
Too confident of his own worth, too rich to;
And understands too well, the Emperor hates him,
To hope for composition.

Alph. On my life,
We need not feere his coming in.

Her. On mine,
I do not wish it: I had rather that
To show his valor, he would put us to the trouble
To fetch him in by the Ears.

Med. The Emperor.

Enter Charles the Emperor, Pescara, etc. Attendants.
Charl. You make me wonder (Nay it is no council, You may partake it
Gentlemen) who would have thought,
That he that scorned our proffered amity,
When he was sued to; should, ere he be summond,
(Whither persuaded to it by base fear,
Or flattered by false hope, which, it is uncertain)
First kneel for mercy?

Med. When your Majesty,
Shall please to instruct us, who it is, we may
Admire it with you.

Charl. Who, but the Duke of Millaine,
The right Hand of the French: Of all that stand
In our displeasure, whom necessity
Compels to seek our favor, I would have sworn
Sforza had been the last.

Her. And should be writ so,
In the list of those you pardon. Would his City
Had rather held us out a Seidge like Troy,
Then by a fein'd submission, he should cheat you
Of a just revenge: Or us, of those fair glories
We have sweat blood to purchase.

Med. With your honor
You cannot hear him.

Alph. The sack alone of Millaine
Will pay the Army.

Charl. I am not so weak,
To be wrought on as you fear; Nor ignorant,
That Money is the sinew of the War;
And what terms soever he seek peace,
It Is in our power to grant it, or deny it.
Yet for our glory, and to show him that
We have brought him on his knees; It is resolved
To hear him as a Supplyant. Bring him in;
But let him see the effects of our just anger,
In the Guard that you make for him.
Ex. Piscara
Hern. I am now
Familiar with the issue (all plagues on it)
He will appear in some dejected habit,
His countenance suitable; And for his order,
A Rope about his neck; Then kneel, and tell
Old Stories, what a worthy thing it is
To have power, and not to use it; Then ad to that
A Tale of King Tigranes, and great Pompey,
Who said (forsooth, and wisely) 'Twas more honor
To make a King, then kill one: Which, applied
To the Emperor, and himself, a Pardons granted
To him, an Enemy; and we his Servants,
Condemned to beggerie.
En. Sforza
Med. Yonder he corns,
But not as you expected.

Alph. He looks, as if
He would outface his dangers.

Hern. I am cousen'd:
A suitor in the Devils name.

Med. Hear him speak.

Sf. I come not (Emperor) to invade thy mercy,
By fawning on thy fortune; Nor bring with me
Excuses, or denials. I prosesse
(And with a good Man's confidence, even this instant,
That I am in thy power) I was thine enemy;
Thy deadly and vowed enemy; One that wished
Confusion to thy Person and Estates;
And with my utmost powers, and deepest counsels
(Had they been truly followed) furthered it:
Nor will I now, although my neck were under
The Hang man's Axe, with one poor syllable
Confess, but that I honored the French King,
More then thy self, and all Men.

Med. By Saint Jacques,
This is no flattery.

Her. There is Fire, and Spirit in it;
But not long lived, I hope.

Sf. Now give me leave,
(My hate against thy self, and love to him
Freely acknowledged) to give up the reasons
That made me so affected. In my wants
I ever found him faithful; Had supplies
Of Men and Moneys from him; And my hopes
Quite sunk, were by his Grace, bouy'd up again:
He was indeed to me, as my good Angel,
To guard me from all dangers. I dare speak
(Nay must and will) his praise now, in as high
And loud a key, as when he was thy equal.
The benefits he sowed in me, met not
Unthankful ground, but yielded him his own
With fair increase, and I still glory in it.
And though my fortunes (poor, compared to his,
And Millaine waigh'd with France, appear as nothing)
Are in thy fury burnt: Let it be mentioned,
They served but as small Tapers to attend
The solemn flame at this great Funeral:
And with them I will gladly wast my self,
Rather then undergo the imputation,
Of being base or unthankful.

Alph. Nobly spoken.

Her. I do begin, I know not why, to hate him
Less then I did.

Sf. If that then to be grateful
For courtesies received; Or not to leave
A friend in his necessities, be a crime
Amongst you Spaniards (which other Nations
That like your aimed at Empire, loved, and cherished
Where e're they found it) Sforza brings his Head
To pay the forfeit; Nor come I as a Slave,
Piniond and setterd, in a squallid weed,
Falling before thy Feet, kneeling and howling,
For a forestal'd remission; That were poor,
And would but shame thy victory: For conquest
Over base foes, is a captivity,
And not a triumph. I never feared to dye,
More then I wished to live. When I had reached
My ends in being a Duke, I wore these Robes,
This Crown upon my Head, and to my side
This Sword was girt; And witness truth, that now
It Is in another power when I shall part
With them and life together, I am the same,
My Veins then did not swell with pride; nor now,
They shrink for fear: Know Sir, that Sforza stands
Prepared for either fortune.

Her. As I live,
I do begin strangely to love this fellow;
And could part with three quarters of my share
In the promised spoil, to save him.

Sf. But if example
Of my fidelity to the French (whose honors,
Titles, and glories, are now mixed with yours;
As Brooks deuowr'd by Rivers, loose their names)
Has power to inuit you to make him a friend,
That has given evident proof, he knows to love,
And to be thankful; This my Crown, now yours,
You may restore me: And in me instruct
These brave Commanders (should your fortune change,
Which now I wish not) what they may expect,
From noble enemies for being faithful.
The charges of the war I will defray,
And what you may (not without hazard) force,
Bring freely to you: I Will prevent the cries
Of murdered Infants, and of ravished Mayds,
Which in a City sacked call on Heavens justice,
And stop the course of glorious victories.
And when I know the Captains and the Soldiors,
That have in the late battle, done best service,
And are to be rewarded; I, my self
(According to their quallitie and merrits)
Will see them largely recompensed. I have said,
And now expect my sentence.

Alph. By this light,
It Is a brave Gentleman.

Med. How like a block
The Emperor sits?

Her. He has delivered reasons,
Especially in his purpose to enrich
Such as fought bravely (I my self am one,
I care not who knows it) as, I wonder, that
He can be so stupid. Now he begins to stir,
Mercy an't be thy will.

Charl. Thou have so far
Outgone my expectation, noble Sforza
(For such I hold thee) And true constancy,
Raised on a brave foundation, bears such palm,
And privilege with it; That where we behold it,
Though in an enemy, it does command us
To love and honor it. By my future hopes,
I am glad, for thy sake, that in seeking favor,
Thou did not borrow of vice her indirect,
Crooked, and abject means: And for mine own,
(That since my purposes must now be changed
Touching thy life and fortunes) the world cannot
Tax me of leuitie, in my settled councels;
I being neither wrought by tempting bribes,
Nor servile flattery; but forced unto it,
By a fair war of virtue.

Hern. This founds well.

Charl. All former passages of hate be buried;
For thus with open arms I meet thy love,
And as a friend embrace it: And so far
I am from robbing thee of the least honor,
That with my hands, to make it sit the faster,
I set thy Crown once more upon thy head:
And do not only style thee, Duke of Millaine,
But vow to keep thee so: Yet not to take
From others to give only to my self,
I will not hinder your magnificence
To my Commanders, neither will I urge it,
But in that, as in all things else I leave you
To be your own disposer
Flourish. Ex. Chart.
Sf. May I live
To seal my loyalty, though with loss of life
In some brave service worthy Caesar's fouor,
And I shall dye most happy. Gentlemen,
Receive me to your loves, and if henceforth
There can arise a difference between us,
It shall be in a Noble emulation.
Who has the fairest Sword, or dare go farthest,
To sight for Charles the Emperor?

Hern. We embrace you,
As one well read in all the points of honor,
And there we are your Scholars.

Sf. True, but such
As far outstrip the Master; we will contend
In love hereafter, in the mean time pray you,
Let me discharge my debt, and as in earnest
Of what is to corn, divide this Cabnet:
In the small body of it there are Jewels,
Will yield a hundred thousand Pistolets,
Which honor me to receive.

Med. You bind us to you.

Sf. And when great Charles comands me to his presence,
If you will please to excuse my abrupt departure,
Designs that most concern me next this mercy,
Calling me home, I shall hereafter meet you,
And gratify the favor.

Her. In this and all things, we are your Servants.

Sf. A name I ever owe you.
Ex. Med. Her. Alph.
Pesc. So Sir, this tempest is well ouerblowne,
And all things fall out to our wishes. But
In my opinion, this quick return,
Before you have made a party in the Court
Among the great ones (for these needy Captains
Have little power in peace) may beget danger,
At least suspicion.

Sf. Where true honor lives,
Doubt has no being, I desire no pawn
Beyond an Emperors word for my assurance:
Besides, Pescara, to thy self of all men
I will confess my weakness, though my State
And Crown's restored me, though I am in grace
And that a little stay might be a step
To greater honors, I must hence. Alas,
I live not here, my wife, my wife Pescara,
Being absent I am dead. Prithee excuse,
And do not chide for freindship sake my fondnes
But ride along with me, I Will give you reasons,
And strong ones, to plead for me.

Pesc. Use your own pleasure,
I Will bear you company.

Sf. Farewell grief, I am stored with
Two blessings most desired in human life,
A constant friend, an unsuspected wife.

Actus Ter. Scae. Secunda.
Enter Graccho, Officer.
Offic. What I did, I had warrant for; you have tasted
My Office gently, and for those soft strokes,
Flea bitings to the Ierks I could have lent you,
There does belong a feeling.

Grac. Must I pay
For being tormented and dishonored?

Off. Fie no,
Your honors not empar'd in it: What Is the letting out
Of a little corrupt blood, and the next way too?
There is no Surgeon like me to take off
A Courtiers Itch that is rampant at great Ladies,
Or turns knave for preferment, or grows proud
Of their rich Clokes, and Suits, though got by brokage,
And so forgets his betters.

Grac. Very good Sir,
But am I the first man of quality,
That e're came under your fingers?

Off. Not by a thousand,
And they have said I have a luckie hand to,
Both men and women of all sorts have bowed
Under this scepter. I have had a fellow
That could indite forsooth, and make fine meeters
To tinckle in the ears of ignorant Madams,
That for defaming of great Men, was sent me
Thredbare and lousy, and in three days after
Discharged by another that set him on, I have seen him
Cap a pe gallant, and his stripes washed of
With oil of Angels.

Grac. I was a foueraigne cure,

Off. There was a Secretary to, that would not be
Conformable to the Orders of the Church,
Nor yield to any argument or reason,
But still rail at authority, brought to me.
When I had worm'd his tongue, and trussed his hanches,
Grew a fine Pulpet man, and was beneficed.
Had he not cause to thank me?

Grac. There was physic
Was to the purpose.

Off. Now for women,
For your more consolation, I could tell you
Twenty fine stories, but I Will end in one,
And it is the last that is memorable.

Grac. Prithee do,
For I grow weary of thee.

Off. There was lately
A fine she waiter in the Court, that doted
Extremely of a Gentleman, that had
His maine dependence on a Signiors favor
(I will not name) but could not compass him
On any terms. This wanton at dead midnight
Was found at the exercise behind the Arras
With the 'foresaid Signior; he got clear off,
But she was seized on, and to save his honor,
Endured the lash; And though I made her often
Curuet and caper, she would never tell,
Who played at push-pin with her.

Grac. But what followed?
Prithee be brief.

Off. Why this Sir, she delivered,
Had store of Crowns assigned her by her patron,
Who forced the Gentleman to save her credit,
To marie her, and say he was the party
Found in Lobs pound. So, she that before gladly
Would have been his whore, reigns over him as his wife,
Nor dares he grumble at it. Speak but truth then,
Is not my Office luckie?

Grac. Go, there is for thee,
But what will be my fortune?

Off. If you thrive not
After that soft correction, come again.

Grac. I thank you knave.

Off. And then knave, I will fit you.
Ex. Officer.
Grac. Whipped like a rogue? no lighter punishment strive
To balance with a little mirth: It Is well,
My credit sunk for ever, I am now
Fit company, only for Pages and for foot boys,
That have perused the Porters Lodge.
Enter two Gentlemen
1. Gentlem. See Iulio,
Yonder the proud slave is, how he looks now
After his castigation?

2. Gentlem. As he came
From a close sight at Sea under the Hatches,
With a she Dunckerke, that was shot before
Between wind and weather,
And he has sprung a leake too, or I Am cousen'd.

1. Gentlem. Lets be merry with him.

Grac. How they stare at me? am I turned to an Owl?
The wonder Gentlemen?

2. Gentlem. I read this morning
Strange stories of the passive fortitude
Of men in former ages, which I thought
Impossible, and not to be believed.
But now I look on you, my wonder ceases.

Grac. The reason Sir?

2. Gentlem. Why Sir you have been whipped
Whipped signior Graccho. And the whip I take it,
Is to a Gentleman, the greatest trial
That may be of his patience.

Grac. Sir, I Will call you
To a strickt account for this.

2. Gentlem. I Will not deal with you,
Unless I have a Beadle for my second.
And then I Will answer you.

1. Gentlem. Farewell poor Graccho.
Ex. Gentlem.
Grac. Better and better still, If ever wrongs
Could teach a wretch to find the way to vengence,
Hell now inspire me. How, the Lord Protector!
My Judge I thank him. Whether thus in private,
I will not see him.
Enter Franc. and Servant
Franc. If I am sought for,
Say I am indisposed, and will not hear,
Or suits, or suitors.

Seru. But Sir, if the Princes
Enquire, what shall I answer?

Franc. Say, I am rid
Abroad to take the air, but by no means
Let her know I am in Court.

Seru. So I shall tell her.
Ex. servant Ent. a Gentlewoman
Franc. Within there, Ladies.

Gentlew. My good Lord, your pleasure?

Franc. Prithee let me beg thy favor for access
To the Duchess.

Gentlew. In good sooth my Lord I dare not,
She Is very private.

Franc. Come there is gold to buy thee
A new gown, and a rich one.
This will tempt me,

Gentlew. I once swore
If e're I lost my maidenhead, it should be
With a great Lord as you are, and I know not how,
I feel a yielding inclination in me,
If you have appitite.

Franc. Pox on thy maidenhead,
Where is thy Lady?

Gentlew. If you venture on her,
She Is walking in the Gallerie, perhaps
You will find her less tractable.

Franc. Bring me to her.

Gentlew. I fear you will have cold entertainment, when
You are at your iourneys end, and 'twere discretion
To take a snatch by the way.

Franc. Prithee leave fooling,
My page waits in the lobbie, give him sweet meats,
He is trayn'd up for his Masters ease,
And he will cool thee.
Ex. Franc. and Gentlew.
Grac. A brave discovery beyond my hope,
A plot even offered to my hand to work on,
If I am dull now, may I live and dye
The scorn of worms and slaves, let me consider,
My Lady and her Mother first committed
In the favor of the Duchess, and I whipped,
That with an Iron pen is writ in brass
On my tough heart, now grown a harder metal,
And all his bribed approches to the Duchess
To be concealed, good, good, This to my Lady,
Delivered as I Will order it, runs her mad.
But this may prove but courtship, let it be
I care not so it feed her Jealousy.
Ex.
Actus Ter. Scae. Ter.
Enter Marcelia, Francisco.
Marc. Believe thy tears or oaths? Can it be hoped,
After a practice so abhorred and horred,
Repentance e're can find thee?

Franc. Dear Lady,
Great in your fortune, greater in your goodness,
Make a superlatiue of excellence,
In being greatest in your saving mercy.
I do confess, humbly confess my fault,
To be beyond all pity; my attempt,
So barberously rude, that it would turn
A saint-like patience, into savage fury:
But you that are all innocence and virtue,
No spleen or anger in you of a woman,
But when a holy zeal to piety fires you,
May, if you please, impute the fault to love,
Or call it beastly lust, for it is no better
A sin, a monstrous sin, yet with it, many
That did prove good men after, have bin tempted,
And though I am crooked now, it is in your power
To make me straight again.

Marc. Is It possible
This can be cunning?

Franc. But if no submission,
Nor prayers can appease you, that you may know,
It Is not the fear of death that makes me sue thus,
But a loathed detestation of my madness,
Which makes me wish to live to have your pardon.
I will not wait the sentence of the Duke
(Since his return is doubtful) but I my self
Will do a fearful justice on my self,
No witness by but you, there being no more
When I offended: yet before I do it,
For I perceive in you no signs of mercy,
I will disclose a secret, which dying with me,
May prove your ruin.

Marc. Speak it, it will take from
The burden of thy conscience.

Franc. Thus then Madam,
The warrant by my Lord signed for your death,
Was but conditional, but you must swear
By your unspotted truth, not to reveal it,
Or I end here abruptly.

Marc. By my hopes
Of joys hereafter, on.

Franc. Nor was it hate
That forced him to it, but excess of love,
And if I e're return, so said great Sforza,
No living man deserving to enjoy
My best Marcelia. With the first news
That I am dead, for no man after me
Might e're enjoy her, but till certain proof
Assure thee I am lost (these were his words)
Fail not to kill her
Observe and honor her as if the seal
Of woman's goodness only dwelt in hers.
This trust I have abused and basely wronged,
And if the excelling pity of your mind
Cannot forgive it, as I dare not hope it,
Rather then look on my offended Lord,
I stand resolved to punish it.

Marc. Hold, it is forgiven,
And by me freely pardned. In thy fair life.
Hereafter study to deserve this bounty
With thy true penitence (such I believe it)
Against my resolution has forced from me,
But that my Lord, my Sforza should esteem,
My life fit only as a page, to wait on
The various course of his uncertain fortunes,
Or cherish in himself that sensual hope
In death to know me as a wife, afflicts me,
Nor does his envy less deserve my anger,
Which though such is my love, I would not nourish,
Will stick the ardor that I had to see him
Return in safety

Franc. But if your entertainment
Should give the least ground to his jealousy,
To raise up an opinion I am false,
You then distroy your mercy. Therefore Madam
(Though I shall ever look on you as on
My lives preserver, and the miracle
Of human pity) would you but vouchsafe,
In company to do me those fair graces
And favors which your innocence and honor
May safely warrant, it would to the Duke
(I being to your best self alone known guilty)
Make me appear most innocent.

Marc. Have your wishes,
And some thing I may do to try his temper,
At least to make him know a constant wife,
Is not so slau'd to her husbands doting humors,
But that she may deserve to live a widow,
Her fate appointing it.

Franc. It is enough,
Shout, and Floursh
Nay all I could desire, and will make way
To my revenge, which shall disperse it self
On him, on her, and all.

Marc. What shout is that?
Ent. Tiberio Stephano
Tib. All happiness to the Duchess, that may flow
From the Dukes new and wished return.

Marc. He Is welcome.

Steph. How coldly she receives it.

Tib. Observe their encounter.
Flourish.

Ent. Sforza, Pescaria, Isabella, Mariana, Graccho and the rest.
Mar. What you have told me Graccho is believed,
And I Will find time to stur in it.

Grac. As you see cause,
I will not do ill offices.

Sf. I have stood
Silent thus long Marcelia, expecting
When with more then a greedy have thou would
Have flowne into my arms, and on my lips
Have printed a deep welcome. My desire
To glaze my self in these fair eyes, have borne me
With more then human speed. Nor durst I stay
In any Temple, or to any saint
To pay my vows and thanks for my return,
Till I had seen thee.

Marc. Sir, I am most happy
To look upon you safe, and would express
My love and duty in a modest fashion,
Such as might suit with the behauior
Of one that knows her self a wife, and how
To temper her desires, not like a wanton
Fierd with hot appetite, nor can it wrong me
To love discreetly.

Sf. How, why can there be
A mean in your affections to Sforza?
Or any act though near so loose that may
Inuit or heighten appetite, appear
Immodest or uncomely. Do not move me,
My passions to you are in extremes,
And know no bounds, come kiss me.

Marc. I obey you.

Sf. By all the joys of love, she does salute me
As if I were her grandfather. What witch,
With cursed spells has quenched the amorous heat
That lived upon these lips? Tell me Marcellia,
And truly tell me, is it a fault of mine
That has begot this coldness, or neglect
Of others in my absence?

Marc. Neither Sir,
I stand indebted to your substitute,
Noble and good Francisco for his care,
And fair observance of me: There was nothing
With which you being present could supply me,
That I dare say I wanted.

Sf. How!

Marc. The pleasures
That sacred Hymen warrants us excepted,
Of which in troth you are too great a doter,
And there is more of beast in it then man.
Let us love temperatly, things violent last not,
And too much dotage rather argues folly
Then true affection.

Grac. Observe but this,
And how she praised my Lords care and observance,
And then judge Madam if my intelligence
Have any ground of truth.

Mari. No more, I mark it.

Steph. How the Duke stands?

Tib. As he were routed there,
And had no motion.

Pesc. My Lord, from whence
Grows this amazement?

Sf. It is more dear my friend,
For I am doubtful whether I have a being,
But certain that my life's a burden to me,
Take me bake good Pescara, show me to Caesar,
In all his rage and fury I discliame
His mercy, to live now which is his guist,
Is worse then death, and with all studied torments.
Marcellia is unkind, nay worse, grown cold
In her affection, my excess of feruor,
Which it was never equaled, grown distasteful.
But have thy wishes woman, thou shall know
That I can be my self, and thus shake off
The setters of fond dotage. From my sight
Without reply, for I am apt to do
Something I may repent. O, who would place
His happiness in most accursed woman,
In whom obsequiousness ingenders pride,
And harshnesse deadly. From this hour
I Will labor to forget there are such creatures;
True friends be now my mistrisses. Clear your brows,
And though my heart strings crack for it, I will be
To all, a free example of delight:
We will have sports of all kinds, and propound
Rewards to such as can produce us new.
Vnsatisfiz'd though we surfeit in their store.
And never think of cursed Marcelia more.
Ex.
Actus Quart. Scae. Prim.
Enter Francisco, Graccho.
Franc. And is it possible thou should forget
A wrong of such a nature, and then study
My safety and content?

Grac. Sir, but allow me
Only to have read the elements of Courtship
(Not the abstruce and hidden acts to thrive there)
And you may please to grant me so much knowledge,
That injuries from one in grace, like you,
Are noble favors. Is it not grown common
In every sect, for those that want, to suffer
From such as have to give? Your Captain cast
If poor, though not thought daring, but approved so
To raise a coward into name, that is rich,
Suffers disgraces publicly, but receives
Rewards for them in private.

Franc. Well observed.
Put on, we will be familiar, and discourse
A little of this argument. That day,
In which it was first rumored, then confirmed,
Great Sforza thought me worthy of his favor,
I found my self to be another thing,
Not what I was before. I passed then
For a prittie fellow, and of prittie parts too,
And was perhaps received so: but once raised,
The liberal Courtier made me Master of
Those virtues, which I never knew in my self.
If I pretended to a jest, 'twas made one
By their interpretation. If I offered
To reason of Philosophy, though absurdly,
They had helps to save me, and without a blush
Would swear, that I by nature had more knowledge,
Then others could acquire by any labor.
Nay all I did indeed, which in another
Was not remarkable, in me showed rarely.

Grac. But then they tasted of your bounty.

Franc. True,
They gave me those good parts I was not borne too,
And by my intercession they got that,
Which (had I crossed them) they durst not have hoped for

Grac. All this is Oracle. And shall I then,
For a foolish whipping learn to honor him,
That holds the wheel of Fortune? No, that sauors
Too much of the ancient freedom: Since great men
Receive disgraces, and give thanks, poor knaves
Must have not spleen (...). Though I love
My limbs as well (...) any man, (...) you had now
A humor to kick me lame into an office,
Where I might sit in State, and undo others,
Stood I not bound to kiss the foot that did it?
Though it seem strange there have been such things seen
In the memory of man.

Franc. But to the purpose,
And then that service done, make thine own fortunes.
My wife thou say, is jealous, I am too
Famillar with the Duchess.

Grac. And incensed
For her commitment in her brothers absence,
And by her Mothers anger is spurred on
To make discoucrie of it. This her purpose
Was trusted to my charge, which I declined
As much as in me lay, but sinding her
Determinately bent to undertake it,
Though breaking my faith to her may destroy
My credit with your Lordship, I yet thought,
Though at my peril, I stood bound to reveal it.

Franc. I thank thy care, and will deserve this secret,
In making thee acquainted with a greater,
And of more moment. Come into my bosom,
And take it from me. Can thou think, dull Graccho,
My power, and honors, were conferred upon me,
And ad to them this form, to have my pleasures
Confined and limited? I delight in change,
And sweet variety, that is my heaven on earth,
For which I love life only. I confess,
My wife pleased me a day, the Duchess, two,
(And yet I must not say, I have enjoyed her)
But now I care for neither. Therefore Graccho,
So far I am from stopping Mariana
In making her complaint, that I desire thee
To urge her to it.

Grac. That may prove your ruin,
The Duke already being, as it is reported,
Doubtful she has played false.

Franc. There thou art cosen'd,
His dotage like an ague keeps his course,
And now it is strongly on him. But I loose time,
And therefore know, whether thou will or no,
Thou art to be my instrument, and in spite
Of the old saw, that says, it is not safe
On any terms to trust a man that is wronged,
I dare thee to be false.

Grac. This is a language
My Lord, I understand not.

Franc. You thought, sir,
To put a trick on me for the relation
Of what I knew before, and having won
Some weighty secret from me, in revenge
To play the traitor. Know thou wretched thing,
By my command thou were whipped, and every day
I Will have thee freshly tortured, if thou miss
In the lest charge that I impose upon thee,
Though what I speak, for the most part is true.
Nay, grant thou had a thousand witnesses
To be deposed they heard it, it is in me
With one word (such is Sforza's confidence
Of my fidelity not to be shaken)
To make all void, and ruin my accusers.
Therefore look to it, bring my wife hotly on
T'accuse me to the Duke (I have an end in it)
Or think, what it is makes man most miserable,
And that shall fall upon thee. Thou were a fool
To hope by being acquainted with my courses
To curb and awe me, or that I should live
Thy slave, as thou did sawcily divine.
For prying in my councels, still live mine.
Exe. Franc.
Grac. I am caught on both sides. This it is for a punie
In Policies Protean School, to try conclusions
With one that has commenced and gone out doctor.
If I discover, what but now he bragged of,
I shall not be believed. If I fall off
From him, his threats and actions go togeither.
And there is no hope of safety, till I get
A plummet, that may sound his deepest counsels.
I must obey and serve him. Want of skill
Now makes me play the rogue against my will.
Ex. Grac.
Actus Quart. Scae. Secund.
Enter Marcelia, Tiberio, Stephano, Gentlewoman.
Marc. Command me from his sight, and with such scorn
As he would rate his slave.

Tib. 'T was in his fury.

Steph. And he repents it Madame.

Marc. Was I borne
To 'obserue his humors, or, because he dotes,
Must I run mad?

Tib. If that your Excellence
Would please but to receive a feeling knowledge
Of what he suffers, and how deep the least
Unkindness wounds from you, you would excuse
His hasty language.

Steph. He has paid the forfeit
Of his offense, I Am sure, with such a sorrow,
As, if it had been greater, would deserve
A full remission.

Marc. Why, perhaps he has it,
And I stand more afflicted for his absence,
Then he can be for mine? So pray you, tell him.
But till I have digested some sad thoughts,
And reconciled passions that are at war
Within my self, I purpose to be private.
And have you care, unless it be Francisco,
That no man be admitted.

Tib. How Francisco!

Steph. He, that at every stage keeps liuerie Mistresses,
The stallion of the State!

Tib. They are things above us,
And so no way concern us.

Steph. If I were
The Duke (I freely must confess my weakness)
I should wear yellow breeches. Here he comes.
Ent. Frac.
Tib. Nay spare your labor, Lady, we know our exit,
And quit the room.

Steph. Is this her priuacie?
Though with the hazard of a check, perhaps,
This may go to the Duke.

Marc. Your face is full
Of fears and doubts. The reason?

Franc. O best Madam,
They are not counterfeit. I your poor convert,
That only wish to live in sad repentance,
To mourn my desperate attempt of you,
That have no ends, nor aims, but that your goodness
Might be a witness of my penitence,
Which seen would teach you, how to love your mercy,
Am robbed of that last hope. The Duke, the Duke,
I more then fear, has found, that I am guilty.

Marc. By my unspotted honor, not from me,
Nor have I with him changed one syllable
Since his return, but what you heard.

Franc. Yet, malice
Is Eagle-ey'd, and would see that which is not.
And Iealousie's too apt to build upon
Unsure foundations.

Marc. Jealousy?

Franc. It takes.

Marc. Who dares but only think, I can be tainted!
But for him, though almost on certain proof,
To give it hearing, not belief, deserves
My hate for ever.

Franc. Whether grounded on
Your noble, yet chaste favors shown unto me,
Or her imprisonment, for her contempt
To you, by my command, my frantique wife
Has put it in his head.

Marc. Have I then lived
So long, now to be doubted? Are my favors
The theames of her discourse? Or what I do,
That never trod in a suspected path,
Subject to base construction? Be undaunted,
For now, as of a creature that is mine,
I rise up your protrectesse. All the grace
I hither to have done you, was bestowed
With a shut hand. It shall be now more free,
Open, and liberal. But let it not,
Though counterfeited to the life, teach you
To nourish saucy hopes.

Franc. May I be blasted
When I prove such a monster.

Marc. I will stand, then,
Between you, and all danger. He shall know,
Suspicion o're-turnes, what confidence builds,
And he that dares but doubt, when there is no ground,
Is neither to himself, nor others sound.
Ex. Marc.
Franc. So, let it work, her goodness, that denied,
My service branded with the name of Lust,
Shall now destroy it self. And she shall find,
When he is a suitor, that brings Cunning armed
With power to be his advocates, the denial
Is a disease as killing as the plague,
And chastity a clew, that leads to death.
Hold but thy nature, Duke, and be but rash,
And violent enough, and then at leisure
Repent. I care not.
And let my plots produce this longed-for birth,
In my revenge I have my heaven on earth.
Ex. Franc.
Act. Quart. Scae. Tert.
Enter Sforza, Pescara, three Gentlemen.
Pesc. You promised to be merry.

1. Gentlem. There are pleasures
And of all kinds to entertain the time.

2. Gentlem. Your excellence vouchsafing to make choice
Of that, which best affects you.

Sf. Hold your prating.
Learn manners too, you are rude.

3. Gentlem. I have my answer,
Before I ask the question.

Pesc. I must borrow
The privilege of a friend, and will, or else
I am, like these, a servant, or what is worse,
A parasite to the sorrow, Storza worships
In spite of reason.

Sf. Pray you use your freedom,
And so far, if you please, allow me mine,
To hear you only, not to be compelled
To take your moral potions. I am a man,
And though philosophy your mistrisse rage for it,
Now I have cause to grieve, I must be sad,
And I dare show it.

Pesc. Would it were bestowed
Upon a worthier subject.

Sf. Take heed, friend.
You rub a sore, whose pain will make me mad,
And I shall then forget my self and you.
Lance it no further.

Pesc. Have you stood the shock
Of thousand enemies, and out-fac'd the anger
Of a great Emperor, that vowed your ruin,
Though by a desperate, a glorious way,
That had no president? Are you returned with honor,
Loved by your subjects? Does your fortune court you,
Or rather say, your courage does command it?
Have you given proof to this hour of your life,
Prosperity (that searches the best temper)
Could never puff you up, nor adverse fate
Deiect your valor? Shall I say, these virtues,
So many and so various trials of
Your constant mind, be buried in the frown
(To please you I will say so) of a fair woman?
Yet I have seen her equals.

Sf. Good Pescara,
This language in another were profane,
In you it is unmannerly. Her equal?
I tell you as a friend, and tell you plainly
(To all men else, my Sword should make reply)
Her goodness does disdain comparison,
And but her self admits no parallel.
But you will say she is cross, it is fit she should be
When I am foolish, for she is wise, Pescara,
And knows how far she may dispose her bounties,
Her honor safe: or if she were auerse,
'Twas a prevention of a greater sin
Ready to fall upon me, for she is not ignorant
But truly understands how much I love her,
And that her rare parts do deserve all honor,
Her excellence increasing with her years to,
I might have fallen into Idolatry,
And from the admiration of her worth,
Bin taught to think there is no power above her,
And yet I do believe, had Angels sexes,
The most would be such women, and assume
No other shape, when they were to appear
In their full glory.

Pesc. Well Sir, I Will not cross you,
Nor labor to diminish your esteem
Hereafter of her, since your happiness
(As you will have it) has alone dependence
Upon her favor, from my Soul, I wish you
A fair atonement.
Ent. Tib. and Steph.
Sf. Time, and my submission
May work her to it. O! you are well returned,
Say, am I blessed? has she vouchfaf'd to hear you?
Is there hope left that she may be appeased?
Let her propound, and gladly I Will subscribe
To her conditions.

Tib. She Sir, yet is froward,
And desires respite, and some priuacie.

Step. She was harsh at first, but ere we parted, seemed not
Implacable.

Sf. There Is comfort yet, I Will ply her
Each hour with new Ambassadors of more honors,
Titles, and eminence. My second self
Francisco, shall solicit her.

Steph. That a wise man,
And what is more, a Prince, that may command,
Should sue thus poorly, and treat with his wife,
As she were a victorious enemy,
At whose proud feet, himself, his State, and Country,
Basely begged mercy.

Sf. What is that you mutter?
I Will have thy thoughts.

Steph. You shall, you are too fond,
And feed a pride that is swollen too big already,
And surfeits with observance.

Sf. O my patience!
My vassal speak thus?

Steph. Let my head answer it
If I offend. She that you think a Saint,
I sear may play the Devil.

Pesc. Well said old sellow.

Steph. And he that has so long engrossed your favors,
Though to be named with reverence, Lord Francisco,
Who as you purpose, shall solicit for you,
I think's too near her.

Pesc. Hold Sir, this is madness.

Steph. It may be they confer of winning Lordships,
I Am sure he is private with her.

Sf. Let me go,
I scorn to touch him, he deserves my pity,
And not my anger, dotard, and to be one
Is thy protection, else thou durst not think
That love to my Marcella has left room
In my full heart for any Iealons thought,
That idle passion dwell with thick-skind Tradesmen.
The undeserving Lord, or the unable,
Lock up thy own wife fool, that must take physic
From her young Doctor upon her back
Because thou have the palsy in that part
That makes her active, I could smile to think
What wretched things they are that dare be jealous,
Were I matched to another Messaline,
While I sound merit in my self to please her:
I should believe her chaste, and would not seek
To find out my own torment, but alas,
Inioying one that but to me's a Dien,
I Am too secure.

Tib. This is a confidence
Beyond example.
Ent. Grac. Isab. Mar.
Grac. There he is, now speak,
Or be for ever silent.

Sf. If you come
To bring me comfort, say, that you have made
My peace with my Marcelia.

Isab. I had rather
Wait on you to your funeral.

Sf. You are my mother,
Or by her life you were dead else.

Mar. Would you were,
To your dishonor, and since dotage makes you
Wilfully blind, borrow of me my eyes,
Or some part of my spirit. Are you all flesh?
A limb of patience only? No fire in you?
But do your pleasure, here your Mother was
Committed by your servant (for I scorn
To call him husband) and my self your sister,
If that you dare remember such a name,
Mewed up to make the way open and free
For the Adultresse, I am unwilling
To say a part of Storza.

Sf. Take her head off,
She has blasphemed, and by our Law must dye.

Isab. Blasphemed, for calling of a whore, a whore?

Sf. O hell, what do I suffer?

Mar. Or is it treason
For me that am a subject, to endeavor
To save the honor of the Duke, and that
He should not be a Wittall on record.
For by posterie 'twill be believed
As certainly as now it can be proved,
Francisco the great Minion, that swayes all,
To meet the chaste embraces of the Duchess,
Has leaped into her bed.

Sf. Some proof vile creature,
Or thou have spoke thy last.

Mar. The public fame,
Their hourly private meetings, and even now
When under a pretense of grief or anger,
You are denied the joys due to a husband,
And made a stranger to her, at all times
The door stands open to him. To a Dutchman
This were enough, but to a right Italian,
A hundred thousand witnesses.

Isab. Would you have us
To be her bawdes?

Sf. O the malice
And envy of base women, that with horror
Knowing their own defects and inward guilt,
Dare lie, and swear, and damn, for what is most false,
To cast aspersions upon one untainted,
You Are in your natures devils, and your ends
Knowing your reputation sunk for ever,
And not to be recouer'd, to have all,
Wear your black liuerie. Wretches, you have raised
A Monumentall trophy to her pureness,
In this your studied purpose to deprave her,
And all the shot made by your foul detraction
Falling upon her sure-arm'd Innocence,
Return's upon your selves, and if my love
Could suffer an addition, I Am so far
From giving credit to you, this would teach me
More to admire and serve her, you are not worthy
To fall as sacrifices to appease her,
And therefore live till your own envy burst you.

Isab. All is in vain, he is not to be moved.

Mar. She has bewitched him.

Pesc. It Is so past belief,
To me it shows a fable.
Ent. Franc. and a servant.
Franc. On thy life
Provide my horses, and without the Port
With care attend me.

Seru. I shall my Lord.
Ex. Seru.
Grac. He Is come.
What crack have we next?

Franc. Great Sir.

Sf. Francisco,
Though all the joys in woman are fled from me
In thee I do embrace the full delight
That I can hope from man.

Franc. I would impart,
Please you to lend your care, a waightie-secret,
I am in labor to deliver to you.

Sf. All leave the room, excuse me good Pesc.
Ere long I will wait on you.

Pesc. You speak Sir
The language I should use.

Sf. Be within call,
Perhaps we may have use of you.

Tib. We shall Sir.

Sf. Say on my comfort.

Franc. Comfort? No, your torment,
For so my fate appoints me, I could curse
The hour that gave me being.

Sf. What new monsters
Of misery stand ready to devour me?
Let them at once dispatch me.

Franc. Draw your sword then,
And as you wish your own peace, quickly kill me,
Consider not, but do it.

Sf. Art thou mad?

Franc. Or if to take my life be too much mercy,
As death indeed concludes all human sorrows,
Cut off my nose and ears, pull out an eye,
The other only left to lend me light
To see my own deformities: Why was I borne
Without some mulct imposed on me by nature?
Would from my youth a loathsome leprosy
Had run upon this face, or that my breath
Had been infectious and so made me shunned
Of all societies: cursed be he that taught me
Discource or manners, or lent any grace
That makes the owner pleasing in the eye
Of wanton women, since those parts which others
Value as blessings, are to me afflictions,
Such my condition is.

Sf. I am on the rack,
Dissolve this doubtful riddle.

Franc. That I alone (you,
Of all mankind that stand most bound to love
And study your content should be appointed,
Not by my will, but sorc'd by cruel fate
To be your greatest enemy, not to hold you
In this amazement longer, in a word,
Your Duchess loves me.

Sf. Loves thee?

Franc. Is mad for me,
Pursues me hourly:

Sf. Oh!

Franc. And from hence grew
Her late neglect of you.

Sf. O women! women!

Franc. I labored, to divert her by persuasion,
Then urged your much love to her, and the danger,
Deny d her, and with scorn.

Sf. 'Twas like thy self.

Franc. But when I saw her smile, then heard her say,
Your love and extreme dotage as a Cloak
Should cover our embraces, and your power
Fright others from suspicion, and all favors
That should preserve her in her innocence,
By lust inuerted to be used as bawdes,
I could not but in duty (though I know
That the relation kills in you all hope
Of peace hereafter, and in me 'twill show
Both base and poor to rise up her accuser)
Freely discover it.

Sf. Eternal plagues
Pursue and overtake her, for her sake
To all posterity may he prove a Cuckold,
And like to me a thing so miserable
As words may not express him, that gives trust
To all deceiving women, or since it is
The will of Heaven to preserve mankind,
That we must know, and couple with these serpents,
No wiseman ever taught by my example
Hereafter use his wife with more respect
Then he would do his Horse that does him service,
Base woman being in her creation made
A slave to man, but like a village nurse
Stand I now cursing, and considering when
The tamest fool would do? Within there, Stephane,
Tiberio, and the rest, I will be sudden,
And she shall know and feel love in extremes,
Abused knows no degree in hate.
Ent. Tib. Step. Guard
Tib. My Lord.

Sf. Go to the Chamber of that wicked woman.

Steph. What wicked woman, Sir?

Sf. The devil my wife.
Force a rude entry, and if she refuse,
To follow you, drag her hither by the hair
And know no pity, any gentle usage
To her will call on cruelty from me
To such as show it, Stand you staring! Go,
And put my will in act.

Steph. There Is no disputing.

Tib. But it is a tempest on the sudden raised,
Who durst have dreamt of?
Ex. Tib. Steph.
Sf. Nay, since she dares damnation,
I Will be a fury to her.

Franc. Yet great Sir,
Exceed not in your fury, she is yet guilty
Only in her intent.

Sf. Intent Francisco?
It does include all sact, and I might sooner
Be won to pardon treason to my Crown,
Or one that killed my Father.

Franc. You are wise,
And know what is best to do, yet if you please
To prove her temper to the height, say only
That I am dead, and then observe how far
She Will be transported. I Will remove a little,
But be within your call: now to the vpshot,
How e're I Will shift for one.
Ex. Franc.
Enter Tiberio, Stephano, Marcelia, Guard.
Marc. Where is this Monster?
This walking tree of Jealousy, this dreamer,
This horned beast that would be? O are you here Sir?
Is it by your commandment or allowance,
I am thus basely used? Which of my virtues,
My labors, setuices, and cares to please you
(For to a man suspicious and unthankful,
Without a blush I may be mine own trumpet)
Inuites this barbarous course? Dare you look on me
Without a seal of shame?

Sf. Impudence,
How ugly thou appear'st now? Thy intent
To be a whore, leaves thee not blood enough
To make an honest blush, what had the act done?

Marc. Returned thee the dishonor thou deseruest
Though willingly I had given up my self
To every common letcher.

Sf. Your chief minion,
Your chosen favorite, your wooed Francisco,
Has dearly paid for it, for wretch, know he is dead,
And by my hand.

Marc. The bloodyer villain thou,
But'tis not to be wondered at, thy love
Does know no other object, thou have killed then
A man I do profess I loved, a man
For whom a thousand Queens might well be riuals,
But be (I speak it to thy teeth) that dares be
A Jealous fool, dares be a murderer,
And knows no end in mischief.

Sf. I begin now
stabs her.
In this my Justice.

Marc. Oh, I have fooled my self
Into my grave, and only grieve for that
Which when you know, you have slain an Innocent
You needs ds mast suffer.

Sf. An Innocent? Let onc
Call in Francisco for he lives (vile creature)
Ex. Steph. To justify thy falsehood, and how often
With whorish flatteries thou have tempted him,
I being only sit to live a stale,
A bawd and property to your wantonness.
Ent. Steph.
Steph. Signior Francisco Sir, but even now
Took horse without the Ports.

Marc. We are both abused,
And both by him undone, stay death a little
Till I have cleared me to my Lord, and then
I willingly obey thee. O my Sforza,
Francisco was not tempted, but the Tempter,
And as he thought to win me showed the warrant
That you signed for my death.

Sf. Then I believe thee,
Believe thee innocent too.

Marc. But being contemned,
Upon his knees with tears he did beseech me
Not to reveal it, I soft-hearted fool
Judging his penitence true, was won unto it.
Indeed the unkindness to be sentenced by you
Before that I was guilty in a thought,
Made me put on a seeming anger toward you,
And now behold the issue, as I do,
May heaven forgive you. dies.

Tib. Her sweet soul has left
Her beauteous prison.

Steph. Look to the Duke, he stands
As if he wanted motion.

Tib. Grief has stopped
The organ of his speech.

Steph. Take up this body
And call for his Physicians.

Sf. O my heart strings.

Actus Quint. Scae. Prim.
Enter Francisco, Eugenia.
Franc. Why could thou think Eugenia that rewards,
Graces, or favors though strewn thick upon me
Could ever bribe me to forget mine honor?
Or that I tamely would sit down, before
I had dried these eyes still wet with showers of tears
By the fue of my revenge? Look up my dearest
For that proud-faire that thiefe-like stepped between
Thy promised hopes, and robbed thee of a fortune
Almost in thy possession, has found
With horrid proof, his love she thought her
And assurance of all happiness, (glory
But hast'ned her sad ruin.

Eug. Do not flatter
A grief that is beneath it, for how ever
The credulous Duke to me proved false and cruel,
It is imposible he could be wrought
To look on her, but with the eyes of dotage,
And so to serve her.

Franc. Such indeed I grant
The stream of his affection was, and ran
A constant course, till I with cunning malice
(And yet I wrong my act, for it was Justice)
Made it turn back-wards, and hate in extremes
Love banished from his heart to fill the room,
In a word, know the fair Marcelia's dead.

Eng. Dead!

Franc. And by Sforza's hand, does it not move you?
How coldly you receive it? I expected
The mere relation of so great a blessing
Borne proudly on the wings of sweet revenge
Would have called on a sacrifice of thanks,
And joy not to be bounded or concealed!
You entertain it with a look, as if
You wished it were undone!

Eug. Indeed I do,
For if my sorrows could receive addition,
Her sad fate would increase, not lessen'em.
She never injured me, but entertained
A fortune humbly offered to her hand,
Which a wise Lady gladly would have kneeled for.
Unless you would impute it as a crime,
She was more fair then I, and had discretion
Not to deliver up her virgin fort
(Though straight besieged with flatteries, vows, and tears)
Until the Church had made it safe and lawful.
And had I been the mistress of her judgment
And constant temper, skillful in the knowledge
Of man's malitions falsehood, I had never
Upon his hell-deepe oaths to marry me,
Given up my fair name, and my maiden honor
To his foul lust, nor lived now being branded
In the forhead for his whore the scorn and Shame
Of all good women.

Franc. Have you then no gall,
Anger, or spleen familiar to your sex?
Or is it possible that you could see
Another to possess what was your due,
And not grow pale with envy?

Eug. Yes of him
That did deceine me. There Is no passion that
A maid so injured ever could partake of
But I have decrely suffered. These three years
In my desire, and labor of revenge,
Trusted to you, I have endured the throes
Of teeming women, and will hazard all
Fate can inflict on me but I will reach
Thy heart salse Sforza. You have trifled with me
And not proceeded with that fiery zeal
I looked for from a brother of your spirit.
Sorrow forsake me, and all signs of grief
Farewell for ever; Vengeance armed with fury
Possess me wholly now.

Franc. The reason sister
Of this strange metamorphosis?

Eug. Ask thy fears,
Thy base unmanly fears, thy poor delays,
Thy dull forgetfulness equal with death,
My wrong else, and the scandal which can never
Be washed off from our house but in his blood,
Would have stirred up a coward to a deed
In which, though he had fallen, the brave intent
Had crowned it self with a fair monument
Of noble resolution. In this shape
I hope to get access, and then with shame
Hearing my sudden execution, judge
What honor thou have lost in being transcended
By a weak woman.

Franc. Still mine own, and dearer,
And yet in this you but pour oil on fire,
And offer your assistance where it needs not,
And that you may perceive I lay not fallow,
But had your wrongs stamped deeply on my heart
By the Iron pen of vengeance, I attempted
By whoring her to cuckold him, that failing
I did begin his tragedy in her death,
To which it served as Prologue, and will make
A memorable story of your fortunes
In my assured revenge, only best sister
Let us not loose our selves in the performance,
By your rash undertaking, we will be
As sudden as you could wish.

Eug. Upon those terms
I yield my self and cause to be disposed of
As you think fit.
Ent. servant
Franc. Thy purpose?

Seru. There Is one Graccho
That followed you it seems upon the tract,
Since you left Millaine, that is importunate
To have access, and will not be denied,
His have he says concerns you.
Ex. servant
Franc. Bring him to me,
Though he has laid an ambush for my life,
Or apprehension, yet I will prevent him
And work mine own ends out.
Ent. Grac.
Grac. Now for my whipping,
And if I now outstrip him not, and catch him,
And by a new and strange way to, hereafter
I Will swear there are worms in my brains.

Franc. Now my good Graccho,
We meet as 'twere by miracle!

Grac. Love, and duty,
And vigilance in me for my Lords safety,
First taught me to imagine you were here,
And then to follow you. All Is come forth my Lord
That you could wish concealed. The Duchess wound
In the Dukes rage put home, yet gave her leave
To acquaint him with your practices, which your flight
Did easily confirm.

Franc. This I expected,
But sure you come provided of good counsel
To help in my extremes.

Grac. I would not hurt you.

Franc. How? hurt me? Such another word's thy death,
Why dare thou think it can fall in thy will,
T'outliue what I determine?

Grac. How he awes me?

Franc. Be brief, what brought thee hither?

Grac. Care to inform you,
You are a condemned man pursued, and sought for,
And your head rated at ten thousand Ducates
To him that brings it.

Franc. Very good.

Grac. All passages
Are intercepted, and choice troops of horse
Scour over the neighbor plains, your picture sent
To every State consederate with Millaine.
That though I grieve to speak it, in my judgment
So thick your dangers meet, and run upon you,
It is impossible you should escape
Their curious search.

Eug. Why let us then turn Romans,
And falling by our own hands, mock their threats,
And dreadful preparations.

Franc. 'Twould show nobly,
But that the honor of our full revenge
Were lost in the rash action: No Eugenia,
Graccho is wise, my friend to, not my servant,
And I dare trust him with my latest secret.
We would (and thou must help us to perform it)
First kill the Duke, then fall what can upon us,
For injuries are writ in brass, kind Graccho.
And not to be forgotten.

Grac. He instructs me
What I should do.

Franc. What Is that?

Grac. I labor with
A strong desire t'assist you with my sernice,
And now I am delivered of t.

Franc. I told you.
Speak my oraculous Graccho,

Grac. I have heard Sir
Of men in debt, that laid for by their creditors
(In all such places where it could be thought
They would take shelter) chose for sanctuary,
Their lodgings underneath their creditors noses,
Or near that prison to which they were designed
If apprehended, confident that there
They never should be sought for.

Eug. It Is a strange one!

Franc. But what infer you from it?

Grac. This my Lord,
That since all ways of your escape are stopped,
In Millaine only, or what is more, in the Court
(Whether it is presumed you dare not come)
Concealed in some disguise you may live safe.

Franc. And not to be discovered?

Grac. But by my self.

Franc. By thee? Alas I know thee honest Graccho,
And I will put thy counsel into act,
And suddenly. Yet not to be ungrateful
For all thy loving travel to preserve me,
What bloody end soever my stars appoint,
Thou shall be safe good Graccho. Who Is within there?

Grac. In the devils name what means he? Ent. servants

Franc. Take my friend
Into your custody, and bind him fast,
I would not part with him.

Grac. My good Lord.

Franc. Dispatch,
It Is for your good to keep you honest Graccho,
I would not have ten thousand Ducates tempt you
(Being of a soft and wax like disposition)
To play the traitor, nor a foolish itch
To be revenged for your late excellent whipping
Give you the opportunity to offer
My head for satisfaction. Why thou fool,
I can look through, and through thee, thy intents
Appear to me as written in thy forhead
In plain and easy caracters. And but that
I scorn a slaves base blood should rust that sword
That from a Prince expects a scarlet dye,
Thou now were dead, but live only to pray
For good success to crown my undertakings,
Ex. servants with Grace. And then at my return perhaps I Will free thee
To make me further sport. Away with him,
I will not hear a syllable. We must trust
Our selves Eugenia, and though we make use of
The counsel of our servants, that oil spent,
Like snuffes that do offend we tread them out.
But now to our last Scene, which we will so carry,
That few shall understand how 'twas begun,
Till all with half an eye may see it is don.
Exeunt
Actus Quint. Scae. Secund.
Enter Pescara, Tiberio, Stephano.
Pesc. The like was never read of.

Steph. In my judgment
To all that shall but hear it, 'twill appear
A most impossible fable.

Tib. For Francisco,
My wonder is the less because there are
Too many Presidents of unthankful men
Raised up to greatness, which have after studied
The ruin of their makers.

Steph. But that melancholy,
Though ending in distraction, should work
So far upon a man as to compel him
To court a thing that has nor sense, nor being,
Is unto me a miracle.

Pesc. 'Troth I Will tell you,
And briefly as I can, by what degrees
He fell into this madness, When by the care
Of his Physicians he was brought to life,
As he had only passed a fearful dream,
And had not acted what I grieve to think on,
He called for fair Marcelia, and being told
That she was dead, he broke forth in extremes,
(I would not say blasphemed) and cried that heaven
For all th'offences that mankind could do,
Would never be so cruel as to rob it
Of so much sweetness, and of so much goodness,
That not alone was facred in her self,
But did preserve all others innocent
That had but converse with her: Then it came
Into his fancy that she was accused
By his mother and his sister, thrice he cursed 'em,
And thrice his desperate hand was on his sword
To have kill d'em both, but he restrayn'd, and they
Shunning his fury, spite of all prevention
He would have turned his rage upon himself,
When wisely his Physicians looking on
The Duchess wound, to stay his ready hand,
Cried out it was not mortal.

Tib. 'T was well thought on.

Pesc. He easily believing what he wished,
More then a perpetuity of pleasure
In any object else, flattered by hope
Forgetting his own greatness, he fell prostrate
At the doctors feet, implored their aid, and swore,
Provided they recouer'd her, he would live
A private man, and they should share his dukedom.
They seemed to promise fair, and every hour
Vary their judgments as they find his fit
To suffer intermission, or extremes.
For his behavior since

Sf. As you have pity within.
Support her gently.

Pesc. Now be your own witnesses.
I am prevented.
Enter Sforza, lsab. Mari. the body of Marc. Doctors, Servants.
Sf. Carefully I beseech you,
The gentlest touch torments her, and then think
What I shall suffer. O you earthy gods,
You second natures, that from your great master
(Who joined the limbs of torn Hyppolytus,
And drew upon himself the Thunderers envy)
Are taught those hidden secrets that restore
To life death wounded men, You have a patient
On whom to'xpresse the excellence of art,
Will bind e'ne heaven your debtor, though It pleases
To make your hands the organs of a work
The saints will smile to look on, and good Angels
Clap their Celestial wings to give it plaudits.
How pale and wan she looks? O pardon me,
That I presume did over with bloody guilt,
Which makes me I confess, far, far unworthy
To touch this snow-white hand. How cold it is?
This once was Cupids firebrand, and still
It Is so to me. How slow her pulses beat to?
Yet in this temper she is all perfection,
And Mistress of a heat so full of sweetness,
The blood of virgins in their pride of youth
Are balls of Snow or Ice compared unto her.

Mar. Is not this strange?

Isab. O cross him not dear daughter,
Our conscience tells us we have been abused,
Wrought to accuse the innocent, and with him
Are guilty of a fact -!
Ent. a servant
Mar. It Is now past help.

Pesc. With me? What is he?

Ser. He has a strange aspect,
A Jew by birth, and a Physician
By his profession as he says, who hearing
Of the Dukes frenzy, on the forfeit of
His life will undertake to render him
Perfect in every part. Provided that
Your Lordships favor gain him free access,
And your power with the Duke a safe protection,
Till' the great work be ended.

Pesc. Bring me to him,
As I find cause I Will do.
Exe. Pesc. and Ser.
Sfor. How sound she sleeps!
Heaven keep her from a lethergie; how long
(But answer me with comfort I beseech you.)
Does your sure judgment tell you that these lids
That cover richer jewels then themselves
Li'ke envious night will bar these glorious suns
From shining on me?

I. Doct. We have given her Sir,
A sleepy potion that will hold her long,
That she may be less sensible of the torment,
The searching of her wound will put her to

2. Doct. She now feels little, but if we should make her,
To hear her speak would fright both us and you,
And therefore dare not hasten it.

Sf. I am patient,
You see I do not rage, but wait your pleasure.
What do you think she dreams of now? for sure
Although her bodies organs are bound fast,
Her fancy cannot slumber

I. Doct That Sir, looks on
Your sorrow for your late rash art with pity
Oh what you suffer for it, and prepares
To meet with free confession of your guilt
With a glad pardon.

Forza She was ever kind
And her displeasure though called on, short liu'de
Upon the least submission. O you powers
That can conucy our thoughts to one another
Without the end of eyes, or ears, assist me,
Let her behold me in a pleasing dream,
Thus on my knees before her (yet that duty
In me is not sufficient) let her see me
Compel my mother (from whom I look life)
And this my sister, Partner of my being,
To bow thus low unto her, let her hear us
In my acknowledgement freely confess
That we in a degree as high are guilty,
As she is innocent; bite your tongues, vile creatures,
And let your inward horror fright your souls
For having belide that pureness, to come near which
All women that posterity can bring forth
Must be, though striving to be good, poor Riualls.
And for that dog Francisco (that seduced me
In wounding her to raise a temple built
To Chastity and sweetness) let her know
I Will follow him to hell, but I will find him,
And there live a fourth fury to torment him.
Then for this cursed hand and arm that guided
The wicked steel, I Will have them joint by joint,
With burning irons seard of, which I will eat.
I being a vultur fit to taste such carrion,
Lastly.

1. Doct. You are too loud, Sir, you disturb
Her sweer repose.

Forza. I am hushed, yet give us leave
Thus prostrate at her feet, our eyes bent downwards,
Unworthy, and ashamed to look upon her,
T'expect her gracious sentence.

2. Doct. He Is past hope.

1. Doct. The body to, will putrify, and then
We can no longer cover the imposture.

Tibe. Which in his death will quickly be discovered
I can but weep his fortune.

Steph. Yet be careful,
You loose no minute to preserve him, time,
May lessen his distraction.
Ent. Pesca. Fran. Eugen.
Franc. I am no God sir.
To give a new life to her, yet I Will hazard
My head, I Will work the senseless trunket' appear
To him as it had got a second being,
Or that the soul that is fled from't were called back,
To govern it again, I will preserve it
In the first sweetness, and by a strange vaper
Which I Will infule into her mouth, create
A seeming breath, I Will make her veins run high to
As if they had true motion.

Pesc. Do but this,
Till we use means to win upon his passions
T'indure to hear she is dead with some small patience
And make thy own reward.

Franc. The art I use
Admits no looker on, I only ask
The sourth part of an hour to perfect that
I boldly undertake.

Pesc. I will procure it.

2. Doct. What stranger's this?

Pesc. Sooth me in all I say
There is a maine end in it.

Frans. Beware.

Euge. I am warned.

Pesc. Look up Sir chearefully, comfort in me
Flows strong lie to you.

Forza. From whence came that sound?
Was it from my Marcelia? if it were
I rise and joy will give me wings to meet it.

Pes. Nor shall your expectation be deferrd
But a few minutes, your Physicians are
Mere voice, and no performance, I have found
A man that can do wonders, do not binder
The Duchess wished recovery to inquire,
Or what he is, or to give thanks, but leave him
To work this miracle.

Sf. Sure, it is my good Angel,
I do obey in all things; be it death
For any to disturb him, or come near
Till he be pleasd' to call us, o be prosperous
And make a Duke thy Bondsman.
Exe. all but Franc. and Eugenia.
Franc. It Is my pupose
I^ that to fall a long wished sacrifice
To my revenge can be a be^efit.
I Will first make fast the doors, so.

Euge. You amaze me
What follows now?

Franc. A full conclusion
Of all thy wishes, look on this Eugenia,
Even such a thing, the saire on earth
(For whose delight the elements are ransacked
And art with nature studies to preserve her,
Must be when she is summond to appear
In the Court of death, but I loose time.

Euge. What mean you?

Franc. Disturb me not, your Ladyship looks pale
But I, your Docter, have a ceruse for you,
See my Eugenia, how many faces
That are adored in Court borrow these helps,
And pass for excellence, when the bettet part
Of them are like to this, your mouth smells sour to,
But here is that shall take away the sent,
A precious antidote old Ladies use
When they would kiss, knowing their gummes are rotten:
These hands to, that disdaind' to take a touch
From any lip, whose honor ^ri(...)t Lord
Are now but as the coursest ca^^h ^ut I
Am at the charge my bill not to be paid to
To give them seeming b^ae^y, so it is done
How do you like my workmanship?

Eugen. I ^mble
And thus to tirannize upon the dead
Is most inhumane.

Franc. Come we for revenge,
And can we think on pity? now to the vpshott,
And as it proves applaud it. My lord the Duke
Enter with joy, and see the sudden chance
Your servants hand has wrought.
Ent. Forza and the rest.
Forza. I live again
In my full confidence that Marcelia may
Pronounce my pardon. Can the speak yet?

Franc. No,
You must not look for all your joys at once,
That will ask longer time.

Pesca. It Is wondrous strange!

Forza. By all the dues of love I have had from her,
This hand seems as it was when first I kissed it,
These lips inuit to, I could ever feed
Upon these roses, they still keep their color
And native sweetness, only the nectar's wanting
That like the morning dew in flowery May
Preserved them in their beauty.
Enter Graccho
Grac. Treason, treason.

Tiber. Call up the guard.

Franc. Graccho! then we are lost.

Gracc. I am got off, Sir Jew, a bribe has done it
For all your serious charge; there is no disguise can keep
You from my knowledge,

Forza Speak.

Gracc. I am out of breath,
But this is.

Franc. Spare thy labor fool, Francisco.

All. Monster of Men.

Franc. Give me all attributes
Of all you can imagine, yet I glory
To be the thing I was borne, I am Francisco,
Francisco that was raised by you,
And made the Minion of the time
The same Francisco,
That would have whor'd this trunk when it had life,
And after breathed a icalousie upon thee
As killing as those damps that belch out plagues,
When the foundation of the earth is shaken;
I made thee do a deed heaven will not pardon
Which was to kill an innocent.

Forza. Call forth the tortures
For all that flesh can feel.

Franc. I dare the worst,
Only to yield some reason to the world
Why I pursud' this course, look on this face
Made old by thy base falsehood, it is Eugenia.

Forza. Eugenia.

Franc. Does it start you Sir? my Sister,
Seduced and fooled by thee, but thou must pay
The forfet of thy falshod, does it not work yet?
What ere becomes of me (which I esteem not)
'Thou art marked for the grave, I have given thee poison
In this cup, now observe me, with thy last
Carowsing deeply of, made thee forget
Thy vowed, faith to Eugenia.

Pesc. O damned villain!

Isab. How do you Sir?

Forza. Like one,
That learnes to know in death what punishment;
Waits on the breath of faith, o now I feel
An AEtna in my entrails, I have lived
A Prince, and my last breath shall be command
I burn, I burn, yet er'e life be consumed
Let me pronounce upon this wretch all torture
That witty cruelty can invent.

Pesc. Away with him.

Tibe. In all things we will serve you.

Franc. Farewell sister,
Now I have kept my word, torments I scorn,
I leave the world with glory, they are men
And leave behind them name and memory,
That wronged do right themselves before they die.

Ste. A desperate wretch.
Exe. guard with Franc.
Forza. I come death, I obey thee,
Yet I will not die raging, for alas,
My whole life was a frenzy. Good Eugenia
In death forgive me, As you love me bear her
To some religious house, there let her spend
The remnant of her life, when I am ashes
Perhaps she will be appeared, and soar a prayer
For my poor soul. Bury me with Marcelia
And let our Epitaph be --

Tibe. His speech is stopped.

Steph. Already dead.

Pesc. It is in vain to labor
To call him back, we will give him funeral,
And then determine of the state affairs
And learn from this example there is no trust
In a foundation that is built on lust.
Exeunt.
FINIS.

