A BRIEF DISCOVRSE of the Nevv-found-land, with the situation, temperature,
and commodities thereof, inciting our Nation to go forward in that hopeful
plantation begun.

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Heart. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JOHN SCOTT of Scots-Tarvet, KNIGHT. etc.
SIR, you are like to have none other account for the present than such as
Marchant-Factors, after bad markets return, that is, papers for payment, for
livers lines, The which though not so acceptable as more solid returns, yet
gives some satisfaction for the expenses of time questionable. I have sent you
a discourse of our Country penned at the request of friends, for the better
satisfaction of our Nobility, unpolished and rude, bearing the countries badge
where it was hatched, only clothed with plainness and truth. I entreat your
favorable acceptance thereof, as your wonted clemency has been to the
Author, if you think it may do good by encouraging any of your Country to
the interprise, I am willing you publish it, other wise let it be buried in
silence as you shall think meetest, and esteem me still one of whom you
have power to dispose.

JOHN MASON.

To the Reader.
FOR as much as there be sundry relations of the New-foundland and the
commodities thereof, Some too much extolling it, some too much debasing it,
preferring the temperature of the air there of before ours, the hopes of
commodities there without pains and mineralles, as if they were apparent
(which as I deny to be a verity, yet I affirm not to be impossible) with
other narrations dissenting from the truth, the which although done out of a
good affection, yet had they better been undone. I have therefore (gentle
Reader) hoping of thy favorable construction, set down in few and plain
terms out of that experience I have gained in three years and seventh
months residence there, the truth, as thou shall find by proof thereof, to
the which I recommend thee and us all to his Grace, that is able and will plant
those that fear him in a better Kingdom.

Farewell. Thine and his Countries in part, not wholly his own. JOHN MASON.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE of the Newfoundland with the Situation, temperature, and
commodities thereof inciting our Nation to go forward in that hopeful
plantation begun.
THE Country commonly known and called by the name of Newfoundland, albeit it
is so much frequented and resorted yearly to, by thousands of our Nation and
others, which have scarcely so much as a superficial knowledge thereof (only
so much as concerns their fishings excepted) is an Island or Islands as some
plats have described it, situate on the front of America, betwixt 46. and 52.
degrees of Northerly latitude, of the bigness of Ireland. the Eastermost side
thereof bounded with the Ocean extends it self nearest North and South: the
variation allowed 100. Leagues, the south face divided from the Isles of Cap.
Bretone by the Gulf of Saint Lowrence a straight of 27. Leagues over lies
West. and by North northerly, and East and by South Southerly in length 77.
Leagues, on the West part embraced by the Grand-bay stretching it self
Northeast and Southwest 75. Leagues. and on the North confined by the Norther
arm of the Grand-bay which separateth it from the continent of Noua Francia
making a fret of 7. Leagues wide, and is described by the Rhombe of W. and by
North and E. and by S. 25. Leag. Almost of a Triangular form saving that many
bays and Inlets making incroachment have disfigured the face thereof with Scars,
eating into the land into 40 leagues space on the South part where we have
searched 30 as good Harbors as the world affords. The longitude thereof
reackoned from the westermost part of the Insulae fortunatae is 330 degrees,
distant in the Line of West and by the South from our Meridian 45. degrees by
common account which in the middle parallel of the difference the Latitude
betwixt the lands end of England and the body of Newfoundland at 39. one half
miles answerable to each degree in the same makes 1764. miles or 588 Leagues.
The air subtle and wholesome, the Summer season pleasant conform to the like
latitude in Europe, saving that ye woodie places in June and Iulie are somewhat
pestered with small Flies bred of the rottenes of ruined wood and moisture
like as in Russia. The Winter degenerating therfrom, being as cold and snowy as
60 degrees in Europe, and of the like temperature in December, Ian. Febr.
March, as the northermest parts in Scotland. viz. The Hebrides and the Orcades
wherein I have twice wintered, or of the Coast betwixt Hamburgh and the mouth of
the Sownd or Nose of Norway: yet more comfortable for the length of the day in
Winter, which exceeds theirs three hours at the least. And albeit it be thus
cold in the Winter season by accidental means, contrary to the natural
position thereof in the Sphere, yet is it tolerable, as by experience, so
that there needs no Stoaues as in Germany: Likewise fruitful enough both of
Summer and Winter corn, an example for our comfirmation thereof we have in
Poland one of the greatest corn Countries of Europe and yet as cold and
subject to freizing as Newfoundland, as also our own experience both in
Wheat, Rye, Barlie, Oats, and Pease, which have grown and ripened there as
well and als timely as in Yorkshire in England. And for grouth of Garden herbs
of diverse sorts as Hysope, Time, Parsely, Clarie, Nepe, french Mallows,
Buglosse, Collombines, Wormwood, etc. There is at this present of 3. years
old of my sowing, likewise Rosemary, Fenell, Sweet marierim, Bassell,
Purselyn, Lettise, and all other Herbs and Roots: as torneps, Pasnepes,
Caretts, and Radishes we have found to grow well there in the Summer season.
The common wild herbs of the Country are Angelica, Violets, Mints, Scabius,
Yarrow, Fern, Salsaparilla, with diverse other sorts whereof I am ignorant; But
suppose would for variety and rariety compose another Herball; of these kinds
we have only made use of certain great green leaves ple^tifully growing in the
woods, and a great Root growing in fresh water ponds, both good against the
Skiruye, and an other pretty Root with a blew stalk and leaves of the nature
of a Skirret growing in a dry Beachy ground, good meat boiled: The Country
fruits wild, are cherries small, whole groaues of them, Filberds good, a small
pleasant fruit, called a Pear, Damask Roses single very sweet, excellent
Straberries, and Hartleberries with abundance of Rasberries, and Gooseberries
somewhat better than ours in England, all which replanted would be much
enlarged. There is also a kind of wild Coranies, wild Pease or Feetches in
many places which we have both found good meat and medecin for the Skiruy; The
Land of the North parts most mountanye and woodye very thick of Fur trees,
Spruce, Pine Lereckhout, Aspe, Hasill, a kind of stinking wood, the three
formest goodly Timber and most convenient for Building. No Oaks, Ash, Beech,
or Ellmes, have we seen or heard of; the greatest parts of the Plains are
marish and boggs, yet apt to be drawn dry by means of many fresh Lakes
intermixed which pay tribute to the Sea; and on the brinks of these Lakes,
through which the water draines away from the roots of the Grass, it
florisheth, in the other parts of the Plains where the water stands and
kills the growth of the Grass with his coldness it is rushie and seggy; in
some parts is barren, and mossie ground, but that that is firm and dry bears
good grass. The Spring begins in the end of April, and Harvest continues
while November, I have seen September and October much more pleasant than in
England; The South part is not so mountanous nor so woodie, for being a little
passed up from the Sea coast the continent has champion ground for 40. miles
together in North and South extent of the like nature of the former, having
pretty Groves and many fresh laks replenished with Eeles and Salmon-Troutes
great, and in great plenty. The Beasts are Ellans, Follow-deare, Hares,
Bears harmeles, Wolves, Foxes, Beauers, Catnaghenes excellent, Otteres, and a
small beast like a Ferret whose excrement is Musk, And the Plantations have
pretty stoare of Swine and Goats. The Fowls are Eagles, Falcons, Tassills,
Marlins, a great Owl much deformed, a lesser Owl, Bussards, Gripes, Osprayes
which diue for Fishes into the Water, Ravens, Crows, wild Geese, Snipes,
Teales, Twillockes, excellent wild Duckes of diverse sorts and abundance, some
whereof rare and not to be found in Europe, Their particulars too tedious to
relate, all good meat, Partriches white in Winter, and gray in Summer, greater
tha^ ours, Butters, black Birds with redd breasts, Phillidas, Wrens,
Swallows, Iayes, with other small Birds, and 2. or 3. excellent kinds of Beach
Birds very fat and sweet, and at the pla^tations English Pigeons. The sea
fowls, are Gulles white and gray, Penguins, Sea Pigeons, Ice Birds, Bottle
noses, with other sorts strange in shape, yet all bowntifull to us with their
Eggs as good as our Turkey or Hens, where with the Ilelands are well
replenished. But of all, the most admirable is the Sea, so diuersified with
several sorts of Fishes abounding therein, the consideration whereof is ready
to swallow up and drown my senses not being able to comprehend or express the
riches thereof. For could one acre thereof be enclosed with the Creatures therein
in the months of June, Iulie, and August, it would exceed one thousand acres
of the best Pasture with the stock thereon which we have in England. May has
Herings on equal to 2. of ours, Lants and Cods in good quantity, June has
Capline a fish much resembling Smeltes in form and eating, and such abundance
dry on Shore as to lade Carts, in some parts pretty store of Salmond, and
Cods so thick by the shore that we heardlie have been able to row a Boat
through them, I have killed of them with a Pike; Of these, three men to Sea in
a Boat with some on Shore to dress and dry them in 30, days will kill
commonly betwixt 25. and thirty thousand worth with the Oil arising from them
100 or 120. pound. And the fish and Train in one Harbor called Saint John's
is yearly in the Summer worth 17, or 18. thousand pounds. Iulie, and so till
November, has Macrill in abundance: one thereof as great as two of ours,
August has great large Cods but not in such abundance as the smaller, which
continues with some little decreasing till December; What should I speak of a
kind of Whales called Gibberts, Dogfish, Porposes, Hering-Hogges, Squides a
rare kind of fish, at his mouth squirting matterefor th like Ink, Flownders,
Crabbes, Cunners, Catfish, Millers, thunnes etc. Of al which there are
innumerable in the Summer season; Likewise of Lobsters plenty, and this last
year stoare of Smelts not having been known there before. I have also seen
Tonnie fish in Newland; now of shell fish there is Scalupes, Musseles, Vrsenas,
Hens, Periwinkles etc. Here we see the chief fishing with his great commodity
expressed, which falls so fitly in the Summer season betwixt seed-time and
Harvest that it cannot be any hinderance to either. I have heard some countries
commended for their two fowld Harvest, which hear thou have, although in a
different kind, yet both as profitable, I (dare say) as theirs so much
extolled, if the right course be taken; and well fares, that country say I,
which in one months time with reasonable pains, will pay both landlords rent,
servants wages, and all Household charges. But peradventure some squeaysie
stomach will say, Fishing is a beastly trade and unseeming a Gentleman, to whom
I answer (Bonus odor luti cu^ lucro) and let them propound the Holanders to
themselves for example whose Country is so much enriched, by it; others say
the Country is barren, but they are deceived, for Terra quae tegit seipsam
tegit Dominum, and the great abundance of Woods and wild Fruits which
excedingly flourish there prove the contrary. And what though the fertility of
the soil and temperature of the Climate be inferior to Virginia, yet for
four maine reasons to be laid down it is to be parallelled to it, if not
preferred before it, the which we will hear propound.

1 The first reason is the nearenes to our own home, which naturally we are so
much addicted unto, being but the half of the way to Virginia, having a
convenient passage for three seasonable Months, March, April and May, which
always accomodate fair winds to pass thither, sometime in 14. or 20. days,
seldom in thirty days. Likewise the commodious return in June, Iulie,
August, September, October, and November, sometimes in 12. 16. 20. and now and
then in thirty days.

2 The great intercourse of trade by our Nation these threescore years and
upwards, in no small numbers frequenting the Newfound land, and daily
increasing, with the likelinesse thereof to continue, fish being a staple
commodity with us, and so sellable in other countries yearlie employing 3000.
thousand Seamen and breeding new daily, also fraighting three hundredth Ships
in that voyage, and releuing of 20000. people more here in England (for most of
these fishers are married and have a charge of Children, and live by this means
not being able to gain half so much by another labor) furthermore the
reuenew that groueth to the. King by the customs of French Spanish and
Straights goods imported, from the proceed of this fish trade suppose at the
least to the value of ten thousand pounds yearly.

3 The conueniency of transporting plantors thither at the old rate, ten
shillings the man, and twenty shillings to find him victual thither, likewise
other commodities by ships that go sackes at ten shilling per tun out, and
thirty shillings home, whereas Virginia and Birmooda fraightes, are five pound
the man and three pound the tun.

4 Fourthly and lastly, Security from foraine and domesticke enemies, there
being but few Saluages in the north, and none in the south parts of the
Country; by whom the planters as yet never suffered damage, against whom (if
they should seek to trouble us, a small fortification will serve being but few
in number, and those only Bow men. Also if any Wars should happen betwixt us
and other Nations, we need not fear rooting out. For the Ice is a Bulwark
all April commonly and after that during the whole Summer we have a garrison
of 9. or 10. 1000 of our own Nation with many good and warlike Ships, who of
necessity must defend the fishing season for their livings sake, as they
always formerlie have done in the Wars with Spain. And afterward in the
months of Harvest and Winter the winds are our friends and will hardly suffer
any to approach us, the which if they should, the cold opposite to the nature of
the Spainard will give him but cold Intertainement; neither will the Plantours
be altogether puffed up with careless security but fortify in some measure
knowing that Non sunt securi qui dant sua Colla securi.

Now having formerly laid down the temperature of the Air and disposition
of the Weather in the Winter season to be cold and consequently different from
other places of the same situation under the same Parallel in Europe, and by
experience answerable to 59. or 60. degrees thereof. It will be expected that I
should show some reasons concerning the same which according to mine opinion
(submitting my self to better Judgments) I will set down; It being a
general rule approved through America that any place under the same Parallel
of another place in Europe is as cold as those places which are situate in 12.
or 13. degrees to the North wards thereof, and the same rule holds a like on
either side of the Equinoctial. For example, the straights of Magelan in 54.
to the South of the Equinoctial, are more cold, snowie and boisterous than any
part of Europe in 65, Likewise on this side the Line, the Country about the
River Orenoaque and Trinidade in 9. or ten degrees is found as temperate as
Gualata under 23. degrees of more northerlie latitude in Africa. So likewise
Saint Augustine in Florida under 31. degrees is anserable to Valadulid in 42.
degrees in Spain, also the plantations under 37. degrees in Virginia are
correspondent in the Winter to the temperature of Deuenshire or Cornewell under
50. degrees hear in England, and although their Summer be some what hotter in
regard of the nearenes of the Sun, being then in Cancer within 15. degrees of
their Zenith, the Radius thereof then striking near at a right Angle, causing a
strange reflection, yet would it be much hotter if the Sun in his passage over
the great Oceane 3000. miles broad under that Parallel, betwixt Europe and
America, by the exhalation of waterish vapors and much moisture thereout, into
the middle region of the Air, did not cool the same, which being made more
gross and thick with misty Clouds, his Beams cannot pearce through with their
propre vigor and force, to heat the Earth; To this cooling of the Suns heat
helps also all those great fresh ponds and lakes so abounding in America.
Fresh waters being more naturally cold than salt, and both colder than the
Earth, of like quality also are the marish and Boggie grounds, the Lands not
manured and therefore more naturally cold, the Country slenderly peopled, void
of Towns and Cities, whereof Europe is full; the smoke whereof and heat of
fires much qualifieth the coldness of the Air. Lastly the chiefest reason of
the coldness in New Foundland in the VVinter season is the Ice which being
congealed into great firm Lands, Even from the North Pole, all along the
Coast of Gronland, Grenland, The North-west passage Terra de laberador and so
toward the Grandbay, all that tract having many Inlets and broken Lands apt
as vnnaturali wombes to breed and bring forth such Monsters, which being
nursed in their ruder arms, till the VVinter season past, are turnde forth of
doors in the Spring to shift for themselves, and being weary of their
imprisonments in those angry Climes with one accord as if they had agreed with
wind and stream take Ferrie into Newfound-land, which immuring us in the
months of Febru. and March, both which are subject to northeast winds and
blowing from this Ice causes it very cold. The current still setting it
southward as a Iaylor to bring it before the Judge, never leaves it till with
the help of the outset of Saint Lawrence Gulf it be presented nearer the Sun
to be broild by his scorching Beams and consumed. I cannot deny but in some
VVinters betwixt Christmas and March, Ice is bred in the Harbors and bays of
New-foundland, by reason of the calmness of the winds there incident, And the
want of streams not causing motion in the Waters, and when it is so frozen, it
is none otherwise then the Texsell or Inner Seas in Holand of 15. or 18. Inches
thickness, and breaks and consumes in the Spring; all fresh Lakes frozen
opens in the end of March or the beginning of April, which brings with it many
showers to wash away Snow, and bare the ground; and in the middle of the Month
many Ships arrive of the English, some French, and in the midest of May some
Portingalls. All which as so many Reapers come to the Harvest, gathering in
abundance the wonderful blessings of the Lord.

I might hear further discourse of our discoueries, conference with the
Saluages by Master John Gye their manner of life. Likewise of the managinge our
business in our plantations with the descriptions of their situations in 2.
places 16. miles distant from other on the northside the bay of conception, of
the manner charge and benefit of our fishings with the several strange
forms, and natures of Fishes, projects for making Iron, Salt, Pitch, Tar,
Tirpintine, Frank-Incense, Furs, Hope of trade with Saluages and such like,
with many accidents and occurences in the time of my government there, but these
may suffice as Verbum sapienti; being of sufficient truth to remove errors of
conceiving the Country more pleasant by reason of his natural sight in the
Sphere, then it is indeed, also to convince and take away malicious and
scandelous speeches of malign persons, who out of envy to GOD and good Actions
(instructed by their father the Devil) have sought to dispoile it of the dew,
and blamish the good name thereof. And lastly to induce thee, gentle Reader,
to the true consideration thereof as a thing of great consequence to our Nation
not only at present, but like to be much more beneficial when the
plaintations there shall increase, which God grant to his own glory and the
good of our Commonwealth.

FINIS.

