A SERMON PREACHED AT TRAFFORD IN LANCASHIRE AT THE MARRIAGE OF A DAVGHTER OF
THE right Worshipful Sir EDMOND TRAFFORDE Knight, the 6. of September Anno.
1586.

By WILLIAM MASSY bacheler in divinity, and fellow of Brasennose College in
Oxforde.

Prouer. 19.14. House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers, but a
godly wife comes of the Lord.

AT OXFORD. Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are (...) be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Tigres head, 1586.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL HIS VERY GOOD PATRON SIR EDMUND TRAFFORD KNIGHT W. M.
wishes health and long life in this woorlde, and in the next to come aeternall
foelicity.
I Having (right Worshipful) received by your good means, great courtesies
both in the country and at my study in Oxforde, and as not able any way to
requite the like, I have yet and will still keep the same in a grateful
memory. In the mean time at a good testimony hereof I dedicate this Sermon
to your Worship, which at your request I preached at your house before the
right honorable the most noble Earl of Darby, and the right reverend father in
God the B. of Chester with diverse Knights and Esquires of great Woorship at
the solemn marriage of your daughter, a modest and virtuous Gentlewoman,
married to a young Gentleman of great worship and good education. The which holy
marriage God bless even as he blessed Joseph, Genesis 48.20.
that it may be said of their issue as it was said of his children, God make
them as Ephraim and Manasse^.

For your self as you have long been a principal protector of Gods truth and
a great countenance and credit to the Preachers thereof in those quarters, and
have hunted out and vnke^neled those sly and subtle foxes the Jesuits and
seminary Priests out of their c^lles and caves, (...) the v^t^rmost of your
(...), with the great ill will of many both open and private enemies to the
prince and the Church, but your reward it with the Lord: and as you have
maintained still yo^^ house with great hospitality in no point dim^^ing the
glory of your worthy predecessors, but rather adding to it: So I pray God still
continue your zeal, your liberality, your loyalty and fidelity to your
prince, Church and common wealth, that here you may line long with increase of
worship, and after the race of your life welr^^^e here you may be partaker of
chose unspeakable ioies in the kingdom of Heaven which be prepared for all
the elect children of God, unto whose blessed protection I recommend you and al
yours. Amen.

Yours to command in Christ Jesus. WILLIAM MASSY.

The text, Psalm. 128. 1 BLessed is every one that fears the Lord and walks
in his ways etc.

2 When thou eatest the labors of thine hands thoushalt be blessed, and it
shall be well with thee.

3 Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the sides of thine house,

4 And thy children like the olive plants round about thy table.

4 Lo surely thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

5 The Lord out of Sion bless thee, that thousee the wealth of Jerusalem all
the days of thy life.

6 Yea that thou see thy childrens, etc.


THE fit opportunity of this time, this great co^course of all sorts have
moved me to take this text, and to undertake to entreat of the honorable estate
of marriage before this honorable and worshipful assembly: wherein if you
cousider the antiquity thereof, God appointed it before the fall of Adam in
paradise: if you respect the necessity, it is natural, and therefore agreeable
to all estates: if you seek after comfort, then virtus vnita fortior, it is
not good, man should be alone. If you care for delectation in an honest
matter, then of all bonds and loves none is so delectable, none is so
inviolable as is the bond and love betwixt the husband and the wife. Lastly if
you mark the continuation thereof from elder times to these our present days,
then behold our Savior did honor marriage with his honorable presence; Ioh. cap.
2.
and with his first most glorions miracle. The godly learned in all ages of all
degrees at al times both princes the nobility and gentility the state
ecclesiastical, the people, as Moses, Aaron, David, Eli, Samuel, Esaias,
Zachary, and all the Apostles but John, the ancient fathers, and reverend
bishops in the pure and primitive times, as Tertullian, Hilary, Nazianzen,
Spiridion, with others have commended, allowed and practiced the same, neither to
the hinderance of their functions nor detriment of the common wealth, nor the
derogation of the glory of God. Iuelapol.
All which have been by our men both by pen, and in the pulpit proved
substantially by scriptures, sufficiently by fathers, and perspicuously by
ancient histories, whereof to discourse more fully I cannot, but will content my
self with a short compendious enarratio^ and explication of this text, wherein
I note these two things. First a description of the husband, the wife and
children with their feuerall and singular duties. Secondly a peticion or
prayer for them.

First in the description of the hitsband the first and chiefest quality
wherewith he must be adorned and furnished is, 1. Part.
to fear god, to serve him aright, to have a right and a righteous faith,
which must be grounded on the word of God. Let me speak as I have read, and I
do believe as I speak: I would have this husband whom I describe to be a
protestant, and to mary a protestant. I would have them both to be of one
religion, and to be of a sound religion, which I am persuaded is not the
stubborn obstinacy of the Jew nor the Godless impiety of the Turk, nor the
vain superstition of the Papist, but is the ancient catholic and apostolic
faith which is now both preached by us and professed by you, that is to believe
rightly, to live uprightly, to offer the sweetince^se of our prayers to god
above, steedfastly to believe to be saved only by Christ's death without any
merit of ours, to frequent the church, to receive the Lords supper in both
kinds, to honor and obey Rings and Princes as the most noble and excellent in
their dominions, and in a word to fear God Such a reverend and religious fear
had Abraham over his son Isaac to mary him not to a profane gentile or
heathenish woman, Genesis 2.3.
but one of his own stock and lyneall descent, that served and worshipped the
same true God that he did: Thus does the blessed Apostle teach, Cor. 6.14.
we must not draw the yoke with infidels. For betwixt this godly husband and
virtuous wife, there must be an equality in years and in virtues, both young or
both old, and no mean love soon hot soon cold, but a most ardent and
fervent love which cannot be quenched with a flud of waters, which cannot be
without this fear of God, and except they be of the same religion, Ambrose.
for so defends Ambrose: Inter quos est diuersareligio, inter eos non est
firma amicitia. Those that be of a contrary religion, the love betwixt them is
not sincere nor cannot be of any long continuance. Many err notoriously in
their marriages through their careless contempt of this fear of God. Some mary
in their noneage and minority, some respect only beauty, others harken after
lands, others after gold and silver, following the Poet:

O ciues ciues quare^da pecunia primum, virtus post (...). And many one for
land takes a fool by the hand. Others are not ashamed to hold this vile and
villainous opinion, as profane Atheistes, Agood marriage if the wife were away.
But are we stronger than Sampson, wiser than Solomon, greater than Achab to
tempt the Lord, who all most grievously offended in this point? Sampson was
thereby dishonored, Solomon brought so far through idolatrous women from this
fear of God, that some of the ancient fathers doubt of his salvation. Ring
Achab of himself was sold to all mischief, but was made the worse through
the wicked counsel of his ungracious wife Iesabel: 1 King ^.22.
but they both had their tragical ends and well deserved: a terrible spectacle
for the like to al posterity. These worldly marriages are justly refuted by him
who said, Mallem virum pecunia, quam pecunia^ viro indigentem. Themist. offic.
2.
Better is an honest poor man than a wicked rich man. And those foolish
marriages are forbid by the wise man in his book Ecclesiasticus, Marry thy
Daughter, Cap. 7.25.
and so shall thou perform a weighty matter: but give her unto a man of
understanding. Glaucus in Homer preferred copper before Goolde, Hom. Iliad. ^.
whereby he showed his folly. Martha chose the woorser part, Luke 10.41.
whereby she showed her woorldelinesse. Esau preferred a mess of delicate
broth before his birthright, for the which he is called of the Apostle a
profane man. Heb. 12.16.
So many prefer beutie before bounty, riches before virtue, gold and silver
before shamefastness and godliness, lands and inheritances before honesty and
discretion. But this our religious husband must fear the Lord with a Godly
fear, Ios. 24.15.
like the good son of Joshua who has this blessed testimony that he feared
the lord with his whole family. Pro. 1.7.
For this fear of the Lord is the beginning of al wisdom. Luke 18.2.
As for those men that resemble the rigorous judge, that neither fear God, nor
good man, that never think of the salvation of their sinful seduced souls,
that either be Athiestes or Libertines or Machiuelians or Spend-thriftes or
covetous Nabals or great Gamsters or Luxurious and Riotous persons or seditious
and traitorous papists, are no fit men to be such a husband as I propose.
But such I commend as here out Prince and Prophet, in royalty a Prince, in
learning a Prophet, Mat. 10.28.
does, who fear not men that can kill the body, but fear the Lord who can kill
both body and soul, and cast both into hell fire, even such a one as walks
not in the ways of the wicked or in his own ways, but in the ways of the
Lord, which is the second quality and duty of a good and Godly busband.

2 And walks in his ways.

The second quality of this husband is to walk in the water of the Lord,
wherein I may decipher unto you the wit and wisdom of a godly and religious
husband. 1. Cor 9.24.
Our life is aptly resembled to a race or course or a journey, in going whereof
a man must have a wise and expert guide to direct him in his journey. This
guide of our religion of our life of all our actions is the word of God. For
so our Prophet erclaimeth with a zealous exclamation, using a retoricall
subtecon both playing the opponent and respondent himself. Psalm. 119.9.
O wherewith shall a young man learn to redress and reform his ways: Even by
ruling himself according to thy word. This word is a rule to judge the
straight from the crooked, a squire to direct our building by, a compass to
guide our ship by, a Law to judge controversies by, and as a God in this
world to decide and determine all matters which shall arise in the Churches of
God, even to the end of the world. For our purpose the Jews erred in marriage
they would seek a divorce for every trifle, they would marry wives that were
young, fair, and wealthy, and when they were either old or poor or deformed,
they would put them away. They did also make the Church of God a denue of
thieves by their profane selling and buieng in it: but our savior reforms
these notorious errors by two principles: Mat. 19.8.
the one is, It was not so from the beginning: Mat. 21.13.
the other, It is writ, my house shall be called the house of prayer. And
certainly this husband shall show his wisdom in this, if he guide himself,
his wife and family according to this rule, to walk in the ways of the Lord,
which are fully and faithfully set down in the old and new Testament, Ier.
8.9.
for so the prophet thinks, You think you are a wise people, but you reject
the Law of God, and what wisdom can be in you? And Austen cites out of Job,
Enchirid. ad Laur. c. 2
this sentence, Hominis Sapientia est pietas. The Godly man is the wise man.
This wise husband may learn in this word to love his wife entirely, Pro.
5.18.
to be merry with her in the Lord, to abstain from too much bitterness, Col.
3.19.
to dwell with her according to knowledge, not to be rigorous but courteous
towardsher, for with the most, courteous persuasions preuail more than sharp
reprehensions do. But chiefly his wisdom shall appear in this, to bring to
his house no ill, naughty and defamed persons. So Menelaus did fondely in
entertaining to his house friendely that lewed and lascivious Parts, whereby
his wife fair Helena was defiled, as also he must be sufferable in the
importunities of his wife. For as a little jar in music is not easily espied,
so a little shrewdness in the wife may be colerated. 1. Pet. 3.7.
For this cause Saint Peter would have house bands to honor their wives, which
consistes in this, in providing sufficiently for their necessities by a godly
providence, and to bear with their infirmities in the Lord, Prou. 29.18 Eccle.
9.
and in no wise, a wise houseband may be jealous over the honesty of his wife,
for that either needs not, or boots not. Ouely let him he as zealous in
religion, as wise in his government of himself, his wife and family: so let
him avoid idleness, and labor diligently in his vocation, which is the third
quality of a good houseband.

2 When thou eatest the labors of thine own hands thou shall be blessed, and
it shall be well with thee.

This good husband must not be idle and slothful, but labor faithfully and
painefully in that vocation wherein God has called him. Genesis 2.15.
So Adam before his fall had this charge of God to dress the garden of Eden.
Genesis 3.15.
And after his fall this precept, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat
thy bread. The divine Philosopher Plato saw so much by the instinct of nature
Nemo sibi nascitur, Cic. Offic. 1.
we are borne to defend our Country to benefit and gratify our friends and
neighbors. There be four parts in the common wealth. The Prince as the head,
the honorable and woorshipfull, as arms and shoulders, the state
ecclesiastical as eyes, the common multitude as the feet. O blessed and happy
shall that realm be when these four parts agree in a sweet consort and
melody in the amiable and blessed love of peace and unity, discharging their
duties fully and faithfully in the fear of God. The Prince in appointing, the
nobility and gentry in counselling, the preachers in feeding, and the people in
beying. 2. King. 18.
For Princes, the imitation of David of Ezechias of Josias is worth the
imitation, who al were very diligent in appointing good laws for the religion
of God, and also I may not forget the great zeal and learning of Alphred king
of this la^d, Act. and Mon.
who divided the day into three parts, some hours he took for his private study
and service of god, some he reserved for the hearing of matters of state and
the common wealth, and the rest he left for his rest, repast and recreation.
For counselors they may imitate Joseph, who under king Pharao ruled the land
of Egypt with great and singular wisdom and providence, Genesis 41.39.
Dan. 44.5.
and they must be as Daniel was to Darius, in whom the enemies could find no
fault touching the government of his kingdom. For the Clergy to feed by
preaching by hospitality by godliness of life, Humfred de vita Iuel.
to follow that reverend Bishop of Salisbury, who followed the noble emperor
who said, O where should a captain die but in the field: so his poesy was, O
where should a Bishop die but in the pulpit? For where preaching fails there
the people perishes. Prou. 29.18 Romans 13.12.
For the common people they must be obedient to their Magistrate to love and
honor their Prince, to bear that nature and affection to their soueraign as did
the Israelites to David the king of Israel, who al made this noble
protestation, It is better that a thousand of us die than David our king. God
save David the king, if he die the great light of Israel is quenched: So let
al faithful and loyal subjects bear this affection to our most noble and
gracious Princess Elizabeth. 2 Samuel 18.3.
It is better that a thousand of us die by the seditious treacheries of our
false forsworn and fraudulent countrymen than Elizabeth our Queen. God
protect and preserve Elizabeth: If she die and miscarie the great light of
Israel shall be quenched.

Now if our husband be any of these four, he has something to do, he must be
careful to provide for his house, to feed and cloth his family, to instruct
his wife and children, to pay his servants their wages faithfully and truly,
and to walk in that vocation with a good conscience whereto God has called
him. Ari. oecom. lib. 1. cap. 6.
The office of the husband, is to get, the duery of the wife is to keep: the
office of the husband is honeslly to maintain his liuelihood, the duty of the
wife is, prudently to govern the househould. Such a noble care had the noble
Emperor Valerianus of whom thus it is writ, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Aula Valeriani erat referta pijs viris, and Ecclesia Dei facta est. The court
of Valerianus the Emperor was fraught and furnished with godly men, and made
the Church of God. Such a noble Captain was Cornelius who has this report to
fear the Lord with his whole family. Act. 10.1.2.
Thus if our husband labor in his vocation he shall have this blessing of the
Lord to eat the fruits of his own labors. Eccles. 1.
The most noble and learned King Solomon in those 12. Chapters of his book
Ecclesiastes declares most largely and learnedly how all things under the cope
of heaven are nothing but grief, sorrow, vexation and anguish, grief of body,
sorrow of heart, ^ix^tion of brain, and anguish of mind: but yet this to be
our part and portion and a blessing of God in this life, when we both sow and
trape, when we both plant the vine and drink the vine, when we build houses and
dwell therein, when we can be content to live of our own, for that is our own
that does us good, when we eat and drink without gluttony and drunkenness, in
sobriety and modesty in the fear of God. This is a blessing, this is a great
blessing, this is a great and gracious blessing of God himself, and such a
blessing shall this religious and wise and politic husband enjoy, when I have
described to you: wherein because I have bin longer than either perhaps I should
or you expected, I will be the shorter in the description of the wife and
children. Which thus follows in the Text.

3 Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the sides of thine house, and thy
children like the olive plants round about thy table.

Among the trees that be fertile and fruitful the Olive is commended for his
fatnes, Judge 9.9^
the fig tree for his sweetness, the vine for cheerfulnes, for wine drives away
sorrow, and is a souerain restoratiue for an heavy and pensive heart: so among
all creatures men and weomen be only commended for their learning, wisdom and
godliness. The comparison of a woman to the vine I will not amplify largely but
touch it briefly. First the vine is weak, Plin. lib. 4.
and must be underset and underpropped by some sure and strong stay: so the
wife is the weaker vessel more subject to infirmities, and a wise modest man
will not disclose her infirmities, but tolerat the same with good discretion: 2.
Sa. 11.1.7.
so Bersabe was more beautiful than strong, when she defiled her body with
David, brake her faith and love with her good husband Vrias: which was the very
occasion of his death. Eua the mother of all showed her self very weak when
she was beguiled with an aple. Genesis 3.6.
Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife was both weak and wicked, when she looked back in token she lusted
after Sodoma and Gomorra against the commandment of God, but she was turned
into a pillar of salt: a terrible spectacle and most horrible monument of
wicked back-sliders and sinful reuolters, Pliny. l. 14.
to al godly posterity. Secondly a vine is not only weak but low too, it grows
near the earth: So a godly wife must not be proud and stately in her own
conceits, but humble and modest in the presence of her husband. For a godly
wife neither must nor will seek a sovereignty or superiority over her husband.
Lomb. lib. 4
For the woman (as the master of the sentences does allegorise) was made of the
rib of man, that he should entreat her gently as his mate: she was neither made
of the head, that she should vsurp authority and power over him, nor yet of the
feet that she should be abused as a slave and vile servant by him: And even as
the lowest soils be commonly most battle and fertile, so those we men that be
most modest and humble, are mest filled and furnished with gods gifts and
graces, Iam. 4.6.
even in the greatest measure. For as the holy scripture says, god resists
the proud, Plin. l. 14.
and gives grace to the humble. Thirdly the vine is fruitful, it be areth
grapes plentifully, which well ripened, and mightily pressed, do yield great
store of wine, Galen. de. Sa. 4.
which cheereth the heart of man, refreshes the vital spirits, heateth the cold
stomach, helps the rawnes and crudity and many other infirmities of the same.
There are many wives which are fruitful in children, and this is a corporal
blessing: for so many godly children, so many blessings of God. In the old law
sterrility and barrennes was deemed as a curse of God, and therefore many godly
and religious weomen as Sara, Rachel, Rebecca, Genesis 3^.
Anna with others heartily and humbly prayed of god, that he would give the^
children. Psalm 127.5.
O happy and blessed is the man that has his quiver full of godly children
brought up in the fear of the lord, they shall be a terror to the enemy, a stay
to the country, and a comfort to their parents. But there is another spiritual
blessing, Good religion.
there is another fruitfulnes beeter tha^ this, that is, that the wife be
invested and adorned with good qualities. First that she fear God religiously,
and walk in his ways, for then shall God procure and purchase her favor and
grace in the eyes of her husband. And therefore we find by experience that
diverse weomen not so fair being godly, are better liked and loved of their
husbands, than others more amiable and beautiful, Pliny.
and yet not so godly. For as the loadstone draws hard iron to it: so this
fear of god in ye wife will easily move a wise husband: but it will force a
waiward husband to entreat hit lovingly and gently. Love.
And as to season unsavory meats, pleasant and delicat sauces be prepared: so
to give a good relish to the sweet food of honest marriage it must be tempered
and seasoned with a most ardent and fervent love. And good reason to love them to
who^ we have given our bodies and al, and chosen to be partakers of all ioies
and sorrows, of wealth and woe, of health and sickness, and for who^ we forsake
father, mother, brother, sister, frind, kif and kin and al, and that not for a
time, but during ye course of our life. I say it is good reason we should like
and love them, and that with a most near and dear affection. We read of noble
Iulia Pompeys wife, who expressed the sign of a most loving wife, for being with
child, when she saw her husbands warlick coat brought into the city al imbrued
with gored blood, fell into a sudden sound, scriching most rufully and woefully
crieng out. O Pompey Pompey farewell, and so this noble lady with her untimely
child prese^^ly dyed. The greatest maintainer of this houest love is
shamefastness, Shamefast. (...)
which is such a virtue in a woman, that without it the rest are al disgraced.
For this shamefastnes is given to weomen, for a defense to keep their
reputation, for a castle to preserve their chastity, for a fort to maintain
their honor, and for a garland to advance their praise and comme^dation. (...)
Aristotle the famous philosopher requiers in a maid to be mar^ed four
things, (...), riches, good pare^tage, beauty and virtue. Beauty is
commendable, a good parentage is honorable, wealth, land and a good
inheritance is not to be contemned: but the chiefest dowry, the best
inheritance, the most precious Jewel in a woman is virtue, and especially the
virtue of obedience. So our Apostle teaches, Wives obey your husbands. Ephesians.
5 22. Obedience
Man is fitter for this soueraynty of rule and regunent then a woman, even by
the law of nature, having greater skill to rule, experience to govern,
capacity to comprehend, wisdom to understand, strength to execute, carefulnes
to prosecute, patience to suffer, and a greater courage and magnanimity to
perform and perfect all purposes and practices whatsoever. Host. 1.2^
In the book of Hester we read of king Hasuerosh king of the Medes and
Persians, he had a masterly and imperious shrewe to his wife Queen Vasti, who
would not obey him in a certain matter. Whereupon he called and conue^ted his
nobles and counselors and by their counsel she was put away, and he married
the noble and virtuous lady Queen Hester. But let this imperious Oueene go.
Let us pass over Zantippe Soccates wife. Exodus 4. lob. 2.9.
Let Sipora Moses wife, let Jobs wife and good Tobias also, as most noble and
notorious shrewes go, and let every godly wife follow the good example of
godly Sara, who obeyed her husband Abraham with all dutiful reverence and
called him Lord in toke^ of her singular humility. Good name.
And as she must be obedient, so she must have an especial care of her good
name. For a good name is as a sweet ointment and as a most delicious and
precious perfume. Plutarch in Caesar.
Caesar would have his wife Pompeia not only fre from dishonesty, but also fre
from al suspicio^ both of dishonesty and disloyalty. There be many ways to
preserve this good name, but I take this to be as one most chief and excellent
in a maid or wife to be resident at home, as the snaile, Tit. cap. 2.5.
and not often to range and run abroad as Dina did. To keep home.
For by this means the house shall be better governed, her husband better
pleased, all evil suspicions avoided, and great expenses saved. For few there
be but they are great wasters in their gay and gorgeous apparel, which is the
more increased by gossoping and gadding abroad as the manner is in some places.
But our Apostle teaches godly weome^ not to delight in too gay and garish
apparel, 1 Pet 3. 1 (...) 2.9.
but so to attire themselves as well becomes modest matrons, and as is fittest
for the vocation of their husbands. And here our king and propher Oauid in
modesty a prophet, in majesty a king would have a godly wife to be as a side
and part of the house, or as a wall to the house to defend it, not to be a
ruin to pull it down, either by ye pride of her fancies, or pomp of her train,
or delicatnes of her diet, or sumptuousnes in Jewels, or bravery in apparel, or
lightness in conversation, to root up the walls of her house, to turn up al
topsituruy, and not to leave one stone upon another.

Now if the godly wife be as the fruitful vine, or fat flourishing olive, no
marvel if her children be finely and fitly resembled to the branches of the
vine or tender plants of the olive tree. The branch is tender, it will bend or
bow at your pleasure, the young children be pliable as soft wax, they be
flerible as tender olive branches, then a gentle rod will break no bones, Prou.
cap. Ephe. 6.4.
then he that spares the rod does spil and spoil the child. For this is the
exhortation of S. Paul, you Parents bring up your children in the faith and
fear of the lord, get you schoolmasters both to instruce them by doctrine and
reform them by discipline. For a child better unborn than untaught. Arist.
pol. l. 8. cap. 3.
The old Grecians (as the noble philosopher says) were wo^t to teach their
children 3. things (...). the which thus the fine and ingenious poet has
expressed, In Eunuch.
Facpericulum in literis, in palaestra, in musica. They were trained up in the
liberal and ingenious arts, as chiefly Grammar, Rhetoric, and Music, and in
feats of actiuity, whereby their bodies were made the stronger to abide tough
and long study the better. Pro. 22.6.
And king Salomo^ who was diligently taught of Nathan the prophet gives forth
this precept and profit, teach a child in his youth virtue and learning, and
when he coms to years he will not forget it. Act 7.22.
So Moses, so Dantel, so Samuel, so Paul, so Timothy, so Origin were trained up
from their infancy both in divine learning, 2 Timothy 3.
and most of them also in profane literature. The fruit shall be this, as S.
Ciril says, Contra Iu. lib. 7.
pueri sacris literis enutriti, postea fiunt religiosissimt, children nousled
and nursed up from their tender years in reading and hearing holy Scriptures,
they shall reap this fruit thereby not to be superstitious or heretical in
opinions, or hauty and lofty in spirite^s, but to be most religious, and as the
king of Israel saw, They will remember such things as they learn in their youth,
Pro. 2^.
the better when they come to years of discretion. And as in battle it is a
necessary point and poll^y for the getting of the victory and conquest ever our
enemies, that when one soldiar is slain, that another presently take his
station and place and therein fight manfully and coragiously so in the good
geueinment of a common wealth, when a good father dies some learned and wise
men take it to be a necessary point and policy for the mantenance and
preservation of peace and unity against eiull dissension and co^spiracy, that y
son take his place if he be able to weald and dicharge the like function and
veretio^.

4 Lo surely thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

This religious fear of God which brings to the husband wife and children both
temporal and spiritual blessings both in this life and in the life to come,
does consist in following virtues, and forsaking vices: which must be with all
carfulness avoided. Now the noisome and poisonful weeds which will hurt both
husband, wife and children, must with al diligence be grubbed out of the grounds
of our hearts, least the venomous and contagious weeds stifle and ouer-grow the
good and pure corn. The weeds be the sin of Sodom and Bomorra, polygamy,
incest, adultery, fornication, al uncleanness, common gaming, riotous and
prodigal living, careless security in the parents, and stubborn contumacy in
the children. These heinous and horrible vyees, consume our bodies, wast our
goods, shorten our lives, discredit our good names, make our enemies to mock
us, give occasion to the papists to blaspheme the name of god, and the religion
which we profess, endanger the salvation of our sinful souls, and never
escape the due and dreadful punishments of God either in this life, Eccles.
7.8. 2 Samuel 12.10 Genesis 9. Genesis 19.
or in the life to come. Take example by David, the sword of God did never
depart from his house. By Noah, he was mocked of his own son. By Lot, he
committed incest with his own daughters: by Anacleo^ a noble poet, who was so
famous a bibber of wine and strong drinks, that he was choked with a husk of a
grape. Take example of Eli an old judge, 1 Samuel 2.22.
an old priest, and an old father: and of his two rebellious sons Hophny and
Phinees, in the end the wicked and luxurious sons were killed in battle, one
of their wives died with child, Chap. 4.
theold father Ely fell backward from a stool and brake his neck, the ark of God was taken of the barbarous Philistines, and the glory departed from Israel.
For this purpose I have read this excellent history. There came once before
wise Solon a father with his son, one accusing the other. The father complained
of the disobedience of his son: and the son accused the father of his ill
education, which was the cause of his disobedience. Solon well considering the
cause, and perceiving a falt to be in both, did thus determine and decide the
matter: because the father had not brought up his son in good instruction, and
dutiful correction, therefore the father after his death should be deprived of
his sepulcher: and the son for his disobedience should be disinherited. You will
perhaps think this a sharp judgment of a wise and grave judge, but sore
diseases need strong medecins, and if Solons determination were put in ure in
these our days, I fear me some fathers would lack the honor of their burial,
and some sons would be put from their inheritance. But if the godly husband,
wife and children do avoid these notorious vices, if the husband be religious,
wise and laborious in his vocation, if the wife be chaste, modest, obedient and
humble, if the children be well schooled and brought up in the faith and fear
of the Lord: then they al shall be blessed both in the city and in the field,
Deuteronomy. 24.
in the fruit of their bodies, in the fruit of the ground, in their cattle, in
their basket, in their coming in, and in their going out: their Oxen shall be
strong to labor, Psalm. 144.
their sheep shall bring forth ten thousand in the streets, they shall not go
into captivity, they shall be blessed in all the labors of their hands, even as
the trees of the lord full of suck and sap, as the trees planted by the waters
side, they shall be planted in the house of the lord, they shall prosper and
flourish in their young years, in their old age they shall be fatre, fat, and well
liking, yea they shall see the church of God flourish, their children live long,
and peace in the commonwealth. For the which 3. here our prophet and Prince
David prateth, which petition of David I will shut up briefly thus in the
conclusion.

5 The Lord out of Syon bless thee that thou may see the good of Jerusalem
all the days of thy life.

6 Yea that thou see thy childrens children and peace upon Israel.

In this prayer of David three circumstances are worth the due consideration.
1. who prays. A king and a prophet. 2. to whom he prays. To the Lord that
dwells in Sion. 3. for what. For three things.

1 For the prosperity of the Church. 2 For the long lives of ye married parties.
3 And for the peace of Israel, which I may well understand the common wealth.
Great is the efficacity and force of prayer both in peace and war, in
prosperity and adversity, in health and sickness at all times and in all estates.
It is said, Orante Mose vicit populus, when Moses prayed for his people they
vanquished their enemies. Ioh. 5. Io. 14.16.13.
And this is our comfort that whatsoever we ask of the father in Christ's name
if it be co^medious and expedient for us, we shall be sure to obtain it. Then
no meruell if here the prophet and king of Israel give himselie to prayer. O
it is a great matter and of great importance when princes and nobles and men of
great worship be religious and given to prayer and to the holy service of God.
For this cause David was accounted a man after Gods own heart. 1 King. 20
For this cause Iostas that young king is so highly commended. For this cause
Ezechias his days were prolonged 15 years longer. This makes the church of
god to grow up lustily as the palm tree and to flourish as the tal Cedar of
Libanus, the people every man to sit quietly and peaceably under his own vine,
and the common wealth to have peace and plenty as in the happy days of
Solomon. Ciril in an epistle to Cheodosius even in the beginning thus says,
Citil. Epist. ad I heod.
p^etas in Deum est fundamentum regijs honoribies. O noble emperor the state
of your common wealth hanges of your religion toward God. If you serve him
aright your kingdom shall flourish, one of your royal seed shall always sit on
your royal seat: but if you forsake God he will forsake you, he will raze and
root out your memories from the face of the earth, he will trample your name
and fame under his feet, he will east your honors in the dust, and this is a
curse of al curses.

The 2 circumsta^ce is, to whom he prays: eue^ to the lord of Sion. Our
prophet and prince prays not to Abraham, to Isack, to Jacob, or to any
archangel or angel in heaven, but to the lord which dwelled in Syon. Mat. 9.
Ioh. 16.
We have a plain commandment to pray to him alone, we have a firm promise
that so praying our prayers shall be hard: we have the examples of al godly men
so to pray both in the old and new testament. Cicero reports of Caesar thus, qui
ad te non audent accedere Caesar, Orat. pro Deiotar.
tuam humanitatem ignorant. They that be affrayd to speak to thee o Caesar, they
know not thy singular humanity: so I say they that allege either their own
indignity or the severity of god against sinners, and so dare not come to Jesus
alone by hearty prayer, they know not his singular humanity and humility.

The 3 circumstaunce is the matter for the which our prophet prays, which is
threefold: for the church, the long lives of the married persons, for the peace
of the common wealth. There be 2 deadly and mortal enemies to the common wealth
and church of god. Heresy, and treachery. The subtle serpent in Genesis did
move Adam and Eua to taste of the forbidden tree, Genesis 3.4.
and said, you shall not die: so the cruel and subtle serpent of Rome eggeth
forward and encorageth his sworn vassals of Spain, France and Italy and our
desperate devilish English rebels to assay to touch ye Lords anointed and alms
them with fair golden promises, you shall not by, you shall get you a name, you
shall be men of great renown. It is an heroical designment and meritorius
before God and good catholics. Iuel in a (...) of letie.
A famous and most learned Bishop of this land, does hold there be four
ordinary means to keep heresy from our church, and treason from our commonwealth. 1 Learning. The first is to maintain universities and free schools. 2
Preaching. The second is to appoint learned preachers in every parish Church to
catechize the youth, to teach the people obedience. 3 Thankfulness. The third to
be thankful to god for all his benefits. 4 Discipline. The fourth discipline to
reward the godly and punish the wicked. The execution of these things will
make our church and common wealth to flourish; the contempt of these will make
our court as Sion the holy hill of ye Lord, our church as Jerusalem the holy
city of the lord, Luke 19.
our land as Judea the holy land. Sion was, Jerusalem was, Judea was, but now
Sio^ is utterly razed, Jerusalem is utterly ransacked. Therefore let not Rome
brag of any prerogative of her place for antiquity, or palace for royalty.
That which happened to Jerusalem may happen to Rome great controversy there is
betwixt the Jesuits and us where antichrist should sit, and who he is. Ad Did.
I will say nothing of S. Ierom, only I will cite one sentence of Bernard which
shall make the matter clear. Ep. 125. Bestia illa in apocalypsi cu^ datumest os
loque^s blasphemias, and bellu gerere cum sanctis, Be. ad Gau. de lorator.
petre cathedram occupat tanquam Leo paratus ad pradam. The beast spoken of in
the Apocalypse to whom is given a mouth to speak blasphemies and to make war
with saines, does now occupy the seat of Peter as a Lion prepared to his pray.
The place then for Antichrist is the great city Babylon, Roma. Septicollis.
sited on seven hills. The names of the hills he Palatinus, 2 These. 2.
Capitolinus, Aue^tinus, Caelius, Esquilinus, Viminalis, Quirinalis. Then for
the person who is that great Antichrist (if ye ty him to one person) then it
must either be the Turk, or y Jew, or the heathen emperor, or the Pope. But if
Antichrist eue^ the great antichrist must sit in the temple of god as god, if
antichrist must deceive by false and frandulent miracles, Apoc. 18.
if antichrist must be a false and foolish prophet as Balaam, if antichrist
must have the name of mystery written in his forehead as once ye hypriest of the
Jews had in his Lamina, sanctit as sehouae Holiness to ye lord, if antichrist
must overcome by flattery, by sweet and sugared speeches as harlots do, not by
arms and dint of sword as cruel tyrants do: the^ where antichrist shall sit and
who antichrist is, I refer it to ye iudgemets of ye learned and consciences of
the godly that hear me this present day. To God the father. cand.


