SAINT PETER'S CHAIN: Consisting of eight golden Linckes, most fit to adorn
the necks of the greatest States. Nobles, and Ladies in this land, as the
chiefest Jewel of true Nobility: and not unfit for the meaner sort.

Digested into eight Chapters, and published by R. M. Minister.

With a Prayer annexed to the end of every Chapter.

2. PETER 1, 5, 6, 7. Join virtue with your faith, etc.

FIDES VINCIT MVNDVM. CHARITAS PRO LEGE REGE ET GREGE 1. Faith. 2. Virtue. 3.
Knowle. 4. Temper. 5. Patience. 6. Godliness. 7.Broth. kin 8. Love.




LONDON, Printed by John Windet, dwelling at Paul's Wharfe at the sign of the
Cross Keys, and are there to be sold. 1596.

To the Christian godly disposed Reader, grace and peace be multiplied.
ALthough I am not ignorant (courteous Reader) how dangerous a thing it is
accounted, to write and publish books now in these plentiful days of
learning and knowledge: also, how many great scholars and learned men of our
land, are retained from doing that public good (as I take it) to Church and
commonweal, according to their several abilities, because many men complain,
that books want readers, more than readers want books: and because they fear
the censure (oftentimes) of the^ that are enemies both to God and al godliness:
(for who, I pray you, are the common carpers of our time? Are they not for the
most part either Papists or Atheists?) yet am I of another, and I hope, better
opinion, that these forenamed reasons or any other of that kind, that may be
named, ought not to affray or discourage any from occupying of their talents
in the fear of God, as well in writing, as in preaching, so that thereby the
one be not hindered by the other.

What though there be many books? yet al books are not godly books. True it
is, that many have justly complained of the multitude of vain and wanton
books, but never did I read or hear any godly man complain, that there are
too many books tending to virtue, and godliness: nay, let me say more, what
though there be a multitude of good and learned books? yet we know, the most
part of people are not learned, and as necessary it is, if it be not more
necessary, that the ignoranter sort have moebookes, composed according to
their capacities, as it is for the learned to have many learned books
imprinted, to the increase of their knowledge. What though there be a great
many that will carpe and find fault with our well doing? Is it not
sufficient that we have God and a good conscience witnessing with us, and
comforting us in our labors?

Lastly, if every circumstance be duly weighed, some convenient time spent in
writing need not be a hindrance (as some pretend) but rather a furtheraunce
unto preaching: for can any write without studying? and will not that studying
help the^ in preaching? Has only S. Austen said, Proficiendo scribo, and
scribendo proficio? In profiting I write, and by writing I profit? Have not as
famous men as Europ has bred these many years said ye like, that have written
much, and yet preached almost every day? Writing, we see, unto the^ was no let
or hinderance unto preaching: whose example therein might make many learned men
of our days to co^siderwhat their callings do require. Thus if we will duly
examine this matter, we shall see how these usual objections to hinder men from
doing the most good they can in their callings, are but as thick mistes,
which the Sun beams of truth will easily scatter and disperse, or like unto
bugs, to afright little children withal, that are afraid with the shaddowe of
any thing. And now, (christian Reader) for mine own part, as I have no cause
to use many words of persuasion unto thee, for the acceptance of these my
poor labors, seeing I have (not long since) found more favor that way, than
I my self did expect, or durst to desire, so I will not use many speeches more
in this preface, to hinder thee from reading the book it self, wherein, if
thou take the least comfort or profit, I will account my self well
recompensed for my pains.

The whole book it self is but little, and yet I have digested it into
several Chapters, that thou may read the same with the more delight. The
title of this book is somewhat glorious, the Argument surely godly, only the
handling of it is plain and simple. The substance whereof this Chain was
made, is a metal finer than the gold of Ophir, the workman that by the
spirit of God first riuited the links of this Chain together, was such a one,
to use the words of Saint Paul, as did study to show himself approved of
God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed. It was Saint Peter's 2 Timothy 2.15,
work, therefore called S. Peter's Chain. The title, you may see, is not
forced: the matter I have endeavored to handle, according to this our Apostles
own method: amplifying and enlarging the same, agreeable with the tenor of the
scripture. The only mark that I level at is this, first, that as satan by
his subtlety labors to link many sins together in one soul, and to draw
many souls with him in his chain unto hell, so the godly may be as careful
to link many virtues together in one, and so even to tie themselves to virtue
and godliness, as with a most strong Chain, which all the devils in hell may
not be able to break. Again, seeing we live in these last and loose days,
wherein Mat. 24.12
sin does abound, and iniquity has gotten the vpperhande, seeing the whole
world, as Saint John says, is set on wickedness, and people draw sins unto
them 1 Ioh. 9.19,
as it were with cart-ropes, insomuch that it seems the whole foundation of
virtue and godliness is shaken, that so in like manner ye godly may have so many
props as are possible, to stay them from falling, and being knit and lincked
together with this holy Chain, they may by little and little hale and tow
forward, one helping and supporting another toward the haven of rest, where
the tempestuous seas of sin and iniquity leave raging. Solomon, I remember,
Eccle. 4.12.
speaks of a threefolde cord, that is not easily broken: but here is no
cord, but a strong cable, not of three, but of eight twists, to draw thee
forward unto heaven. This cable must not be divided into parts, for then one
twist will break after another, thou must hold by all or none. Therefore is it
rightly called a Chain, because one lincke must hold fast the other, Faith must
hold Virtue, Virtue must keep Knowledge, Knowledge must preserve Temperance,
Temperance must stay Patience, Patience must retain Godliness, Godliness must
uphold Brotherly kindness, Brotherly kindness must draw on love or Charity
with it, and Love must have recourse back again unto Faith, and so the Chain
is perfected. So that in deed, he that has one of these lincks, has all, and
he that has not all has none. Here is no boasting of faith without works:
here is no rejoicing in works without faith, here is no virtue without
knowledge, no knowledge without temperance, no patience without godliness, no
godliness without brotherly kindness, no kindness among brethren without godly
love or charity. Begin with faith, and end in love, (for faith works by
love) so shall thou be sure to have the end of thy faith, even the saluauation
of thy soul, which is the thing that I heartily wish unto thee and me. Thus do
and thou shall live, thus live, and thou shall never Gal: 5.6.1. Pet. 1.9. Heb.
12.2.
die. Vale in authore salutis. Farewell in Christ, the author and finisher of
thy faith.

Thine in the Lord, Radford Mauericke.

A view of Saint Peter's Chain.
See (gentle Readers) see, a Chain of peerless price,
is offered here, t'adorne your minds withal.
Accept it I you pray, and use it with advice,
it may you comfort bring, when world threat'ns thral.
Jewels, Gems, and corrall, pearls and precious stones,
came from the earth, to earth they must again,
No pleasure in this life, is free from grief and groans,
the greatest joys, are often mixed with pain.
This Chain therefore you may account, as treasure sure,
for it has had the trial of the fire.
Put case these papers here, will not long time endure,
yet is the ground work sure; if you desire,
Eternal bliss, with holy saints, and Angels bright,
where tears and greefes, are banished far away:
This Chain will keep your feet, to tread the path aright,
unto that blessed life that dures for aye.
Enclinea while your ears, to hear Saint Peter's voice,
have faith in Christ, first planted in your breast,
Remember next, of virtues all, to take the choice.
good knowledge will you bring to virtues rest,
Sobriety forthwith, in heart you must embrace,
dame patience, must stand fast by your side;
Consider then to run, religions godly race,
that godliness with you may still abide.
Have loving kindness too, unto your brethern dear,
let godly love your christian hearts inflame:
Ames deeds are surely good, they do the needy cheer,
If you do this, it will increase your fame.
Now have I don forsooth, both tongue and pen are at a stay,
my muse is dull, my vain is dry, your pardon do I pray.
The contents of the book.
Of Faith. Chap. 1. Of Virtue. Chap. 2 Of Knowledge. Chap. 3 Of Temperance.
Chap. 4 Of Patience. Chap. 5. Of Godliness. Chap. 6. Of Brotherly kindness. Chap.
7 Of Love. Chap. 8
SAINT PETER'S CHAIN:
Of Faith. Chap. 1.
FOr as much as there is ingrafted in the minds of al me^, a natural
disposition and inelimation, greedily to desire such things as seem either
most fair and beautiful, or else most sweet and acceptable unto our outward
senses, as Eua desired the forbidden fruit, because it was fair to the Genesis
3.6. and 3.6
eye, and Adam affected the saine, by too much harkening unto the persuasions
of his wife: And the carnal Israelites preferred their gross feeding in Egypt
before Numb. 11.4.5
heavenly Manna, for that it did better relish their fleshly taste: and the
wicked Sodomites would grope with their hands (after they were stricken with
blindness) to find out Lots door: and Rahel would forgo Genesis 19.11.
for a time the company of her husband, for the great desire she had unto
Leahs Mandraks, which as we may gather out of the Canticles, have a very
fragrant and and 30.15. Canti. 7.13.
and odoriferous savor. For as much therefore (I say) as it is our wanton eyes,
our itching ears, our dainty taste, our fine smeling, or our gross handling,
that must advise us with their deceitful counsel, to make choice of things
that seem most pleasant to the contentation of our several senses, and
disordered desires; what maruaill is it Man's senses deceivable.
that this rich Gem, and precious Jewel of faith lies hidden among us,
regarded of so few, yea despised and trodden under feet of many? Is it because
there is no excellent or virtuous operation in it? Not so, but because the
virtue thereof is so divine and precious, that it cannot be comprehended by our
earthly senses: Our eyes are dim they cannot see it: our ears are dull, they
cannot hear it: our taste is glutted, and cannot relish it, our fingers are
benumbed they cannot feel it: our noses are stopped, they can not smell it.

Heb. 11.1
and invisible substance, but yet it does not follow that she is able of her
self to understand the secresies of faith, for one invisible thing does not
always know the secresies of another: as for example, the devil The devil
knows not our thoghts Heb. 4.12.13.
who is invisible, does not know the secret thoughts of man which are also
invisible, but only God knows them: nothing more does the soul understand the
virtue and secret operation of faith, except it be first revealed by the
spirit of God.

This is proved most plainly by that saying of Saint Paul, The natural man
cannot 1. Cor. 2.14.
perceive the things that are of God. Now when the Apostle speaks of the
natural man, we must needs confess, that under the word man, he comprehends
both parts of man, soul, and body, for the body without soul is not a man,
but a lump of flesh, or a carkesse: so the^ it is plain by the words of Saint
Paul that the soul of a man unregenerate No man unregenerate does know the
secresies of faith.
does no more know the secresies of faith, and the things that are of God,
then the body does.

Moreover, if we consider the principal parts and powers of the soul, (since
the fall of Adam) shall we perceive any thing therein but mere darkness and
ignorance? What is our reason and understanding, even of them that have the
finest wits, is it not mere foolishnes? Is not our knowledge blinded? Is not
our freewil utterly lost and decayed? Can we make choice of any thing that is
good? Surely no: for if the very regenerate do but know in part, (as the
Apostle says) then doubtless the natural man knows nothing 1. Cor. 13.12.
in respect of true knowledge: for which cause the same Apostle speaking unto
such natural men (how witty soever they be in their own conceit) says
plainly, if they think they know any thing, (meaning 1. Cor. 8.2.
in the mysteries of God, they know nothing (says he) as they ought to know.

Wherefore we may affirm for certainty, without any further proof, that no
man by his own natural reach of wit and understanding, can judge of the
virtues and qualities of faith, but only such as are renewed and borne again
by the spirit of God.

Now then (as I said) is it any marueil that this precious Jewel of faith, is
so smally estimated and slenderly accounted of in the world, of mere worldly
and carnal men? Seeing they have no skill at al to judge of the rare virtues and
operation thereof, neither by means of the outward senses of their bodies, nor
yet by the force and powers of their souls, but are altogether like unto the
Cock, whereof the fable speaks, that seeing a precious Gem or Jewel lying on
the donghill, wished he had had one grain of Barley for that precious Jewel,
because he knew not the price and virtue of the same, and therefore did wish
for that, which served best, to the satisfying of his own appetite and desire.

Seeing then the case thus stands, that most people are so miserably
deceived, choosing with greedy earnestnes and desire, and as it were with both
hands apprehending the vain and transitory things of this life, and make small
or none account, but even like filthy swine trample under their feet, Gods
Treasures contemned of worldly men.
those precious pearls of the word of God, of faith and free salvation
purchased by the blood of Christ, to the high dishonouring of Almighty God, to
the endaungering of their own souls, to the great scandale or offense of
other, and to the extreme grief of heart of each true faithful and godly
Christian; seeing the case thus stands (I say) and these premises duly
considered, I have thought it meet, and verily agreeing with my calling, to
spend a little time in contriuing these plain and simple treatises of faith,
and the fruits thereof hereafter following, to this end that partly by the
help hereof, if God give a blessing thereunto, but chiefly by prayer,
reading, and hearing of Gods word preached, the ignorant sort may attain unto
the knowledge of faith and other mysteries of God by grace, which we by our
own natural knowledge and understanding, are not able to attain unto: and
that also these rich gifts of God, as faith, and the rest, may be the better
accounted of, to Gods glory, and our eternal comfort and salvation..

And because it is the mind of the holy 2. Pet. 1, 5.
Ghost, (as Saint Peter notes) that all virtues whatsoever should be linked
unto faith, as the very fountain from whence they must spring, therefore I
have made this my first Chapter, wherein I will (God assisting me) in as brief
manner as I can, declare and make plain to those, whose eyes it shall please
the Lord to open, what an excellent and precious Jewel faith is, as also what
great profit and commodity we receive by it.

But here first of all, entreating of faith in general, it shall not be
amiss to make known what faith it is whereof I will entreat; for there is a
certain Moral faith or trust, which we call fidelity, that ought to be
between man and man, and even this is a virtue worthy of commendation: there is
also an Historical faith, when we only believe the bare History, whether it
be humane, or divine, without any further application of it unto our selves,
and this faith is also in some sort worthy of due praise: and there is a
Temporary faith, when some do believe for a time (as our Savior says)
nothing Mat. 13.21.
worthy to be commended, but is like unto that faith whereof Saint James
speaks, that is dead in it self (to speak nothing Iam. 2.17.
of that faith which is called miraculous, because it has ceased for the most
part, since the time of the Apostles).

Now it is not my purpose to entreat of any of these, seeing they are gifts
common What faith it is whereunto Saint Peter would have virtue joined.
to the good and to the bad: neither does Saint Peter mean to link his
Golden Chain with any one of them, for that would disgrace his whole work: but
that faith which I mind to speak of, is supernatural, divine and heavenly,
far more glorious and excellent, then can be comprehended (as I have already
said) by the wit and natural understanding of man.

But what is it (will some say) that you do so commend? Will thou know? Surely
it is that, which thy tongue has uttered a thousand times, when thou have said
I believe in God. And is this such a great matter (will worldlings say) to
believe in God? Does this only thing deserve so great praise and commendation?
Yea verily. But here beware, A Caveat.
least thou deceive thy self in the understanding of the words; for there be
three things almost like in words, but far differing in true sense and
meaning: namely to believe God, to believe there is a God, and to believe in
God. The devils believe the first and the second, that God is true of his
promise, which is to believe God, and they also believe there is one God, and
no more, and tremble (as Saint James says) but they Iam. 2.19.
believe not the third, that is in God, which is as much as to embrace him for
our good God, and to rest and repose our selves on him and his word only,
which is that true justifying faith, whereof I speak. So then we must take heed
(as I said) that we do not deceive True faith believes in God.
our selves, thinking we believe very well, if we believe God, and believe
there is a God, which thing indeed we ought also to do, but we must go
further, to believe in God, that is to acknowledge him for our good God and
Savior, and this is meant by saying, I believe in God, I believe (I say) and not
another for me, for every one shall be saved by his own faith, and not by
another, as the Prophet Habacuk says: The just shall Haba. 2.4.
live, by his own faith.

Furthermore to believe in (...) to believe in God the Father, in Go^ ^he son,
and in God the holy Ghost, three persons in trinity? and one God in unity of
essence: And is it then so easy a matter to believe the trinity in unity, and
the unity in trinity? No verily; flesh and blood does not reueal these things
unto us (as Christ said unto S. Peter) Mat. 16.17
but only God himself, both by the outward preaching of his word, and by the
inward working of his holy spirit. Wherefore Galat. 5.6
a true lively and justifying faith (which evermore works by love) may be
thus A definition of a true lively faith.
defined, namely that it is a most certain and sound persuasion of Gods great
good will and favor toward us, grounded upon the truth of his free promises,
made unto mankind in his son Christ Jesus, revealed unto us by the preaching
of his word, and sealed in our hearts by his holy spirit.

Thus then having briefly and plainly showed, what faith it is whereof I mind
to entreat, as also how it is defined and known: I will now (God willing)
proceed in my purpose, to show (as much as in me lies) out of the treasury of
Gods word, the excellency and goodness of this faith, what rare virtues are to
be found in it, and the The preaching of Gods word the means to bring us unto
faith.
mighty working and operation thereof, to this end, that neither so precious a
jewel as faith is, nor the means whereby we may attain it, I mean the
preaching of Gods word, may be so much despised and What titles are given unto
faith: Mat, 7, 6
conte^^^d of wicked worldlings as it is.

First it makes not a little to the commendation of this faith, that the holy
ghost by the mouth of Saint Peter does call it precious: for writing to the
dispersed Jews, which were converted to the faith, 2. Pet. 1.1.
he begins his second epistle thus: Simo^ Peter a servant and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to you, (says he) that have obtained like precious faith with
us, by the righ teousnesse of our God and Savior Jesus Jude 20
Christ. And Saint I^de in his epistle does call it most holy, saying: And ye
brethren edify your selves in your most holy faith. Now we know the holy
Ghost does not delude or deceive us, as men use to do many times, in giving
glorious names and titles to things that are of no great value, but calling
faith precious, and most holy, it is to signify unto us, that it is a most
rare and singular jewel, of great price and estimation, Faith a jewel of great
price.
and that so we should esteem and account of it: for no sooner can we hear of
Gems, pearls and precious stones, but presently we are ravished with the
desire of them.

Therefore the Scripture oftentimes under the names and titles of precious
things, that we most account of in this life, does comprehend heavenly and
everlasting treasures, as in the 7. of Matthew our Savior Christ says: Give
not that which is holy unto dogs, meaning his holy and blessed word: neither,
says he, cast ye your pearls before Mat, 6, 20
swine.

And a little before in the sixth Chapt. seeing how greedily we desire worldly
treasure, and 13.14
bids us to lay up treasure in heaven. And in the thirteenth of Matthew, he
first compares the kingdom of heaven to a treasure hid in the field, which
being found we should sell all that we have, to buy that field: and 45
and again in the same place, considering how merchants do venture their goods
and We ventur much for worldly, but very little for heavenly treasure,
lives, and undertake all dangers by sea and by land, to seek for gold, pearls,
and the like; he draws this second similitude, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is like unto a marcha^t man, that seeks good pearls, who having found
a pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had and bought it. And not
only is the word of God, and faith, and other such means to bring us unto
heaven, comprehended under these terrene and earthly similitudes: but even
heaven it self, with all the beauty and glory thereof, as in the 21. of
Reuelat: 2^
the revelation, does plainly appear. 9,
10


Come says the Angel unto S. John, I will show thee the bride the Lambs wife:
then the Angel showed unto him in the spirit from an high mountain, the
great city 11
holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God:
and her 11.
shining was like unto a stone most precious, and so forth. Then he speaks of
the walls, 12.
and of the twelve gates: the^ of the situation and proportion of the city,
how it was four square, that the length and the breadth, and the height of it
were equal: then he comes 16
to the building, saying that the wall 18,
was of Jasper, and the city of pure gold, that the foundations of the walls
of the city were garnished with all manner of precious stones, and names
twelve of them, the first 19,
was of Jasper the second of Saphir: the third of a Chalcedony: the fourth an
Emeraude: and so forth. After he says, that the twelve gates were of twelve
pearls, and every 21.
gate of one pearl, that the street of the city was of pure gold, as shining
glass. The scripture comprehends heavenly things under earthly similitudes.


Now who sees not, how that the holy Ghost under the semblances and
similitudes of gold, precious stones and pearls, which we account our
cheifest treasure here on earth, does signify thereby far more glorious and
excellent things, such as saint Paul 1 Cor. 2.9
says, no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor can be conceived by the heart
of man, the joys, which God has prepared for us in heaven. Well then, to
return to our purpose, has God himself fattributed such worthy titles to our
faith, as holy, and most precious? surely then it is so, let us not doubt of
it: the use that we should make thereof is this, that having it in some great
measure, we must account of it as a most precious jewel, and not forgo it for
any gold: if we have but a little, let us pray the Lord to increase it: if
we have none at all, let us earnestly seek it: and to that end let us make
more account of Gods word, and the preaching thereof, then heretofore we have
done: for that with prayer unto God, is the Without Faith we are most miserable.
only mean to come by it; otherwise if we ever want it, let us assuredly
know, our state to be most miserable and accursed, notwithstanding we have
all other riches and treasure in the world. This doctrine we learn in that
our faith is called most holy, and precious.

Now let us see, how the thing it self, that is faith, does agree with those
excellent tytles which are given thereunto, for it is not without great cause,
doubtless, that S. Peter does call the faith of Gods elect precious, and S.
Jude most holy, seeing they together with the rest of the Apostles, had not
only heard the same so much praised and commended by our savior Christ, but
also had seen by experience the rare virtues and operation thereof.

And if every herb that grows in the whole garden of this world, and every
gem and precious stone that lies hidden in the bowels of the earth, be worthy
of praise and co^mendations, for the several and particular operations and
virtues in every of them: how much more praise and commendation is there to be
given unto this rich Gem and precious Faith has all virtues in itself.
jewel of faith? seeing a thousand fold more excellent virtues then are to be
found in all kind of herbs and precious stones, though they be innumerable,
are abounda^tly to be found in this one and only jewel of faith.

But here I must needs confess mine own great insufficiency, and want of
skill; first, that I cannot look into the secrecy of so deep a mystery as
faith is: next, that I cannot think sufficiently of the virtues thereof, much
less can I with pen or tongue, disclose and make known the same, for the
benefit of others. To the end therefore, that I may promise no more then (by
Gods grace) I may be able to perform, of this matter I will speak very little of
my self, seeing I know little, or nothing: only I will collect into a short
sum, the substance of that which the holy Ghost himself has vouchsafed to
set down, in the praise and commendation of faith, and of those that have been
endowed with so rich a Jewel.

Pliny, Galen, Hypocrates and others, that write of the nature, virtue, and
operation of trees, plants, and herbs: and of the nature of beasts, birds,
fishes, metals, and precious stones, do labor by all means possible, to make
known to the world, the secrecy of natural things, for the preservation of
the health of man's body, being otherwise unknown to the most part of people:
and their labors are worthy of great praise, yea surely it serves greatly to
the setting forth of Gods glory, who has made nothing in vain: for All
things serve to set forth Gods glory, who has made nothing in vain.
what tree is there, whose root, bark, leaves or fruit, either some or all of
the^ are not medicinable? what herb, or weed is there, which has not his
proper virtue and operation? how many medicines are there taken from birds,
beasts, and fishes: and from every part of the^ within and without? all kinds
of metals may be used in drinks and potions; as gold, silver, tin, lead,
steel and iron: What should I speak of the shelles of fishes, of pearls,
corrales and precious stones? are not some of them cordial for the heart,
others most sovereign for the eyes, for the head and stomach, and for every
part of man's body? All these things are known and All earthly medicines
serve only for our mortal bodies in this life, but faith is a medicine for
soul and body, here and for ever.
I need not stand upon them, saving that it makes thus much for my purpose,
that all these forenamed things, and whatsoever else that may be named in the
world, do all serve but for the preservation of man's mortal body, and that in
this life: But this precious jewel of faith, whereof we speak, serves, both
for the preservation of man's soul, and body, in this life, and for their
eternal salvation, in the life to come. Who then hearing of such a precious
jewel, would not sell all that ever he has to buy it?

Now the rare virtues and operation of Faith, were not so commonly known,
before our savior Christ came in the flesh, only a few did account of it, as
Abraham and others, both before and in the time of the Faith more plainly
revealed since the Gospel then before.
Law: but now since the Gospel has been preached, faith has been openly
revealed, now it has been highly commended, and extolled. What meant our
Savior Christ, when he would show the virtue and power of his Godhead, in
working of his cheifest miracles and healing all kind of diseases, evermore to
say, thy faith has made thee whole, thy faith has saved thee? surely it was
Christ himself that healed them, yet Mat. 9. 22. Mark 10. 52.
he attributes the same to the faith of them that were healed, thereby to show
the excellency of Faith, and that except they did believe and had faith, they
could not be healed.

There be three things to be considered Three things especially in the Gospel,
serve to the extolling of Faith.
in the Gospel, which make very much to the extolling of Faith. The one is,
that Christ did help a great many for their own faith. Another that he healed
some of their bodily diseases, for the faithes sake of others. The third is,
that want of Faith in some, was a great hinderance unto Christ, that oftentimes
he could not do that good which otherwise he would. These three points may
be showed briefly by examples. for the first sort we have these examples:
The foul leaper that came unto Christ, in Mat. 8.2.
the eight of Matthew, showed his faith plainly in this, saying unto him, if
thou will thou can make me clean: to whom Jesus answered, I will, be thou
clean: and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

Another example we have in the ninth of Matthew, of that woman which had been
diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, and 9. 22.
who thrusting in among the press of people to touch but the hem of Christ his
garment, was presently healed, to whom Christ said, thy faith has made thee
whole. And in the fourteenth of Mathewe, it is said, that and 14.36.
many were healed by touching of Christ's garments, because they believed that
he was able to heal them. Another example we have of two blind men, in the
ninth of Matthew, which cried after Jesus to be healed, and 9.22.
but he first asked them, whether they did believe, that he was able to heal
them, (not that Christ was ignorant whether they did believe or not, but to
show unto them, and others, that he would not help them, except they did
believe): and they said, yea Lord: then said Jesus, according to your faith
be it unto you: and presently their eyes were opened. The like example we have
of blind Bartimeus in the tenth of Mark, which cried after Jesus, Mark. 10, 52
(whom he called the son of David) to have mercy on him, and never ceased
crying, till Jesus called him, and opened his eyes, saying unto him, thy faith
has made thee whole: Many such examples there are in the Gospel, but for
breuities sake I pass them over.

Likewise there want no examples of them that our savior has healed for the
faithes sake of others: I will also produce a few of them. The Centurions
servant, in the eight of Matthew, that lay sick at home of a palsy, Mat, 8, 5,
and was grievously payned, because his master believed that Christ was well
able to heal him, if he did but speak the word only: was cured of his
disease the self same hour, and the faith of his master greatly commended.

Another example we have in the ninth of Matthew, of a man that was sick of the
palsy also, and being not able to go, was borne of four men, and let down
in his and 9.2
bed by coardes, through the roof of the house wherein Jesus was, and Jesus
seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy, take up thy bed, and go
home to thine own house.

Another example we have of Iairus a ruler of the sinagogue, which came unto
Mark. 5.22,
Christ (as Mark says) for his daughter, when she was at point of death: and
as Matthew Mat, 9, 18
says, she was dead before he spoke with Jesus, who said unto Christ, come
and lay thy hand on her, and she shall live: and according to his faith, she
was raised unto life again.

Another worthy example we have of the woman of Canaan, in the fifteenth of
and 15, 21,
Matthew, whose daughter was piteously vexed of a Devil, how she came unto
Christ for help, and would not be answered, till she had her petition
granted, and her daughter healed. Thus we have seen examples, of such as have
been healed for their own faith, as also for the faithes sake of others.

Now let us note the third thing, namely that for want of faith, our savior
was greatly hindered, from doing that good which he would: as it is plainly
to be seen Mark, 6, 1, 2
in the sixth of Mark: when coming into his own country, among his own
kinsemen and acquaintance, and preaching unto them on the Saboath, as his
manner was, many that heard him were astonyed, Christ lea^ accounted of in his
own cuntry.
and said, from whence has he these things? Is not this the carpenter, Mary's
son, and brother of James and Ioses, and are not his sisters (meaning by
brothers and sisters, his nere kinsefolke) here with us? and they were offended
in him. Then said Jesus unto them, a prophet is not without honor, but in his
own country, among his own kindred, and in his own house. And he could do
no great works there (says the text) save that he laid his hand upon a few
sick Vnbeleese hinders us of many good things
folks, and healed them: but he marueiled at their unbelief: so that we see
unbelief was the only cause, which hindered Christ from doing them that good
which otherwise he would.

The like or worse thing we read of the hoggish Gergesites, which by reason of
their Mat. 8.34.
want of faith, esteemed more of their swine then of Christ: and therefore
prayed him that he would depart from them. But what should I heap up examples
of such as were never effectually called? seeing it is certain, that many of
Gods children, by reason of the littlenes of their faith, or for want of faith
in some particular things, have almost hindered themselves of many good things,
yea and brought themselves into great danger. The weakness of Marthaes faith,
had almost let Ioh. 11.39 40.
that her brother Lazarus should have been raised again, when he had layne
in in the grave four days, for she said unto Christ he stinketh: to whom
Christ answered, Said I not unto thee, that if thou did believe thou should
see the glory of God? as if he should say, thy weakness of faith does hinder
this miracle.

For want and weakness of faith, the disciples of Christ were almost drowned,
while Mat. 8.25.
Christ slept in the ship, for when they had awoke him saying, we perish, he
rebuking them said, why do ye fear, O ye of little faith. And Saint Peter
himself when he would come alone unto Christ upon the and 14.31
sea, was not far from drowning, and all for want of faith. For want of
faith, godly Zacharias, the father of John Baptist, was Luke 1.2.
dumb for a time, because he did not believe the tidinges which the Angel
brought him of the birth of his son. Thus have we briefly noted these three
things: First how many have been healed by their own faith: next, that not a
few have been healed by the faith of others: lastly, that weakness and want of
faith, has hindered Christ from doing good, and brought even the dear
children of God in danger. Whereupon we may conclude, that faith is a most
rare and singular virtue, worthy of all praise and commendation.

Now if faith were always required for the health of their bodies, how much
more Faith good for the health of soul and body.
for the health of their souls? And was not this the cheifest purpose of
Christ (think we) to lead them by these outward means to consider of the
weakness and sicknesses of their souls? yes surely: and the doctrine thereof
is most necessary for us to consider of: For we are all full of the foul
leprosy of sin, from top to toe, but faith in Christ does make us clean:
for it is written, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all 1. Ioh. 1.7.
sin. We are all benumbed with the dead palsy of sin: But faith in Christ
does quicken us again: as Christ says, He that believes in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live. We are all blind, and cannot Ioh. 11. 25
see the way that leads unto life, but faith in Christ must be our guide: We
are all deaf and cannot hear as we should, the word of God: till faith have
opened our inward senses. In one word, there is no disease of the soul or
body, which is not either helped, or eased by the benefit of faith.

Is thy heart and soul wounded within thee, by reason of thy sin? Faith is a
sovereign and cordial medicine: it will surely heal thee. Have thou had a
long time scales upon thine eyes, that thou can not see the brightness of
Gods word shine upon thee? Oh, apply the salve of faith mixed with the powder
of true repentance, and thou shall see how soon they will fall from thee, as
they did from the eyes Act, 9, 18
of Saul. Art thou oppressed with heavy sadness? why, faith in Christ will
bring thee joy. If thou be sick, it will restore thee to health. Art thou
poor? it will make thee rich, Art thou dead? it will raise By faith all
things are possible. Mark. 9.23.
thee to life again: all things are possible, unto him that believes.

Will thou yet hear more what benefit thou receauest by faith: hearken then:
By faith we are made the sons of God: By faith we shall obtain everlasting
life: Ioh. 1, 22 and 3:6 and 11.25 and 3.36 and 6, 47
By faith he that is dead may live: He that believes, shall never die. He
that believes has everlasting life.

Contrariwise, whatsoever is not of faith, Romans 14, 23 Heb, 11, 6: Ioh. 3, 36
Mark: 16, 16
is sin. Without faith, it is impossible to to please God: Without faith, we
shall be condemned. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him:
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not,
shall be damned.

This true, lively and justifying Faith, Mat, 22, 12:
whereof we speak, is that rich wedding garment, which every christian ought
to wear: and whosoever is found without it shall be bound hand and foot,
and cast into utter darkness, there shall be weepinge and gnashing of teeth.
This faith is that strong shield of defense, Ephesians. 6.16.
wherewith we must quench all the fiery darts of the Devil: if we want this
armor, we shall surely be slain of Satan. This faith is the light of the
body, which who so has Mat: 6.22.
not, walks still in darkness not knowing whither he goes. This faith is
usually compared unto a hand, wherewith we receive (as one says) the rich alms
of God: if we lack this hand, we shall die for want. This holy Faith the mother
of repentance.
faith is called the mother of true repentance, and repentance the daughter of
faith, for as soon as we have a true justifying Faith, presently repentance
follows with the fruits thereof, as Saint John Baptist says, Bring fourth
fruit worthy of repentance.

This lively justifying faith is never idle, Mat. 3.8. A true iustiying faith
never idle, but still wor^eth by ^oue.
but still works by love, and is the root from whence all good works do
spring. As the sun cannot be without light, nor the fire without heat, nor
water without moystnes: No more can any one which has this true justifying
faith, be without good works, which are the fruits thereof. Therefore it is
very true which Saint James says, that as the body without the soul is dead,
so faith without works is dead in it ^am. 2.17.
self: Neither is there any disagreement between the doctrine of Saint Paul,
and Saint James, though the one say we are Romans 3.28.
justified by faith, and the other by works: for Saint Paul speaks of our
justifying before Iam. 2.24.
God by faith only thorough the blood of Christ, and Saint James of our
justifying S. Paul and S. James reconciled concerning justification.
before men, when we make known to the world, by our good works, which are
the fruits of faith, that we are justified.

Therefore let us believe the Scripture which says, that Abraham believed God,
Romans 4.36.
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, That we are not justified by
the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. For by grace we are
saved, says Gala. 2.16.
Saint Paul, through faith, not of our selves: it is the gift of God, not of
works, least any Ephesians. 2.8.9.
should boast: which place does cut the throat of that gross opinion of those
proud Pharisayicall Papists, that ignorantly brag Popish supererogation,
superabundant arrogancy.
and boast of their works and merits, as though they could merit heaven
with them; both for them selves and others, forsooth, by their works of
supererogation, but more rightly called superabundant-arrogancie. Let us
believe the Apostle saying, if righteousness came by the law, then Christ
Gala, 2.21.
dyed in vain. Let us believe the truth it self saying, when ye have done all
that ye can, yet say ye are but unprofitable servants, ye have done but what
was your duty to do. Luke 17.10


It is our duty and required of us upon Mat. 25.41
pain of damnation, to do good works, which (as Saint Paul says) God has
ordained Ephe. 2.10.
that we should walk in them: but not that we should trust in them to be
saved, for faith herein must have the pre-eminence. Therefore Saint Paul
counts all things Phil, 3, 8.9.
loss and doung, that he might win Christ, and might be found in him not
having his own righteousness, but the righteousness which is through the faith
of Christ. 1. Cor. 13.
love and charity before it, for he says; now abides these three, faith,
hope and love, but the chiefest of these is love?

True, it is chief, in respect that it does What S. Paul means by saying,
that faith is chiefer then love,
extend it self far and near to the benefit and profit of our neighbors,
(for faith profits our selves, and love our neighbors) and, because it does
continue longer then faith and hope does, for the use of the^ both does cease,
when we have the fruition and possession of that which we hoped for, and when
we have the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our souls: but love is
only begun in this life, and perfected in the life to come: in these respects
Saint Paul says, it 1. Pet. 1, 9.
is chief. Notwithstanding, though we grant this, and say further with the
same Apostle, that as there is no true love, without faith, so there is no true
faith, without love, because faith works by love: yet it Gala. 5.6.
is certain, that faith in respect of our salvation, and in this matter of
justification, is more excellent then love: yea, love must come after faith, as
an obedient daughter Love the daughter of faith.
after her mother; which faith does bring forth both hope and love. Faith then
is the ground of things hoped for. Hope is an undoubted expectation of those
things, which are promised unto us of God by the means of Christ. Love is
linked unto them both, and may not be separated from them.

By faith, says the Author to the Hebrus, our forefathers obtained a good
report: Heb. 11.1.2
therefore I conclude, that faith ought still to have the pre-eminence in
justification: for thereby are we received and made the sons Faith must have
the pre-eminence in justification.
of God, even by our faith in Christ, by whom we obtain everlasting life.
This doctrine, as it does stir us up to believe, so should it stir us unto
love and charity, which are the lively fruits of faith, and without it faith
is dead in it self.

But here we must also take heed, that we do not imagine, that faith (though
it be a rare and singular virtue) does thereby of it self deserve everlasting
life, for so we should fall into error, but faith is called most Christ only
has purchased heaven for us. faith the instrument to apprehend it.
holy, excellent or precious, in this respect, that it is the mean appointed
by God himself, whereby we should apprehend and receive most holy, excellent
and precious gifts, whereof the chiefest is eternal and everlasting life,
purchased unto us, by the death, passion, and resurrection of Christ, even by
his righteousness, and obedience. Of this eternal and everlasting life, our
faith grounded upon the promises of God does most certainly assure us; and then
by hope (which is also the child of faith) we do with patience wait for the
accomplishment, and performance thereof. For those joys, which one day we
shall have in perfect possession, How faith and hope are distinguished.
we do now enjoy by faith, and hope: the which may thus be distinguished,
the one from the other: Faith does apprehend things present; and hope things to
come: by things present, I mean also eternal life; which may be said to be
present, in respect that we have some feeling and taste of it in this life, and
in respect of the certainty of Gods counsel and will, touching the salvation
of his elect, that cannot be altered. Therefore the Scripture uses often times
the present tense, for the future, the time present, for the time to come, as
Christ says, He that believes, has everlasting life. And Saint Paul says,
by grace ye are saved. Ioh. ^.36. Ephe. 2.8.


By things to come, I mean the accomplishment and performance of our
salvation, which in this life we do patiently wait for, and expect by hope;
therefore hope is sometimes used in the same sense that faith is, as in the
eight to the Romans, Saint Paul says we are saved by hope, that is by Romans
8.24
hope, our faith is supported, and we are comforted, til we have the end of
our faith, even the salvation of our souls.

Again, this difference is between faith, and hope, that faith does embrace
and apprehend Wherein faith and hope agree.
the promises of things, and hope the things whereof the promises are made,
only in this, faith and hope agree, that they have always respect unto one
and the self same benefits. As for example, when Abraham Genesis 17.19.
was promised to have a son in his old age, he did verily believe it, but
with hope did expect the performance thereof many years. He was promised also
the land of Canaan, to him and his seed: he did verily Genesis 17.8.
believe it should be accomplished, but yet he did only enjoy the same by
hope. Thus we have seen briefly the difference between faith, hope, and
love, as also how they agree in one: but of love we shalspeake more (God
willing) in the last Chapter.

Now let us proceed a little further in our purpose, to show the excellency
and worthiness of faith, whereby we are assured of things invisible, as though
we saw them Things invisible are plainly seen, with the eyes of faith-Heb.
11.3.
with our bodily eyes; if not more assured. Through faith, we understand the
world was made by the word of God; so that the things which we see, are not
made of things which did appear.

Through faith we are assured of our election, before the foundations of the
world were laid: God has chosen us (says Saint Paul) in Christ before the
foundation of the Ephesians. 1.4.
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

Through faith we are assured of our reconciliation with God: for God was in
Christ, (says the Apostle) and reconciled 2. Cor. 5.19
the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them.

Through faith we are assured of our redemption, justification and
sanctification: Ye are of him (says Saint Paul) in Christ Jesus, 1, Cor. 1.30
who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.
Through faith we are assured of our adoption, that we are the sons of God:
The spirit Romans 8, 16
bears witness unto our spirits (says the Apostle) that we are the
children of God.

Through faith we are assured that we have the spirit of God: Know ye not
that the 2. Cor. 13.5
spirit of Christ dwells in you, except ye be reprobates?

Through faith we have the true knowledge of God and of Christ, and in the
end everlasting life. This is life eternal, to know God the father, and whom
he has Ioh. 17.3.
sent Jesus Christ.

Lastly, through faith we are assured, that nothing shall separate us from the
love of God: for those whom God once loves, to Ioh. 13.1.
the end he loves them. I am persuaded, (says Saint Paul,) that neither
death, nor Romans 8.38.
life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our If we have
faith, nothing can separate us from God.
Lord. See the^, the excellency of faith, which may yet again be considered,
four manner of ways: In respect of God, in respect of our neighbors, in
respect of our selves, in respect of the devil and of the world.

In respect of God, we feel peace of conscience: Being justified by faith we
Romans 5.1.
have peace toward God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. We have hope of the
glory to come. We have access unto the and 8.21. Heb. 4.16.
throne of grace. In respect of our neighbors, we have mutual concord, godly
love and charity. In respect of our selves we have patience in afflictions,
rejoicing in Romans 5.3.
tribulations, joy in the holy Ghost, dying unto sin, living unto
righteousness. In respect of Satan, our faith fights for Ephe. 6.16.
us against his temptations, and in respect of the world, we do by little and
little overcome it. This is the victory which overcomes the world, even your
faith. 1. Ioh. 5.9.


What should we say more? If thou have faith, all things in heaven and earth
make for thee: if thou want faith, al things in heaven earth and hell make
against thee: if thou have All things make for the faithful as al things make
against the infidels.
faith, thou art rich without any other thing: if thou want faith, thou art
poor possessing al other things: if thou have faith, thou may be bold as
a Lion: if thou want faith, thou will tremble at the shaking of a leaf: if
thou have faith, thou needs not fear the Faith a strong fort, against our
enemies.
force of thine enemies: but for want of faith the hearts of people faint
within them.

The wicked fly says Solomon, and no man pursues them: contrariwise, the
faithful will say with David, God is our hope, Pro. 28.1.
and strength, a help in troubles ready to be found. Therefore will we not
fear, Psalm. 46, 1.2 3.
though the earth remove, and though the mountains fall into the depth of the
Sea, and the hills shake at the surges of the same. Again David says, though
thousands had Psalm. 3.6
hemd me in on every side, yet would I not fear. And again, I will say unto
the Lord, O my hope and my fortress; he is my God Psalm. 92.1.2
in him will I trust: surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the
hunter, and from 3.
the noisome pestilence: he will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be
safe under 4.
his feathers: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler: thou needst not be
afraid of the terror of the night, nor of the arrowe that flies by day, nor
of the pestilence that 5.
walks in the darkness, nor of the plague One faithful man better in
fight, then a thousand infidels.
that destroys at the noone day, a thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten
thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come near thee. Behold then (I
beseech you) the 6.
force of faith, blessed is the man that has 7.
the Lord for his God. Psa. 144.15


Now having hitherto heard the excellency of faith, and what profit we receive
thereby, it shall not be amiss to note for our further comfort and consolation,
what worthy praise and commendation, the Scripture has always given unto
faithful men and women, and what great acts and wonders have been wrought by
them, through the force of faith. First, concerning these faithful ones which
lived before the coming of Christ, it has pleased the holy Ghost to make a
long Catalogue of the chiefest of them, in the eleauenth Chapter of the Epistle
to the The faith of our ancestors commended.
Hebrews, to this end, that we should have their examples ever before our eyes:
nay to teach us, that if they were so faithful in the time of the law, much
more should we be in the time of the Gospel. I will only note the examples. By
faith, Abel his offering was accepted Heb. 11.4.
before God. By faith, Enoch was translated from earth into heaven. By faith,
Noe and his 5.
family were saved in the Arc. By faith, Abraham 7.
came out of his own country, and being 8.
tried, offered up his only begotten son. By faith, Sara conceived, when she
was fowerscore 11.
and ten years old. By faith, Isaac blessed 20.
Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come. By faith, Jacob when he was a
dying, 21.
blessed both the sons of Joseph. By faith, Joseph when he dyed, gave
commandment 22.
of his bones.

By faith, the parents of Moses, hid 23.
him three months, because they saw he was a proper child, not fearing the
Kings commandment. By faith, Moses himself, when he came to age, refused to
be called the son 5.
of Pharaos daughter, choosing rather to suffer adversity with the children of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. By faith, he forsook
Egypt, and feared not the 27.
fiercenes of the King, for he endured as he which saw him that is invisible.
By faith, he ordained the Passover, and the effusion of 28.
blood, least he that destroyed the first borne should touch them. By faith,
Moses and the children of Israel passed through the 29.
red sea, as by the dry land, which the Egyptians assaying to do, were
drowned. By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after 30.
the Israelites had compassed them about seven days. By faith the harlot
Rahab, was 31.
not destroyed with the rest in Jericho, because she received the spies
peaceably. To 32.
be short, by faith Gedeon, Barack, Samson, By faith our forefathers in bat
tell have had the victory.
Iephte and David, fought valiantly the Lords battles, and had the victory.

By faith, Samuel, Elyas, Elisha and other of the Prophets, together with them
before named, have subdued kingdoms, wrought 33.
righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched
the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong,
waxed 34.
valiant in battle, turned to flight the armies of the strangers.

By faith, women (as the woman of Sareptha 1. Kin. 17.22.
and the Shunammite) received their dead children, restored unto life by Elias,
and Elisha. 2. Kin. 4.32
Through faith other also were racked 35.
and would not be delivered, that they might receive a better resurrection.

Some other were stoned, hewn a sunder 36.
(O the cruelty of tyrants) were tempted, were slain with the sword: others
wandered up and down in sheep skins, and in Goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented, whom the world was not worthy of, they wandered in
wildernesses, and mountains, 37.
and Dens, and Caves of the earth, and these all through faith obtained good 38.
report. Thus the holy Ghost does begin, and thus he does conclude this his
Catalogue, in commending the faith of our ancestors, 39.
that lived before the coming of Christ.

Now then let us note also a few examples out of the new Testament, and so
draw to an end (for I must needs confess, that the abundant Doctrine which
the Scripture affords concerning faith, has carried me much further, then I
purposed at the beginning:) Notwithstanding, seeing faith is Faith the
principal Jewel of S. Peter's Chain.
the principal Jewel of our whole work, pardon me if I be somewhat long in
this Chapter, I will endeavor to be the briefer in all the rest. By faith in
the old Testament, we hear how Sara conceived and brought forth Isaac,
according to the natural generation of mankind: but by faith in the new
Testament the Virgin Marie conceived the Son of GOD, by the ouershadowing of
the holy Ghost, without the natural help of man. Mat. 1.18


By faith her cosen Elizabeth, acknowledged the Virgin Mary, to be the mother
of our Lord, when also the babe John Baptist sprang in her womb. By faith
Joseph Luke. 1.45
the supposed father of Christ, did take Marie unto his wife, when before he
had thought to put her away privily. By faith he and his wife fled into Egypt,
to preserve Mat. 1.19.
the babe Jesus, from the tyranny of Herod. By faith the Shepherds leave
their flocks and 2. 21.
in the field, to see poor Jesus lying in a Luke. 2.16.
Manger, who returning back again, glorify GOD for that they had seen and
heard, and publish the same to others. By faith the wise men came from the East
Countries to Jerusalem, and from thence to Bethlem, where they worshipped the
child Jesus, notwithstanding his poverty, and Mat. 2.1.
offer unto him, gifts, gold, frankencense and Myrrh.

By faith holy Simeon took Jesus in his arms, when Marie came unto Jerusalem
to be purified according to the law: and he Luke 2.27.
said: Lord, now let thou thy servant to 28.29.
depart in peace: and so forth. Then Simeon Verse. 34.
also blessed them and said unto Mary, This child is appointed for the fall
and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken
against, yea and a 35.
sword shall pearce thy soul, that the the thoughts of many hearts may be
opened. By faith likewise at the same instant, Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe and 2.36.37.38.
of Aser, which was of a great age, and had lived seven years with a husband
from her virginity, but was a widow fower-score and four years, serving God
in the temple, with fasting and prayer, night and day: she (I say) coming up
then at the same time, confessed likewise the Lord, and spoke of him to all
that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

By faith, John Baptist, when he came to age, went out into the wilderness to
prepare Mat, 3.1.
the way of the Lord before him. By faith, he Baptiseth the people in the
floude Mat. 3.5.
Jordan, as many as did repent and believe in Christ, who was then at hand. By
faith, Ioh. 1.29.
he pointed out with his finger the Son of God, saying, Behold the Lamb of
God which takes away the sins of the world. and 41.
By faith, Andrew the Disciple of John Baptist, brought his brother Simon Peter
unto Christ, saying, We have found the Messiah, which by interpretation is
Christ. By faith, Philip persuades Nathanael to come unto Christ, saying unto
him, Behold we have and 45.
found him of whom Moses did write in the law and in the Prophets. By
faith, Nathanael says unto Jesus, thou art the Son of God, thou art the
King of Israel, and 49.
because Christ said, he saw him under a fig tree. By faith, Simon Peter, and
the Sons of Zebedee leave their fishing and Mat. 4.18. 21.
nets, to follow Jesus, after that he had told them, that he would make
them fishers of men.

By faith, Matthew the customer left all his Mat. 9.9
gain to follow Jesus. By faith, Saint Paul, Saint Steven and all the
Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 11.
endured all labors and dangers, imprisonment, 23
mockings, scourgings, and death it self Acts. 7.59.
for the name of Christ, and for the work of the ministry. By faith,
infinite Martyrs, and the Saints of God since the time of the Apostles, have
done likewise. By faith, Zacheus made this protestation from his heart, Luke
19.8.
saying, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have
done any man wrong, I restore him fowerfolde; to whom Christ answered. This
day salvation is come into thine house. By faith, the good Mat. 8.10
Centurion said, that Christ was able to heal his servant with his only
word, of whose faith Christ himself gave this commendation, that he had not
found so great a faith no not in Israel.

By faith, the poor woman of Canaan, said unto Christ, that it was lawful
for Mat. 15.28.
dogs to eat up the crummes which fall from their Masters table: whose faith
also Christ highly commended, saying unto her, Woman, great is thy faith, be
it unto thee even as thou will.

But what stand I to reckon up more examples to this purpose, let us look up
into the stars of heaven, and if we be able to number them, then may we also
bring into a The stars of heaven, and the faithful children of Abraham
innumerable.
reckoning all the true sons of Abraham, registered in the book of Gods
remembrance, for their strong and steadfast faith in the promises of God, made
unto Adam, Abraham, and the rest of Gods elect, since the beginning of the
world. These examples which I have noted, and many other which of purpose I
omit, are surely written for our learning, that we through patience Romans 15.4.
and comfort of the Scripture might have hope.

Last of all, the great and glorious titles whereby the faithful are called in
the Scripture, How the faithful are named in the Scripture.
make not a little to the commendation of this faith, whereof we speak. The
faithful are called the sons of God, the sons of light, living stones, the
temple of the holy Ghost, the body of Christ, the household of God; the
fellow Citizens of 2. Cor. 6. 18 Luke 16.8.1. Pet. 2.5.1. Cor. 6.19 Ephesians. 1.23.
and 2.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.
the Saints, a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people. Wherefore,
seeing we have heard so great commendation of faith and faithful people, what
marvel is it, that the Scripture every where does exhort us unto faith,
and that Christ himself, and all his Apostles did take so great pains, to
bring the world unto the obedience of faith, by the preaching of the Gospel,
and reioce in nothing more, then to hear and see how that the Churches of God,
where the Gospel has been preached, did continue in their faith?

Therefore Saint Paul in the first to the Romans did thank God, that their
faith Romans 18.
was published throughout the world. And Coloss. 1.2
in the first to the Collossians he begins thus: To the saints and
faithful brethren in Christ: and by and by he says: We give thanks to God,
since we heard of your faith 3.
in Christ Jesus: And again in the second Chapter he says: I rejoice to
behold your Chap. 2. 5.
order, and steadfast faith in Christ: And in the first to the Thessalonians and
first he says, 1 Thessalonians: 1.2
We give God thanks for you, without ceasing, remembering your effectual
faith. And in the second to Timothy and first, he calls 3
to remembrance the unfeigned faith, which 2 Timothy: 1.5.
dwelt first in his grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice. And to Philemon
he writes thus: I give thanks when I hear of Phile. 1.4 5.
thy love, and faith. What does all this signify unto us, but that this says
whereof we speak, is most excellent in the sight of God and man?

Hence comes it to pass, that the same Apostle does so earnestly exhort us
unto this 1 Cor, 16 13.
faith, and to abide in it. Stand fast in the faith, (says he) quite you like
men, and be strong. Again, he says, Prove your selves whether 2.13.5
ye are in the faith. Again, We walk by faith, and not by sight. Again, Above
all, Ephesians, 6, 16 1 Timothy 1, 5 and 6.11, 12
take the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. Again, The end of the commandment, is love, out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. And unto Timothy he says, But
thou O man of God, follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meekenes, and so forth: Faith must fight for us. 2. Tim. 1.13
By and by he says, Fight the good fight of faith.

Again, keep the true pattern of the wholesome words which thou have heard
of me, in faith and love in Christ Jesus. Again, he bids us to do good unto
all, but especially to them that are of the household Tit. 2, 2
of faith. And to Titus he says, let the elder men be sound in the faith. And
in the Epistle Heb, 4, 2. Gods word profits not without faith. and 11.6.
to the Hebrews, it is said, that Gods word profits us not, except it be
mixed with faith. And without faith it it is impossible to please God. For a
conclusion therefore, Christ himself says, Be faithful unto the death, and
I will give thee the crown of life. What tongue then can express the Revel. 2.10
excellency of faith, and the profit we receive by it! Contrariwise, all woe
and misery is theirs that have not this faith: for All woe is theirs that have
not faith. Romans 14.23
without faith, whatsoever we do is sin: whether we pray, read, sing,
eat, drink, labor: or whatsoever we do without this faith, I say it is
sin. Iannes and Iambres are compared with the reprobates that want 1 Timothy
3.8, 2 Timothy 1.20
faith. Hymeneus and Alexander are noted with eternal infamy, because they
made shipwreck of their faith.

For want of faith, the man in the Gospel that presumed to come to the wedding,
was bound hand and foot and cast into utter Mat. 22.12 13.
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Finally, as unbelief
was the cause that so many thousands died in the wilderness, and so few
entered into the land of Canaan: so unbelief, and want of Unbelief the cause
that so few entered into the promised land. Heb. 3.19
faith, is the cause that so many shall die eternally in the world to come, and
be condemned unto the bottomless pit of hell. For this is the last conclusion
(almost) of the whole Bible, spoken by him that shall judge both quick and dead.
The fearful and unbelieving, (says he) that is, all such as have not this
true justifying faith, whereof we have all this while entreated, shall be cast
into Reuelat. 21.8.
the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone.

For the avoiding of which endless torments, let us betime bewail our own
blockishnes, that hitherto have so little esteemed of this so precious a Jewel
of Faith: let us learn to make more account of Gods word, then heretofore we
have done: let us pray the Lord to forgive us that is past, and to increase
this holy faith in us, for time to come: so shall we be blessed here and for
ever. And so much concerning the excellency of faith, and the vtility or
profit we receive by it.

Now it shall be necessary for us, to consider, before we conclude this
Chapter, from whom this faith comes, that is, whose gift it is, and to whom
it is given: to this end, that none may imagine faith to be a natural gift,
common to all: seeing it is given only to them, whose names are written in the
book of life.

First that faith is the gift of God, I think Faith the gift of God.
none will deny, and therefore I shall not need to stand long about the
proof thereof. When Saint Paul says, we are saved by grace, through faith:
presently he says Not of our selves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8
Saint James says, every good giving, and Iam. 1, 17
every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from the father of
light: that is, from God, which is called the light that none can attain unto:
but faith is a good and perfect gift: therefore surely it comes from God.

Again, Saint Paul writing unto the Philippians, says: Unto you it is given
Phillip. 1.29
through Christ to believe: therefore to believe is the gift of God. Again in
the twelft to the Hebrews, the holy Ghost exhorts us to run with patience,
the race that is set Heb. 12.1.2
before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith: Therefore
faith must needs be the gift of God.

Moreover when the Apostles of Christ do pray the Lord to increase their
faith, Luke 17. 5
they do thereby plainly show, that faith is the gift of God. Again, Paul
planteth, Apollos waters, by preaching of Gods 1 Cor. 3.6
word; but God gives the increase, that is, faith to believe. Many such
places there are, but these may suffice.

Next now, that this excellent gift of faith is not common to all, appears
by this one saying of Saint Paul unto the Thessalonians: 2 Thessalonians. 3, 2
All men have not faith. Therefore, To whom faith is given, and in what measure.
it is a thing most necessary to be considered, to whom this faith is given,
and whether it be given to all in a like measure or not.

Here, first of all we are to consider of the gifts of God, how some are
temporal, some eternal, some common with the good and bad, some given only
to Gods elect. The gifts that are temporal, are all things that pertain to
the use of this present life: yea and life it self is a temporal gift,
because it is decreed that we must all die. The benefit of the air, the
benefit of the earth, the benefit of the water, the benefit of the Sun and
firmament, and all the creatures in either of them, are temporal gifts,
serving only for the use of man in this life, and common to the good, and to
the bad: as Christ says, that God our Father causes the Sun to shine upon
the evil and the good, and the rain to fall upon Mat. 5, 45
the just and unjust.

Again, the gifts of the mind, as wisdom, reason, knowledge, memory,
learning, and the like, are all temporal gifts, together with the gifts of
healing, of prophesying, Temporal gifts
and working of miracles, as Christ says in the seventh of Mathewe: Many will
say unto me at the day of judgment, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name
prophesyed, and by thy name cast out Devils, Mat, 7, 22
and by thy name wrought many great miracles? and then I will profess to them,
says Christ, I never knew you, depart from me all ye that work iniquity. 23.


Again, other accidental gifts (as we say) of the body, as health, strength,
beauty, riches, honors, and the like, are all terrene and temporal gifts:
and no man can certainly judge thereby, whether the possessors Eccles. 9. 1. No
man ca^ certainly judge by the having, or not having of temporal blessings
whether he be beloved or hated of God, Spiritual gifts.
thereof be either beloved or hated of God. And that is the meaning of Solomon
when he says: No man can know whether he be in the love, or hatred of God:
meaning, by the having, or not having of these earthly and temporal gifts.

Now, on the other side, the gifts that are heavenly, are faith, love, joy,
peace, meekenes, temperance, patience, godliness, Justification, sanctification,
adoption, glorification, and finally, eternal and everlasting salvation: all
these gifts are given only to such as God has elected to be heirs of
salvation, according as Saint Paul says: Romans 8, 29
Those which God knew before, he also predestined, to be made like to the
image of his Son: those whom he predestined, them also he called. Whom
he called, them also he justified: and whom 30
he justified, them also he gloryfied.

So then it is certain, that Faith and all these other heavenly gifts, are
given only to the chosen and elect people Tit. 1, 1:
of God: for which cause, faith is called by Saint Paul, the faith of Gods
elect. Again it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that so many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed and so were saved. Again, all Act. 13. 48.
Ephesians. 2.8.
that are saved, are saved by grace, through faith: therefore so many as are
saved, have faith, and none other. No man comes unto me (says Christ) but
those the father John 6, 44. Mat, 13. 11. Faith is a mystery*
draws. And to his disciples he says, To you it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to others it is not: Again, faith is
a chief part of the mystery whereof Saint Paul speaks: Therefore to some it
is given to have faith, and to some it 1, Tim. 3.16
is not: Again, Christ says in the tenth of John: Ye believe not, why?
because ye are John 10, 26
not of my sheep: that is, none of those who are elected unto salvation:
therefore none but Gods elect do believe.

Here further we learn, that faith is not given us in respect of any
righteousness, merit Faith is not given for our own worthiness:
or desert, that is in us: but of God his free mercy, as well to the Jews, as
to the gentiles: to the Grecian, and to the Barbarian: to the bond, and to the
free: to male, and female, wheresouer throughout the whole world, dispersed, as
many as be elected unto salvation.

Now, although man knows not the time No time set when we shall be called
when, yet certain it is that every one of the elect shall be called, one time
or other, according as God in his divine providence has appointed. For as he
chooses whom he will, so those whom he has chosen he calls unto faith by
the ministry of his word, and effectual working of his holy spirit, when it
pleases him: unless by his secret work, according to his everlasting counsel
and election, he call them in their infancy to himself out of this world,
before they come to years of discretion. Heereuppon it is that he calls some
in their youth, some in their middle age, and some not before old age: some at
the dauning of the day, some at the Math. 20. 3 4, 5, 6
third hour, some at the sixth hour, and some at the eleventh hour: so long
as the time of this present life indureth, and this light of grace continues,
so long the time lasts of the heavenly calling.

Let no man or woman therefore despair, Let none despair of their calling, for
he that is not called to day may be to morrow.
or doubt of their salvation, that are not yet effectually called, for they
know not how soon they may be, only let every one pray that when God does
call, we may be ready to yield our obedience: especially let not the
preachers and ministers of Gods word be discouraged, though in a long time they
see little fruit or their labors: for faith many times which is planted by
their preaching, Faith many times covered as fire in the ashes,
does lie close hid and covered, as the fire in the ashes: one day, when
God will, it shall break out into flames of charity and godlynes: at least
wise, if the Gospel which we preach be hid, it is hid to 2. Cor. 4. 3
them that perish: as many as are ordained unto salvation, shall at one time or
other yield their obedience, and so eternally be saved.

But because it falls out often A comfort for weaklings
times, that many of the dear children of GOD, are very much grieved, yea,
almost plunged in the pit of desperation, when they hear that none but such
as have faith shall be saved, because they themselves do not feel the heat
of faith, so effectually as they desire: Therefore I have thought it very
necessary, before I conclude, briefly to show, that there are diverse
measures of faith, some He that has the least measure of true faith shall be
faued.
greater, and some lesser, and that the least measure of faith, if it be true
faith, suffices unto salvation: so shall none of Gods children (I hope) be
discouraged, when satan shall cast into their minds, the littlenes of their
faith.

First, every christian must hold for certain that which Saint Paul teaches
in the fourth to the Ephesians, namely, that there is one Lord, and one faith:
next, Ephe. 4. 6
it is behoofefull for us to know, that this one faith is given to the
faithful in diverse and sundry measures, according as Saint Paul says in the
twelfth to the Romans, That Romans 12.3
every one must understand according to sobriety, according as God has
dealt to every man, the measure of faith, to some a greater measure is given,
to some a lesser.

Also the fruits of faith are not in all The fruits of faith are not alike in
all the faithful.
the faithful a like: as namely, one faith, full man and woman has and may
have more knowledge, more love, more fear of God, more hope, more patience,
more brotherly kindenes, and so forth, then another has, according as he
has received a greater measure of faith: but yet the measure of faith, by the
good providence of God, is so distributed and divided, that there are none of
Gods elect, to whom is given less then may suffice unto salvation, for the
measure of faith does contain this in it self, that there is a sufficient
portion to every one: he that has the lesser measure, shall have salvation,
with him that has the greater.

And doubtless it is done by the special counsel and providence of God, that
one has a greater measure of faith then another; for God has so moderated all
those things, by his wisdom, that to those whom he has appointed to endure
many great battles, he has given a larger portion of faith. As to Ahraham,
Isaac, To those whom God will try most he gives most faith.
Jacob, Moses, David, and the like, whom when he would try by many
trybulations and temptations, he vouchsafed to bestow upon them a greater
measure of faith, not that thereby they should attain unto salvation, rather
then other that have lesser gifts of faith, but that they should serve to the
furthering of Gods glory, and that they might be examples to those, that are
more infirm and weaker.

Now, if any would know what the least measure of faith is that any man or
woman can have: surely it is this, when a man of an What the least measure of
faith is.
humble spirit, by reason of the litlenes of his faith, does not yet feel the
assurance of the forgiveness of his sins, and yet is persuaded that they are
pardonable, and with his heart prays God that he would pardon and forgive
them. Now that such a one has faith, it is perceived by the good desires Esa.
57.17
and prayers which he makes, because such prayers and desires, are testimonies
of the spirit of God, whose property is, to stir up a longing and a lusting
after heavenly Good prayers a token of true faith. Romans 8.26
things, with sighs and groans for Gods favor and mercy in Jesus Christ:
and where the spirit of Christ is, there is Christ dwelling, and where Christ
dwells 2. Cor 13.5
there is true faith, how weak so ever it be.

Moreover, faith though it be but little, is the gift and working of God,
proved by this saying of the Apostle Saint Paul, that it is God that works
both Phil. 2.13
the will and the deed: therefore, whosoever has this good will and desire in
him, it is certain that there is the presence and working of Gods holy
spirit. Now we must not judge of the grace of God by the absolute perfection
or quantity of faith, but only by the foundation whereupon it rests, which
foundation is the merits, the obedience, satisfaction, and righteousness of
the son of God imputed unto us, for faith is, (as before is noted) the A
Similitude.
hand wherewith we apprehende and lay sure hold upon the righteousness of
Christ Jesus. And even as a little child may as truly hold a gold ring or
precious jewel with his little and weak hand, as a giant with all the force of
his hand and fist, being one and the self same ring, so the merits of the
son of God, be one and the same, whether our faith be weak, or strong to
apprehend them.

This then being (as we have said) the least measure of faith, when we have
an earnest desire to be saved, and yet have not the full assurance of our
salvation: it is then our duty daily to pray the Lord to increase our faith,
till we come by little and little unto the greatest measure, which we shall
not have at the first, but in some continuance of time, when we have been well
practiced in repentance (for as soon as we have the least measure of faith,
repentance will also appear in some measure.) When therefore (I say) we have
some time bin well practiced in repentance, and have had diverse experiences of
Gods love toward us in Christ, then afterward will appear in our hearts the
fullness of persuasion, which is the ripeness and strength of faith. For this
is the greatest measure of faith, when any one daily increasing in faith,
comes to be fully persuaded of Gods love in Christ, The greatest measure of
faith.
toward himself particularly, and of the forgiveness of his own sins.

This I suppose is the greatest measure of faith, how be it, I am still
persuaded, that there is no man's faith so strong; but it is No man's faith so
strong, but it is sometimes shaken
sometimes shaken with the wind of doubtfulness. Thus are we come now at length
thorough Gods assistance, to the concluding and shutting up of this discourse
of faith being the foundation of our whole work, wherein we have seen, what
true faith is, what excellent virtues and operation it has, what great profit
and commodity we The sum of the first chapter.
receive by it, that many of our forefathers have been renowned for their
faith: lastly, whose gift it is: to whom it is given, and in what measure. Now
to him that is of power to establishe us according to the gospel of Romans 16
Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery 25.
which was kept secret since the world began, 26.
(but now is opened and published among all nations, by the scripture of the
27.
prophets at the commandment of theeuerlasting God, for the obedience of
faith.) To God, I say, only wise, be all praise, and honor, and glory,
thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for faith, and the increase thereof.
O Almighty God and omnipotent creator, Lord of heaven and earth, the giver of
all good things, from whence every good and perfect gift does proceed, and by
whose merciful goodness it is augmented and increased within us, I beseech thee
of thine infinite clemency, to plant deeply in my soul that most sweet root
of faith, and to water it continually with the dew of thy heavenly grace, that
it may spring and bud forth into the green and lively branches of a godly
life, with peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost: and that the seed
thereof so soon as it is ripe, may fall down again into the garden of my
heart, to the further increase of the same, til it grow up into that great
tree of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. To whom
with thee O father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever, Amen.

OF VERTVE IN GENERAL. CHAP. 2.
THE order and course of nature (being duly observed) does make this plain
unto us, that though there be many and innumerable things in this world,
yet that every thing has a certain head, root, fountain, and beginning, from
whence each particular is derived. For when God, which is the cause of nature,
would show forth in the theater of this world, the surpassing excellency of
his wisdom, not only in creating all things of nothing, but also in
governing and preserving all things that were created, that they might continue
and endure out the time which he had appointed: The Scripture says, that God
did make every thing according to his kind, and withal did put certain
seeds of things in the Genesis 1, 12 The course of natural things continued by
Gods providence ti^ the end o^ the world
things themselves, whereby there might be a propagation or continued course of
things from generation to generation, so long as the world should endure.

Right so, Gods mighty power and infinite wisdom does no less plainly
appear in things supernatural, I mean in the gifts of ye mind, wherewith he
does beutify and adorn the soul of man: for it is God that gives both the
beginning, and increase of al Faith the root of virtue.
virtue and goodness. Now the beginning of virtue in us is faith, which God does
first plant in the heart of man, faith then may be compared unto the root, from
whence does arise the stem of virtue. Virtue in general breaks out into
particular branches, as knowledge, temperance, patience, and the rest: and
every branch brings forth fruit according to his kind. Therefore Saint Peter
writing unto such as were converted unto 2. Pet. 1. 5
the faith, wills them to join thereunto virtue, saying, Join virtue with
your faith: whereby doubtless he means, that they should endeavor to lead a
civil and honest life, as every one had received the measure of faith: and to
the end they should not think it a matter indifferent, he bids them to
give al diligence thereunto, even to join virtue with their faith, because by
and through their faith in Christ, God had given them all things that pertain
unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him By flying ^he corrup^o^s
of this ^orld, we ^aw neervnto God
that had called them unto glory and virtue: whereby most precious promises were
given unto them, that by them, they should be partakers of the godly nature,
in flying the corruption, which is in the world, through lust. So that now we
see, what must be the chief and principal care of all those, that have
received this excellent gift of faith, whereof we have spoken in the former
chapter, Namely, to give all diligence to join unto our faith virtue, that so
our faith may appear by our honest living, and godly conversation. Wherefore
in this chapter we must speak of virtue in general, being the second lincke
in Saint Peter's Chain, and afterward come to her particular branches.

Virtue in general is obedience to Gods commandments, wrought in Gods
children what virtue is, and from whom we have it.
by the spirit of sanctification, directed or referred to the glory of God,
and accepted of him in Christ Jesus. And to speak plainly, whatsoever thing is
good and honest, that is virtue. Virtue (says one) is a strong castle, that
can never be won, a river that ne edeth no rowing, a sea, that moves not: a
fire that quenches not: a tresure, that never has an end: an army, never
overcome: a sign that never deceives: a plain way that never fails: a
sirupe that forthwith heals, and a renown that never perishes. Again,
virtue in all works is chiefly to be praised, as the head fou^tain and chief
jewel of all manner of riches. Virtue above all things Virtue offers her self
to all that will receive her.
does (or should) purchase to men good will, friendship, and love. Virtue, says
another, is shut up from no man, that is willing to entertain her: she
receives all men gladly, she calls all sorts (and sexes) of men and women,
kings, Queens, servants and bannished men, she requires neither house nor
substance, but is only contented with the naked man.

Again, virtue exceeds all earthly things, for, if liberty, friends, health,
wealth, and prosperity fall from thee, yet virtue will keep thee company:
therefore virtue in aduesity is best tried. Travel therefore, says one, and
take pains to spend thy life in the trade of virtue: the pain is but short,
but thy virtue shall ever endure. The way of virtue is hard at the beginning,
but the path being once trodden, it shall seem very pleasant. The less time
that a man has to live, the more earnestly is the study of virtue to be
embraced. That person is not worthy to live, that will not study to live
virtuously. Virtue is praised of many but there are few that effectually
follow it. Men will put themselves to pains for ye attaining of any thing save
virtue and honesty. It is a great virtue to fly those things our selves,
which we reprove in others: he that lives virtuously in this life, his soul
shall have rest with God. These are the sayings indeed of heathen men, which
only had the light of nature to guide them, whereunto now if we add but this,
that this virtue whereof they speak must be joined unto faith, then
doubtless Virtue must be joined unto faith.
their sayings are godly and sound, and most worthy to be embraced of us
christians. Otherwise without faith virtue will vanishe A similitude.
away as a smoke. And as it is not possible, to fill that vessel with wine,
that is already full with puddle water, except we first emtye the vessel, no
more is it possible, that any one can have true virtue abounding in him, that
has not his heart first purged from vice and sin by faith.

This was the cause that heathen men which wanted faith in Christ, were not
able to attain unto true virtue; only they saw the shadow thereof in the
glimmering light of nature, the substance whereof was far above them. They
were like unto children, which seeing the moon shining in a pool of Another
similitude.
water, seem to snatch after it to take her in their hands, but as soon as they
trouble the water, their endeavors are frustrated: even so those heathen men
seemed still to see virtue shining from heaven, but as soon as they troubled the
waters of their understanding, to reach after it, presently they were deceived
of their purposes. Whosoever therefore will attain unto the school of virtue,
must have faith, and the knowledge of Gods word to lead him thereunto.

Furthermore, we must takeheed that we Gods word joined with faith, will bring
us to the school of virtue.
mix not vice and virtue together (for they can indeed no more agree then fire
and water) but my meaning is, that we do not hide and cover over our vices,
with the cloak of virtue, or rather hypocrisy; for like as the eye cannot
look upward and downward Similitudes
both at one time, no more can the mind of man, apply vice and virtue
together. And as in a pair of tables, nothing may be well written, before the
blots and blurs be wiped out, so Virtue cannot abide with any, except he first
put away his vices; according to the saying of a godly father, We cannot
attain unto the kingdom of Virtue except we first shake of the yoke of vices.
This is the only cause therefore, why so many desire virtue, and so few attain
unto it, because few men will forgo for virtue sake, that vice and sin which he
best loves.

Many perhaps, will leave for a time some The reason why we do desire virtue,
but yet not attain unto it.
certain vices; because they would seem to be virtuous, but when virtue
comes to be their guest, one foul sin or other beats her back again. One
will leave swearing, drunkenness, and such like: another will forsake theft or
stealing with the hand: an other lying and falswitnes bearing; but yet every
one of these will be either an idolater, adulterer, or usurer; and so still
retain one sin or other to chase virtue from them. Thus leaving of some
sins, shall be a cloak unto them, to cover other more fouler vices, to the
end they may seem unto the world virtuous and religi^ous. But even as iron
and A similitude.
clay cannot be tempered together, no more can vice and virtue agree together
in any one man: therefore it is well said of one, Either be as thou show, or
else show thy self as thou art. What a goodly show of virtue did that Mat.
19.2^
young man in the gospel make, when he told Christ that he had kept the law
of God from his youth: yet he was not free from that foul vice of covetousness.
But, it is to be feared that there be many such, nay te^ times worse in our
days, that will cover covetousness, murder, adultery, extortion, bribery, and
the like, under the pretensed veil and vizard Papists use religion as a vail
to cover all impiety. Exodus 3. 5.
of virtue and religion. Wherefore it is most necessary for all christians to
know, that true virtue which proceeds from faith, is a most holy thing: and
therefore as Moses must put of his shoos before he might talk with God; so
must we cast from us vice and sin (I mean the delight and continuance in any
gross sin, be it never so pleasant or profitable unto our fleshly nature)
before this heavenly gift of virtue, will harbor and remain within us. When
Elias should ascend 2. King. 2 13.14
up into heaven, he must first cast down his mantle: so doubtless no man ca^ be
partaker of this true virtue, before he cast the garment of vice and sin away
from him, specially the cloak of hypocrisy, which is most worn of any garment
in this land. How often have Many changes of apparel, only hypocrisye never
changed.
we seen new fashions, and changes of apparel in this Country? yet this
garment does remain still unaltered. They that are ashamed to wear one suit
of apparel two days together, are not ashamed to wear this old cloak of
hypocrisy many years.

Surely among all other sins hypocrisy Hypocrisye the chiefest enemy to
virtue.
is the most deadlyest enemy unto virtue. In virtue there may be nothing
counterfeit, for therein is the only image of verity. Therefore it is well
said of S. Cyprian, that it profits not to show virtue in words and to
destroy it in deeds. Virtue then doubtlest is a jewel of great worth, for
even the wicked do desire to have it: at leastwise covet to make show to the
world that they have it; because they would be the better accounted of. For
like as a precious stone in a gold ring, so shines an heart that is settled
Virtue best tried in aduersytie.
in virtue. They therefore that will make show to the world, that they have
virtue, when it is not so, are like unto them that gilde gold upon copper
rings, that their bravery may appear for a little while, but in a short time
it wears away. Gold is tried by the touch, and virtue by the continuance of
it: if it be counterfeit, in time of adversity it will appear. That is true
virtue in deed, which has bin tried in the fire of tribulation, as the gold
in the furnace.

Nothing can easily corrupt a mind wholly dedicated to virtue. As worms will
not eat the wood of cedar; so nothing can hurt the soul possessed with
virtue: true virtue joined with faith, does adorn the soul of man, and
causes it to aspire unto heavenly things. Therefore does Saint Peter say,
Join virtue with your faith. And Saint Paul says, Whatsoever things are
true, Phil. 4. 8.
whatsoever things are honest, what soever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things appertain unto love, whatsoever things appertain
unto good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on
these things, and then the God of peace shall be with you.

But here we may note by the way, that this virtue in general has included
in it, many more particular branches, then the Apostle Saint Peter has linked
together in his chain; which to entreat of at large, would be very tedious:
therefore let this one word of S. Paul suffice for all, whatsoever thing is of
good report, let that be embraced for a virtue: only I think it meet, to
speak something here of humility, because (as S. Gregory humility the keeper
of virtue.
says) she is the keeper of virtue.

And God himself, the giver of faith, and al other virtues, has most respect
unto them that in humblenes of mind, cast themselves down before the presence
of his majesty. For thus says he that is high and excellent, he that
inhabiteth the eternity, whose name Esaias 57. 15.
is the holy one: I dwell in the high and holy places: with him also, that is
of a humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
give life to them that are of a contrite heart.

But what is humility? surely by the learned it is thus defined, To be a
virtue, whereby we do acknowledge our own weakness, A definition of humility.
and uncleanness, joined with the true fear of God, whereby also we do keep our
selves within the bounds and limits of our calling, trusting in the divine
help, not despising other instruments, and means appointed of God: but
acknowledge the gifts of God in others, as well as in our selves, knowing that
our endeavors cannot prosper, without the blessing and help of God. Moreover,
Humility, is to yield obedience unto God, correcting us for our faults, and
not to fret and fume against his majesty. Which thing, S. Peter means when he
says, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God: and 1 Pet. 5:6,
he shall exalt you in due time. Humility, among many other virtues, is highly
commended in the scripture, even as the vice contrary thereunto (which is
pride) is utterly condemned. God resists the proud (says S. James) and
gives grace to the humble. And Iam. 4, 6 Prou. 29, 23
Solomon says, The pride of a man shall bring him low, but the humble in
spirit shall inherit glory. Again, he says, Pride goes before destruction,
and an high mind before the Prou. 16.18
fall. Hereof we have many examples, of such as have been brought unto
confusion by their pride: and of many other that have been exalted by
humility, acording to this saying of Christ, He that exalts himself, Luke
14.11
shall be brought low: but he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

What got Lucifer and the other Angels by pride? when they were not content
with their first estate in heaven? were they not 2 Pet. 2. 4. Iud, 6
cast down into the bottomless pit of hell, where they are reserved in
everlasting chains, unto the judgment of the great day? Examples how God
has punished pride.


Now, shall we think, that God would so severely punish pride in heaven, and
yet suffer proud men unpunished here on earth. Surely no, they shall not go
altogether unpunished in this world, though their eternal punishmente be also
reserved till the Ester 7.10.
judgment of that great day. Proud Haman, when his pride was at the highest,
was hanged upon a hie pair of gallows, of fifty cubits hie. Dan, 4.30


Nabuchadnezar for his exceeding pride of heart, was feign to eat grass with
beasts, till his hayres were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like
unto birds claws. Herod in all his pomp and pride, Act. 12, 23
when he thought to be honored of the people as a God, was immediately
stricken of an Angel, and eaten up of crawling lice.

The like, or far greater punishment one day, shall befall that proud beast
of Rome, with seven heads, and ten horns: even that Antychrist and child of
perdition, Revel. 17.7
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish
with the brightness of his coming: because in the great pride of his heart,
he exalts himself 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3 4. Antychrist the very picture of pride
against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as
God, in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Thus shall God cut
of all the proud ones of the earth, and their end shall be eternal confusion.

Solomon considering of the punnishment which the proud shall feel in hell,
seems Wised. 5. 8.
to note the talk that should pass between them there: for then (says he)
they shall say one to another, what has pride profited us? or what profit
has the pomp of riches brought us? Wherefore, seeing pride and arrogance of
heart, is so odious before God, let us the rather embrace true humiliti, so
shall we be beloved of God and men: as one says, Humbleness and lowliness
of mind, makes a man highly in favor with God: and meekenes of words makes
him to sink into the hearts of men. Humility therefore, for her excellency,
should be the sister Humility the sister of true nobility.
of true nobility: Nature gives unto age estimation and authority: but
meekness of heart is the glory of youth and age, and gives unto them both
dignity and honor. That may rightly be called genterie, that is begun,
continued, and ended in true humility. according to our english proverb, A
gentleman, has gentle conditions. It is the saying of a sage man, that the
higher any one is in authority, so much the more gentle and lowly should he
behave himself: and that nothing is more seemly, or commendable for a prince
or noble man, the^ the virtue of gentleness, meekenes, and humility. For the
gentle and lowly minded man cannot lightly be hated: Virtue, specially learning
Humility makes a man beloved.
with humility has advanced many men unto great honor and dignity: agreeable
to that saying of Solomon, Before honor goes humility: and again, The
reward of humility, is life, riches and glory. Man is in nothing Prou. 15.33
and 22, 4.
more like unto God, then in gentleness and humility. The virtue of humility
says one, encourages to attain truly the Law of God, and makes apt
vessels to receive the spirit of God: according to this saying of David, Them
that be meek will God guide Psalm. 25.9.
in judgment, and teach the humble his way.

Therefore the prophet David, knowing the great virtue of humility, makes
this protestation of himself in one of his Psalms: Psalm. 131.
Lord says he: I am not high minded, I have no proud looks: but on the
contrary, my soul (says he) is even as a wayned child, meaning that he was
humble in heart as a child.

And surely, the example of a child is We must learn humility of children:
very forcible to teach us humility: therefore Christ himself used the same
example unto his Apostles, when in pride of heart they demanded who should be
greatest in the kindome of heaven. Then Jesus called a little child, and set
him in the midst of his disciples, and said unto them: Verily I Mat. 18.1.2
say unto you, except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven: but contrariwise, Whosoever shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven. See then what a precious virtue humility is, and to what great honor
it prefers us, even to be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Humility
prefers us to the greatest honor. Galat. 5.22.


True humility and gentleness of mind, is a chief fruit of the spirit of
God. The fruit of the spirte (says Saint Paul, is love, joy, peace, long
suffering, gentleness, meekness, and so forth: Therefore is it that the same
Apostle does so earnestly exhort us Collos,. 3 12 13.
unto humility, As the elect of God (says he) holy and beloved, put on
tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekenes, long suffering. Thus
we see, how humility is both commanded and commended unto us. Now let us a
little consider, how that as God in his justice, has evermore thrown down
the proud, so in his mercy he has exalted the humble and Examples how God
has exalted the humble Numb. 12.3
meek.

Moses that man of God, among all his virtues, is commended for nothing more,
then for his humility and meekenes: for he is said to be the meekest man
upon earth: and see how he was exalted of God, When his father and mother had
left him, by the Exodus 2.3.4 5.
rivers brinke among the bulrushes, God caused him to be taken up, advanced
him to the court of Pharao, and after made him a prince and a governor over
his own people. Little David the son of Ishai, because he was little in his
own eyes, and as we have heard before, humble in heart as a wained Psalm. 78,
70, 71
child, therefore God did exalte him and took him from following the Ewes
great with young, and advanced him to the kingly throne. Neither have we only
examples of men, but also of women, as of Esther, that of a poor captive,
having nor father, nor Ester 2, 17.
mother alive (only a good kinseman Mordecay) was by God advanced to be the
wife of a King.

What inould we speak of the humility and low estate of the virgin Mary, who
notwithstanding was chosen by God himself to be the mother of Christ. This
great working of God in throwing down the proud, and exalting the lowly, does
that holy Virgin well note in her song of rejoicing, when she says, My soul
does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my savior: by Luke
1.46.
and by she shows the reason, For he has looked on the poor degree of his
servant, and scattered the imaginations of the proud: He has put down the
mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. The very same
thing does Hanna the mother of Samuel, note in her prayer, saying, 1 Samuel 2.7 8.
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, brings low, and exalts: he
rayseth the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill,
to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory.

Hence is it that Saint Paul faith (though 1 Cor. 1, 27 28.
to another purpose) that God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to
confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of this world, to
confound the mighty things: and vile things, and things which are despised,
has God chosen: and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are:
that no flesh should glory in his presence, but according as it is written, he
that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Ierem, 9.24


Thus we have seen how God does evermore exalt them that are humble and lowly
in their own eyes. Let us therefore make much of humility. But yet, to
proceed a little further, if we will have examples of humility, then let us
come to the example of The chiefest example of humility.
all examples, even to the example of Christ Jesus the Son of God. Which
example Saint Paul does propose unto us in the second to the Philippians,
saying. Let the same Philip. 2.5.
mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but he made himself of no
reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto
men, and was found in his shape as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore God has
highly exalted him: and so forth.

Now we must not only learn, by the example of Christ to be humble and lowly
in We must learn by the example of Christ to be humble both in prosperity,
and adversity. 1. Pet. 2.21 22.23.
prosperity, but also in adversity, when we shall suffer any thing for his
sake: for here in says Saint Peter, has Christ left us an example, that we
should follow his steps, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered he threatened not, but in great humility, committed his cause to God
that judges righteously. Therefore Christ for his great meekness and
humility, is compared in the Scripture unto a Lamb, Christ for his humility
compared to a sheep and to a lamb. Ioh. 1.36. Esaias. 53.7. Christians called
the sheep of Christ. Ioh. 21.16.
and a sheep. John says, Behold the Lamb of God. And Esaias by the spirit of
prophecy said, that Christ was oppressed and afflicted: that he was brought
as a sheep to the slaughter, yet opened he not his mouth. This great humility
of Christ ought to be followed of all Christians, who are therefore called the
sheep of Christ.

Unto this humility Christ himself does exhort us saying, Learn of me, that
am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, Learn
of Christ: what Mat. 11.29
shall we learn? Learn humility, learn patience, if thou be rich and an
heir borne unto great lands and possessions, yet learn humility of Christ,
for he was Lord and heir of heaven and earth, when he so humbled himself
for thy sake. Art thou poor having nor house nor living? Learn of Christ to
be contented, for he had them not. The All virtues are to be learned of Christ.
Mat. 8.20.
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nestes, but the son of man
has not whereon to rest his head. Art thou afflicted, grieved and tormented in
this life? O learn of Christ to be patient, for he suffered a great deal
more for thee. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Mat.
5.4.5.
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. In one word: learn
humility, patience, and all other virtues, of Christ, God, says Saint Austen,
was made humble: let man blush to be proud.

And to say the truth, what cause has man to be proud, that is naught else
but Nothing in man whereof he should be proud, before he was man he was dust
before dust was made he was nothing.
dust and ashes? Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, says the
Scripture, Puluises, (says Isydore) and in puluere sede Cinis es, and in
Cincre viue. Dust thou art, in dust therefore sit and abide, Ashes thou art,
and therein spend thy life. These things indeed are proper unto us, our bodies
are earthy, weak, frail, subject to hunger, to thirst, to cold, to heat, to
weariness, to all kind of defect and sicknesses: and last of all, to death and
corruption. Our souls, which are the chiefest parts of man, are defiled and
polluted with sin, and filthiness; whereof then should man be proud? O esca
vermium (says that sweet father) O massa pulueris, etc. O Worms meat, O
froath, O vanity, why art thou so proud and insolent? Learn therefore betimes
of Christ, to be humble, least Pride will have a fall.
that pride have a fall. Know, that without humility, thou shall never be
praised for any virtue. Similitudes


Isydore says, he that will heap virtues together without humility, does
nothing else but carry dust in the air. As a little Colloquintida does mar
a whole pot of pottage, so pride does make all other virtues abominable. Pride
and vainglory has brought many men, (otherwise endued with very rare gifts)
to shame and ignominy. *Quanto doctior es, tante te geras submissius, is a
good lesson for all that are or have The better learned, the more humble we
should be.
been Scholars to remember. Saint Gregory says, al our gifts whatsoever are
nothing worth, except they be seasoned with the salt of humility. For this
cause is it, that I have made mention thereof, in this Chapter Humility is as
salt, to season al other virtues.
of virtue. If any take profit thereby, it is that I have wished: If any other
by means of their pride scorn at it, their case is to be lamented. Now we
will follow the other virtues in order, even as they are linked together by S.
Peter, when he says, Join virtue with your faith, with virtue, knowledge: and
so forth.

A Prayer for the virtue of humility.
O Most glorious God and merciful Father, whose dwelling is in eternity, and
whose Majesty fills both heaven and earth; I thy vile and wretched servant,
naught else but dust and ashes, do prostrate my self here before thy throne
of mercy, beseeching thee evermore to give me true knowledge and feeling of
mine own defects and misery, of the corruption of my body, and deformity of
my soul polluted with sin and iniquity: to this end, that I may be truly
humbled, when I shall see all the parts of my soul and body, and whatsoever
proceeds from them both, even my best deeds, to be stained as a menstruous
and defiled cloth. O Lord, let never the foot of pride get the upper hand of
me; nor the wind of of vain glory overthrow me: let faith bring me to the
tower of virtue, but let humility keep me from falling. Let me not glory in
any thing that I do, or in any virtue that I have, seeing I have nothing which
I have not received from thee. Let not learning, strength, honor, riches or
beauty make me proud and hautie, for they are but the fading flowers of this
life. Let me ever have this poesy written in my heart, He that exalts
himself shall be brought low, but he that humbles himself (without
hypocrisy) shall be exalted: because it is thou (O Lord) that resistest the
proud, and give grace to the lowly: This grace good Lord I bescech thee,
grant unto me, for his sake that through humility, has purchased unto us
eternal glory, even Christ Jesus thy Son and Prince of our salvation, to
whom with thee (O dear Father) and the holy Ghost, be all praise and glory
for ever, Amen.

Of Knowledge. CHAP. 3.
As Soon as Almighty GOD, by his infinite wisdom had created heaven and earth
of nothing presently he says, let there be light, showing thereby (as also
Genesis 1.3.
we find by experience) that nothing in the world would either have been
pleasant or comfortable, if thereunto had not been added the benefit of light.

And is not the same thing to be noted in the creation of man, who is called by
Philosophers, a little world? Yes truly, for the life of man without light is
most tedious and uncomfortable. Now look what the Knowledge unto the soul, is
as light unto the eyes of the body.
light of the eyes is unto the body, the same is knowledge unto the soul; for
a man that has never an eye to see with all, if he have knowledge in his
mind, is much more happy, then he that has two eyes without knowledge. They
that want the benefit of their eyes and sight, are called blind, and they
that want the benefit of knowledge, are called ignorant: the one is blindness
of the body, the other of the soul. As therefore it is impossible for a blind
man of himself to go into a far Country or City, where We cannot attain
unto virtue, without knowledge
he was never before: so it is impossible for him that has no knowledge, ever
to attain unto the kingdom of virtue.

For this cause is it, that Saint Peter exhorting us unto virtue, does bid us
to take 2. Pet. 1.5.
knowledge for our guide, saying, Join with your virtue knowledge: as if he
should say, It is in vain for you to labor for the attaining of virtue,
except you be first endued with the light of knowledge. Knowledge then is the
keye which opens the gate, unto the schole of virtue. Knowledge in general,
is a virtue or power of the soul, which What knowledge is.
is occupied in the finding out of things, and the causes of things, whether
they be good or evil. Of knowledge, some is natural, some artificial, and
some supernatural, but each of them the gift of God. Natural knowledge
Knowledge some natural, some artificial, some supernatural. Romans 1.20.
albeit it be very much darkened since the fall of Adam, yet it is not
altogether extinguished, for even by that knowledge which is natural, we know
so much of God, as makes us inexcusable: howbeit, since in those things which
we know naturally, we Jude. 10. Natural knowledge cannot bring us unto virtue
corrupt our selves (as Saint Jude says) therefore this knowledge can not bring
us unto virtue.

Now this knowledge which we have by nature, is very much helped by Art and
learning: and this I call artificial knowledge, Nature very much helped by
art.
when by the benefit of learning we attain unto an higher degree of knowledge
then the unlearned do. This kind of knowledge and learning, whosoever does not
account of, is not worthy to be reckoned among the number of men.
Notwithstanding, this is not simply that knowledge which Saint Peter means,
when he says, join with your virtue knowledge, But that which I said is
supernatural, even in one word, the knowledge of God in his Son Christ:
which knowledge Saint Peter wishes unto us, when he says, Grace and peace be
multiplied by the knowledge of God, and of Jesus 2. Pet. 1.2.
our Lord.

But yet before I entreat at large of this knowledge, I think it meet to
speak somewhat Learning a good means to bring us to the knowledge of God.
more of that knowledge: which we have by the benefit of learning, because it
is a notable means to bring us unto the true knowledge of God. Learning in all
ages has been very generally accounted of, and the profit which we receive
by it, is, that thereby we seem to differ from unreasonable creatures, for as
one says, a person void both of learning and utterance, differs little from
a stone. Learning and knowledge says another, is the only good thing and
ignorance the only evil thing. Learning is the gathering together of many
men's sentences and acts, to the augmentation of knowledge. By learning,
Countries and commonweales flourish. Learning is a better patrimony, then
goods or livings; the one may learning better then riches.
be taken from us, the other cannot. Therefore this was a fine saying of Bias
the Philosopher, (when he saw some in danger of loosing their goods) Omnia
mea mecum porto. I carry (says he) all my goods with me, meaning, his
learning which is indeed the safest riches. Therefore one says, it is better
to be a beggar, then unlearned.

And indeed, how many have we seen and read of, that of poor men's children
have been by learning and knowledge highly advanced? As on the contrary, many
for want of learning that have had great store of wealth and substance left
them, by their friends, yet have come to great poverty in the end. Learning
therefore must needs be an excellent thing: it makes the poor men to become
rich, and it teaches rich men well to dispose their goods, least they fall into
poverty. The more high and honorable The greater calling, the more need of
learning.
any one is in calling, the more need a great deal has he of knowledge and
learning. They are in a wrong opinion, says one, that suppose learning to be
nothing auailable to the government of a common wealth. No small virtue, says
Aristotle, grows to a commonwealth, by the wisdom of a learned prince ruler
or governor: agreeable to that saying of wise King Solomon, that by a Prince
of understanding and knowledge, a Realm indureth long. Prou. 28.^.


If we have had and now have, the experience hereof in this land, let us give
God Never any nation felt a sweeter commodity of a learned prince, then
England.
the praise, and pray for the continuance of it: let Schools and scholars, be
accounted of, for they are the ornament of Church and commonweal. Let
Scholars apply their minds to all good learning, and knowledge in their youth,
for they know not to what preferment it may bring them before they be old:
Learn such things, says Plato, when thou art a child, as may profit thee,
when It is better to take pains in youth then to be unlearned in old age.
thou art a man; endeavor thy self to learn in thy youth, though it be
painful, for it is less pain for one to learn in his youth, then in age to
be unlearned.

There be two things much to be lamented in our time, the one, that a great
deal of time is misspent before we attain unto learning, the other, because
when we have attained thereunto, we make little use thereof, Three things to be
lamented in our age.
to profit Church or commonweal; as though we must be learned only for
our selves. An other evil there is as bad or worse then the former, if any by
their industrious labor, seek to do good to many, they that never mean to
do good to any, will be the first that shall speak evil of their endeavors.
Therefore one says well, to lack knowledge, is an evil thing: to disdain
learning is worse, but to speak evil of them that seek to profit other, is
worst of all, and farthest from all grace. If any have misspent time as too many
do, when they be young, let them be the more studious in their age,
remembering that saying of Socrates, It is no shame for a man to learn that he
knows not, of what age soever he be.

Now as learning and knowledge is highly commended, so on the contrary,
ignorance No shame to learn goodness be we never so old.
is much to be dispraised. They which be ignorant (says Plato) and of evil
disposition, be very unhappy, for where ignorance and sin is, there
infidelity and misery most plainly appears. Again, as the light of true
knowledge, increases virtue and works a godly life, so the darkness of
ignorance, hinders virtue and increases Ignorance a deadly enemy unto
virtue.
a wicked life. The ignorance and want of knowledge, that is in brute beasts,
makes plainly the difference that is between man and them, for so much
differs man from the dull and brutish beast, as he shows himself by
knowledge, to be clearly unspotted of ignorance: Ignorance is the
Ignorance can never speak well of learning.
defamer of learning and knowledge. Therefore Saint Jude says, The wicked
speak evil of the things they know not. Idleness ingendereth ignorance, and
ignorance increases error; if therefore we will avoid the errors of this
life, let us apply our selves unto learning and knowledge.

Thus much I have thought good to speak of learning and knowledge in general
(which I call artificial knowledge) because (as it is before said) it is a
good means (being not abused) to come unto the true knowledge of God, whereof
now we must entreat, Howbeit, because GOD sometimes (in this point) works
by means, and sometimes without means, let us take Two extreemes to avoided.
heed of these two extremities, that we do never despise these external
helps of learning, because some have had the true knowledge of GOD without
them, neither despair of obtaining the true knowledge of God, because we are
not learned in other arts and sciences. For true it is, that Moses was
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and they were no hindrances, but
rather furtherances unto him, to serve Acts. 7.22. Humane sciences a help to
Moses in his calling So likewise to Paul and Apollos.
GOD in his calling, after he had revealed his word and knowledge unto him.
Learning, the knowledge of tongues, and other liberal sciences were great
helps unto Paul and Apollos in the work of their ministry, therefore where
God gives these gifts, let them be accounted of, and used to his glory.

But yet let none think, the true knowledge of God to be tied to these
outward Gods grace, not tied to outward means.
means, for Christ does give thanks to God his father, because he revealed the
secresies of his Gospel to babes and sucklings; that is, to such as had no more
knowledge in liberal Mat. 11.25
sciences, then babes and sucklings have. And S. Paul says, where is the wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made the
wisdom 1. Cor. 1.20
of this world, foolishnes? Meaning, that no man be he never so learned and
wise, could by his own natural reach of wit and understanding, attain unto
the true knowledge of God and of Christ: again, this saying of the Apostle
must stand, The natural man cannot perceive the things that are of God.
Wherefore when Saint Peter bids us to 1. Cor. 2.14
join knowledge unto virtue, he means neither that knowledge which we have
by nature; neither that which is helped and amended by art and learning, but
this other Both natural and artificial knowledge must attend as handmaidens
upon supernatural knowledge.
kind of knowledge, which is supernatural, upon whom both nature and art should
attend as hand maids, namely the true knowledge of God in his son Christ,
whereunto we can never atteine of our selves except we be illuminated and
enlightened by the holy spirit of God.

This is life eternal, to know God the father, Ioh. 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent to be the Savior of the world. Unto this
knowledge does S. Peter exhort us when he says, Join with your virtue
knowledge, meaning that we can by no means, begin to lead a godly and
virtuous life, before we be taught True know ledge only learned out of Gods
word.
and instructed in this knowledge, the which is no where to be learned, but in
the Schole of Christ, out of the book of God, which only teaches perfect
wisdom, and perfect knowledge.

But some will say, did not the sage and wise Philosophers, which were only
learned in humane knowledge and sciences, excel in The Philosophers that lived
before Christ, knew more then many Christians do now.
sundry virtues, many of us which live in this plentiful time of knowledge?
True it is, and the greater condemnation hangs over our heads, that cannot
see to walk at noone day, as well as they which walked only by the twylight, or
rather at midnight; for they only being lead by the light of nature, came
surely very near unto virtue, their steps did trace oftentimes the shadow of
virtue, and they thought the same to be true virtue, for why? They had not the
light of Gods word whereby they might know the shadow from the substance. Even
as the blind man in the Luke 8.24.25.
Gospel as soon as Christ began to open his eyes, said, he saw men
walking as if they were trees: but when our Savior Christ gave him perfect
sight, then he confessed that they were men indeed and no trees, so if it had
pleased God, to give these Philosophers the knowledge of his word, then
doubtless they would have left the shadow of virtue, and have run unto the
substance, then they would have joined unto their knowledge true virtue
indeed.

But out alas upon the dullness, and darkness, the ignorance and blindness
of the people of this age: O the dimnes of our sight, which have not only the
same light of nature which they had, and withal the whole law and the Prophets
(unto the which if we would give heed as Saint Peter exhorts 2. Pet. 1, 19.
us, it would shine unto us as a light out of a dark place) but also we have
had (and blessed be God, yet have) the bright morning star, and the sun of
righteousness it self shining unto us in the Gospel, ten thousand times more
clearer and brighter, Christians cannot see to walk in the path of virtue.
then the sun in all his strength; and yet we can not see to walk in the
path of virtue, nay we cannot so much as tread upon the shadow of virtue, but
walk on still in darkness and the shawdow of death, as though we did dwell yet
in the darkness of Egypt. Ignorance or want of knowledge surely in many, Want of
knowledge the cause of sin.
is the cause that they cannot see to walk in the steps of virtue.

But yet I do not so much lament to see the ignorance of some (though it be
lamentable to see so many continue still in ignorance and the word of God so
plentifully preached The ignorant that live in some ciuility a great deal
better then they that boast of knowledge, but are void of common honesty.
as it is,) as I do bewail the state and condition of other, that make show to
the world of great knowledge and understanding of the Scriptures, yea, and will
seem to talk reason and dispute of it oftentimes, as though there were
nothing in them but religion, and holiness, but when their words are past,
and their talk ended: if for their great words we look for some deeds, and
for long talking expect honest walking, then we shall see the case very much
altered: they which seemed to be very godly and zealous, will above many
other, appear in their lives and conversation, to be most dissolute, wicked
and ungodly. Some of them will be beastly adulterers, some cruel
extortioners, some biting usurers, some false periurers, some deceitful
coseners, some merciless, and without all compassion to the poor and needy:
and yet I say, their talk shall be sometimes, and in some company, of Gods
word and religion. It is therefore very well It is better seem ignorant, then
to boast of knowledge without practice. Psalm. 50.16
noted of one, who says, that it is better to seem ignorant, then to boast of
knowledge without practice.

But what says the eternal God unto those talkers? why take thou my word in
thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? The kingdom of God says S. Paul is not
in word, 1 Cor. 4.20
but in virtue and power: they regard not ^. Pet. 1, 5.
this exhortation of Saint Peter, who bids them to join unto their knowledge,
virtue, temperaunce, godliness, and so forth: they think not that the grace of
God has appeared to teach them to deny all ungodliness Tit. 2.11.
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world: they believe not that this is the will of God, even our sanctification,
that we should abstain from fornication, That every 1 Thessalonians. 4.3
one should possess his vessel in honor and holiness, and not in the
lusts of concupiscence, as do the Gentiles which know not God, that no man
oppress or defraude his brother in bargaining because the Lord is an auenger
of all these things. They fear not that saying of Saint James, There shall
be judgment merciless, to him that shows no mercy, and that mercy
rejoices Iam. 2.13.
against judgment.

In one word, they wilfully deceive themselves, and knowing, they will not
Ephesians. 5.5
know, That no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor couetouse person, which
is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. And
is not then the state of those to be lamented above them that are ignorant?
for they shall be beaten with many stripes, because they Ignorance joined with
obstinacy.
know their masters will, and do it not: whereas they that are ignorant, (if
there be not joined with it wilful obstinacy and resistance Ignorance shall
excuse none, therefore not the mother of devotion but of confusion.
of the truth) shall be beat with fewer stripes: but beaten they shall be, and
not excused: therefore let none plead ignorance, for ignorance is now known
not to be the mother of devotion, but of error and confusion.

Let us above all things learn to Speculatiue knowledge naught worth with out
practatiue.
know, and that we know, let us endeavor to put in practice: Let us no
longer content our selves with speculatiue knowledge, for it is practatiue
knowledge that Saint Peter exhorts us unto, when he says, Join with your
virtue, knowledge, even the true knowledge of God in his Son Christ.

This is that knowledge which S. Paul Ephesians. 1.16.17.18.19.
prays God to give unto the Ephesians, when he says, I make mention of you
in in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory,
might give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation; through the
knowledge of him, that the eyes of your understanding may be lightened, that ye
may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious
inheritance is with the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his
power toward us which believe according to the working of his mighty power.
And a little after he says, That ye may be able to comprehend and 12.18, 19
with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and to
know the love of God, which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all
fullness of God. This is that true knowledge whereunto S. Peter exborteth us.
The same thing again means S. Paul, when he says, Brethren, be not
children in understanding, but as concerning malitiousnes, be children: but in
understanding and knowledge be of a ripe 1 Cor. 14, 20.
age.

We must therefore use all means possible to increase our knowledge, as
reading and hearing of Gods word, read and preached unto us, prayer unto God
for the Reading, preaching, meditating, and conferrence with the learned, be
special means to increase knowledge. Prouer. 2, 12.
increase thereof, with often meditation thereon, conference with them that have
knoweledge and so forth: yea we must know, that this holy knowledge of Gods
word, and the mysteries thereof, is that treasure which we must day lie seek:
even as Solomon exhorts us saying: My son, if thou will receive my words,
and hide my commandementes within thee, and cause thine ear to hearken unto
wisdom, and incline thine heart unto understanding: for if thou call after
3.
knowledge, and criest for understanding: 4.
if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for treasures, then
thou shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.
For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding.

Whereby also we may note, that this knowledge comes not naturally, but it
is the Lord that gives this wisdom and knowledge.

Therefore Solomon bids us to ask and seek it at Gods hand: and after he
says, It is God that gives wisdom and knowledge. Knowledge must be craved
of God by prayer. Mat. 7.7.
Trust in the Lord, and lean not unto thine own wisdom: as if he should
say, think not to understand this knowledge by thine own wisdom, but by
prayer from God, and by using such means as he has appointed for the
obtaining of the same. Ask and ye shall have (says Christ) seek and ye shall
find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Again, Christ says, Search
the Ioh. 5.39.
scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life: and they are they
that testify of me. The fear of the Lord says Solomon, is the beginning of
this knowledge, The fear of the Lord the beginning of knowledge Prove. 1.7
who so finds it, doubtless finds great treasure.

Therefore he faith in his third chapter Blessed is the man that finds
wisdom, and the man that gets understanding, for and 3.13.
the marchandice thereof is better then the merchandise of Silver, and the
gain 14.
thereof, is better then Gold: It is more precious then pearls, and all
things that 15
thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her: length of days is in her
right hand, 16.
and in her left hand riches and glory: Her ways are ways of pleasure, and
al her paths 17
prosperity, she is a tree of life, to them that lay hold on her, and blessed
is he that 18.
receives her.

See see how the holy Ghost does compare understanding, wisdom, and
knowledge, to a tree of life, to gold, silver, pearls or precious stones:
Here then are most rare jewels for kings, Queens, and Rich Jewels for
gentilitie, to adorn themselves withal.
Princes, for Lords, Ladies and gentlemen, to adorn and deck themselves
withal, yea and also for the poor and meaner sort to enrich themselves
withal. Why take we so much pains, to travel by sea and by land, from one
end of the world to the other, for Gemmes and Iewelles? and let lie the
Jewel of all Iewelles, the true understanding We travail more for gold, then
for Gods word.
and knowledge of Gods word, which Solomon says is more precious then pearls:
and all Jewels that thou can desire, are not to be compared to it. No not
the Jasper, the Topace, or the Chrisolite, nor any precious stone whatsoever.

Believe me, Saint Peter was a cunning workman, and a perfect Ieweller, S.
Peter a cunning Ieweller.
that could choose such a precious stone, or rich pearl, to beautify, and
adorn, his Chain withal. Surely that must needs The true knowledge of God
more worth then a kings ransom. The true practice of Gods word in the court
does give light to all the cuntry. People live more by examples, then by laws.
be a rich Chain, where one lincke of it is more worth, then a Kings
ransom.

O how this rich Jewel, the knowledge of Gods word, and the true practice
thereof, would make noble men and gentlemen Ladies and gentlewomen to shine in
the court.

Surely, the brightness of their virtue would give a great light throughout
this whole land, to others that have a great desire to follow the fashions of
the Court: for the world is come to this pass now a days, that we live
more by examples, then by good Laws and precepts: this saying was never more
verified then in our time, Regis ad exemplum, totus componitur Inferiors will
follow their superiors.
orbis. The whole world is given to follow the example of those that are above
them in authority.

Let every one therefore consider of his own calling, and study to profit
others by his example that depend upon him: let our light shine before men,
that others Mat. 5.16
seeing our good works, may glorify God our heavenly father: Especially, let
them that are called lights, lead other after them by their light of
doctrine, They that are called lights, ought to give light unto others Psalm. 1
32 9,
and holy conversation, let the ministers of the Lord, be clothed with
righteousness, that the Saints may sing with ioyfulnes. Let us labor by all
means possible to increase our knowledge by reading and meditating on the word
of God, which as David says, must be a lantern to our feet, and a Psalm 116.
150. Coloss. 3.16
light unto our paths. Let the word of Christ dwell in us plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, as every one has obtained more
knowledge one then another, that ye may be blameless (says the Apostle) and
pure, and the sons of God without rebuke, in the mids of a naughty and
crooked nation, Phil. 2.15.
among whom see that ye shine as lights in the world.

Thus let every one endeavor to make use of that which he knows, for that
No virtue to know much and do nothing.
is no virtue to know much, and to do nothing, but to practice that good which
we have learned, is a virtue worthy of much praise.

In vain (says one) is that long travel in study and learning where actual
experience does not show forth her fruits, for learning and knowledge is of
good me^ sought for, and lodged even in their breasts to this only end, that
they may thereby know sin, and eschew the same, know virtue, and attain
unto it: for if learning and knowledge be not applied hereunto of them that
have it, she leaves in them her whole duty undone.

Therefore Saint Peter says. Join with 2. Pet 1. 5. Knowledge teaches the
way to virtue.
your virtue knowledge, that is, let knowledge teach you the way to virtue, and
by virtue and godlynes of life, let it appear that you have knowledge. Let
knowledge and virtue be joined together, for they may not be separated: as a
general or captain, is the directour of an whole host, so reason lightened
with true knowledge is the A similitude.
guide of man's life. But here we are to note, that even in this knowledge
whereof we speak, there is a mean to be kept, for the proverb is, Omne
nimium vertitur in vitium, every too much is an evil, and S. Paul says,
Scientia inflat. Knowledge puffs men up 1. Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge without
humility puffs men up with pride. 1. Cor. 2.2.
with pride. We must therefore keep our knowledge within compass, and never
desire more then is meet for us to know. Saint Paul, though he were
excellent in knowledge, yet he esteemed not to know any thing save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. Hereof might arise this saying, Si Christum discis,
satis est, si caetera nescis, Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
If To know Christ is the chiefest knowledge.
thou know Christ, it skilleth not though thou be ignorant in many other
things: contrariwise, if thou know not Christ, all other knowledge in the
world is to no purpose. This caveat and admonition, I think not to be
unnecessary in these days of ours, when as many wanton wits have wandered
abroad in the fields of their own inventions, to seek and search out for
hidden and secret things, such as God has not revealed unto us in his word:
yea, they will not stick to enquire what God did before the world was created,
forgetting in the mean while, what their duties do require of themselves here
on earth, nothing fearing that saying of Solomon, He that searches out the
secrets of Gods majesty, shall be overwhelmed We must not enquire out of
Gods secrecies more then is revealed in his word
with his glory. They remember not that Adam in seeking (by tasting the
forbiden fruit, to know more then God would have him to know, was deprived
of that excellent knowledge he had before. The same thing doubtless does
befall still unto his posterity, that will not be content with the knowledge
of those deep and heavenly misteryes of man's salvation, revealed unto us in
the word of God, but in seeking to know other things that pertain Adam by
seeking to know more then was meet, was deprived of that knowledge he had
before.
not unto them, they become very fools in those things which they ought to
know. Thus have we seen what an excellent thing learning and the true
knowledge of God is, and how we ought to apply the study thereof, to this
end, that we might live honestly, godly, and virtuously in this life, where as
we do know but in part, that so at length (thorough the merits of Christ
Jesus) we may come to that life 1. Cor: 13: 12:
where our knowledge shall be perfited, and our happiness and felicity for
evermore continued.

A Prayer for the true knowledge of Gods word.
O Most wise God, and loving father, which dwell in the light that none
without thy grace and mercy in thy son Christ can attain unto; I heartely
beseech thy divine majesty for Christ his sake to enlighten my mind and
understanding with the bright beams of thy heavenly light, I mean with the
trne and certain knowledge of thy most holy and blessed word, that mine own
natural blindness and ignorance of my soul being driven away, I may the better
see to walk without stumbling, in the right path that leads unto virtue. O
Lord above al things I beseech thee to grant me this grace, that I may know
thee to be the true God, and Jesus Chist whom thou have sent to be the Savior
of the world so shall I not only thereby avoid the errors of this life, but
also attain unto thy heavenly kingdom, to see thy light in the land of the
living, where there is no need of the sun or of the moon, for thy glory and
the brightness of the lamb, thy son Christ Jesus is the light thereof: to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all praise and glory for ever, Amen.

OF TEMPERANCE. CHAP. 4.
IT is not a thing observed to no purpose, that physicians do feel the pulses
of their sick patients, whether they be moderate or out of temper, for
thereby they give a great judgment of the state of them that are diseased.

Now look how man's body is distempered with sickness, even so is the soul of
man with sin* there are infinite diseases to disquiet the body, and there are
innumerable sins, to grieve and torment the soul: there is Physic
appointed for the body, and there is also Physic ordained for the soul: the
body many times for want of timely Physic, is in great danger of death by
sickness, and so is the soul of man by sin: Much money given for health of
body, but physic for the soul is little regarded
the body oftentimes is recovered when Physic is applied, and so is the soul
of man if she receive that Physic which is appointed for her: only herein
is a difference, when we are sick in our bodies by diseases, we will give
any money to have health, but will suffer our souls to be very extremely
sick, and almost at point of death with sin, and never care to seek for
health, nay, we will scarce receive Physic for our souls, though it be
brought home unto us freely without money, without penny or penny worth. Even
as the prophet Esaie complains of the Jews that refused to receive the grace
of God, which Esaias. 55.1.2.
was offered unto them freely without money, but were willing to lay out their
silver for that which was naught worth, and wherewith they could not be
satisfied. What marvel then is it, that the sinful soul of man is so
distempered and out of order, insomuch that the beating of her pulses, may be
perceived with out feeling? Now of all sicknesses, the sickness of intempera^cy
is the worst, for it greatly anoyeth, and in time destroys Intemperancy a
dangerous disease of the soul.
both the health of soul and body: it also makes the body unapt for any
labor, and it hinders the soul from all virtue, whereof we have but too many
examples. S. Peter therefore knowing the great hurt which comes unto man by
intemperancie, exhorts us to make much of the virtue contrary thereunto,
called temperance or sobriety: and to the end we should regard it the better,
he linkes the same to his chain, saying: Join with your faith virtue, with
virtue knowledge, with knowledge tempera^ce Temperance therefore without al
question, 2. Pet. 1.5.
is a worthy virtue, otherwise it should not have bin joined with these other
Jewels, of faith, knowledge, and the rest.

But what is temperance? Temperance or sobriety (says one) is a virtue which
does moderate the appetites and desires of meat, drink, and other things,
which What temperance is.
man may lawefullie use: so that neither prayer, meditation, studying, or
laboring in our vocation, be hindered with the excess thereof, neither our
natural sleep nor health of our bodies hurted for want of that which is
sufficient: so it seems that temperance is a keeper of a mean in every
thing. And even as in tunes or A similitude.
singing, without the mean there can be no good melodye, so in the government
of our life, without sobriety or temperance, every thing will be disordered.
Where Temperance rules not, there is gluttony, surfeiting, drunkenness,
luxuriousnes, and all kind of wickedness. Where Temperance bears swaye, there
the health of the body is preserved, there also the soul of man is at
liberty, to read, to pray, to study, to meditate, to take counsel,
Temperance a worthy virtue.
to give counsel, to govern all the affayers of this life. Where temperance
is, there is shamefastnes, there is honesty, there is chastity, there is
modesty, there is humility, there is moderation and good order kept, in
discerning what ought to be done, how it ought to be done, and what ought to
be left undone.

By temperance we avoid many sicknesses of the body, and many diseases of the
soul. Who then would not be in love with temperance? Temperance, says one,
is a noble Virtue, and chiefly appertains to the honorable state of mankind:
whereby the princely governor reason (which reigns as king in man, is known
to bear sway in man, whereby all his things are tempered and ordered, and
thereby differs from brute beasts.

Temperance is an enemy to lust, and lust is a waiting servant unto bodily
pleasure. Temperance calls a man back srom all wicked lusts, and carnal
appetites, and suffers him not to exceed in foolish rejoicing, nor in
ungodly sorrowing.

He is to be called a temperate and moderate person (says one) which not
only Who is a temperate man.
does keep under his wanton and corrupt affects, but so endeuoreth also
himfelfe, that in his country he is chargeable to no man, to no man cruel or
grievous, neither to any man dangerous. Temperance therefore is a moderatrixe
which causes us to keep 2 decorum in every thing. Intemperate youth, full of
carnal affections, quickelie turns the body into age, to be full of
infirmityes, foul and feeble. When the unbridled carcass or foul flesh of
man, is not well tempred, or discreetly ruled, but overmuch cherished, set at
liberty, and pampered, then is the soul the less regarded or looked upon, but
abides in most deformed Where the body is too much pampered, there the soul
is the less regarded. A similie.
state and miserable: and the more delicatly the body is handled, the more
stubbornely it wrestleth against the mind, and does cast it of, even as a
horse too well cherished, uses to cast off his rider. If we could therefore
consider the excellency of man's nature, and the dignity thereof, we should well
perceive how foul and dishonest a thing it is, to be resolved into letcherie,
immoderate eating and drinking, and to live loosly and wantonly: and on the
contrary, how honest, fair, and commendable a thing it is, to live
continently, temperatly, sadly and soberly.

But if we could step a degree farther, and consider now, not what excellency
man is of by nature, but whereunto we are called by grace, then doubtless we
should be ashamed of those foul vices which we daily commit, and give our
selves more to temperance, sobriety, chastity, and the like, which are the
true ornaments of christianity. Unto this temperance and sobriety, the
scripture does very earnestly exhort us, and diswade us from the vices
contrary thereunto. The grace of God (says Saint Paul) Tit. 2. 11 Sobriety a
chief ornament of christianity. Romans 13.11
has appeared to this end, to teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.
Therefore he says in another place: The night is past, the day is at hand, let
us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of
light, so that we walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife and envying,
but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh.

Again, among the manyfold fruits of the spirit, which the Apostle Saint
Paul Gal: 5: 23:
reckons up, he names temperance for one. The fruits of the spirit are,
joy, peace, meeknes, temperance, against such there is no law. And when Saint
Peter would exhort us unto holiness, he first of all exhorts us unto
temperance, and sobernes, saying, Be sober and trust perfectly in 1. Pet. 1.13.
the grace of God, and so forth. And then presently adds, Be ye holy, as
God is holy.

Again, putting us in mind of the day of judgment, and that we should take
heed of Satan, he says, Be ye sober and watch, and, Be ye sober and
watchful unto prayer. and 4.7. and 5.8.
Meaning, that there can be neither prayer nor watchfulnes, without sobriety
and temperance. And indeed who finds not by experience, that when the flesh
is pampered up, then drowsy sleepines and Inte^perancy an enemy to study and
all good exercyses.
sluggishnes comes upon us, and makeeth us unapt to study, prayer, or any
good exercise.

For this cause has it been the manner of the church of God in all ages,
whenever they would give themselves to holy exercyses, presently to command
a godly and religious fast, not from flesh only (as the papists do) but from
all kind Godly fasting a good help unto prayer.
of meats; to the end they may the more devoutly serve God. So likewise does
our Savior Christ commend unto us abstience, sobriety, and temperance, when
he Mat. 26.41.
commands us to watch and pray, least we fall into temptation: And above
all things to take heed, that our hearts be not overcome with surfeiting,
and drunkenness, Luke 21, 34.
and cares of this life, and so suffer the day of judgment to come upon us
unawares.

Oh that the beastly belly Gods, and drowsy drunckardes of our days, which
Esaias. 28.1.
sit quaffing from morning till night, would sometimes call to their
remembrance this admonition and forewarning of our Savior! who tells them
plainly that the day of judgment shall come upon them as a snare, if they
continue Luk: 21.35
in their beastlines. But what reckoning make they of the day of judgment?
Are not they the very mockers and scoffers Belly Gods and drunkerds make a
mock of the day of judgment. 2. Pet. 3.3
which Saint Peter fore-prophesied should come in this last age of the world?
that in derision of God and al godliness say, where is the promise of Christ's
coming unto judgment? because they see the continuance of the world as yet,
therefore they imagine, that it shall never have an end, not considering, that
one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day: that it is as easy for the Lord to destroy the world with fire, as it
was to make the same of nothing, and to destroy it again with water: that the
Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slacknes) but is
patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men come to
the knowledge of his truth. Howsoever these wicked mockers, according to the
hardness of their hearts, Romans 2. 5.
which cannot repent, heap unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath,
and declaration of the just judgment of God. O consider this all ye that
forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be Psalm: 50.22.
none to help: for surely (as Saint Peter says) the day of the Lord will
come (how sone the Lord knows, and far of it cannot 2. Pet. 3.10.11.12.
be) as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away in
noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works
that are therein shall be burnt up. Seeing therefore that all these things
must be dissolved, what manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godlynes? Wherefore let us take heed of surfeting, drunkenness, and the cares of
this life (al which now a days are scarcely Surfeiting and drunkenness scarce
counted for sins.
counted for sins) least the day of judgment come upon us, to our
everlasting destruction. Above al, let us make much of sobriety and temperance,
for if we would keep our selves, our souls and bodies in temperance,
chastity, and sobriety, surely neither the day of judgment, nor the day of
our own death should ever overtake us suddenly. Let us remember that Saint
Peter bids us to join with our knowledge temperance. Temperance doubtless
is a virtue much to be sought for, and without it we are more like beasts then
men.

She is both a necessary and profitable servant. What say I, a servant? nay,
she should be our mistres, yet truly such is the intemperancy of our time,
that she would Te^perance both a necessary and profitable servant.
think her self happy if she might have any office in our houses: she would
serve for little or no wages, yet would she save yerelie in some houses,
enough to pay the wages of all the rest of the servants. She cares not what
office she had so she might be courteously entertained: she would be cook,
but gluttony will not suffer her to come into kitchen: she would be panterer,
but she cannot have the chippinges for her labor: so little is she accounted
of: she would be in the Seller to draw beer and wine, but drunkenness will not
suffer her to be quiet: she would come to be her misters chambermaide, to
put on her apparel seemly about Te^perance fit for every office.
her, but pride thrusts her down over the stairs or greeces: she can have
almost no place to rest in, but either in the streets, or in some poor
laboring men's houses, yea the very beggars do scorn her company: she runs
from the country to She is suffered to run the country for want of
entertaynement.
the court from the court to the country, and can hardly get any service: if
she be entertained for a while, she is put away again without a quarters
warning, nay, sometimes on a sudden without an hours warning: so
rigoriouslie is she dealt withal in many places, surely it is marvel that
she tarrieth one year in this country, saving that I suppose Temperance well
used in no country.
other countries give her so ill or worse intertainment then we.

Well, Saint Peter yet counsels us to entertain her, and to keep her, when
he says, join with your knowledge temperance. Use temperancy in your diet,
temperancy in eating, tempera^cy in your drinking, temperancie in your
sleeping, temperancy in your We must use temperance in all things.
gesture and walking, temperancy in your apparel, temperancie in your delights
and recreation; temperancie in your words, temperancie in your deeds,
temperancy in all your appetites and desires. In one word, without this virtue
of temperance al things will be out of order and good temper, if this Without
temperance every thing will be out of temper and good order:
lincke of temperance be broken. Saint Peter's Chain will never hold. Much
more might be said, but I study brevity. God grant this little which has bin
spoken, may be advisedly read, well ruminated, and better digested, so shall
all other virtues be the rather accounted of, to Gods glory and our salvation.

A prayer for Temperance.
O Most holy and eternal God, which art all holiness and paritie it self, and
hate all iniquity and uncleanness; vouchsafe unto me I earnestly beseech
thee this grace, that as thou have made me a reasonable creature, and endued
me with wit and understanding, so I may have a special regard to keep a
godly moderation in all the actions of this life: that I may never break the
bonds of temperance, by overmuch eating, drinking, sleeping, playing, or by any
filthy and ungodly living, whereby I should show my self in life and
conversation worse then brute beasts that have no understanding, but that I may
rather deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and study to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed appearing
of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has commanded us in his holy word to take
heed least when he come unto judgment, our hearts be not overcome with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so to suffer this day
to come upon us unawares. For which cause good Lord I beseech thee, grant unto
me that virtue of sobriety and temperancy, that I may both spend and end my
days in such necessary duties as thou have commanded me: to the glory of thy
name and comfort of my conscience, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior, Amen.

Of Patience, The fifth Chapter.
IT seems to some desiring to see far countries, a matter of no less ease
then pleasure, to sail over the seas from one land to another, so long as the
ship is carried with a good wind, and in fair weather: for then the mariners
sing, Sail we merry mariners: then the marchantes play and sport, then the
soldiers and passengers be sleeping and snorting under the hatches: but when
the wind begins to turn; when the weather begins to be foul, when blustering
blastes arise, when the surges and waves of the sea tumble over the ship,
when we are wet head and ears, then our hearts begin to sail us, then our
courage asswageth, then What we purpose in prosperit^ adversity we forget.
(...) us, then (...) itself threatens us, then every man (...) himself
back again, in the place from whence he came, and the desire which before we
had to see strange countries is now cooled, assuaged and abated.

Right so it ^alleth out in the desire which we have to see the new Jerusalem,
that heavenly cuntry; we begin to back our selves in Reave, 21.10
the ship of virtue, we hope to sail thither upon the seas of pleasure, we
have happily at the beginning a good gale of wind, and fair weather, but before
we are come three leagues at sea, before we have forgotten our friends and
fellows that we left behind us, there arises a mighty wind, and cruel
tempest, the wind of adversity begin to blow, the waves and surges of trials
and temptations come upon us, yea death and persecution assaileth us: then we
wish our selves at home in our own country again, then our desires to that
heavenly cuntry begins to wax cold, and few there be that keep on a straight
course till they come to the haven of rest.

How excellent therefore is that saying of the spirit of God, in the tenth to
the Hebr. Heb. 10.36
Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promises. So we that are sailing over the Without patience, we can
never come to the haven of rest.
feas of this world have need of patience, to endure the surging waves of
trial, and temptations, lest with the children of Israel we desire to return
back again, when we are in the midst of our journey. Wherefore S. Pet.
having tried by experience these things, 1. Pet. 16.
as soon as he has exhorted us unto Temperance, presently bids us to join
thereunto patience, knowing very well, that no sooner can we begin to tread
the path unto a godly, virtuous, and temperate life, but presently we shall be
subject to infinite trials and tribulations, according to this scripture that
says, As many as will live godly in ^ Tim. 1. 12
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution and affliction: therefore in good time
adds exhortation unto patience, saying, Join with your temperance, patience,
use that as a remedy, what troubles soever come upon you for living godly and
virtuously.

Patience then is a virtue whereby we What true patience is and the use
the^reof.
obey God in suffering adversity, so that we do nothing contrary to the
commandment of God, but by faith acknowledge him to be near unto us with his
help, either to mitigate or else to deliver us from that present adversity we
are in: yea patience and good belief in God makes man victorious. The means
to retain patience is to have a clear conscience, and a good cause for the
which we suffer, for true patience (as one says) is when the cause is just,
and the end profitable and necessary. How beit, we must also suffer with
patience, as well the corrections for our faults, as also troubles wrongfully
inflicted upon us of men.

This patience surely is a notable virtue, Patience is best tried when we are
wrongfully afflicted by men.
pertaining as well to the inward, as outward governance* and is the
vanquisher of injuries, the sure defense against the affectes and passions of
the soul, retaining always joy and gladness in adversity and grief: for
patience is best tried in adversity. Be constant and patient in adversity,
and in prosperity humble and lowly. Be patient in tribulation, and give no man
cause to speak evil of thee. Receive patiently the words of correction,
though they seem grievous for a little season. In suffering afflictions,
Patience is made strong.

Patience and perseverance are two proper notes whereby Gods children are
truly Patience, and perseuera^ce in goodness, true marks of Gods children,
known from hipocrites, counter feits, and dissemblers. By patience and
sobriety, we pass over the troubles of this world more joyfully. Therefore S.
Peter joins them both together, saying, Join with sobriety or temperance,
Patience: the one will teach thee to do well in prosperity: the other to
suffer well in adversity. The fear of God, Patience the nurse of all virtues.
faith, prayer, humility and other virtues, do grow, and increase in us
through patience, Even as iron, except it be often scoured, will soon corrupt
and wax rustie: so except A similitude.
the sinful heart of man, and his flesh, be often scoured with adversity, they
will soon be corrupted with the rust of filthiness, and sin, which
adversity, by patience is either overcome or mitigated. This gift of patience,
if God had not always granted unto the faithful in their adversities, they
must needs have fainted, yea and fallen to Patience as a pillar does support
Gods children in a^uersity.
the ground, under the burden of their manifold troubles and calamities.

When our Savior Christ had told his disciples and Apostles, what great
troubles and afflictions they should suffer in this life: Luke 21. 19.
he adds this presently for their comfort, that they should possess their
souls in patience. And S. James wills us to let patience to have her perfect
working in us, so shall we Iam. 1.4.
be perfect, lacking nothing. Again he says, Blessed is that man which
patie^tly suffers temptations, for when he is tried, he shall receive the
crown of life, which God has promised to them that love him. S. Paul says
Romans 5.3.
Tribulation brings forth patience, patience experience, experience hope, and
hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,
by his holy spirit which is given unto us. These exhortations unto patience are
very necessary, because all troubles and adversities are very hard for our
flesh and blud to bear, and except we be used to pass under the rod of
correction, we will be All afflictions are grievous to our fleshly nature.
like to untamed heiffers, or wild steeres, that cannot abide their yokes
before they have a while submitted their necks unto them.

Therefore the holy Ghost says, no chastisement seems pleasante, but is
grievous Heb. 12, 11
for the present season, though afterward it brings forth the quiet fruit
of righteousness to the^ that are exercised therein. And our savior Chirst
says, Take my yoke upon you, Mat. 11, 29,
use your selue: unto it, and you shall find rest unto your souls: for which
cause Solomon says, My son despise not the chastning of the Lord, neither
saint when thou art rebuked of him, for who^ the Lord loves, he chastises,
and scourges every son that he receaueth: So that we see afflictions are not
hurtful, but good for us, and therefore ought to be borne Afflictions necessary
for the children of God Afflictions sure tokens of Gods favor, toward his
children.
patiently. Again, we may note here that when we are chastened and corrected
of God by sicknesses, by poverty, by loss of goods, by loss of friends, or
so forth, if we take the same patiently, they are sure testimonies that we are
the sons and children of God, because those whom he loves he chasteneth
oftentimes for their amendment, but the wicked he suffers to wax proud in
their sins, and so fatteth them against the day of slaughter.

Therefore let not this thing grieve us as it The wicked fatted against the day
of slaughter. Psalm. 37.35 Psalm. 73.3 18.
did David and Jeremy, to see the wicked flourish, for a time in this world. I
saw the wicked flourish, says David, like a green Bay tree, but I pasied bye,
and lo, they were gone at length (says he) I understood the end of these men
how God does set the^ in slippery places, suddenly Ierem. 12.1.
they are destroyed, cast down, and come to a fearful end: This shall be the end
of the ungodly that flourish for a time. But the children of God, which are day
lie tried here The children of God tried by tribulation, as gold in the furnace.
with the fire of tribulation, as the gold in the furnace, are thereby purified
and cleansed from many sins, and are made meet temples for the holy Ghost to
dwell in. Let us not therefore murmr at this working of God, but with patience
commit our selves unto him, as unto a faithful creator. Let us know that
health, wealth, children, friends, prosperity and the When God gives we must
be thankeful, when he takes, let us be patient.
like, are but temporal blessings: If God give them unto us, let us be
thankeful: if he take them from us again, let us be patient: knowing that he
has reserved greater things for us in heaven. If we should always have rest,
ease, and tranquillity of body, and mind in this life, then would we never
care to aspire unto that heavenly life, where there is nothing else but joy and
felicity, unto which joy we shall never attain, except we suffer patiently in
this life afflictions, and miseries: for Christ himself went not up into joy,
before Christ suffered pains, before he entered into joy.
he suffered pain, nay he suffered more pains for us ten thousand times, then
all the children of God can or have suffered since the beginning of the world.
Therefore the scripture says, that the Prince of our salvation (which is
Christ) was consecrate through afflictions because he should bring many
children Heb. 2.10.
unto glory. If therefore we will be partakers with Christ in glory, we must
also suffer patie^tly here with him in misery. The disciple is not above his
master, if Christ our Mat. 10.24.
master have drunken deeply of this bitter cup of afflictions, let us not
refuse to pledge him, in that measure which God has appointed for us, for by
afflictions we are made conformable unto the Son of God. It: 2. Cor. 4.11. 2.
Tim. 2. 11.12 Romans 8. 17. If we suffer with Christ we shall reign with him.
is a true saying, says S. Paul, If we die with Christ, we shall live with
Christ: if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him. And again, the same
Apostle says. That we are heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, if so
be we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. Let us
therefore suffer adversity patiently, and with thankefulnes. Remembering
evermore these holy sayings of patient Job: Shall we receive Job 1.21. and 2.
10.
good things, at the hands of God, and not evil? meaning by good things
prosperity, and by evil things adversity: Not that adversity is evil of it
self to Gods children, but because Jobs wife to whom he spoke, Adversity no
evil thing to Gods children.
happily did account it so. Again, when the Lord had taken away all Jobs
riches, goods and children in one day, he endured the same most patiently, and
praising God for it said, The Lord gives, the Lord takes away, blessed be
the name of the Lord. O example of patience never to be forgotten: In Job we
may see a perfect pattern of true patience.
Therefore is it that S. James says, Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
and what end the Lord made.

True it is, we have heard, and we have read of the patience of Job, but we
soon Iam. 5.11.
forget it, and make little use there of to our selves, for then we would not
be so impatient in every adversity as we are.

Job was patient in most great extreamities, We hear and read but do not
imitate Jobs patience.
and every light affliction, does make us to break out into impatiencie. A
little sickness, a little sorrow, a small loss of goods, or wife, or husband,
or child, or friend, or such like! O these are crosses that no man can bear?
Nay if we be but crossed or ouerthwarted Small crosses make us break out,
into impatiencie.
in our ordinary suites and dealings. if they that be above us in authority,
do but frown upon us: if we hear that our good name be called in question,
(though percase we have well deserved it) even these and a thousand such like
matters or of less importance, do easily cause us to break the bonds of
patience, and we cannot be pacified in a small time. See therefore whether it
were not necessary for Saint Peter to exhort us to join with our temperaunce
patience.

Moreover we must know that it is not enough for us, to suffer patiently these
crosses and adversities which we have worthily deserved, but if we be
Christians we must go Whatsoever is laid upon us for Christ's sake we must
patiently bear it. Reave. 14.12
a degree further, to suffer patiently, whatsoever is laid upon us wrongfully
for Christ's sake. And this patience is called in the scripture the patience of
Saints, because it is proper only to the children and Saints of God, to be
persecuted, afflicted and tormented in this life for the testimony of Jesus. I
John, (says Saint John in the Revelation) even Revel. 1.9.
your brother and compagnion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience
of Jesus Christ, was in the I Will called Patmos, for the word of God, and the
testimony of Jesus. This John was he whom Jesus loved, Ioh. 21.7.
and yet behold he must suffer banishment, persecution, and tribulation, for
the testimony of Jesus, though not unto the death. For it is recorded that he
only of all the Apostles dyed in his bed, the rest were Martyred and put to
death, for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Even as most part of the Prophets
were, that went before them.

Therefore Saint James says, take, my brethren, the Prophets for an example of
suffering Iam. 5.10.
adversity, and of long patience which have spoken in the name of the Lord.
But they were all persecuted and most of them put unto death for their labor,
as Christ himself witnesses when he says unto the Jews, Ye are witnesses
unto your selves, Mat. 23.31.32.33.34.
that ye are the children of them which murdered the Prophets, fulfill ye also
the measure of your fathers, O ye Serpents, the generation of Vypers! How
should ye escape the damnation of hell? A most fearful denunciation The
ministers of Christ must look for persecutions in this life. Act. 20.23.
to bloody persecutors. This then is the portion which the Saints, and
especially the Ministers of Gods word, are to look for in this life. This is
that the holy Ghost did certify Paul in every place where he came, that
bonds and imprisonments should abide for him. Whereof he and the rest of
Christ's Apostles, and Disciples did often times rejoice, that they were counted
worthy to suffer for his sake.

Here again is that saying of the holy Acts. 5.41.
Ghost to be remembered, ye have need of patience: if we cannot be patient
in small matters, when these great trials and temptations Heb. 10.36.
come upon us, how then shall we be patient? True it is, that the Church and
children of God in this land, have had a good Gods children have had a good
breathing time in this land.
breathing time, (blessed be God for it, and God in his great mercy continue
it) these many years: but must we therefore think, that we shall never be
called to the battle, because we have been spared a few years? Others in
other Countries of Gods dear Saints and children, have been afflicted and
persecuted: when their course is ended, we also may be brought forth, for
there shall never be an end of persecution in this life, til the day of
judgment, when the blood of all the Saints which have been slain since the
beginning of the world shall be avenged: as it is plainly to be seen in the
sixth of the Revelation, for there John says: when the Reave. 6.9.10.11.
Angel had opened the fith seal, he saw under the altar the souls of them
that were slain, for the word of God, and for the testimony that they
maintained. And they cried with a loud voice saying, How long Lord, holy, and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? And it was said unto them, that they should rest for a little season,
until their fellow servants, and their brethren that should be killed even as
they, were fulfilled.

Now it is certain, that these souls shall Gods children evermore persecuted
one where or other till the day of judgment.
rest and remain in their place till the day of judgment, therefore until
that day there shall be some or other that shall suffer for the word of God, and
for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Let none of God his children therefore in
what Country or nation so ever No true Christian priuileged from persecution.
1. Cor. 10. 13.
they be, think themselves priuileged from the heat of persecution. Rather
let every one pray daily and howerly, when it shall please the Lord to lay
his trials upon us, that he will give us patience to bear them: which thing
doubtless he will do, for he is faithful, A singular comfort that God will
lay no more upon his children then they shall be able to bear. God always true
of his promise.
and his promise is past, that he will lay no more upon his children then they
shall be able to bear, but will give the issue with the temptation. And this
promise has the Lord always fulfilled to his Saints and faithful children,
in all ages. Whereof we have innumerable examples in the Scripture, and the
Acts and Monumentes of the Church, howsome were stoned, hewn a sunder, slain
with the sword, drawn in pieces of wild Look for examples in the scriptures,
and Acts and Momuments how God has stre^ghned his children in most gneuous
torments.
horses, roasted upon gredirons, some cast unto wild beasts to be devoured,
some their skins fleyed off their shoulders, innumerable burned unto Ashes in
flaming fire, or consumed by some other torment devised by cruel and bloody
tyrants. In this lost age of the world, that bloody beast of Rome has
endeavored to be like other tyrants that were before him in cruelty But in all
these torments, the Lord sustained his Saints and children, and gave them great
patience to endure what pains or punishments soever that could be inflicted
upon them, so true is that saying of the spirit of God The Lord The beast of
Rome, has endeavored to exccede all tyrants before him in cruelty. 2. Pet.
2.9.
knows how to deliver them that are his, out of temptation. Wherefore every
Christian ought to take boldness in all afflictions: even as Saint Paul did
when he was delivered (for a time) out of the mouth of that Lion at Rome: The
Lord assisted me (says he) and strengthened me, and I was delivered from the
mouth of the Lion, meaning from cruel Nero, Emperor of Rome, that bloody
tyrane. Whereof also he takes further 2 Timothy 4.16 17.18.
assurance for time to come, saying in the same place, and the Lord will
deliver me; The faithful are assured that God will either deliver them, orgiue
the^ strength and patience to endure. Acts. 20.25. How Gods children are marty
red, and delivered, out of the hand of their enemies. Mat. 10.28. Rom, 15.4.
and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: here then is that assurance
which every one ought to have in God, Paul was sure he should be delivered,
he was sure he should be preserved; yet no doubt he did know that he must be
martyred one time or other, (as not long after he was) how was he then
delivered? His body and soul were preserved unto Gods everlasting kingdom.
Therefore our Savior Christ bids us not to fear death nor tyrants, for
they can kill but the body, but rather to fear God, that can cast both body
and soul into hell fire. Althese things are written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope.

Let these examples ever be before our eyes, let us serve God truly in our
callings, let our trust be wholly in him, then shall we never want patience in
afflictions, but rather rejoice in tribulations, which shall Romans 5.3.
bring forth patience. Let us still remember this saying of Saint Peter, it is
better, if the will of God be so, that we suffer for well doing 1. Pet. 2.20.
then for evil, for hereunto are we called, as Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps: Let us oftentimes call
to remembrance, that sweet saying of our Savior, Blessed are they which
suffer persecution for righteousness Mat. 5.10.11.
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: Blessed are ye when men revile
you, and say all manner of evil sayings against you falsely for my sake,
rejoice and be glad for great is your reward in heaven. Let us never forget
these most comfortable sayings of Saint Paul. That all the afflictions of this
life are not worthy of the glory that we shall have in the life to come.
That we need Rom, 8.18 31.
not fear the force of any tyrants, for if GOD be with us who can be against
use who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall
he not withhim give us al things also? Who shall lay No tribulation, nor
persecution canseparate the faithful from God.
anything to the charge of Gods chosen? It is GOD that justifies, who shall
condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea rather which is risen again, who is
also at the right hand of GOD, and makes intercession for us. Who shall
separate us therefore from the love of God? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or sword? At it is written, for thy
sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter, nevertheless in all these things, we are more then conquerours,
through him that loved us.

Last of all, let us be assuredly persuaded, as Saint Paul was, that neither
Verse. 38.
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor 39.
things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. This
assurance of faith we ought to have in our God, in all our trials,
temptations, and afflictions whatsoever. Let us therefore be faithful and
patient unto the death, then Christ will give us a crown of life, which he
has purchased for us by his death and passion.

A Prayer for Patience.
O Righteous God and merciful father, how wonderful art thou in all thy works,
and who is able to comprehend the secrets of thy judgments? Thou bring man
unto destruction, by and by thou say, come again O ye children of men; thy
wrath lasts but the twinkling of an eye, but in thy presence there is life
for evermore, heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. I acknowledge (O Lord) that all my corrections are ten thousand times
less then my deseruings: therefore I pray thee good Lord still correct me to
amendment, but plague me not to my destruction. And because there is no
chastisement but is grievous for the present season, (though after it brings
forth the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised therein)
therefore I most humbly beseech thee, O my good God and father, to give unto me
in all my trials and temptations that most excellent gift of patience, quietly
to bear and suffer, whatsoever thy gracious goodness has appointed to lay
upon me, for the trial of my faith, for the glory of thy name, and for the
good example of others. Yea O Lord I most instantly entreat thee, to let
patience have her perfect working in me, so shall I be perfect lacking nothing,
and howsoever it shall please thee to dispose of my body and goods, yet grant
me good Lord this benefit, that I may possess my soul in patience, so whether
there come sickness, come health, come life, come death, or come what will
come, I may say with patient Job, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed
be the name of the Lord. This mercy O my good God, vouchsafe to grant unto me,
and to all the afflicted members of thy Church for thy dear Son Jesus
Christ's sake, our only Savior and advocate. So be it.

OF GODLINESS. CHAP. 6.
WHen it pleased the holy Ghost to indite and set forth in a book the
patience of Job, for an example unto all posterity, he puts this in the
front and beginning thereof, that Job was a just and upright man, one that Job.
1.1.
feared God and eschewed evil. Now whereto serves this great commendation of
Jobs godliness? But to this end that we should know, that this holy man Job,
did not of himself, by any virtue or power of his own nature, bear with so
great patience these great calamities and afflictions; but because he was an
upright man in all his dealings toward the world, and full of Religion and
piety toward God: For this cause, as it seems was he the patientest man
in the Godliness the cause of patience.
world, because he was the holiest and godliest man that then lived in all the
world: even God himself, who sees the hearts of all men bearing witness, for
so God says unto Satan, have thou not considered my Verse, 8.
servant Job, how none is like him in all the earth, an upright and just man,
one that fears God and escheweth evil? So that we see by how much more God
would try his patience, by so much the more he commends his godliness. Job
therefore was patient, Without godliness there can be no perfect patience.
because he was godly. Here upon the contrary may be concluded, that without
piety or godliness, there can be no good and perfect patience.

This doctrine was well known unto Saint Peter: therefore as soon as he has
exhorted us unto patience, presently he says, join unto your patience
godliness: as if he should say: unless ye be religious 2. Pet. 1, 6.
and godly, ye cannot be patient. Godliness therefore is the biginner,
maintainer and supporter of patience.

Now what it is to live godly, and how a godly man is to be known, we may
above Who is a godly man.
learn from the mouth of God. For if Job were a godly man, as doubtless he
was, then to live godly is to live uprightly and justly, to fear GOD, and
eschew evil. All this did Job. This description of a godly man, is the same in
effect that Saint Paul says, Tit. 2.11.
The grace of GOD (which brings salvation) teaches, namely to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberlie, righteouslye, and godly
in this present world.

To deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, is with Job, to eschew evil: to
live soberly, is with Job, to live uprightly in respect of our selves: to live
righteously, is with Job, to live justly in respect of our dealings with
others: to live godly, is with Job, to fear GOD, that is to live religiously
in his fear, honoring and worshipping his name, according to his will. So then
we plainly see what it is to live godly, namely True religion must be without
superstition.
to be religious without superstition, to be sober in our lives and
conversation without hypocrisy, and to deal truly and plainly with all men,
in simplicity: who so does this, is surely a godly man.

The which thing that we should with all care endeavor to perform, is the
meaning of Saint Peter, when he says, Join unto your patience godliness.
Piety or godliness vpholdeth patience, for the patience which The wicked have
patience perforced.
the wicked seem to have, is patience perforced as we say, and is not true
patience, but rather impatiencie. Therefore Saint Peter says, We must join
piety or godliness to our patience, as if he should say: there cannot be a
patient man exceept the seed of true Religion and godliness be first planted
in his heart: for what is the cause that wicked worldly men and women, do so
fret and fume, and chafe at every storm of adversity, but because they are
Want of Religion and godliness the cause of all impatiencie.
not religious and godly? On the other side, we see that the faithful and
godly have and do suffer all troubles and adversities patiently, and with
contented minds.

What made Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Patryarkes, Moses and the rest of
the Prophets, Saint Steven, Saint James and all the rest of the Apostles,
together with all the rest of the Martyrs, in the ten first persecutions and
since, to be so patient in all their trials and afflictions, and specially at
the time of their death, but because they had true Religion, piety, and
godliness? Godliness therefore surely supporteth and holds us within the
bonds of patience, that we break not out with the wicked into all impatiencie.
Therefore is it that Saint Peter exhorts us, to join with patience
godliness.

Godliness then above all things, ought to be desired, for it is a surpassing
treasure Godliness above all things ought to be desired. 1. Tim. 6.9
that never perishes. Godliness says Saint Paul is great gain, if a man
be content with that he has, for we brught nothing into this world, and it is
certain, we shall carrye nothing with us. Again he says, godliness is
profitable to all things: it has the promise of this life present, and of that
that is to come. If therefore we will lack nothing in this life, nor in the
life to come, let us learn Godliness has promise of this life present, and
the life to come. Psalm, 34.10. and 128.1.2,
to live godly.

The Lions, says David (though they be feared of al beasts) do lack and
suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want no manner of thing that
is good. Blessed is that man that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways.
When thou eatest the labors 3.
of thy hands thou shall be blessed, and it shall go well with thee. Thy wife
shall be 4.
as the fruitful vine on the sides of thine and 119.1 2.
house, and thy children like the Olive plants round about thy table. Lo
surely thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the Lord. and 112.
Again, Blessed are those that are upright in their way, and walk in the way
of the Lord, Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, Verse. 1.
and seek him with their whole heart.

Again, blessed is that man that fears the Lord and delights in his
commandments, his seed shall be blessed upon earth, 2.
the generation of the righteous shall be blessed. Riches and treasures shall
be in his 3.
house, and his righteousness endures for ever. Unto the righteous arises
light in 4.
darkness, he is merciful and lends, and will measure his affairs by
judgment: surely 5.
he shall never be moved, he shall be had in 6.
an everlasting remembrance.

Therefore Solomon says, he that follows Prou. 21, 21
after righteousness, and mercy, shall find life, righteousness and glory,
Infinite such places there are, which show the blessedness of the righteous
and godly, 1. Tim. 4 8.
that they have, as Saint Paul says, the promise of this life, and that that
is to come.

The eight and twenty Chapter of Deuteronomic is full of those blessings, which
the godly shall have, and of the curses that shall Deu. 28.2.
fall upon the wicked. All these blessings shall fall upon thee and overtake
thee (if 3.
thou be godly,) Blessed shall thou be in the 4.
City, and in the field, Blessed shall be the 5.
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, the fruit of thy Cattle,
the increase 6.
of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and
thy dough, Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou
be when thou go out, etc.

Then turning to the wicked and ungodly he says, Cursed shall thou be in the
Verse. 16.
City and in the field, Cursed shall be thy basket and thy dough, Cursed
shall be the 17.
fruit of the body, and of thy land: the increase 18.
of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, Cursed also when thou come in,
and cursed also when thou go out, and 19.
so forth.

The same thing does David show in the first Psalm, when he says, that the
Psalm. 1. 3.
Godly shall be like a tree planted by the rivers side, that will bring forth
her fruit in due season, his leaf shall never fade, and look whatsoever he
does it shall prosper: but contrariwise he says, The wicked shall verse 4.
be nothing so, but they are like the chafe which the wind scatters away
from the face of the earth, therefore the wicked shall not stand in judgment,
nor the ungodly 5.
in the assemblye of the righteous, for the Lord knows the way of the
righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish. So likewise Solomon says,
Blessings 6.
are upon the head of the righteous, but iniquity Prou. 10.6.
shall cover the head of the wicked. The memorial of the righteous shall be
blessed, but the name of the wicked shall 7
rotte. Therefore David says again, the Psalm. 11. 5
Lord will try the righteous, but the wicked, and him that loves iniquity
does his soul abhor.

Again, he says, upon the wicked God shall rain snares, fire and brimstone,
6.
storm and tempest, this shall be their Gene. 19.24
portion to drink: Which thing we know he did upon the beastly and wicked
Sodomites, and the Cittyes there about. Neither shall the punishmente of the
wicked, and says David in this life, but the Psalm. 9. 17. No end of punishment
to the wicked, neither in this life, nor in the life to come
wicked after this life shall be turned into hell, and all the people that
forget God.

O then beloved, since the case is so, that the godly are so exceedingly
blessed, both here and for ever: and the wicked so miserably accursed, in this
life, and in the life to come, let us speedily forsake our sins and wickedness,
lest Gods curses come speedily upon us: and let us assuredly know, that if we
fear God, and love godliness, we shall be blessed a thousand fold, whereof
we have many examples in the scriptures, of such as for their faith and
godliness have been blessed before us.

Abell for his faith and godliness, his Examples of such as God has blessed
for their faith and godliness. Gene, 4.4. and 5.24. and 7.1
offering was accepted of God, when cursed Caynes was rejected, God himself
giving testimony with Abell, that he was righteous.

Enoch for his faith and holiness, was taken up into heaven, for he was
reported of, that he had pleased God.

Noah for his faith and godliness, was saved in the Arc, when all the world
besides, except his family, perished in the water.

Lot serving God among wicked and ungodly and 19.16.
people, was saved alive when Sodom and Gomorra were burned with fire and
brimestone.

Abraham for his faith and godliness, and 12, 2.3.
was blessed of God above all them that lived before him.

So Isaak, Jacob and the Patriarchs Heb. 11.9
heirs with him of the same blessing.

What should we speak of Elias, Elisha, Samuel, and all the rest of the
prophets, which for their faith and godliness are so renowned in the scripture?
What should I Luk, 1.6.
make mention of Zacharias the father, and John Baptist the son, the one is
said to Mat. 11.11, Luk 2.25. Act. 10.2. and 6.5 2 Cer. 1, 12. and 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. Women also commended for their faith and godliness. 2. Pet. 3.5.
Genesis 27.46. Exodus 15.20 Iud, 5, 1 Ester 4, 16 Luke 1, 6 and 1, 30.
be just before God, walking in all the commandementes of God without reproof:
the other that he was the chiefest among women's children.

Add hereunto, holy Simeon, good Cornelius, Saint Stephen, Saint Paul, and
all the rest of the Apostles, of whom as Saint Paul says, The world was
witness and God also, how holily, how justly, and unblameably they walked
before God.

And not only does the scripture commend men, but women also for their faith,
and godliness, as Saraa, Rebecca, Myria^, Debora, Ester, Elizabeth, ye virgin
Mary, Martha and Mary the sisters of Lazarus, Marye Ioh. 11.5 Luke 8.3. Mark.
16.1 Act. 9.^9 and 14. 14.15. 2 Timothy 2.1.5. Act. 18.2. Romans 1 6..
Magdalene, and Ioanna the wife Chusa, Herodes steward, Susanna and many
others which ministered unto Christ of their substance: Mary the mother of
James, and Salome, and others that bestowed cost on Jesus being dead, of
Dorcas, Lydia, Lois and Eunice the grandmother and mother of Tymothie: of
Priscilla, Phebe, and the elect Lady to whom 2 Ioh. 1.
John writes, with infinite other, which to repeat at large, would be more
tedious then profitable.

All these both men and women, have been wonderfully blessed of God for their
faith, for their holiness, for their religion, for their zeal and godliness,
and are most worthy examples for us to follow, of what calling, sex or degree
soever we God will bless them that be godly.
be: If we be faithful, holy, zealous, religious and godly, as they were,
then surely God will bless us as he did them. For God is one and the same
still. I am God (says he) I change not: in every nation, Mala. 3.6. Act.
10.35.
he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. who will
reward every one according, as he shows forth his faith by his good works.
That is, as says Saint Paul, to them Romans 2. 7
which by continuance in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are contentious, 8
and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation, and
wrath. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon every foul that does evil, 9.
upon the Jew first, and also the Gentile: but to every man that does good,
shall be 10
glory, and honor, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile: for
11
there is no respect of persons with God.

Wherefore, let us hearken unto Saint Peter, who bids us to join godliness
with patience, and the other virtues: yea God no accepter of persons. Leuit.
11. 1 Pet. 2. 11
let us hearken unto God himself, who bids us be holy as he is holy: let
us eschew evil, and do good, let us seek peace and follow after it.

Let us not be dismayed with the multitudes of the ungodly, for there are some
Reuelat. 22 11.
which are unjust, and will be unjust still, some filthy, and will be filthy
still: but let him that is righteous, be righteous still: and let him that is
holy be holy still: for behold I come shortly (says Christ) and my reward
is with me, to give to every 12
man as his work shall be.

Blessed are they that do his commandments 14.
mentes, that their right may be in the tree of life, and that they may enter
in through 15.
the gates into the City: for without shall be dogs, and inchaunters, and
whoremongers and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies.

A Prayer for godliness.
O Good and gracious God, most loving and merciful Father, seeing thou have not
only created me after thine own image, but also redeemed me being lost,
that I might be thy child by adoption and grace: I most humbly beseech thee so
to assist me with thy holy and sanctifying spirit, that I may lead my life in
a holy christian and godly conversation, as behooves me professing thy name:
that I may be holy, as thou O Father art holy; that I may be partaker of thy
Godly nature in fleeing the corruption which is in the world through lust,
that I may daily offer up unto thee, my soul and body, as a holy and
acceptable service, that I may cast of the old man, the whole body of sin,
and be renewed in the spirit of my mind, and put on the new man, which after
thy likeness is created in righteousness and true holmes: that seeing Christ
Jesus is made unto me wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: I
may by virtue of his resurrection, die daily unto sin, and live unto thee in
godliness and newnes of life during mine abode here in this world, that in the
world to come I may have life everlasting, through the same Christ Jesus our
Lord and Savior, Amen.

Of Brotherly kindness. Chap. 7.
THe Apostle Saint Peter, having furnished six linkes of his Chain, the
virtue and use whereof, do especially profit, and appertain to each
particular person, that is endued with them: as every particular man and woman
must be saved by his own faith, every one must have virtue, to addorne and
beautify his faith: every one must have true knowledge to lead him the way
unto virtue: every one must labor, by temperaunce and sobriety, to keep his
own body in subjection to his spirit, according as his knowledge out of Gods
word does teach him, every one has need of patience, to endure the sundry
trials and temptations, of this life, and of godliness which is the maintayner
and supporter of christian patience. Thus I say, every one of these virtues do
in a special and peculiar ma^nerprofite themselves that are endued with them.

But because man is not borne alone for himself, (as heathen men also have
taught) and therefore must not only have virtues to benefit himself, but
also such as wherewith he may do good to others. Therefore Saint Peter
bids us to join with the other forenamed virtues, first brotherly kindness,
which is a most fervent 2. Pet: 1. 7. What brotherly kindness is.
love and kind affection that all the children of God do bear one unto the
other, and therefore rightlye called of the Apostle brotherly kindness, as we
are brethren in Christ by grace of redemption: and then bids us last of al to
join with our brotherly kindness love or charity, which extends it self
farther then brotherly kindness does, not only to the saints and children of
God, but unto all men in general, even unto our very mortal and deadly
enemies. For this cause then is it, that Saint Peter does not bring love and
brotherly kindness together within the compass of one link, but speaks of
them severally and distinctly, yet lincketh them one in the other, because
there can be no brotherly kindness where there is no love, nor any true love
where there is not brotherly kindness. Whereupon it must needs follow, that
none but the children of God, can have either love or brotherly kindness.

people and infidels, yea, and also many of them which bear the names of
christians show great kindness one to the other, not because they are
christians, and of the household of faith (for that is the least thing they
account of) but for some other cause, and in some other respect.

Now for as much as natural kindenes was before brotherly kindness, and because
brotherly kindness whereunto Saint Peter exhorts us, does not take a way
natural kindness, but rather seeks to repair nature thorough grace:
therefore I think it not amiss, in this chapter to speak first of natural
kindness, and how we do degenerate herein contrary to our kind and nature,
and then to come to this christian brotherly kindness that Saint Peter speaks
of, which does excel and exceed the other by many degrees: showing withal
the want of this brotherly kindness, which does too much bewray it self even
among those countries and nations which are professed christians.

First then concerning natural kindenes, we may consider the great and
wonderful wisdom of almighty GOD, as in all things, so especially in this
one thing, forming in numerable sorts of creatures wherewith the whole world is
replenished, Gen: 1, 24 Nature has taught all beasts to love their kind.
infused into each creature this secret force of nature, that every one
should love and live together with such as were best like the one unto the
other. The birds of the air by themselves, the beasts of the field by
themselves, the fishes of the sea by themselves, and the creeping worms under
the earth by themselves. Yea moreover, of all these general kinds, he made
diverse and sundry particulars, that should sort themselves one with another.
Of birds, some are Eagles, some are Doves, and so forth. Of beasts, some are
Lions, some are Leopardes. Of fishes some are Whales, some are Dolphines. Of
creeping things, some are Adders, some are Snakes, and so forth. And of all
these several sorts of birds, beasts, fishes and creeping things, we see
every one fly, go, swim, and creep with his make and like, observing yet
unto this day that wonderful force of nature which was first given unto them.

Now what does all this teach and preach unto us, but that man which was made
Lord Man taught his duty by unreasonable creatures.
and governor over all these other creatures, should keep still that same
force of nature which was also given him in his kind, to live mutually together
one with ye other? for when Adam was formed of the dust of the earth, even
nature no doubt taught him this, that of all the creatures in the world, there
were none made like unto man, I mean in shape and fairenes of body (to speak
nothing of Gen: 2. 20.
the soul which is the chefest part of man) which Adam could find in his heart
to choose for an equal make and companion with him. Birds they were feathered,
and too swift of flying, Beasts they were hairie and too swift No unreasonable
creature fit to bear Adam company.
of running, Fishes they were shellye and to swift of swimming: creeping and
crawling wromes, which could scarce move one foot from the ground, were the
vnequallest of all to be matched with man, who was made to stand upright upon
his feet, to behold the glory of God in the firmament and heavens. Thus when
nothing could be found Gen: 2: 18.
fit to keep Adam company, God of his great mercy made one of Adams own
flesh and bone like unto him. only differing in sex, whereby mankind might be
also increased, and the world thereby replenished.

Of these twain so liking and loving together, because they were like of body,
like of Adam and Eve fit companyons.
speech, and like of mind, has sprung all the increase of mankind in
whatsoever country or nation now they are remaining. And every one has a
secret force of nature in himself, to love and like one another: which kind
of affection, is called natural kindness, or if you will, brotherly natural
kindness, Natural brotherly kindness.
as we are brothers by creation, how soever man in this point, has
degenerated out of kind, more then all other creatures in the world.

Nature has taught all beasts to love their like, and nature has taught men
to love Many men more unnatural than brute beasts
one another: Wheresoever thou see man, which is thy flesh, thou ought
for that cause to love him, and to show brotherly kindness unto him, Be he
Turk, Jew, Barbarian, Scythyan, Grecian, or of any other nation or country
under heaven, nature (if thou be not more unnatural then a beast) has taught
thee to show the kindness of a man unto him: and to do him any good thou can.
If thou see him in poverty, thou ought to bestow thy liberallity upon Man
by nature ought to love one another.
him: if he be sick, thou ought to succor him: if he be in sorrow, thou
ought to comfort him, if he be out of the way, thou ought to guide him;
if he be dead thou Esaias. 58.7. No man hates his own flesh, therefore every
one should show kindness to another.
ought to bury him. These lessons, I say, nature does teach thee; and the
scripture when it persuades us to help the needy in their distress, uses
this argument of persuasion, not to turn away thy face from thine own flesh:
it is thine own flesh, and of thine own kind, therefore show kindness unto
all men. O would to God this force of nature were not quenched in us, then
should not so many pitiful and distressed creatures lie vnholpen and
vnreleeued of such as are well able to relieve them. This only thing does
plainly declare, that man does more degenerate and grow out of kind in this
point, then either the beasts of the field, or birds of the air, which will
lovingly help one another, and show kindness one to another: the same I say
should one man do for another, of what nation or country soever he be: for
nature it self does persuade us thereunto, to show the kindness of a man one
to the other.

Rotten members must be cut off.
nature, then the whole body should perish: for of two mischiefs, the
lesser is to be chosen, and nature must yield unto necessity. Even so it
fares in the body politic of every comonweale; for that rotten members, and
malefactors are cut off by the sword of the magistrate, it is for the
preservation of the whole body of that country or weal public. Neither can
it be said, that the magistrate does any thing against nature, which
doubtless is grieved in respect Magistracy maintained
of nature, that any member is cut off, how be it for the health of the whole
body it must be done. Even as a chyrurgion A similitude.
(though he show his boldness of courage outwardly) is touched by nature in
compassion, when he cutteth off an arm or leg from any body: but it is the
office of the surgeon to do the one, and it is the duty of the magistrate to
do the other: and neither of them offend against nature.

This I speak generally of all countries and nations where any government is
observed: if we should speak particularlye of Christian commonweals, and
of Christian magistrates, that have the word of God, why then we may
answer further, that they have Gods warrant, who is above nature, to take
away rotten members, by the swoorde at home, As Saint Paul says, Gods word
is every christian magistrates warrant. R^. 13.4, Deutro. 20. 1.2. 3.4. Wars
lawful where the cause i^ good.
if thou do evil, fear; for he bears not the swoorde for naught: for he
is the minister of GOD to take vengeance on him that does evil. As also to
defend their Country and people by feats of arms both at home and abroad.

None of these things, I say, is against the law of nature, which teaches
every man to show brotherlye kindness, yea the magistrate as well as any
other: notwithstanding to speak all in a word, it is not Not the magistrate but
the law that puts malefactors to death.
the magistrate but the law that puts malefactors to death. Wherefore, this
force of nature does still remain untaken away, that brotherly kindness must
be showed one to another, as we are all men made by one workmaster, of one
metal though cast in diverse moldes.

Now that one man does love his own degrees of brotherly kindness.
country men better then another, and in that country his kindred before other,
and in that kindred his own family before an other, and in that family, his
wife and children before other, it comes also to pass by the secret force
of nature. For as in birds, beasts, and fishes, though birds will company with
birds, and beasts with beasts, and so forth, yet every of them have their
several fellowships, as before we have noted. So likewise though in
generallitie, man will company with man, and in a sort show kindness one to
another, yet nature has her working in us also, even in this, that by how much
more we are lincked together by any bond of familiarity and friendship, of
country, or kindred, by so much more we will show kindness one to ye other,
for that in deed is right brotherly True brotherly kindness.
kindness, and most agreeable unto nature. For as we cannot show kindness to all
men at one time, so it were unnatural (and such unnatural wretches there are
many in this land) to be unkind unto our own country Unkind countriemen that
will help other countries rather then their own.
men, kindred, neighbors and friends, and to seek opportunity to show kindness
unto other countries, or to them we never saw before. This you will say is
kindness, but it is unnatural kindness, such as is odious before God and man.

Now, as there are some which turn natural into unnatural kindness, so the
most part of people that are irreligious and living in this declining age of
the world, are grown so barbarous, hard hearted, inhumane and brutish, insomuch
that it seems this natural kindness is almost extinguished in them. And if
I may speak by way of comparison, we shall find that not only brute
beasts do excel many men in this natural kindness one toward the other, but
also in declaring their natural affection unto man, more then one man
sometimes does unto another. Few natural men without religion and godliness do
love their wives as the turtle does his make: no woman can show more kindness
unto her children, then the Pellicane does to her young; If unreasonable
creatures can match, nay ouermatch many of us in these two points of natural
kindness, then what shall we think of the rest?

Again, histories do record what great affection brutishe beasts have showed
unto mankind. Pliny reports that in the city of Ceston an Eagle being
brought up by a young maid, loved the maid so well, that it would fly
abroad and kill fowls and bring them home to the damsel, and when she died
the Eagle died with her. As strange a thing as this we read of an Elephant
which was in the wars at what time Pirrhus subdued the city of Argos, which
elephant after he perceived that his master was slain, went up and down
among the dead soldiers, to seek his master, which being found, the Elephant
brought his body being dead to a safe place, where the Elephant after much
mourning, dyed for sorrow. What should I speak of the affection and natural
kindness that horses and dogs do show unto their masters? we do daily
see something before our eyes, but histories do report much more.

Of Horses, that Alexander king of Macedon, that Julius Caesar Emperor of
Rome, that Antiochus king of Siria, had each of them a horse, who bearing unto
their masters such affection, would suffer no other to ride upon them but
only their masters, unto whom they would crouch and kneel down to the
ground to receive them upon their backs. It would be too long to rehearse
the tenth history that does record the kindenes which dogs have shown unto
their masters; Lisimachus that noble Grecian, had a dog named Durides, that
loved him so well, that even at Lisimachus death, the dog died also. Hiero had
another dog, that ran willingly into that flame of fire where his master
did burn, and so dyed with him. Titus Sabinus dog, as Fulgotius says, never
forsook his master in prison: when any one gave the dog bread or meat, he
brought it unto his master in prison, and when his master was thrown into the
river Tyber, the dog was seen to do what he could to lift up his
masters head out of the water, thinking his master had been alive.

These and many other such do writers report of the kind affection that brute
beasts do bear unto mankind, which I have noted only to this end, that
these monsters in nature, and not men, may be ashamed to see how far they
degenerate from that natural kindness which was once given unto them; when they
shall see even brute beasts to excel them therein.

The want of this natural kindness is is not the least cause of so many
unnatural murders, villanyes, and conspiracies in the world. And if this
natural kindness were of force among us, though some care neither for God nor
religion (as a great many do not) yet they would not be so unkind, as in
the hardenes of their hearts to turn away their faces from their own
flesh, which many times they see ready to perish for want of things
necessary, whom they might well relieve with their superfluity. Insomuch,
that though it was once said, Homo homini Deus, that man should be loving as
God unto man. Yet now it is proved contrary in a great many, that Homo homini,
non lupus (as the Proverb is) sed demon, Men rage not like wolves, but more
like devils one against another. And the longer we live, the worse: one age is
more hateful than another, and this age seems to show less natural kindness
than former ages.

For who sees not, or rather what heart lamenteth not, to see how this natural
kindness which should be between man and man, does cool and decay daily? Is it
not now come to this pass among a great many, that one man is not regarded of
another, that country men disdain one the other, that kinsmen reproach the one
the other, that neighbors deceive one the other, that no man will trust one
another, no, not his brother? Subjects are disloyal toward their prince,
children are unnatural toward their parents, people have no hearty love
toward their pastors, many pastors love more the fleeces than their sheep,
every man loves himself, few of the common sort care as they should for
the common profit of their Country. Thus has self love even bannished
natural love and kindness out of our coasts. I speak yet still of natural
kindness, as we are brothers by nature and creation.

Insomuch, that most certainly we now live in those last days and perilous
times which the Apostle S. Paul foreprophesied 2. Tim. 3.1
should come before the end of the world, when men should be lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them which are good,
traitors, headye, high minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God,
having a show of holiness, but having denied the power thereof, all which
things are most certainly fulfilled in our time.

But leaving to discourse farther of natural kindness, and of such unkind
natural men as this age yields, I must come to the chiefest thing that ought
to be spoken of in this Chapter, even unto christian brotherly kindness, which
the Apostle Saint Peter in any case would have us to link unto the six
former virtues, for Christians must not only show brotherly kindness one to
another, because we are brothers by nature and creation, but chiefelye and
principally, because we are also brothers by grace of redemption, by
profession and religion, because we have one God, one faith, one baptism, one
savior and redeemer. And is this brotherhoode nearer and dearer than the
other? O far dearer: by nature and creation we are brothers according to the
flesh, but by grace we are knit Brothers by redemption nearer and dearer then
by creation.
together in unity of spirit: by nature we inioye here in a fraternity,
the temporal things of this world, (and that neither but by usurpation or
tolleration) but by grace we enjoy through hope, those durable riches which
shall never fade. By nature we are the sons of men, but by grace we are made
the sons of God, The same spirit bearing witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of God. If we be children, Rom: 8.16.17.
we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if
so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be gloryfied with him. By
nature we are heirs here of temporal inheritances, but by grace we are
heirs and coheires with Christ Jesus of eternal glory: in a word, by
nature, or rather by corruption of nature, we are the children of wrath and
damnation, but by grace we are restored unto life and salvation.

If by nature therefore we ought to show kindness to our brothers, according
unto the flesh, how much more unto them that are brothers both by nature and
profession?

This Argument, from the lesser to the greater, does the Apostle Saint Paul
use, when he would persuade his beloved Philemon, Brothers both by nature and
profession. Phile: 16.
to show kindness unto Onesimus, an old servant of Philemons: I beseech thee
(says the holy Apostle Saint Paul) for my son Onesimus, whom I have
begotten in my bonds, that thou would receive him for ever: not now as a
servant, but above a servant, even a brother beloved, specially to me, how
much more to thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord.

Here then was brotherly kindness to be showed, both because Onesimus was
once Philemons servant, and of his familye; in which respect, Saint Paul (as
the learned do note) does call Onesimus Philemons brother, according to the
flesh, as also because he was now a brother, according unto grace.

Furthermore, as there are degrees of brotherly kindness, according to nature,
so also according to grace: for though love, (whereof we must speak in the
next chapter) Degrees of brotherly kindness according to grace.
does extend it self far and near to all the children of God alike, that
are dispearsed thoroughout the whole world, yet christian brotherly kindness,
does show it self by degrees (which shows a differrence between love and
brotherly kindenes) according to country, kindered, affinity, fellowship, and
so forth. It was godly brotherly kindness in Moises, so earnestly to pray the
Lord to pardon his country people, Exodus 32.31
the children of Israel, (though therein he had chiefly respect unto Gods
glory) or else to raze his name out of the book of life. In like manner it was
christian brotherly kindness in Saint Paul, to wish himself Romans 9. 3.
separated from Christ for his brethren that were his kinsemen according to the
flesh: And the same brotherly kindness have all the faithful (though not in so
great a measure) even unto this day. The faithful husband does chiefelie
desire the salvation The fruits of brotherly kindness.
of his wife, the wife likewise of her husband: faithful parents, the
salvation of their children, children ought to bear the same affection unto
their parents; so brothers and sisters, so neighbors and friends, so kinstolke
and country folk, should bear this Christian brotherly kindness one to the
other. For these virtues which we had first given unto us by creation, are not
taken away by grace of redemption, but rather restored. Therefore Saint Paul
says, Be ye affectioned, Gifts of nature restored by grace of redemption.
to love one the other with brotherly kindness. And the author to the Hebrews
faith, Let brotherly love continue. And again, forsake not the fellowship that
ye have among your selves, as the manner Heb: 12. 1.
of some is. And Saint Peter in the second Chapter of his first Epistle says,
Honor 1. Pet. 2.17.
all men, love brotherly fellowship. Therefore the saints of God in the
primitive Church, are commended in the third of Act. 3.42.
the Acts, because they did continue not only in the Apostles doctrine, but
also in Christians should live together in godly fellowship.
fellowship. If these Christians were commended, for that they continued in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship: how are many that bear the names of
Christians in this age to be condemned, for that they agree neither in the
Apostles doctrine, neither in brotherly kindness, and Christian fellowship: but
divide and separate themselves one from the other?

How are all the nations in Christendom divided and rent asunder the one from
the other? (a token that the latter day draws The bonds of Christian
fellowship broken.
near) Are not almost all the bonds of christian fellowship, and brotherly
kindness broken? Does not one christian nation thirst for the blood of an
other? Nay will all the blood of all the true Christians in Europe, quench the
thirst of that blouddy beast of Rome, that does nothing else but seek to make
havoc of the church of God, and that under the pretense of holiness and
religion? Surely it is most certain, that Antechrist that spiritual whore of
Babylon, has not only made drunken the most part of the Kings and Princes of
the earth, with the cup of her fornication, but also has been the very The
pope the bellows of discention.
bellows, which out of hell mouth, has kindled the coals these many years of
most part of the wars in christendom. France Germany and many other
countries, may be produced for witnesses: yea I am persuaded that the King of
Spain himself (which at this day is content to be in this respect at the
Popes command, to run, to go, to fight when he bids him) would also confess
this The Spanish clergy the drudges of popery.
truth, if he were not affraide of his clergy, the very drudges of Popery.

The Turks and Sarasens, need not trouble themselves to make war against
Christendom, for we have them that by name and profession are Christians,
which do travel in pain, (as a woman ready to be delivered, till they hear
or see all christendom together by the ears. But let Spain above all take
heed, lest while they prepare A good caveat for Spain.
their forces to fight against christians, their country be overthrown, by
Turks and Barbarians.

And as for that beast of Rome and the City and country thereof, which a
long The judgment of the whore.
time have fed and pampered such a blouddy beast and beastly whore. Let her (I
say) assuredly know, that her sins are come Revel. 18.5.
up into heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities: and will reward her as
she has rewarded other, and give her double according to her works, and in
the cup which she has filled to other, shall be filled to her the double.

In as much as she has glorified her self, and lived in pleasure: so much shall
she have torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart I sit as a Queen, and
am no widow, and shall see no mourning. Therefore shall her plagues come at
one day, death, and sorrow Ver. 8. When God judges there is no end of torment.
and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God that
will condemn her.

Yea God does daily destroy her with the breath of his mouth, but shall utterly
abolish her, at the brightness of his coming, which 2 Thessalonians. 2*8
shall be at the day of judgment.

And that this day is at hand, this is not one of the least signs, that
nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, as now is to be
seen in christendom, that Tokens that the day of judgment is at hand.
brotherly love, and kindness, among christian nations is waxen cold, and
iniquity abounding, even as our savior foretold should come to pass before
the end of the world. Therefore let all the wicked ones of the Mat. 24.7.12.
world, specially they that have received the mark of the beast in their
right Reave. 13.16
hand, or in their foreheade, howl, cry and weep, for the judgment of the
great day is coming. But O heaven rejoice of this, and 18.20.
and ye holy Apostles, and prophets, and martirs, for God has given you
judgment upon The godly rejoice for the judgment of the whore. Luke 21.28.
the beast: and let all the godly and faithful people in the world, be glad,
and lift up their heads with joy, because their redemption draws near.

Thus have we seen, how the bonds of brotherly love and kindness, are broken
and rent asunder, throughout all the lands of christendom. And I would to God
there were no breach of this brotherly love and kindenes, among those
christians, which live together in one land, under one christian Prince, having
all one God, one faith, one baptism, one true religion: that we would walk
worthy Contentions among Christians lamentable. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.6
of the vocation, whereunto we are called, in all humblenes of mind, and
meeknes with long suffering, supporting one the other through love, endeavoring
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, even as we are called
in one hope of our calling, and that we would all speak one thing, that
there were no dissentions among us, but 1 Cor. 1.10.
that we would be knit together in one mind and in one judgment.

So should God be glorified, so should all our Princes good and godly laws be
obeyed, The fruit of Christian concord.
so should the mouths of our adversaries be stopped, so should virtue
flourish, and righteousness should look down from heaven upon us, so should
Sion rejoice, and Israel would be glad, to see brotherly kindness maintained
among us. God is not the author Galat. 6, 16,
of confusion, but of peace, and as many as follow this rule, the God of love
and peace, be with them: Amen.

A Prayer for brotherly kindness.
O Most wise and mighty creator, Lord of heaven and earth, who by thine
infinite wisdom, have knit mankind together in a most wonderful order, to
this end that we should show all frendlines, and brotherly kindness one to the
other: and as in all other living creatures of this world, so specially in man
thou did at the beginning infuse into his breaste, this secreat force of
nature, that we should like and live together in godly fellowship and society
among our selves* but so it has fallen out, by reason of sin, and the malice
of Satan; that as in all other good things, so especially in this, we do
degenerate and grow out of kind, and one man cares not for another: but
eueryman for himself, selfeloue is strong and headdy, but brotherly kindness
weak and decayed. Therefore good Lord I beseech thee, renew again in me and
in all people, by the benefit of grace, that which we have lost by sin and
corruption: that as we are all brothers by creation, so all nations (if it be
thy will) may show natural kindness one to the other: but specially grant grace
O Lord to me and al Christians, that as we are now knit together again by a
more nearer bond of religion and christianity, so we may show our selves in
all dutiful kindness, to be the children of one God, members of one body,
heirs and coheyres with Christ Jesus of eternal salvation, purchased unto us
by his death and passion, to whom with God the Father, and God the holy Ghost,
be all praise and glory for ever: Amen.

Of Love, or Cheritie. Chap. 8.
IT is the manner of cunning and curious golde-sinithes, that work only upon
fine and pure gold, evermore to put unto their work, some privy sign or
mark, whereby they will know their own doings from others, that use not so
fine gold as they do. The very same thing (in a sort) our skillful and
perfect workman Saint Peter seems to do, in this excellent piece of work
now in hand, he has beaten out all his linckes of the purest and finest gold,
he has so curiously lincked one lincke in the other, and riuited the same
fast with the hammer of Gods word, that it cannot be perceived where the
soldering is. Now being about Saint Peter's chain, made all of pure gold.
to finish his chain, he adds this last linck of love unto it, which serves
him as a privy sign or mark to know this chain made all of purified gold,
from all other men's work, that shall go about to counterfaite the same with
any base gold, or copper that has not been tried by the perfect touchstone
of the word of God, nor weighedin the balance of the sanctuary.

And this is done surely to great purpose, for as no golde-smith be he never so
skilful, can make any work of his finest gold, but some shifting mates or
other, will counterfaite the same in Copper, and double-gilde it over with
gold, in such sort that (except it betryed two or three times by the touch) it
shall not appear that it is counterfaite. Even so Saint Peter, knowing that
there Many counterfaiters of virtue in the world.
would arise many such deceauers in the last age of the world, that would
counterfeit his Chain, making show to the world, that they have faith, virtue,
knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, and brotherly kindness, when in truth
(being tried by the touch it is nothing so) he therefore (me thinks) adds
of set purpose, unto his Chain this golden True love can hardly be
counterfaited. A similitud
link of love, which cannot well be colored or counterfaited. For as the
Camelion, can change himself into any color, except it be white, so the
wicked impes of Satan, can counterfaite every virtue, except it be love and
charity: the which thing when they would also go about to do, the heat of
their malicious stomaks ever more be wraie them, by this lincke then of love
and charity, it shall appear, who are truly virtuous, and who are
counterfaite hypocrites, and dissemblers.

Furthermore, this love whereunto Saint Peter here exhorts us, is a true note
whereby the children of God are known, and a badge which every Christian ought
to Love the badge of Christians
wear. Therefore love may be called the badge of Christians. Noble and
gentlemen we see, (that their retinue, and attendants may be known) when they
receive any man into their service, give them a badge or recognisance. Every
soldier in the field, Similies.
knows of what band he is, by ye ensign that is borne before him. Christ
Jesus therefore that most noble and victorious Captain, that has vanquished
sin death and hell, to the end he might have his soldiers and Christ will
have his soldiers known from Satan's.
servants known from all other, has assigned unto them a peculiar badge or
recognisance, such as cannot be countersaited, and it is indeed this love
which S. Peter speaks of. By this (says Christ) shall all men Ioh. 13.35
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one an other. This badge of love
must be plated fast, not in the sleeue, but in the hearts of Christians: the
Metal whereof this badge Love must be in the heart.
of love is made, does far exceed al gold or silver, for gold will not
appear if it be covered with any other thing, but love the closer it is hid
in the heart, the brighter will it shine throughout all the parts of the body.
Like unto a precious stone called the Topaze, that glittereth or shines best
in the Love like unto a precious stone that shines best in the dark.
dark. And indeed how can it be otherwise? Can it be dark in that house
where the Sun shines in through the Glass windows? Nay, can that place of
the firmament be dark where the Sun abides? No verily: much less can that
soul and body of man be dark, where God himself which is all light remains.

Now God is love, as says Saint John, Beloved 1. Ioh. 4.7.
let us love one an other, for love comes of God, every one that loves is
borne of God, and knows God: contrariwise, he that loves not, knows not
God, for God is love. Again, he says, No man has seen 8.
GOD at any time; if we love one another God dwells in us, and his love is
perfect Verse. 12.
in us. Again, he says, God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells
in God, and 16.
and God in him. What divine and heavenly thing then is Christian love and
charity? How does this one lincke beautify this golden Chain? Who would not
be in love with such a Jewel, where God himself is engraven in the midst?
Many think they Love a principal Jewel.
are safe, when they have a Crucifixe of gold, silver or copper hanging about
their necks, though their hearts be full of hatred, sin and malice. But O
beloved, here is a rich and precious Jewel worthy the wearing: the Crucifixe,
is but a feigned and false picture of the body of Christ, whereby if thou take
Crucifixe dangerous.
not heed, thou may soon commit Idolatry: ^fat least the very wearing of
it be not Idolatry: but if thou have this Jewel of love in thine heart, then
thou need not fear the force of thine enemies, for thou have God abiding
with thee, and if God be with thee, who can prevail against thee? There be
Romans 2 31.
indeed poor Politicians now a days, which think it good policy (but it is
against Divinity) though thou be no Papist, (but percase a Newter, or an
Atheist) to have a Poysonfull pollititians.
Crucifixe always hanging about thy necks for, say they, if the Spaniards,
who are poisoned Papists, should invade this land, they will use thee well, for
thy Crucifixe sake. But it is sounder Divinity, and better agreeing with
Christianity in thy confidence that He that has confidence in God will defy
Gods enemies.
thou have in God, to defy both Pope and popish Spaniards, the open and
professed enemies of God and of Christ his anointed: and to harbor love in
thine heart, whereby thou may assure thy self, to be the soldier of
Christ, who is able to defend thee, and will defend thee, trusting in GOD, (if
it be for his glory and thy salvation) from the force of all enemies
whatsoever.

Surely this fearefulnes that is in the hearts of people, as it does argue great
wickedness, and guiltiness of their consciences, so it is a A guilty
conscience cannot be bold. John. 4. 17.
manifest sign, that the love of God is not in them. For as S. John says,
herein is love perfect in us, that we should have boldness, (not only in this
life against our enemies but also) in the day of judgment. Again he says,
There is no fear in love, but perfect 18.
love casts out fear, and he that fears is not perfect in love: if
therefore thou will not be afraid of thine enemies in this life, nor of
damnation in the life to come, entertain Love casts out fere.
true love and Charity in thine heart and mind, Love God above al, and thy
neighbor as thy self: for therein consists the Mat. 22.37.
whole law and the Prophets, as our Savior Christ does witness. And Saint
Paul says, Romans 13.9.
the Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Again, love hurts not his neighbor, therefore is love the fulfilling of the
law. We must therefore Gala. 5.14.
love God above all, and our neighbors as our selves.

There be some indeed that will say, they We cannot love God if we hate our
brethren.
love God, and yet will hate their brethren, but that cannot be: if we love
God, we will surely love our neighbor: if we hate our neighbor, we hate God
also. This is clear by the words of Saint John; whose Sermons savor al of
love: if any man say I love God, 1. Ioh. 4.20
and yet hate his brother, he is a liar, for how can he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, Love God whom he has not seen. And this
commandment have we of Christ, that he that loves God, should 21.
love his brother also. Again he says, In this are the children of God
known, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever does 1. Ioh. 3.10
not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother. O
then beloved I am afraid that the devil has a great many more children
here among us then Christians by name but not indeed.
God has: for though we be all called Christians, yet there is little Christian
love among us, but old malice, deadly hatred, bitter envying, contention,
striving, lawing, quarrelling, fighting, murdering, both with hand heart and
tongue. O these are not the fruits of the spirit! But love, and peace, and
meekness and gentleness, they are the fruits of Gala. 5.
the spirit, the other are the marks of the children of Satan, who has
evermore borne deadly hatred to Gods children, and and has beenea liar and a
murderer, from the beginning.

Therefore Saint John says, He that hates his brother is a murderer. And our
Savior Christ says, whosoever is angry with 1. Ioh. 3.15
his brother unadvisedly is culpable of judgment. As love therefore is the
badge Mat. 5.22.
of Christians, so hatred and malice are the proper notes of Satan's brood,
the children Hatred and malice Satan's recogniscences.
of darkness. As fire and water cannot agree together, no more can love and
hatred remain in one man: one fountain cannot bring forth salt water and
sweet: a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit: therefore Saint James
says, Who so is a wise Iam. 3.11 12.
man, and endued with knowledge: Let him show by good conversation his works
in 13.
meekenes of wisdom: but if ye have bitter envying, and strife in your
hearts, this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and
deuilish, for where envying 14.
and strife is, there is sedition and al manner of evil works: but the wisdom
that is 15.
from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full
of mercy and 16.
good fruits; without judging and without hypocrisy: and the fruit of
righteousness 17.
is sown in peace, of them that make peace. 18.


Wherefore, as I have said, these inward grudgings and bitter contentions
between professed Christians, are evident tokens, that there is great want of
this love and charity among us. Love, says Solomon, (and it is Prou. 10.12
repeated again by Saint Peter) does cover a multitude of sins, if any
therefore rejoice 1. Pet. 4.8.
in blazing abroad the faults of their brethren, how have they this love
within Love covers many faults. Gala. 6.1.2,
them? We ought rather to follow the counsel of Saint Paul, to support one the
other with the spirit of meekness, considering that no man is free from
temptations. The The nature and office of true love 1. Cor. 13.1
nature and office of this true love and charity, is excellently set forth by
Saint Paul in the thirteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinths: for
there the Apostle shows, that al other gifts, as the gift of tongues, 2.
prophecy, knowledge, and the rest, without love are nothing worth. Again, If
any would give his body to be burned, and all his goods to the poor, without
love it profits nothing. If any say, to give our goods to the poor, is a
fruit of love and charity, I confess it, and it is a doctrine needful to
be urged in these days of dearth and pennurie (when Lazarus craves, and
Dives hoardeth) to teach and exhort all Christians 3.
unto liberality, to charge them that are rich in this world (upon pain of
damnation) that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God,
which gives us abundantly Exhortations unto charity most necessary.
all things to enjoy. That they be good and be rich in good works, ready to
give and to distribute to them that have need, Laying up in store for
themselves a 1 Timothy 6.17
good foundation, against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal
life. For he that gives to the poor lends unto the Lord, and look what he
lays out, it shall 18.
be paid him again with advantage: this is godly Usury, this is to hoard up
riches in heaven: Blessed is the man that provides for the poor and needy.
It is a blessedder 19.
thing to give then to receive. On the contrary, Godlyinterest. Psalm. 41.1.
Act. 20.35. 1. Ioh. 3.17.
he that has this worlds goods, and seeeth his brother has need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, surely there is no love of God in him.

Notwithstanding, though this doctrine, I say, be true and needful to be urged
continually, yet it is true also, that we may give al our goods to the poor,
and yet want love and charity. For, to give our goods to some We must give our
Almeswith out partiality.
poor which we love and like, and in our hearts to hate (with a deadly
hatred) others, which are also our own flesh, proceeds not of love, but of
natural kindness; wherewith infidels and heathen people are endued. Again, we
may give our goods vain gloriously, or in hope of meriting. Therefore is it
that Saint Paul says, Though thou give 1. Cor. 13.3
al thy goods to the poor, and have no love, it profits thee nothing. And
our Savior Christ says, that we must not only love and Mat. 5.44.
do good to them that love us (for so the wickedst men in the world do,) but
we must To love our enemies comes not of nature but of grace Romans 12
love and do good to our enemies, which thing comes not of nature, but of
grace. If thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink. O,
this is hard, to hard hearted people, but God will have thee to do this: if
thou be his child, love will bring this to pass, and till thou can do this
in some measure; thou may fear to call God Father. Therefore Christ says,
I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse Mat. 5.44.
you, pray for them which hate and persecute you. Why shall we do all this?
Christ answers, that ye may be the children of your heavenly Father, for he
makes the Sun 45.
to rise upon the evil and the good, and his rain to fall upon the just and
unjust. On the contrary, says Christ, if ye love them that love you, what
reward shall ye have, do not the Publicans even the same? Be ye 46.
perfect therefore (in love) even as your heavenly Father is perfect. To give
our goods 47.
only to such poor as we love and like, such as we know will blaze the same
abroad, and to hate other whom we should love, is not to be perfect, but
partial in love, and so for such love we shall have no thank of GOD. We have
spoken before of brotherly-kindnesse, that does keep it self within some
limits, but this Love whereof now we speak has no bounds but extends it
self over Love has no bounds.
all the world, even to our very enemies. He that cannot love his enemies for
Christ's sake is not perfect in love. God loved us when we were his enemies, we
must follow God in this respect. Be followers of God, says Romans 5.6.
Saint Paul, and walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and so forth.
Beloved says Ephesians. 5.1.
Saint John, If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. The love
that God has 1. Ioh. 4.11
showed unto us is infinite, and unmeasurable, we must therefore endeavor to
love God, and our enemies for his sake in some We must love our enemies because
God loved us being his enemies.
measure. Or else, Woe, Woe be unto us. We must love God, because he loved us
first, and we must love our enemies for Gods sake, because he loved us when we
were his enemies.

This doctrine by how much more it is hard for flesh and blood to perform,
because it is against our fleshly nature, which is evermore desirous of
revenge, by so much If we cannot forgive we must pray God to change our hearts.
Mat. 18. 24.
more ought we to desire God to change or mollify our hard hearts, that we may
be ready to forgive others one hundred pence, seeing God is so kind to forgive
us ten thousand talents, always remembering this definitive sentence of Christ.
If ye forgive not other their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father
forgive you your trespasses. Mat. 6.15.
Therefore Christians are taught daily to pray the Lord to forgive them, as
they do Mat. 6.12.
forgive others, that is, if we do not forgive others, then we desire the
Lord not to forgive us, which is most fearful, if we have any grace to
consider ofit. This then is to be When we pray and do not forgive we sin
grievously.
perfect in love (as far as we can attain to perfection in this life) to
love God with all our hearts, with all our souls and with all our strength, and
our neighbor, though our enemy, as our selus. The which thing, because no man
can do in such absolute sort as he ought, therefore we cannot be perfect in
love, til We^ cannot be perfect in love in this life.
we have laid down our fleshly nature, and be clothed with immortality: but
we must do the best we can: and though we cannot love God and our neighbors,
as we should, yet we must forgive our enemies freely as we are commanded: yea,
and love them, even as our dearest friends: though they be our mortal enemies,
and have sworn our death, yet we must love them, (not with a feigned We must
pray for our enemies. Luke 23.24. Act. 7.60.
but true Christian love) and pray for them, that God would change their
hearts, and forgive them, even as Christ, and Saint Stephen prayed for their
persecutors, saying, To forgive injuries, is given unto us of God.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. This love which causes us to suffer
injuries patiently, and to forgive them freely, is the special gift of God,
and given only to his 1 Cor. 13.4.
elect. Therefore Saint Paul says, Love suffers long, and is courteous: Love
enuieth 5.
not, love does not boast it self, it swells not, it disdayneth not, it
seeks not her 6.
own things, it is not provoked to anger, it 7.
thinks no evil, it rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth,
it suffers all things, it believes all things, it hops all things, and
indureth all things: Why then, he that has this lincke of love, has Love
has all virtues included in it.
all these virtues included in it: O rich chain, where one lincke is bedecked
with so many precious pearls: contrariwise then it must needs follow, that
they which can suffer no injuries, they that are of a currish nature, and not
courteous, they that envy at other men's good success, and prosperity, they
that are puffed up with pride and vain glory, Vices contrary unto the fruits
of love.
as a bladder with wind, they that will commend none, but disdain all, they
that are not contented with their own, but seek other men's, by deceit or
oppression, they that not only think evil, but study to devise mischief:
they that are sorry to have truth known, and rejoice in iniquity. These and
such like whosoever they are, and of what calling or degree soever they be of,
have not received this badge of love, whereby they should be known to be true
christians.

Last of all, S. Paul says, that love never Verse 8.
falls away, but abides with us in this life, and shall continue with us for
evermore in the life to come. O then let us make much of Love and charity, for
it is a surpassing Love a surpassing treasure.
treasure. It is no marvel that Saint Peter would not finishe his Chain
before this lincke of love were aded unto it. That must A glorious Chain that
begins with faith and ends in love. Happy are they that wear this chain.
2. Pet. 1.8.
needs be a golden and glorious chain, that begins with faith, and ends
in love: having lincked unto them both, all graces and virtues whatsoever:
happy, yea thrice happy are they that wear this Chain: surely, they shall
never be bound in everlasting chains. If these things (says S. Peter) be
among you, and abound, they will make you, that ye shall never be idle, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 9.
Christ. But he that has not these things (as faith, love, and the rest) is
blind and cannot see far of, and has forgotten that he was 10
purged from his old sins, wherefore breethren give all diligence, to make
your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall,
but by these means an 11
entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost be all praise, glory, power and majesty, from age to age world without
end.

A Prayer for Love, or Charity.
O Blessed Lord God, most loving and merciful Father, for as much as thou have
showed unto mankind thine infinite and unmeasurable love, not only in creating
us of the dust of the earth, and then preferring us to be lords over all the
works of thy hands, but also and especially have manifested this thine
inexpressible kindness toward us in giving thine only beloved son to death
for us, that he might bring us unto life: to this end that in a thankeful
remembrance of this thy so great love and kindness, we should show our love to
thee again, and to our neighbors and brethren for thy sake, Grant therefore
unto me good Lord, that I may love thee above all things, and my neighbor as
myself, not only my friends and those that do me good, but also mine enemies,
because thou louedst me when I was thine enemy: that I may never suffer the
sun to go down upon my wrath, but with all gentleness and from my heart, I may
suffer injuries and forgive mine enemies. O Lord if thou will vouchsafe to
receive me into thy service, give unto me thy badge of christian love or
charity, whereby I may be assured that I am thy servant: let the fire of this
love break out from me into flames of good works, that I may be ready to do
good unto all, but specially unto them that are of the household of faith. This
grace vouchsafe unto me, and to all christians, for his sake in whom thou art
well pleased. So shall thou O God dwell here in earth with me, and I shall
evermore dwelhere, and in heaven with thee: to whom with thy blessed son our
Savior, and the holy Ghost, our everlasting comforter, be all land, and
honor for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo and honos.

