THE EMPEROVR OF THE EAST. A Tragae-Comoedie. The Scaene Constantinople. As it
has been diverse times acted, at the Blackfriars, and Globe Play Houses, by
the Kings Majesty's Servants.

Written by PHILIP MASSINGER.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for John Waterson, ANNO 1632.

The ACTORS names.
THEDOSIVS the younger. Paulinus, a Kinsman to the Emperor. Philanax, Captain
of the Guard. Timantus. Chrysapius. Gratianus. Eunuchs of the Emperors
chamber. Cleon, a trauailer, friend to Paulinus. Informer. Proiector: Master of
the manners. Mignion of the suburbs. Countryman. Surgeon. Emperick.
Pulcheria, the protectresse. Athenais, a strange virgin, after the Empress.
Arcadia. Flaccilla. the younger sisters of the Emper. Servants. Mutes.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY especial good Lord, JOHN Lord MOHVNE, Baron of
Okehampton, etc.
My good Lord,
LET my presumption in stiling you so (having never deserved it in my service)
from the clemency of your noble disposition find pardon. The reverence due to
the Name of Mohune, long since honored in three Earls of Sommerset, and eight
Barons of Munster, may challenge from all pens a deserved celebration. And
the rather in respect those Titles were not purchased, but conferred, and
continued in your Ancestors, for many virtuous, noble, and still living
Actions; nor ever forfeited, or tainted, but when the iniquity of those times
labored the depression of approved goodness, and in wicked policy held it
fit that Loyalty, and Faith, in taking part with the true Prince, should be
degraded, and mulcted. But this admitting no farther dilation in this place,
may your Lordship please, and with all possible brevity to understand, the
reasons why I am in humble thankfulness ambitious to shelter this Poem under
the wings of your Honorable protection. My worthy friend Mr Aston Cokaine your
Nephew, to my extraordinary content, delivered to me, that your Lordship at
your vacant hours sometimes vouchsafed to peruse such trifles of mine, as have
passed the Press, and not alone warranted them in your gentle suffrage, but
disdained not to bestow a remembrance of your love, and intended favor to me.
I profess to the world, I was exalted with the bounty, and with good
assurance, it being so rare in this age to mecte with one Noble Name, that in
fear to be censured of leuitie, and weakness, dares express it self, a
friend, or Patron to contemned Poetry. Having therefore no means else left me
to witness the obligation, in which I stand most willingly bound to your
Lordship, I offer this Tragae-Comoedie to your gracious acceptance, no way
despairing, but that with a clear aspect, you will daine to receive it (it
being an induction to my future endeauours) and that in the list of those, that
to your merit truly admire you, you may descend to number,

Your Lordships Faithful Honorer; PHILIP MASSINGER.

To my worthy Friend, Mr. PHILIP MASSINGER, upon his Tragae-Comoedie, called
The Emperor of the East.
SVffer, my friend, these lines to have the grace,
That they may be a mole on Venus face.
There is no fault about thy Book, but this,
And it will show how fair thy Emperor is.
Thou more then Poet, our Mercury (that art
Apollo's Messenger, and do impart
His best expressions to our ears) live long
To purify the slighted English tongue,
That both the Nymphs of Tagus, and of Poe,
May not henceforth despise our language so.
Nor could they do it, if they ere had seen
The matchless features of the faerie Queen;
Read Johnson, Shakespeare, Beaumont, Fletcher, or
Thy neat-limnd pieces, skillful Massinger.
Thou known, all the Castillians must confess
Vega de Carpio thy foil, and bless
His language can translate thee, and the fine
Italian wits, yield to this work of thine.
Were old Pythagoras alive again,
In thee he might find reason to maintain
His Paradox; that souls by transmigration
In diverse bodies make their habitation,
And more; that all Poetik souls yet known
Are met in thee, united, and made one.
This is a truth, not an applause. I am
One that at farthest distance view thy flame,
Yet may pronounce, that were Apollo dead,
In thee his Poesy might all be read.
Forbear thy modesty. Thy Emper^urs vein
Shall live admired, when Poets shall complain.
It is a pattern of too high a reach
And what great Phoebus might the Muses teach.
Let it live therefore, and I dare be bold
To say, it with the world shall not grow old.
Aston Cokaine.
A friend to the Author, and well-wisher to the Reader.
WHO with a liberal hand, freely bestows
His bounty, on all comers, and yet knows
No ebb, nor formal limits, but proceeds
Continuing his hospitable deeds,
With daily welcome, shall advance his name
Beyond the art of flattery: with such, fame
May yours (dear friend) compare. Your muse has been
Most bountiful, and I have often seen
The willing seats receive such as have fedd,
And risen thankful; yet were some misled
By Nicetie, when this fair Banquet came
(So I allude) their stomachs were to blame,
Because that excellent sharp, and poinant sauce
Was wanting, they arose without due grace,
Lo thus a second time he does inuit you:
Be your own Caruers, and it may delight you.
John Clauell.
To my true friend, and Kinsman: PHILIP MASSINGER.
I Take not up on trust; nor am I lead
By an implicit Faith: what I have read
With an impartial censure I dare crown
With a deserved applause, how ere cried down
By such whose malice will not let 'em be
Equal to any piece limnd forth by thee.
Contemn their poor detraction, and still write
Poems like this, that can endure the light,
And search of abler judgments. This will raise
Thy Name, the others Scandal is thy praise.
This often perused by grave wits, shall live long,
Not dye as soon, as passed the Actors tongue,
(The fate of slighter toys) And I must say
It Is not enough to make a passing play,
In a true Poet. Works that should endure
Must have a Genius in 'em strong, as pure.
And such is thine friend; nor shall time devour
The well formed features of thy Emperor.
William Singleton.
Prologue at the Blackfriers.
BUT that imperious custom warrants it,
Our Author with much willingness would omit
This Preface to his new work. He has found
(And suffered for it) many are apt to wound
His credit in this kind: and whether he,
Express himself fearful, or peremptory,
He cannot escape their censures who delight
To misapplie what ever he shall write.
It Is his hard fate. And though he will not sue,
Or basely beg such suffrages, yet to you
Free, and ingenious spirits, he does now,
In me present his service, with his vow
He has done his best, and though he cannot glory
In his invention, (this work being a story,
Of reverend Antiquity) he does hope
In the proportion of it, and the scope,
You may observe some pieces drawn like one
Of a steadfast hand, and with the whiter stone
To be marked in your fair censures. More then this
I am forbid to promise, and it is
With the most 'till you confirm it: since we know
What ere the shaft be, Archer, or the bow,
From which it is sent, it cannot hit the white
Unless your approbation guide it right.
Prologue at Court.
AS ever (Sir) you lent a gracious ear
To oppressed innocence, now vouchsafe to hear
A short petition, At your feet in me
The Poet kneeles, and to your Majesty
Appeals for justice. What we now present,
When first conceived, in his vote and intent,
Was sacred to your pleasure; in each part
With his best of sancie, judgment, language, art,
Fashiond, and formed so, as might well, and may
Deserve a welcome, and no vulgar way.
He durst not (Sir) at such a solemn feast
Lard his grave matter with one scurrilous jest,
But labored that no passage might appear,
But what the Queen without a blush might hear.
And yet this poor work suffered by the rage,
And envy of some Catos of the stage:
Yet still he hopes, this Play which then was seen
With sore eyes, and condemned out of their spleen,
May be by you, The supreme judge, set free,
And raised above the reach of calumny.
The Emperor of the East. The Scaene Constantinople.
Act 1. Scaene 1.
Paulinus. Cleon. Paul. IN your six years travail, friend, no doubt you have
met with
Many, and rare adventures, and observed
The wonders of each climate, varying in
The manners, and the men, and so return,
For the future service of your prince and country,
In your understanding betterd.

Cleon. Sir, I have made often
The best use in my power, and hope my gleanings,
After the full crop others reapd before me,
Shall not when I am called on, altogether
Appear unprofitable: yet I left
The miracle of miracles in our age
At home behind me; every where abroad
Fame with a true, though prodigal voice, delivered
Such wonders of Pulcheria the Princess,
To the amazement, nay astonishment rather
Of such as heard it, that I found not one
In all the States and Kingdoms that I passed through,
Worthy to be her second.

Paul. She indeed is
A perfect Phoenix, and disdaynes a rival.
Her infant years, as you know, promised much
But grown to ripeness she transcendes, and makes
Credulity her debtor. I will tell you
In my blunt way, to entertain the time,
Until you have the happiness to see her,
How in your absence she has borne her self,
And with all possible brevity, though the subject
Is such a spacious field, as would require
An abstract of the purest eloquence
(Deriu'de from the most famous Orators
The nurse of learning, Athens, showed the world)
In that man, that should undertake to be
Her true Historian.

Cleon. In this you shall do me
A special favor.

Paulinus. Since Arcadius death,
Our late great Master, the protection of
The Prince his Son, the second Theodosius,
By a general vote and suffrage of the people;
Was to her charge assigned, with the disposure
Of his so many Kingdoms. For his person
She has so trained him up in all those arts
That are both great and good, and to be wished
In an Imperial Monarch, that the Mother
Of the Gracchi, grave Cornelia (Rome still boasts of)
The wise Pulcheria but named, must be
No more remembered. She by her example
Has made the court a kind of Academy,
In which true honor is both learnd, and practisd,
Her private lodging's a chaste Nunnery,
In which her sisters as probationers hear
From her their sovereign Abbess, all the precepts
Read in the school of virtue.

Cleon. You amaze me.

Paulinus. I shall ere I conclude. For here the wonder
Begins, not ends Her soul is so immense,
And her strong faculties so apprehensiue,
To search into the depth of deep designs,
And of all natures, that the burden which
To many men were insupportable,
To her is but a gentle exercise,
Made by the frequent use familiar to her.

Cleon. With your good favor let me interrupt you.
Being as she is in every part so perfect,
Me thinks that all kings of our Eastern world
Should become riualls for her.

Paulinus. So they have,
But to no purpose. She that knows her strength
To rule, and govern Monarchs, scorns to wear
On her free neck the servile yoke of marriage.
And for one loose desire, envy it self
Dares not presume to taint her. Venus son
Is blind indeed, when he but gazes on her.
Her chastity being a rock of Diamonds,
With which encountered his shafts fly in splinters,
His flaming torches in the living spring
Of her perfections, quenched: and to crown all;
She Is so impartial when she sits upon
The high tribunal, neither swayd with piety,
Nor awd by fear beyond her equal scale,
That it is not superstition to believe
Astrea once more lives upon the earth,
Pulcheriaes breast her temple.

Cleon. You have given her
An admirable character.

Paulinus. She deserves it,
And such is the commanding power of virtue,
That from her vi^ious enemies it compells
Paeans of praise as a due tribute to her. Solemno loud music:

Cleon. What means this solemn music?

Paulinus. It vshers
The Emperors morning meditation,
In which Pulcheria is more then assistant.
It Is worth your observation, and you may
Collect from her expense of time this day,
How her hours for many years have been disposed of.

Cleon. I am all eyes and ears.

Enter after a strain of music, Philanax, Timantus, Patriarch, Theodosius,
Pulcheria, Flaccilla, Arcadia, followed by Chrysapius and Gratianus, Informer,
Servants, Officers. Pulcheria. Your patience Sir.
Let those corrupted ministers of the court,
Which you complain of, our devotions ended,
Be cited to appear. For the Ambassadors
Who are importunate to have audience,
From me you may assure them, that to morrow
They shall in public kiss the Emperors robe,
And we in private with our soonest leisure
Will give 'em hearing. Have you especial care too
That free access be granted unto all
Petitioners. The morning wears, Pray you on Sir;
Time lost is never recouerd.

Exeunt Theodosius, Pulcheria, and the train. Paulinus. Did you note
The majesty she appears in?

Cleon. Yes my good Lord,
I was ravished with it.

Paulinus. And then with what speed
She orders his dispatches, not one daring
To interpose; the Emperor himself
Without reply putting in act what ever
She pleased to impose upon him.

Cleon. Yet there were some
That in their sullen looks rather confessed
A forced constraint to serve her, then a will
To be at her devotion, what are they?

Paulin. Eunuchs of the Emperors chamber, that repine,
The globe and awful scepter should give place
Unto the distaffe, for as such they whisper
A woman's government, but dare not yet
Express themselves.

Cleon. From whence are the Ambassadors
To whom she promisde audience?

Paulinus. They ate
Imployd by diverse Princes, who desire
Alliance with our Emperor, whose years now
As you see, write him man. One would advance
A daughter to the honor of his bed,
A second, his fair sister: to instruct you
In the particulars would ask longer time
Then my own designs give way to. I have letters
From special friends of mine, that to my care
Commend a stranger virgin, whom this morning
I purpose to present before the Princess,
If you please, you may accompany me.

Cleon. I Will wait on you, Exeunt.

Act. 1. Scene 2.
Informer; Officers bringing in the Proiector, the Suburbs Mignion, the Master
of the habit and manners. Informer. Why should you droope, or hang your working
heads?
No danger is meant to you, pray bear up,
For ought I know you are cited to receive
Preferment due to your merits.

Proiector. Very likely,
In all the proiects I have read and practisd
I never found one man compeld to come
Before the seat of justice under guarde
To receive honor.

Informer. No; it may be you are
The first example. Men of qualities,
As I have delivered you to the protectresse,
Who knows how to advance them, cannot conceive
A fitter place to have their virtues publish'de,
Then in open Court: could you hope that the Princess
Knowing your precious merits, will reward 'em
In a private corner? no, you know not yet
How you may be exalted.

Suburbs Minion. To the gallows.

Informer. Fie,
Nor yet depressde to the Galleys; in your names
You carry no such crimes: your specious titles
Cannot but take her: President of the Proiectors!
What a noise it makes? The master of the habit,
How proud would some one country be that I know
To be your first pupil? Minion of the suburbs,
And now and then admitted to the Court,
And honored with the style of Squire of Dames,
What hurt is in it? One thing I must tell you,
As I am the State scout, you may think me an informer.

Master of the habit. They are Synonima.

Informer. Conceal nothing from her
Of your good parts, 'twill be the better for you,
Or if you should, it matters not, she can conjure,
And I am her vbiquitary spirit,
Bound to obey her, you have my instructions,
Stand by, heeres better company.

Enter Paulinus, Cleon, Athenians, with a Petition. Athenais. Can I hope. Sir,
Oppressed innocence shall find protection,
And justice among strangers, when my brothers,
Brothers of one womb, by one Sire begotten,
Trample on my afflictions?

Paulinus. Forget them,
Remembering those may help you.

Athenais. They have robde me
Of all means to prefer my just complaint
With any promising hope to gain a hearing,
Much less redress: petitions not sweetened
With gold, are but unsavory, often refused,
Or if received, are pocketted, not read.
A suitors swelling tears by the glowing beame^
Of Choleric authority are dried up,
Before they fall, or if seen never pittled.
What will become of a forsaken maid?
My flattering hopes are too weak to encounter
With my strong enemy, despair, and it is
In vain to oppose her.

Cleon. Cheer her up, she faints, Sir.

Paulin. This argues weakness, though your brothers were
Cruel beyond expression, and the judges
That sentenced you, corrupt, you shall find here
One of your own feign sex to do you right,
Whose beams of justice like the Sun extend
Their light, and heat to strangers, and are not
Municipall, or confinde.

Athenais. Pray you do not feed me
With aerie hopes, unless you can assure me
The great Pulcheria will descend to hear
My miserable story, it were better
I died without her trouble.

Paulinus. She is bound to it
By the surest chain, her natural inclination
To help the afflicted, nor shall long delays
(More terrible to miserable suitors
Then quick denialls) grieve you; Dry your fair eyes,
This room will instantly be sanctified
With her blessed presence; to her ready hand
Present your grieuances, and rest assured
You shall depart contented.

Athenais. You breath in me
A second life.

Informer. Will your Lordship please to hear
Your servant a few words?

Paulinus. Away you rascal,
Did I ever keep such servants?

Informer. If your honesty
Would give you leave, it would be for your profit.

Paul. To make use of an Informer? tell me in what
Can you advantage me?

Informer. In the first tender
Of a fresh suite never begd yet,

Paulinus. What Is your suite Sir?

Informer. It Is feasible, here are three arrant knaves
Discouerd by my Art:

Paulinus. And thou the arch-knaue,
The great devour the less.

Informer. And with good reason,
I must eat one a month, I cannot live else.

Paulinus. A notable canniball? but should I hear thee,
In what do your knaves concern me?

Informer. In the begging
Of their estates.

Paulinus. Before they are condemned?

Inf. Ye^ or arraigned, your Lordship may speak too late ^ls^
They are your own, and I will be content
With the fif^ part of a share.

Paulinus. Hence Rogue,

Informer. Such Rogues
In this kind will be heard, and cherished too.
Fool that I was to offer such a bargain,
To a spic'd conscience chapman, but I care not
What he disdaines to taste others will swallow. Loud Mus.

Enter Theodosius, Pulcheria, and the train. Cleon. They are returned from the
Temple.

Paul. See, she appears,
What think you now?

Athenais. A cunning Painter thus
Her veil taken off and awful sword and balance
Laid by would picture justice.

Pulcheria. When you please,
You may intend those royal exercises
Suiting your birth, and greatenesse: I will bear
The burden of your cares, and having purged
The body of your empire of ill humors,
Upon my knees surrender it.

Chrysapiu^. Will you ever
Be awde thus like a Boy?

Gratianu^. And kis^e the rod
Of a proud Mistrisse?

Timantus. Be what you were borne Sir.

Philanax. Obedience and Majesty never lodged
In the same Inn.

Theodosius. No more; he never learned
The right way to command, that stopped his ears
To wise directions.

Pulcheria. Read ore the Papers
I left upon my cabinet, two hours hence
I will examine you.

Flaccilla. We spend our time well.
Nothing but praying, and poring on a book,
It ill agrees with my constitution, sister.

Arcadia. Would I had been borne some masquing Ladies woman,
Only to see strange sights, rather then live thus.

Flaccilla. We are gone forsooth, there is no remedy, sister:

Exeunt Arcadia and Flaccilla. Gratianus. What has his eye found out^

Timan^us. It Is fixed upon
That stranger Lady.

Chrysapius. I am glad yet, that
He dares look on a Woman.

All this time the informer kn^eling to Pulcheria, and delivering papers.
Theodos. Philanax,
What is that comely stranger?

Philanax. A Petitioner.

Chrysostom. Will you hear her case, and dispatch her in your Chamber?
I Will undertake to bring her.

Theod. Bring me to
Some place where I may look on her demeaner
It Is a lovely creature?

Exeunt Theodosius, Patriarck and the train: Chrysostom. There Is some hope in this
yet.

Pulch. No you have done your parts:

Paul. Now opportunity courts you,
Prefer your suite,

Athenai^. As low as misery
Can fall, for proof of my humility,
A poor distressed Virgin bows her head,
And lays hold on your goodness, the last alta^
Calamity can fly to for protection.
Great minds erect their never falling trophies
On the firm base of mercy; but to triumph
Over a suppliant by proud fortune captiu^d,
Argue^ a Bastard conquest: it is to you
I speak, to you the fair, and just Pulcheria,
The wonder of the age, your sexes honor,
And as such daine to hear me. As you have
A soul molded from heaven, and do desire
To have it made a star there, make the means
Of your ascent to that celestial height
Virtue winged with brave action: they draw near
The nature, and the essence of the Gods,
Who imi^ate their goodness.

Fulcher. If you were
A subject of the Empire, which your habit
In every part denies.

Athenais. O fly not to
Such an evasion; what ere I am,
Being a Woman, in humanity
You are bound to right me, though the difference
Of my religion may seem to exclude me
From your defense (which you would have confinde)
The moral virtue, which is general,
Must know no limits; by these blessed feet
That pace the paths of equity, and tread boldly
On the stiff^ neck of tyrannous oppression,
By these tears by which I bath 'em, I conjure you
With pity to look on me.

Pulch. Pray you rise.
And as you rise receive thi^ comfort from me.
Beauty set off with such sweet language never
Can want an Advocate, and you must bring
More then a guilty cause if you pr^uaile not.
Some business long since thought upon dispatched^
You shall have hearing, and as far as justice
Will warrant me, my best aids.

Athen. I do desire,
No stronger guard, my equity needs no favor.

Pulch. Are these the men?

Proiector. We were, an't like your highness,
The men, the men of eminence, and mark,
And may continue so, if it please your grace.

Master This speech was well proiected.

Pull. Does your conscience
(I will begin with you) whisper unto you
What here you st^nd accused of? are you named
The President of Proiectors?

Inform. Justify it man.
And tell her in what thou art useful.

Project. That is apparent,
And if you please, ask some about the court,
And ^hey will tell you too my rare inventions,
They owe their bravery, perhaps means to purchase,
And cannot live without me. I alas
Lend out my laboring brains to use, and sometimes
For a dram in the pound, the more the pity.
I am all patience, and endure the curse^
Of many, for the profit of one patron.

Pulch^r. I do conceive the rest. What is the second?

Informer. The mignion of the suburbs.

Pulcheria. What has he
To do in Constantinople?

Mign. I steal in now and then,
As I am thought useful, marry there I am calde
The Squire of Dames, or servant of the sex,
And by the allowance of some sportfull Ladies
Honored with that ti^le.

Pulch. Spare your Character,
You are here desciphered; stand by with your compere.
What is the third? a creature I never heard of;
The master of the manners, and the habit,
You have a double office.

Master. In my actions
I make both good, for by my theoremes
Which your polite, and terser gallants practice,
I rerefine the court, and ciuilize
Their barbarous natures: I have in a table
With curious punctualitie set down
To a hairs breadth, how low a new stamped courtie^
May veil to a country Gentleman, and by
Gradation, to his merchant, mercer, draper,
His linen man, and ^aylor.

Pulch. Pray you discover
This hidden mystery.

Master. If the foresaid courtier
(As it may chance sometimes) find not his name
Writ in the Citizens books, with a State hum
He may salute 'em after three days waiting:
But if he owe them money, that he may
Preserve his credit, let him, in policy, never
Appoint a day of payment, so they may hope still:
But if he be to take up more, his page
May attend 'em at the gate, and usher 'em
Into his Cellar, and when they are warmed with wine,
Conduct 'em to his bedchamber, and though then
He be under his Barbers hands, as soon as seen,
He must start up to embrace 'em, veil thus low,
Nay though he call '^m cosins, it is the better,
His Dignity no way wronged in it.

Paulinus. Here Is a fine knave.

Pulch. Does this rule hold without exception sir^h a
For Cou^^iers in general?

Mast. No, dea^e madam,
For one of the last edi^ion, and for him
I have c^mposde a Dictionary, in which
He is instructed, how, when, and to whom
To be proud or humble; at what times of the year
He may do a good deed for it self, and that is
Writ in Dominicall let^ers, all days else
Are his own, and of those days the seuer^ll hours
Marked out, and to what use.

Pulch. Show us your method,
I am strangely taken with it.

Mast. Twill deserve
A pension, I hope. First a strong cullise
In his bed to h^ighten appetite: Shu^tle-cock
To keep him in breath when he rises; Tenni^ Courts
Are chargeable, and the riding of great horses
Too boystrous for my young Courtier, let the old ones
I think not of, use it; next his meditation
How to court his Mis^re^^e, and that he may seem wi^ty,
Let him be ^urnish'd with con^ederate jests
Between him and his f^iend, that on occasion
They may ventem mutually: what his pace, and garb
Must be in the presence, then the length of his sword,
The fashion of the hilt, what the blade is
It matters not, 'twere barbarism to use it,
Unless to show his strength upon an and iron,
So the sooner broke, the better.

Pulch. How I abuse
This precious time! Proiector, I treat first
Of you and your disciples; you roar out,
All is the Kings, his will above his laws:
And that fit tributes are too gentle yokes
For his poor subjects; whispering in his ear,
If he would have them fear, no man should dare
To bring a sallad from his country garden,
Without the paying gubell; kill a hen,
Without excise: and that if he desire
To have his children, or his servants wear
Their heads upon their shoulders, you affirm,
In policy, it is fit the owner should
Pay for 'em by the pole; or if the Prince want
A present sum, he may command a city
Impossibilities, and for nonperformance
Compel it to submit to any fine
His Officers shall impose: is this the way
To make our Emperor happy? can the groans
Of his subjects yield him music? must his thresholds
Be washed with widows and wronged orphans tears,
Or his power grow contemptible?

Project. I begin
To feel my self a rogue again.

Pulch. But you are
The Squire of Dames, devoted to the service
Of gamesome Ladies, the hidden mystery
Discovered, their close bawd; thy slavish breath
Fanning the fires of lust, the Goe-between
This female, and that wanton Sir, your art
Can blind a jealous husband, and disguisde
Like a Millainer or Shoemaker, convey
A letter in a pantophle or glove
Without suspicion, nay at his table
In a case of picketoothes; you instruct'em how
To parley with their eyes, and make the temple
A mart of looseness: to discover all
The subtle brokages, were to teach in public,
Those private practices which are, in justice,
Severely to be punished.

Mignion. I am cast,
A jury of my patronesses cannot quit me.

Pulcheria. You are master of the manners, and the habit,
Rather the ^corne of such as would live men,
And not like Apes with servile imitation,
Study prodigiou^ fashions. You keep
Intelligence abroad that may instruct,
Our giddie youth at home what new found fashion
Is now in use, swearing he is most comp^^^te
That first turns monster. Know villains, I can thrust
This arm into your hearts, strip off the flesh
That couers your deformities, and show you
In your own nakedness. Now though the law
Call not your follies death, you are for ever
Banished my brothers court. Away with 'em.
I will hear no reply.

Exeunt Informer, Officers, Prisoners, the curtains drawn above, Theodosius,
and his Eunuchs discovered. Paulinu^. What think you now?

Cleon. That I am in a dream, or that I see
A second Pallas.

Pulch. These removed, to you
I clear my browe, speak without care sweet maid,
Since with a mild aspect and ready ear,
I sit prepared to hear you.

Athen. Know great Princess,
My father, though a Pagan, was admired
For his d^epe search into those hidden studies,
Whose knowledge is denied to common men:
The motion, with the diverse operations
Of the superior bodies, by his long
And careful observation were made
Familiar to him, all the secret virtues
Of plants, and simples, and in what degree
They were useful to mankind, he could discourse of.
In a word conceive him as a Prophet honored
In his own country. But being borne a man,
It lay not in him to defer the hour
Of his approaching death, though long foretold:
In this so fatal hour he called before him
His two sons, and my self, the dearest pledges
Lent him by nature, and with his right hand
Blessing our several heads, he thus began;

Chrysostom. Mark his attention.

Phyl. Give me leave to mark too.

Athen. If I could leave my understanding to you,
It were superfluous to make division
Of whatsoever else I can bequeath you,
But to avoid contention, I allot
An equal portion of my possessions
To you my sons: but unto thee my daughter,
My joy, my darling (pardon me though I
Repeat his words) if my prophetic soul
Ready to take her flight, can truly guess at
Thy future fate, I leave the strange assurance
Of the greatenesse thou art borne to, unto which
Thy brothers shall be proud to pay their service,

Paulinus. And all men else that honor beauty

Theod. Nymph.

Ath. Yet to prepare thee for that certain fortune,
And that I may from present wants defend thee,
I leave ten thousand crowns, which said, being called
To the fellowship of our Deities, he expird,
And with him all remembrance of the charge
Concerning me, left by him to my brothers.

Pulch. Did they deteyne your legacy?

Athenais. And still do.
His ashes were scarce quiet in his vrne,
When in derision of my future greatness,
They thrust me out of doors, denying me
One short nights harbor.

Pulch. Weep not.

Ath. I desire
By your persuasion, or commanding power,
The restitution of mine own, or that
To keep my frailty from temptation,
In your compassion of me, you would please
I as a handmaid may be entertaind
To do the meanest offices to all such
As are honored in your service.

Pulch. Thou art welcome. What is thy name?

Ath. The forlorn Athenais.

Takes her up and kisses her. Pulch. The sweetness of thy innocence strangely
takes me^
Forget thy brothers wrongs, for I will be
In my care a mother, in my love a sister to thee;
And were it possible thou could be wooned
To be of our belief.

Paulinus. May it please your excellence,
That is an easy task^, I^ though no scholar,
Dare undertake it; clear truth cannot want
Rhetorical persuasions.

Pulch. It Is a work,
My Lord, will well become you; break up the Court,
May your endeavors prosper.

Paulinus. Come my fai^e one,
I hope my convert.

Ath. Never, I will die
As I was borne.

Paulinus. Better you nere had been.

Philanax. What does your majesty think of? the maid's gone.

Theod. She'^ wondrous fair, and in her speech appeared
Pieces of schollarship.

Chrysap. Make use of her learning
And beauty together, on my life she will be proud
To be so converted.

Theod^ From foul lust heaven guard me. Exeunt^

Act. 2. Scaene 1.
Philanax, Timantus, Chrysapius, Gratianus. Philanax. We only talk when we
should do^

Timantus: I Will second you,
Begin, and when you please.

Gratianus. Be constant in it.

Chry. That resolution which grows cold to day,
Will freeze to morrow.

Gratianus. 'Slight, I think she will keep him
Her ward for ever, to her self engrossing
The disposition of all the favors
And bounties of the Empire.

Chrysostom. We that by
The neerenesse of our service to his person,
Should raise this man, or pull down that, without
Her license hardly dare prefer a suit,
Or if we do, it is crossed.

Philanax. You are troubled for
Your proper ends, my aims are high and honest
The wrong that is done to M^iesty I repine at:
I^ love the Emperor, and it is my ambition
To have him know himself, and to that purpose
I Will run the hazard of a check.

Gratianus: And I^
The loss of my place^

Timan. I will not come behind,
Fall what can fall.

Chry. Let us put on sad aspects
To draw him on; charge home, we will fetch you off,
Or ly dead by you.

Enter Theodo^ius. Theod. How Is this? clouds in the chamber^
And the air clear abroad.

Phil. When you our Sun
Obscure your glorious beams, poor we that borrow
Our little light from you, cannot but suffer
A general Eclipse.

Timantus. Great Sir, it is true,
For 'till you please to know, and be your self,
And freely dare dispose of what is your own
Without a warrant; we are falling meteors;
And not fixed flarres.

Chrysostom. The pale faced Moon that should
Govern the night, usurp the rule of day,
And still is at the full in spite of nature,
And will not know a change.

Theod. Speak you in riddles?
I am no Oedipus, but your Emperor,
And as such would be instructed.

Philanax. Your command
Shall be obeyed, till now I never heard you
Speak like your self; and may that power by which
You are so, strike me dead, if what I shall
Deliver, as a faithful subject to you,
Has root, or growth from malice, or base envy
Of your Sisters greatness; I could honor in her
A power subordinate to yours, but not
As it is predominant.

Timan. It it fit that she,
In her birth your vassal, should command the kn^es
Of such as should not bow but to your self?

Great. She with security walks upon the heads
Of the nobility, the multitude
As to a Deity offr^ng sacrifice,
For her grace, and favor.

Chrysostom. Her proud fe^te even wearied
With the kisses of petitioners.

Gratian, While you,
To whom alone such reverence is proper,
Pass unregarded by her,

Timant. You have not yet
Been Master of one hour of your whole life,

Chrysostom. Your will and ^aculties kept in more awe,
Then she can do ^er own

Philanax. And as a bondsman,
O let my zeal find grace, and pardon from you,
That I descend so low, you are designed
To this or that employment, suiting well
A private man I grant, but not a Prince,
To be a perfect horseman, or to know
The words of the chase, or a fair man of arms,
Or to be able to pierce to the depth,
Or write a comment on the obscurest Poets,
I grant are ornaments, but your maine scope
Should be to govern men to guarde your own,
If not enlarge your empire.

Chrysostom. You are built up
By the curious hand of nature to revive
The memo^ie of Alexander, or by
A prosperous success in your brave actions
To rival Caesar.

Timant. Rouse your self, and let not
Your pleasure be a copye of her will

Philan. Your pupil age is passed, and manly actions
Are now expected from you^

Great. Do not loose
Your subjects hearts,

Timant. What is it to have the means
To be magnificent, and not exercise
The boundless virtue?

Great. You confine your self
To that which strict Philosophy allows of,
As if you were a private man.

Tim. No pomp,
Or glorious shows of royalty, rendering it
Both loved, and terrible.

Great. 'Slight you live, as it
Begets some doubt, whether you have or not
Th'abilities of a man.

Chrysostom. The Firmament
Has not more stars then there are several beautie^
Ambitious at the height to impart their dear,
And sweetest favors to you.

Great. Yet you have not
Made choice of one, of all the ^ex, to serve you,
In a Physical way of courtshippe.

Theod. But that I would not
Begin the expression of my being a man,
In blood, or stain the first white robe I wear
Of absolute power, with a s^r^ile imitation
Of any tyrannous habit, my just anger
Prompts me to make you in your sufferings feel,
And not in words to instruct you, that the license
Of the loose, and saucie language you now practiced,
Has forfeited your heads.

Gr^t. How Is this?

Phil. I know not
What the play may prove, but I assure you that
I do not like the prologue.

Theod. O the miserable
Condition of a Prince! who though he vary
More shapes then Proteus in his mind, and manners,
He cannot win an universal suffrage,
From the many-headed monster, Multitude.
Like AEsops folish Frogs they trample on him,
As a senseless block, if his government be easy.
And if he prove a Storke, they croke, and rail
Against him as a tyranne. I Will put off
That majesty, of which you think I have
Nor use, nor feeling, and in arguing with you,
Convince you with strong proofs of common reason,
And not with absolute power, against which, wretches,
You are not to dispute. Dare you that are
My creatures, by my prodigal favors fashioned,
Presuming on the neerenesse of your service,
Set off with my familiar acceptance,
Condemn my obsequiousness to the wise direction^
Of an incomparable Sister, whom all parts
Of our world, that are made happy in knowledge
Of her perfection^, with wonder gaze on?
And yet you that were only borne to eat
The blessing^ of our mother earth, that are
Distant but one degree from beasts (since slaves
Can claim no larger privilege) that know
No farther then your sensual appetites,
Or wanton lust have taught you, undertake
To give your sovereign laws to follow that
Your ignorance marks out to him? Walks by.

Gratian. How were we
Abused in our opinion of his temper?

Phil. We had forgot it is found in holy writ,
That Kings hearts are inscrutable.

Timantus. I never read it,
My study lies not that way.

Philan. By his looks
The tempest still increases.

Theod. Am I grown
So stupid in your judgments, that you dare
With such security offer violence
To sacred majesty? will you not know
The Lion is a Lion, though he show not
His rending paws? or fill the affrighted air
With the thunder of his rorings? you blessed Saints,
How am I trenched on? is that temperance
So famou^ in your cited Alexander,
Or Roman Scipio a crime in me?
Cannot I be an Emperor, unless
Your wives, and daughters bow to my proud lusts?
And cause I ravish not their fairest buildings
And fruitful vineyards, or what is dearest,
From such as are my vassalls, must you conclude
I do not know the awful power, and strength
Of my prerogative? am I close handed
Because I scatter not among you that
I must not call mine own. Know you court leeches,
A Prince is never so magnificent,
As when he is sparing to enrich a few
With th'iniuries of many; could your hopes
So grossly flatter you, as to believe
I was born and traind up as an Emperor, only
In my indulgence to give s^nctuarie,
In their unjust proceedings, to the rapine
And aua^ice of my groome^?

Philar. In the true mirror
Of your perfections, at length we see
Our own deformities.

Timant. And not once dating
To look upon that majesty we now slighted,

Chrysostom. With our faces thus glewd to the earth, we beg
Your gracious pardon.

Great. Offering our necks
To be trod on, as a punishment for our late
Presumption, and a willing testimony
Of our subjection.

Th^od. Deserve our mercy
In your better life hereafter, you shall find,
Though in my Fathers life I held it madness,
To vsurp his power, and in my youth disdainde not
To learn from the instructions o^ my sister,
I Will make it good to all the world, I am
An Emperor; and even this instant graspe
The Scepter, my rich stock of majesty
Entire, no scruple wasted.

Phila. If these tears
I drop, proceed not from my joy to hear this.
May my eye-bals follow 'em.

Tim^ I will show my self
By your sudden metamorphosis transformed
From what I was.

Great. And nere presume to a^ke
What fits not you to give.

Theod. Move in that sphere,
And my light with full beams shall shine upon you.
Forbear this slavish courtship, it is to me
In a kind idolatrous.

Phil. Your gracious sister.

Enter Pulcheria^ Servant. Pull. Has he converted her?

Ser. And, as such, will
Present her when you please.

Pull. I am glad of it.
Command my Dresser to adorn her with
The robes that I gave order for.

Mar. I shall.

Pull. And let those precious Jewels I took la^^
Out of my Cabinet, if it be possible,
Give luster to her beauties, and that done,
Command her to be near us.

Mar. It Is a province
I willingly embrace, Exit Mart.

Pull. O my dear Sir^
You have forgot your morning task, and therefore
With a mothers love I come to reprehende you,
But it shall be gently.

Theodos. 'T will become you, though,
You said with reverend duty. Know hereafter,
If my mother lived in you, how ere her son,
Like you she were my subject.

Pulch. How?

Theod. Put off
Amazement, you will find it. Yet I Will hear you
At distance, as a sister, but no longer
As a gouernesse, I assure you.

Great. This is put home,

Timant. Beyond our hopes

Philam. She stands as if his words
Had powerful magic in 'em.

Theod. Will you have me
Your pupil ever? the down on my chinne
Confirms I am a man, a man of men,
The Emperor, that knows his strength.

Pulcheria, Heaven grant
You know it not too soon.

Theod. Let it suffice
My wardships out. If your design concerns us
As a man, and not a boy, with our allowance
You may deliver it.

Pulch. A strange alteration!
But I will not contend. Be, as you wish, Sir,
Your own disposer, vncompeld I cancel
All bonds of my authority. Kneeles.

Theod. You in this
Pay your due homage, which performed, I thus
Embrace you as a Sister. No way doubting
Your vigilance for my sa^etie as my honor,
And what you now come to impart, I rest
Most confident, points at one of them!

Pulch. At both,
And not alone the present, but the future
Tranquillity of your mind: since in the choice
Of her, you are to heat with holy fires,
And make the consort of your royal bed,
The certain means of glorious succession,
With the true happiness of our humane being,
Are wholly comprehended.

Theodosius. How? a wife?
Shall I become a votarie to Hymen,
Before my youth has sacrificed to Venus?
It Is something with the soonest, yet to show
In things in different, I am not auerse
To your wise counsels, let me first suruay
Those beauties, that in being a Prince I know
Are riualls for me. You will ^ot confine me
To your election, I must see dear sis^er^
With mine own eyes.

Pulcheria. It Is fit Sir, yet in this
You may please to consider, absolute Princes
Have, or should have, in Policy, less free, will
Then such as are their vassals. For, you must,
As you are an Emperor, in this high business
Weigh with due providence, with whom alliance
May be most useful for the preservation
Or your increase of Empire.

Theod. I approve not
Such compositions for our moral ends,
In what is in it self divine, nay more
Decreed in heaven. Yet if our neighbor Princes,
Ambitious of such neerenesse, shall present
Their dearest pledges to me (ever reserving
The caution of mi^e own content) I Will not
Contemn their courteous offers.

Pulch. Bring in the pictures: 2. Pictures brought in.

Theod. Must I then judge the substances by the shadows?
The Painters are most envious, if they want
Good colors for preferment^ virtuous Ladies
Love this way to be fla^terd, and accuse
The workman of detraction, if he add not
Some grace they cannot truly call their own.
Is It not ^o Gratianus? you may challenge
Some interest in the science.

Great. A pretender
To the art I truly honor, and subscribe
To your majesty's opinion.

Theod. Let me see,
Cleanthe, daughter to the King of Epirus,
AEtatis sua, the fourteenth: ripe enough,
And forward too, I assure you. Let me examine
The Symmetries. If Statuaries could
By the foot of Hercules set down punctually
His whole dimensions, and the countenance be
The index of the mind, this may instruct me,
With the aids of that I have read touching this subject,
What she is inward: the color of her hair,
If it be, as this does promise, pale, and faint,
And not a glistering white; Her brow, so so;
The circles of her sight, too much contracted;
Inno's fair cow eyes by old Homer are
Commended to their merit, heeres a sharp frost,
In the tippe of her nose, which by the length assures me
Of storms at midnight, if I fail to pay her
The tribute she expects. I like her not:
What is the other.

Chrysapius. How has he commenced
Doctor in this so sweet and secret art,
Without our knowledge?

Timantus. Some of his forward pages
Have robbed us of the honor.

Philanax. No such matter,
He has the theorie only, not the practick.

Theod. Amasia, Sister to the Duke of Athens,
Her age eighteen, descended lineally
From Theseus, as by her pedigree
Will be made apparent: Of his lusty kindred?
And loose so much time! it is strange! as I live, she has
A Philosophical aspect, there is
More wit then beauty in her face, and when
I court her, it must be in tropes, and figures,
Or she will cry absurd. She will have her elencha
To cut off any fallacy I can hope
To put upon her, and expect I should
Ever conclude in Syllog^smes, and those true ones
In part and toto, or she will tire me with
Her tedious Elocutions in the praise
Of the increase of generation, for which
Alone the sport in her morality
Is good and lawful, and to be often practiced
For fear of missing. Fie on it, let the race
Of Theseus be matched with Aristotle's,
I Will none of her.

Pulcher. You are curious in your choice, Sir,
And hard to please, yet if that your consent
May give authority to it, I Will present you
With one, that if her birth, and fortunes answer
The rarities of her body, and her mind',
Detraction durst not tax her.

Theod. Let me see her,
Though wanting those additions, which we can
Supply from our own store: it is in us
To make men rich, and noble, but to give
Legitimate shapes and virtues, does belong
To the great creator of them, to whose bounties
Alone it is proper, and in this disdaines
An Emperor for his rival.

Pulch. I applaud
This fit acknowledgement, since Princes then
Grow less then common men, when they contend
With him, by whom they are so.

Enter Paulinus, Cleon, Athenais newly habited. Theod. I confess^ it.

Pulcheri^. Not to hold you in suspense, Behold the virgin
Rich in her natural beauties, no way borrowing
Th'adulterate aids of art. Peruse her better,
She is worth your serious view.

Phyl. I am amazed too.
I never saw her equal.

Gratian. How his eye
Is fixed upon her!

Timantus. And as she were a fort,
He would suddenly surprise, He measures her
From the bases to the battlements.

Chrysostom, Ha! now I view her better,
I know her; it is the maid that not long since
Was a petitioner; her bravery
So alters her, I had forgot her face.

Phil. So has the Emperor.

Paulinus. She holds out yet,
And yeeldes not to the assault.

Cleon. She is strongly garded^
In her virgin blushes.

Paulin. When you know, fair creature,
It is the Emperor that honors you
With such a strict suruay of your sweet parts,
In thankfulness you cannot but return
Due reverence for the favor.

Athenais. I was lost
In my astonishment at the glorious object,
And yet rest doubtful whether he expect^
Being more then man, my adoration,
(Since sure there is divinity about him,)
Or will rest satisfied if my humble knees
In duty thus bow to him.

Theod. Ha! it speaks.

Pulch. She is no statue Sir.

Theod. Suppose her one,
And that she had nor organs, voice, nor heat,
Most willingly I would resign my Empire
So it might be to after-time^ recorded
That I was her Pigmalion, though, like him,
^ doted on my workmanship, without hope too
Of having Cytherea so propitious
To my vows, or sacrifice, in her compassion
To give it life or motion.

Pulch. Pray you be not raped so,
Nor borrow from imaginary fiction
Impossible aids; she is flesh and blood, I assure you,
And if you please to ho^or her in the trial,
And be your own security, as you will find
I fable not, she comes in a noble way
To be at your devotion.

Chry. It Is the maid
I offered to your highness, her changed shape
Concealed her from you:

Theod. At the first I knew her,
And a second firebrand Cupid brings to kindle
My flames almost put out: I am too cold,
And play with opportunity.
May I taste then
The nectar of her lip? I do not give it
The praise it merits: antiquity is too poor
To help me with a simile to express her.
Let me drink often from this living spring,
To nourish new invention.

Pulcheria. Do not surfeit
In ouer-greedily devouring that
Which may without satiety feast you often.
From the moderation in receiving them,
The choysest viands do continue pleasing
To the most curious palate; if you think her
Worth your embraces, and the sovereign title
Of the Grecian Empress,

Theod. If? how much you sin,
Only to doubt it; the possession of her
Makes all that was before most precious to me,
Common, and cheap: in this you have shown your self
A provident Protectresse. I already
Grow weary of the absolute command
Of my so numerous subjects, and desire
No sovereignty but here, and write down gladly,
A period to my wishes.

Pulcher. Yet before
It be too late, consider her condition,
Her father was a Pagan, she her self
A new converted Christian.

Theod. Let me know
The man to whose religious means I ow
So great a debt.

Paulinus. You are advanced too high Sir,
To acknowledge a beholdingnes, it is discharged,
And I, beyond my hopes, rewarded, if
My service please your Majesty.

Theod. Take this pledge
Of our assured love. Are there none here
Have suits to prefer? on such a day as this
My bounty's without limit. O my dearest,
I will not hear thee speak; what ever in
Thy thoughts is apprehended, I grant freely:
Thou would plead thy unworthiness, by thy self
The magazine of felicity, in thy lowness
Our Eastern Queens at their full height bow to thee,
And are in their best trim thy foyles and shadows.
Excuse the violence of my love, which cannot
Admit the least delay. Command the Patriarch
With speed to do his holy office for us,
That when we are made one.

Pulch. You must forbear Sir,
She is not yet baptized.

Theod. In the same hour
In which she is confirmed in our faith,
We mutually will give away each other,
And both be gainers; we will hear no reply
That may divert us on.

Pulch. ^^u may hereafter
Please to remember to whose furtherance
You ow this height of h^ppinesse.

Ath. As I was
Your creature when I first petitioned you,
I will continue so, and you shall find me,
Though an Empress, still your servant.

All go off but Philanax, Gratianus, and Timantus! Gratianus. Here Is a marriage
Made up on the sudden!

Philanax. I repine not at
The fair maids fortune, though I fear the Princess
Had some peculiar end in it.

Timantus. Who'^ so simple
Only to doubt it?

Gratianus. It is too apparent,
She has preferred a creature of her own,
By whose means she may still keep to her self
The government of the Empire.

Tim. Where as if
The Emperor had espoused some neighbor Queen,
Pulcheria with all her wisdom could not
Keep her pre-eminence.

Philanax. Be it as it will,
It Is not now to be altered, heaven I say
Turn all to the best.

Gratianus. Are we come to praying againe^

Phil. Leave thy profaneness

Gratian. Would it would leave me.
I am sure I thrive not by it.

Timant. Come to the Temple.

Great. Even where you will, I know not what to think on^t,

The end of the second Act.
Act. 3. Scaena 1.
Paulinus. Philanax. Paulinuss. Nor this, nor the age before us ever looked o^
The like solemnity.

Philan. A sudden fever
Kep'd me at home. Pray you my Lord acquaint me
With the particular^.

Paul. You may presume
No pomp, nor ceremony could be w^nting,
Where there was Privilege to command, and means
To cherish rare inventions.

Phil. I believe it;
But the sum of all in brief.

Paulinu^. Pray you so take it;
Fair Athenais not long since a Suitor,
And almost in her hopes forsaken, first
W^^ Christened, and the Emperors mothers name
Eudoxia, as he willed, imposed upon her:
Pulcheria the ever matchless Princess,
Assisted by her reverend Aunt Maria,
Her Godmothers.

Phil. And who the masculine witness?

Paul. At the new empress suite I had the honor.
For which I must ever serve her.

Phil. 'twas a grace,
With justice you may boaste of.

Paul. The marriage followed,
And as it is said, the Emperor made bold
To turn the day to night, for, to bed they went
As Soon a^ they had dined, and there are w^gers
Laid by ^ome merrye Lord's, he has already^
Begot a boy upon her.

Phil. That is yet
To be determined of; but I am certain,
A Prince so soon in his disposition altered,
Was never heard nor read of.

Paul. But of late,
Frugall and ^paring, now nor bounds, nor limits
To his magnificent bounties. He affirmed,
Having received more blessings by his empress
Then he could hope, in thankfulness to heaven
He cannot be to prodigal to others.
What ever s'off^r'd to his royal hand
He signs without perusing it.

Phil. I am here
Enjoined to ^ree all such as lie for debt,
The creditor^ to be paid out of his coffers.

Paul. And I all malefactors that are not
Convicted, or for treason or foul murder,
Such only are excepted;

Phil. It Is a rare clemency!

Paul. Which we must not dispute, but put in practice.

Exeunt. Actus 3. Scaen. 2.
Loud Music. Showt^^ within: Heaven preseru^ the Emperor, Heaven bless the
Empress: Then in State, Chrysapius, Patriarch. Paulinus. Theodosius. Athenais.
Pulcheria. Her two young Sisters beari^g up Athenais train. Followed, by
Philan^x. Gratianus. Timantus. Suitors, pres^nting petitions. The Emp^rour
s^aling them. Pulcheria appears troubled. Iul. SIR by your own rules of
Philosophy
You know things violent last not, royal bountie^
Are great, and gracious while they are dispensed
With moderation, but when their excess
In giving gyant-bulkes to others, take from
The Princes just proportion, they loose
The names of virtues, and, their natures chang'd^
Grow the most dangerous vices

Theod. In this, sister,
Your wisdom is not circular; they that sow
In narrow bounds, cannot expect in reason
A croppe beyond their ventures, what I do
Disperse, I lend, and will with usury
Return unto my heap: I only then
Am rich, and happy, (though my coffers sound
With emptiness) when my glad subiect^ feel,
Their plenty and felicity is my gift;
And they will find, when they with cheerfulness
Supply not my defectes, I being the stomach
To the politic body of the State, the limbs
Grow suddenly faint, and feeble; I could urge
Proofs of more finenesse in their shape and language,
But none of greater strength: dissuade me not,
What we will, we will do; yet to assure you,
Your care does not offend us, for an hour,
Be happy in the converse of my best
And dearest comfort; may you please to license
My priuacie some few minutes?

Athenais. License Sir,
I have no will, but is derived from yours,
And that still waits upon you, nor can I
Be left with such security with any,
As with the gra^ious Princess^, who receiue^
Addition, though she be all excellence,
In being stilde your sister.

Theod. O sweet creature!
Let me be censured fond, and too indulgent,
Nay though they s^y vxorious, I care not,
Her love, and sweet humility exact
A tribute far beyond my power, to pay
Her matchless goodness. Forward.

Exeunt, Theodosius and the train. Pulch. Now you find
Your dying fathers prophecy that foretold
Your present greatness, to the full accomplished.
For the poor aides, and furtherance I lent you,
I willingly forget:

Ath. Even that binds me
To a more strict remembrance of the favor,
Nor shall you from my soul ingratitude,
In any circumstance ever find cause
T'upbraid me with your benefit.

Pull. I believe so.
Pray you giu^ us leave: what now I must deliver
Under the deepest seal of secrecy,
Though it b^ for you good, will give assurance
Of what is looked for, if you not alone
Hear, but obey my counsels.

Ath. They must be
Of a strange nature, if with zealous speed
I put 'em not in practice.

Pull. 'Twere impertinence
To dwell on circumstances, since the wound
Requires a sudden cure, especially
Since you that are the happy instrument
Elected to it, though young in your judgment
Write far above your years, and may instruct
Such as are more experienced.

Ath. Good madam,
In this I must oppose you, I am well
Acquainted with my weakness, and it will not
Become your wisdom, by which I am raised
To this titulary height, that should correct
The pride, and ouerweening of my fortune,
To play the parasite to it, in ascribing
That merit to me, unto which I can
Pretend no interest; pray you excuse
My bold simplicity, and to my weight
Design me where you please, and you shall find^
In my obedience, I am still your creature.

Pull. 'Ti^ nobly answered, and I glory in
The building I have raised; go on, sweet Lady,
In this your v^rtuous progresse^ but to the point,
You know, nor do I envy it, you have
Acquired that power, which, not long since, was mine,
In governing the Emperor, and must use
The strength you hold in the heart of his affections,
For his private, as the public preservation,
To which there is no greater enemy,
Then hi^ exorbitant prodigality,
How ere his sycophants, and flatterers call it^
Royal magnificence, and though you may
Urge what is done for your honor, must not be
Curbed, or be controlled by you, you cannot in
Your wisdom but conceive, if that the torrent
Of his violent bounties be not stopped, or lessened,
It will prove most pernicious. Therefore, Madam,
Since it is your duty, as you are his wife,
To give him saving counsels, and in being
Almost his idol, may command him to
Take any shape you please, with a powerful hand,
To stop him in his precipice to ruin.

Ath. Auert it heaven.

Pull. Heaven is most gracious to you, madam,
In choosing you to be the instrument
Of such a pious work. You see he signs
What suit soever is pre^err'd, not once
Inquiring what it is, yielding himself
A prey to all; I would therefore have you, Lady,
As I know you will to advise him, or command him,
As he would reap the plenty of your favors,
To use more moderation in his bounties,
And that before he gives, he would consider,
The what, to whom, and wherefore.

Ath. Do yo think
Such arrogance, or usurpation, rather,
Of what is proper, and peculiar
To every private husband, and much more
To him an Emperor, can rank with the obedience
And duty of a wife? are we appointed
In out creation (let me reason with you)
To rule, or to obey? or 'cause he loves me
With a kind impotence, must I tyrannize
Over his weakness? or abuse the strength
With which he arms me to his wrong? or, like
A prostituted creature, merchandise
Our mutual delight for hire? or to
Serve mine own sordid ends? in vulgar nuptials
Priority is exploded, though there be
A difference in the parties, and shall I,
His vassal from obscurity raised by him
To this so eminent light, presume to appoint him
To do, or not to do this, or that: when wives
Are well aocommodated by their husbands
With all things both ^or use, and ornament,
Let them fix there, and never dare to question
Their wills or actions. For my self, I vow,
Though now my Lord would rashly give away
His Scepter, and imperial Diadem,
Or if there could be any thing more precious,
I would not cross it; but I know this is
But a trial of my temper, and as such
I do receive it, or if it be otherwise,
You are so subtle in your arguments,
I dare not stay to hear them.

Pulcher. Is It even so?
I have power ore these yet, and comm^nd their stay,
To hearken nearer ^o me.

1 Sister. We are charged
By the Emperor, our brother, to attend
The Empress service.

2 Sister. You are too mortified ^ister,
(With reverence I speak it) for young Ladies
To keep you company. I am so tired
With your tedious exhortations, doctrines, uses,
Of your religious morality,
That for my health sake, I must take the freedom
To enjoy a little of those pretty pleasures
That I was borne to:

1 Sister. When I come to your years,
I Will do as you do, but till then, with your pardon,
I Will lose no more time. I have not learned to dance yet^
Nor sing, but holy hymns, and those to vile tunes too;
Nor to discourse, but of Schoolemens opinion^.
How shall I answer my suitors? since, I hope,
Ere long I shall have many, without practice
To write, and speak something that is not derived
From the fathers of Philosophy.

2 Sister. We shall shame
Our breeding Sister, if we should go on th^s.

1 Sister. It Is for your credit, that we study
How to converse with men; women with women
Yields but a harren argument.

2 Sister. She frowns,
But you will protect us Madam?

Ath. Yes, and love
Your sweet simplicity.

1 Sister. All young gyrles are so,
Till they know the way often.

2 Sister. But when we are entered,
We shall on a good round pace,

Ath. I Will leave you Madam.

1 Sister. And we our duties with you.

Ex^unt Athenais and the young Lady^^. Pull. On all hands
Thu^ slighted? no way left^ am I grown stupid
In my invention? can I make no use
Of the Emperors bounties? now it is thought: within there^

Servant. Madam. Enter a Servant.

Pull. It shall be so; nearer; your ear
Draw a petition to this end.

Seru. Besides
The danger to prefer it, I believe
Twill nere be granted.

Pull. How Is this? are you grown,
From a servant, my director? let me hear
No more of this. Dispatch, I Will master him
At his own weapon. Exit Servant.

Enter Theodosius, Favorinus, Philanax, Timantus, Gratianus. Theod. Let me
understand it,
If yet there be ought wanting that may perfect
A general happiness.

Fau^r. The peoples joy
In seas of acclamations flow in
To wait on yours.

Philanax. Their love with bounty levied,
Is a sure guard. Obedience forced from fear,
Paper fortification, which in danger
Will yield to the impression of a reed,
Or of it self fall off.

Theod. True, Philanax.
And by that certain compass we resolve
To steer our Barque of government.

Enter Servant with the petition. Pull. 'Ti^ well.

The. My dearest, and my all-des^ruing Sister,
As a petitioner kneel? it must not be,
Pray you, rise, although your suite were half my Empire,
It Is freely granted.

Pulch. Your alacrity
To give has made a beggar; yet before
My suite is by your sacred hand and se^le
Confirmed, it is necessary you peruse
The sum of my request.

Theod. We will not wrong
Your judgment, in conceiving what it is fit
For you to ask, and us to grant, so much,
As to proceed with caution, give me my signet,
With confidence I sign it, and here vow^
By my fathers soul, but with your free consent
It is irreuocable.

Timantus. What if she now
Calling to memory, how often we
Have crossed her government, in revenge has made
Petition for our heads?

Gratianus. They must even off then,
No ransone can redeem v^.

Theod. Let those iewell^
So highly rated by the Persian merchants
Be bought, and as a sacrifice from us
Presented to Eudox^. She being only
Worthy to wear 'em, I am angry with
The irresistable necessity
Of my occasions, and important care^
That so long keep me from her.

Exeunt Theodosius and the traynei Fulcher. Go to the Empress,
And tell her on the sudden, I am sick,
And do desire, the comfort of a visit,
If she please to vouchsafe it. From me use
Your humblest language: But when once I have her
In my possession, I will rise, and speak
In^ higher strain, say it raise storms, no matter.
Fools judge by the event, my ends are honest. Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scaene 3.
Theodosius. Timantus. Philanax. Theod. WHat is become of her? can she that
carries
Such glorious excellence, of light about her^
Be any where concealed?

Philanax. We have sought her lodgings,
And all we can learn from the servants is,
She by your majesty's sisters waited on,
(The attendance of her other officers
By her express command denied,)

Theod. Forbear
Impertinent circumstances, whither went she? speak.

Phil. As they guess, to the laurel groue^

Theod. So slightly guarded ^
What an earthquake I feel in mee^ and but that
Religion assures the contrary,
The Poets dreams of lustful Fawnes, and Satyrs,
Would make me fear, I know not what.

Enter Paulinus^ Paul. I have sound her,
And it please your Majesty.

Theod. Yes, it does please mee^
But why returned without her?

Paul. As she made
Her speediest approche^ to your presence,
A servant of the Princ^sses Pulcheria
Encounterd her; what 'twas, he whisperd to her
I am ignorant, but hearing it, she started,
And willed me to excuse her absence from you,
The third part of an hour.

The. In this she takes
So much of my life from me; yet I Will bear it
With what patience I may; since it is her pleasure^
Go back, my good Paulinus, and entreat her^
Not to exceed a minute.

Timant. Here Is strange fondness! Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scaene 4.
Pulcheria. Servants. Pull. You are certain she will come?

Ser. She is already
Entered your outward lodging^.

Pull. No train with her?

Ser. Your excellence sisters only.

Pulch. It Is the better;
See the doors strongly guarded, and deny
Access to all, but with our special license.
Why do thou stay? show your obedience,
Your wisdom now is vselesse. Exeunt Servants.

Enter Athenais, Arcadia, Flaccilla. Flac. She is sick sure,
Or, in fit reverence to your Majesty,
She had waited you at the door.

Ar. 'Twould hardly be Pulcheria walking by.
Excused, in civil manners, to her equal,
But with more difficulty to you, that are
So far above her.

Ath. Not in her opinion;
She has been too long accustomed to command
T^acknowledge a superior.

Ar. There she walks.

Fla. If she be not sick of the sullens, I see not
The least infirmi^y in her.

Ath. This is s^range!

Ar. Open your eyes; the Empress.

Pull. Reach that chair:
Now sitting thus at distance, I Will vouchsafe
To look upon her.

Ar. How! sister: pray you awake,
Are you in your wits?

Fla. Grant heaven, your too much learning
Does not conclude in madness.

Ath. You entreated
A visit from me.

Pull. True, my servant used
Such language, but now as a mistress I
Command your service.

Ath. Service!

Ar. She Is stark mad, sure.

Pull. You Will find I can dispose of what is mine own
Without a guardian.

Ath. Follow me. I will see you
When your frantique fit is ore. I do begin
To be of your belief.

Pulch. It will deceive you.
Thou shall not str from hence, thus as mine own
I seize upon thee.

Flac. Help, help, violence
Offered to the Empress person.

Pulch. It Is in vain:
She was an Empress once, but, by my gift,
Which, being abused, I do recall my grant.
You are read in story; call to remembrance,
What the great Hectors mother Hecuba
Was to Ulysses, Ilium sack'd^

Ath. A slave.

Pulch. To me thou art so:

Ath. Wonder and amazement
Quite ouerwhelme me: how am I transformed?
How have I lost my liberty?

Knocking without: Enter Servant. Pulcheria. Thou shall know
Too soon, no doubt. Who Is that with such rudeness
Beats at the door?

Ser. The Prince Paulinus, madam,
Sent from the Emperor to attend upon
The gracious Empress.

Ar. And who is your slave now?

Fla. Sister, repent in time, and beg pardon
For your presumption.

Pulch. It is resolved:
From me return this answer to Paulinus;
She shall not come; she is mine; the Emperor has
No interest in her. Exit Servant.

Ath. Whatsoere I am,
You take not from your power ore me, to yield
A reason for this usage.

Pulch. Though my will is
Sufficient to ad to thy affliction,
Know wretched thing, it is not thy fate, but folly
Has made thee what thou art: it is some delight
To urge my merits to one so ungrateful;
Therefore with horror hear it. When thou were
Thrust as a stranger from thy fathers house,
Exposed to all calamities that want
Could throw upon thee, thine own brothers scorn,
And in thy hopes, as by the world forsaken,
My pity, the last altar that was left thee,
I heard thy Siren charms, with feeling heard them,
And my compassion made mine eyes vy tears
With thine, dissembling Crocodile; and when Queene^
Were emulous for thy imperial bed,
The garments of thy sorrows east aside,
I put thee in a shape as would have forced
Envy from Cleopatra, had she seen thee;
Then, when I knew my brothers blood was warmed
With youthful fire^, I brought thee to his presence,
And how my deep designs, for thy good plotted,
Succeeded to my wishes, is apparent,
And needs no repetition.

Ath. I am conscious
Of your so many, and vnequall'd favors,
But find not how I may accuse my self
For any facts committed, that with iustice^
Can raise your anger to this height against me.

Pull. Pride and forget^ulnesse would not let thee see that,
Against which now thou can not close thine eyes.
What injury could be equal to thy late
Contempt of my good counsel, when I urged
The Emperors prodigal bounties, and entreated
That you would use your power to give 'em limits,
Or, at the least, a due consideration
Of such as su'd, and for what, ere he signed it?
In opposition you brought against m^
The Obedience of a wife, that Ladies were not,
Being well accommodated by their Lords,
To question, but much less to cross their pleasures;
Nor would you, though the Emperor were resolved
To give away his Scepter, hinder it,
Since 'twas done for your honor, covering with
False colors of humility your ambition.

Ath. And is this my offense?

Pull. As wicked counsel
Is still most hurtful unto those that give it;
Such as deny to follow what is good,
In reason, are the first that must repent it.
When I please you shall hear more, in the mean time
Thank your own wilful folly that has changed you
From an Empress to a bondewoman.

Theod. Force the doors,
Kill those that dare resist.

Enter Theodosius. Paulinus. Philanax. Chrysapius. Gratianus. Ath. Dear Sir
redeem me.

Flaccilla. O suffer not, for your own honors sake,
The Empress you so late loved to be made
A prisoner in the court.

Arcad. Leap to his lips,
You 'll find them the best sanctuary.

Flaccilla. And try then,
What interest my reverend Sister has
To force you from 'em.

Theod. What strange may-game's this?
Though done in sport, how ill this leuitie
Becomes your wisdom?

Pulch. I am serious Sir,
And have done nothing but what you in honor,
And as you are your self an Emperor,
Stand bound to justify.

Theod. Take heed, put not these
Strange trialls on my patience.

Pulcher. Do not you Sir,
Deny your own act; as you are a man,
And stand on your own bottomes, 'twill appear
A childish weakness to make void a grant,
Signed by your sacred hand, and seal, and strengthend
With a religious oath, but with my license,
Never to be recalled. For some few minutes,
Let reason rule your passion, and in this, delivers the deed.
Be pleased to read my interest; you will find there
What you in me call violence, is justice,
And that I may make use of what is mine own,
According to my will. it is your own gift Sir,
And what an Emperor gives, should stand as firm
As the celestial poles upon the shoulders
Of Atlas, or his successor in that office
The great Alcides.

Theod. Miseries of more weight,
Then it is faind they supported, fall upon me,
What has my rashnes^e done? in this transaction
Drawn, in expres^e and formal terms I have
Given and consigned into your hands, to use
And observe, as you please, my dear Eudoxa.
It is my deed, I do confess it is,
And as I am my self, not to be cancelled:
But yet you may show mercy, and you will,
When you consider that there is no beauty,
So perfect in a creature, but is soilde
With some unbeseeming blemish; you have labored
To build me up a complete Prince, it is granted,
Yet as I am a man, like other Monarchs,
I have defects and frayleties, my facility,
To send petitioners with pleased looks from me,
Is all I can be charged with, and it will^
Become your wisdom, (since it is in your power)
In charity to provide, I fall no further
Or in my oath, or honor.

Pull. Royal Sir,
This was the mark I aimed at, and I glory
At the length, you so conceive it. 'twas a weakness
To measure by your own integrity
The purposes of others. I have shown you
In a true mirror what frui^e grows upon
The tree of hudwinckt bounty, and what dangers
Precipitation in the managing
Your great affairs produces.

Theod. I embrace it
As a grave advertisement, and vow hereafter
Never to sign petitions at this rate.

Pulch. For mine, see Sir. it is canceled, on my knees
I redeliuer what I now begged from you. Tears the deed:
She is my second gift.

Theod. Which if I part from
Till death divorce us. Kissing Athen.

Athenais. So Sir,

Theod. Nay sweet chide not
I am punished in thy looks, defer the rest,
Till we are more private.

Pulch. I ask pardon too
If in my personated passion I
Appeard to harshe, and rough.

Ath. 'Twas gentle language, what I was then considerd

Pulch. O dear Madame,
It was decorum in the Scane^

Athen. This trial,
When I was Athenais, might have passed,
But as I am the Empress.

Theod. Nay no anger,
Since all good was intended.

Exeunt. Theodosius. Athenais. Arcadia. Flaccilla. Pulcheria. Building on,
That certain base, I fear not what can follow, Exit Pulch.

Paulinus. These are strange devices Philanax.

Philan. True my Lord,
May all turn to the best.

Great. The Emperors looks
Promised a calm.

Chrysapius. But the vexed Empress frowns
Presaged a second storm.

Paul. I am sure I feel one,
In my leg already.

Philan. Your old friend, the gout?

Paul. My forced companion, Philanax.

Chrysostom. To your rest:

Paul. Rest and forbearing wine, with a temperate diet,
Though many Montebancks pretend the cure often,
I have found my best Physicians,

Phil. Ease to your Lordship. Exeunt^

The end of the third Act.
Actus 4. Scaen. 1.
Athenais. Chrysapius. Ath. MAke me her property?

Chrysostom. Your majesty
Has just cause of distaste, and your resentment
Of the affront in the point of honor cannot
But meet a fair construction.

Ath. I have only
The title of an Empress, but the power
Is, by her, ravished from me^ she suruayes
My actions as a gouernesse, and calls
My not observing all that she directs
Folly, and disobedience.

Chrysostom. Under correction,
With grief I have long observed it, and if you
Stand pleased to sign my warrant I Will deliver
In my vnfainde ze^le, and desire to serve you,
(Howere I run the hazard of my head fort
Should it arrive at the knowledge of the Princess,)
Not alone, the reasons why things are thus carried,
But give into your hands the power to clippe
The wings of her command.

Ath. Your service this way
Cannot offend me.

Chrysostom. Be you pleased to know then
But still with pardon, if I am too bold,
Your too much sufferance impes the broken feather^
Which carry her to this proud height, in which
She with security, soars, and still towers ore you,
But if you would employ the strengths you hold
In the Emperors affections, and remember
The orb you move in should admit no star else,
You never would confess the managing
Of state affairs to her alone are proper,
And you sit by a looker on,

Athenais. I would not,
If it were possible I could attempt,
Her diminution, without a taint
Of foul ingratitude in my self.

Chrysapius. In this
The sweetness of your temper does abuse you,
And you call that a benefit to your self
Which she for her own ends conferred upon you.
It Is yielded she gave way to your advancement:
But for what cause? that she might still continue
Her absolute sway, and swing ore the whole state,
And that she might to her admirers vaunt,
The Empress was her creature, and the giver
To be preferred before the gift.

Athenais. It may be.

Chrysostom. Nay it is most certain: whereas would you please
In a true glass to look upon your self,
And view without detraction your own merits
Which all men wonder at; you would find that fate,
Without a second cause, appointed you
To the supremest honor. For the Princesse^
She has reigned long enough, and her remove
Will make your entrance free to the possession
Of what you were borne to, and but once resolve
To build upon her ruins, leave the engines
Tha^ must be used to undermine her greatenes
To my provision.

Ath. I thank your care,
But a design of such weight must not be
Rashly determined of, it will exact
A long and serious consultation from me.
In the mean time Chrysapius ^est assured
I live your thankful Mistrisse. Exit Ath^

Chrysostom. Is this all?
Will the Physic that I minister'd work no further?
I have played the fool, and leaving a calm po^t
Embarked my self on a rough sea of danger.
In her silence lies my safety, which how can I
Hope from a woman? but the die is thrown,
And I must stand the hazard.

Enter Theodosius. Philanax. Timantus. Gratianus. Huntsmen. Theod. Is Paulinus
So tortured with his gowte?

Phil. Most miserably,
And it ads much to his affliction, that
The pain denies him power to wait upon
Your Majesty.

Theod. I pity him: he is
A wondrous honest man, and what he suffers,
I know will grieve my Empress.

Tim. He indeed is
Much bound to her gracious favor.

Theod. He deserves it,
She cannot find a subject upon whom
She better may confer it: is the stagge
Safe lodged?

Gratian. Yes Sir, and the hounds and huntsmen ready.

Philan. He will make you royal sport. He is a dear
Of ten at the least.

Enter Countrieman with the apple. Gratianus^ Whither will this clown?

Timant. Stand back.

Countrym. I would zee the Emperor, why should you Courtiers^
Scorn a poor Countryman^ we zweat at the Plough
To vill your mouths, you and you curs might starve el^.
We prune the orchards, and you cranch ^he fruit;
Yet still you are snarling at us.

Theod. What Is the matter?

Count. I would look on thy sweet face.

Timantus. Unmannerly swain.

Count. Zwaine, though I am a zwaine, I have a heart yet,
As ready to do service for my leege,
As any Princox Peacock of you all.
Zookers had I one of you zingle with this twigge,
I would so veeze you.

Timant, Will your Majesty
Hear his rude language?

Theod. Yes, and hold it as
An ornament, not a blendish. O Timantus!
Since that drad power by whom we are, disdaines not
With an open ear to hear petitions from us,
Easy access in us his deputies,
To the meanest of our subi^cts, is a debt,
Which we stand bound to pay.

Count. By my granams ghost
It Is a wholesome zaying, our vicar could not mend it
In the pulpit on a Zunday.

Theod. What Is they suite friend?

Count. Zu^e? I would laugh at that. Let the court beg from thee.
What the poor country gives: I bring a present
To thy good grace, which I can call mine own,
And look not like these gay folk for a return,
Of what they venture. Have I giuent you? ha,

Chrysostom. A perilous knave.

Count. Zee here a dainty Apple, Presents the Apple.
Of mine own grafting, zweete, and zownde I assure thee.

Theod. It is the fairest fruit I ever saw.
Those golden apples in the Hesperian orchardes
So strangely guarded by the watchful Dragon,
As they requi^'d great Hercules to get 'em,
Nor those with which Hippomenes deceived,
Swift footed Atalanta, when I look
On this, deserve no wonder. You behold
The pooreman, and his present with contempt
I to their value prize both; he that could
So aid weak nature, by his care, and labor,
As to compel a crabtree stock to bear
A precious fruit of this large size, and beauty,
Would by his industry change a petty village
Into a populous City, and from that
Erecte a flourishing Kingdom. Give the fellow
For an encouragement to his future labors,
Ten Attick talents.

Countrym. I will weary heaven
With my prayers for your Majesty. Exit Count.

Theod. Philanax, From me present this raritie to the rarest
And best of women, when I th^nk upon
The boundless happiness that from her flow to me
In my imagination I am raped
Beyond my self; but I forget our hunting,
To the forres^ for the exercise of my body,
But for my mind, it is wholly taken up,
In the contemplation of her matchless virtues. Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scaena 2.
Athenais, Pulcheria. Arcadia. Flacc^lla. Ath. YOU shall know there is a
difference between us.

Pulch. There was I am certain not long since, when you
Kneeled a petitioner to me, then you were happy
To be near my feet, and do you hold it now
As a disparagement that I side you Lady.

Ath. Since you respect me only as I was,
What I am shall be remembered.

Pull. Does the means,
I practiced to give good, and saving counsail's
To the Emperor, and your new stamped majesty
Still stick in your stomach?

Ath. It Is not yet digested,
In troth it is not, why good gouernesse,
Though you are held ^or a grand Madam, and your self,
The first that ouerprize it, I nere took
Your words for Delphian oracles, nor your actions
For such wonders as you make 'em, there is one
When she shall see her time, as fit and able
To be made partner of the Emperors cares,
As your wise self, and may with justice challenge
A nearer interest. You have done your visit,
So when you please, you may leave me.

Pull. I Will not bandye
Words with your mightiness, prow'd one, only this,
You ca^rie to much sail for your small bark,
And that when you least think upon it may sincke you. Exit Pulch.

Flacc. I am glad she is gone.

Arcadia. I feared she would have read
A tedious lecture to us. Enter Phil. with the apple.

Philanax. From the Emperor,
This rare fruit to the rarest.

Ath. How my Lord?

Philanax. I use his language Madame, and that trust,
Which he imposed on me, discharged, his pleasure
Commands my present service. Exit Philan.

Ath. Have you seen
So fair an Apple?

Flacc. Never.

Arcad. If the taste
Answer the beauty.

Ath. Prettily begged, you should have it,
But that you eat too much cold fruit, and that
Changes the fresh red in your cheeks to palenesse.
Enter Servant. I have other d^nities for you; you come from
Paulinus, how is it with that truly noble,
And hon^st Lord? my witness at the fount;
In a word the man to whose blessed charity
I owe my greatenesse. How is it with him?

Servant. Spiritely,
In his mind, but by the raging of his gout
In his body much distempered, that you pleased
To inquire his health, took off much from his pain,
His glad looks did confirm it^

Ath. Do his Doctors
Give him no hope?

Seru. Little, they rather fear,
By his continual burning, that he stands
In danger of a fever.

Ath. To him again,
And tell him that I heartely wish it lay
In me to ease him, and from me deliver
This choice fruit to him, you may say to that,
I hope it will pr^ue Physical.

Seru. The good Lord
Will be oreioyde with the favor.

Ath. He deseru's more, Exeunt.

Actus 4. Scaena 3.
Paulinus brought in a chair. Surgeon. Chirurg. I Have done as much as art
can do, to stop
The violent course of your fit, and I hope you feel it,
How does your honor?

Paul. At some ease, I thank you,
I would you could assure continuance of it,
For the moyetie of my fortune.

Chir. If I could cure^
The gout my Lord, without the Philosophers stone
I should soon purchase, it being a disease,
In poor men very rare, and in the rich
The cure impossible, your many bounties;
Bid me prepare you for a certain truth,
And to flatter you were di^honest.

Paul. Your plain dealing
Deserves a fee. Would there were many more such
Of your profession. Happy are pooremen,
If sick with the excess of heat or cold,
Caused by necessitous labor, not loose surfets
They, when spare diet, or kind nature fail,
To perfect their recovery, soon arrive at
Their rest in death, but on the contrary
The great, and noble are exposed as preyes
To the rapine of Physicians, and they
In lingering out what is remediless,
Aim at their profit, not the patients health;
A thousand trialls and experiments
Have been put upon me, and I forced to pay dear
For my vexation, but I am re^olu'd,
( I thank your honest freedom) to be made
A property no more for knaves to work on.
What have you there?

Enter Cleon with a parchement role. Cleon. The triumphs of an artsman
Over all infirmities, made authentical
With the names of Princes, Kings and Emperors
That were his patients.

Paul. Some Empericke.

Cleon. It may be so, but he sweare^ within three days
He will grub up your gout by the roots, and make you able
To march ten leagues a day in complete armor,

Paul. Impossible,

Cleon. Or if you like not him

Chirurg. Hear him, my Lord, for your mirth; I will take order,
They shall not wrong you.

Paul. Usher in your monster.

Cleon. He is at hand, march up: now speak for your self?

Enter Emperick. Emper. I come not (right honorable) to your presence, with any
base and ^ordid end of reward; the immortality of my fame is the white I shoot
at, the charge of my most curious, and costly ingredients fraide, amounting to
some seaventeene thousand crowns, a trifle in respect of health, writing your
noble name in my Catalogue, I shall acknowledge my self amply satisfied.


Chir. I believe so.


Emper. For your own sake I most heartily wish, that you had now all the
diseases, maladies and infirmities upon you, that were ever remembered by old
Galen, Hippocrates, or the later, and more admired Paracelsus.


Paul. For your good wish, I thank you.


Emper. Take me with you, I beseech your good Lordship, I urged it that your
joy in being certainly: and suddenly freed from them, may be the greater, and
my not to be paralleld skill the more remarkable: the cure of the gout a toy,
without boast be it said, my cradle practice, the camer, the Fistula, the
Dropsy, consumption of Lunges, and Kidnyes, hurts in the brain, heart, or
liver, are things worthy my opposition, but in the recovery of my patients I
ever overcome them, but to your gout.


Paul. I marry Sir, that cured I shall be apter
To give credit to the rest

Emp. Suppose it done Sir,

Chir. And the means, you use I beseech you.

Emper. I will do it in the plainest language, and discover my ingredients.
First my boteni Terebinthina, of Cypris, my Manna, ros coelo, coagulated with
vetulos ouorum, vulgarly yelkes of Eggs, with a little Cyath, or quantity of
my potable Elixir, with some few scruples of sassa-fras and Guacum, so taken
every morning and evening, in the space of three days, purges, cleanses, and
dissipateth the inward causes of the virulent tumor.


Paul. Why do you smile?


Chir. When he has done I will resolve you.


Emper. For my exterior applications I have these balsumunguentulums extracted
from herbs plants, roots, seeds, gummes, and a million of other vegetables,
the principal of which are Vlissipona, or Serpentaria, Sophia, or Herba
consolidarum, Parthenium or commanilla Romana, Mumia transmarina, mixed with my
plumbum Philosophorum, and matter metallorum, cum ossa paraleli, est vniuersal^
medicamentum in podagra.


Cleon^ A coniuring balsamum,


Emp. This applied warm upon the pained place, with a fether of S^ruth^o
cameli, or a bird of Paradise which is every where to be had, shall expulse
this tartarous, v^seous, anatheos, and malignant dolor.


Chir. An excellent receipt, but does your Lordship
Know what it is good for?

Paul. I would be instructed,

Chir. For the gonorrhea, or if you will hear it
In a plainer phrase, the pox.

Emper. If it cure his Lordship
Of that by the way, I hope Sir it is the better;
My medicine serves for all things, and the pox Sir,
Though falsely named the Sciatica, or gout,
Is the more Catholic sickness.

Paul. Hence with the rascal.
Yet hurt him not, he makes me smile, and that
Frees him from punishment. They thrust off the Emper^

Chir. Such slaves as this
Render our art contemptible,

Enter Servant Seru. My good Lord,

Paul. So soon returned?

Seru. And with this present from
Your great, and gracious Mistrisse, with her wishes
It may prove Physical to you.

Paul. In my heart
I kneel, and thank her bounty. dear friend Cleon
Give him the cupboorde of Plate in the next room.
For a reward.
Exeunt Cleon and the Servant. Most glorious fruit, but made
More precious by her grace, and love that sent it.
To touch it only coming from her hand
Makes me forget all pain. A Diamond
Of this large size, though it would buy a Kingdom,
Hewed from the rock, and laid down at my feet,
Nay though a Monarchs gift, will hold no value,
Compared with this, and yet ere I presume
To ^ast it, though san^ question it i^
Some heavenly restoratiue, I in duty
Stand bound to weigh my own unworthiness:
Ambrosi^ is food only for the Gods;
And not by humane lips to be profaned:
I may adore it as some holy Relick,
Deriu'de from thence, but impious to keep it,
In my possession; the Emperor only,
Is worthy to enjoy it go good Cleon, Enter Cleon^
(And cease this admiration at this object;)
From me present this to my royal master,
I know it will amaze him, and excuse me
That I am not my self the bearer of it.
That I should be lame now, when with wings of duty
I should fly to the service of this Empress,
Nay no delaye^ good Cleon.

Cleon. I am gone Sir. Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scaene 4.
Theodosius. Chrysapius. Timantus. Gratianus. Chrysostom. ARE you not tired Sir?

Theod. Tired? I must not say so
Howeuer, though I rode hard; to a huntsman,
His toil is his delight, and to complain
Of weariness, would show as poorly in him,
As if a General should greiue for a wound,
Received upon his forhead, or his breast,
After a glorious victory, lay by
These accoutrements for the chase. Enter Pul^h.

Pulch. You are well returned Sir,
From your Princely exercise.

Theod. Sister, to you
I owe the freedom, and the use of all
The pleasures I enjoy; your care prouides
For my security, and the burden which
I should alone sustain, you undergo,
And by your paine^ull watchings, yield my sleeps
Both sound, and sure. How happy am I in
Your knowledge of the art of government!
And (...) me, I glory to behold you
Dispose of great designs, as if you were
A partner, and no subject of my Empire.

Pulch. My vigilance, since it has well succeeded.
I am confident, you allow of, yet it is not
Approved by all.

Theod. Who dares repine at that,
Which has our suffrage?

Pulch. One that too well knows,
The strength of her abilities can better
My weak endeavors.

Theod. In this you reflect
Upon my Empresse^

Pull. True, for as she is
The consort of your bed, it is fit she sh^re in
Your cares, and absolute power.

Theod. You touch a string
That sowndes but harshely to me, and I must
In a brothers love advise you that hereafter
You would forbear to move it. Since she is
In her pure self a harmony of such sweetness,
Composed of duty, chaste desires, her beauty
(Though it might tempt a Hermit from his beads)
The least of her endowment^. I am sorry
Her holding the first place, since that the second
Is proper to your self, calls on your envy.
She err? it is impossible in a thought,
And much more speak, or do what may offend me.
In other things, I would believe you sister:
But though the tongues of Saints, and Angels taxed her
Of any imperfection, I should be
Incredulous.

Pulcheria. She is yet a woman Sir^

Theod. The abstract of what is excellent in the sex:
But to their mulct^, and frayleties a mere stranger;
I Will dye in this belief. Enter Cleon with the apple.

Cleon. Your humble^t servant,
The Lord Paulinus, as a wi^nesse of
His zeal, and duty to your Majesty,
Presents you with this jewel.

Theod. Ha!

Cleon. It is
Preferred by him.

Theod. Above his honor?

Cleon. No Sir,
I would have said his patrimony,

Theod. It Is the same.

Cleon. And he intreates, since lamenesse may excuse
His not presenting it himself, from me
(Though far unworthy to supply his place)
You would vouchsafe to accept it.

Theod. Farther off,
You have told your tale. Stay you for a reward?
Take that. Strikes him.

Pulch. How Is this?

Chrysostom. I never saw him moved thus.

Theo. We must not part so Sir, a guarde upon him. Enter Guard. they all got a
side.

Theod. May I not vent my sorrows in the air,
Without discovery? forbear the room,
Yet be within call, what an earthquake I feel in me?
And on the sudden my whole fabric totters.
My blood within me turns, and through my veins
Parting with natural redness I discern it,
Changed to a fatal yellow: what an army
Of hellish fu^ies in the horrid shapes
Of doubts, and fears, charge on me! rise to my rescue,
Thou stout maintainer of a chaste wi^es honor,
The confidence of her vertu^^; ^ee not shaken
With the wind of vain surmises, much less suffer
The devil jealousy to whisper to me
My curious observation of that
I must no more remember. Will it not be?
Thou vninuited ghest, ill mannerd monster,
I charge thee leave me, will thou force me to
Give fuel to that fire I would put out?
The goodness of my memory proves my mischief^,
And I would sell my Empire, could it purchase
The dull art of forgetfulness. Who waits there?

Timantus. Most sacred Sir.

Theod. Sacred, as it is accursed
Is proper to me. Sir, upon your life,
Without a word concerning this, command Exit Ti^^.
Eudoxia to come to me; would I had
Nere known her by that name, my mothers name,
Or that for her own sake she had continued
Poor Athenais still -- No intermission?
Will thou so soon torment me? must I read
Writ in the table of my memory,
To warrant my suspicion, how Paulinus
(Though ever thought a man auerse to women)
First gave her entertainment? made her way
For audience to my sister; then I did
My self observe how he was ravished with
The gracious delivery of her story,
(Which was I grant the bait that first took me too)
Sh^e was his convert, what the rethorick was
He used I know not, and since she was mine,
In private, as in public, what a mass
Of grace and favors has she heaped upon him!
And but to day this fatal fruit, She Is come.
Enter Timantus. Athenais. Flaccilla. Arcadia. Can she be guilty?

Ath. You seem troubled Sir,
My innoc^nce makes me bold to ask the cause
That I may ease you of it, no salute
After four long hours absence?

Theod. Prithee forgive me. Kisses her.
Me thanks I find Paulinus on her lips,
And the fresh Nectar that I drew from thence
Is on the sudden pal'd, how have you spent
Your hours since I last saw you?

Ath. In the converse,
Of your sweet sisters.

Theod. Did not Philanax
From me deliver you an apple?

Ath. Yes Sir;
Heaven! how you frown! pray you talk of something else,
Think not of such a trifle.

Theod. How! a trifle?
Does any toy from me presented to you,
Deserve to be so slighted? do you valewe
What Is sent, and not the sender? from a peasant
It had deserved your thanks.

Ath. And meets from you Sir
All possible respect.

Theod. I prized it Lady
At a higher rate then you believe, and would not
Have parted with it, but to one I did
Prefer before my self.

Ath. It was indeed
The fairest that I ever saw.

Theod. It was?
And it had virtues in it, my Eudoxia
Not visible to the eye.

Ath. It may be so Sir,

Theod. What did you with it, tell me punctually;
I look for a strict account.

Ath. What shall I answer?

Theod. Do you stagger? ha?

Ath. No Sir, I have eaten it.
It had the pleasantest taste. I wonder that
You found it not in my breath.

Theod. I says I did not,
And it was wondrous strange.

Ath: Pray you try again.

Theo. I find no scent often here. You play with me
You have it still?

Ath. By your sacred life, and fortune,
An oath I dare not break, I have eaten it.

Theod. Do you know how this oath binds?

Ath. Too well, to break it.

Theod. That ever man to please his brutish sense
Should slave his understanding to his passions,
And taken with soon fading white and red
Deliver up his credulous ears to hear
The magic of a Siren, and from these
Believe there ever was, is, or can be
More then a seeming honesty in bad woman

Ath. This is strange language Sir.

Theod. Who waits? come all.
Nay sister not so near, being of the sex,
I fear you are infected to.

Pulch. What mean you?

Theod. To show you a miracle, a prodigy
Which Afric never: equaled can you think
This master piece of heaven, this precious vellam,
Of such a purity, and virgin whiteness,
Could be designed to have perjury, and whoredom
In capital letters writ upon it?

Pulch. Dear Sir,

Theod. Nay add to this ^n impudence beyond
All prostituted boldness. Art not dead yet?
Will not the tempests in thy conscience rende thee
As small as Atomes^ that there may no sign
Be left, thou ever were so! will thou live
Till thou art blasted with the dreadful lightning
Of pregnant, and unanswerable proofs,
Of thy adulterous twines? dye yet that I
With my honor may conceal it.

Ath: Would long since,
The Gorgon of your rage had turned me marble,
Or if I have offended?

Theod. If! good Angels!
But I am tame: look on this dombe accuser.

Ath. O I am lost!

Theod. Did ever cormorant
Swollow his pray and then digest it whole
As she has done this apple? Philanax,
As'tis, from me presented it. The good Lady
Swore she had ea^en it; yet I know not how
It came entire unto Paulinu^ hands,
And I from him received it, sent in scorn
Upon my life to give me a close touch,
That he was weary of thee. Was there nothing
Left thee to see him, to give satisfaction
To thy insatiate lust, but what was sent
As a decrefauour from me? how have I ^ind
In my do^age on this creature? but to her
I have lived, as I was borne, a perfect virgin.
Nay more I thought it not enough to be
True to her bed, but that I must feed high,
To strengthen my abilities to cloye
Her ravenous appetite, little suspecting
She would desire a change.

Ath. I never did Sir.

Theod. Be dumb, I will not waste my breath in taxing
Thy base ingratitude. How I have raised thee,
Will by the world be to thy shame spoke often.
But for that ribawd, who held in my Empire
The next place to my self, so bound unto me
By all the ties of duty, and allegiance
He shall pay dear for it, and feel what it is
In a wrong of such high consequence to pull down,
His Lords slow anger on him. Philanax,
He Is troubled with the gout, let him be cured
With a violent death, and in the other world,
Thank his Physician.

Philanax. His cause unheard Sir?

Pulch. Take heed of rashness.

Theod. Is what I command,
To be disputed?

Philan. Your will shall be done Sir:
But that I am the instrument --

Theod. Do you murmur? Exit Phil with the gard^
What could thou say if that my license should,
Give liberty to this tongue? thou would dye? I am not
Athen. kneeling, points to Theod. sword. So to be reconciled, See me no more.
The sting of conscience ever gnawing on thee,
A long life be thy punishment. Exit Theod.

Flacc. O sweet Lady
How I could weep for her!

Arcad. Speak dear Madam, speak.
Your tongue as you are a Woman, while you live,
Should be ever moving, at the least the last part
That stirrs about you.

Pull. Though I should sad Lady
In policy rejoice, you as a rival
Of my greatenesse are removed, compassion,
Since I believe you innocent, commands me
To mourn your fortune, credit me I will urge
All arguments I can allege that may
Appease the Emperors fury.

Arc. I will grow too,
Upon my knees, unless he bid me rise,
And swear he will forgive you.

Flacc. And repent too
All ^his pother for an apple^

Exeunt Pulcheria. Arcadia. Flaccilla. Chrysostom. Hope dear Madam,
And yield not to despair, I am still your servant,
And never will forsake you; though a while
You leave the court, and city, and give way
To the violent passions of the Emperor.
Repentance in his want of you will soon find him.
In the m^ane time I Will dispose of you, and omit
No oppor^unity that may inuit him
To see his error.

Athen. Oh! Wrangling her hands.

Chrysostom. Forbear for heavens sake:

The ^nde of the fourth act.
Act. 5. Scaene 1.
Philanac. Paulinus. Guard. Executioners. Paul. THi^ is most barbarous! how
have you lost
All feeling of humanity, as honor;
In your consent alone to have me used thus?
But to be as you are a looker on,
Nay more a principal actor in it (the softnes
Of your former life considered) almost turns me
Into a senseless statue.

Philanax. Would long since
Death by some other means had made you one,
That you might be less sensible of what
You have, or are to suffer.

Paul. Am to suffer?
Let such, whose happiness, and heaven depend
Upon their present being fear to part with
A fort they cannot long hold, mine to me is
A charge that I am weary of, all defenses
By pain, and sickness batterd; Yet take heed,
Take heed Lord Philanax, that for private spleen
Or any false conceived grudge against me,
(Since in one thought of wrong to you, I am
Sincerely innocent) you do not that
My oyall Master must in justice punish,
If you pass to your own heart through mine
The murder as it will come out discovered.

Phil. I murder you my Lord? heaven witness for me
With the restoring of your health, I wish you
Long life, and happiness: for my self I am
Compelled to put in execution that
Which I would fly from, it is the Emperor,
The high incensed Emperors will commands
What I must see performed.

Paul. The Emperor!
Goodness, and innocence guard me! wheels, nor racks
Can force into my memory, the remembrance
Of the least shadow of offense, with which
I ever did provoke him, though beloved
(And yet the peoples love is short, and fatal)
I never courted popular applause;
Feasted the men of action, or labored
By prodigal gifts to draw the needy soldier,
The tribunes, or centurious to a faction,
Of which I would rise up the head against him.
I hold no place of s^rength, fortress, or castle
In my command, that can give sanctuary
To malcontents, or countenance rebellion.
I have built no palaces to face the court,
Nor do my followers bravery shame his traine^
And though I cannot blame my fate for want,
My competent means of life deserves no envy.
In what then am I dangerous?

Phil. His displeasure
Reflects on none of those particulars,
Which you have mentioned, though some jealous Princes
In a subject cannot brook 'em.

Paul. None of these?
In what then am I worthy his suspicion?
But it may, nay it must be, some informer
To whom my innocence appear^d a crime,
Has poyson^d his late good opinion of me.
It Is not to dye, but in the censure of
'So good a Master guilty, that afflictes me.

Phil. There is no remedy.

Paul. No, I have a friend yet,
Could ^he strictness of your warrant give way to it,
To whom the s^ate I stand in now delivered,
That by fair intercession for me would
So far prevail, that my defense unheard
I should not innocent, or guilty suffer,
Without a fi^ distinction.

Phil. These false hopes
My Lord abuse you. What man, when condemned,
Did ever find a ^riend? or who dares lend
An eye of pity to that starcros'd subject
On whom his sovereign frowns.

Paul. She that dares plead
For innocence without a fee, the Empress,
My great, and gracious Mistrisse!

Phil. There Is your error.
Her many favors which you hoped should make you,
Prove your undoing. She poor Lady is
Bannish'd for ever from the Emperors presence,
And his confirmed suspicion, to his wrong,
That you have been over familiar with her,
Doomes you to death. I know you understand me.

Paul. Over familiar?

Phil. In sharing with him;
Those sweet and secret pleasures of his bed,
Which can admit no partner.

Paul. And is that
The crime for which I am to dye? Of all
My numerous sins, was there not one of weight
Enough to sink me, if he borrowed not
The color of a guilt I never saw,
To paint my innocence, in a deformed
And monstrous shape? but that it were profane
To argue heaven of ignorance, or injustice,
I now should tax it. Had the stars that reigned
At my nativity such cursed influence,
As not alone to make ^ee miserable,
But in the neighborhood of her goodness to me
To force contagion upon a Lady,
Whose purer flames were not inferior,
To theirs, when they shine brightest? to dye for her
Co^par'd with what she suffers is a trifle.
By her example warned, let all great women
Heereaf^er throw pride, and contempt on such
As truly serve 'em, since a retribution
In lawful courtesies, is now styled lust,
And to be thankful to a servants merits
Is grown a vice, no virtue.

Phil. These complaints
Are to no purpose: think on the long flight,
Your better part must make.

Paul. She is prepared
Nor can the freeing of an innocent
From the Emperors furious jealousy hinder her.
It shall out, it is resolved, but to be whispered
To you alone. What a sol^mne preparation
Is made here to put forth an inch of taper
In it self almost extinguished? mortal poison?
The hangmans sword, the halter?

Phil. It Is left to you,
To make choice of which you please.

Paulinus. Any will serve,
To take away my gout, and life together.
I would not have the Emperor imitate
Romes Monster, Nero, in that cruel mercy
Ilee showed to Seneca; when you have discharged
What you are trusted with, and I have given you
Reasons beyond all doubt, or disputation,
Of the Empresses and my innocence, when I am dead,
Since it is my Masters pleasure, and high treason
In you not to obey it, I conjure you,
By the hopes you have of happiness hereafter,
Since mine in this world are now parting from me,
That you would win the young man to repentance
Of the wrong done to his chaste wise Eudoxia,
And if perchance he shed a tear for what
In his rashenesse he imposed on his true servant,
So it cure him of future jealousy,
^Twill prove a precious balsamum, and find me
When I am in my grave. Now when you please,
For I am ready.

Philanax. His words work strangely on me,
And I would do, but I know not what to think on^t. Ex.

Act. 5. Scaene 2.
Pulcheria. Flaccilla. Arcadia. Timantus. Gratianus. Chrysapius. Pulch. STill
in his sullen moo^d? no intermission
Of his melancholy fit?

Timantus. It rather Madam
Increases, then grows less.

Gratianus. In the next room
To his bedchamber, we watched, for he by signs
Gave us to understand, he would admit
Nor company, nor conference.

Pulch. Did he take
No rest as you could guess?

Chrysostom. Not any Madam;
Like a Numidian Lion, by the cunning
Of the desperate huntsman taken in a toil,
And forced into a spacious cage, he walks
About his chamber, we might hear him gnash
His teeth in rage, which opend, hollow grone^
And murmurs issued from his lips, like winds
Imprisoned in the cauernes of the earth
Striving for liberty; and sometimes throwing
His body on his bed, then on the ground,
And with such violence, that we more then feared
And still do, if the tempest of his passions
By your wisdom be not laid, he will commit
Some outrage on himself.

Pulch. His better Angel,
I hope will stay him from so foul a mischief,
Nor shall my care be wanting.

Tim: Twice I heard him,
Say false Eudoxia, how much art thou
Unworthy of these tears? then sighed, and straight
Rores out Paulinus, was his goutie age
To be preferred before my strength and youth?
Then groand again, so many ways expressing
Th'afflictions of a tortured soul, that we
Who wept in vain, ^or what we could not help,
Were sharers in his sufferings.

Pulch. Though your sorrow
Is not to be condemned, it takes not from
The burden of his miseries; we must practice
With some fresh object to divert his thoughts
From that they are wholly fixed on.

Chrysostom. Could I gain
The freedom of access, I would present him
With this petition. Will your highness please, A paper de^liuer'd.
To look upon it. You will soon find there
What my intents, and hopes are. Enter Theod.

Gratianus. Hal it is he.

Pull. Stand close,
And give way to his passions, it is not safe
To stop them in their violent course, before
They have spent themselves.

Theod. I play the fool, and am
Unequal to my self, delinquents are
To suffer, not the innocent. I have done
Nothing, which will not hold weight in the scale
Of my impartial justice: neither feel
The worm of conscience, vpbraiding me
For one black deed of tyranny; wherefore then
Should I torment my self? great Julius would not
Rest satisfied that his wife was free from fact,
But only for suspicion of a crime
S'ud a divorce, no^ was this Roman rigor
Censured as cruel, and still the wise Italian,
That knows the honor of his family,
Depends upon the purity of his bed
For a kiss, nay wanton look, will plough up mischief,
And sow the seeds of his revenge in blood.
And shall I to whose power the law's a servant,
That stand accomptable to none, for what
My will c^lls an offense, being compelled,
And on such grounds to raise an Altar to
My anger, though I grant it is cemented
With a loose strumpets and adulterers gore,
Repent the justice of my furie^ no.
I should not: yet still my excess of love
Fed high in the remembrance of her choice
And sweet embraces, would persuade me that
Conniuence, or remission of her fault,
Made warrantable by her true submission
For her offense, might be excusable,
Did not the cruelty of my wounded honor
With an open mouth deny it.

Pulch. I approve of
Your good intention, and I hope 'twill prosper.
He now seems calm. Let us upon our knees
Encompasse him. Most royal Sir,

Flacc. Sweet brother.

Arc. As you are our Sovereign, by the ties of nature
You are bound to be a Father in your care
To us poor Orphans.

Timant. Show compassion Sir,
Unto your self.

Great. The maies^ie of your fortune
Should fly above the reach of grief.

Chrysostom. And it is
Impaired, if you yield to it.

Theod. Wherefore pay you
This adoration to a sinful creature?
I am flesh, and blood as you are, sensible
Of heat, and cold, as much a slave unto
The tyranny of my passions, as the meanest
Of my poor subjects the proud attributes
(By oil'd tongued flattery imposed upon us)
As sacred, glorious, high, invincible,
The deputy of heaven, and in that
Omnipotent, with all false titles else
Coind to abuse our frailetie, though compounded,
And by the breath of Sycophants applied,
Cure not the least fit of an ague in us.
We may give poor men riches; confer honors
On vndeseruers; raise^ or ruin such
As are beneath us, and with this puffed up,
Ambition would persuade us to forget
That we are men: but he that sits above us,
And to whom, at our utmost rate, we are
But pageant properties, derides our weakness.
In me to whom you kneel, it is most apparent.
Can I call back yesterday, with all their aides
That bow unto my scepter? or restore
My mind to that tranquillity, and peace
It then inioy'd? can it make Eudoxia chaste?
Or vile Paulinus honest?

Pull. If I might
Without offense, deliver my opinion,

Theod. What would you say?

Pull. That on my soul the Empress
I^ innocent.

Chrysostom. The good Paulinus guiltless.

Great. And this should yield you comfort.

Theod. In being guilty
Of an offense far, far transcending that
They stand condemned for. Call you this a comfort?
Suppose it could be true? a corrasiue rather,
Not to eat out dead flesh, but putrify
What yet is sown'd. was murder ever held
A cure for jealousy? or the crying blood
Of innocence, a balm to take away
Her festring anguish? as you do desire
I should not do a justice on my self,
Add to the proofs by which Paulinus fell,
And not ^ake from 'em, in your charity
Sooner believe that they were false, then I
Unrighteous in my judgment? subjects lives
Are not their Princes tennisballs to be banded
In sport away, all that I can endure
For them, if they were guilty, is an atome
To the mountain of affliction, I pulled on me,
Should they prove innocent.

Chrysostom. For your Majesty's peace
I more then hope they were not; the false oath
Took by the Empress, and for which she can
Plead no excuse, convicted her, and yeeld^
A sure defense for your suspicion of her.
And yet to be resolved, since strong doubts are
More grievous for the most part, then to know
A certain loss.

Theod. It Is true Chrysapius,
Were there a possible means.

Chrysostom. It Is offered to you,
If you please to embrace it. Some few minutes
Make truce with passion, and but read, and follow
What Is there proiected, you shall find a key,
Will make your entrance easy to discover
Her secret thoughts, and then, as in your wisdom
You shall think fit, you may determine of her,
And rest confirmed, whether Paulinus died
A villain or a Martyr.

Theod. It may do,
Nay sure it must, yet howsoever it fall,
I am most wretched which way in my wishes,
I should fashion the event, I am so distracted
I cannot yet resolve of ^ollow me;
Though in my name, all names are comprehended.
I must have witnesse^, in what degree
I have done wrong, or suffered,

Pulch. Hope the best Sir. Exeunt.

Act. 5. Scaena 3.
A sad song. Athenais in sack ecloth. Her loose hair. Athen. WHY art thou
slow, thou rest of trouble, Death,
To stop a wretches breath?
That calls on thee, and offers her sad heart
A prey unto thy dart.
I am nor young, nor fair, be therefore bold,
Sorrow has mad^ me old,
Deformed, and wrinkl'd, all that I can crave,
Is quiet in my grave.
Such as live happy, hold long life a Jewel,
But to me thou art cruel:
If thou end not my tedi^u^ misery,
And I soon cease to be.
Strike, and strike home then, pit^y unto me
In one short hours delay is tyranny.
Thus like a dying Swan, to a sad tune
I sing my own dirg, would a requiem follow
Which in my penitence, I despair not of,
This brittle glass of life, already broken
With misery, the long and quiet sleep
Of death would be most welcome, yet before
We end our pilgrimage, it is fit that we
Should leave corruption, and foul sins behind us.
But with washed feet, and hands, the Heathens dare not
Enter their profane temples; and for me^
To hope my passage to eternity
Can be made easy 'till I have shook of
The burden of my sins in free confession,
Aided with sorrow, and repentance for 'em,
Is against reason. It Is not laying by
My royal ornaments, or putting on
This garment of humility, and contrition.
The throwing dust, and ashes on my head;
Long fasts to tame my proud flesh, that can make
Atonement for my soul, that must be humbled,
All outward signs of penitence, else are vselesse.
Chrysapius did assure me, he would bring me
A holy man, from whom (having discoue^'d
My secret crying sins) I might receive
Full absolution, and he keeps his word.
Welcome most reverend Sir, upon my knees
I enter^aine you.

Enter Theodosius, like a frier^ with Chrysapius. Theod. Noble Sir forbear,
The place, the ^^cred o^fice that I come for,
Commandes all priuacie. My penitent daughter,
Be careful, as you wish remission from me,
That in confession of your sins, you hide not
One crime, whose ponderous weight, when you would make
Your flights above the firmament, that may sincke you.
A foolish modesty in concealing ought
Is now far worse then impudence to profess,
And justify your guilte, be therefore free
So may the gates of mercy open to you.

Ath^^ais. First th^n, I ask a pardon, for my being
Ungrateful to heavens bounty.

Theod. A good entrance.

Ath. Grea^enesse comes from above, and I raised to it
From a low condition, sinfully forgot
From whence it came, and looking on my self
In the ^alse glass of fl^tterie, I received it
As a debt due to my beauty, not a gift
Or favor from the Emperor.

Theod. 'Twas not well.

Ath. Pride waited on unthankfulness, and no more
Remembering the compassion of the Princess,
And the means sh^e used to make me what I was,
Contested with her, and with sore eyes seeing
Her greater light, as it dimmed mine, I practiced
To have it quite put out.

Theod. A great offense,
But on repentance not unpardonable.
Forward^

Athenais. O Father, what I now must utter,
I fear in the delivery will destroy me,
Before you have absolu'd me.

Theod. Heaven is gracious.
Out with it.

Athenais. Heaven commands us to tell truth.
Yet I most sinful wretch, forswore my self.

Theod. On what occasion?

Ath. Quite forgetting that
An innocent truth can never ^^and in need
Of a guilty l^e, being on the sudden asked
By the Emperor my husband, for an Apple
Presented by him, I swore I had eaten it,
When my grieved conscience too well knows, I sent it
To comfort sick Paulinus, being a man,
I truly loved and favored.

Theod. A cold sweat,
Like the juice of Hemlocke bathes me. aside.

Ath. And from this
A furious jealousy getting possession
Of the good Emperors heart, in his rage he doomed
The innocent Lord to dye, my perjury
The fatal cause of murder.

Theod. Take heed daughter,
You niggle not with your conscience, and religion,
In stiling him an innocent from your fear,
And shame to accuse your self. The Emperor
Had many spies upon you, saw such graces,
Which virtue could not warrant, showered upon him;
Glances in public, and more liberal favors
In your private chamber meetings, making way
For foul adultery; nor could he be
But sensible of the compact passed between you,
To the ruin of his honor.

Ath. Hear me Father,
I looked for comfort, but in this you come
To add to my afflictions.

Theod. Cause not you
Your own damnation, in concealing that
Which may in your discovery find forgiuenesse^
Open your eyes, set heaven, or hell before you.
In the revealing of the truth, you shall
Prepare a palace for your soul to dwell in,
Stored with celestial blessings; whereas if
You palliate your crime, and dare beyond
Playing with lightning, in concealing it,
Expect a dreadful dungeon, filled with horror,
And neuer-ending torments.

Ath. May they fall
Eternally upon me, and increase,
When that which we call time has lost its name;
May lightning cl^aue the center of the earth,
And I sink quick, before you have absolu'd me,
Into the bottomless Abyss, I fever
In one unchaste desire, nay in a thought
I wronged the honor of the Emperors bed.
I do deserve, I grant, more then I suffer
In that my feruor, and desire to please him,
In my holy meditations pressed upon me,
And would not be kept out, now to dissemble
(When I shall sudd^inely be insensible,
Of what the world speaks of me) were mere madness:
And though you are incredulous, I presume,
If as I kneel now, my eyes swollen with tears,
My hands heaud up thus, my stretched heartstrings ready
To break a sunder, my incensed Lord
(His storm of jealousy blown ore) should hear me,
He would believe I lied not.

Theod. Rise, and see him, discouers himself.
On his knees with joy affirm it.

Ath. Can this be?

Theod. My sisters, and the rest there, all bear witness.
Enter Pulcheria, Arcadia. Flaccilla. Chrysapius. Gratianus. Timantus. In
freeing this incomparable Lady
From the suspicion of guilt, I do
Accuse my self, and willingly submit
To any penance, she in justice shall
Please to impose upon me.

Ath. Royal Sir, your ill opinion of me 's soon forgiven.

Pull. But how you can make satisfaction to
The poor Paulinus, he being dead, in reason
You must conclude impossible.

Theod. And in that
I am most miserable; the Ocean
Of joy, which in your innocence flowed high to me,
Ebb's in the thought of my unjust command,
By which he died. O Philanax (as thy name
Interpreted speaks thee) thou have ever been
A lover of the King, and thy whole life
Can witness thy obedience to my will,
In putting that in execution, which
Was trusted to thee, say but yet this once
Thou have not done what rashly I commanded^
And that Paulinus lives, and thy reward
For not performing that which I inioin'd thee,
Shall centuple what ever yet thy duty,
Or merit challenged from me.

Phil. It Is too late Sir.
He Is dead, and when you know he was unable
To wrong you, in the way that you suspected,
You Will wish it had been otherwise.

Theod. Unable?

Phil. I am sure he was an Eunuch, and might safely
Lie by a Virgins side, at four years made one,
Though to hold grace with Ladies he conceald it.
The circumstances, and the manner how
You may hear at better leisure.

Theod. How! an Eunuch?
The more the proofs are, that are brought to clear thee,
My best Eudoxia, the more my sorrows.

Athen. That I am innocent?

Theod. That I am guilty
Of mur^her, my Eudoxia. I will build
A glorious monument to his memory,
And for my punishment live, and dye upon it,
And never more converse with men.

Enter Paulinus. Paulin. Live long Sir,
May I do so to serve you^ and if that
I live does not displease you, you owe for it
To this good Lord.

Theod. My self, and all that is mine.

Philan. Your p^rdon is a payment.

Theod. I am raped
With joy beyond my self. Now my Eudoxia
My jealousy puffed away thus, in this breath
I scent the natural sweetness. Kisses her.

Arcad. Sacred Sir,
I am happy to behold this, and presume,
Now you are pleased, to move a suit, in which
My sister is joined with me.

Theod. Prithee speak it,
For I have vowed to hear before I grant,
I thank your good instructions.

Arc. It Is but this Sir,
We have observed the falling out, and in,
Between the husband and the wise shows rarely,
Their iarres, and reconcilements strangely take us.

Flac. Anger and jealousy that conclude in kisses
Is a sweet war in sooth.

Arc. We therefore, brother
Most humbly beg you would provide us husbands
That we may taste the pleasure often.

Flac. And with speed Sir,
For so your ^auour's doubled.

Theod. Take my word,
I will with all conuenience; and not blush
Hereafter to be guided by your counsels.
I will deserve your pardon. Philanax
Shall be remembered, and magnificent bounties
Fall on Chrysapius. My grace on all.
Let Cleon be delivered and rewarded,
My grace on all, which as I len'd to you,
Return your vows to heaven, that it may please
(As it is gracious) to quench in me
All future sparks of burning jealousy.

THE END.
EPILOGVE.
WE have reason to be doubtful, whether he
On whom (forced to it by necessity)
The maker did confer his Emperors part
Has given you satisfaction, in his art
Of action an^ delivery; it is sure truth
The burden was too heavy for his youth
To undergo: but in his will we know
He was not wanting, and shall ever owe
With, his, our service, if your favors daine
To give him strength, he^reafter to sustain
A greater weight. It is your grace that ca^
In your allowance of this write him man
Before his time, which if you please to do
You make the Player, and the Poet too.

