THE HEROYK LIFE And DEPLORABLE DEATH Of The most Christian King HENRY the
fourth.

Adressed to his Immortal Memory; By P: MATHIEV, Counceller and
Historiographer of France.

TRANSLATED By Ed: Grimeston, Esquire.

LONDON Printed by GEORGE ELD* 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Lord Viscont Cranborn.
MY good Lord: I have presumed to offer this discourse unto your view, not for
that you understand it not in the Original, or to instruct your knowledge, the
French tongue being familiar unto you, and the subject, with all the
Circumstances, as well known as to any; but to make you Censor of the work,
and of the Authors integrity, having remained in that Court, and received
favors from that great King, living in the height of worldly felicity, and
with all been an eye witness of that sad and mournful spectacle, and of the
general consternation of the French, lamenting the Tragical and sudden death
of their King, to their ir-reparable loss.

This work may happily seem to some unseasonable, when as his death is in a
manner forgotten, there having also been so many Pamphlets, and petty
discourses published of that subject. But as my Authors excuse is, That time
can prescribe no bounds to their sorrow, nor reason moderate their grief,
which renues with time, and therefore never unseasonable to lament so great a
loss. So I finding it written by an eloquent Pen, and by his own
Historiographer, who attended on him daily, to record both his words and
Actions, and who both could and has written many particularities upon this
Accident, which were unknown to others, have thought it as worthy the
knowledge of our Nation as any of the rest, and I hope will give the Reader
more content.

I have presumed to make your Lordship Patron of my labor, both for that you
can Judge if there be any thing defective, and in respect of my own private
obligation, having received many favors from your Lordship during my aboade in
France, with that hopeful Gentleman Master Henry Howard: Vouchsafe it my good
Lord your countenance, and accept it as a poor testimony of his
thankfulness, who is and will be

Always ready to do you service: Ed: Grimeston.

The Author to the Queen Regent.
MAdam this work is dedicated to the public weal, whether all Histories go;
to the Kings service, whereat all affections should aim; to the immortal
reputation of Henry the Great, whether all my thoughts shall tend, and
presenting it to your Majesty as to the Gouernesse of the realm, to the mother
of my king, to the widow of my master, I discharge my self of that which I
owe to the Instruction of Posterity, to the glory of the Son, to the memory
of the Father, and to the honor of your commandments. I am sorry that it could
not add the praise of diligence to the merit of my obedience, but his
slacknesse makes it not unseasonable; the subject is Immortal, the world will
never cease to admire so glorious a life, nor to lament so tragical and
sudden a death. This fatal day of the 14. of May, which should have been the
period of your mourning, has been the renewing of it, and has revived your
sorrows with such passion as the spirits could hardly be stayed from
following your tears. Our greefes shall never be so old, but they shall still
find new causes to lament. It is true (Madame) that they are much eased by the
happy effects of your regency which has preserved those that held themselves
lost, has maintained the laws of the state, raised up the subjects hope, let
the world see that in a Queens heart you carry the courage of a King, and that
Italy has brought forth a Blanch to Lewis the 13. as Spain did to Lewis the 9.
you make that great Prince to live again, for whose departure the Earth weeps,
and Heaven rejoices at his return, he reigns in the King his son, he
triumphs in the restoration of France and in the renown of his virtues, which
lives in you Madam, he breathes in your sighs, he is reverenced in your
authority, he has left you the force of his judgment, the respects of his
majesty, the felicity of his reign, the wills of all his subjects, whereof you
dispose in such sort as it seems the time present has no cause to fear the
future, nor to grieve for that is past.

P. Mathieu.



THis was that Man of Men, whose Cradle sprung
With Happy Lawrells (that to Heaven aspired)
Whose Youth with Worth of all the Worthies rung,
Whose Aged Glories all the World admired:
His Countries Father; Others Arbitrer:
The Mercury of Peace, the Mars of War.
This Prince of Prowess and of Policy,
Arming to aid the Rightful Heir of Cleue,
Stepmother Rome (Mother of Treachery)
Did of his Life with bloody Knife bereave;
Stepmother Rome; well may we call thee so,
That now have killed two Sons, two Kings arow.
THE Deplorable death of Henry the fourth, the French King.
IF PEACE MAKE Kingdoms and Estates happy, France, which has enjoyed it
twelve years under the shadow of her Kings palm and lawrell-branches, may
say, that heaven could add nothing to her felicity but Constancy, which is
more desired then enjoyed in human affairs. The seeds of division are rooted
out, distrust does no more trouble men's minds, there is no cause of factions
and alterations, and private miseries are covered with public prosperities.

Never Prince was more beloved nor better obeyed at home, none more re-doubted
nor admired abroad. The Princes of Christendom seek and respect his
alliance, he gouernes the courages of the greatest, and the wills of the
meanest at his pleasure: his affairs are freed from the injuries of necessity
or confusion. He has seen treasons against his Estate, as soon prevented as
conceived, these furious torrents are crept into the earth, which they would
have swallowed up: he demands nothing from heaven but he obtaines it: his
neighbors dare not refuse him any thing. What fears he? and of whom is he
not feared?

In the midst of these contents, he prepares a mighty army, the which the
first day seems to promise victory, and to sing the triumph: every man desires
to understand whether it goes, his friends grow jealous, and his enemies
tremble. They see the sword drawn, which threatens to have reason of them that
will not do it, but no man knows to whom it speaks; force and valor are
ready to charge, but we see no enemy; there is no peace broken, no war
proclaimed.

The restitution of Iuliers, the liberty of Germany, the new alliance with the
duke of Sauoy, were the apparent causes of this arming, few men knew his secret
intentions. If it be lawful to judge of the greatness of a desseigne by the
preparation, we must of force say that France could not but hope for great and
glorious effects, and that having not of long time made a greater preparation,
he had not attempted any thing of greater moment.

The Arsenal of Paris had within 25. years seen four great provisions, but
this last was mightier and more then any of the rest: the Duke of Suylly did
show by demonstration, that the first of this equipage should be at Chalons,
when as the last should go out of Saint Martins suburbs at Paris. The brauest
resolutions came as to an Accademie of valor and virtue. The Princes of
Germany brought both their swords and hopes. Count Maurice, who has ever
commanded, came thither to obey, and the King without doubt did add unto those
glorious titles of Restorer of France, and Protector of the quiet of
Christendom, that of Arbitrator of the Empire.

The Rendezuous for the Army was in Champagne; the Duke of Neuers, as Governor
of the Province, and supplying the place of Collonell of the light horse of
France, commanding it: It was fortified with 6000. Suisses, well appointed and
well armed, of the which the Duke of Rohan was Colonel; The Kings arrival
might have augmented it with 4000. gentlemen, and the regiment of his gardes.
It struck such a terror and amazement into his neighbors, as these words were
publicly spoken at Colen. It were a madness to think to resist a Prince
which has these great quallities, of Valiant, Powerful and Fortunate. Many
doubted that it would trouble the peace of Christendom, and that the succors
which he had promised to a Protestant Prince, would be a scandal to religion.
The King told the Popes Nuncio, That he informed himself only, whether they
that demanded succors were his firm friends, and if their cause were just, as
for Religion it should be no way wronged. Time, and the Capitulation of Iuliers
have verified this promise.

The indiscreet and burning zeal of many, transported men's minds with these
strange apprehensions. He told one of the bad offices which his enemies did
him in blemishing the integrity of his thoughts toward Religion, and
withdrawing the fidelity of his subjects from his service. Having used great
words upon this subject, which would be as orient Pearls in his History, if
he had not forbidden them to be published; he ended with these words. The
first thing whereof I have spoken, is for the assurance of the Catholic
religion in the country of Cleues. I will never endure, that it complain
neither of my armies, nor of my intentions. I told the Duke of Suylly the other
day that if all the Princes of Germany were resolved to make a protestant
Emperor, I would hinder it.

He had a great desire to see his army, and nothing stayed him but the Queens
Coronation, the only action which wanted in the prosperities of peace, and the
wishes of France. This duty had been neglected ten years, by them that should
do it, and by her that should receive it. France, thinking she could perform
nothing equal to the merrits of this Princess, confessed, that disability made
her unthankful: The Queen had her spirits glutted with so many other sorts of
content; her Piety entertained her so sweetly with the hope of crowns which
are given in heaven, as she cared not for any earthly one, although her
courage thought it self wronged, to be exempted from an honor which had been
common to the Queens of France.

That which other Kings had given unto them by way of ceremony, this King was
bound to yield unto her, who did crown all the graces which he received from
heaven, and did eternize the Flowers de Luz in her Royal posterity: He
granted it sooner then she made show to desire it, and presently commanded the
City of Paris to think upon the honors which were done unto him at his entry
presently after his Coronation. They set 800. men on work about the
preparation of this pomp, they employed many excellent wits, to give life unto
their statues and marble: If the triumph had bin ended, Europe had not seen
any thing to equal it. And to judge of the whole by a part, the cloth of gold
and silver which was distributed came to a hundred and fifty thousand crowns.
It seemed they had gathered together all the Pearl of the Indies, and all the
treasures of Asia upon this occasion; but as desseignes, pressed forward with
diverse passions, work powerfully in the minds of men, the King languishing
on the one side with a desire to go unto his Army, and not willing to part
before the Queens Coronation, it held his will and affection in suspense.

It was propounded to defer this ceremony until September; Sanguin, a
councellor of the court of Parliament, and Provost of Merchants at Paris, gave
him to understand, that this delay would make the charge unprofitable, and that
what was done would no more serve, if it stood long exposed to the air.
Whereupon the King said to the Duke of Guise, That he lamented the time which
was lost in this expectation: Nothing is performed with diligence in their
opinions which desire and attend. The Duke of Guise seeming to have no other
ambition, then not to be last that came unto the feast, said that he did
languish until he were in the Army, that he would serve him better there then
at the Queens Coronation; that he was the meanest Captain, but the best
soldier of his realm.

On the Monday, the King was hunting at Saint German, and disposing of the
days which he meant to spend at Paris, he said: King disposes of the time.
On twesday I will go, and lie at Saint Denis on wednesday; thursday I will
return: on Friday I will dispose of my affairs; Saturday I will run; on
Sunday shall be my wives entry; Monday the marriage of my daughter of
Vendosme; Tuesday the feast, and Wednesday to horse. And although he knew
well, both by the reasons of his Judgment, and by those of his belief, that
the time past was no more his, and that of the present he had but an instant,
yet his thoughts and cogitations extended to future things, saying, that He
prepared work for Me to augment his History: and being on the Twesday at
mass, the Dauphin delivering him a Crown for his offering, he said unto the
Marshall of Feruaques, and to Saint Geran, Governor of Bourbonois. My Son
does now carry a Crown, I hope within six years he will carry a sword after
me.

He was much troubled to resolve all difficulties touching the ranks,
Difficulties for precedence.
places and honors of the coronation. D'Rhodes master of the ceremony, did
often present unto him the order that was observed at the Coronation of Queen
Elenor, wife to Francis 1. of Katherine wife to Henry 2. of Elizabeth wife to
Charles 9. but in every thing his will did serve for a rule and law. There was
some difficulty for the ornaments of mantles: The same differences which they
give in the Arms of Princes howses, to distinguish the elder from the younger,
are observed in the ornaments which are given at marriages and funerals. For we
have seen upon the mantles of Orleance the Lambeaux gueles with the flowers de
Luce. Upon those of Arthois, the Lambeaux castelled or, upon those of Aniou
Lambeaux moving in chief: in like manner they of Valois, of Berry, of Alenco^,
have carried borders either plain or engrailed, or charged with besans: they of
Eureux bastons Or and Argent, and they of Bourbon bastons gueles.

The Queens Mantle was pouldered with flowers de Luce, Description of the
Queens Mantle.
without number, as merely royal and belonging soly unto Majesty. The Kings
daughter and Queen Marguerite had 4. flower de luces pure upon the border of
their mantles. The Princesses of the blood, demanded three, with the
differences of arms, to the end that as there was a destinctio^ of the Kings
daughters mantle from theirs, so should there be of theirs from those of other
Princesses. The Earl of Soison said, that the flowers de luce were the marks
of their house, that their marriages and funerals were honored therewith, that
the Princesses of the blood had always carried them, with the differences of
the branches and royal families from whence they were descended. The Princess
of Conde at the entry of Queen Elizabeth; The Lady Douager, Mother to the
Princess of Conde, at his marriage. The Princess his mother, and the Duke of
Montpensier at their Interments, as honors and prerogatives inseparable from
the quality of their birth; without the which the Princesses of the blood
should not be distinguished from the rest. But finding that this distinction
was not pleasing unto the King, Eatle of Soissons retires himself discontented.
he retired himself to his house at Montigny, and the Countess of Soisson
came not to the ceremony. This departure did afflict him, and this affliction
appeared in his countenance, on Twesday the xi. of May, and in the words which
he spoke upon that subject, to his most confident servants. At the end of his
dinner he was advertised, that some troops of horse which were in the army,
came and lived at discretion, and did not obey the Duke of Neuers; he was
offended with the Captains, and told them they should be with their charges;
Then directing his speech to the Constable and other Noblemen, he said. When
my subjects shall be ruined, who shall feed me? who shall pay you your
pensions and entertainments? They that serve me must rest satisfied with what
I give them. I have taken an order to deduct that out of the taxes which the
people has given unto the men of war, and to account upon the soldiers
musters what they have received of the people. This equality being observed,
the discipline which they think so difficult, shall be kept in despite of
the most insolent and incorrigible. The Captains should prevent these
disorders, if they were in the army, but they will see Coronations and
Triumphs; Curiosity should not make them remiss and careless of their
duties. I would go a hundred leagues to a battle, but I assure you I would
not step a foot for this; and if it were not necessary, they should not see
me there.

All difficulties were determined with so great toil and contention, King and
Queen came to S. Denis.
as if the Queen had been at the beginning of this enterprise, she would have
bin distasted, and lost all desire to pursue it; Their Majesty's came on
wednesday being the 12. Of May to S. Denis. The King at his arrival remembered
that he had not bin in the Abbey since his conversion, and this remembrance
made him to speak these words. The last time I was here I had no heir, and
did not look to have any, I thank God now for that which he has given me.

The Queens chiefest care was to prepare her self to receive the grace which
she expected the next day. The King seeing her enter into her devotions to
confession, he retired himself, and kissing her, he said, My love, make a
confession for us both. Vitry being then in quarter, as Captain of the guard of
the Kings person, had caused the doors of S. Denis church to be walled up,
reserving only one which did not open but to such as had a ticket from him, or
were well known. It was opened presently after midnight, every one being
placed at ease to see, or to be seen: the scaffolds being built after that
manner, as notwithstanding that the assembly were of seven or eight thousand
persons, yet the last were no way hindered by them that were before them.
Nothing did trouble the beholders sight, nor the officers who appointed what
should be done.

The Kings Oratory being on the side of the Altar toward Dagoberts tomb,
Preparation of S. Denis church.
the founder of that Church, had two doors, one to the Altar, the other to the
Queens Theater. He came thither presently after dinner, and it seemed he had
laid aside majesty for that day, and had resigned it wholly unto the Queen, to
have but the remainder of the honors which were done her. He made a turn about
the Church, until she were ready, giving order for all things necessary. His
judgment did determine the difficulty betwixt the two Captains of the
hundred Gentlemen, and that which fell out betwixt the Archers of the guard of
the Kings body, and the hundred Gentlemen. He advised the last to look unto
themselves, saying, That he had never seen but in such ceremonies one would
outstrip another. All that served for the pomp and state of this action,
marching before the Queen, about two of the clock she was conducted to the
Church, Manner of the Queen going to her Coronation.
and did ascend the great Theater: The Dauphin, the Duke of Aniou, (by reason
of the indisposition of the Duke of Orleans) and for them Souvray and Bethunes
their governors carried the folds of her Mantle. The Cardinals of Gondy and
Sourdy led her, the Prince of Conty carried the Crown, the duke of Vendosme
the Scepter, the Cheualier of Vendosme the hand of Justice. The Lady Elisabeth
the Kings daughter, and Queen Marguerite followed the Queen; the Princess of
Conde, the Princess of Conty, and the Duchess of Monpensier carried the
train of her royal mantle, Chasteauvieux, her knight of honor did help to
support it, by her Majesty's express commandment

The beauty of this pomp was admirable to all men: Queen Marguerite carried
an ornament, as she whose mother had been crowned upon the same Theater. The
Marguerites of France come after the flower de luce of florence. Marguerite of
Valois did serve Katherine de Medicis in the like occasion. Other Queens have
affected solitarines, to conceal their greefes and complaints for the change
of their condition. She came to Court to let the world see the contentment
which she receives in the justice of that which has been prosecuted at her
entreaty, advanced with her desires, and followed with her quiet. She yields
all honors and respect to this Queen: She does acknowledge so many merits
and perfections to be in her, as she does not think one crown sufficient for
so many virtues.

We must confess that there was never seen, neither could there be seen any
thing that did equal the order, the beauty, and majesty of this action. They
were amazed at such a silence in so great a multitude, at so great reverence
done to holy mysteries among men of different religions: so great order and
constancy among spirits whose patience is presently spent, and cannot force
themselves to ceremonies of long expectation, some being there from the
beginning of the night, others from the break of day. When as the King saw the
Queen approach, he said that he had never seen her so beautyfull. And
although it seemed that the care of rising early, and the troble of so forced
and ceremonious a day should have been prejudicial, yet her complexion was
never cleerer nor more fresh.

I did carefully observe all the Kings discourse; Kings carriage at the Ceremony
the quicknes and viuacity of his spirit did work more actiuely then his eyes,
and did pierce into things which they must divine. At the same instant he
carried his eyes upon one, and did judge of the actions of another being far
off. The Duke of Espernon said unto him, Sir, Do you not see the Popes Nuncio
who laughs at the countnance of his neighbor? No (said the king) it is to see
la Force and father Cotton in discourse. It was true he did judge of their
thoughts and words, by their eyes and countenance, and suddenly he did observe a
Lady in one place and a nobleman in another, and did let the farthest of them
understand that he knew them. Every motion was an action, he spoke to the
nobleme^ that were about him, to the Archbi. of Rheims, the Duke of Espernon
Montbason and Raise, to Bellegard master of his horse, to the lords of Pralin,
la Force, du Bellay and de Vic; he commanded the Marquis of Vernueill to
observe what was done, he spoke to them that were below; he pitied the
Cardinal of Ioyeuse for that they kept him so long fasting, and Queen
Margueret for that she had risen too soon; he did presently answer all
difficulties which grew for precedence. His spirit was every where, and yet no
where but in himself.

They had prepared a chair for him, but the joy which he conceived made him
to leave it, and to lay by both hatte and cloak, still changing his place, and
always speaking either of that which he saw, or of what was done. He was very
attentive to the Coronation, the which he would have performed with all
reverence and silence: he was sorry to see the glass of the winddowes (which
the Duke of Montbason brake, to have a more free veiw) fall upon the Prelates
which were set at the foot of his Oratorie before the Altar. I observe this to
stop their mouths which have said, that it was done by his commandment.

The Queen was brought before the Altar, there to be crowned. The form of
Coronations requires, that the Inferior be crowned by the superior. Augustus
gave the Diadem to Herod, Tiberius to Tigranes King of Armenia; Nero to
Tiridates, Domitian to Decebalus, and Traian to Parthania; Princes which
acknowledge no superior, receive it from God by the hands of their Ministers;
and Queens, which have no light but from the beams of Kings their orient
Sun, should be crowned by Kings. Esther was crowned by Assuerus. Ptolomee,
marrying his sister, did set a Crown upon her head in the face of the army.
Mitridates gave it to Milesia, Heraclius to Eudoxia. Constantin the younger to
Theodora, Phocas to Leontia, and in our days Christina of Lorraine was crowned
by Ferdinand great Duke of Tuscane. But the piety of the house of France, to
show that her Kings and Queens have no majesty but what comes from God,
binds them to receive the Crown by his Ministers, and before his Altars,
confessing that these supreme honors depend merely of his grace. Kings have
been present at the Coronation of Queens, as Lewis the young at that of
Isabell of Henault, and Philip Augustus at that of Alix of Blois, not to
authorize, but to adorn the action; the only presence of God, by that of his
servants, being necessary. Crowns are equal, there is no disparitie, Jupiter
has no more beams in his then Juno. That wherewith the Queen is crowned, is
the same the King receives at his anointing. Reason, which makes of two hearts
one, and the persons consorts of one life, to divide equally their crosses and
co^forts, does neither allow of the difference of crowns observed at the
coronation of the Empres of Constantinople, nor the form of crowning them, the
Emperor receiving the crown from the Patriarch, the which he sets upon his
wives head.

The Queen then being before the Altar, kneeling, Coronation of the Queen.
her hands joined, and her head humbled, they made a prayer, that it would
please God to bless that action of the Ministry, and humility of his
Ministers, and pour upon her the effects of his grace and virtue. The Bishop
of Paris having been appointed to present the sacred oils, the Queens head
and breast was anointed. The Bishop of Beziers, chief Almoner to the Queen,
by reason of the indisposition of Cardinal du Peron, chief Almoner of France,
presented the crown, which the Cardinal of Ioyeuse did set upon her Majesty's
head. The Prelates presented the honors, the Scepter, the hand of Justice, and
the Ring; The kiss, whereof women are dispensed in homages ended this mystery,
and the general silence made it more venerable and stately. The Queen
returning from the Altar to the Throne, the crown of Stones which was set on
in the place of the greater, had almost fallen off, but she stayed it presently
with her hand, and set it fast. A prediction of good fortune which her wisdom
and government should bring unto our miseries. It seemed that her heart was not
pleased with so great joy, honor, and contentment as that day did give her, for
she was sad and troubled, as a Prophetess of some disaster. During this
melancholy, she spoke these words. I consider that I can receive but two honors
in this Church, this is the first, the other shall be at my funeral, when it
pleases God.

This great Queen did imitate the Emperors of Constantinople, who on the day
of their Coronations did choose Marble and Porphery for their tombs. This was
to have the spirit touched with the same motions of that great light of the
Eastern Church, who commanded his friends to put him in mind to finish his
tomb, when they should see him most joyful. She remembered her whose name
she bears, who paid unto her son the great usury of the joy, which she
had had at his birth, who did not apprehend so great glory to be exalted above
the Thrones of Angels, as she felt grief and sorrow to see him tied upon the
Gross betwixt two thieves.

The King having observed all this ceremony, said, That it was a great mark of
the dignity of the Church, for that it had particular forms and ceremonies to
honor a royalty, where as other Religions had not any thing like to anoint
their Kings, nor ministers appointed to that end. Some one said unto him, that
under the bark of ceremonies they found great mysteries; that the simplest and
lightest had their reasons and grounds, that even the smoke on Incense bad
hirs, representing the prayers and intentions of the faithful sent up to
heaven. This caused him to remember an excellent discourse which Cardinal du
Perron had made unto him upon that subject, speaking as all the East has
spoken of the writings of Gregory Nazianzen, whose authority was so great, as
they were never reprehended nor contradicted. He also took great delight in
the discourse which Father Cotton made to the Marquis of la Force, upon the
explication of the ceremonies of the mass and the Coronation.

This being ended, he settled himself to hear the rest of the service, and
setting him down in his chair, he came to his first admiration, why the
Ambassador of Spain did not uncover himself. Cicogne told him that the
deceased King of Spain did but move his hat at the elevation, and put it on
presently again, as if he had saluted a very mean Gentleman. Whereupon the
King said, If we had that feeling of Religion which we should have, we would
do more reverence to those mysteries, for we must believe, that after the
words of consecration pronounced until the Communion, Jesus Christ is always
present upon the Altar. These were his very words, there wants nothing but the
grace and zeal wherewith he delivered them. I observed them curiously for the
beautifying of his History, and the honor of his piety. In acts of religion,
humility is no less requisite in Princes then in subjects. Devotion does no
wrong to Majesty. That which seems unfitting for gravity, is honorable in
religion. David danced among the rest before the Arc, and did not disdain to
acknowledge, among them all, him that had advanced him above all. The most
fruitful and necessary lesson for Kings, is humility; their birth and quality
makes them disposed to pride. Humility is the true caracter of grace. All
virtues are commendable in great Princes, but humility is necessary: many are
advised, but this is commanded.

He that has not all may save himself, but he that has not this is undone.

With this humility the Queen received the book of the Gospel and kissed it,
acknoledging that it is the rule of salvation, the compass of faith, the
Doctrine of eternal wisdom, which makes Kings to reign. That which it
teaches is truth without deceyte, that which it commands is bounty without
malice, and that which it promises is felicity without misery,. But when she
did rise from her throne to come unto the offering, humility retired unto her
heart, and left nothing but sweetness in her eyes: Majesty appeared upon her,
and about her, after a stately and reverent manner, so as in marching she
seemed, not a Queen, but a Goddess, and then it was that the King said, that
this was rightly to play the Queen.

All things were answerable. She came in the same order that she had been
conducted to the Coronation; Queen goes to the offering.
the offerings being carried upon rich cushions with towels of white damask
fringed with gold. She received them from the hands of the Princesses of Conty,
of Montpensier and of Guise, and offered them herself upon the Altar; the
wine in two little barrils of silver and guilt, a loaf of silver, and a loaf
of gold, with a purse and thirteen pieces of gold, every piece being worth
thirteen crowns.

The preface being begone, the King followed the Cardinal of Ioyeuzes voice
who was at the Altar. It is an ancient mark of piety in the Kings of France,
to mingle their vows and voices with the Ministers of God. Charlemaigne,
Robert, and St. Lewis did sing in the Church, and King Charles the 9. had been
heard sing. He carried so great reverence and respect to holy Mysteries, as
his eyes discovered the zeal of his heart. The Popes Nuncio observing this
feruency, and these pure and free motions of his spirit, rejoiced with the the
other Prelates, saying that the Pope would receive great contentment therewith.

To all this days honors, which were the greatest that the earth could produce,
it was fit to add the perfection of all the graces which we can receive from
heaven, the full sum of all benefits, the abridgment of wonders, the eternal
gage of the love of God; wherefore the Queen was led the third time toward the
Altar, where she did kneel down upon a Cushon which the Duke of Elbeuf
presented to her, and received the holy Sacrament, having, for greater
reverence, set by the Crown which she had upon her head. A sollemne
declaration that the Crowns of Princes submit themselves to our Saviors
Crown of thorns, that all their majesty depends of his power, their
greatness has no brightness but from that light, and it seems like unto the
Enamell which does not show about a Pigeons neck, if the Sun does not shine
upon it.

The Ceremony ended, about 4. of the Clock the Heralds cast a largess unto
the people of a great number of pieces of gold and silver. All the Church did
sound again with cries and acclamations of joy and happiness.

I have not described it so perticularlye and exactlie as some may wish: This
is a History, not a Ceremonial.

If the Noblemen which served in this action take it ill that they have been
forgotten in this discourse, they must remember that their names are written
elsewhere, and that the hazards of battles, and not the pompes of Ceremonies
are their ture Theaters.

The Queen was conducted back again to her Chamber by the Duke of Guise, and
the Cheualier of Guise his brother: The King received her in the presence
Chamber, and in that encounter the great feruencie of his heart did euaporate
it self by the tears of his eyes, with such tenderness and affection, as one
would have thought he had given his last imbrasing. He told her that she was
to thank God, for that all things had past so well: That never any thing had
been performed with more order and honor; and seeing her to have more desire
to rest then to dine, he commanded every one to depart the Chamber.

He was so well pleased with her royal Mantle, as he presently told Sancerre,
Controwler general of his plate, and master of the Queens roabes, that he
would have a Cassock of the same fashion, besides three others of diverse
coullers, imbrodered and inricht with diverse Ciphers, to carry upon his arms;
and for that he could not have them before his departure, he commanded him to
follow in post, and to bring it as soon as it should be made, recommending
the soliciting thereof unto the Queen.

He supt at Saint Denis, and they told him during supper, that the Ambassadors
of Spain and Venice had a quarrel. He had foreseen it, and knowing that
their spirits were altered by the forgetting of some complement which the one
thought should have been done by the other, they might discover their
discontents upon the first occasion, he recommended it to the Popes Nuncio, to
have a care least they should do anything unworthy the respect which was due to
that occasion. This was handled so discreetly, as the solemnity was not
troubled. The Ambassador of Venice did sometimes cast forth words to draw on
others. The Ambassador of Spain who had promised that he would not offend
him, if he were not first offended, foreseeing that if in this discourse, he
gave him siegneurie or Lordship, instead of Excellency, (terms which were the
only cause of the jar which was betwixt them) he should be forced to break
out into some passionate speech, he remained silent, and kept his gravity,
having much pain to command himself, so as his countenance could not
dissemble the trouble and perturbation of his mind; At the return from the
Ceremony they did accompany the Nuncio, and did attend until he was entered
into his Caroch to return to Paris. At the very instant of his departure they
fell to words and then to blows. The King would needs see the keeper of the
house and his wife, to understand the manner, the advantage, and the issue of
this Combat.

After supper he sent Chasteauvieux to tell the Queen that if she had a will
to go to Paris he would stay for her; who answered, that she was ready.
They came back together in one Caroche, and the King made a discourse unto her
of this quarrel, with the discriptions and exaggerations, which he could
enrich exceeding well, and the joy wherein he was gave it much grace. Two
leasters of the Court, to entertayne him in this humor fell to words and blows
before him upon the way. The enseigne of his guard seeing this sport on
horseback and with swords drawn to be too near his Carroche, he caused
them to retire, but the King commanded them to let them alone, for that he
took delight in it.

All that evening he spoke of nothing but of that which he had seen and
observed, and could not sufficiently admire the Majesty, grace, and royal
behavior of the Queen. Here-vpon La Brosse a learned Physician and
Mathematician, said unto the Duke of Vendosme, after a long discourse, that if
the King could avoid an accident which did threaten him, he might live yet
thirty years. Predictions of the kings death.
No man is willing to let Kings understand that which may troble them; the Duke
of vendosme thinking it more convenient that la Brosse should be the reporter
of this advise, besought the King to hear him; the king demanded what he
would. At these words the Duke of Vendosme held his peace, his silence made the
King more desirous to know it, he pressed him, and he excused himself, in the
end the Kings commandment drew from him that which la Brosse had spoken: You
are a fool, said the King you believe it; Sir answered the Duke of Vendosme,
in these matters belief is forbidden, but not fear; your majesty's
preservation binds all the world, and me more then all men not to contemn any
thing: I beseech you most humbly to be pleased to bear him; the King would
not, but forbad him to speak of it. I cannot, said the Duke, do less then
aduertize the Queen. The King replied twice, that if he spoke of it he would
never love him; And so la Brosse was sent away. This discourse I had word by
word from the Duke of Vendosme.

At the same time the Queen did rest at an other prediction, which did assure
her that she should not pass those days of joy and triumph without some
wonderful cross and afliction. At her return from Saint Denis she saw him
that had told her, whom she let understand that all things had succeeded hapily
at her Coronation, and that there was more likelihood to hope for good then to
fear any evil. Madame, said he, your entry is made, if I have not spoken the
truth, I will burn my Books.

It is true that she had been long before aduertized that in May 1610. she
should have a great Cross. But as she is as little curious of these
observations, as any Princess of Europe, so there is not any one living that
does contemn them more, not that gives them less credit. She did noe more
esteem this Prediction, then the threats of the Astrologians, who said, that
she should dye upon the delivery of the Lady Christina her second daughter.

At that time they spoke generally of some great accident that should happen.
They called to mind many predictions upon Commets, the Eclypses and
Conjunction of superior Planets. Leouicius had coniured all Kings that were
borne under Aries and Libra, to have a care of themselves.

The Star which was seen the year before at noonday, had been considered
by the Mathematicians as a sign of some sinister effect, The river of Loire
had ouer-flowed with the like fury at the time of the violent deaths of Henry
the second, and Henry the third. The seasons perverted the extreme cold, the
violent heat, and those mountains of Ice which were seen upon the rivers of
Loire and Saone filled men's heads with like apprehensions. They had divulged
about Paris verses of the Samaritaine upon the new bridge, in imitation of
Nostradamus, which spoke plainly of the Kings death.

It is a great rashness to presume to foretell that which no man but God
knows. The knowledge of future things is ouercast with darkness, so as
human judgments cannot pierce into it. If future things might be known by
the stars, men had no need of Prophets to foretell before so many ages, of
their Redemption, of the estate of the Church, and of the latter day.

But for my part I hold, that if the stars give not some knowledge of these
great disasters which fall upon Princes, it were a folly for private men to
consult upon their influences, and to divine what shall happen.

The religious contempt which this Prince made of all these observations, is so
much the more commendable in him, for that curiosity does insensibly settle a
belief in the spirits of great men, by the encounter of some truth, as it is
impossible that in aiming still at one mark, they should not sometimes hit it.
The Court, which has always idleness to make men's minds delicate, and vanity
to make them curious is the element of these diuiners, they adore them when
they speak truth, and they excuse them when they are mistaken, they remember
if they have delivered any thing truly, and forget their lies. God does also
suffer a mischief to fall upon him that did believe it, not to give countenance
and authority to the Impostor, but to punish his lightness that gave ear to
the Impostor.

He was told in the beginning of his reign, that he should be interred
eight or ten days after King Henry the third, whose hearse was laid in
deposito, at Compeigne: That he should be slain in the 57. year of his age,
and that this mischief should happen at a great ceremony, with a hundred other
fantasies, which he regarded not, saying always, That God only knew the
accoumpt, and could number the days of man. And although that by the events of
that which they had foretold him of his greatest adventures, yea of his coming
to the Crown, his belief should have bin tempted to hearken to such
predictions, yet it remained always constant in the contempt which he had made.

In Germany they had made his Horoscope, the which ended his life in the 57.
year of his age, by a violent blow: Bumbaste a great Mathematician had
published by the trumpet of the Imperial Knight, that this Prince went happily
and triumphantly to the Monarchy of Europe, if a terrible accident which did
threaten him in the midst of his great and glorious desseignes did not hinder
him.

He that had foretold the Duke of Guise of the issue of the estates of Blois,
and the Duke of Mayenne, the loss of the battle of Yury, had said, he should
dye this year of a violent death. A great Preacher told the Duke of Guise and
his mother, that this joy should be troubled with great sorrow and heaviness.
They had found upon an Altar at Montargis, a prediction of this disastrous day.
An Image they said, had cast forth tears at Bolleyn; many other signs more
curious then considerable. The Marshall of Raiz wife has bin heard say, that
Queen Katherine being desirous to know what should become of her children,
and who should succeed them, the party which undertook to assure her, let her
see a glass, representing a hall, in the which either of them made so many
turns as he should reign years, and that K. Henry the 3. making his, the Duke
of Guise crossed him like a flash of lightning, after which the Prince of Navarre
presented himself, and made 22. turns, and then vanished.

Whilst they made all things ready for the Coronation, they showed him a
Prediction come out of Spain, telling that a great King which had been
prisoner in his youth, should dye in the month of May, but he said, that that
was the policy of the Spaniard to trouble that coronation, and that they
should send the ball back with the like advise. It seemed that he himself was
the Sybile of his own misfortune: he told the duke of Suylly that he had
something lying at his heart, so as he could not be merry, and that he
apprehended some accident. He said often, that he should not continue long,
and that good men should want him. They told him that by reason of the
continual rain in the spring, the streets of Paris were all covered with mire,
and that if they were not cleansed, the Queens entry would be very
incommodious for the Noblemen that were appointed to attend about her Litter,
whereto he answered, It concerns not me, I shall not see it. The tree
planted in the Court of the Lovure fell of it self the first day of May,
without any force or violence, and beyond all appearance the head toward the
lesser stayrs* Bossompiere seeing this, told the Duke of Guise, with whom he
leaned upon the bars of iron of the little walk before the Queens Chamber,
that in Germany and Italy they would hold the fall of this tree to be
ominous, whose shadow did serve all the world. The King supposing they had some
other talk, leaning his head easily unto theirs, heard all this discourse, and
said unto them, My ears have been filled these twenty years with these
Predictions, but there shall nothing happen but what pleases God.

On Saturday the eight of May he came to see the Queen, being set at dinner,
asking her if the Coronation should be on Twesday, but she held her peace, for
that her answer could not satisfy his desire. Then he said unto her, Why? you
speak nothing unto me. I would be glad (said the Queen) it were tomorrow, but
Sancerre tells me it cannot be before Thursday; whereupon he sent for
Sancerre, and grew in choler at these delays, lamenting more the loss of
time and occasions then two hundred thousand crowns which this stay did cost
him, and thereupon he said unto the Queen, My love, if it be not on Thursday,
I assure you that Friday once past you shall see me noe more. The Queen
smyling, you will be glad (said she) to see the entry. No (answered the King)
On Friday I will bid you far-well. Man speaks words after his own sense, and
the destynies makes them to be understood, and to fall out after an other
manner.

Walking at the Tuilleries on the Wednes-day, he said unto Montigny and
Cicongne, I would I weere dead; And when as they told him that he had noe
cause to wish for death, He wishes him self dead.
his life being full of all prosperity and content, he answered, you are more
happy then I am, which words he spoke often and to many. His servants were
afflicted, for that he did afflict himself without subject, for at that time
he had so great prosperity in his affaiers, so much reputation in his
desseines, as nothing did oppose it self against his will, but to augment the
glory of his power. He had so many blessings in his house, as he might like to
that wise King of Egypt, His great blessing and happiness.
show the Queen his wife, and the Princes his children, as his treasors, and
the greatest graces which favorable heaven may give unto a great Prince.

In matters that were most declyning and in a manner desperate, God did always
assist him with great courrage, and with an invincible constancy, which bred
admiration in his servants and amazement in his enemies, who saw him recover
new force like Anteus when as they thought he had been quite vanquished, but
in the dissentions and quarrels of his Court, he could not but show his
disquietnesse and impatience, at the motion whereof he did sometimes wish to
change his condition, he commended sollitarinesse, wherein he found the true
tranquillity of the mind. There is nothing wanting; Manna falls there, the
ravens bring bread from Heaven. If the waters be bitter, there is wood to
sweeten them. If the combat of Amalec and Edom be there, the triumph of Moses
and Joshua is likewise there. But this kind of life is not fit for Princes, who
are not borne for themselves, but for their Estates, and for the people over
whom they are set. In this sea there is no other haven but the grave, and they
must die in action.

When as his cheese servants, who could not yield unto a lie, nor dissemble the
truth, did acquaint him with any disorder in his affaiers, and that using the
power which he had given them, they did lay open with all freedom and
sincerity, the things that were not generally liked of: he promised to take a
time to reform them, gave his reasons, represented inconveniences, and
consequences, there concluding, coldly, without any alteration of choler,
which is ordinary in Princes that are contradicted, he said, When I am dead
they shall then know my worth. Desiring that the Queen should be informed of
affairs; he did often instruct her, and advised her to know them whom he did
most trust, saying, That she might one day have need of them, and seeing her
estrange her thoughts from that business, he added, that by the order and
course of nature he should go first, and that he would leave her France in
that estate, and all things so well settled and assured, as she should not be
troubled like other Queens to maintain them.

A little before the Queens coronation, passing with her from her Chamber to
the Cabinet, he stayed at the door to speak to one, and seeing her stay
until he had done, he said smiling unto her, Pass on, pass on Lady Regent.
He did then allow that which the heavens had resolved to do, and men have
since confirmed, that which God and the King had ordained. He had never called
the Dauphin King. It is the last word that Kings speak; the jealousy of
Sovereign command does not pronounce it, but in extremity, and I remember that
a Nobleman saying unto him, that he wished that my Lord the Dauphin had a dozen
of his years, he answered; I would not that he bad one. And the day of the
coronation, as if God would that in so great an assembly he should make the
last disposition of his estate: he said unto his Guard; Behold your King.

Going on a time out of his Carroch, he told the Prince of Conde and the Baron
of Saint Chaumont, that he had been advertised he should die in a Carroch of
a violent death. The last time he came from Monceaux, he past by Saint Maur
des Fossez to see the Dauphin, going from thence after supper to Paris to his
bed: Being advised by some to take his horse, and that it was dangerous to go
by night in a Carroche, he answered, If any one should fear it is I, for I
have been told I should dye in a Carroche. He had escaped great dangers in
Carroch, which should have made him apprehend the truth of this prediction.
France shall never remember the ouer-throwing of the Carroch into the river of
Seine at Port de Neuilly, and of that which was in it, but she will acknowledge
her self bound to praise God, who preserved the King, and retired the Queen
from out the midst of the shaddows of death, and saved her from this
shipwreck, to save France at need. We have spoken it before, and we will say
again in the continuance of the History, that the deep waters were not able
to quench the lively and eternal flames of love which she bare unto the King;
for the first words she pronounced were, Where is the King? A Mathematician
did advertise him at the siege of la Fere, that he should not pass such a day
without danger of his life; In despite of these dreams, he showed himself
unto the walls, and to the enemies Cannon, and supping that night at Trauessy,
he praised GOD for that the day which had been noted unto him to be
unfortunate, had past happily. He did accompany the Duchess of Beaufort to
Mouy, where she was lodged by Torchelight, the horses stumbled in a bad
passage, and drew the Carroche after them into a precipice or downe-fall, all
that were in it were in great danger, the Carroche was torn in pieces, and the
horses slain or lamed. This accident following presently after the threat,
should have been of force to make him leave the use of Carroches, but he made
a jest at it, and would never believe that this was an effect of the
Mathematicians Prediction.

It is true, there is no worse lodging for a Prince which goes in public then
a Carroche. The King of Chyna goes in one, but besides his ordinary gards,
which are about him, he has always five or six attired like himself, to
the end he should not be distinguished nor known. When as they propounded unto
the Earl of Fuentes a desseigne to trouble France, and to kindle a new civil
war, he said, it was impossible whilst the King lived, and that first of
all be must be made away. When as he that did manage this business, did
represent unto him the difficulty thereof, the Earl answered, that there was
nothing more easy, seeing that he went often in a Carroche.

We must neither believe confidently nor wholly neglect all kinds of dreams.
Those of great Princes are not vain upon great resolutions, after which we
find that they have been divinely inspired. Few great accidents have happned
unto the Queen without some precedent dream. The Queens dreams.
She drempt of the death of Pope Leo the tenth, and that Cardinal Aldobrandino
said unto her, that his successor should be noe less affected to her house.
She saw the death of the great Duke Fernand her uncle in a dream, and the next
day sending for his Agent, she demanded what news he had last received. To
whom he answered; that he had none but good; then she replied, that the first
he should receive should not be so.

Some few days before this fatal accident she had two dreams, the which
were true predictions, when as the Iewelers and Lapidaries prepared her crown
she drempt that the great diamonds and all the goodly stones which she had
given them to enrich it were turned into Pearls, the which the interpreters of
dreams take for tears. The second dream made her to start as one terrified;
where at the King did wonder, and asked her what she ayled, the which at the
first she would not discover, saying only, that dreams were lies, and that
she gave no credit to them: neither do I, said the King, but what was your
dream? being pressed and entreated; I drempt, said she, that one stabd you with
a knife upon the little stairs. God be thanked, answered the King, it is but a
dream: she asked if she should call up Renouilliere, who was the first woman
of her Chamber, but the king told her there was no need and so fell presently a
sleep. He was a Prince of so good a constitution, as he had two things equally
at his disposition, to sleep and wake when it pleased him.

Many things were observed at S. Denis and taken for a bad presage: the King
and Queen said that their sleeps had been interuped by a Scrike oule, a
night bird which betokens funerals, which had made a croking all night at their
Chamber window. The stone which lies upon the vault whereas the Kings are
intered was found open. Curiosity, which observes every slight circumstance,
took it for an il figne that the Queens taper went out of it self, and that
if she had not laid hand to her Crown, it had fallen twice. I know not what
to think when as the same day this Prince, beholding the Theaters so well
peopled and in so good order, said; that it made him remember the day of
judgment, and that they would be much amazed to see the judge come. This
year before this accident two Gentlemen, the one of Bearne, the other of
Condome of diverse relligions, yet both servants to the king, brought two
visions which did advertise him of this latter day, he of Condome, had seen
nothing but in a dream; the other said, that walking a great man had appeared
unto him, carrying the kings picture upon his heart, and had said unto him; Go
unto Fontainbleau whereas the King shall enter even as thou shall arrive, tell
him this and that on the behalf of God. He obayed and theking heard him, who
remembering that many cossenors had covered their deceits with the like
aduertisments to get money, and seeing this gentleman refuse three hundred
crowns which he had appointed for his Journey, saying that he had noe other
desseine therein but to obey God, and to serve the King, he did not contemn
this advice, and was well conceited of it.

Many after the blow will say that they had spoken well, every man will deal
with divining, and say that Cassandra has spoken truly, but she was
unfortunate, noe man believed her, we will not go far, to morrow we will
confess that all these predictions were too true. The King came to see the
Queen, who supt in her secret Cabinet, and was atended on by her women. He
talked unto her, and drank twice the remainders of that which she had left in
her glass, more for pleasure then for any thirst, and then he went presently
to his bed, And as his army was the continual object of his thoughts, being in
his great Cabinet ready to go to his rest, he took Pralin by the arm, and
leaning upon him, he spoke these words; Many think ill of my voyage, but by
the grace of God, from a cause which in their opinions is bad, and in my
judgment most just, we will draw good effects.

The Queen was still in her Cabinet when he went to bed, where she remained
long, entertayning her self with that which was done, and that which was to be
done. Her good servants were bound for many respects to remember that day, but
she would have the remembrance of her Coronation accompanied with that of her
affection, and therefore she sent unto them in particular Medalles, of pieces
of gold and silver, which the largess had made public at Saint Denis, and
commanded Dargouge, her Tresorer, to give them unto all the officers of her
household: these pieces had on the one side her picture wonderfully well cut,
and on the other a great Crown, out of the which sprung three branches, a
Laurel, a Palm and an Olive, with this Inscription after an Antike manner,
appointed by the Chancellor; Seculi Felicitas. She also disposed of many
things that might serve for the finishing of her entry. We may well speak now
for to morrow at this time we shall speak no more of this. We might have
seen Arcades, Theaters, Arbors and Statues set up to this end, with the goodly
troops of horse and foot of the City. But that which remained to be seen,
was such, as they might use the like words unto the beholders, as they did unto
such as were invited unto the secular games; Come and see that which was never
seen, and which no man living shall ever see.

Of all the ceremonies of the house of France, the goodliest and most sumptuous
are at the Coronations and entry of Queens. The Ornaments, the long habits,
the sex, add particular graces and beauty to the Pomp, and hold the eyes,
hearts, and spirits of men suspended, betwixt joy and admiration.

We should have seen the Queen in her litter, Description of the Queens
entry.
made like a triumphant Chariot, covered both within and without with cloth of
tissue of gold and silver, the chair, pillars, and every part of it, with the
canopie over it of the same; the Daulphin on horseback, the Lady Elizabeth and
Queen Marguerite also in a litter, ten Princesses or Duchesses, attired after
a royal manner, with crowns on their heads, upon white horses with
saddle-clothes of cloth of silver, the trains of their mantles being carried
up by Squiers; the Lady of honor, and the Dame d'Atour, with the chief Ladies
of the Court in gowns of cloth of tissue, gold and silver, with double trains
upon white hackneys; twelve of the Queens Maids attyred in cloth of silver,
in three Chariots covered with cloth of gold and silver, the Knights of the
Order, the Noblemen of the Court, the Knight of honor, the Master of her
Horse, four Squires, four Gentlemen servants, he that carried the
cloake-bag, ten Pages, fourteen footmen, five horses of show, a horse which
carried the casket of Jewels, the Queens hackney, her double gelding, and with
all this a great number of men richly appointed, to answer the excellency of
the equipage. The Queen had given liueries to the Captains of the gardes, to
the four companies, to the hundred Suisses, to the great Provost, and to the
Captain of the Port, to their Archers, to the vshers of the Chamber carrying
Maces, to the Herald at Arms, Trumpets, Houbois, Drums and Phifes.

They had erected a Theater at Saint Lazare, where the Queen should have
received the reuerences, homages, and orations which should have been made
unto her, in the behalf of the body, and all the orders of the city, of the
Sovereign companies, and the faculties of the University. And to that end the
Chancellor was appointed to be near unto her Majesty, attired in a roabe of
tawnie velvet in grain, lined with unshorn velvet, his cassock of satin of
the same color, and his hatt of tawnie velvet. His predecessors at such
ceremonies were attired in cloth of tissue, gold and silver, but he would go
more modestly.

All this was ready for Sunday, there was no delay, nothing wanting: the Queen
was wonderfully well pleased that the King had no more cause to be
discontented for the stay of his voyage. Nothing could hinder the perfecting of
this joy, but that which no man thought could happen. But the thoughts of men
are but wind, their resolutions but Chimera's, their contents but illusions,
Princes are oftentimes entertained with fables when they watch, they tell them
tales to make them sleep, and some thing must be said whilst they sleep to
revive their servants, whom a continual care afflicts, least this great joy
should be crossed with great sorrow.

Jupiter commanded Pleasure to retire to Heaven, for that he was so well
followed and served by men, as he did no more care to leave the earth. To
return more purely, he disrobed himself. Grief, who all the time of his
abode on earth had been banished, found those clothes and disguised
himself. Since she has always deceived the world, which under the shows
of joy incounters sorrow: the greatest joys being but mere vexations covered
with little pleasure.

Behold the fourteenth day of May which had been so famous in the tryumphes of
France for the happy victory which King Lewis the twelfth obtained on that day
in the year one thousand five hundredth and nine, at Ghiradadda, is now so
tragical and lamentable in the memory of the French, as the years of many
ages shall never bring it about, but it shall renew in their hearts the
immortal wounds wherewith it has galled them.

The King did rise early to end the day betimes, The Kings actions the day of
his death.
and past into his private Cabinet to apparel himself. I will note many
small circumstances; I will observe all his words curiously; I will report all
his actions diligently; both for that they were his last, and the last duties
which the History owes him; as also to represent them all together as in a
table, whereas men's judgments shall find diverse objects to busy themselves
withal. Being in his Cabinet he sent for Rambure, who was arrived the night
before, and whom he would employ in his army about the Duke of Vendosme; he
spoke to de Barraut touching the quarrel betwixt the Ambassadors of Spain and
Venice. About six of the clock he went to bed again, to give himself more
liberty to do the homage of his heart unto God, and to spend some time in the
exercises of piety, the which noe occasions, noe not in alarmes could make him
neglect. Hearing some one at the door, he said, It is Mounsieur de Villeroy,
for he had sent for him by la Varenne. He discoursed much with him of
affairs, and referring the rest unto the Tuilleries, he commanded him to draw
the curtain, and so continued his prayers, staying for his clothes.

He did long to see the Noblemen which had not been at Saint Denis, to make
them partakers of the contentment which he had received. Such a contentment as
might be that of a triumphant King, of a most happy husband, and of a joyful
father; having seen upon the theater of glory, that which he held most dear
in this world, and in a word his wife crowned, served, and followed by his
children. But this content did no ways withdraw him from his affairs; he
caused that morning the expeditions to be sealed for all that which he had
granted to the Duke of Sauoy, making it known that he was very well pleased,
that his will had been followed and effected at Brussoles, where as the
Marshall d'Esdiquieres had seen that Prince upon the clearing of his
desseignes, and of the means to execute them. The Duke of Bouillon Councellor
of State, having made three iourneys into Piedmont about that business, had
brought the articles of the league, offensive and defensive, signed in that
conference.

The joy he had conceived thereof, sat on his face all that morning, as he
walked in the Tuilleries, whether my lord the Dauphin came to see him. He spoke
to the Cardinal Ioyeuse, and to diverse other Lords, and related the excellency
and beauty of the coronation. He was careful to appease the strife betwixt the
ambassadors of Spain and Venice. This spirit which in war would be every where,
and in peace did execute all the offices of his subjects, would needs know of
the harbingers, what order was taken in S. Denis street, the number of those
who were to be lodged, and what lets were made by particular persons, and where
his own lodging was; it was appointed near to S. James his hospital. He went
to the monastery of the Fueillans, and heard out mass without any
interruption. The ancient order of Gods service in the house of the French
Kings, forbids any man to undertake to speak to the King concerning
business when he is hearing mass. He is only to be enterteined with
discourses of piety. His custom was to cause the gospel for that day to be
expounded to him.

When he came thither after none, his Majesty used some excuses to the
Prelates, saying; Businesses have made our devotions slow: It is true, that when
I labor for the commonwealth, I pray, and by reason thereof I do some times
on working days loose mass. This is to leave God, for God. In the same church
he saw the Chapel which the family of Bassompierre had builded, and reading
this verse of the Psalm, which was set down for an Emblem, Quid retribuam
Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? he said, Bassompierre as a German
should have added, Calicem accipiam. This so sharp and ready reply, drawn
from the thing it self, was admired, and the Duke of Guyse thereupon having
broken a witty jest, the King added, You know me not: when you shall miss me,
then you will know me, and that will be shortly.

Before he would sit down to meat, he did in his Cabinet hear D'escures
concerning the iourny he made by his commandment, to discover the passage of
the river Semoy. By his report he was assured of that which others held
doubtful; he did represent it easy, safe, and commodious, through the
country of Castle-Renaud, which belongs in sovereignty to the Princess of
Conty at the foord of Fillouer a little beneath Linchamp.

He was much pleased with this resolution, for it was told him that the Marquis
Spinola had seized on those places to stop his passage. His content was
augmented, when as he certified him of the state and goodly disposition of his
Army, of the Swisses arrival, of the equipage of the artillery, and of the
good order which the Duke of Neuers did there observe, of the joy which the
foreign troops conceived for his coming, of the general amazement of the
country of Luxembourg, and of other Provinces of the Low countries, which made
this Prince invincible, and which at the very first, would cause weapons to
fall out of the hands, and confidence from the hearts of the most resolute.

The desire to behold it, was redoubled in his soul, when as he considered
how his desseignes, did as it were out-goe his desires; that all things were
conformable to his will, and that Fortune did seem to present him with Towns
and Provinces, taken in nets: He was so opportunely and faithfully served, as
he caused places of great importance to be discovered, before they who
commanded them had any inckling thereof, and he was more confident to take
them, then resolute to assail them.

All the officers of the Crown, all the chief Lords of the kingdom, all the
gallantry of the Provinces were near about him, and albeit they did not
certainly know whether the wind would carry them, they were content to be
embarked in a shipp, whose Pilot was not only skillful in guiding the Helm,
but had been always beloved and favored of Neptune.

He said, that he would have four thousand Gentlemen; that out of the same
number, he would choose two thousand, and would cause them to serve with
pikes, with a thousand musketeiers, chosen out of all the infantery, and that
under the conduct of a good Captain, he would present them at the head of the
enemies army, and would cause them to skirmish.

Then he added in favor of the French Nobility, of whose force, courrage, and
sufficiency he had made good proof. What is their in the whole world that is
able to resist it? what can not two thousand French Gentlemen do in their
Kings presence? They will ouer-turne Mountains. He showed. twelve petronels
for twelve foote-man, saying, that it was to salute five hundred paces off,
those galants who should come to play the Carabines at any time when he went to
make discovery.

He made account in his absence to commit al royal authority to the Queen,
leaving the Constable and the Chancellor with her, he determined to take the
President Ianin along with him, in praise of whose wisdom and integrity he
said, I have ever given him good words, but no deeds. He is old and has
still done me good service.

He was highly pleased with the advertisement which the Marshall Bouillon had
sent him, concerning the state of the frontiers, and for that the Marquis
Spinola made show to meet him halfe-way, and to hinder his passage into the
county of Liege, but that all the people cried out Viue la France.

At his dinner he called Nerastang, and told him what delight he took, in
that his regiment was one of the brauest and best armed, and for that he had
so speedily caused it to march to the Rendezvous, that the number did exceed
their entertainment, assuring him that he would remember his Captains.
Nerestang replied, that the honor to be first employed in the execution of his
commandments did oblige them to think more how to seek occasions to serve
him well, then on the means of recompense: being assured that they would never
be poor under so great and fortunat a Prince. Thus ought you to speak and in
this manner will I be served quoth the king. It is for subjects to forget their
services, and for Princes to remember them. My servants should trust to me, and
to the care I have of them. Those unto whom I have done more good then to your
self do not acknowledge it so much as you do, and of great benifits are made
the greatest ingratitudes.

Hereupon he perceived the Princess and the Lady Christina his daughters
coming toward him, he kissed them, and asked if they had dyned. The Lady of
Monglas, their gouernesse, said that they had dined at Saint Denis before they
came forth, and that they had there seen the relikes and the treasor. The Lady
of Vendosme added that the Duke of Aniou looking steadfastly on a too mbe, one
had told him that it was the Papa, and how that at that speech he did nothing
but weep and cry. That is because he loves me, (said the King) for yesterday
while the ceremony lasted he never gaue-ouer crying Papa. He saw a master of
requests of his household standing by, and from a martial discourse which he
had ended, he fell into an other of religion, witnessing the desire which he
had at his return to labor in the reunion of his subjects, by such certain
and just remedies as they should not be rejected but by those, who loved the
disease better then the cure. They are the most ardent vows and purest sighs
of good minds, whose days in this schism are but careers of troubles and
discontent.

He amply enlarged his discourse thereon, and of the means to work the
couersion of a Governor of a Province and one of his most confident and
faithful servants. This man wondering at such thoughts in those great
deseignes of arms and affairs, did twice protest, and that very zealously
that his mind was ever ready and disposed thereunto. He graciously received
the book of the Auant-Victor which he presented to him: who-so-euer is
desirous to know the Author thereof, to admire his wit, let him read the French
Soldier.

After dinner he talked long with the president Ianin, and with Arnauld, the
superintendent of his treasures, telling them that he was resolved to labor
in the reformation of his state in every part thereof, to relieve the miseries
and oppressions of his people, and no more to endure here-after, that gold
should be of more power in his Kingdom then virtue or desert, nor that the
sale of offices should profane sacred things, coniuring all his good servants
to second his good intents, with resolution and courage.

He came into the Queens chamber attended only by the Marquis of la Force,
and albeit they said that he was in a pleasant humor, I found his countenance
other-wise disposed, neither did his mind agree with his words. He passed on
to the Queens Cabinet, who was busy in giving order for all things necessary
for the pomp and magnificence of her entry, having commanded the Bishop of
Bezeirs, her chief Almner, to go to the Conciergery of the Palace, together
with two or three masters of requests, to consult about the enlargment of the
prisoners. He perceived the Duchess of Guyse to be desirous to go into the
City, and said unto her, Cousin, tarry here still we will laugh and be merry,
she excused her self by reason of an assembly made by certain Advocates of
the court of Parliament, at which she must needs be. He said, he would go visit
the Princess of Conty who kept her chamber, being wearied with the former
days toil: He could not tarry in one place and much less conceal his
irresolutions, in the sundry agitations whereof, he told the Queen that he
knew not what to do; that he was desirous to go to the Arcenall; and because
he grew somewhat choleric, the Queen thereupon said to him, Sir do not
go your self, send some one thither, you are now in a good humor, and you
will go and disquiet your self.

At his coming forth of the Queens Cabinet he shut himself into his own
for to write, and at the fifth line, as his spirits where never so attentive to
any one business, but that he had still force and vigor to think of many
more, he called in Clauary, whom he had sent to the Venetian Ambassador, to
know in what humor he found him upon the composing of his quarrel.

After he had written, and given the letter to one that waited for it, he came
to the window, and laying his hand upon his forehead, he spoke these words. O
God! there is something lying here that does much trouble me. They were noted
by Castelnaud, with whom he confidently talked a long time, having told him
three days before, that three kind of greefes did perplex him.

Cares are inseparable accidents to royalty. These high regions are never
without storms; great states, like unto great ships, are ever laden with
troubles and cares. This Princes mind was tossed too and fro with sundry
thoughts; and besides all that, a prisoner having told him of great matters
contrary to his service, he was sorry that he was enforced to dissemble them
till his return. His judgment, which knew unto what point of greatness he
ought to raise men's minds and courages, would not dispose of the office of
Marshall general of the army, at their pleasures who desired it.

He was discontented for that his army was not employed, and for that they of
Coloigne, like to those of Liege, had not been dealt with concerning victuals.
His foresight, going before all necessities, made him resolve not to march but
in safety, with considerations worthy his experiences and reputation. In regard
whereof he determined to make three lodgings for his army, the first at the
passage of the river of Semy: the other two farther on in a neutrall country,
and not to stir from thence till he had fortified them, with cauallery and
foote-forces, and with all sorts of defenses; and therefore above all things he
would be assured of that, whose want breaks greatest desseignes, and weakneth
the mightiest armies.

Coming forth of his Cabinet, he entered into the Queens chamber, where he
talked with the Chancellor about grave, serious and important business, which
touched the future, more then the present time: as though God would not have
him to leave the world, before he had opened his last intents to the first and
chief officer of his justice, and the last with whom he conferred about
business. This discourse being ended, the Chancellor observing that he made no
have to go into the city, said unto him; Sir, I must go and assemble your
Council. The King embracing him replied; Go your way, I will go and bid my
wife farewell, He spoke to the Lords there present, and said; Ye know very
well how Queen Marguerite said, that my wife has done wonders at her
Coronation. This had respect to some Ladies, who because they would be present
at that solemnity had forced their years and infirmities, and as they were
telling of certain fooleries committed at S. Denis, whereat they al did laugh,
he said; Let us not laugh so much on Friday, least we weep on Sunday. He did
mock at that superstitious opinion, believing that on that day all hearts would
wholly give themselves over to mirth.

He came into the Queens Cabinet: And herein I did observe what power the
presence of this Princess had, to sweeten the discontents, and to scatter the
clouds of this Prince his mind: for as though he had no more felt the sorrow,
whereof he even now complained, he did fashion his countenance, speech and
gesture, to whatsoever might make show of a supreme content of mind. He
played the part of a father with his children, the Dukes of Orleance and Anjou.
But in the midst of all this it was discerned, that his desire was to go
abroad and yet could not. He said to the Queen: I know not what I ayle, I am
not able to go from hence: she coniur'd him to stay still. He commanded
Frontenac to go to the Palace to give order for the royal feast, and told him
that he himself would be there by six of the clock the next morning, to see
how all things were prepared.

Within a while after he sent de Vitry likewise, willing him to have a
special care that he might there receive as great content, as he had done at
S. Denis, and that he should find Frontenac and Forcy there. Vitry replied,
Sir, you shall see other matters there, but seeing your Majesty does command
me to go thither, it may please you to remember, that I cannot be in two
places at once: For when I see you hunting, or walking smally accompanied, my
mind is then at quiet, and I am not afraid of your person, as I now am in this
great City, which is full of incredible numbers of unknown strangers. Get you
hence, quoth the King, you are a Prater, and would feign tarry here to chat
with these women. Do that I bid you; fifty and odd years are past, since I
have kept my self without a Captain of my Guard, I can yet well enough keep
my self alone. To this Vitry replied, You need not Sir to be alone: for all
your guard stand ready, expecting when your Majesty will come abroad.

All the grace, excellency, and charms of eloquency could not persuade him in
peace to care for that which he had neglected in war. His courage having so
often engaged him in danger among his enemies, would not suffer him to distrust
among his subjects. That brave Alexander thought it dishonor not to hazard
himself at the passage of the river Granick, having crossed the arm of the sea
of Helespont. This generous Palm has brought forth fruit at all seasons of
his life, and his History does furnish so many examples thereof, as wonder
steals away belief. As the stars do go contrary to the course of the
world, even so do his actions against base and vulgar opinions, and do throw
dust in their eyes, which think to follow the high pitch of his valor.

From the first day that he went to the war, he forgot the greatness of his
birth, the necessity of his affairs, the fruit of his hopes, to sacrifice his
own particular safety to that of the general. Never did Captain of a troop
of Carabines bear himself more bravely, freely, and with more courage in
dangers. Dangers in cities, dangers in the field, dangers at the passage of
rivers, dangers at incounters, skirmishes, battles, and retreat.

Death was every where presented before his eyes, every where did he brave and
contemn it. Of a thousand examples which may be found in his history, I will
mention two or three to clear this truth, and to make it apparent that never
Prince has incurd more danger to deserve the name of valiant, nor never used
greater discretion to purchase that of Fortunate.

He attempts to take Eaux with seven or eight men: a seditious fellow, sets
his harquebuze at his breast, saying, That he could hitte the white; because
this Prince above all those of his troop did wear a white doublet.

The City being assured; his servants in the heat, caused him to be hanged
forth at a window, the rope brake, he understood that one of his followers had
given him a stab with a Poinard in the breast, he turned him away, and would no
more see him, saying, That he who had escaped the Rope, ought to incur no
farther danger.

At the taking of Cahors, as he passed over the bridge, the shot of an
harquebuze from the city, slew him that was next him. The fight lasted more
then thirty hours, and without his example, in contempt of dangers, the most
resolved courages would have grown cold. His presence did heat them, as they
say liquid Bitumen does inflame the air which is round about it.

He comes forth of Nerac with nine or ten horse, to view the army of the
Marshall Matignon, who in a bravery was coming thither. He was discovered by
those, whom he went to discover, and on a sudden was saluted with a furious
charge. He retires without disorder, and without enforcing his horse more then
his ordinary pace. They reckoned five hundred poles or stakes which supporred
the Vines to be broken and cracked a sunder with shot, by whose covert he
returned to the city.

If any man say that at the same time he was but King of a part of Navarre,
and chief of a party, for whose fortune he was enforced to hazard his own,
his hurt at Aumale does testify, that being King of France he did not spare
his flesh. The last of his military actions is sufficient to judge of all the
former.

His army being in the Tarentaise made show to assail a bridge, to discover
the enemies order, and to engage them in the fight. He commanded the Count of
Soyssons to go thither, and perceiving the soldiers to grow warm, that the
heat of the fight did draw them farther on then he would have had them, that
they were angry because they might not be suffered to end the matter, he him
self would go thither, contrary to the advice of his chief servants, who
said, that by thrusting himself so freely into danger, he was not only
careless of his own life, but of al those likewise whose safety depended upon
him; that the chief duty of a General of an army was to preserve him who was
to preserve all the rest. The Prince trespaseth against the public safety,
which contemns his own particular. The noblest and valiantest Grecians were
those who were best armed, supposing that they who came to the wars badly
armed, had no desire to fight. Their laws punished him who did forsake his
target, and not his sword. The reason was that a man ought cheefely to provide
for his own defense before he attempt to offend his enemy, especially those
who have the government and command, of a state or army.

But he would show, that age does not weaken courage, that the dignity of a
Crown does not dispense a Prince from dangers, that the Laurel does not defend
him from the lightnings of war, and that he desired to have no part in the
glory of incounters, unless he had a share in the danger. He mounted a horse
which the Marshall Desdiguieres gave him, he went bee-yond the foremost to hold
them back and to bring them off from the danger whither the excess of valor
did carry them,

When the enemies saw him with his truncheon in his hand, a white beard on a
face fired by the heat of his courage, and the contempt of dangers, they
protested that nothing could be done with more glory, gravity, judgment, nor
boldness. In this action he performed three charges; that of a King, showing
the authority and fortunatenesse of his presence: that of a Captain, ordring
all matters speedily, iudiciously, without disorder and without danger: and
that of a soldiour by being in those places where the shot of muskets and
hargubuzes, were liberally bestowed.

Let them that please, term these exploits by the name of happy rashness;
blame he that list that general who being aduertized of the threatenings of
his death, answered, that Sparta did not depend upon one man alone: let who
will magnify the opinion of those which say, that a good and discreet Captain
ought to die of olde-age, or at least wise old: Praise life they that please,
as the most precious gift of Heaven, which all the gold that the Sun has
made, and shall make, can never be able to buy: this Prince thought that there
was nothing so great nor so generous, as the contempt of life, and that the
Caesar's and Alexanders would have never bin crowned with so many Lawrells if
they had basely retired from dangers.

As he did not respect present perils, so he did mock those which were far
of, Elizabeth Queen of England aduertized him that a strange Gentleman who was
one of his followers had no good meaning toward his person, reason would that
he should have been apprehended, or at least dismissed. He never showed him
bad countenance for it, he continued for a time well entertained in his court,
mounted out of his own stable, honored with his commandments, til his own
conscience enforced him to get him thence, and no longer to abuse that royal
bounty.

This noble disposition could not believe that to be in an other man, which
was not in it self, and he did never disquiet his own rest with suspicions
and distrusts. Some four years since, slander did invent against a worthy
Gentleman of Brettaigne, an odious and cruel accusation of treason and
disloyalty, and did color it with such strong circumstances, as were
sufficient to alter the pulse and complexion of innocence it self. He was
advertised thereof, and for to show that he could not distrust those whose
services had deserved his trust, he called for the Gentleman, he discovered
this accusation unto him, and having assured him that no impression thereof
remained in him, he willed him to confere thereof with one of his principal
ministers, who being amazed at this freeness and bounty in affairs of so
great importance, wherein a man could not err twice, where rigor was
commendable, distrust reasonable, secrecy necessary, and simple suspicions
taken for accusations; after he had told him that which was past, with all
circumstances and presumptions, he confessed that the kings generous
disposition had no Parallel but that of great Alexander, who did receive with
one hand the drink which his Physician Philip brought him, and with the other
showed him the letter by which he was advertised that Darius had promised him
great rewards to poison him. He was advertised at the same time that there were
deseignes against his person, and he supposed that in such assemblies the
execution thereof might be more boldly done: but if during the fury of the wars
he had despised such admonishments, how could he apprehend them in time of
peace? It was told him in the month of October. that one was come forth of a
certain country with such a curssed and damnable intent, but when he was
informed of the fashion of the man, and how that he had a mark on the face, a
beard of such a color, and his clothing after the Walloone cut, he said, that
the aduertisment was not good, and that such a man was very easy to be known.

His trusty servants nevertheless did not give over their discovery of him: he
was advertised besides of another who came conducted by the same spirit, but by
another way, and was to come to Paris in in November, but he was not discovered.

He did wholly resign himself to the will of God, believing that what-so-uer
he had appointed was in euitable that a man ought cheerfully to follow his
destiny without fearing. He said unto those who did beseech him to have more
care of his own preservation. He that shall fear death shall enterprise
nothing against me. He that shall despise his own life shall make attempts on
mine, and I shall not be able to hinder them: It is your parts to look to it.
A life that is continually in this fear is worse then death. When I go to bed
I recommend my self to GOD, and when I rise I beseech him to preserve me: the
rest is in his power. He will defend me from fools, and as for wisemen I fear
them not. Besides I live in such fashion as I may not enter into these
distrusts; It is for Tyrants to be ever in fear and dread; valiant shepherds
sleep in safety; cowards are ever fearful. That religious Numa would not
distrust those who trusted to him. Magnanimous as Caesar, greater in Clemency
then Caesar, is destroyed like to Caesar, for that he did more regard his
great and innocent bounty then an other man's extreme fury and wickedness.

The manner of his life, the condition of the times, the state of his affairs,
the religious observation of treaties of Peace, and Edicts, would not suffer
him to torment his mind with the apprehension of these attempts. The ulcers of
the mind were healed, the wildest hearts were tamed, pretenses amazed,
discontents repaired, and enemies so changed, as they detested such
conspiracies against a Prince, whose life was so fruitful and necessary for
all Christendom.

A desperate fellow borne at Negre-pelisse went into Spain to prostitute him
self to this damnable desseigne, he discovered himself to one of the King of
Spaines Esquires, named by the place of his birth Valdemoro. De Barraut,
Ambassador there for the King, had some inckling thereof, and complained to the
Popes Nuncio, to the end he should consider the impiety of those who give ear
to such monsters: The Duke of Lerma assured him that diverse of that humor had
offered themselves, and were still repulsed, protesting that those impious and
execrable thoughts, unworthy of the mind of a King, were not in that of his
master, and that he was amazed to see a nation, which was so much praised for
their fidelity and affection to their Kings, so much to degenerate, and to
produce such unnatural monsters. He commanded Valdemoro to relate the whole
course of that bargain to the Ambassador. Valdemoro came to him and told him;
how that this wretch came unto him, boasting that he knew the means how to
kill the King. It is not needful to lay open that means, unless we should
do like those, who reproouing superstition and enchantments, do learn the
rules and charms thereof. He confessed that he had listened to that
proposition, but his conscience representing unto him the heinousness of such
an attempt, he had imparted the matter to a Jesuit, who did very much divert
him from such a cursed practice, and had exhorted him to advertise the
Ambassador thereof, to the end they might have a care of the safety of the
Kings person.

De Barraut advertised his Majesty hereof. He often spoke of it, he praised
the wisdom of his Ambassador, the integrity of the Duke of Lerma, and the duty
which the Jesuit had done to truth and to his own conscience. The praise had
been more perfect, and the merit more plain and evident for the Spaniards, if
they had punished this traitor. He ought not to have come forth of Spain
vnchastised. All Kings are brothers, and all kingdoms interessed in these
attempts. This act of Justice was reserved for De Verdun first President of
Languedoc, to annex it to the other great examples which he has showed in that
Province.

This wretch coming to Toulouse, was upon the Ambassadors aduertisment
apprehended. From prison he was sent to execution, and his fellow to the
galleys.

Now to continue the discourse of this generous contempt of death, it is
certain, that this great confidence which this Prince chiefly had in the
protection of God, then in his own conscience, which did not enforce him to
fear his enemies, nor to distrust his own subjects, did much hasten the
storm which will now presently fall upon him. If he had erected in France as
many Trophies and Monuments of the severity of his justice, as wonders of his
clemency, attempts would not have been so freely framed in weak spirits. The
Lybian Lions do not come near those cities on whose walls their spoils are
hung, Woolues fly from the sound of those drums that are made of their
skins.

It is not long since, that it pleased him to make a large discourse unto me
of the dangers, which by the singular providence of God he had escaped,
saying, That his pleasure was to have them remembered in his History, even as
his heart did retain the acknowledgment of them, and upon his relation of his
discontent, for that his Court of Parliament at Tours had condemned a man to
dye, who for to escape from his enemies had promised to kill him, his heart
never consenting to his mouth; I told him, that those who were to administer
Justice, could not use too much severity for the preservation of his person,
that so many heads depended on his head, so many lives on his life, that not
only consents, but thoughts, not only thoughts, but dreams to attempt
against a Princes life, were punishable, and had ever been punished.

He continued his discourse, how that if he had sent that mad fellow to his
court of Parliament, who incountred him on the new bridge, and who saying, That
he was descended from the first King of France, demanded to have the Crown
restored unto him, he did not doubt but that they would have put him to death
for which he should have been very sorry, because they should have punished a
poor Idiot, who to the first question that the President Ianin asked him
concerning his birth and quallities, replied, that he could extract himself
from Pharamond. He was known (quoth the King) to be so far beside himself,
and so troubled with melancholy, as I being one day at the Bastill, and he
espying me a far off, cried out aloud, deliver me my kingdom. I told him
madness did not excuse attempts of that nature, how Caboche, for drawing his
sword upon King Henry the second like a mad man without effect and violence was
condemned to dye. That another madman had undergone the like punishment who
assailed Ferdinand King of Arragon the year. 1492. and gave him a wound with a
sword from the ear down to the neck, who being imprisoned and tormented with
all kind of tortures, confessed nothing but that the devil had willed him so
to do, promising to give him Ferdinands Crown. This folly did not excuse him.
They did cut off his feet and his hands, they plucked out his eyes forth of
his head, he was torn in pieces with burning tongues, his body was consumed
with a lingering fire, and he gave up the ghost drop by drop. And albeit the
saying is that mad men are sufficiently tormented by their own madness, and
that it is not lawful to augment the affliction of the afflicted, yet
neuer-the-lesse, there is nothing which does sooner make those who are out of
their wits to become temperate then the punishment which is inflicted upon
them.

The King did interrupt my speech with this word, truly royal, and truly his
own, Mercy pardons those who have not deserved it, and the iuster that wrath
is, the more commendable is mercy.

This good Prince did still endeavor to sweeten the sharpness and rigor of
the commandments of his laws: and as Numa would have sooner appeased Jupiter
with heads of Garlic then of men, so he had rather like Alexander, execute
the rigor of his vow on the Ass, then on his keeper.

This free and generous mind disdayning all these fears and cautions, and
contemning all coniurements to have respect to his own safety, would not for
fear of the future, abate any thing of the time present, and being satisfied
with the mishap which every day produces without adding by prevention that of
to morrow, said to the Queen, That he was resolved to go into the City, and
going forward to the stairs before the Queens chamber, he asked, if his
Caroche were beneath. The villain which had undertaken this execrable deed
heard these words, and grumbled betwixt his teeth, Thou art mine, thou art
undone.

Before he departed, he bad the Queen farewell three several times and kissed
her, as if his heart had testified his grief to be separated and divided from
hers, the Marshal of la Chastres wife perceiving these imbracements told him,
that he began every day to love the Queen better and better, that his good
servants did receive great content thereby, and did daily hope for more, but
she hoped he did not flatter her. At his going forth he met with the Dutch
esse of Mercure who was the last Princess that ever he spoke to.

In coming down the lesser stayres he commanded the Marshal Bois Dauphin to
make himself ready to go along and being come down into the Court he
spoke to the Duke of Anjou and showed him Bassompier, asking him, if he knew
him. He took his Caroch about three quarters of an hour past three, he
satte in the chief place thereof, and having asked the Duke Espernon if he had
any business in the town, he placed him on his right hand. In the boot of
the same side, was the Marshall Lauardin, and de Roquelaure. The Duke of
Mombason and the Marquis de la Force sat in the forepart of the Caroche with
Liancour his chief Quiery, and the Marquis of Mirebeau.

The Coachman entreated the Quirie whose turn was then to wait, to ask the
King whether he went, and he answered, Carry me from this house. Being
under the Arche of the first gate, he caused his Caroche to be opened on
every side; when he came as far as the Hostell of Longueuill, he sent back
all those which followed. They asked him once again whether the Caroche should
go, he said, to the Tirouer Cross and when he was there he said. Let us go
to S. Innocents Churchyard. He went to the Arcenall to acquaint the Duke of
Suylli with the great content he received by D'Escures journey, and how that
those doubts which he had made to him were cleared.

And now does mine ignorance and humility cause me to shut mine eyes against
those radiant beams of that sovereign power which disposes of second causes
as he pleases. My thoughts do loose themselves in the gulphes of this
inevitable power called Destiny, which this Prince accounted for an ordinance
of God, drawn to a necessity, and whereof he made admirable observations.
About three years since, a gentleman, one of his hunts-men, having waited out
his quarter, craved leave of him to go home, inte^ding to depart the same day.
His Majesty having given him leave, he understanding that the King would hunt,
stayed his journey, and said, that he had a great desire to see the Stag. He
came, and saw it sonie, as being stricke^ into the belly with on of the
brau^cklers, he fell down dead in the place. You may see (quoth the King,
returning from hunting) what destinies is, he craved leave of me to depart,
and I granted it, and having no business to stay him he would needs seek his
own death by hunting. His hour was come, he was not able to bold it back a
minute, there-vpon he made a large discourse of such like observations.

But when I consider how he did labor to have all things meet together with
this accursed moment, how that he goes abroad with some vn-willingnesse of
mind, which is ever the secret Oracle of good or evil adventures; how that
the Queen, to divert him from going into the City, did the same as Calphurnia
did to keep Caesar from going to the Senate house; how that he made have to
get him forth of the Lovuere; how that he would not suffer his Guard to
follow him; how he sent away the Captain thereof to the Palace; how the
Lieutenant is very sick, the Enseigne gone to visit the first President de
Harlay; how that he causes his Caroche to be opened on every side, puts
of his cloak the better to lay open his side, how the footmen take an other way
and leave the Caroch; how the street is stopped up with a Cart, I am enforced
to say, that destiny coupleth together all things, to the same end, to make
them fall out even as it pleases, that all things seem to favor this
damnable enterprise, that misfortune blinds those whom she will ouer-throw,
and uses Pittacus his stratagem, who fighting a combat with Phrinon, did so
cunningly entangle him in the snares which he had hidden in his buckler, as
being fast he easily slew him.

The force of man was weak and fearful to attempt on the person of this
Prince: Hell spewed forth the author from her bottomless pit. This wretch
had lead a bad life, and among those who knew him, was accounted a castaway,
and a desperate fellow. He had a long time followed a suit in law about a
succession, and having lost it, misery enforced his father and mother to beg,
necessary poverty made his resolution voluntary: He threw himself into the
monastery of the Fueillants, and was thrown out again by reason of the
weakness of his brain. Those who lodged him told me since that he was wholly
subverted, and that the word Huguenot would turn his folly into madness. His
mind was still amazed, wavering and superstitious, susceptible of all
impressions, and ever resenting the deprauation of his humors. He that walks
mad a mile never comes home wise. The more his folly was aparent the more he
thought it was hidden, and the duller he was the more he presumed of wisdom,
and not accounting himself to be sick, he did not care for health, Afterward
he returned home into his own contry where he continued a whole year in
prison for a murder. He became a knave in the Palace, a fool in the
cloister, and desperate in prison, in which place he had vizions and fancies,
whereon, and upon the false reports which he went up and down gathering
against the Kings iustest and sincerest actions, or upon those false
impressions which were given him, and which he greedily received, he framed
this execrable and damnable resolution to kill him. His courage would not
suffer him to execute it so suddenly as he had resolved it: he did three whole
years nourish the vipers of his thoughts in his bosom; he was afraid of it,
and confessed, that at the very first motion his hair stood upright, that sweat
dropped down from his forehead, and a shaking over all his members. In this
fury he made some iourneies from Angoulesme to Paris, the last was in the
Easter-hollidayes, intending to execute his purpose, but he would first have
the Qu. to be crowned, because (as he said) he would not have her to be
deprived of so just and well-deserued an honor. If he had stayed but one day
longer, want would have enforced him to have gone home again; for he had but
three quartescus left of all his money.

Resolving then not to let this cursed day slip without executing his cruel
design; he did drink more freely then he was wont, and continued a long time
at the Louure, sitting on the stones at the gate, where the Laqueis attend for
their Masters. He thought to have given the blow betwixt the two gates: the
place where he stood gave him some advantage, but he found the Duke Espernon
to sit in that place where he thought the King would have been, and cutting
a shorter way, he tarried for him at one of the little shops which are toward
the Innocents Churchyard, in the street called La Ferronnerie. In that street
are many small houses and shopps which join to the wall of the Innocents
Church-yarde. King Henry the second being at Compeigne the year 1554. the 14.
of May, a fatal mark of the first year, and last day of this great Princes
life, considering that this street was a cross way in the City of Paris, and
the Kings ordinary passage from the castle of Louuer to their house of
Tournelles, and that the shoppes made it more narrow and uneasy, he commanded
that they should be taken down. The Edict was allowed in Parliament, and the
execution neglected to our woe. This wretch sweating and in a heat, glides
along by these shoppes.

At the entry into the street, the King saw Montigni in his Caroche, and
according to his usual affability, culled unto him, Servant Montigni, Servant
Montigni. The Caroche entering into this street met with two carts on the right
hand, the one laden with wine, the other with hay: and that was the cause,
that it took toward the left hand, staying still and stopping every moment.
The footmen were gone over Saint Innocents Churchyard; the Gentlemen could
not come near the Caroche, diverse men passed along betwixt the Caroche and the
shoppes; this Tiger came the same way, his cloak hanging on the left shoulder,
the knife in his hand, and his hat upon it to hide it. The Kings sitting
embouldened him. If his face had not been from him, I think that the
reverence and majesty which Gods finger has imprinted on the face of Kings
would have kept him back. His right arm was about Duke Espernons neck, unto
whom he had given a paper to read, his left arm leaned on the Duke Mombasons
shoulder, who turned away his head because he would not seem too curiously to
hearken to that which the King spoke softly: For he gave himself forward to
speak to the Duke of Espernon, and the Marshall Lauardin these words. At my
return from the Arcenall, I will show you D'Escures his deseigne for the
passage of mine Army, you will be pleased therewith, and it has much
contented me.

At these words, this fury perceiving that the King lay open with all his side,
and that one of the foote-men, who alone might have hindered him, tarried behind
to tie his garter, gave him two stabs with a knife over the wheel, and thought
to have given him more, but the Duke of Mombason received the third on his
doublet sleeue. The first stabbe was betwixt the second and third ribbe, a
fingers breadth gliding under the muskle pectorall, not hurting the Thorax. The
second a little lower in the midst of the side betwixt the fifth and sixth
ribbe the breadth of two fingers and past beyond one of the lippets of the
lunges, even to the very artery, the which he did cut a sunder beneath the
left auricle of the heart. The King feeling the first hurt, did lift up his
arm, and gave more ouerture to the second. It was perceived afterward that
the outward part of his doublet sleeue toward the hand, was stricken through in
two places, and his shirt in three by reason it was foulded and this confirms
the murderers speech, who said to diverse, that he had given three stabbes,
but one alone did the deed.

At the first the King said, I am hurt, but the second followed so suddenly as
he could hardly make an end of this word, It is nothing. For the blood ran
forth of his mouth like streams. Duke Espernon presently arises to lift him
up, and besought him to think upon God. He clasped his hands together and
lifted up his eyes toward Heaven. His soul bathed in the blood of the
innocent lamb who was slain from the beginning of the world does gently leave
this body, reeking with blood of wounds innocently received.

The Caroche stood still: the way was stopped, the street full of people, all
things in amazement, and the Coachman so affrighted, as he could neither go
forward nor backward. Saint Michell, one of his ordinary Gentlemen, drew his
sword upon this wretch, to have slain him, the Duke Espernon cried out, that
he should not touch him, that it was as much as his life was worth, and that
the King had no harm. He drew the knife forth of his hand. The Count of
Curson struck him on the throat with the pommell of his sword. La Pierre, one
of the exempt Captains of the guards, seized on him, and delivered him into the
hands of the footmen, who committed him to Montigni. De Liancour came forthwith
out of the Caroche, and went to the towne-house to take order for that which
belonged to his charge. Others went to look to the safety of my Lord the
Dauphin. The Baron of Courtomer by a letter written by his own hand, has
assured me, that at the same instant, and in the same street, the Marquis of
la Force requested him to go to the Arcenall to aduertize the Duke of Suilly
of that accident, that going thitherwards he met with eight or ten men on
foot, and two on horseback, who saying to themselves with blasphemies; He
must dye, went forward toward this Tiger to assail him: that he went before
them with his drawn sword, and crossing their weapons, told them that the King
was well, and had commanded that no man should hurt him. The first President
being advertised hereof, sent his son the Count of Beaumont unto him, to
demand whether he could tell what manner of men they were, he answered that
they were lost in the throng, and that in such a matter he ought not to
propound any incertainty.

This lamentable and perfidious stab was given so suddenly as no man perceived
it, the confusion was so great, that if this monster had thrown away his knife
from him, he would not have been known in that amazement, for it was common:
nor by the palenesse of his countenance, for he confessed, that he entered the
Kings body as easily as into a bottle of hay. At that instant the devil took
from him all sorts of apprehensions, of respect, and judgment.

After that the Caroche was turned back, the King was carried to the Louure. At
the entering into the Court, they called for wine and Chyrurgians, but there was
no need either of the one or other. The report of the hurt was already brought
thither, but his death was not known till the coming of the Caroch, out of
which they drew the dead King. He was carried and laid upon the bed of the
little Cabinet by the Duke of Mombason, de Vitry, the Marquis of Nermonstier,
Sully one of the Squires, and certain others whose names I could not learn.

Petit his chief Physician told me, that he gave not up the ghost till he was
laid upon the bed, and that he having said unto him, Sir, remember God, say in
your heart, Jesus thou son of David have pity upon me, he opened his eyes
thrice: Another Gentleman told me the same thing. But it is to be doubted
whether the nature of the hurt did afford him so much life, without being
strangled with the blood. De Vic, Councellor of State, going up with the
Chancellor and the other Lords of the council, was there present, and tarried
there all the night, showing by that last duty, with what affection he had
carried all the former. The Archbishop of Ambrun came thither, said the prayers
and suffrages of the Church for his souls health.

It is reported that a Duke of Bourgondy had like to have died for fear at the
sight of the nine Worthies which a Magician showed him. Grief had like to have
choked in the place, those who in the turning of an hand did see this King of
worthies lie dead.

Albeit that I saw his shirt bloody, his stomach swelled with the abundance of
blood, his forehead beginning to wax yellow, his eyes shut, his mouth open,
the cross of his order lying upon it, it seemed unto me that it was an
illusion, mine imagination contradicting mine eyes, being not able to figure
unto me that I saw him dead, who an hour before spoke of nothing but to fight,
vanquish, and triumph.

I said as other men did, is this that victorious Prince unto whom the whole
world has given the title of Great and Invincible: who by remoouing himself
gave motion to the whole world, whose deseignes elevated and discontents abated
men's courages, whose menaces affrighted his enemies, and laws assured his
subjects? This Prince who sustained Christendom in her weaknesses, did comfort
it in her afflictions, assured it in her fears, who by the force of his wit,
by the light of his judgment, by the happiness of his memory, by the proof of
his experience, and by these three eyes of prudence, knowledge, foresight, and
remembrance, knew how to do, and did so well perform the hardest profession
of all others, which is that of commanding men.

This Prince, so constant in affairs, so watchful for occasions, so
foreseeing in doubtful matters, so moderate in prosperous, so discreet in
difficult, who was never daunted in fight, was not troubled in dangers, and did
not give place to fortune, who knew what ought to be feared and contemned,
what was to be desired and sought after. This Prince who did reason to al me^,
who would know it in all things, so ready to divert evil and advance good,
environed with all kinds of contentments, with glory and felicity aspiring to
great matters, for the increase of Gods glory, the reputation of France,
determining to reform that which was yet in disorder, to mend those great
pieces of works which are equal to the proudest buildings, which have carried
the name of wonders, and evident works; and resolving to cause learning and
knowledge to reflorish in the university of Paris, and Piety every where, the
Great Henry unto whom the destinies, merits, and virtues, did promise the
Monarchy of the whole world, dies upon the point of executing his promises.
All the Princes, the Cardinals, the Prelates and the Lords of the Court came to
see him upon the bed of his Cabinet; one kissed his forehead, another his
hand, diverse fell down at his feet, all melted into tears. The Constable
came thither likewise, and did much augment the sorrow of that spectacle, for
complaining unto God that he had suffered him to live so long and had taken
away a Prince so necessary for Christendom, his speech and legs failed him.
Their hearts were cleft a sunder with complaints, their eyes melted into tears,
perceiving those eyes to be for ever extinct, which were the delights of all
the Court, whose beams were so ardently and carefully desired and pursued as
diverse thought they had lost that day wherein they had not deserved some
glance thereof.

Portrature in times past could not represent the sorrow of a father for the
sacrifize of his daughter, eloquence could not express the Queens grief for
the death of the King her Houseband. If that be not the subject of most just
tears nature has none, sorrow finds none, reason ordayneth none.

But after that eyes had paid such just tribute to grief, and that this
Princess had spent nine nights without sleeping, to give satisfaction to her
tears, and to keep this mischief from spreding forth any further, she
showed that God had reserved her to clame the violence of our miseries.

By this will we begin the History of her Regency, and of the King her
Sons reign, where we shall see how their Majesty's entertaind these
disastrous news, and with what greatness of courage, affection and fidelity,
they were served by the Princes and officers of the Crown, Lords of the
Council, Governors of Provinces, and by the City of Paris, and by all the
rest, where matters have passed on in such sort, as France has had matter to
be amazed in her amazement.

These discourses are like pieces forth of frame, if they be represented out
of time. All this merits a new volume: The History of Henry the fourth passes
no farther then his last gasp, and where that ends, there begins that of
Lewis the thirteenth, the most happy son of a father, who was the ornament of
ages past, and the admiration of succeeding times.

But it is against reason to put off till an other time the duties which were
rendered to the greatness of his memory, to the honor of his burial, to the
revenge of his death.

His History began at his Cradle, it must end at his hearse. Upon Friday at
midnight the Kings body being disrobed of a black satin suit raced, without
lace, was reuested with a white satin doublet, and laid upon the bed of his
chamber, where he was seen, considered, wept for, and lamented by all the
City of Paris. The heat of the season, and the blood which was gathered
together in his belly would not permit any longer to defer his opening. It was
done on Satterday about four of clock, in the presence of fourteen of the
kings Physicians, of whom the chief were, Petit, Milon, de Dorme, Herouan,
four Physicians of Paris, eleven of the Kings Chirurgians Martel, Pigray,
Guillemeau, Regnaude, etc. They found, him so healthful, and all his parts so
sound, as had not this stab been he might have atayned to a long and happy
old age. They were likewise of opinion, that if he had been trrasparent to the
view of this parricide, he could not have hurt him in a more deadly place. His
bowels were sent to Saint Denis, by one of the guard, with six soldiers, and
buried without any ceremony.

The Kings heart was shut up in an heart of silver. La Varenne, governor of
Angiers, and Postmaster of France, came to the Queen to put her in mind,
that the Kings intention was, to have it lie at la Flesche, where it was first
formed; and to commit the keeping thereof to the College of Iesuists. At this
word, of the kings heart, the Queen received a new wound in her own, it being
impossible that a wife should without grief endure to have her husbands heart
demanded of her: She answered that seeing God had done his will, her desire was
to have the Kings performed, she commanded that the same heart should be
consigned into the hands of the father Jesuits, to carry it to la Flesche, and
gave charge of the conduct thereof to the Duke of Mombason. The Prince of Conty
delivered it Father Iaquinot, Rector of the professed house of Saint Lewis:
Father Cotton gave thanks in the name of the whole company. De Vitry caused
four and twenty Archers to march near to the Caroche, and twelve torches,
even to their Church wherein this precious pawn remained certain days. From
thence it was carried well accompanied, and received with great pomp and
magnificence into the town of la Flesche, by La Varenne, his son the Baron
of Saint Susanne, all the orders of the City, and after sundry honors,
discourses and funeral Poems, it was set down in the church of the Jesuits
college

The Kings body being enbalmed was laid in a coffin of lead, covered with a
biere of wood, upon which was spread a great cloth of gold, and the Hearse over
that; two Altars upon each side, where eighteen days together masses were
said in the morning, and the suffrages at all hours, day and night, without
intermission.

Prayers were made for him in all the Churches of France. Those whose doctrine
suppose it to be unprofitable for the dead, were not insensible of the public
grief of this accident, for, judging it to be an effect of Gods anger upon
France, did ordain through all the Provinces where they have Churches, a
General fast, whose laws dispense with no man, and it is performed with such
discipline, as the bodies endure hunger all the day, and the souls are fed,
either in speaking to God, or hearing his word.

From the Chamber it was carried to the Presence, where was yielded to his
effigy, at dinner and supper times, the services due to the original when it
was living. Hereupon the Queen was councelled to enterre King Henry the third,
King of France and Poland, and to yield unto him those duties which the living
owe to the dead, and which for sundry great respects had not been performed in
their due time. The Duke of Espernon, Bellegard master of the horse, were
commanded to go to Compeigne, to cause the coffin to be brought to S. Denis.
The discourse of his funeral shall be seen in the end of his history. We
must not make a story here, but only to consider, how that France in eight
days space, has seen two Kings interred, unjustly and perfidiously slain by
two stabbes of a knife.

Eight days after, the funeral pomp was solemnized. The enterments of the
French Kings, since Charles the eight, have ever held one self same order, he
that sees the picture of the one, beholds that of all the rest, there is
nothing to be added thereunto, but the noting of times and places, and men's
names. If in it there has been any alteration at all, it is only in more or
less sumptuousness. But as this great Prince did in so many sorts surpass
his predecessors, the Queen likewise would have his obsequies in expense and
magnificence, to out-goe all that had been before.

The effigy having remained ten or twelve days in the presence, for the
manner is not to let it stay there any longer, was taken thence, the body laid
upon Tressels, and the Chamber hung with black. The King clothed with a royal
mantle of purple, came thither with my Lords his brethren, the Princes of his
blood, and the Lords of the Court, and besprinckled it with holy water. The
Sovereign companies performed the same ceremony on other days.

The Chancellor with the advice of the Council decreed that in the proclamation
he should be surnamed, Henry the great, Incomparable in Magnanimity and
Clemency. Titles which he had deserved, as well for the quallity of his person,
as for the favors of his fortunes, and the merits of his virtues.

That great extent of persons and honors, which reached from the gate of Paris
to that of Saint Denis, may as well be comprehended by imagination as
discourse, if we will figure to our selves great numbers of burning torches,
five hundred poor persons, diverse lame soldiers clad in black, and if we add
thereunto all the Clergy of Paris, for all Congregations regular and secular
went along the Chartreux and the Celestins exepted. The Jesuits presented
themselves to go with it. All the Sovereign companies, the ordinary Justice of
Paris, all the faculties of the university. The household, the Milicia, and the
Kings Stable. All this was the conuoy.

That which follows, was ordained for the pomp. The Chariot of arms drawn
with six horse, wherein lay the Kings body. His effigy environed with the
Court of Parliament in scarlet gowns, the Canopy carried over it by the Provost
of Merchants and Sheriffs of the city of Paris. The hand of Justice, the
Scepter, and Crown. The Kings Armor was carried, the Sword sheathed, the Helm
crested with the Mantelet, the coat Armor, Shield, Gantlet, Spurs, the
Pennons, Banners and Ensigns of all the companies cresped with black. The
horse of honor, twelve horses mounted by twelve Pages. The Bishops,
Archbishops, Ambassadors and Cardinals.

After followed the mourning, wherein were my Lord the Prince of Conty, my Lord
the Count of Soyssons, the Lords of Guise, Ioinuille, Elbaeuf, the Dukes of
Espernon, and Mombason, the Knights of the order, and diverse Lords. At other
times the Kings Children did mourn. The body of Clotaire was conducted by his
four Children from Compeigne to Soisons, Lewis the gross, yielded that duty
to Phillip the first, his brother. Lewis the 8. to Phillip Augustus, Phillip
the 3. to Lewis 9. Charles the 5. to John. Charles Duke of Orleance, and Henry
Duke of Aniou, mourned at the obsequies of Henry the second their father.

The Ceremonies which upon such occasions ought to be certain, are altered
according to the times. That which seems to be fit in one season, is not so
at another. Because says Du Tillet, that they have not any certainty. At other
times the effigy was laid upon the coffin, to move the people to honor the
body which was within it, and for to show that the King dies not; and that the
administration of Justice, the first and principal office of a King cease
not, the court of Parliament has ever environed it. At the Funeral of King
Francis the first it was divided from the coffin, and from that separation
proceeds the disputation concerning the place which the Bishop of Paris is to
hold in that Ceremony,

On Tuesday the 29. of June, the Coffin was conducted to our Ladies Church, and
placed under the burning Chapel. The Princes of the blood, and the Lords that
mourned sat down on the right side of the Quier, the court of Parliament
placed it self on the left. On wednesday after the service, the funeral
oration being pronounced by the Bishop of Air, and dinner ended, it was
conducted in the same order to Saint Denis. Beyond the suburb the ranks were
broken, those that were on foot mounted their horses and Caroches, this grave
and goodly order vanished. Montespan, Vitry, and Pralin, Captains of the
Guards, did not leave the chariot of arms, having declared that their charge
obliged them to serve the body and not the effigy.

The Monks of Saint Denis came to receive it at the hanging cross, they made
some doubt that the King was buried, and that the body was not in the coffin,
the great and excessive heat not permitting to keep him any longer in his
Chamber, where it was soon known that he had not been well enbalmed. Vitry
assured them that it was the kings very body, that there was no deceit, and
that the greatest Kings are made of none other metal then the meanest men on
earth.

The Ceremony needed no borrowed weepers, nor hired tears. Every one did
afford them with abundance, those which had not their eyes full of tears, had
their hearts void of pity and commiseration. Sorrows were strangely redoubled
and brake forth into great cries, as he was laid into the grave with the
honors that were done unto it. When the Count Saint Paul, executing in that
action the office of great master, told them that the King was dead, and when
after him the Heralds thrice proclaimed over the grave The King is dead, al
hearts followed him in thought and many in desire. Tears, which constancy and
gravity held in, that they might not appear, were no less bitter then those
which common grief did cast forth to be seen. If any one had strength to
resist tears, it was wanting to fight with sorrow.

To tell now what the lamentation of Paris was, is to go about to persuade a
matter incredible to him that has not seen it; in all places fountains of
tears were discerned to flow forth; in all places cries and gronings of the
people were heard* they seemed to be knocked down, so greatly had the violence
of sorrow danted and amazed them. If it be demanded from whence this extreme
grief came, the answer is ready From love, From whence this love? from the
Kings goodness. Paris bears the immortal proofs of his great and immense
goodness. Who did more offend him then Paris? unto whom has he showed more
love then to Paris? Forgetting all his riots and debauches, he takes Paris,
sets it at liberty, deals by those like a Father, who before his entrance
called him Tyrant. Since then he has still labored to restore her ruins,
and to cause it to forget both the remembrance and feeling thereof, to the end
it might say, that it had been plunged in a gulphe of miseries, only to come
forth thereof more happy and more mighty.

Paris did never more flourish then under his reign, having in that City
builded other Cities to embellish and inritch it. If I were assured (said he)
of as much time as would suffice me for two great pieces of work, I would
build the Louvre, and enclose the Suburbs of Paris with walls, and then I
would vaunt to have built the goodliest House, and the greatest City in the
world.

All other Cities, in comparison of Paris, seemed unto him but Pyes-nests, and
held for a fable whatsoever was spoken of Quinzey, grand Cairo, Cambalu, and
Cassagale.

He took a pride in showing to strangers the wealth, and the public and
particular commodities of this abridgement of the world, and took no delight
in new inventions to charge it. Goodly and Royally ingenious was the answer
which he made to the Provost of Merchants and Sheriffs of Parts, who besought
him to allow of some small tax upon the conduit-pipes of the City, to help
them to bear the charge of feasts and presents which they were to make to the
forty deputies of the Suisses and their train. He heard them concerning this
new invention, and then answered. Find out some other matter, it belongs
only to JESUS CHRIST to turn water into wine.

When men spoke of the insolences and ryots of that City during the troubles,
he had rather to lay the fault on those that led them, then to brand his
forehead with the shame of her sedition and disobedience. The people of Paris
(said he) is good, it goes as it is led. Mischief comes from those that
go before, and not from their simplicity which follow after, and grow bad by
infection.

These torrents of tears did ouer-flow the whole country, It was pity to
behold through all the Provinces of France the poor countrey-people to be
gathered together in troops on the high ways all amazed, their arms folded,
to learn of those that passed by this disastrous news, and when that they
were assured thereof, a man might see them to scatter themselves like sheep
without a shepherd, not simply weeping, but crying out and roaring as madmen
about the fields. This sorrow sprang from this Princes care to have them live
in peace.

He was extremely displeased with the exactions which the poor people endured
by usury and petti-fogging by law; He was not insensible of their miseries:
He did not bear them as the high Priest did the names of the twelve Tribes
without, he had them imprinted in the bottom of his heart, with a wonderful
discontent for that the necessity of his affairs would not permit to ease
them; and considering on a time that the taxes were excessive in sundry places
of the kingdom he said, my people are made to pay a double tax, one to Me
and another to my Officers. The second makes the first insupportable, for the
expenses of the officers amount to more then the tax; It is a hard matter to
keep my self vnrobd, and almost impossible but that my people should be so:
When he rode about the country, he would stay to speak to the people, to
question with those that passed by, whence they came, whether they went, what
commodities they carried, what the price of every thing was, with other
particularities; and observing that it seemed unto diverse, that this popular
facility did offend his Kingly gravity, he said, The Kings my predecessors held
it dishonor to know the worth of a Teston, but as for me, I would I knew the
value of a farthing, and with how much labor these poor people use to get it;
to the end they might not be charged above their ability.

The great numbers of Orations and Funeral Poems which were made in sundry
places upon his death, are so many proofs how dear this Princes life was, and
his loss lamentable to the whole world.

The University of Paris has showed it self to be the Nurse of gallant wits,
the Queen of Europes Athens. The Schools and Academies of those of the
Religion have produced diverse goodly and excellent writings in sundry Languages
upon the same subject: learned men of foreign Countries have not been silent
in this general afliction.

As this great Kings actions have ever been more admired then followed, more
followed then equalled: even so have we seen discourses therevppon, which can
neither be surmounted nor imitated.

If passion did not carry away matters with the self same hatred that it
bears to the places and persons from whence they come, it would allow of that
which is publicly rehearsed in a common wealth which has not breathed but
under this Princes protection, deserves to be reckoned among the rarest and
excellentest pieces. But his triumph needs not our laurels, his memory
contemns our marbles, his merits surpass our discourses, his happiness
derideth our Complaints, and his thoughts are not ours. The report of this
death was forthwith spread over all the world, and did out-goe the accident in
sundry places.

This is not the first time that these terrible blows have been sooner
published then felt. Diverse Kings of Christendom entertained these news with
sorrow, all with amazement, having but too much subject to deplore their
misery, whom they accounted so happy. It has been a stratagem of nature, to
bring forth men incapable of reason, for if they had any they would never
accept the entrance into this world. If the souls of great Princes knew their
fortunes and dangers, and lastly the violent deaths whereunto their bodies are
subject, they would never animate them. If they had any choice, they would
sooner enter into those of shepherds; to be if not more happy, at least more
contented.

The King of England had the first news thereof being on hunting. His feeling
was such, as he presently dispatched messengers to his Council at London, and
maintained that words were not capaple to express his grief, adding this
verse in Latin, which says, That light griefs speak, and great ones are
dumb. He renewed the Edicts against the Catholics, and fearing least the
ceremony of the declaration of the Prince of Wales might be disturbed by some
sinister accident, he commanded them not to come within ten miles of the
assembly, and Priests to depart forth of the Realm.

Before then, he had sent the King word by De Vitry, that he desired to
oblige himself to him by a reciprocal and solemn oath, that the children of
him that should first dye, should remain in the suruiuers protection, who
should take upon him the defense of them and their states toward all men, and
against all men, he remembered it, did make a new oath to keep his word, and
to employ all his means to revenge the death of so good a brother, and so
great a King.

All the feelings of Princes were but shadows compared to the sorrow and
complaints of the Duke of Sauoy: He lost both his rest and diet, and held that
for a piercing and sensible offense which the Spanish Ambassador said unto him:
That of a certain, God did love the house of Sauoy; for without this death,
the Duke had been ruined.

The Pope could not sleep all that night; he prayed for the soul of this
great Prince; said that this loss was common to the Church, and to all
Christendom; he caused certain young men to be condemned to the Galleys, who
thinking that this death would free their Prince and Country of a redoubted
enemy, had termed that Parricide their Restorer, and had drunk to his health.

He felt to the quick the Queens sorrow, and the wrong which was done to the
King, he did forthwith dispatch letters to the principal officers of the
kingdom, to conjure them to continue toward the son those proofs of love
and fidelity which they had rendered to the father. And though Popes are sildome
present at Funerals, he would needs be there, and heard the Funeral
Oration pronounced by Jacques Seguier, who gave unto this great Prince the true
titles of his virtues and merits, stiling him, Protector of the public
tranquillity; The ornament of the Catholic Church, the Vmpier of Christian
Princes, the Delight of the world. An Elogie which not satisfying the Popes
love, he sent him word, that he had not said enough.

The King of Spain was suddenly awaked when this news was brought him, and
not knowing what it was, demanded, if the king had denounced war against him:
he will never do it, for he is slain, answered the marquis of Velada. At that
word he said, being pressed with truth and sorrow, That the greatest Captain
of the world was dead, he remained for a time speechless, and the Queen wept
with warm tears. When he understood that he which had done the deed was in
prison and alive, he praised God for it, to the end that they might be known
who had set him a work, and that slander might not prevail over the innocent,

The Archduke resolving to give him all kind of content, being assured that the
storm should not fall upon his Countries, unless he did provoke him, did not
in his private sorrow disemble the public loss. That generous Princess borne
of a flower de luce of France, did more clearly euaporate the fire of her
thoughts, and said, That Christendom had lost the glory and ornament of Kings.

The Kings of Poland, Sueuia and Denmark, bewailed his death, cherishing his
Pictures with an eternal love, and recommending to their children the
admiration and imitation of the heroic actions of his life.

The Emperors domestic discontents did not keep back this sorrow from entering
into his solitude, nor himself from considering whereunto worldly greatnesses
do tend. The going up to them is sharp and slippery, the top trembling, the
downe-fall fearful, we ascend to them with great difficulty, they cannot be
kept but with fear, and the descent from them is a Precipice. The Princes of
Germany said, That the burning torche of Kings was extinct: He was lamented
and bewailed by the Suisses, and by the States of the Netherlands, as a Father
by his Orphane children. The Lords of Venice, said with tears in their eyes,
Our King is dead.

We cannot express the grief of other Countries, which sweetly lived at
quiet under the shadow of the victories and prosperities of this great Prince,
and which were covered under his protection, as the Chicken pursued by the Kite
covers it self under the wing of the damme. The great Turks account all
Christian Princes but dung, they think nothing to be worthy to be equalled
with them. It was wondered that Mahomet endured the comparison betwixt himself
and Mathias Coruin, but as Amurath and Mahomet have admired the great and
warlick actions of this Prince, even so Acmet their successor having notice of
this death, thought that the Column which vpheld the Christian Empire was dead.

We have already heretofore observed, how that the report of his death, did in
diverse places fore-runne the certainty thereof. D' Arsens Ambassador to the
States told me, that he could produce before the Queen, hundreds of persons,
who affirmed this report to he published in Flanders before the arrival of
the Posts. I have heard the Queen say, That her Ieweller had received letters
from thence, written at the same time, whereby he was entreated to write back
whether it were true that the King was slain. The report oftentimes of these
great accidents are spread abroad among the people without any certain Author,
and when we go about to seek out the cause, they are lost among the throng
like waves in a vast sea.

Demons and Sorcerers do undertake to bring speedy news from far. The late
King has often told the tale of a spirit belonging to a footman of an Earl
of Foix, who perceiving that his Master could not sleep, being troubled with
the incertainty of the success of a matter either of some siege or battle,
did on a sudden bring him all the particularities thereof, so as this Prince,
without stirring from his house at Coraze, (where this spirit is yet to be
heard), knew whatsoever was done over all Europe. In this manner did Apollonius
Thyaneus, see at Ephesus how Domitian was slain at Rome, and Cajus Cornelius
tarrying in Padua was at the battle of Pharsalia.

This does not exclude the beleeefe of the truth of Visions and Revelations
which God gives to his servants, nor of the care which the Angels have that
are appointed guardians and defenders of states, to cause people to know these
great and important motions. The Christians in Palestine, had notice of the
resolution of relief which the Christian princes had promised them upon the
very same day that the decree was concluded in the counsel of Clermont.

This is memorable. A secular priest of Doway, who, for his religious and holy
life, has merrited the common report to have dyed happily, had before his
death three extacies: after the two first he spoke of things, which, because
they were not understood, were not considered; being come again to himself
from the third as from a profound rapture, he cried out, that they were killing
the greatest Monarch of the Earth. It is observed that this word was spoken at
the very same time that the stabbe with the knife was given,

We must go on no farther without astonishment, because that on the very same
fourteenth day of May, which shall ever be marked with black in the Kalenders
of France, a Nun of the Abbey of Saint Paul in Picardy, sister to
Villers-hodan Governor of Diepe, being not very well, was visited in her
chamber by her abbess, sister to the Cardinal Sourdy, and after that they had
entertained one an other with discourses fit for their condition she cried out
without any trouble, or such agitations and fear proper to Enthousiasts,
Madam, pray unto God for the King, for they are killing him, and within a while
after, Alas, he is dead! By conferring the words with the deed, it was found
that all this was done in one hour, The piety and simplicity of this Nun,
does not permit this to be referred to any other power then that of God, who
causes his servants to see things a far off, as though they were present.

This manner of death, so sudden, so smally prevented did amaze the whole
world, every man thought upon his conscience, and diverse Lords of the Court by
putting on mourning habit for this death, did likewise take upon them the
resolutions of the contempt of this life, and said for a while, that which a
great Trompet of the Church said ever, O life, which have deceived so many,
Seduced so many, blinded so many, thou art nothing at thy beginning, thy light
is but a shadow, thou art but smoke at thy height, thou art sweet to fools,
thou art bitter to wise men, who loves thee knows thee not, who knows thee
contemnes thee.

The great ones who all their life long run after the dreams and vapors of
the world, whose thoughts are wholly anchored upon the earth, and their hopes
have no farther extent then the earth, did in the picture of this death behold
that of the vanity of their greatness and ambition, things so vain and frail,
as when they seem to glister and twinkle like Diamonds, they vanish from our
sight, and break themselves in pieces like glass.

Their spirits being touched with this death as with an Adamant, should
without ceassing turn toward the firm and fixed Pole of that truth,

That what-so-euer is under Heaven is nothing but vanity, and that the world
passes away with his covetousness. The report of this accident was a mighty
voice, which awaked them, to make them consider, that the earth is not their
dewlling place, but the passage to an happier abode: that the pleasures,
delights, and contentations of the Palaces wherein they dwell in this world,
do oblige them to take care to be well lodged in an other, because it is
yrkesome to depart forth of a fair and goodly house, and to enter for ever
into a foul and loathsome cottage.

It rests now to see how public Justice, being transgressed by this enormous
crime, has been satisfied by the vile and wretched sacrifice of this
Parricide. By and by after this mischief, the Queen sent the President Ianin,
Lomenie, Secretary of State, and de Bullion, Councellor of State, to the House
of Raiz, to examine him, and to know what would follow this detestable blow.
What he then told them was the selfsame that he afterward spoke, and their
censure was the same of all other wisemen, who have held this wretch for a
melancholic fellow; They made a show that the King was not dead, nor his hurt
mortal, supposing with more ease to draw from him the truth of this
instigation, and that the lesser the mischief was, the easier would be the
confession: but he told them, That he knew well enough that he was dead. A
while before, he had said, That the knife entered so far into him, as his
fist touched the Kings doublet.

They found certain Papers about him, and among others, verses for one that is
to be carried to execution: he said that an Apothicary of Angoulesme made
them, who had showed it him to have his opinion thereof, because that he had
used to make verses. I noted that he had written it with passion and
attention, as if he did mean to make use of it himself, for the words which
he did set down for the last violent leaps of a soul in that taking, were
written more curiously, and in different letters from the other, and because he
said that he had ever bin desirous to tell the King that he ought to make
war upon those of the Religion, they asked him, who had given him that
counsel; he answered, that they were not to know it, and that he would tell it
to his Confessor. This I have seen in the original. I saw him within a while
after in the Hostell of Raiz, where telling me that he had been a Fueillan,
and that he was expulsed from that company for composing writings concerning
certain visions and meditations upon Gods judgments.

I then perceived that melancholy had troubled his spirits with her fumes, had
made him capable of diabolical suggestions and impressions, that torture would
sooner make trial of his obstinacy, then enforce his conscience.

He had imprinted in his imagination a belief clean contrary to the Kings
piety and Justice. He had in times before been called in question for a
murder, and Sanguin, Councellor in the court of Parliament, had drawn his
process. Thereupon, an other councellor told him, that it had bin good for him
and all France that he had been punished for it, for then he should not have
slain the Lords anointed and the most Christian King. He answered. It is a
Question to know whether he were the most Christian king. From the time that
this cursed resolution was framed in his mind he did (like the viper) convert
into poison what-soeuer he heard to be well spoken of this Prince.

Many, having iudiciously considered his manners and motions, have thought that
those visions which had so much trobled him in his sleep and waking, the
interior voices which affrighted him day and night, and a number of other
violent impulsions were manifest tokens of the obsession of the Devil. A
fellow that often lay with him said, That a spirit did awake and torment him in
the night, and when he was asked who it was, he answered, It is mine Uncle which
craves some ease of his pains.

He had besides his disposition to such fooleries, a proud and furious conceit
of wit above all other men, an arrogant presumption to have a share in Gods
Counsels, to be able to decipher his wills, and to be chosen to execute them.
Thereupon he did brutishly declaime against higher powers, and said, that it
was necessary they should be chastised. From this damnable Thesis, That it was
lawful to kill a Tyrant, he went on to this false hypothesis, that the King
was worse, and his chief tyrany was, for that he would not make war upon the
Huguenots, which is as much to say, as, because he did not kill them, to make
them to believe, and did not set his kingdom on fire, to cleanse it. It is
certain that in this deluge of words, and among so many slanderous speeches,
which he uttered, Truth, nor his own Conscience would not permit him to call
the King a Tyrant. Whatsoever he spoke against the life of this Prince was
inspired into his soul, by the same council that had practiced his death, He
that did the first murder told the first lie.

But it was impossible to persuade the people but that this blow had some other
setter on then the Diuill, and to be certain thereof they impatiently desired
that this Schelme (France has no word horrible enough to express so many
abominations) might be delivered over to the Parliament, that in so
extraordinary a matter there was no need to stand scrupulously upon all the
ordinary forms, that all his kindred were to be seized upon, with all those
whom he had conferred with, and that forthwith the truth would be known.

But those high spheres do not govern their motions by that of the inferior.

On Saturday, the xv. of May at night he was brought to the Conciergery of the
palace. The first President du Harley, the President de Blasmenil, the
counselors Boin and Courtin, did dilligently and exactly labor to frame his
Process. The Queen did oftentimes send the Marquis of Ancre to acquaint them
more confidently with her intentions, and how desirous she was to have the
truth known. She sent them word, how that a Butcher had offered to flea that
wretch alive, promising, to cause him to hold out a long time, and to reserve
strength enough in him to endure the execution after that his skin should be
flead off.

The Court imputed this proposition to the zeal of a great Princess, who
would have the whole world to know, that Justice had omitted nothing for the
reparation of that public offense, nor for the discovery of the branches and
springs thereof. It did commend the affection of a widow, pierced through with
grief, who pursued the just revenge of her husbands death, and the care of a
charitable mother that feared for the King her son, not thinking, but that if
this blow was devised for the father, the like was meant toward the Princes
his children.

Her Majesty supposing that if this wretch could be brought to repent him of
his crime, he would more freely declare who had set him on to do it: thought
it fit that he should be visited by Doctors and religious persons, who should
so dispose his soul, as it might apprehend eternal torments rather then
temporal.

Diverse particular persons spoke to him in the Conciergery and unto all of
them he told one tale, how that no man living had concelled or urged him there
unto.

He that should take upon him to set down all his speeches upon this subject,
with all the escapes of his fury and madness, might augment this volume with
superfluities: we must keep our selves to his answers before his Judges, who
have observed that (his brutish speeches against higher powers excepted) in all
other matters he was ignorant and blockish.

The question was not of knowing who had committed the mischief, but who had
councelled and willed it to be done, Seruin, Le Bret, the Kings Advocates,
Duret the first substitute to the Attorney General, did therein use whatsoever
wisdom, judgment and sharpness of wit might conceive. They called before
them all those with whom the offender had conferred, they examined two
Iacobins, and finding great sincerity and simplicity in them, sent them away.
They used a young Friar with the same gentleness, of whom the offender had
asked this question. Whether a Penetenciary ought to reveal the confession of
one, who should tell him that he had been tempted to kill a King: This young
Friar, either thorough insufficiency or amazment, made him no answer. They
delivered him over to his superiors, wishing them to use means, if, by the
form of Regular discipline, they could draw any farther light from him; and
because the Iacobins said, that upon the same question they had sent him to
father Aubigni the Iesuist, who was a man much used in the resolutions of cases
of conscience, they sent for him likewise, and examined him exactly thereupon.
He told Seruin in particular that since by the disposing of his superiors he
had given over preaching, to apply himself altogether to Confessions, God had
given him that singular grace, presently to forget whatsouer had been told him
under the seal of Confession.

The offender answering before the Commissioners, nothing would ever be drawn
from him, which might give any knowledge of those who had councelled or hartned
him to this deed; he would never reveal the setter on, protesting that he had
not bin induced nor councelled thereunto by any man, and that in confession he
had never bewrayed his design, fearing least it should be revealed, and
himself put to death, as well for the will as for the deed. He said that the
resolution of his attempt, which he termed a temptation, proceeded from
certain visions and meditations which he had had watching, and because that
he had been made to believe that the Kings Army was appointed to march
against the Pope.

That a certain man of Angoulesme had told him how that the King had said,
That his predecessors had raised up Popes, and that it was in his power to
hurl them down: That a Soldier, speaking of the Kings designs, said, that
he would serve him, though against the Pope, being not bound to enquire of
the causes or motions of the war. That these reports had made him to resolve
upon the deed, believing; that to make war upon the Pope, was to do it
against God: That the Huguenots having attempted in the Christmas holy days to
kill the Catholics, the King had not punished them. That in this opinion he
had been desirous to speak to the King, making means for that purpose to
diverse persons, who judging of his wit by his discourse had still councelled
him to return home to his house. That at the beginning of the year he came
to the Louure, offered himself to speak to the King, and was kept back by
the guardes:

That he had only once spoken to Father Aubigni the Jesuit, concerning his
Visions and Meditations, and had showed him a broken Knife, whereupon was
engraven a Heart and a Cross, telling him, that he thought that the King ought
to convert those of the Religion to the Catholic Church: That Aubigni had
exhorted him to have recourse unto God, and to make means to some great man to
come to speak with the King, and to use broths to settle his brain. Aubigni
being heard, and confronted by the offender, said, that it was all false and
counterfeit.

All men labored to know the Author, and desired to be inuentors of new
torments to pluck it forth of the vilans bosom, every man thought that if they
used him gently, they should use all other men cruelly. Balbany Inuentor of the
new Cesternes, made offer, and did make an engine in manner of a butter-churne,
or Obeliske turned vpside down, which he showed to Seruin. The body being put
into it, slided down with its own weight, was thrust hard together, as the
churne shrunk in, and did sink down, in such sort as the shoulders were
fastened to the heels with torments slowly cruel, the body notwithstanding
loosing none of it strength, for in four hours after it might be made to
endure the same torment again.

The violentest tortures are not the cruellest, those who suffer them can not
long endure them, and the extremity of pain dulleth the senses Those that are
most long and languishing, are most bitter and sharp. The court of Parliament
thought it not fit to apply any other torments then usual.

But it was a question whether the offender should be tortured before his
condemnation. The ancient manner would not permit it, for tortures are applied
but in two cases, the one before judgment to draw forth proof of the fact,
the other after to know the accomplices and authors. It was not needful to know
the truth of the matter, for the offender confessed it, and was taken with the
manner. They found a decree, whereby one who had attempted to poison King Lewis
the eleventh, was tortured sundry times and on sundry days before his
condemnation.

Heerevpon the Parliament decreed that he should be tortured three sundry times
and on three sundry days, but because he endured the first with so great
certainty and continuance of his answers, without varying or change, and
fearing least his strength being weakened he would not have force enough to
endure the execution, they did not continue the tortures; they did likewise
perceive, that all the torments which he had endured, with those which he was
to suffer, were not of force to alter his speech.

La Guesle the Kings Attorney general, striving with his sickness, caused
himself to be carried to the Court of Parliament to take his conclusions with
the Kings Advocates, and considering that so great and horrible a mischief,
whose like was not to be found in ages past, and which brought fear and
scandal to posterity, ought to be punished with torments extremely severe, he
craved, with their consents, besides the tearing with pincers and the
dismembring of that wretched body, a new kind of torture by adding to the
burning pincers, molten lead, skalding oil, burning pitch, wax, and brimstone
incorporated together. Man could not invent a pain more sensible and pearcing.

The Parlaments of France have never used the like, in ancient time they have
been used apart in great executions, and in most severe reuenges, but this
Parricide was the first who felt the mixture of all those ingredients.

It was great reason by unknown means to seek satisfaction for so
unrecoverable a loss.

The conclusions being taken the people of Paris did greatly desire to see the
execution of that man, borne for the ruin and desolation of men, who had
slain the noblest man living, and because they feared that if his health did
impair, as it was likely it would, he should endure less then he ought, the
first President besought the Queen that it might please her to make an end of
him. Her Majesty who had desired this delay, in hope that time would give light
to this darkness, referred the matter to the discretion of the court.

The great Chamber, the Tournelle, and that of the edict, being assembled, they
proceeded to the judgment of the Indictment: whatsoever had been done before
the Commissioners being read and noted the offender was heard. He reserved one
trick of his folly to tell being upon his stool. Being in the Church of viuona
beyond Poitiers, he saw in a vision a Moore in a triangle. He entreated a
painter (who lay with him) to lend him his pen and Ink to set it down in
writing. The Painter gave him one made in form of a triangle and showed him
the picture of a Moore. His imagination being wakened, and heated with these
objects, observed them and took them for interpreters of what he vnder-stood
not. His mind, ever prompt and ready to his hate against the King, made him
think that this Moore was like him, that all the water in the sea would not
wash him clean, and thereupon he framed strange Chimeraes. This was the
revelation which he kept so secret and misterious as he never revealed it till
at last.

His furious speeches against the King made men believe that his mind had been
pre-occupied with bad impressions and his wicked and scelerous resolution
strenghened and maintained by the doctrine to kill Kings. Therefore the Court
in judging his process decreed, that the College of Sorbone should be
assembled to renew their ancient decree of the year 1413. confirmed in the
council of Constance the year 1415. declaring this opinion to murder Princes
under color of Tyranny to be heretical and impious, opening a door to all
sorts of disloyaltyes and rebellions, the foundation of that furious Anarchy,
published in times past in Bohemia, Germany, Scotland and France in the times
of trouble and confusion, and revived in Spain in time of peace, after the
death of Phillip the second. This craves a large discourse, which belongs to
the History of the new reign, wherein shall be seen how this cursed doctrine,
the cut-throate of Kings has been detested and thundered against.

The fact being apparent, the offender convicted, they had no more to do but
to ordain a punishment as great as the deed was heinous. They consulted
whether they ought to invent a new. But the court having ever detested
punishments of extreme rigor, they thought that those who were already
invented were sufficient to punish the fact; that they ought to borrow none of
strangers, nor leave their usual custom, considering that it did punish men
of flesh, not of brass, Christians and not Turks: and because those who had
attempted against the life of Kings without effect had been drawn with four
horse and torn with pincers, and that here the attempt was followed by the
execution, they thought it reason to add thereunto (following the conclusions
of the Kings learned council) lead, wax, oil and pitch melted together.
Heerevpon there were some who said that in the ptunishment of offenses men
ought not so much to respect the time past as that to come; that offenders were
not only punished because they should perish but to keep others from
perrishing, that punishments were not so much ordained to put the guilty to
death, as to leave behind an example and detestation of the fact: that there
were penalties in the laws of the Romans which had never been executed, as
that which permitted creditors to cut in pieces the bodies of their debtors,
that pouring hot lead into the wounds, made with the pinsors, it was to be
feared that the prisoner would presently faint and dye, and that the residue of
the punishment would be ended on a dead body. That therefore they were of
opinion to refer it to the sight and discretion of the executioner, whether
the ofender had strength enough to endure the molten lead; if not, to pour some
other liquor which should not have the same sense and feeling on the members of
the offender, and yet nevertheless for example should work the same effect in
the peoples sight.

All matters being well considered by the courts-decree he was declared to be
worthily attainted and convicted of divine and humane treason in the highest
degree, for the most mischeeuous, most abominable and most detestable murder,
committed on the person of the King of most happy and famous memory.

And for satisfaction thereof, it condemned him to make an honorable amends
before the great gate of the Cathedral Church of Paris, naked in his shirt,
holding a burning torche in his hand of two pound weight, and to declare, that
wickedly and treacherously he did kill the King with two stabs of a knife in the
body: from thence being brought to the Grieve, upon a Scaffold, his pappes,
brawnes of his arms, and calves of his legs, to be torn with burning
Pincers, his right hand holding in it the knife wherewith he committed the
murder to be burnt off with fire of Brimstone, and on the places where he
shall be torn with Pincers, molten lead to be cast, scalding oil, burning
pitch and rosin, wax and brimstone melted together. That done, his body to be
drawn and dismembered with four horse, his members and body consumed with
fire, and scattered in the wind, his goods confiscate, the house where he was
borne to be raced down to the ground, his father and mother to be banished
forth of the realm of France, and his other kinsfolks enforced to change
their names.

The Decree followed word for word the conclusions of the kings Attorney. All
the differences was in three things which he requested, but were not decreed.
The first, that after the tearing with Pincers and the molten lead, the
parracide should be let alone one hour before he were disme^bred with horses.
The second, that after the razing of the house where he was borne, salt should
be sown in that place, in sign of a perpetual curse. The third, that for to
abolish the name of so execrable a murderer, and to purge France from such an
abominable race, his father, mother, brethren, sisters, and other kinsfolk
bearing that cursed surname, should for ever be banished out of the realm of
France, and have but fifteen days allotted them without further delay, to
dispose of their goods

The Court considering how that all offenses, of what nature soever, did not
extend farther then the persons who committed them, held back the punishment of
his father and mothers banishment, and altered it by causing his other
kinsfolks to change their names.

Murder in time past has bin so odious and detestable, as the punishment
extended to the ninth generation. I did demand one day of an Attorney of
Suizerland, why treson was so sildome seen among them? Because (quoth he) that
we use to punish traitors rigorously, and we do wholly root out their
generation. It is better that a few houses be desolate the^ a whole country.
They would have innocent children to bear their fathers fault, because that
fatherly affection was of more force to hold back an attempt, and to break the
execution thereof, then the fear of punishment. Guntran includes in the
punishment of murderers, all his kinsfolks that were convicted of the crime.
Seruin on a time told this to the late King, who accounted this extreme
justice, extreme wrong. His mercy which did ever strive with his justice, saw
no proportion of reason, why the innocent should suffer for the guilty, and
said, That the soul of such a King went a boot-haling in an other world.

The abolishment of this accursed name was most justly decreed. It has not
appeared in all this discourse to have had the honor to enter into the History;
the murderer ought to be satisfied with that which his cruel and barbarous
ambition made him hope for, thinking by setting fire, not to one Temple, but to
the four corners, and in the midst of the kingdom, to consecrate it to
eternity.

The name of Manlius was famous in Rome, one slight suspicion of state,
against the State did wholly deface it. The names of these detestable wretches
never ought to dishonor an History; they must be smothered in oblivion, and
if at any time we chance to name them, it must be with curses and execrations.
The name of this parricide must be given to the devil, we must give to this
parricide the name of Devil.

The sentence was executed the same day it was pronounced, and for to see the
execution, all the Princes, Lords, officers of the Crown, and Counselors of
state, came to the Towne-house, and the whole city of Paris almost, to the
Grieve. The Execution was not thought fit to be done all in one place, for if
his hand had been cut off there where he slew the King, the place was so
narrow as the punishment would have been seen but of a few, and pain would
have diminished his strength which was necessary to endure other punishments.

Before the prisoner was brought to the Grieve, they gave him the buskins, which
drew from his mouth the former words, but far greater cries then the first
torture. It appeared by him, that although he had the charm of silence, so
much boasted of by sorcerers, yet he had none against pain. At the first
wedging he cried out, O my God take pity on my soul, and forgive me this
offense, but not if I have concealed ought. The second wedging ended the
torment, for a sownding seized on his heart and within a while after the
hangman on his body,

Diverse saw him in the Chapel, where he was assisted by two Doctors of
Sorbonne, Filsac and Gamache, to settle his conscience and to make it fit and
capable of Gods mercy, and perceiving certain Princesses and other Ladies to
come in, he said that he would speak with the Regester. It was an excuse to
rid them thence that were there, and to be freed from their sight, because they
should add no more shame to his sorrow, for he told him no more then he had
done at former times.

The Doctors could get no more of him: but I wonder how he had the discretion
to tell them that his desire was to have his confession revealed and published,
to the end the whole world might know that he had not done that deed by the
instigation of any man. The Doctors made this relation, and the Regester caused
it to be enroled. He thought that the people would have thanked him for the
deed: and when the Archers that guarded him to execution were commanded to take
heed that no hurt were done him in the streets, this proud slave answered, no
body means to hurt me, but he was amazed when at the gate of the Concergery,
in the Court of the Palace, and in all streets, he heard horrible cries made
against him. He perceived the people not only desirous of the punishment of
his body, but of the destruction of his soul, all men wishing him in hell,
curssing his birth and life. The Ancients in times past used words of strange
force against those who were exposed, and as it were vowed to execution, and to
the public hate, Go wretched soul, go damned soul, soul the most
desperate upon earth, let the earth deny thee succor, refuse thee her
nourishment, and Heaven her light.

He made an honorable amends before our Ladies Church, falling prostrate on the
earth, he kissed the end of the Torch, and seemed to have his heart broken in
pieces with repentance. In prison he had uttered diverse blasphemous speeches,
against the piety, justice, mercy, and other good intents of the King. The
Queen commanded Testu, Knight of the watch, to look to him that he did not
so in the streets; but already, before he came forth of the Concergery, he had
testified an extreme grief, for having held so bad and impious opinions of
this great King.

Being pressed with remorse of his own conscience, he did detest his crime,
for when doctor Filsac would have given him absolution, and willed him to lift
up his eyes to heaven, he answered, I will not do so, for I am unworthy to
look thereon, and he was contented that this absolution should be converted to
his eternal damnation, if he had concealed ought of the truth.

The people would not give him the comfort which they never denied to any in
that case. None but the Doctor sung the suffrages usual at the execution of
offenders. All pity lay in the Hangman who promised diverse times quickly to
dispatch him, so as he would reveal the truth. The most tender and
compassionate hearts, had none for him, and diverse were sorry that he was
absolved.

I observed how those that were most gentle and pitiful, took no pity on
this man, and were so lost in their sorrow, as notwithstanding they knew that
Jesus Christ dyed for him, yet they thought they should not transgress against
charity, to bid the devil take him. Heerepvon I call to mind how the fathers of
the council of Toledo making a decree to bind Christians to desire the safety
of King Cinthillus the Goth; and to attempt nothing against him, added
thereunto these words. Anathematized and cursed be he who shall despise our
decree, or enterprise to offend the King, in any sort, or upon any occasion
what-soeuer: In all Christian congregations let him be abhorred and condemned
by a sovereign judgment, execrable to all Catholics, abominable to the holy
angels, and to all those whom God has ordained for his ministers, let him be
destroyed in this world and damned in the next, and without remedy let him be
held for damned, at the day of everlasting damnation.

Perseuering in this confession he received absolution, on condition to be
damned if he had not told the truth.

He was laid along on the scaffold, horses are tied to his hands and feet, his
right hand being stricken through with a knife, was burned in a fire of
brimstone. I noted that it was not the same knife, wherewith he slew the king,
for after the hangman had showed it to the people, who by a general cry did
testify how they abhorred that infernal instrument, he threw it to one of his
men, who put it into a bag.

This wretch to behold how his cursed hand did broile, had the courage to lift
up his head, and to shake off a spark of fire which was in his beard. This
unprofitable care to save it being noted, afforded matter to diverse to praise
the custom observed in Germany, Suisserland, and diverse other places, to shave
off and then to burn all the hair from all parts of the bodies of those who
are convicted for any notorious crimes, but the court of Parliament holds this
for superstitious.

When they had pinched him with the pincers he cast forth grievous cries: Then
they poured molten lead, scalding oil, burning pitch, wax, and brimstone on
those places burnt by the pincers This pain was the most sensible and percing
of all his punishment, and he showed it by the lifting up of his whole body,
the beating with his legs, the panting of his flesh. All this was not
sufficient to move the people to pity; when all was done, they wished it
might begin again.

I saw a young man in the Hall of the Towne-house in danger to have been badly
dealt with, for a word, which by indiscretion and not of malice, escaped from
him, when he saw them pour the oil on the places burnt with the pincers, he
was amazed and in steed of saying what torment, he said what cruelty is this,
this word was forthwith taken, and if the fellow had not slipped a-way in the
throng, hearing them begin to murmr and threaten him, he had been taught
how to call that cruelty which was pure and perfect Justice.

If in this torment they used any pause, it was to give the hangman time to
breath and to the prisoner to feel himself to die, to the divines to exhort
him to tell the truth. He said that he knew none other then what he had so
often before uttered, and that he should be very foolish, perceauing his body
in that lamentable case to abandon his soul to a worsse.

The horses begun to draw, but not fast enough to the people minds, whereupon
diverse to help them began to pluck the ropes. No man thought it shame to
execute the hangmans office on him who had slain their father. A horse-courser
perceiving one of the horses out of breath alighted from his own, took off
the bridle and saddle, and did put it in the place of the tired one. This horse
held out better then any of the other, and gave such strong pulls to his right
thigh as it forthwith losed all the joints.

If the people might have been let alone the Hangman should not have meddled
with him, diverse offered themselves, to make his punishment last longer, and
himself to live many days dying, An Heart pierced through with grief for
wrong offered to one it loves, cannot be satisfied, but by some great testimony
of sorrow and revenge. A Jew dwelling in the City of Aix in Prouence, was
condemned to be flead alive before his own house for uttering blasphemous
speeches against the Virgin Mary: Certain gentlemen would needs be
executioners of so just a punishment, and with vizards on their faces, they
came upon the scaffold, made the hangman to come down; and flead the Jew, to
save whom the Sinagog ofred to Renatus King of Sicille 11000. Florins.

The ropes, whereto the body was tied betwixt two posts set up in the midest of
the scaffold, being loosed, it was a long time haled and pulled foreward and on
every side: His sides being dashed against those posts, some ribb was still
cracked in pieces, so as it was thought that without this and the grievous
infusion of lead, life, which was strong and vigorous in him, (and so strong as
plucking back at one time one of his legs he stayed the horse which drew it)
would have lasted and continnued longer,

The Executioner peceiuing that all his members were broken and crushed in
pieces, that the horses were tired, and that he was in the agony of death,
would have cut him in four quarters, but at the first stroke, the impatient
people snatched him forth of his hands, the lackeis gave him a hundred blows
with swords, every one gat a piece, and dragd it through the City. A woman was
seen with strange revenge to set her nails and teeth in that murderers
flesh. The hangman was amazed when he saw nothing of him left but the shirt to
finnish the execution, meaning to have burnt the body to ashes. The people
dragged these wretched relics up and down the city, in the same manner as the
Menades did tear the body of Orpheus.

At the last, it being divided almost in as many pieces as there be streets
in Paris, diverse fires were made in sundry places, and chiefly there where the
King was slain: The Suisses burnt one piece of it before the Lovure. Little
children were seen in the streets to carry straw and wood to the fire. There
were some who having drawn certain pieces of that body up and down the
city, gathered them together on the Grieve, and by burning them, made an end of
the execution.

It seemed that this so just and exemplary punishment would in some sort have
comforted the public grief; but the satisfaction was not equal to the
offense, nor the comfort to the sorrow. The wounds of hearts were opened again
when men remembered that the causes of this death were wrapped up in
impenetrable darkness, and when many cried out, That this murderer at his
death had retained some after-thought.

The opinion nevertheless of those who thought that this detestable deed had
none other motion, but from his own mad and phrantick spirit, is maintained by
great likelyhoods. No stirs have bin within or without the realm. Nothing
ensued this mishap. All Princes are grieved for it, and have made offer of
their forces to revenge it. We must not think but that the prosperity of this
Crown has had great enemies, and that disloyal minds have offered themselves
to disturb the quiet thereof. But if the law of God did not tie Princes to
detest such conspiracies, that of honor would suffer them to think thereon.
The History of Lewis the eleventh declares, what praise all Europe gave him
for aduertizing his enemy the Duke of Burgondy of an attempt against his person.

A Prince who seeks to make away his enemy, otherwise then by justice, and by
the event of war, shows a mind full of fear, void of courage, and seems
to fear that which it should contemn. It was a generous deed of Fabricius,
who delivered into Pyrrhus hands the fellow who offered to poison him: so noble
a deed as Tiberius perceiving a certain Prince of the Celtes to make offer to
kill Ariminius by poison, answered: that Rome did not use to be revenged of her
enemies secretly and by deceit, but openly and by Arms.

By how much this act did add glory and honor to the reputation of the Romans,
by so much more was that of Titus Flaminius odious, who put Haniball to death,
who was retired to the Court of Prusias King of Bithinia. When Titus Liuius
notes that, he considers the great alteration of the minds and courages of
the Romans. The fathers of these men advertised Pyrrhus, who entered Italy in
arms, to look to himself, that some would poison him, These men (says he)
send an Ambassador to Prusias, to persuade him to violate the laws of
Hospitallity with Haniball. Plutarche to take away this blemish of the Romans
reputation, lays the blame on Flaminius, and says, that the Senate did
repute that fact over cruel, and proceeding from covetousness of glory, to
the end that in Histories he might be named the cause and Author of Hannibals
death, whom Rome left alive, like a Bird whose plumes and feathers were all
fallen off with age.

How often has offer been made to our King of certain and infallible means
to dispatch his enemies? How often has he rejected them, as unworthy the
Religion and magnanimity of a Christian Prince? abhorring to employ against
them any other thing then the right of Arms. His valor carried him into
dangers without fear, gave him victories without cruelty, Triumphs without
insolency, and changed his lance into Laurel, like that of Amphiaraus. This
brave Alexander did never know how to steal victories, nor to vanquish by
treachery. He would like Marcellus have the Sun always to be witness without
reproach of all his triumphs.

It is some comfort to us that this prince was so well beloved, so much feared
of all Christian princes, as none had a hand in this damnable deed. But that
does not assuage our grief, for the more we consider how far the greatness
and felicity of this Prince extended, the more is the remembrance thereof
sorrowful, the more sensible the loss. But if our souls, in admiring the
immortal reputation which he has left behind him, are not comforted, the
light thereof is but smoke, the glory an illusion, and virtue but a Chimera.

Never Prince died more suddenly. Here is grief. never did any Prince live in
greater glory, Here is comfort. He entertains death in the great designs of
his courage, in the amazement and admiration of the world; who ever made a more
glorious end? Of what death could he have dyed, to have been more bewailed, or
to have less sense of death?

This sun of Christendom setting in the west, does augment the force of his
beams. He dies like a torch, which gives greatest light when it is almost
extinct, redoubling his flame and darting forth his last sparks in the body of
his light. The same wherein he procures sighs is so high, so full, and
perfect, as if his death were not so well known and bewailed as it is,
Posterity being amazed at the heroical actions of his life, should have more
reason to think him immorrall, then the Oracle had to doubt whether Lycurgus
were a man.

Greece being so much obliged to the labors of Hercules, thought it folly not
to praise him: whosoever shall know what this prince has done to establish
peace in Europe, will think it want of discretion not to admire the strokes of
his sword, and the excellency of his judgment. The Greeks never made Triumph
wherein the statue of Hercules was not carried about. Never shall any great
enterprise be attempted but by the example of his great actions; posterity will
hardly believe that our age has brought forth a Prince who before him had none
that could be equalled with him in the greatness of his courage, and will
leave none after him but will hardly imitate that which he has fortunately
executed both in war and peace.

For so much glory purchased with so much toil, for so many Trophies erected
with so much glory, for so many prosperities which did crown all his
deseignes, his mind was no higher elevated, nor his presence more estranged
from his subjects.

He did not think that his body yielded a greater shadow after, then before
his victories, and he did not cause the heads of the Collosses of the Gods to
be taken off, to set on his own. His majesty was kind and gentle to all men,
and was terrible only to proud and rash persons, speaking often a latin verse,
That he knew how to pardon the humble and to tame the proud. He had joined two
things together which commonly are seperable, Greatness and Moderation, and like
Theopompus, King of Sparta, giving way to whatsoever was to stiff and
boisterous in power absolute, he made his commandments easy, and the
obedience to them without labor and murmuring.

In a word, we cannot speak ill of a Prince who has ever done so well, Truth
shall for ever be victorious, it is immooueable, and as gold and glass cannot
be turned into any other substance, because the one is the suns last
workmanship, and the other that of the fire: Truth which is as fair as gold,
and as clear as glass, may well be molten in the fire of slander, may well
be broken in pieces by lies, but the essence thereof can never be changed. In
despite of Hell, the forge of slander, and of all those hell hounds who some
and fret against the memory of this great King, he shall have the glory of a
Prince, religious, merciful, valorous, magnanimous, gentle and wise. What his
enemies shall speak of him in secret, will not much differ from that which his
faithful servants say of him publicly.

But if he understand what we speak of him, and if he do yet entertain
that curiosity which in times past he had of the truth of his History, I am
certain, that he will not take it well, if we disroabe him of human
weaknesses: he did not love flattery, which takes away moates, and leaves
spots on the garment, delighting to be praised of those, who believed those
praises which they gave him, but if he observed any clawing, he would no more
taste it. Princes pay flattery with her own money, Flatterers dissemble the
vices of Princes, and Princes dissemble the lies of flatterers.

True it is, that two scarres remain on the face of his reputation. He
brought the one into the world with him, the other came with him to the Crown.
For the first. This violent fault of his eyes did manifest, that his heart was
not invulnerable against the shafts of love, as it was invincible against those
of Fortune. He would not abstain from loving that which was fair, and of the
most imperious passions of his soul, this did usurp the sovereignty; but, it
did never make him to neglect the offices and duties of a great King. Pleasure,
which in many subjects overthrows wisdom, debaucheth reason, smothercth
valor, did no wrong to his affairs, to his wisdom, nor to his courage.

For the second. He was not displeased to be thought hard to grant excessive
gifts, near and very considerate in recompenses, never desirous to prevent
demands, nor to surprise hopes, albeit that he had a desire to give, that he
well knew that there was no money better deserved, then in the following of his
Court and Armies, that to give speedily is to give twice, that long hopes
consume patience, and that it is a kind of contentment for a man to come to
his iourneys end before he be weary.

Recompenses were demanded by so many men, as not being able to give to all
those who thought they deserved them, those who still remained discontented,
and gave him the name of covetous, were very many: albeit, never King of
France, did scatter his bounty into more hands.

To conclude, his virtues were general, and his defects particular, which were
not discerned, but as invisible and needless Attomes in the large extent of
his fame. Europe never bred a greater Prince, and the Idaeaes of a better King
remain in heaven, the original and eternal aboade of that royal soul,
where it enjoys most perfect happiness, and knows what the vantage is of
never ceasing to live, though it here ceased to Reign.

FINIS.
A Panegyre: Containing the Life and Heroyck deeds of the most Christian King
Henry the fourth.
ALthough the world holds an opinion, that there is nothing so excellent and
rare, but the like may be seen again; that nature is never weary, and that
the Phoenix rises again out of her own ashes; yet will it be hard to make us
hope, that Europe can produce another Henry, whose actions are admired by all
the Kings of the earth, and being compared to those of fore-passed ages are
like unto those high mountains which disdain the proudest rocks that are
under them.

In whom could there concur so many merits? for whom will virtue be so happy,
and fortune so constant? for whom will heaven do so great wonders? who will
undertake to exceed him? who dares equal him? who can follow him? of whom may
we say that which is said of him. A wiser Prince there is not any found, a more
Courageous the world bears not, and a better there cannot be.

His life is so full a Table, as there is not any thing but stays the eye,
stirs up the Judgment, and draws it to Admiration. They shall not speak in
any part of the world of this Prince, but the fame of his great and
incomparable actions, will make a great Impression in the brauest courages.

Theseus could not but talk of Hercules labors: Themistocles could not sleep
when he thought of the combats of Miltiades: great Princes will feel their
hearts inflamed with glory and honor, when they shall represent unto
themselves the victories and Trophies of great Henry.

The very day that heaven made him be born at Pau, it gave him the crown of
Navarre, it promised him that of France; and did assure him that the glory of
his life and of his reign should not be limited with other bounds then the
continuance of the world. His breeding was as much inferior in delights and
dainties, as it should be superior in force of mind and greatness of courage to
other Princes of his time.

His court was in the village, his nurce a contry-woman, his Courtiers
peasants, his language Bearnois, his excercises in the field, his walks among
the rocks, his delights in Innocent things, his appetites for necessary things,
his distaste in superfluous; taking part with the children of the village, of
the injuries of the air, and the indisposition of the seasons, whilst the
equality of the age, and the liberty of that life held the difference of
qualities and conditions suspended.

His inclination to Arms had not diminished the pleasure he had taken in
learning, if they had not been forced to gird him with a sword as well for
defense as ornament. The Ignorance of that which he should have learned, and
the forgetting of that which he had learned, did frame in his mind a continual
grief; complaining of the little care they had had of his Institution: for he
desired in greatest occasions to marry his pen unto his sword as Caesar had
done.

As his breeding had inured his body to travel, and had presented pain unto
him with pleasure, and pleasure with pain, fortune had made his mind
invincible to Accidents, and gave him so great in quantity, and so diverse in
quallity, as in the end she was forced to confess that his courage did
surpass the violence of her attempts and his wisdom the stratagems of her
deseignes.

Diversity of Religion troubling the most happy and profound Peace that ever
France inioyed, he was brought to Bois de Veisane, or Vincennes, there to be
bred up with the Infants of France, or rather to be a precious gage of The
ancient fidelity of the house of Bourbon. The Queen his mother drew him from
the court, to instruct him in the religion whereof she would have him
Protector, as they which made profession thereof did acknowledge him for their
General after the death of the Prince of Conde, and the loss of the Battle
of Iarnack. His presence did revive their danted spirits, and stayed the
strangers who would no more serve a cause miserably dejected, condemned by the
Kings Edicts, and pursued with public hatred. Relligion found at Rochabeille
that she might hope for more by the presence of this Prince then by the force
of her Arms. The Army depended upon his authority, and he depended of his
Mothers, who being courteously severe, did not allow his youth any thing, but
what she might not well refuse.

After the Battle of Mont-conter, he went above three hundred leagues in a
short time, and having recovered new forces, he let them see at Rene-le-duk,
that he would never lay down Arms, until he had purchased for his party,
either an assured Peace, or an absolute victory. He first obtained a truce
for two months, and then a peace, more beneficial then the precedent, which
should have been the end, but it was but a change of the miseries of France.

Under his Influences appeared that fatal and furious Canicular, The Massacre
on saint Bartholmews day.
which made a burning sword run through the streets of Paris, and throughout
all the good Towns of France. His liberty was restrained, his conscience
forced, his servants banished. Some were ouer-whelmed with the blow, and
others were amazed at the clap, and all apprehended the danger.

The Castle of Bois de Veisaine which had been his first Academie, became his
prison, and the Court the exercise of his patience: King Henry the third gave
him his liberty, but thinking always that his abode in Court was an honorable
Captivity, he freed himself, under a coullor of going a hunting, and was
presently followed by them, who did expect on earth none other succors from
heaven, then by the care which this Prince seemed to have of their conduct and
protection.

He did with grief re-enter into the servitude which they do feel which
command in Civil wars, detesting in his soul all reuolts against the
Prince, and lamenting the condition of such as in these divisions were
sometimes forced to see, do and endure things contrary to the evidence of
reason, and the just feeling of their consciences. This war taught him great
lessons of patience, constancy, frugalitie and moderation. His virtue did not
exempt him from the outrages of necessity. He wanted money, his munitions
failed him, his forces disbanded, his friends grew weary, his own hope was
tired, and that which will hardly be credited in an other age, he had some
difficulty (having four score thousand pounds starling of yearly revenues)
to repel hunger, which does never force Kings. Among the discourses which he
has made to young men, to teach them how to suffer, he has been heard to
say, That having on a time made a great march, he was forced to eat a piece
of a Goose half broyled upon the coals without any bread, the which was so
old and tough, as it seemed to be of that race which had watched to save the
Capitol. He felt a great delight to have reduced delight to that point, as no
cross of fortune might alter her.

But amiddest all these wants, he never wanted courage, with the which he
promised himself to have whatsoever he wanted. A man may wish all things to
his enemy but courage, for therewith he shall deprive himself of the fruits
of his wishes, and force (which is incountred by valor) is always in danger.
The necessity of his own defense did justify his Arms, the which he laid
aside as soon as the fifth Edict of peace had settled concord and obedience in
the hearts and wills of the French.

He did nourish this new plant carefully, and, by the conferences of Flaix,
and Nerac, did pacify the winds which did blow against her first buddes. They
sought to engage him in new confusions, but as Ulysses, who for that he would
not be enchanted by the Sirens songs, caused himself to be tied to the Mast
of his ship, he kept himself close to the body of Saint Lewis tree, against
foreign Enchantments, which did solicit him to stir up new troubles. He
discovered a far off the practices that were made to renew the miseries, and
resolved with greater constancy to serve France, holding as a maxim, that
there was no health in the Estate, but with the Estate, and in the sincerity of
such thoughts, the death of the Duke of Alencon, the Kings only brother, set
him in the nearest degree unto the Crown.

France was then divided into three factions, the two agreed easily against
his; yet did he offer unto the King the service of his person and Arms, to
make him recover that which a careless bounty in the beginning of these
disorders (when as he preferred mild and fearful remedies to them that were
hardy and severe) had wrested from him. When as this storm fell upon him, he
had no other thoughts but to maintain France in Peace, to restore authority to
the King, and liberty to him and his.

The realm was plunged into present miseries, under the vain fear of that
which was to come and uncertain, the King suffering that during his life they
should dispute of the succession of his Crown. They did no more look of him,
but as the Sunne-set of his realm, all men's eyes were turned upon two
Princes, both great in courage and reputation. The one had a Crown already,
and the law of the Kingdom called him to the second: the other had great
parties to get it, and to keep it being gotten.

The heart of the one was inclined to love the other, they were seen in one
Chamber in the Lovure, they went a hunting, made matches at tennis, played at
dice, visited the Ladies together. The King of Navarre carried the Duke of
Guise behind him on horseback through the streets of Paris: He loved him
as his kinsman, having not any one nearer next to them of his name. These great
shows of friendship did not please the King, but as great hatred proceeds from
great love, and good Vinegar is made of the best wine, this love degenerating
into hatred, was the cause of great ruins, as we shall presently see.

If that age had carried desseignes worthy of the swords of these two, who were
the greatest personages that France ever bare, and two of the greatest
Captains in the world, she might have recovered those goodly and rich pieces
of her Crown, whereof she had been dispossessed. If their controversy had
been but for Achilles arms, and that they had been cast in the midst of
Palestina, to be his that should win them by the point of his sword, Ajax did
never contend for them so resolutely against Ulysses, as they would have done
together, but their thoughts reached not so far, the one contented himself with
that which was justly due unto his birth, and the other to purchase that which
he thought should belong unto his valor.

The King fearing the hope of the one the deseignes of the other, and the
courage of them both, suffered the one to force him to make war against the
other. So as in a moment we saw the Edicts revoked, and the chief forces of
the realm employed against the King of Navarre. He was assailed, during the
space of four years, by two royal Armies, one sent to refresh an other, and
led by great Captains. The God of armies gave him the victory at the Battle
of Coutras, to make it known that he would end in him the wonders of his
works, and lead him by the hand to the place whether his enemies thought he
should never come, especially after that he had been beaten with the
fulminations of the Vatican, and in a manner out of hope to pass the river of
Loire after the rout of that great Army which Germany had sent to his succor.

It seemed that the war was dead: but it did but sleep, we saw that furious
tumult of the Barricados burst forth, the which chased the King out of Paris;
and did wound his heart with an incurable ulcer. He dissembled this injury, he
pacefied those that had put him in choler, he used all policy and arts to
cover the fire of his revenge under the ashes of forgetfulness; he called an
Assembly at Rouan, whereas the Cardinal of Bourbon was held for the first
Prince of the blood, and the lawful heir of the Crown declared unworthy to
succeed.

The more they labor to quench this royal plant, the more it sprouts, the
Counsels for his ruin prove his advancement. The conspiracy of Joseph's
brethren was the bridge whereby he past to the chief honors of Egypt. Heaven
which never spares his prodigies with and against great men, took away at that
time with a flash of lightening the bar in the Arms of the house of Bourbon,
in the Chapel of Archambaud of Bourbon, brake it in pieces, and did not hurt
the flowers de Luce, nor the rest of the scutchin.

The two Pillars which supported the building were beaten down, and their fall
did shake all France. The King, who thought that he had quenched the fire of
war in the blood of these two Princes, saw it kindled more violently in every
corner of the realm, many came running to have some pieces of this general
combustion. Henry of Bourbon presented himself to quench it, he past the river
of Loire; And when his servants at this passage advised him to think of his
own safety, and to consider with whom he had to do. He said, The chance is
cast, the succor of France, and the service of my King are deerer unto me, then
mine own life.

He delivered the King from the danger wherein he was at Tours, and desiring no
other quallity then the first of his servants, he brought unto his obedience
Gargeau, Gien, la Charity, Pluuiers, Estampes, Dourdan, and fortefied his camp
in such sort before Paris, as he left it to his choice to enter by a Port or a
breach, by love or by force, within three days he had been seen in his
Louure and in his seat of Justice, without that fearful blow, the which
wounding him in the belly, did strike France to the heart, and reduced it to
that estate, as if it had not been speedily supported by that great Prince, it
had fallen in pieces. He received her and cherished her, as if he had been
born for France, and not France for him.

He might have come to the Crown by succession, which was the easiest way, but
God, to try his courage and to exercise the force of his mind, presented the
most painful and difficult unto him, that of Conquest, through such continual
toils, such apparent dangers, and such extreme afflictions, as a soul of
another birth then his would not have undertaken so painful a task for a
Diadem. I should make a History instead of a Panegyre, if I would represent
them all, they require a more free and large discourse.

Great actions may be represented in a small table, we may see a Caesar at the
passage of Rubicon, and how he defeated Petreius, Afranius and Varro in
Spain; Pompey at Pharsalia, Ptolomie in Egypt, and Pharnax in Asia, but so
many words, so many discourses, every action merits a volume. Even so we may
speak of the actions of this King after the manner of the Geographers, who note
great rivers with small lines, and strong and mighty cities, with points.

He begins the first actions of his reign by the last duties of Piety, which
he causes to be done unto the Kings body, the which was laid in Saint
Corneils Church at Compeigne, a place of safety and famous by the Interment of
two Emperors Kings of France. There was a horrible and monstrous confusion
seen, which sought to disorder and ouerwhelme all things. To a true and
lawful Royalty, they did oppose one feigned and Immaginary, under the name of
a Prince that was prisoner, who neither had the age, nor was of a profession
necessary to undertake the revenge of the Kings death, and the preservation of
the Realm.

Although the servants of the true King be divided in religion, yet are they
not in the fidelity which they owe him, nor in the affection of his service,
neither yet in desire to revenge the execrable Parricide, of their King. Their
honor and that of France is the only Trophee which they promise unto
themselves of this war.

Other nations do it not but for spoil and booty, but the French propound not
any thing unto themselves but the honor of the Kings service. Xerxes with his
Army of a hundred thousand fighting men would be loath to charge them, as he
repented to have taken arms against the Grecians, when as he understood that
all their ambition was to deserve, not crowns of gold but garlands of Olive,
and Persly at the Olympike games.

The Pope, who until this time had not seen clearly into these confusions,
repented that he had taken the shows and pretexts for the causes and reasons
of these confusions, he pierces into the desseigns, and does openly
discountenance them, whom in the beginning he had favored, and that which
before he would have done as a Partesan, he now begins to do as a Father.

The beginning of this reign had great difficulties, amazement being more
powerful in the minds of many, then affection was zealous in their hearts.

He saw himself constrained to endure of them, who could not endure of
themselves, to shut his eyes at that which he saw, and to turn away his ears
from that which he understood, practicing that Gracious manner cf pardoning,
seeming to be ignorant of the offenses, and suffering wickedness to drink
the poison which she her self had compounded. What other spirit then his
would have been capable to temper the passions of men's minds? What Ulysses
could have contained so many contrary wines in one bottell? And yet in the
midst of all this, his heart is firm, and his soul quiet, the more
rebellion ouerflowes, the more does the sea of his clemency swell.

Never Prince embarked in a better vessel, but never did the sea rage more
furiously to swallow him up. He had need of as many eyes as Argus to watch, as
many heads at Typheus to dispose, and as many Arms as Briareus to labor.
Attending some good occasion to employ his whole Army, he dispersed it into
three Provinces, Normandy, Champaigne, and Picardy. He assures himself of Pont
de Larche, to cut of the Comerce by water betwixt Paris and Rouen, he makes his
entry into Diepe, commends the fidelity of Caen, forces his enemies to retier
from Paris, and to come and be beaten at Arques. Paris who thought to see him a
prisoner, sees him triumphing in her suburbs, and knows that this torrent had
been stayed in one corner of the realm, to ouerflow more violently.

He chaseth rebellion out of the Provinces of Dunois, Vendosme, Maine, Perch,
and the better part of Normandy; he comes to Tours to refresh himself, and to
see his council, the sovereign companies of his Justice, and of his Finances.
From thence he forces Man's and Alencon, and it seemed that his Canons and
Regiments had wings, having marched above a hundred and fifty leagues in less
then two months. His councels pass the wisdom of those that council him;
his desseignes prevent the foresight of his enemies, his courage gives
assurance to his servants, and his happiness in all his enterprises makes them
say, that if he should be on the maine Sea upon a hurdle, he should not
perish. None but Jupiter can cast forth lightning, none but Hercules can handle
his club, and it fits best with Henry to wear a Crown of Palm and Bays. He
besieges Dreux, and seeing that his enemy did advance to succor it, he makes
show to retire, gives him time to pass the river to follow him, and seeing him
past, and engaged in the plain of Yury, he offers him battle, and wins it.

The battle of Marathon, where as 10000. Grecians defeated 100000. Persians on
foot, and 10000. horse is not so renowned to the Athenians, as this victory of
reason and right against numbers and force, is unto the French. All his grief
was to see the fields dyed with the blood of his subjects, for he could have
wished that the stranger alone had paid the expenses of his triumph. The fruits
of this victory put into his hands, in less then two months, fifteen or
sixteen good towns: only Meulan presuming rashly to resist his forces,
suffered the pains of her rashness. Sens was the only thorn which stayed the
course of his victory, but desiring to strike rebellion at the heart, and to
bury it in the same place where it was first bred, he turned head toward
Paris, cutting the veins which did nourish this huge body; he seized upon the
passages for victuals above and beneath, of the rivers of Seine, Maine, Yonne
and of Oyse, by the taking of Mante, Poissy, Melun and Montreau, and he takes
from them also the commodities of the plain by the taking of Saint Denis.

He reduced Paris to extreme misery, but desiring rather to fail in the
severity of war, then in the mildnes of his clemency, he entreats that City
like a father which called him Tyrant, daily, and understanding the fearful
effects which necessity wrought, that they did eat raw dogs publicly, and
that the mothers found their children missing, he desired to relieve the
despair of this people, succoring the Princes and Princesses with victuals,
suffering virgins, children, scholars and Churchmen to come forth, and by
this pity augmented the obstinacy of the rest of the besieged. She is freed
from famine to be aflicted with new Calamities and desolations; she has eaten
so many dogs, as she retains the rage and fury, with the which she falls
upon the chief Officers of Justice.

The King inuites the army of strangers to the hazard of a Battle, and
presents himself above the village of Chelles, but they will not hazard any
thing, and bound their Conquests with the ruin of Lagny: and the taking of
Corbeil. It came into France like a Torrent, but he forced it to return being
pressed and scanted for victuals, and did let them see at Longeual, that courage
prescribes a law to numbers, being content to let the vanquished know, how far
the honor of a victory does extend. In this Encounter there was a troop did
obstinately make head against him, engaged him in the thickest of the danger,
and slew five or six if his company near unto him. In the end it was in his
will to have cut them all in pieces, but as soon as he saw them humbled, he
left his Pistol, and retained the just advantage which he had, saying, That
he would not see them suffer harm, which were not in case to do any.

Soon after he had other means offered him to enter into Paris, but he would
not hearken to it, for that the execution could not be without great disorder.
One of his good servants, who has disdained life after the death of so good a
master, had an infallible enterprise, having means to let in by Port Bucy,
(whereof they had promised him the Keys) as many men as he would, to fortify
the courages and resolutions of them that were within the City, and who
desired rather to be taken by their King with the hazard of their goods, then
to be guarded by the Spaniards with the loss of their liberties. This great
Prince considering that it was impossible to prevent it, but in this surprise
the City would feel the fury of the war, and that the good must suffer for
the bad, he said, that he had rather not take Paris, then to ruin it.

Chartres is besieged, and having endured the siege two months, they were more
desirous to trust unto the mercy of the assailant, then to any hope of succors.
The enemy seeing that this Hercules could not be vanquished with any earthly
forces, they desire to draw lightning from heaven to consume and ruin him.
Gregory the 13. the oracle of Philip, of a common father, becomes the head of a
party, casting forth his fulminations against this Prince, the Bulls were burnt
at Tours and at Chalons.

The Parlaments with the like courage (as they had in former times, resisted
the insolences of Bonifaces, Pius and Julius) make it known, that the
remedies of fire and blood are not fit the languishings of France: that this
generous mind will not be forced, and that they must hope, that he will one day
bind the Church to call him sometimes her father, and sometimes her son.
Fear to displease the Pope, had not so much power over them, as the care of
the Estate, and the preservation of the liberties of the French church. The
army which came to demand the execution of the Bulls was as soon dispersed as
employed. At the sight of a hundred horse of the Kings white Cornet, a 1000.
Cassaks of watchet velvet, all imbrodred with gold and ciphers of keys joined
unto swords, dare not abandon the shadow of the walls of Verdun, and make it
known that their troop consists of many men and good horses, but of few
soldiers, and that they had to deal with men whose Arms feared not the lead
of Rome.

The prosperity of his affairs did nothing alter his mind from the desire he
had in the beginning of his reign, for the good of a Peace; The ouertures and
propositions whereof were secretly handled, for that they would not offend the
Strangers, who were better pleased to see France languish then cured, and who
labored to make the subject irreconciliable to their Prince. The time was so
close as it would not suffer the hearts of good men to be open; it was Impiety
to propound a peace, and treason to seek it.

He loses no time in the mean time, he passes into Normandy, to fortify
his servants and subjects by his presence: In the sight of the sun, and in
less then two hours he executes a memorable enterprise upon Lovuiers; he
causes his council to come from Tours to Mante, to resolve there upon his
chief and most important affairs, he enters into Picardy, beseegeth Noyon,
which at the third volley of the Canon yielded in view of the Army, which durst
not attempt to succor it, nor to hazard a Battle against a lesser number.

Having received some forces from the Queen of England he presented himself
before Rouen, sommons it, and does press it to yield him the duty which it
owes. The hope of succors makes the Inhabitants obstinate in their resolutions.
The King turned head toward this new Army, and resolved to fight with it,
contrary to the advice of his chief servants, who seeing the disproportion of
these forces, advised him to pass Pont de l'Arche. His courage bound him
rather to follow the path of danger with honor, then that of safety with
shame, and made him say, with Pompey, but with more truth and better success,
That in striking his foot against the earth he would raise up Legions. All his
servants which were far of returned to the army, the Duke of Parma who
thought to have an easy victory, saw his enemies in front of him.

The two armies were in sight at Aumale, where as the King was hurt with a
shot, which did not hinder him from pronouncing that royal and generous word
Charge Charge, and to do that which himself had commanded, charging valiantly
with his hurt into the thickest of the enemies fury, and then he made a
glorious retreat: diverse days after he was in all the occasions, where as
glory was never seen but in a world of dangers.

He beats his enemies at Bellencombe, he stripes them at Bure, and makes them
to quit Yuetot with dishonor and great loss.

In the view of two Squadrons of the enemies horse, he himself took a
Centinell perdu at Henry-quart-ville. This great Army was as much pressed with
necessity, as the chief commanders were with sickness, the soundest of them
both being carried in a litter. The King ouertakes them at Caudebeck upon the
river of Seine, and forces them to separate themselves, the one gets to Rouen,
the other by the savor of two bridges, the one at Caudebeck, and the other at
Charanton, recouers Chasteau Thierry, and seazeth upon Espernay.

This voyage did confirm him in the opinion which he had at the first, as a
Sovereign Prince interessed in the Kings defense, and as a Prince of Italy
enemy to the pride of Spain, that the Kings quarrel being Just and
maintained by a good sword, he would prevail, and that if the war continued
longer Spain should have more wood to heat her oven, then corn to send to
the mill. He said moreover That this Prince was an Eagle in war which soared
into the clouds when they thought to take him, and fell suddenly upon them
which held him to be farther off.

Quilbeuf ruined that which remained, it defended a seege three weeks, and
forced the assaylant to dislodge without drum or Trompet. Espernay was
recovered; eight horses put 300. to rout. Nothing stays the force of the Kings
arms but humility and piety: The vanquished have no hope but in the conquerors
mercy. He dismissed the Prince of Anhalt with the Reisters which he brought him.

He had promised at his coming to the crown, that he would not show himself
difficult to be instructed in the Religion of his predecessors. He had
vanquished his enemies, it was necessary he should vanquish himself. That rich
diamond of religion, whose fire is so pure and water so clear, did not shine
with that luster upon his Crown, as his Predecessors had carried it, for that
he did not serve God after their manner. It was desired that Piety, which has
given unto the Kings the glorious title of most Christian, should give unto him
that of the eldest son of the Church. He therefore suffers himself to be
Instructed, and being instructed does acknowledge the truth, the Church does
triumph thereat, and heaven does furnish bays. His valor has triumphed over
his enemies, and his Piety did triumph over his conscience. Many have had their
shares in his victory against his enemies, but in that of himself the conquest
is his own. This miraculous work of heaven ouer-threw new desseignes.

He makes profession of his religion at the entry of the Church of the first
Apostle of France, the sacred monuments of his Predecessors are the witnesses
of the sincerity of his heart. He caused himself to be anointed and crowned
in the first and most ancient Temple of Christendom, which they say was
dedicated by the Druydes, To the Virgin that should bring forth. His heart like
a Lamp prepared to burn; was no sooner kindled by this divine fire, whereof
Constancy and Truth are the Vestalls, but darkness vanished, and the pretexts
fell like walls undermined. The League, the Typhon of sedition, from whence
sprung so many Serpents and Vipers of disloyalty was smoothered under the Etna
of her own presumption and pride. Those great Colosses of foreign desseignes
were beaten down, the foundation of the pretext of Religion supporting them no
more. The war can no more carry the title of a war for religion. Paris at
the first speech of this Mass, or to speak more-properly, at the very ringing
of the Bell, receives him for Catholic, they run to Saint Denis to add the
tears of their miseries to those of joy, for a Grace which was more desired
then hoped for.

Hell storming at the saving of a soul so necessary for the glory of Heaven,
stirs up a wretch who undertakes to kill him. The Tiger stayed at the shining
of a glass: This Monster seeing the zeal of Piety to shine in the eyes of
this Prince, confessed that he had horror to offend the Sovereign dignity
ordained of GOD, among Angels and men. Rome which had cast forth her
fulminations against him from the top of Vatican, makes bonefiers for joy of
his return unto the Church, and erects a Triumph to his Piety.

The Island of Zeilan holds not any lawful King, but he that the day of his
Coronation carries the hereditarie ornament of the Crown, a Rubie as big as a
hand, and three fingers thick, for the which the great Cham of Cathay, would
have given a great and mighty City. In like manner Rome could not hold him for
most Christian King, which did not carry this precious Ring of the Religion of
Saint Lewis.

Pagan Rome has deserved great Elogies of all the nations of the earth, they
called her the City of the world, a heap of triumphs and trophies, and the
mother of all Cities. The Marbles and Medailes have named her, the eternal
City. They of Smyrna in the time of Cato: they of Pergamo under Augustus: and
they of Athens under Adrian, have given her the name of Divine, Holy, August
and Sacred. Christian Rome is called by those great lights of the East and
West, the Chair of the Apostles; the inexpugnable fort of truth: the
Metropolitaine of all the world; the Archetype of Religion; the miracle of
Piety, the Sanctuary of Innocence; the rule of Consciences, and the Mountain
of Syon. All tytles equally famous, but the glory could not be greater then by
that of a godly Mother to a great Prince, who acknowledging her, was received
by her as the eldest son of the Church. She sets these trophies on the top
of his conquests, thinking that of a soul so precious to Christendom, very
profitable to the Church, and that her groundwork could not be beautified
with a goodlyer plant.

France, which during her sleepy and insensible stupidity, had suffered her,
members to be cut off by pieces, began to open her eyes which she had kept
shut, for that she would not know her own miseries, nor feel her Infirmities,
she neglected all remedies, and now that she feels her own wounds, she
desires to be cured: This feeling was the infalible Crisis of her health: hope
revived good men, and confusion amazed the wicked. The Crow which could not say
from the top of the Capitol It goes well; may now say All will go well. This
body had yet some sound, vigorous and perfect parts, and it had good blood to
restore it. Gold set in work being cast into the fire, loses his fashion,
but not his weight. The ancient loyalty of the French, lost her form in this
fire of rebellion, but the substance remained perfect and without blemish, to
be repaired and beautified by the industry of this Prince.

The King promises to make her happy, if she desires to be so; he makes her to
taste the sweetness of a truce, to make her covet the felicity of Peace. The
Parliament of Paris having cast up the phleme of temporising, kindles his
courage, and by a decree disperceth the Chymera's of Spain, which thought to
reduce France unto a Province. The most obstinate are forced to confess, that
the earth strives in vain against the decrees of heaven; that whatsoever had
been done to keep under and ruin this Prince had raised, preserved and
advanced him: that in declaring him unworthy of the crown, they had drawn him
from the farthest bounds of France, and thinking to hold him in the waves of
division, they had brought him to the Port of greatness. Behold in the end he
is the Hercules of Gaul, the tamer of Monsters, which France had not brought
forth, but did nourish and entertain.

Paris which had resisted his mildness, is surprised by force: he takes it
with 4000. men. She sees her self taken and feels it not, neither is there any
alteration but that of joy dispersed through all the streets for so sweet a
change. He enters like a King and entreats like a father. He changes the sword
of just revenge, into a scepter of mild command: he pardons even the A
seditious number of leaguers within Paris.
sixteen, the people adore him and kiss his feet. The Lovure receives his
Majesty, the Palace his justice, the temple his piety, and all orders his
clemency. He visits the Cathedral church of this city to give God thanks,
who was the Author of this conquest, the founder of this authority, and the
fountain of this felicity.

Laon was a refuge for the foreign troops whom he suffered to depart out of
Paris. they tried the effects of his cleme^cy, and felt of his valor: for
having sustained three asaults in one day, and seeing the defeat of two mighty
conuoyes, they yielded. This prise was followed by the reduction of all
Picardy. He beseegeth and takes Noion, and forces the town and castle of
Dreux. He casts the firebrand of war upon those who had set France on fire,
and causes Artois, the county of Bourgondy, Piedmont and Sauoy, to feel the
just fury of his arms. He strikes every where as soon as he threatens, He
seems to be mounted upon Pegasus, to be in all places where his presence is
necessary. Behold he enters triumphing into Lions, and in an instant is upon
the frontier of Picardy, from thence his authority like a spirit of life
disperseth it self throughout all the members of the body.

But it is not sufficient for him to have made war, if it does not produce
peace. The most royal virtue of a great Prince which enters into a troubled
estate is Justice, the most mighty is valor, the greatest effects come from
Arms, and the most glorious fruits of Arms from peace. He shows that he
has not made war, but for peace, that his club, (like unto that of Hercules)
is made of an Olive tree, and his sword dipped in Oil. He adds unto his Bays a
crown of Olyue branches, he gives peace to them that demand it, and does not
refuse it, but unto those who being ostinate in their own ruin contemn it.
Five Dukes sacrifice to this royal clemency.

The first obtaines peace for his estate, Duke of Lorraine.
being councelled and governed in this resolution by Ferdinand great Duke of
Tuscany, a most wise and happy Prince.

The second for his party, Duke of Maienne.
whereof he is the head, and which give him the glory of great continency in
so great liberty, and of wise command in a furious confusion, for that he
would never yield that religion should be wronged, nor the estate ruined.

The third, Duke of Guise.
who seemed to be most interessed, for that in this civil tempest he had
lost his Father and his Uncle, gives his wrongs unto France, and has the
honor to receive the Kings first embrasings, he is content to command in that
Province, whereas his grandfathers, by the mothers side, had sometimes
reigned, and that France should see four young plants spring out of that tree,
which the Kings fury had ouer-throwne.

The fourth is content to leave the troubles of the world, Duke of Ioyeuze.
to prepare himself to a solitary life, where he had begun to live.

The fifth did beautify the trophies of the Kings glory, Duke of Mercure.
by the whole reduction of the goodliest Province in France, and sees the
Hermines to revive at the smell of the Flower de Luce.

This great King had by his clemency won these great men, whose hearts had
never yielded to weakness. He did so govern their humors and affections, as
he made them profitable for his service. M. Sceuola had wonderfully wronged
Porsenna, but the constancy of him that did the offense, changed the revenge
of the offended into admiration. He restored him his sword, and Sceuola taking
it with the left hand (for the other was burnt) said unto him; Porsenna, Thou
could not have vanquished me by fear, and now thou have overcome me by
courtesy. Whereupon he discovered unto him a conspiracy of three hundred
Romans, and protested that he was not sorry that he had not slain so good
a man. Generous minds will not be forced nor baffeled. Laurel is bitter to
them that bite it. There are herbs very sweet when they are gently handled,
but they lose their savor when they are roughly rubbed.

This Prince did never desire to be revenged but by the justness of his arms,
but when he saw that other means would not prevail. In the greatest declining
of his affairs, and when as necessity did suffer him to seek revenge, either
by policy or by force, he let them see that the generosity of his courage
could not yield unto the profit which may grow by a base and wicked action.
After the defeats of his Reisters, a gentleman came unto him at Chastel Ialeux
and told him that he had means to ruin the Duke of Guise and his chief
enemies, setting fire unto a sausedge being planted in a certain place of the
Palace of Guise, in Paris. To whom he answered, be gone, speak no more of it,
even as you measure to others so shall it be measured to you again.

The temple of clemency being open unto great men, was not shut to the meanest.
He does embrace them and does not refuse to capitulate with simple captains,
suspending for a time the greatness of his majesty to accomodate himself to
the inconstancy of the world, and to show that his hands no less accustomed to
bear the palms of valor then the crowns of clemency knows how to raise up
them that humble themselves, and reform such as go astray. He is content to
hinder the fall of such as did shake and waver at the first wind of sedition;
experience having taught him that the people suffer themselves to be abused
with bruits, and opinions, he does therefore carefully observe the practices
and policies of these deceivers.

The pleasure of liberty being recovered, defaceth the sorrow of forepassed
servitude. All the revolted Towns seek the shortest way to retire themselves
out of this misery, and confess that the shortest follyes are the best. They
return to their duties, not by order of their quallities, nor the reason of
example, but as they are touched with repentance of rebellion, the which does
now seem a dying lamp, that having nothing to feed it leaves him in suspense
whether it be dead or alive. Al his thoughts tended to the happy end of all his
victories, and to increase the prosperity of France, when as his enemies
surprised Amiens with Apples and nutts, and trobled him to recover it with
Canon shot making it known that there was nothing impossible nor impregnable
for his courage.

Then did Europe call him the Invincible: a title which he did not purchase
with his arms a cross, nor by his Lieftenants, but with the price of his
blood and the peril of his life in the view of his enemies, and with the
consent of all the world. To say that he has conquered France, and subdued in
France the most warlike Nations in Europe, is to say all that can be said, to
judge whether that he had deserved that glorious title of always victorious,
always Augustus. This great King alone was worthy of the conquest of France,
and France was alone worthy of the valor of so great a King. France is no
estate of Pigmes which may be conquered by armies of Cranes. It is neither
America nor Canada, contryes in a manner not habitable by reason of the
ordinary inundations, whereas the Inhabitants are forced a part of the year to
leave the land and to live in Barks and Canoes upon the water, whereas the
people are so dull and brutish as they dare not think themselves to be men.

It is not that miserable region of the Icthiophages, whose towns and houses
are made of fishbones, nor that part of Numidia whereas they live of herbs and
water, it is the Queen of Realms, it is the realm of Kings, the beauty of
delights, the felicity and the force of the world, so rich, abundant and
fruitful as in cutting of superfluous things she has no need of the world for
that which is necessary. It is she that has made head against the Romans, then
against the Goths, Hunns, Vandales, and Sarazens; which has joined unto her
crown, Germany, Hungary, Saxony, a part of Spain, Palestina, and the Empire
of Greece; she has given laws and Kings to other Crowns, and brought the
French name in such reputation, as the Christians of the East used not any
other. Yet she has not the wonders which makes other nations of the world
more admired then frequented, and from whence no man comes but he has the
privilege to purchase credit, as they were wont to say of those that went for
Iseland; If I say she did not nourish cruel and savage beasts like unto
Afric; If she does not carry trees fifteen faddom about the body, as at
Peru, nor does produce cloves like the Moluques, nor cinomon as at Bantan,
nutmegs as at Iauan, nor ginger and pepper as at Calecut, musk as at Sertuge,
perfumes as in Arabia, nor Cassia and balm as in Egypt: If it be not as rich
in Diamonds, as the Island at Zeilan, nor in pearls like to Var, nor in
Emerauds like to China, nor in rubies like to Perne nor in Opalls like to
India, she is mighty in men, capeable to conquer all this, If they knew the
means as well to keep it as to get it. Fruitful and flourishing in men which
understand the true point of honor, the true honor of valor, which cannot
yield to dangers and which teaches them to go on and how to dye better then
to kill. It is she that carries the crown of glory and of piety, by the
continuance of her monarchy, the constancy of her piety, the power of her
empire, the reputation of her princes, she carries the title of the Queen of
people and nations. Great was the glory of this Prince to have reduced France
under his obedience, great indeed to have vanquished so many great courages
that were armed against him. Posterity, which shall judge of all this justly
will ascribe no less glory unto him to have forced the King of Spain to
reason then in former ages was given to Alexander to have subdued the persians,
Caesar the Gaulls, and Pompey the Parthians. If this truth does not pass
without amazement, It will enter without contradiction into the minds of those
which know that they had to do with men who were Lions in garrisons and Hares
in combats, and this Prince had in front and of every side men who were sooner
surprised with death then with fear.

The inequality of arms, and of forts proves the difference. Caesar found so
small resistance in one of his greatest designs, as it is no wonder if he did
not write so boldly, I came, I saw, and I over came, for in less then ten
years he conquered three hundredth nations to the Empire of Room. Pompey in
pursuing Metridates did number his victories by his iourneyes and the seiges by
his lodgings. When as Alexander had defeated Darius in battle, he found the
whole contry open, there was not any resistance, but as nature gives at the
passage of Rivers.

If these 3. great Captains whom I hold without comparison, but of themselves
to themselves, had been fronted by our caualary, our regiments, our Canons, our
muskets and our petards, their glory had not been so great and so dispersed.
Artilery is an Invention so new, so terrible, and so different from all the
ancient engines, as we may say that at these days we make war not with Iron,
as in former time, but with fire, not with violent force, but with the
moderation of wisdom and temporising: they do not commit any thing to the
hazard of fortune, but that she carries away by surprise.

The greatest armies of Europe have marched against him, and he has defeated
the greatest Captains. The death of the Earl of Egmont and the ruin of his
troop did serve as a triumph of that memorable day, whereas the God of armies
gave sentence for justice against force, for a royalty against tyranny. Farneze
a Roman by birth, Alexander by name, Achilles by valor, and Ulysses in
policy, did by two goodly retreates cover the weakness of his forces, and
the refusal of a battle. The Earl of Montmarchiano, general of the Popes
army, who had tied the Sword unto Saint Peter's Keys, repasseth the mountains,
without any fruits of his voyage but repentance; Charles Earl of Mansfield
knows, that to come to fight, to vanquish, and to triumph, are all one in this
Prince. His forehead glistering like a Comet at the encounter of Fountain
Francoise, forced the Constable of Castile to fly.

Albert Archduke of Austria, having succeeded Ernest his brother in the
general command of the Low Countries, seeing by the glorious recovery of
Amiens, that the King could not admire any thing (above the Laurel branches
which did crown his head) but the Heavens and the Sun, that it was a folly
to be his neighbor and not his friend, sought his friendship with great
earnestness. Phillip the second King of Spain, and the first moouer of all
these great engines, giving motion to all the lesser wheels, considering that
fortune had not yet raisd any one to be victor over France, and that Charles
the fifth his Father had always exhorted him to live in peace with her,
protesting that there was nothing so gallant or courageous as the Nobility of
France, and holding it a great honor to have had two Princesses of the blood of
the Kings of France, for his grandmother and great grandmother; that war
against a Prince, who was given and cherished by God, was his ruin, and that
an accord was the last anchor of his affairs, desired to end his life and his
reign, by the assurance of a peace for his son, and the husbands of his two
Daughters.

They that had seen the King bred up in arms, and to command armies at
foureteen years of age, his first exercise in dangers and perils, that he had
purchased the glory to know how to vanquish, to use the victory, to subdue his
enemies, and to pardon them being subdued, could not think that a Prince of
that courage, of that humor, and of that fortune, would think of peace, and
quench the thirst of glory, wherewith the greatest courages are wonderfully
altered; and yet he smothered the seeds of civil war, and ended all foreign
war with much glory, profit, and reputation, so as all men thought it should
continue long, giving unto his people a happy peace, rich in all kinds of
prosperities, the which restored rest unto the people, liberty to the nobility,
dignity to the Church, and to all hope, suffering France to take breath, being
no more impossible for a man's body to breath without lights, then for an estate
to live without peace.

Pope Clement the eight was the Angel and the minister of this peace, desiring
that the concord of Christian Princes might be applied to the advantages which
this common enemy drew from their divisions. He had no greater desire in his
soul then to see the injuries of Gods holy name revenged in the whole land,
and the triumph of our redemption raised, whereas infidelity and ingratitude had
cast it down. The world cannot furnish a war more just, a Croisado more
holy, nor a victory more heroyck. The fruits of the Palmtree of Europe are
bitter, they of Afric have no taste, they are only fair and good in Asia. All
the virtues of this Prince have assisted in the building of this public peace,
but piety has the chiefest honor. When as the people saw that he served God
in the religion of his father, they believed that the war was not for
religion, but against the state, they held them all for enemies that would not
acknowledge a Prince whom the heavens by so many miracles had acknowledged.
After the bond which is given to piety, we know not to whether of these three
virtues, Justice, valor, or clemency France is more beholding for her rest.
They be all three great, all three royal, neither had they ever any worthier
throne then in the heart of this Prince. All have a share in the restoration
of this estate: the one had been the sword, the other the buckler, and the
third the crown, the one the stern, the other the ship, and the third the
port. Valor chalengeth the honor of two famous Battles which did save the
Crown, and delivered France from five foreign armies; to have caused courage
to triumph over nombers and right over force, in a hundredth combats and as many
encounters, to have clipped victories wings to the end she should not fly out of
France.

Justice has retained many towns, many people within the bounds of their
duty, whom the respect of wisdom, the condition of affairs the indiscretion
of zeal might have corrupted. She has distinguished the causes from the
pretexts, she has carried a light before truth in the darkness of these
confusions, she has fortefied men's minds and produced examples both of doing
well and suffering much,

Clemency has vanquished towns that were invincible to the force of arms and
Justice of the Kings cause, she is never weary of pardoning, the more you draw
of this fountain, the fuller it is, and the sweeter her water. She has wisely
mingled the victors with the vanquished, She has given life to the guilty, to
augment the number which do not live but by the glory of his bounty. It is the
Altar of Delos, which Greece called holy, for that it never had been gored with
any sacrifise. That Prince which is desirous to save much, must pardon much.
His birth made him great, his fortune greater and his clemency greatest of all.
If he had not pardoned so many rebels, he had not commanded over so many
subjects: when his Justice did represent unto him, that examples of punishments
were necessary, his clemency answered, that the forests of France would not
furnish gibets, if He should believe her. Some one besought him to give him
leave to carry the cannon against some that held his house, he demanded of
him, What he would do when he had forced them* his choler made him answer,
that he would hang them all. Whereupon the King sent him away with this mild
reply, I have no Canon to that use.

You powerful and warlike nations of the world draw your Princes from their
graves, make them to live again with their trophies and triumphs, you shall
not see any which shall march equal in clemency to ours. Where shall you
find examples of this greatness of courage? Paris is the perpetual theater
of this clemency. He might have taken Paris, and the fear to loose it, makes
him to neglect the taking.

He besieges Paris, and supplies the besieged with victuals. He gives
liberty to those that desire to fly from the miseries of the siege. He takes
Paris, and makes the victors condition in show no better then the vanquished,
his enemies go forth with their arms, being grieved to be bound to him for
their lives, whose death they had so often desired. They see him in Paris like
a private Gentleman which visits his friends.

Spain and Italy could not believe that he could trust himself in a Town
which had so much offended him, and hold it for a miracle, that he had no
feeling of these offenses. There is nothing so corrosiue that can alter the
gold of his bounty. Whereof we shall see so many proofs in his History, as
they that have not seen them will hardly believe them.

All have had need of the force of his clemency, many have served as a Trophee
to the power of his Arms, few have felt the severity of his Justice, and many
have found more profit to have been vanquished by his Arms, then to have
resisted. This truth has no need to be set forth with other colors then her
own. It is an oftentation of ignorance, rather then of judgment, to seek
reasons to prove a thing that is known to all the world. A lawful power has
no need of the colors of falsehood, to get belief that she is always
moderate in her prosperities, and that her victories are neither cruel nor
bloody. Tyranie, the most cruel of savage beasts, delights in flattery, which
is the worst of domestic and tame creatures.

He was both valiant and happy. He never lead men to danger, but he brought
them back to glory. Occasions have often forced him to do the duties of a
resolute soldier, having performed that of a great Captain. He has always
loved Achilles lawnce better then Paris harp. Never Prince has run into
greater dangers, encountered more glory, nor better used his victories. His
valor was not without judgment, nor his designs without conduct. Minerua has
always carried a Torch before this Ulysses. As he has had justice in his
arms, wisdom in his councels, vigillance, deligence, and fidelity in
executions, sufferance in pain, and patience in occasions, so his victories
have always been without cruelty or insolency. These three virtues have
restored France unto her King, and the French unto themselves, the children
are content with the follyes of their fathers, and desire not to succeed them.
From the effects of rebellion, they draw the fruits of obedience, they suck
honey out of the stone and oil out of the flint. They that were hottest in
sedition are become most zealous in duty, and it seems that famous sorceresse
has made them more beautiful and more clear then before. If the severity of
his Justice would have used his rigor, it had pulld up many goodly plants the
which being manured with clemency have produced many excellent and necessary
fruits of obedience, service and merit.

All the injuries of France were repaired, only one remained, the just fealing
whereof binds these three powerful virtues to seek reueuge, Justice declares
war, Valor makes it, and Clemency ends it. The lightening which should be
feared of those which are not tucht with it, is ready to fall. Justice shows
the lightenings a far off, Valor causes the thunder to be felt, and
Clemency repayres the ruins, in a manner, as soon as they are made. The King
nombers his iourneys as he passes by so many towns which he takes. His Canons
ecchoing in the Alps amazeth all Italy. The Ambassadors of those Princes and
commonwealths finding it lodged in places, whereas the Snow takes from their
eyes the forms of houses, and the compass of the horizon, were so amazed as
they thought that enchantment, taking from them the true substance of that
which they sought, had substituted a fancy.

That proud Rock of Montmelian, which some held to be an Acro-corinth, humbles
it self: and Charles Emanuel duke of Sauoy, who sought by his assurance to
amaze or divert the mischief which did threaten him, submits himself wisely
unto reason. Peace is confirmed on all sides, valor gives unto France the
glorious title of mighty Empire, Justice makes it the Empire of felicities, and
Clemency augments the felicities of this Empire.

After so many actions, more to be admired then imitated, and so many glorious
labors comparable to those of Hercules, if fables may march hand in hand with
truth, France does acknowledge him for her Savior, her Esculapius, her
Restorer. But she cannot believe that her felicities are perfect, nor her
safety assured, if her Prince do not justly carry the name of father of a
Daulphin, as she does acknowledge him father of the people. It is a great
contentment for a King when as his subjects account his sterillity among the
public miseries, and that his infirmities engender not hopes but fears.

The seal which the eternal providence adds to her felicity was the marriage
of this great Prince, with her who may be said to be the only flower of
Queens, as Florence which has brought her forth is the flower of all the
Cities of Italy. If the law of religion were as powerful as that of duty,
they should appoint sacrifices unto her, as Rome did to the nursse of her two
founders, for she is mother to three Princes, the lively and firm pillars of
this estate, for whose lives France is more bound to heaven, then it should be
for the death of all her enemies.

Thus the great God who is the author of union and concord, did show that this
peace was pleasing unto him, and added to this blessing two graces, which could
not be expected but from his hands, both which make estates absolutely happy,
for as children are the hopes of kingdoms, so are Queens the comforts of
Kings. He who preferred wisdom before all other things that were offered unto
him from above, says, that such an encounter is the gift of God, and just
recompense of merits, and he compares it to the Sun rising, to a Lamp
before the Altar, to a piece of gold, to a foundation upon a Rock.

As he had purchased the name of most victorious in actions of war, so he
got that of most great in affairs of peace. He had caused himself to be
feared and admired in one season, he makes himself to be redoubted and
beloved in another.

Upon the height of this great tranquillity, he considers the winds and clouds
that may trouble it. And as they that are near to mount Athos see the Sun
sooner then others, he discouers with the first how designs rise, and how the
affairs of the world are managed. His eyes are the stars which watch while the
people rest. He has no need to have a Page say unto him, like unto the King of
Persia, Rise Sir, and take order for your affairs.

He watches not simply as a King, but like a Pastor, Who has more care of
his flock then of himself. A royalty has so long and troublesome watchings as
David in his distempers desired not the wings of an Eagle to fly high, but of
Doves to rest himself, for that they fly low near unto the banks, not of
seas, whereas the spirit is always in pain, having to deal in two such
inconstant things, water and wind; but of those rivers whereas they neither
lose bottom nor banck, where-as the strange savor of the water does not offend
their stomachs, nor the fear of danger, nor distrust least the calm should
be turned unto a storm.

His watches makes us to sleep in safety, breathing the sweet air of concord
and felicity, so as France were no more bound to those which were the founders
of their greatness, then to this Prince which was the setler of their rest.

They should seem very ignorant, or malicious, that should not acknowledge the
great vigilancie in the concord which was sometime unknown unto the French, by
that furious division of minds, which made France like unto that Image of that
unfortunate Laococon, the which is seen in one of his royal houses, and does
represent the extreme agonies of his fathers death whom the serpents had
slain, of the child's pains whom he had stung, and of his fear of another whom
he had foulded in his tail. He knew well what it was to fear, to suffer, and
to dye at one instant by the violent cruelties and cruel violence of division,
which in the end makes those places where she inhabits, like unto those whereas
poison grows, so naked and bare of all fruit, as even the barren dust cannot
remain there.

The Gods of the ancients are represented with a harp in their hands. It is a
pleasant thing to see Apollo of Megara to hold a lance in one hand and a harp
in the other, not that Music was their profession, but the accord and
harmoniacal proportion of estates and of people is their chiefest duty that
command and reign, and that Prince may be compared unto the Gods who hold men's
minds in concord.

He can order and dispose of things according to seasons, his remedies are not
contrary to time. A good temper makes all difficulties easy, and we may say
that he has in his disposition those two fabulous tons, out of one of the
which goes out the clouds which melt into waters, and from the other the
winds which makes the rain to cease. The Panther after a continued rain does
not cast forth so sweet a perfume, as this peace does seem sweet after a
great inundation of blood and tears; And to the end this first bud, which did
but show it self should not be withered with the winds of discontent, which
were not yet pacified, and that private murmurings should not end with general
complaints, he gave order to repair all things that were needful, and to cut
up the roots that might breed troble, and above all to make him serve in peace

The praise, which is given a Prince for his Religion and piety seems
superfluous, for there is not any one but should have it in perfection. To
separate religion from a princes heart were to draw a flower from the stock, the
branch from the body: one cannot live without the other. He cannot have so
little Irrelligion but he has enough to do much mischief, and the least
errors that he commits are never small. The zeal of Religion, which serves for
a pretext in the deseignes of great men, is the chief instrument which does
move the wills of the meaner sort, who cannot endure to be forced in their
conscience.

It is a folly in princes to think to reign over men and will not suffer God
to reign over them. Besides the common obligation with all creatures, they are
bound, for that their power depends of that of god, and their lands are of his
land. They must like Ezechias reign under the commandments of God, and the
law of God must reign over the people. While their King had care of the service
of God, they were always well served. Whiles the Ark appeared in the head of
the army, and the Army honored the Arc, the people of God passed no day
without triumph. The harmony is admirable betwxit the Church and the State,
Moises prays for Joshua, Joshua fights for Moises.

Without the zeal of Gods service Constantine had not merited that glorious
surname which the Calender of the Church of Constantinople gives him, of
Apostle among Kings, of equal to Apostle, and other which the marble monuments
have preserved for him, of founder of the public peace and defender of
Religion, and of the faith. Without this zeal the two Theodoses should not be
held the two firm pillars of Christendom, our Kings should not be called most
Christian. Rauenna had not preserved in one of her towers this goodly
inscription: Pipin the godly, was the first which opened the Paxe to this great
Church.

This Diamond of Piety is so goodly in the heart of this Prince, as it has no
need of any foil to set it forth. Dotage and superstition are displeasing, and
sometimes he laments the simplicity of those which are abused, and the
covetousness of such as do suffer it, and for all this he does not offer to
lay his hand to the censor, or to shake the Arc, contenting himself (without
wronging the piety of his fathers) to keep a just measure in the harmony of
conscience; The greatest and most continued toil of all others, for he can
never be so just, nor so equal, but some mallcontent will murmr. He must
set diverse instruments of providence to work, to distinguish the zealous, he
must know the interest of those which make use of the Kings authority to
offend piety, and of those which make a show of piety to offend the Kings
authority, But he never gives ear to counsels nor to remedies which he knows
to be more dangerous then the mischeife, and having learned that faith must be
manured by doctrine and not by arms, by the fire of Charity and not by the
steel of might He leaves all the glory of the triumph of arms to heaven, and
is content to see the combats for religion changed into disputations, the
battles into conferences, the Canons into tongues, and the swords into pens.
Men's minds grow more tame and give ear one to another: they which had gone
astray for company are reclaimed by example. Every one thinks of his own pack.
And parradise is open for all men, get it who can.

The ministers of Religion, being allowed by the Kings Edict, labor to get
ground: The Prelates of the Catholic Church having long relied upon the
continuance of their possession seek out their titles which they had
neglected, and produce them against those that troubled them, but the
contentions of doctrine does not touch the words of obedience, they yield unto
Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God that which is Gods, every man
renders an account of his conscience unto GOD, and his duty unto his King.

Duties are performed without confusion, and there is not any one but knows,
that whatsoever binds them to the service of God, exceeds all other bonds
both natural and civil. God before all, and all after the King, where there
is question of Gods honor, you must tread all humane respects under foot;
Therein the children are strangers, and the fathers unknown. The fathers
nourish their children, not with their bread, but that of God, and God has
redeemed them, not with his blood, but that of his son. Where there is
question of the Princes health, the life of those from whom we hold ours, or
which holds from us, should not be more dear unto us.

An estate or commonwealth may fitly be compared to a great family, the Prince
is the Father ordained by God, but with more authority over his subjects then
the father has over his children, and duty is not more strictly commanded and
recommended to children and servants toward the father of a family, then to
subjects toward their King. This benefit of concord in matters so difficult to
reconcile, bound the King to praise God, and the realm to thank the King, and
to give him the glorious name of Chasemischiefe, which Greece has given to
Hercules, as to the author of their public safeties. Princes cannot do more
for their people, there is no benefit that does equal this, and nothing does
so much augment their affection toward their Princes, as the remembrance of
their benefits. God is worshipped and served by men, for the great good and
benefit they receive daily, and the thanks that they yield unto him, are new
demands.

That great and necessary temper which the King brings to the preservation of
the public concord, is not generally received for a certain proof of his
piety, they will have it more manifest. Slander, who has much tongue, and
little forehead, who is not pleased but in licking ulcers, has been so
impudent as to refer the most clear and sincere proofs of his piety to
hypocrisy, and to say that his mouth like unto Annius Satire, did blow both
cold and whote. His enemies not able to believe, but that this vessel did
still retain the savor with which it had been seasoned, said, that if his
conversion had been true, it had produced the same effects which they had
seen in those great Princes, who had declared themselves irreconciliable
enemies to those whom they held to be forsaken of the true religion, not
allowing temples nor altars to the subjects, being impossible that truth
should agree with lies, that Joshua could have intelligence with Achan, Sampson
with the Philistines, David with Goliath, Asa with the Idolaters, Constantine
with Arrius, Theodosius with Nestorius, Martian with Apolinaris, and Eutiches;
Saint Lewis with the Albigeois, and where the Arc is, Dagon must needs give
place.

Happy for thee, poor France, that these reasons which are not good at all
seasons, nor in all countries, are no more whispered in thine ears; that these
inhumaine councels which have made thee loose so much sense, and so much blood,
are now banished from the thoughts of thy Princes. Councels of Empiricks and
Montebancks, no Christian councels, and much contrary to the eternal wisdom
which seperateth the good grane from the bad until the harvest.

If thou did believe them, thou must open the wound which the sovereign
balm of this concord had cured, and should execute upon thine own
children, who had so well served in thy restoration and liberty, the threate
of Cresus against the Lamsachnes, to root them out like unto pine-trees, which
being once cut do never put forth again. As the Piety of this Prince is
slandered by strangers even so many of the religion, from whom he had separated
himself, did believe that the necessity of his affairs, having forced him to
this change, his heart had not consented unto it but only in show. A great
spirit among them seeing where Chastell had hurt him, spoke thus boldly unto
him, Sir, for that you have left us with the mouth only, God has hurt you but
on the lip.

But both friends and enemies were forced to change this discourse, when as he
would have the honor of Fountainbleau remain to the Catholic Church, when as
they saw him press with such earnestness the Duchess of Bar his sister to
be instructed; when as he had restored the mass in three hundred places from
whence it had been banished; when as so often, in so many discourses he
blamed the Intention of the first authors of these novelties: saying they had
done like unto him that to cleanse his fathers house setts fire of it to have it
done the more speedily.

Every man knows how he did comfort those, wcich had any thought to reduce
themselves. When he saw them waver in the contrary opinions and that it seemed
they would be instructed in that which they would not willingly believe, he
added these reasons which were always most powerful. He told them that it is
great presumption in children to know more then their mother, obstinacy not to
be moved at the secret motions of the spirit, which breaks and consumes
presumption, reduces vanity into powder, and mocks at the wisdom of the wise.
He has been often heard say, that he would have lost an arm, that they
which were in error, had acknowledged the truth; but that faith was a gift of
GOD, where unto he called all, but did not enforce any.

Great is the bounty of God, who vouchsafes to seek man, great is the
rashness of man, who causes God to seek him, and great is his felicity if he
will be found. He therefore exhorts the Bishops and Doctors, to entreat
these sick men with gentle and easy remedies, and that the heat of passion
should yield to wisdom and mildness. That royal speech came out of his
mouth, they must be tamed, as they say Hercules did a certain Giant, which is
(as they of the religion reproach it unto me) embracing them he should smother
them. This piety had extended her branches beyond the seas. The Christians
which are in the East confess that his respect had preserved many Churches,
and that the marks of our redemption remain still in despite of the rage and
envy of the Jews, who vanted that they had obtained the destruction thereof
from the Emperor of the Turks. So many new houses of religion, of doctrine,
and of piety, show with what zeal the heart of this Prince was enflamed, and
that they may say of him as of Theodosius, that he had no less care of the
affairs of the church then of his own. But this is not enough, Pope Clement
the 8. does not think that the church does enjoy the full fruits of the peace
which he had procured, unless the Jesuits might return to their houses. The
King restores them, nay rather he settled them in France; for they were not
before as they had found by proof. His clemency defended them against the
reasons of the first seat of his justice, against the tears of his eldest
daughter the University of Paris. And although the fruits of the Olyue-tree
come late, yet their liquor is good and wholesome. Even so as this grace had
been long attended and pursued, nine years, it was no less sweet unto them
that received it. It was published throughout all the world, thanks came from
all parts, They of Peru, and Chochin, Iapan, Goa and China, added presents of
some singularities of the Contry. It was followed with the ruin of the
Pyramide, with greatest effects of love and magnificence. He gave them his
house of La Flesh with the garden. I have observed the pleasure which he took
in speaking of that action and what content he received when as a great
Cardinal told him that by this restoring his majesty had gotten two thousand
learned pens for his service and perpetual fame: When as they represented
unto him the Catalogue of Colleges, and the thanks of three provinces of
France, He used these words unto them, which should serve as an Epigraphe upon
all their houses, assurance follows confidence, I trust in you, assure your
selves of Me, with these papers I receive the hearts of all your company, and
with the effects I will witness mine unto you. I have always said that they
which fear and love God well, cannot but do well, and are always most
faithful to their Prince. We are now better informed, I did hold you to be
otherwise then you are, and you have found me other then you held me, I would
it had been sooner, but there is means to recompense that is past: love Me,
and I will love you, But the Jesuits do not alone enjoy this sweet light of
this favor; merit calls other companies whereas they find great and worthy
objects of this Princes grace who applies not there spirits but to the glory
of God, and the public good, worthy to enjoy dignities, for that they had no
desire to obtain them, capable to execute their charges, for that they fear
not to lose them, and are content rather to deserve them then to pursue them.
Among them he has found great servants for God and his Church, and the choice
which he has made of their merit, has given glory to his judgment. The
Bishops and Pastors which he had chosen are Timothes in their houses,
Chrysostomes in their pulpits, and Augustines in disputation. Three Cardinals,
made by his hand, have been found so accomplished in all virtues, as the
conclaue had not sought any other to fill the first chair of the Church, if
the scruple of the beginning had not staid it.

The estate of piety and religion being settled in his estate, nothing wauers
in the policy but he does assure it, nothing stumbles but he raises it up
again, and although he lives in the very center, yet if there be any motion
upon the extremities, his hand is there as soon as his thoughts. The
sweetness of rest, the pleasures of peace, are not let to great voyages in the
most difficult seasons of the year. Sedition begins to break out in Poytou,
he disperceth it; the affairs of Normandy have need of his presence, he goes
thither and gives order for the government of Cane; there is a division betwixt
the town and citizens of Metz, but it vanished at the first beams of his eyes.
His service is disturbd in some places of Gyenne, but at the first news of his
coming, every one does sacrifice to his obedience. Sedan has the honor to
make him arm powerfully, and they content receive him victoriously, and yet
the victory brought them no other discommodity, but a forced obedience.

In this great prosperity of his affairs, he yields the like to those which
have releiued and assisted him in adversity, and which have served and followed
him in his greatest crosses. All Europe does honor him, as the first ornament
of all that which he has at any time produced of great and famous in
sovereign houses. His word, fortified with this great credit and authority,
has such power in the hearts of earthly powers, as they hold it as the Oracle
of that which they should do or avoid, and salute him with this glorious
title, of Arbitrator of Christendom, and protector of their quiet.

If the general good had not touched him nearer then his own particular, and
if he had not had a lively feeling in his soul of the ruins which
Christendom suffered by the division of her Princes, he had made his profit of
the miseries of his neighbors. He had entertained the hatred betwixt Spain
and England, whereof the roots were to deep. He had not refused the command of
the Low Countries under the name of Protector. He had done his business beyond
the Alps during the war of Ferrara, he had past after the taking of
Montmelian, and had disputed the rights of the houses of Orleance and Anjou.

Pope Clement the eight considering all this, said, that the holy Sea was no
less bound unto this Prince, for that he had retired his army from the
frontires of Italy, then it had bin of former times to Charlemaine, in freeing
them from the oppression of the Lombards. The 2. pillars which supported her
quiet, were shaken in the beginning of the Popedom of Paul the 5. Discord
labored to ouer-throw, and their ruin was at hand. Sicile by an earthquake
was sometime separated from Apulia, and Spain from Afric, it was to be
feared that Italy by this civil division would be pulled from the union of
the Church. It seemed that the Pope was come to Ferrara to give the first blow,
and that the Venetians stood ready with their Pikes charged.

That great GOD which descending to the earth brought peace with him, and
returning to heaven recommended it to his Apostles, would not that the Pope
should remain long in the thoughts of war, nor that having drawn one sword
against the Venetians he should strike them with another, punishing one offense
with a double punishment. He would not suffer the Venetians to engage
themselves in doubtful resolutions fit for such as are in some hard and
desperate condition, which suffer themselves to fall into the fire after that
they have of long avoided the smoke. He would that the King should be the
author of this peace, and the Arbitrator of the controversy, he made it known
that he dealt not in any thing but the event was happy, representing to the one
and the other that the course they took to repair their interest by arms,
was full of danger and scandal. The dispute was between the father and the
children, and there could be noe such bitterness betwixt persons so near
allied but it might be mollified.

Love engaged their hearts one to another. the father lives more in his
children then in himself. As the thing known is in him that knows it, so
contrariwise he that loves is wholly in it that it loves. As soon as he had
made these spirits apprehend the ruins and desolations which this discord
should bring to christendom, they disrobd themselves freely of their interest,
and gave them to the wise counsel of this Prince.

If the Netherlands, after they had endured the fury and violence of war
fifty years, do now taste of the sweetness of peace, they are bound to him. No
man but he could govern those vlcerd spirits having so wisely foreseen and
attended the times that the sore should be ripe and ready to open and to cure.

The powerful and warlike Nation of the Suisses, which has preserved the
ancient discipline of arms, who purchased their liberty by nine battles, and
maintained is at the charges of the Princes of Christendom who give them
silver to have their friendship, have always believed that the aliance of this
Prince made a part of their felicity. His name was so venerable, his authority
so sacred in their assemblies as in pronouncing it many seeds of discord and
division which began to grow have been suppressed, and fence the renewing of
ancient treaties those people have thought that they lost all their thoughts,
words and deseignes if they did not employ them to praise the virtue and
fortune of this great Prince.

He maintained his estate in peace, he did not suffer the flower to wither
before it brought forth the expected fruits.

He had a care to keep that Oliue-branch, purchased with the price of his
blood, hazard of his life, and the loss of the goodliest and most flourishing
years of his age, always green, He yields liberty, concord, abundance and
felicity to the French whereof civil division had deprived them, and
representing unto himself the storms and tempest which did aflict Moscouy,
Swedland, Poland and Persia, and the clouds which he did foresee would fall
upon other provinces, he had been seen to lift up his eyes to heaven, whether
he sent his best thoughts to acknowledge the prosperities which he had
received, and turning toward his good servants, he spoke these words, God be
thanked we have been as they are, upon the stage, but now we are spectators
and courteous hearers. An inseparable acknowledgement in his soul, and an
ordinary praise in his mouth.

He referrs all the conquest and restoration of France to the glory and virtue
of God. He must have a soul well settled, in all her functions, and well composd,
that does not flatter himself in these encounters. All great Captains,
speaking of their exployts, grace them either with their valor or with their
wisdom, it is a wonder to see them give a greater share to fortune then to
their own judgments, or confess that they are more bound to the favors of
heaven, then to earthly powers. Only Moses was so temperate and modest as he
never vaunted of that which he did. The greatest armies of the world compared
unto his, are but troops of Carbines, for he commanded over a million and
eight hundredth thousand souls, whereof there were two and twenty thousand
Leuits, and six hundredth, three thousand, five hundredth and fifty fighting
men. It is a goodly sight in the history of the Jews, to behold these twelve
Tribes put into four battallions toward the four corners of the world, under
four Colonells, and four Standards, whereof the first being green, had for a
device a Lion; the second read, with a man's head; the third yealow with a
Bull, and the fourth white and red with an Eagle. He makes no account of all
this, but referres his victories to the invincible arm of the God of battles.

The remembrance of the graces which this Prince has received from heaven, is
like unto a pure Crystal glass, which sends back the portraite unto his
beginning, but he has often been heard to speak these Royal words; When I
was borne, there were a thousand other souls more borne, what have I done unto
God to be more then they? It is his mere grace and mercy, which does often
bind me more unto his justice, for the faults of great men are never small.
By the singular providence of the great God he has brought France to a more
happy estate then she her self durst hope for, whereas having scarce either
pulse or spirit, after the death of the last King, she cast her self into his
arms. He had been an Alexander in war for her, dangers have been his
exercises, toils his delights, afflictions his pleasures. He has maintained
his affairs by courage and resolution, he has unfolded the gordian knot of
civil confusion: he has forced all his enemies to turn their backs, and
their faces to flight. His valor has appeared in most desperate occasions,
which could never amaze his judgment, nor shake his courage. He led his
servants so safely and happily in dangers, as he might say unto them as
Pericles said unto the Athenians, If no man but I lead you to death, you shall
be immortal.

He has performed an infinite number of great and heroyck exploits with such
diligence, as they that consider the combat and encounter of his Army, holds
that it never stood still, and they that numbered the sieges it made, believed
that it did always Camp. In the end he bound all his subjects to praise God,
to see him seated in the royal throne of his fathers: He had made it stately
in peace. In the beginning he found it all of brick, but he built it all of
Marble. He adorned it with goodly works, whose beauty is not yet
unprofitable, like to the Pyramides of Egypt, for besides the glory which did
redound to the magnificence of this estate, it brings great commodities to
Arts, manufactures, comerce and voyages, they ease the needy, employ
idleness, and make her no less bound unto him, having restored their good
orders, then Thebes to Pelopidas, and Athens to Thrasibulus, who had given them
liberty.

Policy which was unknown whilst that right was not seen but through the
smoke of Harquebuses, and that France had as many Kings as Governors, now she
discouers the injuries which are done vnro the Law with the oppression of the
poor people, she will not suffer the feeble to be over laden with the burdens
which the stronger have cast upon them; that inequality shall not produce
confusion, nor confusion mutenie, and that what has escaped by the fury of
arms shall not remain abandoned to the violence of Injustice, So as order
having restored good blood into the veins, and given spirit to the heart of
France, she does enjoy happily the everlasting mines of corn, wine, salt,
cloth and wool, for the which Peru pays for a tribute the half of that which
is sent into Spain; for of eight millions four come into France, whereupon
some one praising Spain for that there was only Pistols and Ryalls to be
seen, and no other coin being current; The King answered in these terms,
Those coins in those Countries are marks of abundance, out of their country
they are marks of necessirie. They come to us, and we go not to them, they
do not give them to us they owe them as to their creditors. To make the
felicity of France absolute, and to make it so strong, and powerful as after
it shall seem an oak, which to brave the winds has as many branches without
as roots within, there is no frontier but sees her places in safety, no
Arcenal but is full of arms and Canons, and no garrison but is content with
his entertainment. He makes a temple of Saturn of the Bastile to preserve his
treasure and to defend him from the violence of necessity, the which has often
represented unto him how pitiful that Princes estate is which is surprised
and has no means to resist, He acquitts his debts, pays his pensions,
furnishes his charges, and disingageth the demeanes of his crown* His
liberality dispenses so justly the graces, which to have them continue long he
pours forth sparingly. He gave by reason, not by ostentation, and never did
virtue loose her time in her pursuit, if first she lost not patience.

All things are restrained within the bounds of duty, the magistrates have
their eyes open, so as nothing can pass unpunished, and the mischief
perishes with the author. The first examples proffit, the public impunity
draws on offenses whereas punishment smothers them. The blows that fall upon
the authors amaze others. Phallaris did one act of Justice shutting him into
the Bull of brass that had invented it.

Their are seditions whose beginning cannot be discovered, and those are most
dangerous, resembling bushes which grow without sowing or planting; one branch
ioynes to another, a thorn fastens to a bramble by such a thick conjunction as
no man can put to his hand without harm, and if he set fire to it, it is able
to burn a whole forest, and yet no man knows whence the fire comes. That eye
which watches over Scepters sees and foresees it. He suffers not bad words to
have any aliance with murmerings, nor false bruits with rash judgments of
public actions and enterprises, and that the subjects shall not seek to hold
any other in the estate then that of obedience.

The liberal sciences and professions durst not in the beginning promise unto
themselves any great relief from a Prince who in his youth had no other
accademie then civil war, which opening the temple of Ianus does always shut
that of the muses* learned men spoke plainly that they should not attend of him
neither the honors nor the praises which Plato received of Dennis, Possidonius
of Pompey, Frontonius of Mark Anthony, Arsenius of Theodosius, nor Ausonius of
Gracian, and they thought that the workmen could not be esteemed or cherrished
but of such that loved the works. But as the fire and lightening comes out of
the clouds that are moist and soft; the most ardent favors sometimes comes from
wills that seem cold, for this Prince whom they held a Marius, showed himself
a Caesar to all that professed learning. The exercises that flourished in the
chief Cities of this Realm, the new buildings, and the new chaires adorned
the Universities of France; the honors, dignities, pensions, and preferments
which he had given in favor of learning, are certain proofs of his
affections. And if our age does produce Virgils, he will be their Augustus, if
Aristotle's their Alexander; if Polibius their Scipio; if Alcuinus their
Charlemaine; for he draws from among the common sort, those which have more
excellent qualities above the rest. He holds that it concerns a Prince in
honor and duty to yield unto peace all the liberties and commendable
exercises which war has taken from her.

The Romans did sometime place the Image of Hercules near unto the Muses, and
the Greeks gave him the name of Musagete, to show that the sciences have need
of the force of Princes for their quiet, and Princes the favor of the Sciences
for their reputation. All that have knowledge enter not into the Temple of his
bounty, if they do not produce singular proofs of their knowledge; He will
know them, try them, and prove them, whether their heads be as well made as
well filled. Good God! what a cleernesse of judgment is this knowledge? Metal
is not better known by the sound, then he does judge of men's spirits by their
words. Nothing can be held so covert and so close but he perceth into it. He
makes no great account of those which have but a superficial show of
sufficiency, and are like unto small wines which will not keep. From these
judgments I have learned this goodly doctine. For as small springs are emptied
if they be often drawn, even so spirits which have shallow foundations;
Silence is good in them to make them seem wise, distrust to appear advised,
and reprehension to seem judicious. He does not regard the vain and
fruitless curiosities which extract the brain, and learn that which they
must forget when they have learned it, The study of vain things is a toilesome
idleness, and a painful folly. The spirits being once stricken with this
disease, are cured very late, they spend whole nights to find how many knots
were in Hercules club, and of what coulor Achilles beard was, and the end of
their curiosity is always ignorance. He does much commend those men which can
speak of all things, and are like unto living libraries, whereas they find
whatsoever they desire. He holds that doctrine perfect and solid, which does
not pass over difficulties slightly, but pierces into them, and resolves
them, and especially that which honoreth the public and profits the private.

A maker of Anagrames presenting some thing unto him upon his name, and telling
him that he was very poor; I believe it, answered the King, for they that use
this trade cannot grow very rich. He was attentive to the discourses that were
made in his presence, but he could not endure ignorant men to speak, when as
learned men were silent, nor that they should hold their places. Athens could
not endure Pothinus to play his comedies upon the theater whereas Euripides had
repeated his tragedies.

It seems that many good and profitable inventions have bin unknown in
former ages, to appear under his reign, and to make nature jealous of art.
And although that imposture and falsehood disguise themselves often with the
habit of sufficiency, he does not contemn the Inuentors, he hears them
willingly, remembering Alexanders repentance, who would not hear an unknown
person, which promised to give him news within six days from places from the
which he did not receive any in six weeks, and found him not when he had most
need.

But can we cast our eyes upon al his great and royal actions, and not admire
that great modesty and temper which does beautify them, which are not easily
seen in great powers and authorities, which breeds a majesty confirmed by
time, prosperity and reputation? Princes which have made their fortune, who
have reigned long and have all according to their hearts desire, do commonly
grow insupportable, and think to offend their majesty if they do not retire
themselves from the sight of men. Alexander after the defeat of Darius did not
use any salutation in his letters but unto Phocian and Antipater, A long reign
makes a Princes power so absolute and so fearful as he can hardly contain
himself in that first moderation. Wherefore Tiberius and Nero were as much
hated in the end of their empires as they had been honored in the beginning.

Their is no change in the good nature of this great Prince, he does not abuse
his good fortunes, he does not think that his body yields a greater shadow
after, then before his victories. They have often admired his great familiarity
with his subjects and often he has been heard say to free them from this
wonder, Pomp and shows are for those which have no other means to make
themselves to be esteemed, but God by his grace has put enough into me to
make known what I am, and at all events I had rather be beloved then feared. A
royal speech. Love grows not from rigor, nor pride. The philosophers hold
that bitterness brings forth nothing. Too great severity ruins in steed of
edifying. A prince may be hated, although they which hate him are not hateful
unto him; but he cannot be beloved unless he love. He which will be beloved
and not love, is like unto him that seeks to light a lamp at a torch that is
quite out.

Posterity will receive with more admiration then belief the tables of this
incredible mildness and facillity. I have seen Ambassadors so ravished and
amazed, as going from their audience they have said that they wondered that the
stones and rocks have not moved out of their places to serve so good a
Prince. His moderation, which makes him so wise in affairs and so tractable
unto reason, does not suffer his spirrits to wander in the deseignes of Cyrus,
who did not limit his rest until he was tired with the vanities of his
ambition, for he thinks in time what he shall do for himself when he has no
more to do for his estate, that my Lord the Daulphin shall be capable to reign
and he in that part of his life which counsel Princes that have lived in
torment to seek for a safe port.

He gives the great toils of his youth to all France, and reserues the last
season to his house at Fountainebleau.

King Francis the first, her first restorer, had foretold that they should one
day see her one of the goodliest ruins in Europe, The last troubles, verifying
this prediction, had made it a retreat of wild beasts which durst not go to
the Forests.

He has raised her ruins and has beautified her with such perfections as she
merrits to be nombred amongst the wonbers of the world. The Duke of Sauoy, The
Duke of Mantoua, the Duke of Virtemberg have admired it as the goodliest abode
in Europe. There he resolved to attend some glorious occasion for the crouning
of his life and toils to the good of Christendom. In this sweet
solitariness, which is always environed with actions, exercises and affairs,
he is pleased to quite the victorious Bays which shaddowe his forehead, to
refresh himself in the shadows of those valleys which he has planted; and
to pass the time without any loss of time.

When he is in his house, idleness does not steal from him any moment of his
hours, he is always in vigor and force, always fresh and in humor, always
careful of his reputation. The older it grows the more careful it should be
manured. His exercises in peace are no less laborious then his millitary
actions, he enters into affairs before day, and with the break of day he
goes a hunting and follows the Stags thirty leagues, at his return he gives
himself to some other exercises, he ends the journey in his alleys, goes about
his channel, and maks his whole train to sweat. He never steps foot, speaks
a word, nor gives a look but with some design. There is no discourse so
familiar, nor private favor which hinders, but within an hour after he lets
them know whom he has favored that he is the master.

In this goodly and royal house he has treated of the goodliest affairs in
Christendom, and has received great blessings from heaven. There he has
ioyed at the birth of my Lord the Dolphin, of the Duke of Orleance, the Duke of
Anjou, and of the Lady Elizabeth his eldest Daughter.

This place has produced that just and necessary Edict against the liberty and
fury of combats, the happy fruits of peace, to spare and stanch the best and
whotest blood of France, which was shed by this wound of the point of honor.
The loss of blood is always suspect, if nature does not consent unto it, not
the Physicians ordain it. It is so necessary for the preservation of man's
body, as from what part soever it goes, we must seek to stay it. The King was
not content, with Numa to have the law which stays this blood within the body
published, but he would like unto Lycurgus have it observed. In former ages
they feared men more then laws, in his reign they fear the laws more then men.

This exact and perfect observation, shows, that ordinances which were
impossible to his predecessors, pass without contempt under the absolute and
redoubted respect of his commandment. He was much grieved that he had no
sooner used this remedy, and said, that he had not attempted it but when as he
thought he might do it effectually and profitably. A noble man of Flanders
came to demand leave of him to fight in France against another stranger. He
answered him with this Dilemma, Combats are either permitted by God, or
forbidden; if it be allowed why do you refuse it in Flanders? if it be
forbidden; why do you seek it in France? there may be many and diverse
Kings, but there can be but one God, one faith, and one law; and if there were
no reason to the contrary, should I allow that to strangers, which I grieve
that I cannot prevent in mine own subjects?

A midst these public thoughts he does not forget the private care of the
breeding and institution of the Princes his children, the three mighty pillars
of this estate. He has a wonderful desire to see that royal plant which
should succeed him, to grow and flourish, and said often to the Queen, that she
could not have any meditation in her soul, nor prayer in her mouth of greater
feruency and devotion, then to obtain the favor of God, to see her son well
bred up, adding, that there was nothing so dangerous, as to be an ignorant
King, sometimes calling those Princes that were ill brought up, golden Calves.
When as he gave him those, who do at this day so carefully second his
intentions, he spoke these words unto him worthy of so good a father, and so
wise a King, My son, trouble not your self for riches or treasure, I will
leave you sufficient, but you must make your self capable to get knowledge and
virtue, which I cannot give you: If you your self do not endeavor to attain
unto it by those means which those will show you whom I have appointed to be
about you. Princes may be borne good, generous and capable of virtue, but
institution only makes them wise: wisdom cannot be gotten without pain, she
cannot be sold, and it may be she should find few Chapmen, for folly is bought
daily.

Realms have an interest in the breeding of their Kings children, and the care
that comes from them should be sacred unto them. Romulus to make trial of his
force cast a Iauelin from mount Auentin to Palatine, the which entered so far
into a far soil, as it could not be pulled out, the end of the dart which was of
a Ceruicetree was covered with earth, took root, cast forth branches and
became a great tree, the which was walled about and preserved with so great
care, as if any one saw the leanes but wither, or that it had need of watering
to keeep it green, he gave an alarm to the whole City and cried for water,
as if all had been on fire.

In like manner subjects have cause to greiue and complain when as these
plants from whence they hope for fruits of Justice, and the shadow of their
rest, do wither, being negligently cleansed, watered, and manured.

Amidst all this he is wonderfully careful of his majesty, and to maintain
this great reputation which makes his life admirable to the whole world. They
have no other discourse in the Cabinets of Princes nor in the Senates of
commonweales, but of his heroical actions and of his just and perfect
felicities. They are wonderfully amazed to see a Prince in former-times so
hated, to be so beloved, a Prince so persecuted to be so happy, a Prince so
valiant to be so mild, a Prince so good to be so feared. His name is known
to Nations which do not know him, he is of such authority as he prescribes a
law even to those which will not receive it but by force. They of Holland and
Zeland have carried it unto the 70. degree, and those countries deserve not to
be known, which do not know his reputation. Reputation the Manna and
Nepenthe of generous spirits, the goddess of great courages is so delicate, as
the least excess does blemish it, an unjust enterprise dishonoreth it, an act
of indiscretion, negligence, or idleness does deface it, and a sinister
success ruins it. It is a spirit that goes and returns no more. They report
that water, fire, and reputation, undertook to go throughout the world, and
fearing they should go astray, they gave signs one unto another: Water said
that they should find her where as they saw reeds, and fire whereas the smoke
appeared, loose me not said reputation, for if I get from you, you will never
find me again. There is no such misery as to survive ones reputation, nor so
great a folly as to put it in hazard. They commend that brave archer, who
refused to show his skill unto Alexander; fearing to loose that honor in an
hour, which he had gotten all his life. In the course of the Olympike games,
he that fails in the ambitious hopes of the first crown, may pretend the
second, or the third, but in this course of Royal virtues, who so cannot
obtain that of reputation, shall reap small fruits of the rest, he is
presently contemned, and to use the terms of this great Prince, he may well
say, that the chain is broken, for after that he is once grown into contempt
he always declines. They say a Prince should never see the portrait of fear
but on his enemies back, but there are two kinds of fear excusable, the one
within against conspiracies, and the other without against the power and
designs of strangers. He shall prevent the first in doing nothing that may
make him contemtible and odious to his subjects, and force and arms shall
defend him from the other.

A great King that will not have his majesty strike against this dangerous rock
of contempt, must always bend his thoughts to great actions, for great Princes
are not known but by their great enterprises, God shows that he is God by the
greatness of his works. If he builds it is a world, if he be angry against
the world he sends a deluge, if he will show his love that he bears to the
world, he suffers his son to dye upon the cross to save the world, if he
will recompense the world it is with his paradise; If he arms, the Angels
march in the head of his army, the Elements are the Marshals of his Camp, the
Rocks remove from their center, and follow it to give it water, the clouds
guide it by day, and pillars of fire by night, the Sea opens in twelve parts
for her passage, and the sun stays to give it time to end her victories. If
there were any proportion between that which was finite and infinite, we may
say, that in like manner a King, which will be always held a King, should not
do any thing but should tend to greatness.

Wherefore considering that many great Princes had lost, in the pleasures of
peace, the glory which they had purchased in the danger of war, he labors
incessantly to preserve this great authority, credit and general reputation.
His spirit, which is quick and active, like unto the highest element, has no
rest but in travel, nor content but in pain. The issue of one design, is the
entry into another. But as all things are maintained by order, that the temples
of the Gods are not made of base stuff, the reputation of this great Prince
proceeding from great and incomparable actions, must be preserved and
increased by great and admirable effects. Princes which go not out of their
Cabinets, whose lives are like unto Oysters, always shut up in their shells,
who cause themselves to be kept like unto the fire of the vestall virgins, and
are like unto those Idols that have hands and use them not, feet and go not,
do always survive their reputation.

Behold in an Instant a great and mighty Army which draws upon it the eyes and
thoughts of al Europe. If we shall judge of the deseigne of this Prince by his
courage and good fortune, what triumph shall he not hope for? We see the bow
bent, but no man but the Archer knows whether the arrow shall fly. He has
no cause of fear neither within nor without the realm. All Princes speak
according to his hearts desire, and yield to what he demands. He knows their
forces and sercheth into their deseignes. The desire to be understood without
sending either letter or post, has invented the Cipher of the Adamant, by the
which they imagine, that when as the caracter is touched it mooues in the
counter-cipher a hundredth leagues from thence. The hearts of al princes are like
letters of Adamant, the King carries the Alphabet, they do not move near, nor
far of, but he understands it.

Charge great King, Charge, where and when you please. If the God of Arms be
for you, who can be against you? the lightning makes way through the darkest
clouds, and your deseignes shall shine amidst the greatest difficulties. They
shall succeed otherwise then men think and in places not foreseen, like unto
diuedoppers, who casting themselves into the water rise again where they are
not looked for. And admit you had no deseigne, neither on this side the river
of Rine, nor behold the Alps, it is sufficient to show what you can do when
you please to execute that which is difficult. They judge of the monstrous
greatness of Polyphemus by the measure of his finger: we must consider of this
Army what the power of your Majesty is.

When we behold you in this height of glory our discourse is changed into
admiration, we do like unto those people who, adoring and admiring the sun,
can do no other thing but lift up their hands and set them to their mouths.
Admiration begins and silence ends their homage. Your felicity is so absolute
as you have no need of felicity, your subjects are so happy under your Empire,
as they can desire nothing more then that it may be perpetual.

Stay Reader.
BEhold a strange passage, from a Triumph to a Tomb. I had prepared this
discourse as a Table of the Kings most memorable actions,, and did desire to
end it by the great effects which were expected of that mighty Army, which was
upon the frontier; but in a moment all my thoughts were overthrown, and this
remainder, which should have been beautified with the trophies of his arms is
filled with the mournful spoils of his life. As sometime the City of Athens
was at one instant transported with great joy for the happy return of Theseus
from his voyage of Candy, and afflicted with exceeding grief for the death of
King Aegeus his father, witnessing both the one and the other passion by that
cry, which since has been solemnly observed by the Oschophories (...) whereof
the first is a sound of triumph and courage, and the other a voice of amazement
and affliction; even so France full of contents, and apt to receive greater,
saw it self it an instant plunged in a gulf of sorrows and afflictions for
the execrable paricide committed on the sacred person of her King.

This misery, the bottomless spring of sorrows and complaints, has made this
Panegyre imperfect, for whereas it should have ended by the glory of things
done, I cut it off with the hope of that which was to do. It shall have
perfection enough if it may appear among so many goodly and rich pieces, which
the mournful Muses have erected about the tomb of this great Achilles. They
have not ceased these ten months, to honor him with crowns of all prices, of
all fashions, and of all sorts of flowers. What may be done more? behold some
leaves which they have left all bathd with tears, the which as much obliged as
many, but less diligent then any, I add unto this public sorrow.

If any one say that I perform this duty too late, this grief is always in
season. It is so extreme and violent, as it grows more bitter by consolation,
it resists reason, it is renewed with time, it is comprehended more by feeling
then discourse, constancy cannot vanquish it, nor wisdom dissemble it. I wept
when as all the world spoke, and now when as the time of mourning wipes away
tears, I continue and renew my complaints. My afflictions increase when as I
hear of consolations. Sorrows grown to a custom, are pleasing to miserable
men, the objects revive them, and the History of this great King, which is the
Rock I roll daily, furnishing me at every moment wherewith to make his life
to be admired, gives me but too much subject to lament his death. Farewell
Reader, and pass on.

A Funeral Discourse of the sudden death of the most Christian King Henry the
fourth.
YEsterday Saint Denis was all in triumph, Paris should have been after to
morrow, and this day all France mournes, all Frenchmen are full of affliction.
Thus the clearest days have their storms, the evening is not answerable to
the calmnesse of the morning, nor to the cleernesse. of the noone day. Cloudy
rocks deceive Mariners, and ships are lost where they think themselves
safest. Pleasures smother them that embrace them; sorrow and delight hold so
fast together, as they are as inseparable as a conuex superficies from a
concaue.

Let us speak more plainly, betwixt the high and flourishing glory of the
greatest King of the world and his fall, there was but the twinkling of an eye,
the turning of a hand, and the stay of a Caroche. There was a night betwixt
being and not being of a mighty City of the Guales, but here there is but a
moment. A moment so full of wonders and mysteries, as it is able to entertain
the mind of man day and night in deep meditations. A moment which may better
be considered by silence then by discourse. A moment which gives fear unto
the faithful, amazment to the profane, and sorrow to all men.

An arrow shot from toward Egypt, slew Josias in his Chariot. Henry the
fourth, the first King of Christendom, the greatest Captain of Europe, and
the best of the French kings, who never was in any place but a victor, and who
never desired victories but for the good of the vanquished; who was chosen of
God to march first with his thundering sword to revenge the injuries and raise
the ruins of Christendom; who was a David in courage, a Sa. lomon in wisdom,
and an Ezechias in zeal; who in the felicity of his days, may justly be
termed the Christian Augustus, for that there never had been a general peace
but under his reign; who made it known what a great judgment could do in a
great fortune, a great modesty in a great power; victorious over so many
armies, and triumphing at so many seiges, combats, enterprises and encounters;
Henry upon whom all eyes were turned, his Heroical virtues commended, his will
respected, and all his actions admired; Henry redoubted of all Sovereign
powers, advanced to the height of worldly greatness and full of all sorts of
contents, happy in war, happy in peace, happy in wife, happy in children, and
happy in every thing, is miserably and trecherously slain in his Caroch, and
passes from one life to another in a moment.

This fatal and desastrous moment, engaging us for so many years in mourning
and sorrow, is the day of the death of our prosperities, and the birth of this
Princes life. The first day of the fifth month of the fifty seventh year of
his age must be called his day, for how long soever man's life be he has
properly but one day that may be termed his. The hour which thrusts forth his
last gasp is his hour, all the rest is no more his. Whatsoever he has done
in his life is considered by this day, the judge of all his other days, the
most difficult Catastrophe of the tragedy of man's life. He that is the author
of the first and disposes of the last does only know it, foresees and mocks at
man who thinks he is far from it. Before the last sand of this last day be
run, he cannot crown his felicity: we must praise safety after dangers,
navigations in the port, and victory in the triumph. Who can commend his life
and hold himself so happy whiles that the time past ministers unto him matter
to lament, and that which is to come to fear? This day was feared of all men,
yet not expected of any: Every man did apprehend it as the period of some great
revolution, but for that they held it to be a far of the opinion of the
length of time did moderate the apprehension, and the less it was foreseen
the more fearful it has proved.

And who could imagine so great a mischief in the midst of so many
prosperities, or foresee this storm in so great a calm? If any one amidst
this general joy and content should but have thought of these accidents, they
would have held his brain to have been troubled with the fumes of melancholy,
they would have laughed at him as they did at Anaxagoras, who came to the
Olimpick games in a great gown, for that the day was so fair and the air so
cleeere, as there was no show of reign, and yet presently after it poured
down in great abundance.

We saw this Prince in the Solstice of felicities and contents, it seemed that
the world, hope, nor fortune could produce any thing more perfect, that the
stars were of his intelligence, that the Intelligences guided his deseignes,
and misfortune which may fall upon any man could not fall upon him, that the
lightening of heaven which had often fallen near unto him and not hurt him,
would respect his tables as it had don those of Hercules. I am forced to
confess that the bright shining beams of this great felicity, and of this
powerful reputation dazeled mine eyes, I could not behold it firmly, my sight
could not find any object that might equal it, I saw nothing beyond this King
greater then God, neither did I see any thing on this side God more mighty then
this King.

I had known the world sufficiently never to doubt of her vanity and
inconstancy, and although this knowledge be long, yet the life of man is not
too short to learn it, but the proofs are dangerous. Since the time I had the
honor to see and examine strictly the actions of this great King, I felt this
knowledge to alter in my soul, and doubting of that which was not
questionable, I began to believe that which was altogether uncertain. I did
consider what he had done, and what he would do, I saw him redoubted of his
neighbors, well served at home, his power much respected and admired abroad,
his affairs assured, his counsels sound, his Arcenall full of arms, his
Bastile full of gold, his house of blessings, his realm of prosperities, and
his spirit of great designs; the Princes kept short, the greatest made humble,
the parlaments ready at his commands, the subjects to praise that whereof in
former times they had complained, and Orpheus statue to sweat at the brute of
his deseignes, and the admirable preparation of his arms. So great and mighty
a preparation as if he would have limited his deseignes by the river of Rine
they would have entreated him to rest satisfied with all that is on this side.

In the admiration of all this I said unto my self. Behold an age of wonders,
the order of the world is changed, this Prince understands it, he seeks an
unknown way, he will settle a new belief of the stability of worldly things,
he will fix a nail to stay fortunes wheel, he will let us see that which we
durst not hope for.

They say that Jupiter during the combat between the Grecians and the Trojans,
when as the Gods were divided among themselves for the one and the other, cast
forth a great thunderbolt which amazed both parties. As France is ready to
pass the frontier to encounter some object worthy of her power, behold the
terrible and fearful blow which striks amazement into all the world, behold
that tragic moment which mockes at my discourse, and makes me see that these
great shadows did betoken the suns setting.

In the Image of this fatal day, I represent unto my self that of Phillip,
father unto Alexander, who in the 46. year of his life, and the 24. of his
reign, resolved to pass into Asia, and to prescribe a law to the persians, he
consulted with the Oracle to know the Issue of his deseigne, and it was told
him that the ox should be crowned to be led unto the sacrifise, he thought
that the King of Persia should have been the oblation: and to begin to give
thanks to the Gods of victories, which he held but in hope, he ordained
sacrifices, plays and public feasts, and prises for learning arms, and
music; he invited all the Cities of Greece to this public joy, and to make
it the more stately, he added the solemnity of the marriage of Cleopatra his
daughter with Alexander King of Epirus, this great content did so blind his
eyes from seeing the mischief which should deprive him of life, as Neoptolemus
singing an hymn during the feast, which at every change spoke of the vanity of
great Kings and how that death crossed their deseignes, all which he took for
his advantage, as a prediction of the ruin of the King of Persia.

The next day he went unto the theater to see the plays, and shows himself
with a majesty contrary to the ordinary of Kings. His Image followed twelve
statues of the Gods, after which he marched, and to show that he had no
distrust of the Gretians he would not have any guards about him. In a moment
fortune, which never gives great contents for nothing, changes this pomp into
mourning.

Pausanias who did smother in his soul the revenge of an injury, seeing him in
this estate, aduanceth, and drawing a sword from under his robe thrust him in
to the flank and slew him.

But who so knows that this murderer being greiuously wronged by Attalus
could obtain no justice from Phillip, will abate much of the amazement, the
which cannot be diminished in this other accident, for the King is miserably
murdered by a man who never had any cause to complain of him. I do not hold
it strange that the Emperor Maximin was murdered in his tent with his wife and
children. nor that the soldiers cried out that not any one of a wicked race
should be left alive. For besides that these violencies were ordinary in the
Roman Empire, he took away the goods, honor, and lives of Citizens without
form of Justice: I am no more amazed that Antiochus did breed worms in his
flesh, he had left lively marks of his impiety in the Temple.

I am silent when I see Attalus King of Pergamo, reduced to extreme misery,
and Pyrrhus pursued by Fortune both by sea and land, and Cambises fall upon the
point of his sword, and Aristobulus vomiting forth his soul with his blood.
The first had slain his mother and his wife, the second had spoiled
Proserpinas Temple; the third had murdered his brother and his sister being
with child, and the fourth had put his mother and his brother to death.

But I am amazed to see a Prince who deserves to be called the delights of
mankind, encounter with a death so unworthy of this great and incomparable
bounty. A Prince so great, so good, so merciful, so wise, so happy, so
redoubted, so valiant, was worthy of another age and of another end.

But when as I present him to my self like a Lion, who being as often
victorious as assailed, is in such reputation of his own force, as it does
amaze with the terror of his eyes those that mean to assail it, and that I
see him slain by a fly, for there is no greater disproportion betwixt these
two creatures then betwixt him and the Parricide, all my thoughts are
confounded, I know not where I am.

The most humble and staide spirits seek to examine that which the
Philosophers call destiny, a certain necessity, imposed unto things, and
cause her to come from above, or from supposed principles, as from the
concurrens of the Atoms of Democritus, or the imaginations of the soul of the
universe, or from the order or course of causes, or from the influence of the
stars.

The pure Doctrine terms it A disposition of the divine providence of that
which regardes the adventures and events of the being, and of the inferior
life. A disposition which being eternal and immutable, as being in the spirit
of God, does not impose any necessity, and in that she carries her effects
into things that are humane and created, she is temporal, mutable and
contingent. So as man being considered as temporal, he is under destiny, but
in his principal part, which is immortal, he is not subject unless he
list. The stars have no power over his will. The action of destiny, upon the
matter is necessary, the effect is not. It may be prevented by vigillancy,
care, wisdom and other helps from heaven, and yet in doing nothing but what
we will there happens nothing but what God knows shall succeed.

All that is in God, is God himself, the knowledge of God is his essence, his
essence is immutable, and so consequently his knowledge is inuariable, all that
he knows is infallible, and yet this knowledge does not impose any necessity
upon the actions and wills of men, for this knowledge compared unto things
created, is like unto the knowledge of the workman upon his work, the which is
not the cause; it is the will of the workman, without the which the work
should always remain conceived and framed in his mind and be never seen.
The Idaeas which are in the understanding of God, are the forms and beginnings
of all things, wherefore the knowledge of God is not the cause, for the actions
do not proceed from the knowledge, but by the means of the will which
commands, and of the power which executes; and therefore the knowledge of God
is not the cause of things which are bad, and whereunto his will cannot incline,
for good cannot be the cause of bad, and from the necessity of knowledge, we
may not conclude the necessity of actions.

That eternal wisdom whose secrets are unknown to men, and shall never be
deciphered but at that day, when we shall see his majesty drawn in a chariot
through the clouds, has suffered this mischief to fall either to free and
deliver this Prince from some greater, or to aflict this realm or to make it
an example to all the Princes of the earth, or to show that the world and al
her greatness are but a shadow, dust and wind.

The great God who is the judge of life and death, has disposed of the life of
this Prince by so fatal and mournful an accident, to the end France should
know that they be the effects of his great justice, who being offended at the
excess of this people, with the daughters of Moab, commanded Moises to cause
all the Princes and heads to be hanged in the sight of the sun, to the end his
fury might be diuerted from Israel.

He gives wayward and difficult Kings to the people, and takes away good, when
as he sees they are unworthy of the one and have need of the other.

He will of that these execrable blows, as of so many vipers, Princes should
compound a treakle against the pride, ingratitude and blindness of their
lives, unto the end they may truly apprehend whence they are come and whether
they should go.

What shall those proud spirits think who can never humble themselves, when
with the eyes of their thought they shall enter into this Caroch and view this
great King slain in the midst of seven great noblemen of his court, by the
poorest wretch of his Kingdom? Can they have a better lesson to teach them the
misery of their condition? Let them advance their deseignes, and grow never so
proud they shall be like unto those mystical trees, which decayed, when as
from the topps of them they might discover the sad ruins of ancient Troy.

when in this folstice of greatness and worldly felicity, they shall behold
the tomb of this great King, their pride must needs fall and their ambitions
grow humble.

Swell all thou can humane arrogance, thou art but a shadow and no more. Take
the wall of the Gods if thou will, all thy glory is but wind. let Belus usurp
the name of God if he list: let Ninus or daine altars for his father: let
Nabucadonosor cause himself to be adored, let Clearchus the tirant of Heraclea
carry the lightening for his device, and call one of his Sons thunder: let
Alexander term him self the son of Jupiter Ammon: Caesar go equal with the
gods, Augustus hold himself the Son of Apollo, Nero take the crowns from the
Altar of the Gods, to adorn his bed, Domitian disdain his mother to call
himself the son of Pallas, Caligula take of the heads of the Images of the
Gods to set on his own, Commodus hold Mercuries Caduce in his hand, let
Marcellus being in Spain suffer Crowns to descend upon his head with
artificall thunder and lightning. Let the King of the Molossiens play Pluto in
his Court, and call his wife Proserpina his daughter Ceres and his dog
Cerberus, yet they are men, and in this word are comprehended all the vanities
and miseries of this world. They are but weakness in their birth, inconstancy
in their life, and stinking putrefaction in their death, compassed in with a
thousand miseries as soon as they come out of their mothers womb. Their pride
is but smoke which vanishes as it rises, and in the end draws tears from
their eyes. The greatest Princes of the world have humbled themselves as often
as they have considered that they were but men, and that it might happen in an
instant they should be no more what they were, or should be somwher else, or not
at al. earth earth earth says the voice of the Prophet. hear the word of the
Lord. We must have ears to hear them of men, but our eyes only will hear
that of God. We understand him in seeing these great and terrible accidents.
Earth which come from earth: earth which art fed with earth: earth which
remainest on earth: earth which goes to earth, earth in thy birth, in thy life
and in thy end, behold the greatest of the earth returns to earth.

Emperors, Kings and Princes, you are but dust, know it; your crowns depend of
God, acknowledge it: your days roll and slide away like a wave: your life is
more frail then the wind; an earthen vessel handled gently and preserved
carefully may be long kept; But howsoever you care for your lives, they must
needs break and dissolve. Your greatnesses are but heaps of snow, which we
see melt into water from whence it comes: your life is like a lamp exposed to
the wind, the which is put out with every puff

The mornful sight of this Carosse binds you to consider of the great and
wonderful distance which is betwixt God and you. The names show the
difference. EL signifies force, support and the foundation of all; Adam
Imbecility, infirmity, and so feeble a thing, as it cannot stand of it self.
Your days are compared to the shadow of a Torch, the which vanishes, it
being put out: the weakest differs not so much from the most valiant, and the
meanest from the most excellent: as a mortal thing from that which is divine:
Mortal and divine are opposite and contraries. Accursed flattery does blush
for shame when she sees the Heathen deal otherwise with great men. The town
of Athens received Pompey with these words. For as much as thou hold thy
self to be a man, we esteem thee a God. Those great Cedars of Libanus are
ouer-throwne at the least puff of death, which make shepherds equal unto
kings. and who having come to the old age of some, has laid ambushes for the
youth of others. That this great Prince is dead, it is the course of nature,
and the law of the universe. He has run the same course which 63. Kings of
France have done, and which all his successors shall do. It is a folly to
complain of life, and to be troubled at ones end. He that is grieved at
death, is grieved that he is mortal, and his grief comes too late, for he
should grieve at his birth, which makes him mortal, and not at his death which
makes him immortal.

That it was violent, great Princes are subject to these misfortunes. The
Roman Empire had more Emperors slain by their gards, then by their enemies.
As the birth and funerals of Princes have more pomp then others, so has their
death more amazement. That he is dead suddenly, it is the sweetest death, for
it takes fear and apprehension from death, which is most troublesome. But that
he is dead with the reputation of one of the greatest Princes of the world: it
must needs be the effects of a wonderful glorious life. To dye in the
brightness of great deseignes, is to brave death it self, and to revive and
live again. The last gasp of such a death, has no pain, and there is
comfort in the shortness. It is nothing, said, that Prince in dying. Death which
seemed to be the west and sunne-set of his life, was the Meridian of his glory.
Never Prince carried his life farther into death: for it seems he past without
any midest from one extreme unto the other death.

The Colosse of Rhodes, one of the wonders of the world, was no less admired
being beaten down then when it stood, when as they saw that with one of the
fingers they might make many great statues. In like manner as long as they saw
great Henry like a Colosse of the wonders of Heaven, a maister-peice of the
almighty power, the world admired him; but when as they saw that from his
incomparable actions, and the least effects of his reputation, they might draw
perfect Images, and assured examples of virtues necessary for Kings, this
admiration was changed into rauishment.

A theater of virtues* He that will frame his heart to pure and simple piety,
let him consider his zeal to the service of God, his bounty to Churches, and
his care for the concord of Consciences. He that will see Justice, let him
behold it in his laws and in his arms: who so desires truth, let him examine
his words and his promises. He that knows not wherein magnanimity does
consist, let him represent unto himselfelfe the crosses which he has
incountred, and the dangers which he has surmounted, He that labors to know
constancy, let him admire his fortune. He that will learn the true use of
liberality, let him observe what he gives and what he refuses, how he gives in
refusing, and how he demands in giving. He that seeks infallible proofs of
wisdom valor and moderation, let him think of his deseignes, note his
combats, and consider his victories.

He that has desire to erect trophies unto clemency, let him number the
enemies which he has vanquished, saved and recompensed, left them their lives
and restored their honors. Of wrongs received he has given some unto time,
many to repentance, and al to his bounty. This death was violent by the stroke
of that paricide arm, but it was not by the will of him that received it; as he
desired not death so he feared not his hour. He had been so often and in so
many dangers confronted by her, as he attended her euerywhere resolutly and
with an assured constancy. He has been often heard say, that he would never
refuse to drink of that cup.

He did not care whether it were by a fever or by the sword, whether the gate
were open or broken. He was not of the humor of Aristides of Locris who dying
of the biting of a Wesell, was grieved that he had not been bitten by a Lion.
He thought that this present, whether it were brought by a Raven or by a Dove,
came from heaven, and by his appointment who only knows the number of our
days.

Being at Fontainbleau in November last, and discoursing which was the best
kind of death: He concluded with Caesar for that which was sudden, adding,
that he would willingly be shot in the head with a Cannon, that day that he
should win a battle for France. Epaminondas commanded that they should draw
out the darte wherewith he was wounded, and did willingly embrace death which
came to salute him in the midst of the acclamations for a victory which he
had gotten for his country. All Greece did conjure and inuire Diagoras the
Rhodian to run unto death, after he had seen his three sons Crowned at the
Olympic games. As he did not separate action from life, so would he not have
glory separated from death, nor that the length of abode should prejudice the
sodainesse of the issue. He held them miserable, who had nothing but years to
prove that they had lived, and them more miserable, who had suruiued their
reputation. Alexander in his opinion was happy, for that he dyed young, in the
progress of his reputation, and Cyrus wretched for that the length of his life
had exposed him to the change of his fortune.

He that thinks of the life of the soul, may desire a goodly death for the
body, and all her beauty does consist but in the honor. The ambition to yield
up the last gasp gloriously, is always commendable in a Prince, who cannot
too much desire honor, nor too much contemn all the rest. It is the continual
object of his eyes and heart. Gold which is but earth, more purified then the
rest, and riches which are lost on the earth are for men, whose spirits are
full of earthly vapors, honor is for the Gods, and for those that are
esteemed near unto the Gods.

A generous life runs unto a death different from ordinary men, such a death
as many Princes of that venerable and courageous house of Bourbon, have desired
and incountred; James of Bourbon Constable of France, and Peter of Burbon his
son, dyed at the battle of Brignay, near unto Lion; Lewis of Bourbon at that
of Azincourt, John Duke of Burbon, the first of that name, was taken prisoner
there. Francis of Burbon Duke of Chasteleraut, was slain at the battle of
Saint Bridget; Charles Duke of Burbon at the taking of Rome; John of Burbo^
duke of Anguien died at the battle of Saint Lawrence; Anthony of Bourbon Duke
of Vendosme and King of Navarre, was slain with a harquebush shot at the siege
of Roan, Lewis of Burbon Prince of Condy, dyed at the battle of Iarnae.

This great Prince would not end his life otherwise, thinking it unworthy of a
great courage to languish betwixt a desire of life, and the fear of death, and
to quite for the interest of his abode, sometimes the use of a member, half
Eis sight, and all his hearing, and to submit himself to the discretion of
pain and old age.

His desire was not like unto ours, we would have wished to have seen him send
up his soul quietly to the place of his beginning after a long continuance
of years, and the glorious ending of his designs, that the Queen had closed
up his eyes, that the Princes his Children had received his blessing, the
which is of such efficacy, coming from the mouth of a father, as many have
thought that Oracles and prophesies were not more certain: we would have
desired that he had had time to teach his son, as he said, the knowledge of
good and evil, that his death had been like unto theirs, who sung dying, and
who dyed singing the graces which they had received from the hands of the
Almighty.

But as death is certain, so the form is uncertain, we see round figures fall
otherwise then Cylinders or Triangles, life ends not all after one manner, the
fruits of one tree fall not all at one instant, some are gathered before they
be ripe, others fall of themselves; some are snacht away, some pulled gently,
and the violence of the wind and hail beats them down indifferently.

As he lived and is dead after an other manner then other men, so the sorrow
for his death, was different from that of other Kings. He had lived triumphing,
he dyed in the assurance of a great triumph, his body being carried to his
grave did go under triumphant arches, he has past triumphantly beyond the
firmament, where he sees God, lives with God, is in God, and knows the truth
of the glorious relations which had been made unto him of the City of God.

In a moment, by the loss of some years which seemed to remain of a painful
and laborious life, he purchased eternity. For soddenly upon the feeling of
this mortal wound, he turned his eyes toward heaven, and carried his
thoughts whether his extreme aflictions did conduct him. we must not demand
whose they are which are aflicted, nor whereon they think. Afliction makes men
forget the world, when they must think of heaven. Afliction is the livery of
the servants of God. Heaven speaks upon Jordan and upon mount Thabor to advow
the son of God, but at his death it is silent, for that the cross is
sufficient to declare what he is.

He who is in all places where he is called on, God in the crib, God on the
cross, God in the grave, and God every where, who hears Jeremy in the mire,
Daniell in the den, who makes a palace of a stable* of a Thabor a Mountain,
of a Caluary a Paradise, maks of this Caroch an Arc of propitiation, and sends
his Angels thither to assist this soul, all gored with blood, going forth of
an innocent wound, nay rather all bathd and covered with he blood of the Lamb
which was slain from the beginning of the world. He receives this generous,
courteous and meek soul, which never refused his grace to any one that sought
it.

That great and unspeakable mercy fortify us in this belief, and the same
truth which recommends mercy unto men; for that God is all mercy, and will
rather cease to be God, then to be merciful, who promises mercy to those
which shall be merciful. This great King who in the whole course of his life
has done nothing but remit offenses, who has not only pardoned but forgotten
them, not only forgotten but recompensed them, has found in heaven the fruits
of mercy which he had sown upon earth. His offenses are remitted that does
remit; he that demands grace and shows it not, is like unto him that ruins a
bridge over which he is to pass. He which shows grace to his inferior, is
assured that his superior will not refuse it him. It were blasphemy to think
that God will be vanquished by his creature. He is pleased to show his great
succor in great accidents, Man falls, and he comes from heaven to give him
his hand. He had many other means to have raised him up, but his love found
none more fit. He might have suffered this Prince to have dyed otherwise,
but his mercy had not been so apparent in any other kind of death. He calls
these terrible and soddaine incounters to the absolute power of his bounty,
where as man has scarce the time to contribute a thought or a sigh. Moreover
the Church having in her institution bound all Christians to pray for the
health of all Kings and Princes, there is no doubt but at the very hour of
their death all these continued prayers made incessantly, and sent up to heaven
by so many millions of hearts, are of very great efficacy, by his merit whom
Israel crowned as a King, and crucified as an offender.

A soddaine death is terrible and fearful, but it is not to those which
attend it always constantly, and have been often in those places where she
does never terrify any but cowards. This sodainesse does shake and amaze those
souls, which do never think of God but at need. A Prince who did watch,
sleep, walk, and eat often with these cogitations, made Christian-like
discourses, and said so often, that it was not sufficient to know the graces of
God, but they must acknowledge them, might well be taken, but he could not be
surprised by death. The treacherous knife opens his side to make a passage for
that royal soul, but it could not wound his heart, to the which at his
morning rising he had given the name of God in guard.

Wherefore let us rather lament for our selves then for him, and let us say of
him as Rome did of Tytus, He is gone for his own good, and for our
afflictions; death which has raised him to immortal felicities, does plunge
us into a gulf of miseries. We lament justly for our selves, who see our
hopes dead and our miseries living, death has stroke but one, and has slain
many. The felicity which he enioies does not ease the affliction which does
torment us, the contents which he finds in heaven, takes not from us the
feeling of those griefs which his absence has left us upon the earth. If
death after this blow should have broken his bow, dispairing ever to make the
like shot, that would not cure the wound which his arrow has made.

It auailes not to tell us that we lament him not as dead but as absent, to
represent unto us that we have not lost him, but that we expect him, we find
occasions daily which make us remember our loss, and the assurance of his
return cannot moderate the grief of his departure. If there be any thing in
this world able to mollify our grief, it is, that all nations and al people
have sorrowed for that which we lament. The aflicted receive some ease when as
every man bears a share of their afliction. Christendom has sorrowed for this
Prince like unto a mother who being a widow and old has lost her own son:
Her public tears do witness what she has lost and what she does seek.
This general mourning in all realms shows the reason of her grief and the
greatness of her loss.

This common sorrow comprehends all Epitaphes that can be erected to his
memory. Tears are better understood then words, it is more easy to weep for
this Prince, then to speak of his Royal virtues.

If they will have discourses to praise the wonders of his life, the whole
world is the Theater, fame the Trumpet, and Immortality the triumph. If to
animate men's courages to immitate them, they are in inimitable, no man but
Hercules could measure that Olympian course, none but he could bend that bow,
none but he could wear the spoils of Lynx, no man but Theseus could carry
that Clubbe.

Discourses are to no end, neither to augment the grief of the loss, nor to
advance the greatness of the glory of this Prince, for the one is infinite and
the other is seen in his Apogea. But tears show that he which was lamented of
every man was necessary for all. Glory has presents and crowns of all sorts,
upon al occasions, and to honor all persons, she gives in like manner to
ships which return happily from long voiages, she has for the living, for
the dead and for their tombs. Athens ordained leaves, Room gave them gold,
and by the law of the twelve tables she did religiously recommend their
remembrance. Haniball gave a Crown to the body of Marsellus, Cleomenes to
Lidias, Pericles to Paralas, Augustus crowned Alexanders monuments, the vrne of
Dometrius ashes was crowned, and when as the Emperor Adrian demanded the reason
from the Philosopher Epictetus he understood that those crowns did belong to
the dead as victors over life, which is but a perpetual warfare.

Never Tomb deserved better to be crowned then that of this great Prince, who
has crowned all the actions of his life with immortal crowns of glory and
reputation. But if they should give him as many as they did number in Ptolomes
pomp and at Syllas funeral, or as many as Nero dedicated to Jupiter
Capitolinus, and that they were five or six cubits high, like unto those which
Greece presented unto Berenice upon golden Chariots, they should never equal
the esteem of so many tears which have been poured forth upon his death.

To the glorious Titles of most great, most happy, most victorious, the sword
and buckler of Christendom, the lightning of battles, the Eagle of arms,
the Phoenix of Captains, the Loadstarre of Kings, Truth adds for the most
glorious that of, Lamented of all men, for he must have great and eminent
quallities whom all men shall lament, a general admiration does pre-suppose
more then common virtues; and common tears argue a general loss

The world shall end before they will leave to lament a prince which has been
the ornament thereof. Time which cures the deepest wound will make ours
incurable. Let men's hearts sacrifise to constancy in another season and let them
obtain of reason that which they cannot hope for of time, in this the glory of
tears is in continuance to satisfy such as did think that there was nothing
whereof the mind of man was sooner tired then with heaviness, nor springes
sooner drawn dry then that of tears.

There will always be in the revolution of ages, some Alexander to honor
Achilles tomb, always some Caesar to renew the mourning for Hector, we shall
not be able to stay his tears in considering his own disabilitye to do
that which this Alexander has done.

These tears which flow in so great abundance, have no other spring then the
incredible bounty of this Prince; never people sorrowed for them that were
haultie and difficult, who have always pride in their forhead and collor in
their eyes, servitude is not more intolerable unto them then pride.

Room being bound to the birth of Romulus, to the piety of Numa, and to the
valor of Tullus, had the roialty of it self and the names of Kings in
contempt, when as she saw her self imperiously commanded by Tarquin, in whose
excess she did only consider his pride, and comprehended all under the name of
proud which she gave him.

People fly from those Princes which never leave to be solitary, but to make
all solitary, which go not forth of their Palaces, but like Lions out of their
cages, to fear some and to hurt others.

We should never grieve for a severe, cruel and inhumaine Prince, our tears
should be fained and forced; but for so good and mild a Prince, so loving to
his people, so much beloved of all, and so respected of strangers, the sorrow
can neither be expressed nor limited.

Prodigy of our days! this great bounty which did merit to see the sun of
three ages, which had been respected among the Scythians, and had forced them
to love it, is lost among the French. Shall it be said, that France, always
barren in monsters, shall be come both the Mother and Nursse? shall she be
defamed amongst all the nations of the world, to have slain two Kings one
after another? The Angels rejoice infinitely, when as they understand that men
have done any thing that is good, but how much are they grieved which have a
particular care of this Crown, which have fought by our Kings to save it; who
desire to have their ruins repaired, and who knows that the walls of the
heavenly Jerusalem must not be built but with this sand and lime, when as they
see that it serves for the Babylon of hell, and that the first and goodliest
realm of religion does produce these monsters.

If this crown were elective, they should not find any one that would accept
thereof to run this fortune. After the death of Cleolulphus, the realm of
Northumberland was divided into many factions, seven Kings in a short time
were slain or expeld by sedition.

They that would not endure Kings, subjected themselves to the discretion of
tyrants: good Princes did abhor to command a nation which gloryed more in
killing then obeying, it remained thirty years as it were in prey to the
first Inuader, the Danes enterd it, and were expelled by the Saxons, who in the
end added this Crown unto theirs.

Alas! France is well purged from this reproach, and her tears have washed
away this infamy. She has powered out a thousand execrations against this
detestable paricide, she has cursed the day of his birth, and does not suffer
any other remembrance to remain, but of the just punishment which he has
suffered.

By the abundance of the tears of France, we may judge of the excess of her
sorrow and loss, we never grieve for that which we care not to loose,
neither do we hold that lost, which we hope to recover, but she has lost
so good a Prince as we must never think so see any thing equal to his
bounty, and we must say unto nature upon her death, as was said unto Nero
upon the ruin of his Pauilion; that the loss thereof would show his
disabylytie and weakness, being unable in a long time to produce the like.
With the same passion that men grieve for the privation of things of great
price, they sorrow for those which have been well beloved.

He that shall know that this Prince lived in his Realm like the head of a
Family in his house, and that he was beloved of his Subjects, as a Father of
his Children, will not be amazed at the tears of the French, never eyes
powered forth iuster tears, neither were hearts afflicted with iuster sorrow.

If we be bereaved of the sweet light of our eyes, why should we not
complain? If they have clipped the wings of our hopes and prosperities, why
should we not cry out? if they have drawn forth ourbowels why should we not
feel it?

Can we dissemble such sencible greefes? can any man touch such painful
wounds and not be moved? what proportion of Equity and Justice is there in
that law, which commands to love and forbids to lament the loss of that which
we love?

If the Egiptians wept threescore and twelve days, for the death of their
King; if that of a good servant was so grievous unto Alexander as the whole
army carried the marks of his sorrow; if for the death of Masistius the towers
of the town were beaten down, Carthage caused her walls to be hanged with
black, if Babylon ordained public cessations for the death of her Kings, and
if in these sorrows the Pagans were ashamed to eat for that they would not
seem to be touched with affections and the care of life, what shall France do
to witness that which she suffers in the death of her King and Father?

If she did not weep for this Prince, I know not for whom she should not spare
her tears, if she should forget him, I know not of whom she should have any
remembrance. As among the Romans he was held for profane which had not in
his house the portrait of Anthonine; so shall he unworthily carry the name of
a Frenchman, which shall not preserve in his heart the Image of this great
King, a true Anthonine in clemency, a Traian in bounty, an Augustus in wisdom,
and a Caesar in valor. Armies will always lament their general, the Sciences
their restorer, France her King, Kings their Captain, people their Father, the
Church her eldest Son, Christendom her protector, and Europ her ornament.

The conquest and restoring of France, and the settling of peace and quietness
in Christendom, have given him a greater reputation throughout the world, the^
Caesar ever purchased in 52. battles, Marcellus in 40. and Scipio in the taking
of 152. towns, and therefore the more that we consider what he has bin, the
more we grieve for that he is no more, the more our eyes were pleased with this
sweet light, the more troublesome the Eclipse thereof is.

But this sun is not quite gone, it has but past, we see this Phoenix rise out
of his ashes. In the Fathers West, we adore the Sons East. It is the same
Egle which has renewed his plumes: we see the same majesty in his forehead,
the same mildnes in his eyes, the same quicknes in his actions, the same
designs in his inclinations, the same hopes in his words, and in a manner the
same promptness in his replies.

That great and incomparable Princess his Mother reuiues in her regencie the
reign of this good King, who has left unto her wisdom and felicity, and the
same instruments which he used in the government of this Monarchy; The
affection which he bare unto his people remains in the King his son. As God
could not more advance the fortune of this Princess, then in making her wife
to so great a King, so could he not place her virtue upon a greater Theater
then in committing to her trust the instruction of the King and the government
of the Realm. Let the Father live in heaven, and the Mother and Son long and
happily on earth, while that they shall continue happy, France cannot be
unhappy.

FINIS.
THE TROPHEIS of the Life And TRAGAEDIE of the Death of That Virtuous and
Victorious Prince HENRY the GREAT Late of France and Navarre.

TRANSLATED and Dedicated To the L: Vis-Count Cranborn.

By Ios. Syl.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Cranborn.
BEsides old Bonds which my best Vows engage,
To your dear Parent; and besides the Due
Which to your Self might justly thence accrue;
The apparent Virtues of Your April-age,
Challenge of right this Poems Patronage:
The rather, since we first received from you,
The speedy Notice (no less quick then true)
Of HENRY'S Death, through Hells despightfull Rage.
You saw this Sun, at his High-Noone-shine Set,
In sudden Clowd of his own Royal Blood.
O Horrid Hap! Who ever can forget
Such Fate, such Hate, of one so Great, so Good:
O just Revenge, root out the Ignatian Pack,
The Moule that moved in Faux and Rauaillac.
Iosu. Syl.

THE TROPHIES OF THE Virtues and Fortune of HENRY the Great.
SInce first Apollo lent the world his light,
And Earth empregned with his heatful might,
Europe has seen no Potentate, no Prince,
To Parallel great HENRY'S excellence.
No Term, no Time, his fresh renown shall shed,
Never was King more dear, never more dread.
Phoenix of Kings, wonder of Christendom,
Passing all past, and without Peer to come;
His Courage only match His Clemency;
And should his Tomb to These Two equal be,
Both Spain and France, could not contain the same,
Which have so often seen his feats of Fame.
His Life's a lamp to Princes, and a line,
A Trophey reared by miracle divine:
A Theater to all the Virtues built,
A goodly Garden with such plenty filled,
Of choicest fruits and flowers that choosing, there
Abundance troubles more then Want elsewhere,
The year that EDWARD in Great Britain died,
That France (beyond the mountains) Spain defied.
That Therwin walls were thundered to the ground,
That a fair flower our Royal Hymen Crowned;
In The winter Solstice (when the year is worn)
Within Pau Castle This young MARS was borne.
Borne for the Worlds Good, as his Entrance
Presaged him then the HERCULES of France;
To re-aduance her Lillies long decayed;
For as (by chance) bare-head, abroad he played,
At four years old, a Snake he finds and kills,
At forty, foiles the Hydra of our Ills.
Nor was He bred in soft delicious wise,
(Which forms young Spirits into the form of Vice,)
His Grandsire used him to all Weathers Ire,
His Saulce was Labor, Exercise his Fire,
His noble Heart did never ought inflame,
Save Heavens desire, and The Honor of the same,
Scarce fourteen times had he beheld the birth,
Of th'happy Planet (which praesag'd his Worth,)
Predominant in his Natitiall;
When he became an Armies General,
Whose hottest flame, without Him was but fume;
Nor, but by Him, durst any good presume.
He purchased Peace, the which eft soones was stained
With His Friends blood, and his young soul constraind
To feign some Change of His Religion:
At Vinsein: Castle He was sea'zd upon,
And to the Court confined; where, discontent,
His Spirit droopes, out of His Element.
Escaped thence: with restless toil, He tends
To save the Side of his Aflicted Friends;
By peace again he brings all in ure:
And Mcuusieures death does well his Hopes assure
Of th'after Crown, who but between him stood;
So, now was He the first Prince of the Blood.
Then from a far he does new Storms descry,
To threat his fortune, and his force to try:
He meets the danger with undaunted front,
And in four years bears ten brave Armies brunt,
All with the might of a great Monarch graced,
Whereof, at Coutras he defeats the last.
At last the King to extreme Streights reduced,
In doubt of all, and daring none to trust,
Implores This Prince, who rescues him from Tours,
With just Revenge; and had yer many hours,
Re-humbled Paris to her Princes yoke,
But for Saint Clements Paricidiall stroke.
After which stroke (which all true Frenchmen hate)
France sadly falls in a most wretched state:
Who has least Reason, has most Insolence;
Who has most Power, has least Obedience:
Nor Awe, nor Law; disorder euery-where:
Good without hope, and wicked without fear.
Rebellion spaunes as fast as (in the Spring,)
Fruit-fretting virmine; it does Discord bring
In families, dearth in Towns, death in field,
O! happy you who never daign'd to yield
Unto that Hagge, but Loyal to the Crown,
Have left you Heirs, Heirs of a true renown.
Who coumpts the cares that on a Crown do wait,
As well may number Autumnes fruitful freight,
And Flora's too. Yet this great spirit of man,
Mid th'ebbs and floods of This vast Ocean,
Seems a tall Ship, which maugre Winds and Waves,
In wished Haven her and her Burden saues.
He Is never idle, nor his Exercise
Other then stands with princely offices:
MARS, and DIANA, and CUPID wait on Him:
Maugre his Loss he always gains by Time.
Unto Affairs his ears are open aye,
Nor waytes he lazying on his bed for day,
Shafts, Tigers, Torrents; no, nor lightning flies
More swift about then This bold Aegle plyes
(Amid all perrils) to preserve his State,
With Heed and Speed, from Rebels Pride and Hate.
In Battles first, last in Retreats: in brief,
In Action, Soldier, in Direction, Chief.
Diepe saw his Fortunes on a desperate Dye:
The League presumed he needs must yield or fly:
But, as a Brook the more we stop his Course,
Breaks down his Bay, and runs with swifter Force,
He foiles his Foes at Arques, and shows them plain
That Heavens just hand does His dear Right sustain.
It Is buzzed in Paris, and believed in part,
That he is taken; or constraind to start
From Diepe to Dover, to seek Englands Aid;
And, while Him coming Prisoner-wise, they said,
To the Bastile; He came and overcame
Their Suburbs soon, to their Suborners shame.
Conquest attends him, whether he encamps,
Or marches on: again he takes Estampes:
Lizieux, Eureux, Man's, Meulan, Vandosme, Perch,
And Honfleur, foremost in His Trophie march;
As earnest-pence of His recouer'd State,
And Crown of France, which well admits no Mate.
Tyber and Iber then together flow,
(Too strong in wrong) his Right to ouer-throw.
There prowdeth Power, Here Prowess brighter shines,
And daily shows us by a thousand Signs,
How great Advantage a true Birthright brings
(Against Usurpers) unto lawful Kings.
In IVRY Fields, he seems a Blazing Star;
Seen in the Front of all his Host, a far*
Maiestick Fury in his Martial Face,
The brauest Troops, does in instant Chase:
And boldest Rebels, which the rest had lead;
Came charging one way, and by forty Fled.
Melun surrenders, to his Warlike Lot,
Chartres is chastizd with his thundering Shot,
Louuiers lies humbled at his Conquering Foot,
Noyon lamenteth her Three Succors rout,
Espernay yields her wholely to his hest,
Dreux twice besieged, opens as the rest.
The League that late so violently burned,
To a Cold Fever now her Frenzy turned;
And trusting still in Strange Physicians aid,
Neglects her Care till all her strength decaid:
In dread of all, In doubt her own will quail:
As a weak Ship afraid of every Sail.
That (late) ACHILLES of the Spanish-Dutch,
Farnezean Parma that atchieu'd so much
In Anwerp's Siedge, by match-lesse Stratagem;
And weend the World had had no Peer to Him:
Had here the heart, twice, to refuse to Fight;
And twice departed and bod none Good Night.
Fortune, for Him, no longer used her Wheel,
But, kind and constant, follows at his heel:
He Is happy every where, and over all
Spring Palms and Laurels: only near Aumale
A murderous Bullet put him to some pain,
Yet hindered not His Rescue of his Train.
Who weens to vanquish Him, makes Him invict;
Mild to the Meek, to Proudlings stern and strict:
He loves the Laurels without blood be-sprent,
A Cruel Conquest He does ever lament.
His Thunder batters but Rebellious Walls,
And who least fear him, on them first he falls.
France, Self to slay, and her own Throat to Cut,
Arms her own hands; and (in strange rage) does put
The Knife to whet, in Spaines ambitious paws;
Spain that would Spoil her Crowns primordiall Laws
And would a Scepter with a Distaffe blinn:
But all in vain: The Lillies cannot Spinn.
Re-Romaniz'd, so (say They) Heaven coniures;
His Errors at Saint Denis he abiures:
This Change, in Court Yet changed not one nor other;
For, though his Subjects have not all one Mother,
He holds them all his Sons, They him their Sire;
And Christians all, all to one Heaven aspire.
Within the Temple of The Mother-Mayd,
That bore her Son, her Sire, her God, her Aid,
With Heau'n-sent Oil he is anointed King,
Donns the Order-Coller; and by every thing,
To prove in Him, Saint Lewis Faith and Zeal,
The Sick he touches, and his Touch does heal.
By law of Arms, A City taken by Force,
Should feel the Victors rage, with small remorce;
Paris so taken, is not treated so:
Though well his Justice might have razed low
Those rebel Walls which bred and fed These Wars;
To save the guilt-lesse, he the guilty spares.
There, There Is the Hope and Safety of His Side;
If There he fail, then farewell all beside:
The Spaniard therefore Thither speedy sends,
A great strong Conuoy to confirm His Friends.
Which soon defeated: There began the End
Of Civil Wars, and all to Union tend.
Th'Honor of saving and restoring France,
Is not alone due to His Valiance;
His Clemency has part; which lets him in
To stronger Holds, then all his Arms could win:
That, satisfied with Tears; makes from all parts,
Repentant Rebels yield him up their Hearts.
Lions, the Porter of one Part of France,
Rouen that sees none like strong in ordinance,
Orleans, which England did undaunted prove,
Marseillis, jealous of old Neptunes love,
Aix, Bourges, Sens, Meaux, Poictiers, Troy, Thoulouse,
And Reins; of These, each to his Bounty bows.
This gracious Prince excused the simpler sort,
Whom (Malice-les,) blind Passions did transport,
Against the Laws, with fury of the Time,
Who selfe-affraid to fail in fowler Crime,
Seduced by others slye seditious Lore,
Followd (like Sheep) their Fellows straid before.
This heauenly-humane Clemency of His,
Yet cannot shield Him from some Treacheries;
One wounds him in the Mouth and breaks withal
One of his Teeth, (o Act unnatural!)
And had not God in part put-by the blow,
Even then in Paris had he perished so.
But, having quenched the Civil Fires in France,
Against his ill Neighbors now his Arms advance;
In Piedmont-Fields his Lillye-flowers he plants,
Pills Bourgognie, and all Artois He dants,
And makes the great Castilian M'ARS to fly,
With Fear within; without, with Infamye.
Then those great Warriors that had disobay'd
(Whom not their Courage but their Cause betrayed)
Which came with shame and sorrow (as was meet)
To cast their swords at his victorious Feet,
Fearing his Rigor: He receaues them (rather)
With King-like grace, and kindness like a Father.
Heaven daily works, for him, some special Miracle,
His Faith's an Altar and his Word an Oracle:
His greatest foes have never found him fail,
And should Sincerity, in all men quail,
Exiled from the World (as Moors from Spain)
In This Kings soul she had been found again.
Spain by a train of many Wyles well laid,
Surpriseth Amiens, France is all afraid:
The Spaniard, hence prouder then ever, swells,
Undaunted HENRY Thence him soon repells,
Re-gaines his City, and constraines His foes,
To beg their Peace, or to abide his blows.
The Storms that long disturbd the state are val'd,
The Will Vapors now are from all hearts exhaled,
And France is now all French even all about:
Only the Breton stiffly yet stood out.
But those white Ermines at the last must need,
Of the only Sent of the fair Lillies feed.
Old PHILLIP longs to see the Waters calm,
Finds all designs vain to supplant This Palm;
Since the more shaken, it more fast does grow:
He seeks Peace, the Pope solicits so,
Veruins does treat it, Bruxells swears it done,
And PHILLIP pleased departs the World anon.
France yet retains one sensible Offense,
For which she vows Revenge or Recompense:
Among the Alps her thundering Canons roar,
Proud-browd Montmeilan flaunts and vaunts the more
To stop her furye, but in fine is feign,
To rue her rashness and repent in vain.
God hastens his own Work: This Monarch marries
In Lions Church, the choice, the Chief of Mary's;
The Heavens delight, our Lillies ornament:
Love, in one heart two lovely Souls has blent,
Whence Peace is more confirmed, and Discord, dashed
For; by This knot many great Plotts are quasht.
At Fountainblean (a Paradise for site)
She brought him forth his Dolphin, his delight,
Whose tender youth gives happy hopes of Worth;
One Daughter also did she there bring forth,
And two Sons more (Supporters of the crown,)
Two daughters more, Paris for birth does own.
His Clemency has conquered Rebels rage,
Made of dis-loyall loyal Vassalage;
Yea forced Wills by Pardons and by Grace,
The proof whereof is writ in every place:
Through all the Towns of France both great and small
Where, for Revenge, Reward was daign'd to all.
Once, only once, his Mercy admirable,
Was deaf to Biron and inexorable;
Since when he might, his hault despite would none,
I wonder not to see that Myrmadon,
In the Bastile, a shameful death to bear:
But This I wonder, that he would come there.
Of factious spirits, of close deep hearts, and double,
(Whose Life is strife, whose Rest is best in trouble)
He knows the driftes, and known disolues the same
As fast as fire melts Lead within the flame.
His voice alone, as Dust cast up aloft,
Breaks Hornets buzzing and their swarming, often.
Discord disturbing holy Churches rest,
Twixt Rome and Venice did debates suggest:
Ambition set in foot, free-swelld with hope,
To bridle both the Senate and the Pope;
Both pressed to fight: His Prudence reconciled,
Their Difference, and did their minds remyl'd.
He relisht now the harmeles Sweets of Peace,
Willing his People should partake no less;
But yet some-where he feels a Thorn to prick:
To pluck it out he arms and marches quick
Even to the Frontier: There attaines hi's will,
Wisdom (so) fitly takes her Season still.
You Nations, that for forty years have seen,
BELLONA'S Tempests and fellt MARS his Teene;
That for your Liberties have pawnd your lives:
If freely now you joy your Wealth, your Wives:
If now your Trades into the East you bring,
(Under Heavens Kingdom) only thank This King.
Thus heapt with Honors, This brave King is loath,
That his brave Knights, effeminizd by Sloth,
Mid Games and Dames, during so long a Peace,
Should still lie still in Cities pomp and ease:
Therefore he rears an Army strongly dight,
In Gulich's Claim, his wronged friends to right.
A noble Prince, whose Prowes and Prudence, late
Buda admired, and Rome has wondred-at
(The Honor of His Time) was General;
So stoard with Gould, with Gunns, with Arms, with all,
That neighbor Princes were all in alar'm.
Yet Them This Thunder brought more fear then Harm.
Feare-les it Marches, and respect-les threats,
What-euer Log that its free Passage lets;
Gesture and voice already skirmishing:
And under Conduct of so brave a King,
Great-Brittains, Germans, Switzers, Belgians,
Serve all the Greatness of the Crown of France.
Els-where the while, The Duke that rules the Alps,
Seemd to have his heart no more beyond the Calpes,
Brave noble heart, Saxonitally-Franch.
Fuentez, afraid, with shoulder-shrincking wrench,
Doubts least that Milan stoop to France again;
And CHARLES provoked prove the Skourge of Spain.
Heavens now, to Crown his Tropheis, had set down,
That at Saint Denis he his Queen should Crown
With royal Diadem; and in one Day
The State, the Majesty of France display.
Nothing but Great, but great Magnificence;
But MARIUS Grace excelled all Excellence.
Hence, hence false Pleasures, Momentary Joys,
Mock us no more with your illuding Toys:
A strange Misshap hatched in Hell below,
Has plunged us all in deepest Gulf of Woe,
Taught us, that all Worlds-hopes as Dreams do fly,
And made us all, Cry All is Vanity.
At the Euenings-fower, forth from the Louure road
This mighty Prince (without his Guard) abroad
To see his Arsenall: To his Caroche,
In a straight lane a Hell-hound durst approach,
And with a Knife, twice stabbing, killd him quight,
Turning that fairest Day to foulest Night.
Twice did the Monster stab, for else, the first,
Had not bin mortal; but the Knife accursed
Thrilling his Lungs, cut at the second stroke
The arterial vein, whose blood-flood soon did choke
The peer-les Prince; His dying Eyes and Heart
Imploring Heaven, soon did his Soul depart.
Fell Tigre, tell us, tell us Why, or Whence,
Thou durst (accursed) assalt so Great a Prince:
Wherein had He to Thee or Thine don wrong?
When once (yet This) Thou did too-neer him throng,
His Guard rebukt thee; but He Them, for That:
Caused That Thy Malice, and His Murderous fate?
Fates ruth-les Law alots his royal breast,
To dye the death that CAESAR thought the best;
Death without sense of death, a death so quick
It seldom leaves Kings leisure to be sick:
Nor gives Him leave of his sixth Decads date
To fill the Roll; but seven Six Months did bate.
He, He that was the Hope, the Prop of His,
He that restored France to what it is,
He that confined the Power of Princes still,
He that Commanded Victory, at will,
That was the Worlds delight, Kings glory sheen,
He, He receaues Deaths treacherous stroke, unseen.
The Unhappy street where This fell Hap fell-out,
Where woeful Paris saw her Light put out,
Where cursed Iron pierced her Princes heart,
It shall no more be clept The Iron-mart:
It shall be called The cursed Corner, still;
The Hag-street, or The Hell-street: which you will.
Lord! where were Thou! When That disloyal wretch,
With cruel hand did Thine Anointed reach;
Quenching the Rays of Royal Majesty?
No heart is hid from thine All-piercing Eye,
It sees the Center, knows the Thoughts, Yet thought;
Could it see This, and suffer it be wrought?
Hell often before, out of his black Abisse,
Had spewed up Monsters to have acted This:
But still thy hand from former wounds did ward.
And had he not still trusted to Thy Guard,
His Own had waited Round about his Coach,
And This fell Tiger never should approach.
These Words, this rasher Words escapt my tongue;
When I beheld That Monarch laid along
Dead on his bed, so dead, so butchered;
I blamed Heavens, and Whispering soft, I said,
Because They stopped not This strange Hap before,
Their slumbering eyes now watch the World no more.
But, are mine eyes mine own? Is This That Prince,
Which might have made all Europe His long-since?
Had he not thought The Empire of France enough.
That Lyon-heart, that Courage Cannon-proofe,
Which did so often Impossibles atchiue?
I see it is He: yet scarce my sight believe.
Is This That Mighty King, Gods lively Image,
To whom the greatest in the World did Homage?
In Peace a Dove, in War an Aegle quick,
NESTOR in Court, In Camp ACHILLES-like,
That with a hundred horse a thousand foiled:
That from most Dangers never yet recoiled.
Geat Rome was strangely mazd and all a mort,
When She beheld her CEASARS bloody shert:
And say, Great City, how weart Thou dismayed,
When first thou sawst Thine HENRY sadly laid
Along his Coach, and Covered with a Cloak?
"I thought the Prop of all my Fortunes broak.
Those that have seen in Towns surprised (while-yer,)
When to the Churches all have fled for fear;
May well imagine Paris deep Affright.
Nothing but shiuering: Nobles armed bright,
Clergy at Prayers, People weep and houle:
And the Kings wound has wounded every Soul.
Paris in Honor of her peer-les Queen,
Had plotted Shows, (more pompous never seen)
As, rich to the outward, rare to the inward sense;
But all those Archs (Marks of Magnificence.)
Those Tropheis, Terms, Statues, Colosses, All,
Make but more Mourners at the Funeral.
I yield My Pencill: help APELLES, here,
To Limme (to life) Her dying-liuing Cheer:
Belief is hardly in Man's heart impress't,
Her Grief more hard to be by Art expressed,
Therefore o Queen! Great Stay, Great Star of France,
This Veil I draw before Thy Countenance.
Heaven steeled Thy Heart with Fortitude That Day,
Thy Courage kept the Kingdom from Decay;
And to the Throne Thy Son our Sovereign heft:
Though angry Fates of Father him bereft,
Yet Merciful, they left him such a Mother,
That France could hardly have been ruld by other.
The soudaine Clap of This drad Thunder sounds,
From Alexanders to Alcides Bounds:
The Kings and Princes stand amazed all,
With horror of an Act so Tragical.
Some Rest for-sake, others Repast for-beare,
And Each like Fortune to himself does fear.
So soudainly to see Day turned to night,
Tryumphant Palms into Funerial Plight,
The Royall-Crowne to a deep Mourning Vale,
A living King to a dead Corpse and Pale,
Our Flowers to Thorns: seem Tricks of Sorcery,
Wherein, Conceit consents not with our Eye.
Yes, He is dead: and his eyelids no more
To view this Light shall open (as before;)
Those lovely Eyes the Load-stars of the Court,
Whose gracious glances on the Worthy sort,
Gave Virtue vigor, and Whose awefull frown,
Dis-dared Vice; are now Eclipst and down.
Where are those ready Battaill-ranging Hands?
Those lightning Eyes whose wrath no wall with-stands?
That Voice so dreadful to the stoutest hearts?
That Heart which wrought so many wondrous parts?
That piercing Wit dispersing Clouds of Doubt?
Where is that mighty King, so Famed about?
Inexorable Death! inhumaine, cruel,
Thou shall no more reaue us so rare a Jewel;
Nature has broake the Mould she made Him in.
In all thy Triumph (trayling every Kin)
Shall never march His Match, nor worthier Prince,
To Have bin exempted from thine Insolence.
Ah! poor, weak Virtue, Zealous Love of Thee,
Prolongs not Life, protracts not Death (I see)
This Prince that gave Thee even his Heart for Temple,
This Prince whose Reign shall serve for rare Example
To future Kings, in future Things dismayed,
Should have come sooner, or have later stayed.
His Piety, was neither Fond, nor Faind;
His Prowess, neither Fear, nor Rashness staind;
His Prudence cleard his Counsels, steerd his State;
His Temperance his Wrath did temperate;
His Justice with his Clemency did Yoke:
Yet could not All free Him from Fatal stroke.
Invincible in all: only, the Darts
Which have not spared the Gods immortal hearts,
Have often batterd His: but, by your leaves,
O fairest Beauties! (Beauty it self deceaues)
You never were the Souerains of his breast:
He You (perhaps) You never Him possessed.
In Arms-Art, what He knew not, none can know it,
Neither attempt what He attempted not,
Reason was aye the Aim of His designs,
His brave Exploits (worthy immortal lines)
Shall furnish Theme to Thousand learned Clarks,
Whose Works shall Honor Him, He more their Warks.
His Royal Gests are euery-where extold,
Graven, Carved, Cast, in Marble, Wood, and Gold;
His Life alone's an History admired,
Wherein all Penns, all Pencills shall be tired,
In pourtraying all His valiant Feats to-forn,
Whose Tables ever shall all Courts adorn.
His Bounties Temple had a hard Access,
Not known to any but to Worthiness:
That Gate (indeed) did seldom open quick.
His Liberality, (coy Beauty like)
Loved to be wooed, pressed, and importuned still,
Yea, forced to give, what glad and fain she will.
Yet, by the effects to weigh his Clemency,
Me thinks His Heart must more then humane be,
Me thinks therein some higher Power did shine,
It surely seemed celestial and divine,
And but I saw him dying, pale and wan,
I could have scarce believed This Prince a Man.
He ever loved rather to save then spill,
Not cimenting his Throne with Blood, with Ill,
Nor ween'd by Fear his Diadem assured
With Myldnesse rather grieved minds he cured
His Memory did never wrongs retain,
Beloved Kings (He thought) securest reign.
Praise you This Bounty, you that past the Poles,
Bear Heavens Embassage to Belief-les Souls:
HENRY restored your Country and your credit,
He gave you leave over all France to spread it,
Restord you Bizance, and each pleasant part,
Left you his Court, bequeathed to you his Heart.
If France now flourish, proyning round about,
Olives within, and Lawrells all without,
If now, She give the Law to other States,
If Peace and Plenty reign within her Gates,
If now She fear no Civil Storms again,
These are the fruits of This Great HENRY'S Reign;
If now Her Schools with learned men abound,
If Her rare wits be through the World renownd,
If doubts of Faith be cleared and explored,
If Learning be to her dew Place restord,
If now Desert the charge in Church attain,
These are the Fruits of This Great HENRY'S Reign.
If now her Buildings pass for bewty far
The Worlds old Wonders (which so famous are)
If Paris Thou be peerles to behold,
For State, for Store, for People, Goods, and Gold,
If in Thy City Cities sprout again,
These are the Fruits of This Great HENRY'S Reign.
If the French Scepter be now Selfe-entire,
Fear-les of Foreign or Domestic fire:
If France have fellows of ACHILLES Fame,
If now in France be nothing out of frame,
If now the Indies her Bastile contain,
These are the fruits of This Great HENR'YS Reign.
If now we joy to see our Country free
From Theiues and Rebels (which exiled be)
If Justice now do keep the lewd in awe,
If Desperate Duells be now Curbd by Law,
If now the Weak weigh not the Strongs disdain,
These are the Fruits of This Great HENRYS Reign.
If Merchants rich, If Magistrates be found,
If Officers like Emperors abound,
If pursie Lawyers live Prince-like at home,
If now Inventions to their height be come,
If now good wits find where them to sustain,
These are the fruits of This Great HENRY'S Reign.
Who loved not Him, never beheld his brows,
Who knew his Fortunes, must admire his Prowes,
Who feared him not, His Greatness did offend,
Who weend Him to beguile, his Wisdom kend:
Who durst displease him knew his mercies store;
Who durst not speak his myldnesse did ignore.
Who waileth not his Death knew not his Life,
Glory of His and Others Envy rife,
Incomparable, Admirable Prince
Excelling all the old HEROES Excellence.
For His true Story shall their Fables shame:
Inimitable Life, Illimitable Fame.
O Frenchmen, stop not yet your weeping flood:
This Prince for you has lauisht often his blood,
O! be not niggards of your Tears expense,
(Veil here, my Verse, do ANNE a reverence;
Rare ANNE that shames the rarest wits of Ours
Her divine Stances furnish thee these Flowers)
The Heavens may give us all Prosperities,
Sustain our State, remove our miseries;
But cannot dry up our Tears bitter stream:
In extreme Evils remedies extreme.
Restore our King, quick shall our Joys recover,
Else, never look our Sorrows should give over.
Each-where our Grief finds matter to augment it,
His Names Remembrance does each where present it,
His famous Gests do busy every Sort,
Some tell his Wars, others his Works report.
Others his Favors past, glad-sad deplore;
Then, not to mourn, is not to mind Him more.
Ah! must we live, and see so soudaine dead
The Life that late our Lives enspirited?
Strike sail my Soul, let us put-into the Port,
While HENRY lived 't was good to live (in sort)
But let us after; since He Is reft of breath,
Desire of Life is now far worse then Death.
Sorrow, with us does both lie down and rise,
Wrinckles our Brows, withers our Cheeks and eyes;
We shunn what-euer might our Griefs allay,
We wish the Night, we are weary of the day,
Night brings sad Silence with her horrid Shade,
And even her Color seems for Mourning made.
Extremest Woes yet are with Time ore-past,
Rivers of Tears are dryed-vp at last:
But never Ours: Ours, ever fresh shall flow,
We defy Comforts, we will admit no mo,
Nor seek them, but as Alchimie profound
Seeks that which is not, or which is not found.
Who from the Ocean Motion can recall,
Heat from Fire, Void from Aier, Order from All,
From Lines their Points, from IRIS all her Dies,
Perils from Seas, from Numbers Unities,
Shadows from Bodies, Angles from the Square,
May separate our Hearts from Grief, our Minds from Care.
He must be hart-lesse that is smart less found,
The Soul that is not wounded with This wound,
Most brutish, has no humane Reason in it:
There is no breast of Steel, no heart of Flint,
But must be-mone so great a King, so slain,
Who would not wail a Gally slave so tain.
Let us no more name HENRY'S Kings of France,
Death with two Knives, and with one shiuer'd Lance,
Has killd Three HENRY'S: one at Iousts (in jest)
The Other in's Closet, in's Caroach the best:
So, Three King RICHARDS; and Five Other cry,
Some fatal Secret in some Names does lie.
What worse Disastre can you have behind
To threaten France, o Destinies unkind!
What greater Mischief can your Malice bring,
So good a Father rest, so great a King?
What will you more? Since we no more can hope
For any Good that with This Ill may cope.
This noble Spirit does to his Spring re-mount,
This Bounties Flood retireth to his Fount,
This Atomie to's Unity unites,
This Star returns to the first Light of Lights,
This Ray reuerts where first it light did take,
And mortal wounds, This Prince immortal make.
Farewell sole Honor of all earthly Kings,
Farewell rare Prince for All kind Managings,
Farewell Great HENRY Heavens and Natures Gemm,
Farewell bright Star of Kings, Glories great Beam,
Farewell sole Mortal that I keep in mind,
Farewell false Hope, Fortune, and Court unkind.
Here, leasi Oblivion should usurp her room,
FAME writes in Gold, These Lines upon thy Toombe.
THIS PRINCE, VN-PEERD FOR CLEMENCY AND COVRAGE,
IVSTLY SVR-NAMD, THE GREAT, THE GOOD, THE WISE,
MIRROR OF FVTVRE, MIRACLE OF FORE-AGE;
ONE SHORT MIS-HAP FOR-EVER HAPPIFIES.
FINIS.

