THE VIRGIN MARTYR, A TRAGEDY, AS IT HAS BIN DIVERSE times publickely Acted
with great Applause, By the Servants of his Majesty's Revels.

Written by Phillip Messenger and Thomas Deker.

LONDON, Printed by B, A. for Thomas Jones. 1622.

The Actors names.
Dioclesian Emperors of Rome. Maximinus, A King of Pontus. A King of Epire. A
King of Macedon. Sapritius, Governor of Caesaria. Theophilus, a zealous
persecutor of the Christians. Sempronius, Captain of Sapritius Guards.
Antoninus, son to Sapritius. Macrinus, friend to Antoninus. Harpax an evil
spirit, following Theophilus in the shape of a Secretary. Artemia, daughter to
Dioclesian.
Caliste Daughters to Theophilus. Christeta. Dorothea, The Virgin Martyr.
Angelo, a good spirit, serving Darothea in the habit of a Page. A British
Slave.
Hercius, a Whoremaster. Servants to Darothea. Spungius, a Drunkard.

A Priest to Jupiter. Officers and Executioners.
THE VIRGIN MARTYR.
Actus primus. Scene I.
Enter Theophilus, Harpax.
Theoph. COme to Casarea to night?

Harpax. Most true Sir,

Theoph. The Emperor in person?

Harpax. Do I hue.

Theo. It Is wondrous strange, the marches of great Princes
Like to the motions of prodigious Meteors.
Are step, by step observed, and loud tong'd Fame
The hat binger to prepare their entertainment:
And were it possible, so great an army,
Though covered with the night, could be so near:
The Governor cannot be so vnfriended
Among the many that attend his person,
But by some secret means he should have notice
Of Casars purpose in this, then excuse me
If I appear indredulous.

Harpax. At your pleasure.

Theop. Yet when I call to mind you never faild me
In things more difficult, but have discovered
Deeds that were done thousand leagues distant from me,
When neither woods, nor caves, not secret vaults,
No nor the power they serve, could keep these Christians,
Or from my reach or punishment, but thy magic
Still laid them open: I begin again
To be as confident as heretofore.
It is not possible thy powerful art
Should meet a check, or fail.

Enter a Priest with the image of Jupiter; Caliste, Christata.
Harp. Look on these vestals,
The holy pledges that the gods have given you,
Your chaste fair daughters. Were not to vpbraid
A service to a master not unthankful,
I could say this in spite of your prevention,
Seduced by an imagined faith, not reason,
(Which is the strength of Nature) quite for saking
The Gentile gods, had yielded up themselves
To this new found religion. This I crosd,
Discouerd their intentions, taught you to use
With gentle words and mild persuasions,
The power, and the authority of a father
Set of with cruel threats and so reclaimd em,
And whereas they with torments should have died,
(Hels furies to me had they undergone it) aside
They are now votaries in great Jupiters temple,
And by his Priest instructed, grown familiar
With all the Mysteries, nay the most abstruse ones
Belonging to his Dietie.

Theoph. T was a benefit
For which I ever owe you, Hail Jove's Flamen,
Have these my daughters reconcilde themselves
(Abandoning for ever the Christian way)
To your opinion.

Priest. And are constant in it,
They teach their teachers with their depth of judgment,
And are with arguments able to convert
The enemies to our gods and answer all
They can object against us.

Theoph. My dear daughters.

Caliste. We dare dispute against this new sprung sect
In private or public.

Harpax. My best Lady.
Persevere in it.

Christeta. And what we maintain
We will seal with our bloods.

Harpax. Brave resolution.
I even grow fat to see my labors prosper.

Theoph. I young again to your devotions.

Harpax. Do.
My prayers be present with you.
exeunt Priest and daughters
Theoph. Oh my Harpax.
Thou engine of my wishes, thou that steeldst
My bloody resolutions, thou that armst
My eyes against womanish tears and soft compassion.
Instructing me without a sigh to look on
Babes torn by violence from their mothers breasts
To feed the fire, and with them make one flame:
Old men as beasts, in beasts skins torn by dogs:
Virgins and matrons tire the executioners,
Yet I unsatisfied think their torments easy.

Harpax. And in that just, not cruel.

Theoph. Wear all scepters
That grace the hands of kings made into one,
And offered me, all crowns laid at my feet,
I would contemn them all, thus spit at them.
So I to all posterities might be called
The strongest champion of the Pagan gods
And rooter out of Christians.

Harpax. Oh mine own,
Mine own dear Lord, to further this great work
I ever live thy slave.

Enter Saprinus and Sempronius.
Theoph. No more the Governor.

Sapr. Keep the ports close, and let the guards be doubled
Disarme the Christians, call it death in any
To wear a sword, or in his house to have one.

Semp. I shall be careful Sir,

Sap. It will well become you.
Such as refuse to offer sacrifice
To any of our gods, put to the torture.
Grub up this growing mischief by the roots,
And know when we are merciful to them,
We to our selves are cruel.

Semp. You pour oil
On fire that burns already at the height,
I know the Emperors Edict and my charge,
And they shall find no favor.

Theoph. My good Lord,
This care is timely, for the entertainment
Of our great master, who this night in person
Comes here to thank you.

Sapritius. Who the Emperor?

Har. To clear your doubts, he does return in triumph,
Kings lackying by his triumphant Chariot,
And in this glorious victory my Lord,
You have an ample share: for know your son,
The nere enough commended Antoninus,
So well has fleshd his maiden sword, and died
His snowy plumes so deep in enemies blood,
That besides public grace, beyond his hopes
There are rewards propounded.

Sap. I would know
No mean in thine could this be true.

Harpax. My head answer the forfeit.

Sapritius. Of his victory
There was some rumor, but it was assurd
The army passd a full days journey higher
Into the country.

Harpax. It was so determined,
But for the further honor of your son,
And to observe the government of the city,
And with what rigor, or remiss indulgence
The Christians are pursude he makes his stay here.
For proof his trumpets speak his near arrival. Trumpets afar of.

Sap. Haste good Sempronius, draw up our guards,
And with all ceremonious pomp receive
The conquering army. Let our garrison speak
Their welcome in loud shouts, the city show
Her state and wealth.

Sempr. I am gone.
exit Sempronius
Sapr. O I am ravished
With this great honor, cherish good Theophilus
This knowing scholar, send your fair daughters
I will present them to the Emperor,
And in their sweet conversion, as a mirror
Express your zeal and duty. a lesson of Cornets.

Theoph. Fetch them good Harpax.
A guard brought in by Sempronius, soldiers leading in three kings bound,
Antoninus and Macrinus carrying the Emperors Egles, Dioelesian with a guilt
laurel on his head, loading in Artemia, Sapritius kisses the Emperors hand,
then embraces his son, Harpax brings in Caliste and Christeta, loud showts.
Diocle. So at all parts I find Caesarea
Completely gouernd, the licentious soldier
Confined in modest limits, and the people
Taught to obey, and not compeld with rigor;
The ancient Roman discipline reuin'd,
(Which raysde Room to her greatness, and proclaimd her
The glorious mistress of the conquered world)
But above all the service of the gods
So zealously observed, that (good Sapritius)
In words to thank you for your care and duty
Were much unworthy Dioclesians honor
Or his magnificence to his loyal servants.
But I shall find a time with noble titles
To recompense your merits.

Sapr. Mightiest Caesar
Whose power upon this globe of earth, is equal
To loves in heaven, whose victorious triumphs
On proud rebellious Kings that stir against it
Are perfect figures of his immortal trophies
Won in the giants war, whose conquering sword
Guided by his strong arm, as deadly kills
As did his thunder, all that I have done,
Or if my strength were centupld could do,
Comes short of what my loyalty must challenge.
But if in any thing I have deserved
Great Casars smile, it is in my humble care
Still to preserve the honor of those gods,
That make him what he is: my zealc to them
I ever have expressd in my fell hate
Against the Christian sect, that with one blow
Ascribing all things to an unknown power,
Would strike down all their temples, and allows them
Nor sacrifice nor altars.

Diocle. Thou in this
Walk hend in hand with me, my will and power
Shall not alone confirm, but honor all
That are in this most forward.

Sap. Sacred Casar;
If your imperial Majesty stand pleased
To shower your favors upon such as are
The boldest champions of our religion,
Look on this reverend man, to whom the power
Of serching out, and punishing such delinquents,
Was by your choice committed, and for proof
He has deserved the grace imposd upon him,
And with a fair and even hand proceeded
Partial to none, not to himself, or those
Of equal neerenesse to himself, behold
This pair of Virgins.

Diocle What are these?

Sapr. His daughters.

Art. Now by your sacred fortune they are fair ones,
Exceeding fair ones, would 'twere in my power
To make them mine.

Theo. They are the gods, great Lady,
They were most happy in your service else,
On these when they fell from their fathers faith
I used a judges power, entreaties failing
(They being seduced) to win them to adore
The holy powers we worship, I put on
The scarlet robe of bold authority,
And as they had bin strangers to my blood,
Presented them in the most horrid forms
All kind of tortures, part of which they sufferd
With Roman constancy.

Art. And could you endure
Being a father, to behold their limbs
Extended on the rack?

Theo. I did, but must
Confess there was a strange contention in me,
Between the impartial office of a Judge,
And pity of a father, to help Justice
Religion stepped in, under which ods
Compassion fell: yet still I was a father,
For even then, when the flinty hangmans whips
Were worn with stripes spent on their tender limbs,
I kneeld, and wept, and begd them though they would
Be cruel to themselves, they would take pity
On my gray hairs. Now note a sudden change,
Which I with joy remember, those whom torture
Nor fear of death could terrify, were overcome
By seeing of my sufferings, and so won,
Returning to the faith that they were borne in,
I gave them to the gods, and be assurde
I that used justice with a rigorons hand
Upon such beauteous virgins, and mine own,
Will vseno favor where the cause commands me
To any other, but as rocks be deaf
To all intreatics.

Diocle. Thou deseru'st thy place,
Still hold it and with honor, things thus orderd
Touching the gods it is lawful to descend
To human cares, and exercise that power
Heaven has conferd upon me, which that you
Rebels and traitors to the power of Rome
Should not with all extremities undergo,
What can you urge to qualify your crimes
Or mitigate my anger?

Epire. We are now
Slaves to thy power, that yesterday were kings,
And had command ore others, we confess
Our grandsires paid yours tribute, yet left us
As their forefathers had desire of freedom.
And if you Romans hold it glorious honor
Not only to defend what is your own,
But to enlarge your Empire, (though our fortune
Denies that happiness) who can accuse
The famishd mouth if it attempt to feed,
Or such whose fetters eat into their freedoms,
If they desire to shake them off.

Pontus. We stand
The last examples to prove how uncertain
All humane happiness is, and are prepared
To endure the worst.

Macedon. That spoake which now is highest
In Fortunes wheel, must when she turns it next
Decline as low as we are. This considered
Taught the Egyptian Hercules Sesostris
(That had his chariot drawn by captive kings)
To free them from that slavery, but to hope
Such mercy from a Roman, were mere madness.
We are familiar with what cruelty
Room since her infant greatness, ever used
Such as she triumphd over, age nor sex
Exempted from her tyranny: scepterd Princes
Kept in your common dungeons, and their children!
In scorn traind up in base Mechanicke arts
For public bondmen; in the catologue
Of those unfortunate men, we exspect to have
Our names remembered.

Diocle. In all growing Empires
Even cruelty is useful, some must suffer
And be set up examples to strike terror
In others though far of but when a State
Is raysde to her perfection, and her Bases
Too firm, to shrink, or yield, we may use mercy
And do it with safety, but to whom? not cowards?
Or such whose baseness shames the conqueror,
And robs him of his victory, as weak Perseus
Did great AEmilius. Know therefore kings
Of Epire, Pontus, and of Macedon,
That I with courtesy can use my prisoners
As well as make them mine by force, provided
That they are noble enemies: such I found you
Before I made you mine, and since you were so,
You have not lost the courages of Princes,
Although the Fortune: had you borne your selves
Deiectedly, and base, no slavery
Had been too easy for you, but such is
The power of noble valor, that we love it
Even in our enemies, and taken with it,
Desire to make them friends, as I will you.

Epire. Mock us not Caesar.

Diocle. By the Gods I do not.
Vnloosse their bonds, I now as friends embrace you,
Give them their Crowns again.

Pon. We are twice overcome,
By courage and by courtesy.

Mace. But this latter,
Shall teach us to live ever faithful Vassals,
To Dioclesian and the power of Rome.

Epire. All Kingdoms fall before her.

Pon. And all Kings
Contend to honor Caesar.

Diocle. I believe
Your tongues are the true Trumpets of your hearts,
And in it I most happy Queen of fate,
Imperious Fortune mix some light disaster
With my so many joys to season em,
And give them sweeter relish, I am girt round
With true felicity, faithful subjects here,
Here bold Commanders, here with new made friends.
But what is the crown of all in thee Artemia,
My only child whose love to me and duty
Strive to exceed each other,

Ar. I make payment
But of a debt which I stand bound to tender
As a daugher, and a subject.

Diocle. Which requires yet
A retribution from me Artemia
Tide by a fathers care how to bestow
Aie well of all things to me most precious.
Nor will I therefore longer keep thee from
The chief joys of creation, marriage rites,
Which that thou may with greater pleasure taste of,
Thou shall not like with mine eyes but thine own
Amongst these kings forgetting they were captives,
Or these remembering not they are my subjects,
Make choice of any, by Jove's dreadful thunder,
My will shall rank with thine.

Art. It is a bounty
The daughters of great Princes seldom meet with.
For they, to make up breaches in the state,
Or for some other politic ends are forced
To match where they affect not, may my life
Deserve this favor.

Diocle. Speak, I long to know
The man thou will make happy.

Artem. If that titles
Or the adored name of Queen could take me,
Here would I fix mine eyes and look no farther.
But these are baits to take a mean borne Lady,
Another that boldly may call Caesar father.
In that I can bring honor unto any
But from no king that lives receives addition
To raise desert and virtue by my fortune,
Though in a low estate were greater glory,
Then to mix greatness with a Prince that owes
No worth but that name only.

Diocle I commend thee,
It Is like thy self.

Artem. If then of men beneath me
My choice is to be made, where shall I seek
But among those that best deserve from you,
That have served you most faithfully, that in dangers
Have stood next to you, that have interposd
Their breasts as shields of proof to dull the swords
Aimd at your bosom, that have spent their blood
To crown your brows with Laurel.

Macrinus. Citherea
Great Queen of love be now propitious to me.

Harpax. Now mark what I foretold.

Anton. Her eyes on me,
Fair Venus son draw forth a leaden dart,
And that she may hate me, transfixe her with it,
Or if thou needs wilt use a golden one,
Shoot in the behalf of any other,
Thou know I am thy votary else where.

Artem. Sir.

Theoph. How he blushes!

Sap. Welcome, fool, thy fortune,
Stand like a block when such an Angel courts thee.

Artem. I am no object to divert your eye
From the beholding.

Anton. Rather a bright Sun
Too glorious for him to gaze upon
That took not first flight from the Egles aciry.
As I look on the temples, or the gods,
And with that reverence Lady I behold you,
And shall do ever.

Art. And it will become you,
While thus we stand at distance, but if love
(Love borne out of the assurance of your virtues)
Teach me to stoop so low.

Anton. O rather take
A higher flight.

Artem. Why fear you to be raisd?
Say I put off the dreadful a we that waits
On Majesty, or with you share my beams,
Nay make you to outshine me change the name
Of subject into Lord, rob you of service
That's due from you to me, and in me make it
Duty to honor you, would you refuse me?

Anton. Refuse you Madam, such a worm as I am,
Refuse, what kings upon their knees would sue for?
Call it, great Lady, by another name,
An humble modesty that would not match
A Molehill with Olimpus.

Artem. He that is famous
For honorable actions in the war;
As you are Antoninus, a proved soldier
Is fellow to a king.

Anton. If you love valor,
As it is a kingly virtue, seek it out,
And cherish it in a king, there it shines brightest,
And yields the brauest luster. Look on Epire,
A Prince, in whom it is incorporate,
And let it not disgrace him, that he was
Overcome by Casar, (it was a victory
To stand so long against him,) had you seen him,
How in one bloody seen he did discharge
The parts of a Commander, and a soldier,
Wise in direction, bold in execution;
You would have said, great Caesar's self excepted,
The world yields not his equal.

Artem. Yet I have heard,
Encountering him alone in the head of his troop,
You took him prisoner.

Epire. It Is a truth great Princess.
I Will not detract from valor.

Anton. It Was mere fortune,
Courage had no hand in it.

Theoph. Did ever man
Strive so against his own good.

Sap. Spiritlesse villain,
How I am tortured, by the immortal gods
I now could kill him.

Diocl. Hold Sapritius hold,
On our displeasure hold.

Harpax. Why, this would make
A father mad, it is not to be endured,
Your honors tainted in it.

Sapr. By heaven it is,
I shall think often.

Harpax. It Is not to be forgotten.

Art. Nay kneel not Sir, I am no rauisher,
Nor so far gone in fond affection to you,
But that I can retire my honor safe.
Yet say hereafter that thou have neglected
What but seen in possession of another
Will run thee mad with envy.

Anton. In her looks
Revenge is written.

Mac. As you love your life study to appease her.

An. Gracious madame hear me.

Artem. And be again refusd?

Anton. The tender of
My life, my service, not since you vouchsafe it,
My love, my heart, my all, and pardon me:
Pardon dread Princess that I made some scruple
To leave a valley of security
To mount up to the hill of Majesty,
On which the nearer Jove the nearer lightning.
What knew I but your grace made trial of me?
Durst I presume to embrace, where but to touch
With an vnmannerd hand was death? the Fox
When he saw first the forests king, the Lion
Was almost drad with fear, the second view
Only a little danted him, the third
He durst salute him boldly: pray you apply this,
And you shall find a little time will teach me
To look with more familiar eyes upon you
Then duty yet allows me.

Sap. Well exscusde.

Artem. You may redeem all yet.

Diocl. And that he may
Have means and opportunity to do so,
Artemia I leave you my substitute
In fair Casarea.

Sap. And here as your self
We will obey and serve her.

Diocl. Antoninus
So you prove hers I wish no other heir,
Think on it, be careful of your charge Theophilus,
Sapritius be you my daughters guardian.
Your company I wish confederate Princes
In our Dismatian wars, which finished
With victory I hope, and Maximinus
Our brother and copartner in the Empire
At my request won to confirm as much,
The kingdoms I took from you we will restore,
And make you greater then you were before.
Exeunt omnes, manent Antoninus and Macrinus. Antoninus, Macrinus.
Anton. Oh I am lost for ever, lost Macrinus,
The anchor of the wretched, hope for sakes me,
And with one blast of fortune all my light
Of happiness is put out.

Macr. You are like to those
That are ill only, cause they are too well,
That surfeiting in the excess of blessings
Call their abundance want: what could you wish,
That is not fallen upon you? honor, greatness,
Respect, wealth, favor, the whole world for a dowre,
And with a Princess, whose excelling form
Exccedes her fortune.

Anton. Yet poison still is poison
Though drunk in gold, and all these flattring glories
To me, ready to starve, a painted banquet
And no essential food: when I am scorchd
With fire, can flames in any other quench me?
What is her love to me, greatness, or Empire,
That am slave to another, who alone
Can give me ease or freedom?

Macr. Sir you point at
Your dotage on the scornful Dorothea,
Is she though fair the same day to be named
With best Artemia? in all their courses
Wisemen propose their ends: with sweet Artemia
There comes along pleasure, security,
Vsher'd by all that in this life is precious:
With Dorothea, though her birth be noble,
The Daughter to a Senator of Rome,
By him lest rich (yet with a private wealth
And far inferior to yours) arriues
The Emperors frown (which like a mortal plague
Speaks death is near) the Princess heavy scorn,
Under which you will shrink, your fathers fury,
Which to resist even piety forbids,
And but remember that she stands suspected
A favorer of the Christian Sect, she brings
Not danger but assured destruction with her:
This truly wai'd, one smile of great Artemia
Is to be cherish't and preferred before
All joys in Dorothea, therefore leave her.

An. In what thou think thou art most wise, thou art
Grosely abused Macrinus, and most foolish.
For any man to match above his rank,
Is but to sell his libetty; with Artemia
I still must live a servant, but enjoying
Diuinest Dorothea, I shall rule,
Rule as becomes a husbands for the dangers,
Or call it if you will assured destruction,
I slight it thus. If then thou art my friend,
As I dares wear thou art, and wilt not take
A Governors place upon thee, be my helper.

Macri. You know I dare and will do any thing.
Put me unto the test.

Anton. Go then Macrinus
To Dorothea, tell her I have worn,
In all the battles I have fought her figure,
Her figure in my heart, which like a diety
Has still protected me, thou can speak well,
And of thy choyself language, spare a little
To make her understand how much I love her,
And how I languish for her, bear her these jewels
Sent in the way of sacrifice, not service,
As to my goddess. All lets thrown behind me,
Or fears that may deter me: say this morning
I mean to visit her by the name of friendship,
No words to contradict this.

Macrinus. I am yours,
And if my travel this way be ill spent,
Judge not, my reader will, by the event.
exeunt
Finis actus primus.
Actus 2. Scenus 1.
Enter Spungins and Hercius.
Spun. Turn Christian, wud he that first tempted me to have my shoes walk
upon Christian soles, had turned me into a Capon, for I am sure now the stones
of all my pleasure in this fleshly life are cut off.


Her. So then, if any Coxecombe has a galloping desire to ride, here is a
Gelding, if he can but sit him.


Spun. I kick for all that like a horse, look else.

Her. But that's a kickish Jade, fellow Spungins, have not I as much cause to
complain as thou have? When I was a Pagan, there was an Infidel Punke of
mine, would have let me come upon trust for my coruetting, a pox of your
christian Coxatrices, they cry like Poulterers wives, no money, no Cony.


Spun. Bacchus, the God of brewed Wine and Sugar, grand Patron of rob pots,
vpsie-freesie-tiplers, and super-naculam takers; this Bacchus, who is head
warden of Vintners Hall, Ale-cunner, Mayor of all Victualing houses, the sole
liquid Benefactor to bawdy-houses, Lanze prezado to red Noses, and inuin cible
Adelantado over the Armado of pimpled, deep scarletted, rubified, and
carbuncled faces.


Her. What of all this?

Spun. This boon Bacchanalion stinker, did I make legs to.

Hirc. Scuruy ones, when thou were drunk.

Spung. There is no danger of loosing a man years by making these Indures, he
that will not now and then be Calabingo, is worse then a Calamosthe: when I
was a Pagan and kneeld to this Bachhus, I durst out-drinke a Lord, but your
Christian Lords out-boule me: I was in hope to lead a sober life, when I was
converted, but now amongst the Christians, I can no sooner stagger out of one
Alhouse but I reele into another: they have whole streets of nothing but
drinking rooms, and drabbing chambers, iumbled together.


Hirc. Bawdy Priapus, the first schoolemaister that taught Butchers how to
stick pricks in flesh, and make it swell, thou know was the only Ningle
that I cared for under the Moon, but since I left him, to follow a scuruy
Lady, what with her praying and our fasting, if now I come to a wench and offer
to use her any thing hardly (celling her being a Christian she must endure) she
presently handles me as if I were a cloue, and cleaues me with disdain as if I
were a Calves head.


Spung. I see uo remedy fellow Hircius, but that thou and I must be half
Pagans and half Christians, for we know very fools that are Christians.


Hirc. Right, the quarters of Christians are good for not thing but to feed
Crows.


Spung. True, Christian Brokers, thou know, are made vpof the quarters of
Christians, parboyle one of these rogues and he is not meat for a dog: no, no,
I am resolved to have an Infidels heart, though in show I carry a Christians
face.


Her. Thy Last shall serve my foot, so will I.

Spun. Our whimpring Lady and Mistress sent me with two great baskets full of
Beef, Mutton, Veale and Goose fellow Hircius.


Her. And Woodcocke fellow Spungins.

Spung. Upon the poor lean Ass fellow, on which I ride, to all the
Almswomen: what think thou I hue done with all this good cheer.


Her. Eat it, and be choakt else.

Spun. Wud my Ass, basket and all were in thy maw if I did: no, as I am a demi
Pagan, I sold the victuals, and coynd the money into pottle pots of wine.


Her. Therein thou shewdst thy self a perfect demy-Christian too, to let the
poor beg, starve and hang, or dye a the pip: our puling snotty-nose Lady sent
me out likewise with a purse of money, to relieve and release prisoners: did I
so think you?


Spun. Wud thy ribs were turned into grates of iron then.


Her. As I am a total Pagan, I swore they should be hanged first: for sir
Spungius, I lay at my old ward of lechery, and cried a pox in your two-penny
wards, and so I took scuruy common flesh for the money.


Spun. And wisely done, for our Lady sending it to prisoners, had bestowed it
out upon lousy knaves, and thou to save that labor casts it away upon rotten
whores.


Her. All my fear is of that pinke-an-eye Iacke-an Apes boy, her page.


Spnn. As I am a Pagan, from my cod-peece downward that white-fac'd Monkie,
frights me to, I stole but a durty pudding last day out of an almsebasket, to
give my dog when he was hungry, and the peaking chitface page hit me in the
teeth with it.


Her. With the durty pudding; so he did me once with a cowturd, which in
knavery I would have crumd into ones porridge, who was half a Pagan to: the
smug dandiprat smells us out whatsoever we are doing.


Spun. Does he! let him take heed I prove not his back friend; He make him
curse his smelling what I do.


Her. It Is my Lady spoils the boy, for he is ever at her tail: and she is never
well but in his company.


Enter Angelo with a Book and Taper lighted, they seeing him, counterfeit
devotion.
Ange. O! now your hearts make ladders of your eyes
In show to climb to heaven, when your devotion
Walks upon crutches: where did you waste your time
When the religious man was on his knees,
Speaking the heavenly languague.

Spun. Why fellow Angelo, we were speaking in pedlars
French I hope.

Her. We ha not been idle, take it upon my word.

Ange. Have you the baskets emptied which your Lady
Sent from the charitable hands, to women
That dwell upon her pity?

Spun. Emptled em! yes, I Would be loath to have my belly so empty, yet I Am sure, I
munched not one bit of them neither.


Ange. And went your money to the prisoners.

Her. Went no, I carried it; and with these fingers paid it away.


Ang. What way? the devils way, the way of sin,
The way of hot damnation, way of lust:
And you to, wash away the poor man's bread
In bowls of drunkenness.

Spun. Drunkenness! yes, yes, I use to be drunk: our next neighbors man
called Christopher has often seen me drunk, has he not?


Her. Or me given so to the flesh, my cheeks speak my doings.


Ange. Auant you thieves, and hollow hypocrites.
Your hearts to me lie open like black books,
And there I read your doings.

Spun. And what do you read in my heart?

Her. Or in mine? come amiable. Angelo, beat the flint of your brains.


Spun. And lets see what sparks of wit fly out, to kindle your Carebruns.


Ang. Your names even brand you, you are Spurgius called
And like a Sponge you suck up liquorous wines
Till your soul reeles to hell.

Spun. To hell! can any drunkards legs carry him so far.

Ang. For blood of grapes you sold the widows food.
And staruing them, it is murder, what is this but hell.
Hircius your name, and Goatish is your nature:
You snatch the meat out of the prisoners mouth,
To fatten harlots, is not this hell to,
No Angel, but the devil waits on you.

Spun Shall I cut his throat.

Her. No, better burn him, for I think he is a witch, but sooth, soth him.


Spun. Fellow Angelo, true it is, that falling into the company of wicked
he-Christians for my part.


Her. And she-ones for mine, we have 'em swim in sholes hard by.


Spun. We must confess, I took too much of the pot, and he of the other hollow
commodity.


Her. Yes indeed, we laid lill on both of us, we cousen'd the poor, but it is a
common thing, many a one that counts himself a better Christian then we two,
has done it, by this light.


Spun. But pray sweet Angelo, play not the tell-tale to my Lady, and if you
take us creeping into any of these mouseholes of sin any more, let Cats flea
off our skins.


Her. And put nothing but the poy sond tails of Rats into those skins.


An. Will you dishonor her sweet charity.
Who saved you from the tree of death and shame.

Her. Wud I were haugd rather then thus betold of my faults.


Spun. She took us, it is true, from the gallows, yet I hope she will not bar
yeomen sprats to have their swinge.


An. She comes, beware and mend.
enter Doro.
Her. Lets break his neck, and bid him mend.

Dor. Have you my messages (sent to the poor)
Delivered with good hands, not robbing them
Of any jot was theirs.

Spun. Rob 'em Lady, I hope, neither my fellow nor I am thieves


Her. Deliuerd with good hands madam, else let me never lick my fingers more
when I eat butterd fish.


Dor. Who cheat the poor, and from them pluck their alms.
Pilfer from Heaven, and there are thunderbolts
From thence to beat them ever, do not lie,
Were you both faithful true distributers?

Spun. Lie Madame, what grief is it to see you turn
Swaggerer, and give your poor minded rascally servants the lie.

Dor. I Am glad you do not, if those wretched people
Tell you they pine for want of any thing.
Whisper but to mine ear, and you shall furnish them.

Her. Whisper, nay Lady, for my part I Will cry whoope.

Ang. Play no more Villains with so good a Lady,
For if you do -- -- --.

Spun. Are we Christians?

Her. The foul Feind snap all Pagans for me.

Ang. Away, and once more mend.

Spun. Takes us for Botchers.

Her. A patch, a patch.

Dor. My book and Taper.

Ang. Here most holy Mistress.

Dor. Thy voice sends forth such music, that I never
Was raisht with a more celestial sound,
Were every servant in the world like thee,
So full of goodness, Angels would come down
To dwell with us, thy name is Angelo,
And like that name thou art, get thee to rest,
Thy youth with too much watching is oppressed.

Ang. No my dear Lady, I could weary slarres,
And force the wakefull Moon to lose her eyes
By my late watching, but to wait on you,
When at your prayers you kneel before the Altar,
Me thinks I Am singing with some Quire in Heaven,
So blessed I hold me in your company:
Therefore my most-lou'd mistress do not bid
Your boy so serviceable to get heuce,
For then you break his heart.

Dor. Be nigh me still then,
In golden letters down i will set that day
Which gave thee to me, little did I hope
To meet such worlds of comfort in thy self,
This little pretty body, when I coming
Forth of the temple, heard my begger-boy,
My sweet faced godly begger-boy, crave an alms,
Which with glad hand I gave, with lucky hand,
And when I took thee home, my most chaste bo some
Me thought was filled with no hot wanton fire,
But with a holy flame, mounting since higher
On wings of Cherubines then did before.

Ang. Proud am I that my Ladies modest eye,
So likes so poor a servant.

Doro. I have offered
Handfuls of gold but to behold thy Parents,
I would leave Kingdoms, were I Queen of some,
To dwell with thy good father, for the son
Betwitching me so deeply with his presence,
He that begot him must do it ten times more,
I pray thee, my sweet boy, show me thy parents,
Be not ashamed.

Ang. I am not, I did never
Know who any mother was, but by yon Palace
Filled with bright heavenly Courtiers, I dare assure you,
And pawn these eyes upon it, and this hand,
My father is in Heaven, and pretty Mistress,
If your illustrious hour Glass spend his sand
No worse then yet it does, upon my life
You and I both shall meet my father there,
And he shall bid you welcome.

Doro. A blessed day,
We all long to be there, but lose the way.
exeunt.
Macrinus friend to Antoninus enters, being met by Theophslus and Harpax.
Theo. Sunne-god of the day guide thee Macrinus.

Mac. And thee Theophilus.

Theo. Gladst thou in such scorn,
I call my wish back.

Mac. I Am in have.

Theo. One word,
Take the least hand of time up: stay.

Mac. Be brief.

Theo. As thought: I pritheo tell me good Macrinus
How health and our fair Princess lay together
This night, for you can tell, Courtiers have flies
That buzze all news unto them.

Mac. She slept but ill.

Theo. Double thy courtesy, how does Antoninus?

Mac. Ill, well, straight, crooked, I know not how.

Theo. Once more,
Thy head is full of Winde-mils: when does the Princess
Fill a bed full of beauty, and bestow it
On Antoninus on the wedding night.

Mac. I know not.

Theo. No, thou art the Manunscript
Where Antoninus writes down all his secrets,
Honest Macrinus tell me.

Mac. Fare you well Sir.
exit
Har. Honesty is some Fiend, and frights him hence,
A many Courtiers love it not.

Theo. What piece
Of this State-wheele (which winds up Antoninus)
Is broke, it runs so iarringly? the
Man is from himself divided: Oh thou the eye
By which I wonders see, tell me my Harpax,
What gad fly tickles so this Macrinus,
That up. flinging thy tail, he breaks thus from me,

Har. Oh Sir, his braine-panne is a bed of Snakes,
Whosestings shoot through his eye balls, whose poisonous spawne
Ingenders such a fry of speckled villainies,
That valesse charms more strong then Adamant
Be used, the Roman Angels wings shall melt,
And Caesar's Diadem be from his head
Spurned by base fecte, the Laurel which he wears
(Returning victor) be enforced to kiss
That which it hates (the fire.) And can this Ram,
This Antoninus-Engine, being made ready
To so much mischief, keep a steady motion,
His eyes and feet you see give strange assaults.

The. I Am turned a marble Statue at thy language,
Which printed is in such crab'd Charracters,
It puzzles all my reading, what (ith name
Of Pluto) now is hatching.

Har. This Macrinus
The time is, upon which love errands run
Twixt Antoninus and that ghost of women,
The bloudlesse Dorothaea, who in prayer
And meditation (mocking all your gods)
Drinks up her ruby color, yet Antoninus
Plays the Endymion to this pale faced Moon,
Courts her, seeks to catch her eyes.

Theo. And what of this?

Har. These are but creeping Billows
Not got to shore yet, but if Dorothaea
Fall on his bosom, and be fired with love,
(Your coldest women do so) had you ynck
Brewed from the infernal Stix, and not all that blackness
Can make a thing so foul, as the Dishonours,
Disgraces, Buffettings, and most base affronts
Upon the bright Artemia, Star of Court,
Great Caesar's Daughter.

Theo. I now conster thee.

Har. Nay more, a Firmament of Clouds being filled
With Iouet Artillery, shot down at once
To pash your Godsin pieces, cannot give
With all those Thunderbots so deep a blow
To the Religion there, and Pagan lore
As this; for Dorothea hates your gods,
And if she once blast Antoninus soul,
Making it foul like hers: Oh the example --

Theo. Eats through Cesareas heart, like liquid poison
Have I invented tortures to tente Christians,
To see but which, could all that sceles Hels torments
Have leave to stand aloof here on earths stage,
They would be mad till they again descended,
Holding the pains most horrid, of such souls,
May-games to those of mine, has this my hand
Set down a Christians execution
In such dire postures, that the very hangman
Fell at my foot dead hearing but their figures,
And shall Macrinus and his fellow Masquer
Strangle me in a dance.

Har. No, on, I do hug thee,
For drilling thy quick brains in this rich plot
Of tortures against these Christians: on, I hug thee.

Theo. Both hug and holy me, to this Dorotheae
Fly thou and I in thunder.

Har. Not for Kingdoms
Pil'd upon Kingdoms, there is a villain Page
Waits on her, whom I would not for the world
Hold traffic with, I do so hate his sight,
That should I look on him I must sink down.

Theo. I will not loose thee then, her to confound,
None but this head with glories shall be crowned.

Har. Oh, mine own as I would wish thee.
exeunt. Enter Dorothea, Macrinus, Angelo.
Dor. My trusty Angelo, with that curious eye
Of thine, which ever waits upon my business,
I prithee watch those my still-negligent servants
That they perform my willin what is enioyn'd them
To The good of others, else will you find them flies
Not lying still, yet in them no good lies:
Be careful dear Boy.

Ang. Yes, my sweetest Mistress.
exit.
Dor. Now Sir, you may go on.

Mac. I then must study,
A new Arithmatike, to sum up the virtues
Which Antoninus gracefully become,
There is in him so much man, so much goodness,
So much of honor, and of all things else
Which makes our being excellent, that from his store
He can enough lend others, yet much taken from him,
The want shall be as little as when Seas
Lend from their bounty to fill up the poorness
Of needy Rivers.

Dor. Sir, he is more indebted, to you for praise, then you to him that owes it.


Ma If Queens viewing his presents, paid to the whitenes
Of your chaste hand alone, should be ambitious,
But to be parted in their numerous shares,
This he counts nothing: could you see maine Armies
Make battalles in the quarrel of his valor,
That it is best, the truest, this were nothing,
The greatness of his State, his fathers voice
And arm, owing Cesarea, he never boasts of
The Sunbeams, which the Emperor throws upon him,
Shine there but as in water, and guild him
Not with one spot of pride, no dearest beauty,
All these heaped up together in one scale,
Cannot weigh down the love he bears to you
Being put into the other.

Dor. Could gold buy you
To speak thus for your friend, you Sir are worthy
Of more then I will number, and this your language
Has power to win upon another woman,
Top of whose heart, the feathers of this World
Are gaily stuck, but all which first you named,
And now this last, his love to me are nothing,

Mac. You make me a sad Messenger.
enter Antoninus. But him self
Being come in person, shall I hope hear from you
Music more pleasing.

Ant. Has your ear Macrinus
Heard none then?

Mac. None I like.

Ant. But can there be
In such a noble Casker, wherein lies
Beauty and chastity in their full perfections,
A rocky heart killing with cruelty
A life that's prostrated beneath your feet?

Dor. I am guilty of a shame I yet never knew,
Thus to hold parley with you, pray Sir pardon.

Ant. Good sweetness, you now have it, and shall go,
Be but so merciful, before your wounding me
With such a mortal weapon, as Farewell,
To let me murmr to your Virgin care,
What I was loath to lay on any tongue
But this mine own.

Dor. If one immodest accent
Fly out, I hate you everlastingly.

Ant. My true love dares not do it.

Mac. Hermes inspire thee.

They whispering below, enter above Sapritius, father to Antoninus, and
Governor of Cesaria, with him Artemia the Princess, Theophilies, Spungius and
Hercins.
Spun. See you, do you see, our work is done, the fish you angle for is
nibling at the hook, and therefore untruss the Codpeece point of our reward,
no matter if the breeches of conscience fall about our heels.


The. The gold you earne is here, dam up your mouths, and no words of it.


Her. No, nor no words from you of too much damming neither; I know women sell
themselves daily, and are ^^^knied out for silver, why may not we then betray a
scuruy mistress for gold.


Spun. She saved us from the Gallows, and only to keep one Proverb from
breaking his neck, we will hang her.


The. It Is well done, go go, year my fine white boys.

Spun. If your red boys, it is well known, more lifauour'd faces then ours are
painted.

Sap. Those fellows trouble us.

Theo. Away, away.

Her. I to my sweet placket.

Spun. And I to my full pot.
exeunt.
Ant. Come, let me tune you, glaze not thus your eyes
With self-love of a vowed Virginity,
Make every man your glass, you see our Sex
Do never murder propagation,
We all desire your sweet society,
And if you bar me from it, you do kill me,
And of my blood are guilty.

Art. O base Villain.

Sap. Bridle your rage sweet Princess.

Ant. Could not my fortunes
(Reared higher far then yours) be worthy of you,
Me thinks my dear affection makes you mine.

Dor. Sir, for your fortunes were they mines of gold,
He that I love is richer; and for worth,
You are to him lower then any slave
Is to a Monarch.

Sap. So insolent, base Christian.

Dor. Can I, with wearing out my knees before him
Get you but be his servant, you shall boast you are equal to a King.

Sap. Confusion on thee,
For playing thus the lying Sorcereste.

Ant. Your mockes are great ones, none beneath the Sun
Will I be servant too: on my knees I beg it,
Pity me wondrous maid.

Sap. I curse thy baseness.

Theo. Listen to more.

Dor. Oh kneel not Sir to me.

Ant. This Knee is Emblem of an humbled heart,
That heart which tortured is with your disdain,
Justly for scorning others; even this heart,
To which for pity such a Princess sues,
As in her hand offers me all the World,
Great Caesar's daughter.

Artem. Slave thou lie.

Anton. Yet this
Is adamant to her, that melts to you
In drops of blood.

Theoph. A Very dog.

Anton. Perhaps
It Is my religion makes you knit the brow,
Yet be you mine, and ever be your own,
I nere will screw your conscience from that power
On which you Christians lean.

Sap. I can no longer,
Fret out my life with weeping at thee villain; sir,
Would when I got thee, the high thunder hand
Had struck thee in the womb.

Mac. We are betrayde.

Art. Is that your I doll, traitor, which thou kneelst to,
Trampling upon my beauty?

Theoph. Sir, bandog,
Will thou in pieces tear, our Jupiter,
For her? our Mars, for her? our Sol, for her?
A whore, a hel-hound, in this globe of brains
Where a whole world of tortures for such furies
Have fought as in a Chaos) which should exceed,
These nails shall grubbing lie, from scull to scull,
To find one horrider, then all, for you,
You three.

Artem. Threaten not, but strike, quick vengeance flies
Into thy bosom, caitife: here all loves dies.
exeunt.
An. O I am thunder-struckel
We are both ore whelmed.

Mac. With one high raging billow.

Doro. You a soldier,
And sink beneath the violence of a woman?

An. A woman! a wronged Princess: from such a star
Blazing with fires of hate, what can be looked for
But tragical events? my life is now
The subject of her tyranny.

Doro. That fear, is base,
Of death, when that death does but life displace
Out of her house of earth; you only dread
The stroke, and not what follows when you are dead,
There Is the great fear indeed: come, let your eye,
Dwell where mine do, you will scorn their tyrannies.

Enter below, Artemia, Sapritius, Theophilus a guard. Angelo comes and is close
by Dorothea.
Artem. My fathers nerves put vigor in mine arm,
And I his strength must use; because I once
Shed beams of favor on thee, and with the Lion
Played with thee gently when thou strokst my heart,
He not insult on a base humbled prey,
By lingering out thy terrors, but with one frown
Kill thee: hence with 'hem to execution.
Seize him, but let even death it self be weary
In torturing her: He change those smiles to shreekes,
Give the fool what she is proud of (martyrdom)
In pieces rack that Bawd to:

Sap. Albeit the reverence
Iowe our gods and you, are in my bosom
Torrents so strong, that pity quite lies drowned
From saving this young man, yet when I see
What face death gives him, and that a thing within me,
Says it is my son, I Am forced to be a man,
And grow fond of his life, which thus I beg.

Artem. And I deny.

Anton. Sir you dishonor me,
To sue for that which I disclay me to have,
I shall more glory in my sufferings gain,
Then you in giving judgment, since I offer
My blood up to your anger: nor do I kneel
To keep a wretched life of mine from ruin:
Preserve this temple (builded fair as your is)
And Caesar never went in greater triumph
Then I shall to the scaffold.

Artem. Are you so brave Sir,
Set forward to his triumph, and let those two
Go cursing along with him.

Doro. No, but pitying,
(For my part, I) that you loose ten times more
By torturing me, than I that dare your tortures,
Through all the army of my sins, I have even
Lobord to break, and cope with death to th'face;
The visage of a hangman frights not me;
The sight of whips, rackes, gibbets, axes, fires
Are scaffoldings, by which my soul climbes up
To an Eternal habitation.

Theo. Caesar's imperial daughter, hear me speak,
Let not this Christian Thing, in this her pagentry
Of proud deriding, both our gods and Caesar,
Build to her self a kingdom in her death
Going laughing from us. No, her bitterest torment
Shall be to seele her constancy beaten down,
The bravery of her resolution lie
Battered by the argument, into such pieces,
That she again shall (on her belly) creep
To kiss the pauements of our Panim good.

Art. How to be done.

Theo. He send my daughers to her,
And they shall turn her rocky faith to wax,
Else spit at me, let me be made your slave,
And meet no Romans but a villains grave.

Art. Thy prisoner let her be then: and Sapritius
Your son, and that be yours: death shall be sent
To him that suffers them by voice or letters
To greet each other. Rifle her estate,
Christians to beggary brought grow desperate.

Dor. Still on the Bread of poverty let me feed.
exeunt.
Ang. O my admired mistress; quench not out
The holy fires within you, though temptations
Shower down upon you: claspe thine armor on,
Fight well and thou shall see, after these wars
Thy head wear Sun beams, and thy feet touch stars.

Enter Hircius and Spungius.
Her. How now Angelo how is it? how is it? what thread spins
That whore Fortune upon her wheel now.

Spun. Comesta, comesta poor knave.

Her. Com a port von, com a port von, my petite garsoone

Spun. Me partha we Comrade, my half inch of man's
Flesh, how run the dice of this cheating world, ha?

Ange. Too well on your sides, you are hid in gold
Ore head and ears.

Her. We thank our fates, the sign of the gingle-boyes hangs at the doors of
our pockets.

Spun. Who wud think that we coming forth of the arse, as it were, or fag end
of the world, should yet see the golden age, when so little silver is stirring.


Her. Nay who can say any citizen is an Ass, for lading his own back, with
money, till his soul crackes again, only to leave his son like a gilded
coxccombe behind him? will not any fool take me for a wiseman now, seeing me
draw out of the pit of my treasury, this little god with his belly full of gold.


Spun. And this full of the same meat out of my ambrey

An. That gold will melt to poison.

Spun. Poison, wudit wud, whole pintes for healths shall down my throat.

Her. Gold poison! there is never a she-thrasher in Casarea that lives on the
flaile of money will call it so.

Ang. Like slaves you sold your souls for golden dross,
Bewitching her to death, who stepped between
You, and the gallows.

Spun. T was an easy matter to save us, she being so well backed.

Her. The gallows and we fell out, so she did but part us

Ang. The misery of that mistress is mine own,
She beggerd, I left wretched.

Her. I can but let my Nose drop in sorrow with wet eyes for her.

Spun. The petticote of her estate is vnlac'd I confess.

Her. Yes, and the smock of her charity is now all to pieces

An. For love you bear to her, for some good turns
Done you by me, give me one piece of silver.

Her. How la piece of silver! if thou were an Angel of gold
I would not put thee into white money, unless I weighed thee, and I weigh
thee not a rush.

Spun. A piece of silver! I never had but two calves in my life, and those my
mother left me; I Will rather part from the fat of them, then from a
mustard-tokens worth of Argent.


Her. And so sweet Nit we crawle from thee.

Spun. Adieu, demi-dandiprat, adieu

An. Stay one word yet, you now are full of gold.

Her. I Would be sorry my dog were so full of the poxc.

Spun. Or any Sow of mine of the meazles either.

Ang. Go, go, you are beggars both, you are not worth
That leather on your feet.

Her. Away, away boy.

Spun. Page you do nothing but set patches on the soles of your jests.

Ang. I Am glad I tryde your love, which see I want not,
So long as this is full.

Both. And so long as this. -- so long as this.

Her. Spungius you are a picke-pocket.

Spun. Horcius thou hastnimb'd -. so long as, not so much money is left as will
buy a louse.

Her. Thou Art a thiese, and thou lie in that gut through which thy wine runs,
if thou denyest it.

Spun. Thou lie deeper then the bottom of mine enraged pocket, if thou
affrontst it.

Ang. No blows, no bitter language, all your gold gone.

Spun. Can the devil creep into ones breeches?

Her Yes, if his horns once get into the codpeece,

Ang. Come, sigh not, I so little am in love
With that whose loss kills you, that see it is yours,
All yours, divide the heap in equal share,
So you will go along with me to prison,
And in our mistress sorrows bear a part:
Say, will you?

Both. Will we?

Spun. If she were going to hanging, no gallows should part us.

Her. Lets both be turned into a rope of Onyons if we do

Ang. follow me then, repair your bad deeds past,
Happy are men when their best days are last,

Spun. True master Angele, pray sir lead the way.
exit Au
Her. Let him lead that way, but follow thou me this way.

Spun. I live in a Iayle.

Her. A way and shift for our selves, she will do well enough there, for prisoners
are more hungry after mutton, then Catchpoles after prisoners.


Spun. Let her starve then if a whole Iayle will not fill her belly.
Exeunt Finis Actus secundi.
Actus 3. Scenus 1.
Enter Sapritius, Theophilus, Priest, Caliste, Christeta.
Sapritius. Sick to the death I fear.

Theophilus. I meet your sorrow,
With my true feeling of it.

Sap. She Is a Witch,
A sorceresse Theophilus, my son
Is charmed by her enticing eyes, and like
An image made of wax, her beams of beauty
Melt him to nothing; all my hopes in him.
And all his gotten honors find their grave
In his strange dotage on her. Would when first
He saw and loved her, that the earth had opend
And swallowd both alive.

Theo. There Is hope left yet.

Sap. Not any, though the Princess were appeasd,
All title in her love surrenderd up,
Yet this coy Christian, is so transported
With her religion, that unless my son
(But let him perish first) drink the same potion
And be of her belief, she will not vouchsafe
To be his lawful wife.

Priest but once removed
From her opinion, as I rest assured,
The reason of these holy maids will win her,
You Will find her tractable, to any thing
For your content or his.

Theo. If she refuse it,
The Stygian dampes breeding infectious airs,
The Mandrakes shreekes, or Basiliks killing eye,
The dreadful lightning that does crush the bones
And never singe the skin, shall not appear
Less fatal to her, then my zeal made hot
With love unto my gods; I have deferd it
In hope to draw back this Apostata,
Which will be greater honor then her death
Unto her fathers faith, and to that end
Have brought my daughters hither.

Caliste. And we doubt not
To do what you desire.

Sap. Let her be sent for,
Prosper in your good work, and were I not
To attend the Princess, I would see and hear
How you succeed.

Theo. I am commanded to,
I Will bear you company.

Sap. Give them your Ring
To lead her as in triumph if they win her
Before her highness.
exit Sap.
Theo. Spare no promises,
Persuasions, or threats I do conjure you,
If you prevail, it is the most glorious work
You ever undertook.

Enter Dorothea and Angelo.
Priest. She comes.

Theoph. We leave you.
Be constant and be careful.
exeunt Theo. Priest.
Calaste. We are sony
To meet you under guard.

Dorothea. But I more grieved
You are at liberty, so well I love you,
That I could wish, for such a cause as mine
You were my fellow prisoners: prithee Angels
Reach us some chaires, please you sit?

Caliste. We thank you,
Our visit is for love, love to your safety.

Christ. Our conference must be private, pray you therefore
Command your boy to leave us.

Dorothea. You may trust him
With any secret that concerns my life,
Falsehood and he are strangers, had you Ladies
Been blessed with such a servant, you had never
Forsook that way (your journey even half ended)
That lead to joys eternal. In the place
Of loose lascivious mirth, he would have stird you
To holy meditations, and so far
He is from flattery, that he would have told you,
Your pride being at the height, how miserable
And wretched things you were, that for an hour
Of pleasure here, have made a desperate sale
Of all your right in happiness hereafter.
He must not leave me, without him I fall,
In this life he is my servant, in the other
A wished companion

An. It Is not in the devil,
Nor all his wicked arts to shake such goodness.

Doro. But you were speaking Lady.

Caliste. As a friend
And lover of your safety, and I pray you
So to receive it; and if you remember
How near in love our parents were, that we
En'n from the cradle were brought up together.
Our amity increasing with our years,
We cannot stand suspected.

Doro. To the purpose.

Call. We come then as good Angels Dorothea,
To make you happy, and the means so easy,
That be not you an enemy to your self,
Already you enjoy it.

Christeta. Look on us
Ruined as you are once, and brought unto it
By your persuasion.

Call. But what followed Lady,
Leaving those blessings which our gods gives freely,
And showered upon us with a prodigal hand,
As to be noble borne, youth, beauty, wealth,
And the free use of these without control,
Check, curb, or stop, (such is our Laws indulgence)
All happiness forsook us, bonds and fetters
For amorous Twins, the Rack and Hangmans whips
In place of choice delights, our Parents curses
Instead of blessings, scorn neglect, contempt
Fell thick upon us.

Chris. This considered wisely,
We made a fair retreat, and reconciled
To our forsaken gods, we live again
In all prosperity.

Caliste. By our example
Bequeathing misery to such as love it,
Learn to be happy, the Christian yokes too heavy
For such a dainty neck, it was framed rather
To be the shrine of Venus, or a Pillar
More precious then Crystal to support
Our Cupids Image, our Religion Lady
Is but a varied pleasure, yours a toil
Slaves would shrink under.

Doro. Have you not cloven feetel are you not devils?
Dare any say so much, or dare I hear it
Without a virtuous and religious anger?
Now to put on a Virgin modesty,
Or maiden silence, when his power is questioned
That is omnipotent, were a greater crime,
Then in a bad cause to be impudent.
Your Gods, your temples, brothell houses rather,
Or wicked actions of the worst of men
Pursued and practiced, your religious rites,
O call them rather iugling mysteries,
The baytes and nets of hell, your souls the prey
For which the Devil angles, your false pleasures
A steep descent by which you headlong fall
Into eternal torments.

Call. Do not tempt
Our powerful gods.

Dor. Which of your powerful gods,
Your gold, your silver, brass, or wooden ones?
That can, nor do me hurt, nor protect you,
Most pitied women, will you sacrifice
To such, or call them gods or goddesses,
Your Parents would disdain to be the same,
Or you your selves? O blinded ignorance,
Tell me Caliste by the truth I charge you,
Or any thing you hold more dear, would you
To have him deifide to posterity,
Desire your father an Adulterer,
A Rauisher, almost a Paracide,
A vile incestuous wretch?

Call. That pity
And duty answer for me.

Dor. Or you Christeta,
To be hereafter registered a goddess,
Give your chaste body up to the embraces
Of Goatish lust, have it writ on your forehead,
This is the common Whore, the prostitute,
The Mistress in the art of wantonness,
Knows every trick and labyrinth of desires
That are immodest.

Criste. You judge better of me,
Or my affection is ill placed on you,
Shall I turn Strumpet?

Dor, No, I think you would not,
Yet Venus whom you worship was a whore,
Flora the Foundresse of the public Stews,
And has for that her sacrifice: your great god,
Your Jupiter, a loose adulterer,
Incestuous with his sister, read but those
That have canonized them, you will find them worse
Then in chaste language I can speaks them to you,
Are they immortal then that did partake
Of humane weakness, and had ample share
In men's most base affections? subject to
Unchaste loves, anger, bondage, wounds, as men are.
Her Jupiter to serve his lust turned Bull.
The ship indeed in which he stole Europa.
Neptune for gain builds up the walls of Troy
As a day-labourer, Apollo keeps
Admetus sheep for bread; the Le^^^ Smith
Sweats at the Forge, for hire; Lyometheus here
With his still growing Liver feeds the Vulture;
Saturn bound fast in hell with adamant chains;
And thousands more, on whom abused error
Bestows a diety, will you then dear Sisters,
For I would have you such, pay your Devotions
To things of less power then your selves?

Call. We worship
Their good deeds in their Images.

Dor. By whom fashioned,
By sinful men? I Will tell you a short tale,
Nor can you but confess it was a true one.
A King of Egypt being to errect
The Image of Osiris, whom they honor,
Took from the Matrons necks the richest Jewels
And purest gold, as the materials
To finish up his work; which perfected,
With all solemnity he set it up
To be adored, and served himself his Idol;
Desiring it to give him victory
Against his enemies, but being overthrown,
Enraged against his god (these are fine gods
Subject to humane fury) he took down
The senseless thing, and melting it again,
He made a Basing, in which Eunuchs washed
His Concubines feet, and for this sor did use
Some months it served: his mistress proouing false,
As most indeed do so, and grace concluded,
Between him and the Priests, of the same Basing
He made his god again, think, think of this,
And then consider, if all worldly honors
Or pleasures that do leave sharp stings behind them,
Have power to win such as have reasonable souls,
To put their trust in dross.

Call. Oh that I had been borne
Without a father.

Chri. Piety to him
Has ruined us for ever.

Dor. Think not so,
You may repair all yet, the Attribute
That speaks his Godhead most, is merciful,
Revenge is proper to the Fiends you worship,
Yet cannot strike without his leave, you weep,
Oh it is a heavenly shower, celestial balm
To cure your wounded conscience, let it fall,
Fall thick upon it, and when that is spent,
I Will help it with another of my tears.
And may your true repentance prove the child
Of my true sorrow, never mother had
A birth so happy.

Call. We are caught our selves
That came to take you, and assured of conquest
We are your Captives.

Dor. And in that you triumph,
Your victory had been eternal loss,
And this your loss immortal gain, fix here,
And you shall feel your selves inwardly armed
Against tortures, death, and hell, but take heed sisters,
That or through weakness, threats, or mild persuasions
Though of a father, you fall not into
A second and a worse Apostacy.

Call. Never, oh never, steeled by your example,
We dare the worst of tyrranny.

Chri. Here Is our warrant,
You shall along and witness it.

Dor. Be confirmed then
And rest assured, the more you suffer here,
The more your glory, you to heaven more dear.
excunt.
Enter Artemia, Sapritius, Theophilus, Harpax.
Art. Sapritius though your son deserve no pity,
We grieve his sickness, his contempt of us
We cast behind us, and look back upon
His service done to Caesar, that weighs down
Our just displeasure, if his malady
Have growth from his restraint, or that you think
His liberty can cure him, let him have it,
Say we forgive him freely.

Sap. Your grace hindeys
Ever your humblest Vassals.

Art. Use all means
For his recovery, though yet I love him,
I will not force affection, if the Christian
Whose beauty has out-riuald mine, be won
To be of our belief, let him enjoy her,
That all may know when the cause wills, I can
Command my own desires.

The. Be happy then,
My Lord Sapritius, I am confident
Such eloquence and sweet persuasion dwells
Upon my Daughters tongues, that they will work her
To any thing they please.

Sap. I wish they may,
Yet it is no easy task to undertake,
To altar a perverse and obstinate woman. a shout within, loud Music.

Art. What means this shout.

Sap. It Is seconded with Music,
Triumphint music, ha.
Enter Sempromus.
Semp. My Lord your Daughters
The pillars of our faith having converted,
For so report gives out: the Christian Lady,
The Image of great Jupiter borne before them
Sue for access.

Theo. My soul diuin'd as much,
Blessed be the time when first they saw this light,
Their Mother when she bore them to support
My feeble age, filled not my longing heart
With so much joy, as they in this good work
Have thrown upon me.
Enter Priest with the Image of Jupiter, Iucense and Consors, followed by
Caliste, and Christeta, leading Dorothea, Welcome, oh thrice welcome
Daughters, both of my body and my mind,
Let me embrace in you my bliss, my comfort,
And Dorothea now more welcome too,
Then if you never had fallen off, I am rauish't
With the excess of joy, speak happy daughters
The blessed event.

Call. We never gained so much
By any undertaking.

The. Oh my dear Girl,
Our gods reward thee.

Dor. Nor was ever time
On my part better spent.

Chri. We are all now
Of one opinion.

The. My best Christeta,
Madame if ever you did grace to worth,
Vouchsafe your Princely hands.

Art. Most willingly:
Do you refuse it?
Let us first deserve it:

The. My own child still, here set our god, prepare
The Incense quickly, come fair Dorothea,
I will my self support you, now kneel down
And pay your vows to Jupiter,

Dor. I shall do it
Better by their example.

The. They shall guide you,
They are familiar with the sacrifice,
Forward my Twins of comfort, and to teach her
Make a joint ossring.

Chri. Thus. Call. And thus. They both spit at the Image, throw it down, and
spurn it.

Har. Profane
And impious, stand you now like a Statue?
Are you the Champion of the Gods? where is
Your holy zeal, your anger?

The. I am blasted,
And as my feet were rooted here, I find
I have no motion, I would I had no sight too,
Or if my eyes can serve to any use,
Give me thou iniut'd power a sea of tears,
To expiate this madness in my Daughters:
For being themselves, they would have trembled at
So blasphemous a deed in any other,
For my sake hold a while thy dreadful thunder,
And give me patience to demand a reason
For this accursed act.

Dor. T was bravely done.

The. Peace damned Enchantres peace, I should look on you
With eyes made red with fury, and my hand
That shakes with rage should much outstrip my tongue,
And seal my vengeance on your hearts, but nature
To you that have fallen once, bids meagaine
To be a father, O how durst you tempt
The anger of great Jove?

Dor. A lack poor Jove,
He is no Swaggerer, how smug he stands,
Heel take a kick, or any thing.

Sap. Stop her mouth.

Dor. It is the ancientst godling do not fear him,
He would not hurt the thiese that stole away
Two of his golden locks, indeed he could not,
And still it is the same quiet thing.

Theo. Blasphemer.
Ingenious cruelty shall punish this,
Thou art past hope, but for you yet dear daughters,
Again be witcht, the dew of mild forgiveness
May gently fall, provided you deserve it
With true contrition, be your selves again,
Sue to the offended diety.

Chi. Not to be
The Mistress of the earth.

Call. I will not offer
A grain of Incense to it, much less kneel,
Not look on it but with contempt and scorn,
To have a thousand years conferred upon me
Of worldly blessings, we profess our selves
To be like Dorothea, Christians,
And owe he for that happiness.

The. My ears
Receive in hearing this, all deadly charms
Powerful to make man wretched.

Art. Are these they
You bragged could convert others?

Sap. That want strength
To stand themselves?

Har. Your Honor is engaged,
The credit of our cause depends upon it,
Something you must do suddenly,

The. And I will.

Har. They merit death, but falling by your hand,
It will be recorded for a just revenge
And holy fury in you.

The. Do not blow,
The Furnace of a wrath thrice hot already,
AEtna is in my breast, wild fire burns here,
Which only blood must quench: incensed power,
Which from my infancy I have adored,
Look down with favorable beams upon
The Sacrifice (though not allowed thy Priest)
Which I will offer to thee, and be pleased
(My fiery zeal incidng me to act it)
To call that justice, others may style murder.
Come you accursd, thus by the hair I drag you
Before this holy altar; thus look on you
Less pitiful then Tigres to their prey.
And thus with mine own hand I take that life
Which I gave to you. kills them.

Doro. O most cruel Butcher.

Theo. My anger ends not here, hels dreadful porter
Receive into thy ever open gates
Their damned souls, and let the futies whips
On them alone be wasted: and when death
Closes these eyes, twill be Elysium to me,
To hear their shreekes and howlings, make me Pluto
Thy instruments to furnish thee with souls
Of this accursed fect, nor let me fall
Till my fell vengeance has consumed them all.
exit with Harpax hugging him.
Enter Artemia laughing.
Art. It Is a brave zeal.

Doro. O call him back again,
Call back your hangman, here is on prisoner left
To be the subject of his knife.

Art. Not so.
We are not so near reconcilde unto thee,
Thou shall not perish such an easy way.
Be she your charge Sapritius now, and suffer
None to come near her till we have found out
Some torments worthy of her.

Ano. Courage Mistress,
These Martyrs but prepare your glorious fate,
You shall exceed them and not imitate.
exeunt.
Enter Spungius and Hircius ragged at several doors.
Her. Spunoius.

Spun. My fine rogue, how is it? how goes this totterd world

Her. Have any money?

Spun. Money! no, the Tavern. Iuy clings about my money and kills it. Have thou
any money?

Her. No, my money is a mad Bull, and finding any gap opend, away it runs.

Spun. I see then a Tavern and a Bawdy House have faces much like, the one has
red grates next door, the the other has peeping holes within doors; the Tavern
has evermore a bush, the bawdy close sometimes neither hedge nor bush. From a
Tavern a man comes reeling, from a bawdy house not able to stand. In the
Tavern you are cousend with paltry Wine, in a bawdy house by a painted Where,
Money may have Wine, and a Whore will have Money, but neither can you cry,
Drawer you Rogue, or keep door rotten Bawd, without a silver 'Whistle, we
are justly plagued therefore for running from our Mistress.


Her. Thou did, I did not; yet I had run to, but that one gave me turpentine
pills, and that stayde my running.


Spun. Well: the thread of my life is drawn through the needle of necessity,
whose eye looking upon my lousy breeches, cries out it cannot mend'em: which
so pricks the linings of my body, and those are Heart, Lights, Lungs, Guts,
and Midriffe, that I beg on my knees to have Atropos (the Tailer to the
destinies) to take her sheares and cut my thread in two, or to heat the Iron
goose of Mortality, and so press me to death.


Her. Sure thy father was some botcher, and thy hungry tongue bit off these
shreds of complaints, to patch up the elbowes of thy nittie cloquence.


Spun. And what was thy father?

Her. A low minded Cobbler, a Cobbler whose zeal set many a woman upright, the
remembrance of whose Awle I now having nothing, thrusts such scuruy stitches
into my soul, that the heel of my happiness has gone awry.


Spun. Pity that ere thou trodst thy shoe awry.

Her. Long I cannot last, for all sowterly wax of comfort melting away, and
misery taking the length of my foot, it boots not me to sue for life when all
my hopes are seame. rent, and go wetshod.


Spun. This shows th'at ta Cobblers son by going through stirch: O Hircius wud
thou and I were so happy to be cobblers


Her. So would I, for both of us being now weary of our lives, should then be
sure of shoomakers ends.


Spun. I see the beginning of my end for I am almost starved.

Her. So am not I, but I am more then famishd.

Spun. All the members of my body are in rebellion one against another.


Her. So are mine, and nothing but a cook being a constable can appease them,
presenting to my nose, instead of his painted staff, a spitfull of rost-meate.


Spun. But in this rebellion, what vprores do they make, my belly cries to my
mouth, why do not gape and feed me


Her. And my mouth sets out a throat to my hand why do not thou lift up
meat and cramme my choppes with it.


Spun. Then my hand has a fling at mine eyes, because they look not out and
sharke for victuals.


Her. Which mine eyes seeing, full of tears, cry alowd, and curse my feet for
not ambling up and down to feed Colon, sithence if good meat be in any
place, it is known my feet can smell.


Spu. But then my feet like lazy rogues lie still, and had rather do nothing,
then run to and fro, to purchase anything


Her. Why mong so many millions of people, should thou and I only be
miserable totterdemalions, rag-amuffins, and lousy desperates.


Spun. Thou art a mere I am-an-o, I am-an-as, consider the whole world, and
it is as we are.


Her. Lousy, beggarly, thou whoreson Assa Faetida.

Spun. Worse, al tottrings, al out of frame, thou Fooliamini

Her. As how arsnicke: come make the world smart.

Sp. Old Honor goes on crutches, beggry rides caroched, honest men make
feasts, knaves sit at tables, cowards are laptin velvet, soldiers (as we) in
rags: Beauty turns Whore; Whore Bawd; and both dye of the pox: why then
when all the world stumbles, should thou and I walk upright?

Enter Angelo.
Her. Stop, look who is yonder.

Spun. Fellow Angelo! how does my little man? well.

Ang. Yes, and would you did so, where are your clothes?

Her. Clothes! you see every woman almost go in her loose gown, and why
should not we have our clothes loose?


Spun. Wud they were loose.

Ang. Why where are they?

Spun. Where many a velvet cloak I warrant at this hour keeps them company,
they are pawnd to a Broker.


Ang. Why pawnd, where is all the gold I left with you?

Her. The gold! we put that into a Scriueners hands, and he has cousend us.


Spun. And therefore I prithee Angelo, if thou have another purse, let it be
confiscate, and brought to deuastation.


Ang. Are you made all of lies? I know which way
Your gilt-wing'd pieces flew; I will no more
Be mocked by you: be sorry for your ryots,
Tame your wild flesh by labor, eat the bread
Got with hard hands: let sorrow be your whip
To draw drops of repentance from your heart,
When I read this amendment in your eyes,
You shall not want, till then my pity dies.
exit.
Spun. Is It not a shame that this scuruy Puerilis should give us lessons?


Her. I have dwelt thou know along time in the Subvrbs of the conscience, and
they are ever bawdy, but now my heart shall take a house within the walls of
honesty.

Enter Harpax aloose.
Spun. O you drawers of wine, draw me no more to the bar of Beggary; the sound
of Score a pottle of sack, is worse then the noise of a scolding oyster wench,
or two Cats incorporating.


Harp. This must not be, I do not like when conscience
Thawes, keep her frozen still: how now my masters?
Dejected, drooping, drowned in tears, clothes torn,
Lean, and ill colored, sighing! what is the whitlewinde
Which raises all these mischiefs? I have seen you
Drawn better on it. O! but a spirit told me
You both would come to this, when in you thrust
Your selves into the service of that Lady,
Who shortly now must die; where is now her praying
What good get you by wearing your our feet,
To run on scurny errands to the poor,
And to bear money to a sort of rogues,
And lousy prisoners.

Her. A pox on'em, I never prosperd since I did it.

Spun. Had I bin a Pagan still, I could not have spit white for want of drink,
but come to any Vintner now and bid him trust me, because I turned Christian,
and he cries puh,


Har. You Are righly served; before that peevish Lady
Had to do with you, weomen, wine, and money
Flowed in abundance with you, did it not?

Her. Oh! those days, those days.

Har. Beat not your breasts, tear not your hair in madness
Those days shall come again be ruled by me,
And better (mark me) better.

Spun. I have seen you sir as I take it, an attendant on the Lord Theophilus.


Har. Yes, yes, in show his servant, but hark hither.
Take heed no body listens.

Spun. Not a Mouse stirs.

Har. I am a Prince disguisde.

Her. Disguisde! how! drunk,

Har. Yes my fine boy, I Will drink to, and be drunk,
I am a Prince, and anyaman by me
(Let him but keep my rules) shall soon grow rich,
Exceeding rich, most infinitely rich,
He that shall serve me, is not starved from pleasures
As other poor knaves are; no, take their fill,

Spun. But that sir, we are so ragged...

Har. You Will say, you would serve me.

Her. Before any master under the Zodiake.

Harp. For clothes no matter; I have a mind to both.
And one thing I like in you, now that you see
The bonefire of your Ladies state burnt out,
You give it over, do you not?

Her. Let her be hanged.

Spun. And poxd.

Harp Why now you are mine.
Come let my hosome touch you.

Spun. We have bugges Sir.

Her. There Is money, fetch your cloths home, there is for you

Her. Avoid Vermin: give over our mistress! a man cannot prosper worse if he
serve the devil.

Har. How? the devil! I Will tell you what now of the devil,
He Is no such horrid creature, cloven footed,
Black, saucer-eyde, his nostrils breathing fire,
As these lying Christians make him.

Both No!

Har. He Is more loving,
To man, then man to man is.

Her. Is he so! wud we two might come acquainted with him.

Har. You shall: he is a wondrous good fellow, loves a cup of wine, a whore, any
thing, you have money, its ten to one but I Will bring him to some Tavern to you
or other.


Spun. I Will be speak the best room ith; house for him.

Har. Some people he cannot ondure.

Her. We Will give him no such cause.

Har. He hates a civil Lawyer, as a soldier does peace?

Spun. How a commoner?

Har. Loves him from the teeth outward.

Spun. Pray my Lord and Prince, let me encounter you with one foolish question:
does the devil eat any Mace in's broth?


Har. Exceeding much, when his burning fever takes him, and then he has the
knuckles of a Bailiffe boyld to his breakefast.


Her. Then my Lord, he loves a Gatchpole does he not? Har. As a Bearward does a
dog, a Gatchpole! he has sworn if ever he dies, to make a Serieant his heir,
and a Yoeman his euerseer.


Spun. How if he come to any great man's gate, will the Porter let him come in
sit?

Har. Oh, he loves Porters of great men's gates, because they are ever so near
the wicket.

Her. Do not they whom he makes much on, for all his stroking their cheeks,
lead hellish lives under him.


Har. No, no, no, no, he will be damn before he hurts any man. Do but you
(when you are thoroughly acquainted with him) ask for any thing, see if it does
not come.


Spun. Anything!

Har. Call for a delicate race whore; she is brought you.

Her. Oh my elbow itches: will the devil keep the door?

Har. Be drunk as a beggar, he helps you home.

Spun. O my fine devil! some watchman I warrant, I wonder who is his constable.

Har. Will you swear, roar, swagger? he claps you.

Her. How! ath' chops.

Har. No, ath' shoulder, and cries O my brave boy.
Will any of you kill a man?

Spun. Yes, yes, I, I.

Har. What Is his word, hang, hang, it is nothing.
Or stab a woman.

Her. Yes, yes, I, I.

Har. Here Is the worst word he gives you, a pox on it go on.

Her. O inueaglingrascall, I am rauishd.

Har. Go get your clothes, turn up your glass of youth,
And let the sands run merrily, nor do I care
From what a lavish hand your money flies,
So you give none away, feed beggars.

Her. Hang 'em.

Har. And to the scrubbing poor.

Her. I Will see 'em hanged first.

Har. One service you must do me.

Both. Anything.

Har. Your Mistress Dorothea, ere she suffers,
Is to be put to tortures, have you hearts
To tear her into shreekes, to fetch her soul
Up in the Pangs of death, yet not to die.

Her. Suppose this she, and that I had no hands, here is my teeth.

Spun. Suppose this she, and that I had no teeth, here is my nails.

Her. But will not you be there sir.

Har. No, not for hills of diamonds, the grand Master
Who schools her in the Christian discipline,
Abhorres my company; should I be there,
You Would think all hell broke loose, we shall so quarrel.
Plie you this business; he, her flesh who spares
Is lost, and in my love never more shares.
exit.
Spun. Here Is a Master you rogue.

Her. Sure lie cannot choose but have a horrible number of servants.
exeunt
Finis Actus tertis.
Actus 4. Scena 1.
A bed thrust out, Antioninus upon it sicks, with Physicians about him,
Sapritius and Macrinus.
Sap. O You that are half gods, lengthen that life
Their dieties lend us, turn ore all the volumes
Of your mysterious AEsculapian science
T'encrease the number of this young man's days,
And for each minute of his time prolonged,
Your fee shall be a piece of Roman gold
With Caesar's stamp, such as he sends his Captains
When in the wars they earne well: do but save him,
And as he is half my self, be you all mine.

Doct. What art can do, we promise: phisickes hand
As apt is to destroy, as to preserve,
If heaven make not the medicine; all this while
Our skill has combat held with his disease,
But it is so armd, and a deep melancholy
To be such in part with death, we are in fear
The grave must mock our labors.

Mac. I have been
His keeper in this sickness, with such eyes
As I have seen my mother watch ore me,
And from that observation sure I find,
It is a Mid wife must deliver him.

Sap. Is he with child, a Mid wife:

Mac. Yes, With child,
And will I fear lose life if by a woman
He is not brought to bed: stand by his Pillow
Some little while and in his broken slumbers
Him shall you hear cry out on Dorothea,
And when his arms fly open to catch her,
Closing together, he falls fast asleep,
Pleased with embracings of her airy form;
Physicians but torment him, his disease
Laughs at their gibrish language, let him hear
The voice of Dorothea, nay but the name,
He starts up with high color in his face,
She or none cures him, and how that can be,
(The Princess strick't command, barring that happiness)
To me impossible seems.

Sap. To me it shall not.
I Will be no subject to the greatest Caesar
Was ever crowned with Laurel, rather then cease
To be a father.
exit.
Mac. Silence sit, he wakes.

Ant. Thou kilst me Dorothea, oh Dorothea.

Mac. She Is here; I enjoy her.

Ant. Where, Why do you mooke me,
Age on my head has stuck no white hairs yet,
Yet I Am an old man, a fond doting fool
Upon a woman, I to buy her beauty,
(Truth I am bewitched) offer my life,
And she for my acquaintance hazirds hers,
Yet for our equal sufferings, none holds out
A hand of pity.

Doct. Let him have some Music.

Ant. Hell on your fidling.

Doct. Take again your bed Sir,
Sleep is a sovereign Physic.

Ant. Take an Asses head Sir,
Confusion on your fooleries, your charms,
Thou stinking Glister-pipe, where is the god of rest,
Thy Pills, and base Apothecary drugges
Threatened to bring unto me, out you Impostors,
Quacksaluing, cheating Mountbankes, your skill
Is to make sound men sick, and sick men kill.

Mac. O be your self dear friend.

An. My self Macrunis
How can I be my self, when I am mangled
Into a thousand pieces, here moves my head,
But where is my heart? where ever, that lies dead.

Enter Sapritius dragging in Dorothea by the Hair, Angelo attending.
Sap. Follow me thou damned Sorcores, call up thy spirits,
'And if they can, now let 'em from my hand
Untwine these witching hairs.

Ant. I am that spirit,
Or if I be not (were you not my father)
One made of Iron should how that hand in pieces
That so defaees this sweet Monument
Of my loves beauty?

Sap. Art thou sioke?

Ant. To death.

Sap. Would thou recover?

Ant. Would I live in bliss?

Sap. And do thine eyes shoot daggers at that man
That brings thee health?

Aut. It is not in the world?

Sap. Is It here?

Ant. Oh Treasure, by enchantment locked
In Caves as deep as hell, am I as near.

Sap. Break that enchanted Caut, enter, and rifle
The spoils thy lust hunts after, I deseend
To a base office, and become thy Pandar
In bringing thee this proud Thing, make her thy Whore,
Thy health lies here if she deny to give it,
Force it, imagine thou assaultst a town,
Weak wall, to it, it is thine own, beat but this down,
Come, and un seen, be witness to this battry,
How the coy strumpet yields.

Doct. Shall the boy stay sir.

Sap. No matter for the boy,
Pages are used to these odd bawdy
Shufflings, and indeed are those
Little young snakes in a Furies head
Will sting worse then the great ones,
Let the Pimpe stay.
exeunt aside.
Dor. Oh guard me Angels,
What Tragedy must begin now?

Ant. When a Tiger
Leapes into a tymerous heard, with ravenous Jaws
Being hunger-staru'd, what Tragedy then begins?

Dor. Death I am happy so, you hitherto
Have still had goodness spard within your eyes,
Let not that Orb be broken.

Ang. Fear not Mistress,
If he dare offer violence, we two
Are strong enough for such a sickly man.

Dor. What is your horrid purpose sir, your eye
Bears danger in it?

Ant. I must.

Dor. What.

Sap. Speak it out.

Ant. Climb that sweet Virgin tree.

Sap. Plague a your trees.

Ant. And pluck that fruit which none I think ever tasted:

Sap. A soldier, and stand sumbling so.

Dor. O Kill me, Kneeles.
And heaven will take it as a sacrifice,
But it you play the Rauisher, there is
A Hell to swallow you.

Sap. Let her swallow thee.

Ant. Rise for the Roman Empire ( Dorothea)
I would not wound thine honor, pleasure forced
Are unripe Apples, sour, not worth the plucking,
Yet let me tell you, it is my fathers will,
That I should seize upon you as my prey.
Which I abhor as much as the blackest sin
The villainy of man did ever act. Sapritius breaks in and Macrinus.

Ang. Dye happy for this language.

Sap. Dye a slave,
A blockish Idiot.

Mac. Dear sir, vex him not.

Sap. Yes, and vex thee too, both I think are geldings,
Cold, Phlegmatike Bastard, thou art no brat of mine,
One spark of me, when I had heat like thine
By this had made a Bonefire: a tempting whore
(For whom thou art mad) thrust even into thine arms,
And standst thou puling? had a Tailor seen her
Her at this advantage, he with his crosse-capers
Had rufled her by this, but thou shall curse
Thy dalliance, and here before her eyes
Tear thy flesh in pieces, when a slave
In hot lust bathes himself, and gluts those pleasures
Thy niceness durst not touch, call out a slave,
You Captain of our guard, fetch a slave hither.
exit.
Ant. What will you do dear Sir.

Sap. Teach her a trade, which many would learn
In less then half an hour, to play the Whore.

Enter a Slave.
Mac. A Slave is to me, what now.

Sap. Thou have bones and flesh
Enough to ply thy labor, from what country
Were thou taken Prisoner, here to be our slave.

Slave. From Britain.

Sap. In the west Ocean.

Sla. Yes.

Sap. An Island.

Sla. Yes.

Sap. I am fitted, of all Nations
Our Roman swords ever conquered, none comes near
The Britain for true whooring: sirrah fellow,
What would thou do to gain thy liberty?

Sla. Do! liberty! fight naked with a Lion,
Venture to pluck a Standard from the heart
Of an armed Legion: liberty! I Would thus
Bestride a Rampire, and defiance spit
In The face of death; then, when the battring Ram
Were fetching his careere backward to pash
Me with his horns in pieces: to shake my chains off,
And that I could not do it but by thy death,
Stoodst thou on this dry shore, I on a rock
Ten Piramids high, down would I leap to kill thee,
Or dye my self: what is for man to do
I Will venture on, to be no more a slave.

Sap. Thou shall then be no slave, for I will set thee
Upon a piece of work is fit for man,
Brave for a Britain, drag that Thing aside
And ravish her.

Sla. And ravish her! is this your manly service,
A Devil scorns to do it, it is for a beast,
A villain, not a man, I am as yet
But half a slave, but when that work is past,
A damned whole one, a black ugly slave,
The slave of all base slaves, do it thy self Roman,
It Is drudgery fit for thee.

Sap. He Is bewitched too,
Bind him, and with a Bastinado give him
Upon his naked belly 200. blows.

Sla. Thou art more slave then I.
exit carried in.
Dor. That power supernall on whom waits my soul,
Is Captain ore my chastity.

Ant. Good sir give ore,
The more you wrong her, your selfs vexed the more,

Sap. Plagues light on her and thee; thus down I throw
Thy Harlot thus bi'th hair, nail her to earth,
Call in ten slaves, let every one discover
What lust desires, and surfeit here his fill,
Call in ten flaues.

Ang. They are come sir at your call.

Sap. O oh. Falls down.

Enter Theophilus.
The. Where is the Governor?

Ant. There Is my wretched father.

The. My Lord, Sapritius, he is not dead, my Lord,
That Witch there.

Aut. T is no Roman gods can strike
These fearful terrors, O thou happy maid,
Forgive this wicked purpose of my father.

Dor. I do.

The. Gone, gone, he is peppered: it is thou
Have done this act internal.

Dor. Heaven pardon you,
And if my wrongs from thence pull vengeance down
(I can no miracles work) yet from my soul
Pray to those powers I serve, he may recover.

The. He slirres, help, raise him up, my Lord.

Sap. Where am I?

The One cheek is blasted.

Sap. Blasted! Where Is the Lamia
That tears my entrails? I Am be witch'd, seize on her?

Dor. I Am here, do what you please.

The. Spurn her too'th bar.

Dor. Come boy, being there, more near to heaven we are

Sap Kick harder, go out witch.
exeunt.
Ant. O bloody hangmen, thine own gods give thee breath,
Each of thy tortors is my several death.
exit. Enter Harpax Hircius, and Spungius.
Har. Do you like my service now, say am not I
A Master worth attendance.

Spun. Attendance, I had rather lick clean the soles of your durty boots,
then wear the richest suit of any infected Lord, whose rotten life hangs
between the 2 Poles.


Her. A Lords suit! I wud not give up the cloak of your service to meet the
splay-foot estate of any leftey'd knight above the Antipodes, because they are
unlucky to meet.


Har. This day i will try your loves to me, it is only
But well to use the agility of your arms,

Spun. Or legs, I am losty at them.

Her. Orany other member that has no legs.

Spun. Thou't run into some hole.

Her. If I meet one that is more the^ my match, and that I cannot stand in their
hands, I must and will creep on my knees.


Har. Here me my little teeme of villains, hear me,
I cannot teach you Fencing with these Cudgels,
Yet you must use them, lay them on but soundly,
That's all.

Her. Nay if we come to malling once, puh,

Spun. But what Wall-nut tree is it we must beat.

Har. Your Mistress.

Her. How! my Mistress! I begin to have a Christians heart, made of sweet
butter, I melt, I cannot strike a woman.


Her. Not I, unless she scratch, bum my mistress!

Har. You Are Coxecombes, silly Animals,

Her. What Is that?

Har. Drones, Asses, blinded Moles, that dare not thrust
Your arms out to catch Fortune, say you fall off,
It must be done you are conuetted Rascals,
And that once spread abroad, why every slave
Will kick you, call you motley Christians,
And half faced Christians.

Spun. The guts of my conscience begin to be of whit-leather,

Her. I doubt me I shall have no sweet buttet in me.

Har. Deny this, and each Pagan whom you meet
Shall forked fingers thrust into your eyes.

Her. If we be Cuckolds.

Har. Do this, and every god the Gentiles bow to,
Shall add a fadome to your line of years.

Spun. A hundred fadome, I desire no more.

Her. I desire but one inch longer,

Har. The Senators will as you pass along
Clap you upon your shoulders with this hand,
And with this hand glue you gold when you are dead,
Happy that man shall be can get a nail,
The paring --, they the dort under the nail
Of any of you both, to say this dirt
Belonged to Spungius or Hercius.

Spun. They shall not want dirt under my nails, i will keepe'em long of purpose,
for now my singers itch to be at her.


Her. The first thing I do I Will take her Ore the lips.

Spun. And I the hips, we may strike any where.

Har. Yes, any where.

Her. Then I know where i will hit her.

Har. Prosper and be mine own; stand by, I must not
To see this done, great business calls me hence,
He Is made can make her eurse his violence.
exit.
Spun. Fear it not sir, her ribs shall be basted.

Her. He come upon her with rounce, robble-hobble, and thwicke thwacke thirlety
bouncing.


Enter Dorothea lead Prisoner, a Guard attending, a Hangman with Cords in some
ugly shape, sets up a Pillar in the middle of the stage, Sapritius and
Theophilus sit, Angelo by her.
Sap. According to our Roman customs, bind
That Christian to a Pillar.

Theo. Insernall Furies,
Could they into my hand thrust all their whips
To tear thy flesh thy soul, it is not a torture
Fit to the Vengeance, I should heap on thee,
For wrongs done me: me! for flagitious facts
By thee done to our gods, yet (so it stand
To great Cesaraes Governors high pleasure)
Bow but thy Knee to Jupiter and offer
Any slight sacrifice, or do but swear
By Caesar's fortune, and be free.

Sap. Thou shall.

Dor. Not for all Casar fortune, were it chaind
To more worlds, then are kingdoms in the world,
And all those worlds drawn after him: I defy
Your hangmen; you now show me whither to fly.

Sap. Are hentormentors ready?

Ang. Shrink not dear mistress.

Both. My Lord, we are ready for the business.

Dor. You two! whom I like fosterd children fed,
And lengthened out your starued life with bread:
You be my hangman! whom when up the ladder
Death hald you to be strangled, I fetched down
Clothd you, and warmd you, you two my tormentors.

Both. Yes, use.

Dor. Divine powers pardon you.

Sap. Strike. strike at her: Angelo kneeling holds her fast.

Theo. Beat out her brains --,

Dor. Receive me you bright Angels.

Sap. Faster slaves.

Spun. Faster: I am out of breath I Am sure: if I were to beat a bucke, I can
strike no harder.

Her. O mine arms, I cannot list'em to my head.

Dor. Joy above ioys, are my tormentors weary
In torturing me, and in my sufferings
I fainting in no linbe: ^^^^anto strike home
And feast your fury full.

Theo. These dogs are ours. come from his seat.
Which snarle, yet bite not: see my Lord, her face
Has more bewitching beauty then before,
Proud whore: it smiles, cannot an eye shart out
With these.

Her. No sir, not the bridge of her nose fall, it is full of Iron work.

Sap. Lets view the oudgols, are they not counterfeit.

Ang. There fix thine eye still, thy glorious crown must come
Not from soft pleasure, but by martyrdom,
There fix thine eye still, when we next do meet,
Not thorns, but roses shall bear up thy feet:
There fix thine eye still.
exit. Enter Harpax sneaking.
Dor. Ever, ever, ever.

Theo. We are mocked, these bats have power down to fell giants, yether skin
is not feared.


Sap. What rogues are these.

Theo. Cannot these force a shreeke. beats them.

Spun. Oh! a woman has one of my ribs, and now five more are broken.


Theo. Cannot this make her roar. beats the other he roares

Sa. Who hired these slaves? what are they?

Spun. We serve that noble Gentleman there, he entisde us to this dry-beating,
oh for one half pot.


Har. My servants! two base rogues, and sometimes servants
To her and for that cause forbear to hurt her.

Sap. Unbind her, hang up these.

Theo. Hang the two hounds on the next tree.

Her. Hang us! master Harpax, what a devil shall we be thus used.


Har. What bandogs but you two wud worry a woman!
Your mistessell but clapped you, you flew on:
Say I should get your lives, each rascal beggar
Would when he met you, cry, out helhounds, traitors
Spit at you, fling dirt at you, and no woman
Ever endure your fight: it is your best course
(Now had you secret knives) to stab your selves,
But since you have not, go and be hanged.

Her. I thank you.

Har. I is your best course.

Theo. Why stay they trifling here?
To gallows drag'em by the heels: away.

Spun. By the heels! no sir, we have legs to do us that service.


Her. I, I, if no woman can endure my sight, away with me.

exeunt.
Har. Dispatch'em.

Spun. The devil dispatch thee.
exit.
Sap. Death this day ride in triumph, Theophilus.
See this witch made away to.

Theo. My soul thirst for it,
Come, I my self, thy hangmans part could play.

Dor. Ohhasten me to my coronation day.
exeunt
Enter Antoninus, Macrinus, servants.
Anton. Is this the place where virtue is to suffer,
And heavenly beauty leaving this base earth,
To make a glad return from whence it came,
Is it Macrinus? a scaffold thrust forth

Mac. By this preparation
You well may rest assurd that Dorethea
This hour is to die here.

Anton. Then with her dies
The abstract of all sweetness that is in woman,
Set me down friend, that ere the iron hand
Of death close up mine eyes, they may at once
Take my last leave both of this light, and her:
For she being gone, the glorious Sun himself
To me's Cymerian darkness.

Macr. Stange affection!
Cupid once more has changed his shafts with death,
And kills in stead of giving life.

Anton. Nay weep not,
Though tears of friendship be a sovereign balm,
On me they are cast a way: it is decreed
That I must die with her, our clew of life
Was spun together.

Macr. Yet sir it is my wonder
That you who hearing only what she suffers,
Partake of all her tortures, yet will be
To add to vour calamity, an eye witness
Of her last Ttagicke scene, which must pierce deeper
And make the wound more desperate.

Anton. O Macrinus,
T would linger out my tormentselfe, not kill me,
Which is the end I aim at, being to die to.
What instrument more glorious can I wish for,
Then what is made sharp by my constant love
And true affection. It may be the duty
And loyal service with which I pursude her,
And sealed it with my death, will be remembered
Among her blessed actions, and what honor
Can I desire beyond it?
Enter a guard bringing in Dorothea, a headsman before her, followed by
Theophitus, Sapritius, Harpax. See she comes,
How sweet her innocence appears, more like
To heaven it self then any sacrifice
That can be offered to it. By my hopes
Of joys hereafter, the sight makes me doubtful
In my belief, nor can I think our gods
Are good, or to be served, that take delight
In offerings of this kind, that to maintain
Their power, do face the master piece of nature,
Which they themselves come short of she ascends,
An every step raises her nearer heaven.
What god so erethou art that most enjoy her,
Receive in her a boundless happiness

Sap. You are too blame
To let him come abroad.

Macr. It was his will,
And we were left to serve him, not command him,

Anton. Good sir be not offended, nor deny
My last of pleasures in this happy object
That I shall ere be blessed with.

Theo. Now proud contemner
Of us and of our gods, tremble to think
It is not in the power thou seru'st, to save thee.
Not all the riches of the sea increasd
By violent shipwrackes, nor the unsearched mines
Mammons unknown exchequer shall redeem thee.
And therefore having first with horror weighed
What it is to die, and to die young, to part with
All pleasures, and delights: lastly, to go
Where all Antipathies to comfort dwell
Furies behind, about thee, and before thee,
And to add to affliction the remembrance
Of the Elizian joys thou might have tasted,
Had thou not turned Apostata to those gods
That so reward their servants, let despair
Prevent the hangmans sword, and on this scaffold
Make thy first entrance into hell.

Anton. She smiles,
Unmoved by Mars, as if she were assured
Death looking on her constancy would forget
The use of his inevitable hand.

Theo. Derided to? dispatch I say.

Dor. Thou fool
That gloriest in having power to ravish
A trifle from me I am weary of:
What is this life? to me not worth a thought
Or if to be esteemd, it is that I loose it
To win a better, even thy realice serves
To me but as a ladder to mount up
To such a height of happiness where I shall
Look down with scorn on thee, and on the world,
Where circl'd with true pleasures, placed above
The reach of death or time, twill be my glory
To think at what an, easy price I bought it.
There Is a perpetual spring, perpetual youth,
No joint benumming cold, nor scorehing heat,
Famine nor age have any being there:
Forget for shame your Tempe, bury in
Oblivion, your fainde your Hesperian Orchards
The Golden fruit kept by the watchful Dragon
Which did require Hercules to get it
Compared with what grows in all plenty there,
Deserves not to be named. The power I serve
Laughs at your happy Arabie, or the
Elizian shades, for he has made his bowers
Better indeed then you can fancy yours.

Anton. O take me thither with you.

Doro. Trace my steps
And be assurd you shall.

Sap. With mine own hands
He rather stop that little breath is left thee,
And rob thy killing fever.

Theo. By no means,
Let him go with her, do seduced young man,
And wait upon thy saint in death, do, do,
And when you come to that imagind place,
That place of all delights, pray you observe me,
And meet those cursed things I once called daughters,
Whom I have sent as harbingers before you,
If there be any truth in your religion,
In thankfulness to me that with care hasten
Your journey thither, pray send me some
Small pittance of that curious fruit you bost of.

Ant. Grant that I may go with her, and I will.

Sap. Will thou in thy last minute dam thy self?

Theo. The gates to hell are open.

Dor. Know thou tyrant
Thou agent for the devil thy great master
Though thou art most unworthy to taste of it,
I can and will.
Enter Angelo in the Angels habit.
Har. Oh! mountains fall upon me,
Or hide me in the bottom of the deep,
Where light may never find me.

Theo. What Is the matter?

Sap. This is prodigious, and confirms her witch craft.

Theo. Harpax my Harpax speak.

Har. I dare not stay,
Should I but hear her once more I were lost,
Some whirle wind snatch me from this cursed place,
To which compared (and with what now I suffer)
Hels totments are sweet slumbers.
exit Harpax Sap.
Sap. Follow him.

Theo. He is distracted, and I must not loose him,
Thy charms upon my servant cursed witch,
Gives thee a short repricue, lethernot die
Till my return.
exeunt Sap. and Theo
Anton. She minds him not, what object
Is her eye fixd on?

Macr. I see nothing.

Anton. Mark her.

Doro. Thou glorious minister of the power I serve,
For thou art more then mortal, is it for me
Poor sinner, thou art pleased a while to leave
Thy heavenly habitation? and vouchsafest
Though glorified, to take my servants habit,
For put off thy divinity, so lookd
My lovely Angelo.

Ange. Know I am the same,
And still the servant to your pictie,
Your zealous prayers and pious deeds first won me
(But 'twas by his command to whom you sent 'em)
To guide your steps. I tried your charity,
When in a beggars shape you took me up
And clothd my naked limbs, and after fed
(As you believed) my famishd mouth. Learn all
By your example to look on the poor
With gentle eyes, for in such habits often
Angels desire an Alms. I never left you,
Nor will I now, for I am sent to carry
Your pure and innocent soul to joys eternal,
Your martyrdom once sufferd, and before it
Ask any thing from me, and rest assured
You shall obtain it

Doro. I am largely paid
For all my torments, since I find such grace
Grant that the love of this young man to me,
In which he languisheth to death, may be
Changed to the love of heaven,

Ange. I will perform it.
And in that instant when the sword seta free
Your happy soul his shall have liberty.
Is there ought else?

Doro. For proof that I foregiue
My (...), who in scornd desired
To taste of that most (...) fruit I go to
After my death as sent from me, be pleased
To give him of it.

Ange. Willingly dear Mistress.

Mac. I am amazed

Anton. I feels a holy fire
That yields a comfortable heat within me.
I am quite alterd from the thing I was.
See I can stand, and go alone, thus kneels
To heavenly Dorothea, touch her hand
With a religious kiss.

Enter Sapritius and Theophilus.
Sapr. He is well now,
But will not be drawn (...).

Theoph. It matters not,
We can discharge this works without his help:
But see your son. Sapr, Villain

Anton. Sir I be seech you,
Being so near our ends diuoroe us not.

Theo. He quickly make a soparation of' om.
Have thou ought else to say?

Dorothea. Nothing but blame
Thy tardinesse in sending me torest,
My peace is made with heaven, to which my soul
Begins to take her flight, strike, O. strike quickly,
And though you are un moved to be my death
Hereafter when my story shall be read,
As they were present now, the hearers shall
Say this of Dorothea with wet eyes
She lived a virgin, and a virgin dies. her head struck off

Anton. O take my soul along to wait on mine.

Macr. Your son sinks to. Antonius sinkes

Sap. Already dead.

The. Die all.
That are or favor this accursed Sect,
I triumph in their ends, and will raise up
A hill of their dead Karkatses, to or clooke
The Pyrenean Hills, but i will root out.
These superstitious fools, and leave the World
No name of Christian.

Loud Music, exit Angelo leaving first laid his hand up. on their mouths.
Sap. Ha, hauenly Music.

Mac. It Is in the air.

The. Illusions of the Devil
Wrought by some one of her Religion.
That feign would make her death a miracle,
It frights not me: because he is your son
Let him have burial, but let her body
Be cast forth with contempt in some high way,
And be to Vultures and to Dogea prey.
Exeunt.
The end of the fourth Act.
Actus 5. Scena I.
Enter Theophilus in his study, Books about him.
The. Is It Holliday (Oh Casar) that thy servant,
(Thy Provost, to see execution done
On these base Christians in Casarea)
Should now want work: sheep these Idolaters
That none are stirring, As a curious Painter Rises.
When he has made some admirable piece,
Stands off, and with a searching eye examines
Each colors how it is sweetened, and then hugs
Himself for his rare workmanship. -- So here Sits.
Will I my Drolleries and bloody Lantskips
Long past wrapped up unfold to make me merry
With shadows, now I want the substances. Books.
My Muster-booke of Hel-hounds, were the Christians
Whose names stand here (alive) and armed, not Rome
Could move upon her Hindges. What I have done,
Or shall hereafter, is not out of hate
To poor tormented wretches, no I am carried
With violence of zeal, and streams of service
I owe our Roman gods. Great Britain, what.
A thousand wives with brats sucking their breasts,
Had hot Irons pinch 'em off and thrown to swine;
And then their fleshy backparts he wed with hatchets,
Were mine'd and baked in Pies to feed starved Christians. Ha, ha.
Again, again, -- East. Anglas --, oh, East Angles,
Bandogs (kept three days hungry) worried
1000. British Rascals, styed up, fat
Of purpose, stripped naked, and disarmed.
I could outstare a year of Suns and Moons,
To sit at these sweet Bul-baitings, so I could
Thereby but one Christian win to fall
In adoration to my Jupiter. Twelve hundred
Eyes boar'd with Augurs out: oh! eleven thousand
Torn by wild beasts: two hundred ram'd in the earth
To The armepits, and full Platters round about'em,
But far enough for reaching, eat dogs, ha, ha, ha.
Tush, all these tortures are but phillipings,
Flea-bitings; I before the destinies
My bottom did wind up, would flesh my self
Once more, upon some one remarkable
Above all these, this Christian Slut was well,
A pretty one, but let such horror follow
The next I feed with torments, that when Rome
Shall hear it, her foundation at the sound
May feel an Earthquake. How now? Music.
Rise Consort, enter Angelo with a Basket filled with fruit and flowers.
Ang. Are you amazd'd Sir -- so great a Roman spirit and does it tremble.

The. How came thou in? to whom thy business?

Ang. To you:
I had a mistress late senthence by you
Upon a bloody errand, you entreated
That when she came into that blessed Garden
Whither she knew she went, and where (now happy)
She feeds upon all joy, she would send to you
Some of that Garden fruit and flowers, which here
To have her promise saved, are brought by me.

The. Cannot I see this Garden?

Ang. Yes, if the Master
Will give you entrance. Angelo vanishes.

The. It Is atempting fruit, and the most bright checked child I ever viewed,
Sweet smelling goodly fruit, what flowers are these?
In Dioclesians Gardens, the most beauteous
Compard with these are weeds: is it not February?
The second day she dyed: Frost, Ice and snow
Hang on the beard of Winter, where is the sun
That guilds this summer, pretty sweet boy, say in what Country
Shall a man find this Garden --, my delicate boy, gonel Vanished!
Within there, Iuliarues and Gota. --

enter two servants.
Both. My Lord.

The. Are my gates shut?

1. And guarded.

The. Saw you not -- a boy.

2. Where?

The. Here he entered, a young Lad, 1000. blessings danced upon his eyes, a
smooth faced glorious Thing, that brought this Basket.


1. No sir?
exeunt.
The. Away, but be in reach if my voice calls you,
No! vanished! and not seen, be thou a spirit
Sent from that Witch to mock me, I am sure
This is essential, and how ere it grows,
Will taste it.
Enter.
Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Harpax within.

The. So good, i will have some now sure.

Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha, great lickorish fool.

The. What art thou?

Har. A Fisherman,

The. What do thou catch;

Har. Souls, souls, a fish called souls.

Enter a seruent.
The. Geta.

1. My Lord.

Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Within.

The. What insolent slave is this dares laugh at me?
Or what is it the dog grinnes at so?

1. I neither know my Lord at what, nor whom, for there is none without but my
fellow Iulianus, and he is making a Garland for Jupiter.


The. Jupiter! all within me is not well,
And yet not sick.

Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha. louder.

The. What Is thy name slave?

Har. Go look. At one end.

1. It Is Harpax voice.

The. Harpax, go drag the Caitiffe to my foot,
That I may stamp upon him.

Har. Fool, thou lie. At the other end.

1. He Is yonder now my Lord.

The. Watch thou that end
Whilst I make good this.

Har. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. At the middle.

The. He Is at Barli-breake, and the last coulple are now in hell,
exit seruent. Search for him, all this ground me think is bloody,
And pau'd with thousands of those Christians eyes
Whom I have tortu'd, and they stare upon me;
What was this apparition? sure it had
A shape Angelical; mine eyes (though dazzled
And danted at first sight) tell me, it wore
A pair of glorious wings, yea they were wings,
And hence he flew; it is vanished, Jupiter
For all my sacrifices done to him
Never once gave me smile: how can stone smile, music.
Or wooden Image laugh? ha! I remember
Such Music gave a welcome to my ear,
When the fair youth came to me: it is in the Air,
Or from some better place, a power divine,
Through my dark ignorance on my soul does shine,
And makes me see a conscience all stai'nd ore,
Nay drowned and damned for ever in Christian gore.

Har. Ha, ha, ha. Within.

The. Again, what dainty relish on my tongue
This fruit has left, some Angel has me fed,
If so toothfull, I will be banqueted. eats another.

Har. Hold.
Enter Harpax in a fearful shape, fire flashing out of the study.
The. Not for Caesar.

Har. But for me thou shall.

The. Thou art no Twin to him that
Last was here.
You powers whom my soul bids me reverence
Guard me: What art thou?

Har. I Am thy Master.

The. Mine.

Har. And thou my everlasting slave; that Harpax,
Who hand in hand has led thee to thy Hell
Am I.

The. Auant.

Har. I will not, cast thou down
That Basket with the things in it, and fetch up
What thou have swallowed, and then take a drink
Which I shall give thee, and i am gone.

The. My Fruit!
Does this offend thee? see

Har. Spet it to the earth,
And tread upon it, or i will peece-meale tear thee.

The. Art thou with this affrighted? see, hears more. Flowers.

Har. Fling them away, i will take thee else and hang thee
In a contorted Chain of Isicles
In The frigid Zone: down with them.

The. At the botome,
One thing I found not yet, see. A cross of Flowers.

Har. Oh, I Am tortured.

The. Can this do it? hence thou Fiend infernal hence.

Har. Claspe Jupiters Image, and away with that.

The. At thee i will fling that Jupiter, for me thinks
I serve a better Master, he now checkes me
For murdering my two daughters, put on by thee,
By thy damned Rhetoric did I hunt the life
Of Dorothea, the holy Virgin Martyr,
She is not angry with the Axe nor me,
But sends these presents to me, and its (...)
Ore world to find her, and from her white hand
To beg a forgiveness.

Har. No, i will bind thee here.

The. I set up a strength above thine: this small weapon me thinks is Armor
hard enough.

Har. Keep from me. Sinkes a little.

The. Art poasting to thy center? down hel-hound, down,
Me have thou lost; that arm which hurlesthee hence
Save me, and set me up the strong defense
In the fair Christians quarrel.
Enter Angele.
Ang. Exit thy foot there,
Nor be thou shaken with a Caesar's voice,
Though thousand deaths were in it: and I then
Will bring thee to a River that shall wash
Thy bloody hands clean, and more white then Snow,
And to that Garden where these blessed things grow,
And to that martyred Virgin, who has sent
That heavenly token to thee; Spread this brave wing
And serve then Caesar, a far greater King.
exit.
The. It is, it is some Angel, vanished again!
Oh come back rauishing Boy, bright Messenger,
Thou have (by these mine eyes fixed on thy beauty)
Illumined all my soul, now look I back
On my black Tyranies, which as they did.
Out dare the bloudiest, thou blessed spirit that leads me,
Teach me what I must do, and to do well,
That my last act, the best may Parallel.
exit.
Enter Dioclesian, Maximinus, Epire, Pontus, Macedon, meeting Artemia,
attendants.
Art. Glory and Conquest still attend upon
Triumphant Caesar.

Dio. Let thy wish fair Daughter
Be equally divided, and hereafter
Learn thou to know and reverence Maximinus,
Whose power with mine united makes one Caesar.

Max. But that I feare't would be held flattery,
The bonds considered in which we stand tide
As love, and Empire, I should say till now
I nere had seen a Lady I thought worthy
To be my Mistress.

Art. Sir, you show yourselfe
Both Courtier and Soldier, but take heed,
Take heed my Lord, though my dull pointed beauty
Stained by a harsh refusal in my servant
Cannot dart forth such beams as may inflame you,
You may encounter such a powerful one,
That with a pleasing heat will thaw your heart
Though bound in ribs of Ice, love still is love,
His Bow and Arrows are the same, great Julius
That to his successors left the name of Caesar
Whom war could never tame, that with dry eyes
Beheld the large plains of Pharsalia, covered
With the dead Karkasses of Senators
And Citizens of Rome, when the world knew
No other Lord but him, struck deep in years to,
And men gray haird forget the lusts of youth:
After all this, meeting fair Cleapatra,
A suppliant to the magic of her eye,
Even in his pride of conquest took him captive,
Nor are you more secure.

Max. Were you deformed
(But by the gods you are most excellent)
Your gravity and diseretion would overcome me,
And I should be more proud in being a Prisoner
To your fair virtues, then of all the Honors,
Wealth, Title, Empire, that my sword has purchac'd

Dio. This meets my wishes, welcome it Artemia
With out-stretch'd arms, and study to forget
That Antoninus ever was thy fate
Reserved thee for this better choice, embrace it.

Ep. This happy match brings new nerves to give strength
To our continued league.

Mace. Hymen himself
Will bless this marriage which we will solemnize
In the presence of these Kings.

Pon. Who rest most happy
To be eyewitnesses of a Match that brings
Peace to the Empire.

Diocles. We much thank your loves,
But where is Sapritius our Governor,
And our most zealous provost good Theophilus?
If ever Prince were blessed in a true servant,
Or could the gods be debtors to a man,
Both they and we stand far engaged to cherish
His pietic and service.

Artem. Sir the Governor
Brooks sadly his sons loss although he turned
Apostata in death, but bold Theophilus
Who for the same cause in my presence sealed
His holy anger on his daughters hearts.
Having with tortutes first tried to convert her,
Dragged the bewitching Christian to the scaffold,
And saw her loose her head.

Dio. He is all worthy,
And from his own mouth I would gladly hear
The manner how she sufferd.

Art. 'Twill be deliuerd
With such contempt and scorn, I know his nature
That rather twill beget your highness laughter
Then the least pity.

Enter Theophilus, Sapritius, Macrinus.
Dio. To that end I would hear it.

Art. He comes, with him the Governor.

Dio. O Sapritius,
I am to chide you for your tenderness,
But yet remembering that you are a father,
I will forget it, good Theophilus
He speak with you anon: nearer your care, to Sapritius.

Theo. By Antoninus soul I do conjure you,
And though not for religion, for his friendship,
Without demanding what is the cause that moves me,
Receive my signet, by the power of this
Go to my prisons, and release all Christian
That are in fetters there by my command.

Mac. But what shall follow?

Theo. Haste then to the port,
You there shall find two tall ships ready rig'd,
In which embarke the poor distressed souls
And bear them from the reach of tyranny,
Enquire not whither you are bound, the dietic
That they adore will give you prosperous winds,
And make your voyage such, and largely pay for
Your hazard, and your travail: leave me here
There is a scene that I must act alone.
Haste good Macrinus, and the great God guide you.

Mac. I Will vndertake't, there is some thing prompts me to it
It Is to save innocent blood, a Saintlike act,
And to be merciful has never been
By mortal men themselves esteemd a sin.
exit Mac.
Dioc. You know your charge.

Sap. And will with care observe it.

Dio. For I profess he is not Casars friend
That sheds a tear for any torture that
A Christians suffers. Welcome my best servant
My careful, zealous Provost, thou have toyld
To satisfy my will though in extremes,
I love thee for it, thou art firm rock, no changeling:
Prithee deliver, and for my sake do it
Without excess of bitterness or seosses
Before my brother and these kings, how took
The Christian her death.

Theo. And such a presence
Though every private head in this large room
Were circl'd round with an imperial crown,
Her story will deserve, it is so full
Of excellency and wonder.

Diocle. Ha! how is this?

Theo. O mark it therefore, and with that attention,
As you would here an Embassy from heaven
By a winged Legate, for the truth deliuerd,
Both how and what this blessed virgin sufferd:
And Dorothea but hereafter named,
You will rise up with reverence, and no more
As things un worthy of your thoughts, remember
What the canonized Spartan Ladies were
Which lying Greece so bosts of, your own matrons
Your Roman dames whose figures you yet keep
As holy relickes in her historic
Will find a second vrne. Gracohus, Cornelia,
Paulina that in death desirde to follow
Her husband Seneca, nor Brutus Portia
That swallowd burning coals to overtake him,
Though all their several worths were given to one
With this is to be mentioned.

Maximinus. Is he mad?

Diocl. Why they did die Theophilus, and boldly.
This did no more.

Theo. They out of desperation
Are for vain glory of an aftername
Parted with life. This had not mutinous sons
As the rash Gracchi were, nor was this Saint
A doting mother as Cornelia was:
This lost no husband in whose overthrow
Her wealth and hononr suncke, no fear of want
Did make her being redious, but aiming
At an immortal crown, and in his cause
Who only can bestow it; who sent down
Legions of ministering Angels to bear up
Her spotless soul to heaven; who entertaind it
With choice celestial music, equal to
To the motion of the spheres, she vncompeld
Changed this life for a better. My Lord Sapritius
You were present at her death, did you ere here
Such rauishing sounds?

Sap. Yet you said then it was witchcraft,
And devilish illusions.

Theo. I then hard it
With sinful cares, and belched out blasphemous words
Against his dietie, which then I knew not,
Nor did believe in him.

Diocl. Why do thou now? or dare thou in our hearing?

Theoph. Were my voice
As loud as is his thunder, to be heard
Through all the world, all potentates on earth
Ready to burst with rage should they but hear it,
Though hell to aid their malice lent her furies
Yet I would speak, and speak again, and boldly,
I am a Christian, and the powers you worship
But dreams of fools and madmen.

Maximums. Lay hands on him.

Dio. Thou twice a child (for doting age so makes thee)
Thou could it not else thy pilgrimage of life,
Being almost past through in the last moment,
Destroy what ere thou have done good or great,
Thy youth did promise much, and grown a man
Thou made it good, and with increase of years
Thy actions still betterd as the Sun
Thou did rise gloriously, kepst a constant course
In all thy journey, and now in the cuening
When thou should pass with honor to thy rest,
Will thou fall like a Metcor?

Sapritius. Yet confess
That thou art mad, and that thy tongue and heart
Had no agreement.

Max. Do, no way is left else
To save thy life Theophilus.

Diocl. But refule it
Destruction as horrid and as sudden
Shall fall upon thee, as if hell stood open
And thou were sinking thither.

Theoph. Here me yet
Here for my service past.

Artem. What will he say?

Theo. At cuer I deserved your favor here me,
And grant one boon, it is not for life I sue for,
Nor is it fit that I that nere knew pity
To any Christian, being one my self
Should look for any: no, I rather beg
The utmost of your cruelty; I stand
Accomptable for thousand Christians deaths,
And were it possible that I could die
A day for every one, then live again
To be again tormented, t were to me
An cafie penance, and I should pass through
A gentle clensing fire, but that denyde me,
It being beyond the strength of feeble nature,
My suit is you would have no pity on me.
In mine own house there are a thousand engine
Of studied cruelty, which I did prepare
For miserable Christians, let me seele
As the Sicilian did his brazen bull,
The horridst you can find, and I will say
In death that you are merciful.

Dtoc. Despair not
In this thou shall prevail, go fetch 'em hither, some go for the racks.
Death shall put on a thousand shapes at once
And so appear before thee, racks, and whips,
Thy flesh with burning pinsorstorne, shall feed
The fire that heates them, and what is wanting to
The torture of thy body, I Will supply
In punishing thy mind: fetch all the Christians
That are in hold, and here before his face
Cut'cm in pieces.

Theo. It Is not in thy power,
It was the first good deed I ever did,
They are removed out of thy raceh, how ere
I was determined for my sins to die,
I first took order for their liberty,
And still I dare thy worst.

Diocle. Dind him I say,
Make every artery and sinew crack,
The slave that makes him give the lowdest shrike
Shall have ten thousand Drachmes, wretch i will force thee
To curse the power thou worship'st.

The. Never, never,
No breath of mine shall ever be spent on him, They torment him.
But what shall speak his Majesty or mercy:
I am honored in my sufferings, weak tormentors
More tortures, more: alas you are unskillful,
For Heavens sake more; my breast is yet untorn:
Here purchase the reward that was propounded,
The Irons cool, here are arms yet and thighs,
Spare no part of me.

Max. He endures beyond
The suffrance of a man.

Sap. No sigh nor groan
To witness he has feeling.

Dio. Harder Villains.
Enter Harpax.
Har. Unless that he blaspheme he is lost for ever,
Iftorments cuer could bring forth despair,
Let these compel him to it. oh me
My ancient enemies again, falls down.

Enter Dcrothea in a white robe, crowns upon her robe, a Crown upon her head,
lead in by the Angel. Antoninus, Caliste and Christeta following all in white,
but less glorious, the Angel with a Crown for him.
The. Most glorious vision,
Did ere so hard a bed yield man a dream
So heavenly as this? I am confirmed,
Confirmed you blessed spirits, and make have
To take that crown of immortality
You offer to me; death till this blessed minute
I never thought thee slow paced, nor could I
Hasten thee now for any pain I suffer,
But that thou kepst me from a glorious wreath
Which through this stormy way I would creep to,
And humbly kneeling with humility wear it.
Oh now I feel thee, blessed spirits I come
And witness for me, all these wounds and scarres,
I die a soldier in the Christian wars. dies.

Sap. I have seen thousands tortured, but nere yet
A constancy like this.

Harpax. I am twice damned.

Aug. Haste to thy place appointed cursed fiend,
In spite of hell this soldier's not thy prey,
It Is I have won, thou that have lost the day.
exit Angele the devil sinkes with lightning.
Die. I think the center of the earth be cracks,
Yet I still stand unmoved, and will go on,
The persecution that is here begun,
Through all the world with violence shall run.
flourish exeunt:
FINIS.

