A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS A COMOEDIE As it has been often acted at the
Phaenix in Drury Lane, by the Queens Majesty's servants.

The Author. PHILIP MASSINGER.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Henry Seyle, dwelling in S. Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Tigers head. Anno. M. DC. XXXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF CARNARVAN, Master Falconer of England.
MY GOOD LORD,
Pardon I beseech you my boldness, in presuming to shelter this Comoedie under
the wings of your Lordships favor, and protection, I am not ignorant (having
never yet deserved you in my service) that it cannot but meet with a severe
construction, if in the clemency of your noble disposition, you fashion not a
better defense for me, than I can fancy for my self. All I can allege is,
that diverse Italian Princes, and Lords of eminent rank in England, have not
disdained to receive, and read Poems of this Nature, nor am I wholly lost in my
hopes, but that your Honor (who have ever expressed your self a favorer, and
friend to the Muses) may vouchsafe, in your gracious acceptance of this trifle,
to give me encouragement, to present you with some labored work, and of a
higher strain hereafter, I was borne a devoted servant, to the thrice noble
Family of your incomparable Lady, and am most ambitious, but with a becoming
distance, to be known to your Lordship, which if you please to admit, I shall
embrace it as a bounty, that while I live shall oblige me to acknowledge you
for my noble Patron, and profess my self to be

Your Honors true servant Philip Massinger.

TO THE INGENIOVS AVTHOR MASTER PHILIP MASSINGER, ON HIS COMOEDIE Called, A new
way to pay old Debts.
It Is a rare charity, and thou could not
So proper to the time have found a plot:
Yet whilst you teach to pay, you lend, the age
We wretches live in; that to come, the stage,
The thronged audience that was thither brought
Invited by your fame, and to be taught
This lesson. All are grown indebted more,
And when they look for freedom ran in score.
It was a cruel courtesy to call
In hope of liberty, and then, enthr all.
The nobles are your bondmen Gentry, and
All besides those that did not understand.
They were no men of credit Banckroupts borne
Fit to be trusted with no stock, but scorn.
You have more wisely credited to such,
That though they cannot pay, can value much.
I am your debtor too, but to my shame
Repay you nothing back, but your own fame.
Henry Moody. miles.

To his friend the Author.
YOu may remember how you chid me when
I ranckt you equal with those glorious men;
Beaumont, and Fletcher: if you love not praise
You must for bear the publishing of plays.
The crafty Mazes of the cunning plot;
The polished phrase; the sweet expressions; got
Neither by theft, nor violence; the conceit
Fresh, and vnsullied; All is of weight,
Able to make the captive Reader know
I did but justice when I placed you so.
A shamefast Blushing would become the brow
Of some weak Virgin writer, we allow,
To you a kind of pride; and there where most,
Should blush at commendations, you should boast.
If any think I flatter, let him look
Of from my idle trifles on thy Book.
Thomas Iay. Miles.

Dramatis personae.
Louell. An English Lord. Sir Giles Ouerreach. A cruel extortioner. Welborne.A
prodigal. Alworth. A young gentleman page to Lord Louell. Greedy, A hungry
Justice of peace. Marrall. A Tearme-driuer. A creature of Sir Giles Ouerreach.
Order. Amble. Furnace. Watchall.Servants to the Lady Alworth. Will-doe. A
parson. Tapwell. An alehouse keeper. Three Creditors. The Lady Alworth. A Rich
Widdowe. Margaret. Ouerreach his daughter. Waiting Woman. Chambermaide. Froth.
Tapwells wife.
A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS: A COMEDY.
Actus primus, Scena prima:
Welborne. Tapwell. Froth.

WElborne. No bouze? nor no Tobacco?

Tapwell. Not a suck Sir,
Nor the remainder of a single can
Left by a drunken porter, all night palde too.

Froth. Not the dropping of the tappe for your mornings draught, Sir,
It Is verity I assure you.

Welborne. Verity, you brach!
The Devil turned precisian? Rogue what am I?

Tapwell. Troth durst I trust you with a looking glasle,
To let you see your trim shape, you would quit me,
And take the name your self.

Welborne. How! dog?

Tapwell. Even so, Sir.
And I must tell you if you but advance,
Your plimworth cloak, you shall be soon instructed
There dwells, and within call, if it please your worship,
A potent moharch, called the Constable,
That does command a Citadell, called the Stocks;
Whose guards are certain files of rusty Billmen,
Such as with great dexterity will hale
Your tattered, louzie -- -

Welborne. Rascal, slave.

Froth. No rage, Sir.

Tapwell. At his own peril, do not put your self
In too much heat, there being no water near
To quench your thirst, and sure for other liquor,
As mighty Ale, or Beer, they are things I take it
You must no more remember, not in a dream Sir.

Wellborne. Why thou unthankful villain dare thou talk thus?
Is not thy house, and all thou have my gift?

Tapwell. I find it not in chalk, and Timothy Tapwell
Does keep no other register.

Welborne. Am not I He
Whoseriots fed, and clothed thee? were thou not
Borne on my fathers land, and proud to be
A drudge in his house?

Tapwell. What I was Sir, it skills not,
What you are is apparent. Now for a farewel';
Since you talk of father, in my hope it will torment you,
I Will briefly tell your story. Your dead father,
My quondam master, was a man of worship,
Old Sir John Wellborne, Justice of peace, and quorum,
And stood fair to be Custos rotulorum;
Bare the whole sway of the shire; kep't a great house;
Relieved the poor, and so forth; but He dying,
And the twelve hundred a year coming to you,
Late Master Francis, but now forlorn Welborne.

Welborne. Slave, stop, or I shall lose my self.

Froth. Very hardly;
You cannot out of your way.

Tapwell. But to my story.
You were then a Lord of Akers; the prime gallant;
And I your vnder-butler; note the change now.
You had a merry time often. Hawks, and Hounds,
With choice of running horses; Mistrisses
Of all sorts, and all sizes; yet so hot
As their embraces made your Lordships melt;
Which your Uncle Sir Giles Ouerreach observing,
Resolving not to lose a drop of them,
On foolish mortgages, statutes, and bonds,
For a while supplied your looseness, and then left you.

Welborne. Some Curate has penned this inuectiue, mongrell,
And you have studied it.

Tapwell. I have not done yet:
Your land gone, and your credit not worth a token,
You grew the common borrower, no man escaped
Your paper-pelletts, from the Gentleman
To the beggars on high ways, that sold you switches
In your gallantry.

Welborne. I shall switch your brains out.

Tapwell. Where poor Tim Tapwell with a little stock
Some forty pounds or so, bought a small cottage,
Humbled my self to marriage with my Froth here;
Gave entertainment.

Welborne. Yes, to whores, and canters,
Clubbers by night.

Tapwell. True, but they brought in profit,
And had a gift to pay for what they called for,
And stuck not like your mastership. The poor Income
I gleaned from them, has made me in my parish,
Thought worthy to be Scauinger, and in time
May rise to be Ouerseer of the poor;
Which if I do, on your petition Welborne,
I may allow you thirteen pence a quarter,
And you shall thank my worship.

Welborne. Thus you doggebolt,
And thus.
beats, and kicks him.
Tapwell. Cry out for help.

Welborne. Stir and thou die:
Your potent Prince the Constable shall not save you.
Hear me ungrateful hellhound; did not I
Make purses for you? Then you licked my boots,
And thought your holy day cloak too course to cleane'em.
'Twas I that when I heard thee swear, if ever
Thou could arrive at forty pounds, thou would
Live like an Emperor: 'twas I that gave it,
In ready gold. Deny this, wretch.

Tapwell. I must Sir,
For from the tavern to the taphouse, all
On forfeiture of their licenses stand bound,
Never to remember who their best guests were,
If they grew poor like you.

Welborne. They are well rewarded
That beggar themselves to make such cuckolds rich.
Thou viper thanklesse viper; impudent bawd!
But since you are grow'n forgetful, I will help
Your memory, and tread thee into mortar:
Not leave one bone unbroken.

Tapwell. Oh.

Froth. Ask mercy.

Enter Allworth. Welborne. I will not be granted.

Alworth. Hold, for my sake hold.
Deny me, Frank? they are not worth your anger.

Welborne. For once thou have redeemed them from this scepter:
His Cudegell. But let them vanish, creeping on their knees,
And if they grumble, I revoke my pardon.

Froth. This comes of your prating husband, you presumed
On your ambling wit, and must use your glib tongue
Though you are beaten lame for it.

Tapwell. Patience Froth.
There Is law to cure our bruizes.
They go off on their hands, and knees.
Welborne. Sent to your mother?

Alworth. My Lady, Frank, my patroness! my all!
She Is such a mourner for my fathers death,
And in her love to him, so favors me,
That I cannot pay too much observance to her.
There are few such stepdames.

Welborne. It Is a noble widow,
And keeps her reputation pure, and clear
From the least taint of infamy; her life
With the splendor of her actions leaves no tongue
To Envy, or Detraction. Prithee tell me;
Has she no suitors?

Alworth. Even the best of the shire, Frank,
My Lord excepted. Such as sue, and send,
And send, and sue again, but to no purpose.
Their frequent visits have not gained her presence;
Yet she is so far from fullennesse, and pride,
That I dare undertake you shall meet from her
A liberal entertainment. I can give you
A catalogue of her suitors names.

Welborne. Forbear it,
While I give you good counsel. I am bound to it;
Thy father was my friend, and that affection
I bore to him, in right descends to thee;
Thou art a handsome, and a hopeful youth,
Nor will I have the least affront stick on thee,
If I with any danger can prevent it.

Alworth. I thank your noble care, but pray you in what?
Do I run the hazard?

Wellborne. Art thou not in love?
Put it not off with wonder.

Allworth. In love at my years?

Welborne. You think you walk in clouds, but are transrent,
I have heard all, and the choice that you have made;
And with my finger can point out the North star,
By which the loadstone of your follie's guided.
And to confirm this true, what think you of
Fair Margaret the only child, and heir
Of Cormorant Ouerreach? does it blush? and start,
To hear her only named? blush at your want
Of wit, and reason.

Alworth. You are too bitter Sir.

Welborne. Wounds of this nature are not to be cured
With balmes, but corrosiues. I must be plain:
Art thou scarce manumiz'd from the porters lodge,
And yet sworn servant to the pantophle,
And dare thou dream of marriage? I fear
'Twill be concluded for impossible,
That there is now, nor ere shall be hereafter,
A handsome page, or players boy of fourteen,
But either loves a Wench, or drabs love him;
Court-waiters not exempted.

Alworth. This is madness.
How ere you have discovered my intents,
You know my aims are lawful, and ifeuer
The Queen of flowers, the glory of the spring,
The sweetest comfort to our smell, the rose
Sprang from an envious brier, I may infer
There Is such disparitie in their conditions,
Between the goddess of my soul, the daughter,
And the base churl her father.

Welborne. Grant this true
As I believe it; can thou ever hope
To enjoy a quiet bed with her, whose father
Ruined thy state?

Alworth. And yours too.

Welborne. I confess it.
True I must tell you as a friend, and freely,
That where impossibilities are apparent,
It Is indiscretion to nourish hopes.
Can thou imagine, (let not self-love blind thee)
That Sir Giles Ouerreach, that to make her great
In swelling titles, without touch of conscience,
Will cut his neighbors throat, and I hope his own too;
Will ere consent to make herthine? Give over
And think of some course suitable to thy rank,
And prosper in it.

Alworth. You have well advised me.
But in the mean time, you that are so studious
Of my affairs, wholly neglect your own.
Remember your self, and in what plight you are.

Welborne. No matter, no matter.

Alworth. Yes, it is much material:
You know my fortune, and my means, yet something,
I can spare from my self, to help your wants.

Welborne. How Is this?

Alworth. Nay be not angry. There Is eight pieces
To put you in better fashion.

Welborne. Money from thee?
From a boy? a stipendary? one that lives
At the devotion of a stepmother,
And the uncertain favor of a Lord?
I Will eat my arms first. Howsoever blind fortune
Has spent the utmost of her malice on me;
Though I am vomited our of an Alehouse,
And thus accoutred; know not where to eat,
Or drink, or sleep, but underneath this Canopie;
Although I thank thee, I despise thy offer.
And as I in my madness broke my state,
Without the assistance of another brain,
In my right wits I Will piece it; at the worst
Dye thus, and be forgotten.

Alworth. A strange humor.

Exeunt. Actus primi, Scena secunda.
Order. Amble. Furnace. Watchall.
ORder. Set all things right, or as my name is Order,
And by this staff of office that commands you;
This chain, and dubble ruff, Symboles of power;
Who ever misses in hi function,
For one whole week makes forfeiture of his breakefast,
And privilege in the wine-seller.

Amble. You are merry
Good Master Steward.

Furnace. Let him; I Will be angry.

Amble. Why fellow Furnace, it is not twelve a clock yet,
Nor dinner taking up, then it is allowed
Cooks by their places may be choleric.

Furnace. You think you have spoke wisely goodman Amble,
My Lady's goe-before.

Order. Nay, nay; no wrangling.

Furnace. 'Twit me with the Authority of the kitchen?
At all hours, and all places I Will be angry;
And thus prouok'd, when I am at my prayers,
I will be angry.

Amble. There was no hurt meant.

Furnace. I am friends with thee, and yet I will be angry.

Order. With whom?

Furnace. No matter whom: yet now I think on it
I am angry with my Lady.

Watchall. Heaven forbid, man.

Order. What cause has she given thee?

Furnace. Cause enough Master Steward.
I was entertained by her to please her palate,
And till she forswore eating I performed it.
Now since our master, noble Alworth died,
Though I crack my brains to find out tempting sawces.
And raise fortifications in the pastrie,
Such as might serve for modells in the Low Countries,
Which if they had been practiced at Breda,
Spinola might have thrown his cap at it, and never took it.

Amble. But you had wanted matter there to work on.

Furnace. Matter? with fix eggs, and a strike of rie-meale
I had kep't the Town, till doomesday, perhaps longer.

Order. But what is this to your pet against my Lady?

Furnace. What Is this? Marry this, when I am three parts roasted,
And the fourth part parboyld, to prepare her viands,
She keeps her chamber, dines with a panada,
Or water-gruell; my sweat never thought on.

Order. But your art is seen in the dining-roome.

Furnace. By whom?
By such as pretend love to her, but come,
To feed upon her. Yet of all the Harpies,
That do devour her, I am out of charity
With none so much, as the thinne-gutted Squire
That Is stolen into commission.

Order. Justice Greedy:

Furnace. The same, the same. Meate's cast away upon him,
It never thriues. He holds this Paradoxe,
Who eats not well, can never do justice well:
His stomacke's as insatiate as the grave,
Or strumpetts ravenous appetites

Watchall. One knockes.
Alworth knockes, and enters.
Order. Our late young master.

Amble. Welcome, Sir.

Furnace. Your hand,
If you have a stomach, a cold bake-meate's ready.

Order. His fathers picture in little.

Furnace. We are all your servants.

Amble. In you he lives.

Alworth. At once, my thanks to all
This is yet some comfort. Is my Lady stirring?

Enter the Lady Alworth, Waiting woman, Chambermaid. Order. Her presence answer
for us.

Lady. Sort those silks well?
I Will take the air alone.

Exeunt Waiting Woman; and Chamber-maide. Furnace. You air, and air,
But will you never taste but spoonemeate more?
To what use serve I?

Lady. Prithee be not angry,
I shall er'e long: In The mean time, there is gold
To buy thee aprons, and a summer suite.

Furnace. I am appeased, and Furnace now grows Cook.

Lady. And as I gave directions, if this morning
I am visited by any, entertaine'em
As heretofore: but say in my excuse
I am indisposed.

Order. I shall, Madam.

Lady. Do, and leave me.
Nay stay you Alworth.

Exeunt Order. Amble, Furnace; Watchall. Alworth. I shall gladly grow here,
To wait onyour commands.

Lady. So soon turn d Courtier.

Alworth Style not that Courtship Madam, which is duty,
Purchased on your part.

Lady. Well, you shall or'ecome;
I Will not contend in words. How is it with
Your noble master?

Alworth. Ever like himself;
No scruple lessend in the full weight of honor,
He did command me (pardon my presumption)
As his unworthy deputy to kiss
Your Ladyships fair hands.

Lady. I am honored in
His favor to me. Does he hold his purpose
For the Low-Countreyes?

Alworth. Constantly good Madam,
But he will in person first present his service.

Lad. And how approve you of his course? you are yet,
Like virgin parchement capable of any
Inscription vicious, or honorable.
I will not force your will, but leave you free
To your own election.

Alworth. Any form, you please,
I will put on: but might I make my choice
With humble Emulation I would follow
The path my Lord marks to me.

Lady. It Is well answered,
And I commend your spirit: you had a father
(Blessed be his memory) that some few hours
Before the will of heaven took him from me,
Who did commend you, by the dearest ties
Of perfect love between us, to my charge:
And therefore what I speak, you are bound to hear
With such respect, as if he lived in me,
He was my husband, and how ere you are not
Son of my womb, you may be of my love,
Provided you deserve it.

Allworth. I have found you
(Most honored Madam) the best mother to me,
And with my utmost strengths of care, and service,
Will labor that you never may repent
Your bounties showered upon me.

Lady. I much hope it.
These were your fathers words. If ere my Son
Follow the war, tell him it is a school
Where all the principles tending to honor,
Are taught if truly followed: But for such
As repair thither, as a place, in which
They do presume they may with license practice
Their lusts, and riots, they shall never merit
The noble name of soldiers. To dare boldly
In a fair cause, and for the Countries safety
To run upon the cannons mouth undaunted;
To obey their leaders, and shun mutenies;
To bear, with patience, the winters cold,
And summers scorching heat, and not to faint
When plenty of provision fails, with hunger,
Are the essential parts make up a soldier,
Not swearing dice, or drinking.

Alworth. There Is no syllable
You speak, but is to me an Oracle,
Which but to doubt, were impious.

Lady. To conclude;
Beware ill company, for often men
Are like to those with whom they do converse,
And from one man I warned you, and that is Welborne:
Not cause He Is poor, that rather claims your pity,
But that he is in his manners so debauched,
And has to vicious courses sold himself.
It Is true your father loved him, while he was
Worthy the loving, but if he had lived
To have seen him as he is, he had cast him off
As you must do.

Alworth. I shall obey in all things.

Lady. You follow me to my chamber, you shall have gold
To furnish you like my son, and still supplied,
As I hear from you.

Alworth. I am still your creature.

Exeunt. Actus primi, Scena tertia.
Ouerreach. Greedy. Order. Amble. Furnace. Watchall. Marrall.
Greedy. Not to be seen?

Ouerreach. Still cloistered up? Her reason,
I hope assures her, though she make her self
Close prisoner ever for her husbands loss,
'Twill not recover him.

Order. Sir, it is her will,
Which we that are her servants ought to serve it,
And not dispute. How ere, you are nobly welcome,
And if you please to stay, that you may think so;
There came not fix days since from Hull, a pipe
Ofrich Canarie, which shall spend it self
For my Ladies honor.

Greedy. Is it of the right race?

Order. Yes, Master Greedy.

Amble. How his mouth runs over!

Furnace. I Will make it run, and run. Save your good worship.

Greedy. Honest Master Cook, thy hand, again. How I love thee:
Are the good dishes still in being? speak boy.

Furnace. If you have a mind to feed, there is a chine
Of beef well seasoned.

Greedy. Good!

Furnace. A pheasant larded.

Greedy. That I might now give thanks for it.

Furnace. Other Kukeshawes.
Besides there came last might from the forest of Sherwood
The fattest stagge I ever cooked.

Greedy. A stagge man?

Furnace. A stagge Sir part of it prepared for dinner,
And baked in puffpast.

Greedy. Puffepast too, Sir Giles!
A ponderous chine of beef! a pheasant larded!
And red dear too Sir Giles, and baked in puffepast!
All business set aside; let us give thanks here.

Furnace. How the lean Sceleton's raped!

Ouerreach. You know we cannot.

Marrall. Your Worships are to sit on a commission,
And if you fail to come, you lose the cause.

Greedy. Cause me no causes. I Will proue't, for such a dinner
We may put off a commission: you shall find it
Henrici decimo quarto.

Ouerreach. Fie Master Greedy.
Will you loose me a thousand pounds for a dinner?
No more for shame. We must forget the belly,
When we think of profit.

Greedy. Well, you shall or'erule me
I could even cry now. Do you hear master Cook.
Send but a corner of that immortal pastie,
And I, in thankfulness, will by your boy
Send you a brace of three-pences.

Furn. Will you be so prodigal?

Enter Welborne. Over. Remember me to your Lady. Who have we here?

Welb. You know me:

Over. I did once, but now I will not,
Thou art no blood of mine. Auant thou beggar,
If ever thou presume to own me more;
I Will have thee cag'd, and whipped.

Greed. I Will grant the warrant,
Think of Piecorner, Furnace.

Exeunt Ouerreach. Greedy. Marrall. Watch. Will you out Sir?
I wonder how you durst creep in.

Ord. This is rudeness,
And saucy impudence.

Amb. Cannot you stay
To be served among your fellows from the basket,
But you must presle in to the hall?

Furn. Prithee vanish
Into some outhouse, thought it be the piggestie,
My skullion shall come to thee.
Enter Allworth.
Welb. This is rare:
Oh here is Tom. Alworth Tom.

Alw. We must be strangers,
Nor would I have you seen here for a million.
Exit Alworth
Welb. Better, and better. He contemnes me too?
Enter Woman and Chambermaide.
Wom. Foh what a smell's here! what thing's this?

Chamb. A creature
Made out of the privy. Let us hence for loves sake,
Or I shall sown.

Wom. I begin to faint already.

Exeunt woman, and Chambermaide. Watch. Will know your way?

Amb. Or shall we teach it you,
By the head, and shoulders?

Welb. No: I will not stir.
Do you mark, I will not. Let me see the wretch
That dares attempt to force me. Why you slaves,
Created only to make legs, and cringe;
To carry in a dish, and shift a trencher;
That have not sou'es only to hope a blessing
Beyond black iackes, or flagons; you that were borne
Only to consume meat, and drink, and batten
Upon reuersions: who aduances? who
Shows me the way?

Ord. My Lady.
Enter Lady. Woman. Chambermaide.
Chamb. Here Is the Monster.

Wom. Sweet Madam, keep your glove to your nose.

Chamb. Or let me,
Fetch some perfumes may be predominant,
You wrong your self else.

Welb. Madam, my designs
Bear me to you.

Lad. To me?

Welb. And though I have met with
But ragged entertainment from your grooms here,
I hope from you to receive that noble usage,
As may become the true friend of your husband,
And then I shall forget these.

Lady. I am amazed,
To see, and hear this rudeness. Dare thou think
Though sworn, that it can ever find belief,
That I, who to the best men of this Country,
Denied my presence since my husbands death,
Can fall so low, as to change words with thee?
Thou Son of infamy, forbear my house,
And know, and keep the distance that is between us,
Or, though it be against my gentler temper,
I shall take order you no more shall be
An eyesore to me.

Welb. Scorn me not good Lady;
But as in form you are Angelical
Imitate the heavenly natures, and vouchsafe
At the least awhile to heareme. You will grant
The blood that runs in this arm, is as noble
As that which fills your veins; those costly jewels,
And those rich clothes you wear; your men's observance,
And women's flattery, are in you no virtues,
Nor these rags, with my poverty, in me vices.
You have a fair fame, and I know deserve it,
Yet Lady I must say in nothing more,
Than in the pious sorrow you have show'n
For your late noble husband.

Ord. How she starts!

Furn. And hardly can keep finger from the eye
To hear him named.

Lady. Have you ought else to say?

Welb. That husband Madam, was once in his fortune
Almost as low, as I. Want, debts, and quarrels
Lay heavy on him: let it not be thought
A boast in me, though I say, I releeu'd him.
'Twas I that gave him fashion; mine the sword
That did on all occasions second his;
I brought him on, and off with honor, Lady:
And when in all men's judgments he was sunk,
And in his own hopes not to be bung'd up,
I stepped unto him, took him by the hand,
And set him upright.

Furn. Are not we base Rogues
That could forget this?

Welb. I confess you made him
Master of your estate, nor could your friends
Though he brought no wealth with him, blame you for it.
For he had a shape, and to that shape a mind
Made up of all parts, either great, or noble,
So winning a behavior, not to be
Resisted, Madam.

Lad. It Is most true, He had.

Welb. For his sake then, in that I was his friend,
Do not contemn me.

Lad. For what is past, excuse me,
I will redeem it. Order give the Gentleman
A hundred pounds.

Welb. No Madam, on no terms:
I will nor beg, nor borrow six pence of you,
But be supplied elsewhere, or want thus ever.
Only one suite I make, which you deny not
To strangers: and it is this.
Whispers to her.
Lad. Fie, nothing else?

Welb. Nothing; unless you please to charge your servants,
To throw away a little respect upon me.

Lad. What you demand is yours.

Welb. I thank you, Lady.
Now what can be wrought out of such a suite,
Is yet in supposition; I have said all,
When you please you may retire. Nay, all is forgotten,
And for a luckie Omen to my project,
Shake hands, and end all quarrels in the cellar.

Ord. Agreed, Agreed.

Furn. Still merry master Welborne.

Exeunt. Actus secundi, Scena prima.
Ouerreach. Marrall.
OVerreach. He Is gone I warrant thee; this
Commission crushed him.

Marrall. Your worship have the way out, and never miss
To squeeze these unthrifts into air: and yet
The chapp-falne Justice did his part, returning
For your advantage the Certificate
Against his conscience, and his knowledge too,
(With your good favor) to the utter ruin
Of the poor Farmer.

Over. 'Twas for these good ends
I made him a Justice. He that bribes his belly,
Is certain to command his soul.

Mar. I wonder
(Still with your license) why, your Worship having
The power to put this thinne-Gut in commission,
You are not in it your self?

Over. Thou art a fool;
In being out of Office I am out of danger
Where if I were a Justice, besides the trouble,
I might, or out of wilfulness, or error,
Run my self finely into a Praemunire,
And so become a prey to the Informer.
No, I Will have non often; it is enough I keep
Greedy at my devotion: so he serve
My purposes, let him hang, or damn, I care not.
Friend-ship is but a word.

Mar. You are all wisdom.

Over. I would be worldly wise, for the other wisdom
That does prescribe us a well-gouern'd life,
And to do right to others, as our selves,
I value not an Atome.

Mar. What course take you
With your good patience to hedge in the Manor
Of your neighbor master Frugall? as it is said,
He will nor sell, nor borrow, nor exchange,
And his land lying in the midst of your many Lordshipps,
Is a foul blemish.

Over. I have thought on it, Marrall,
And it shall take. I must have all men sellers,
And I the only Purchaser.

Mar. It Is most fit Sir.

Over. I Will therefore buy some Cottage near his, Manor,
Which done, I Will make my men break open his fences;
Ride over his standing corn, and in the night
Set fire on his barnes; or break his cattells legs.
These Trespasses draw on Suites, and Suites expenses,
Which I can spare, but will soon beggar Him.
When I have harried him thus two, or three year,
Though he sue in forma pauperis, in spite
Of all his thrift, and care he will grow behind-hand.

Mar. The best I ever heard; I could adore you.

Over. Then with the favor of my man of Law,
I will pretend some title: Want will force him
To put it to arbitrament: then if he sell
For half the value, he shall have ready money,
And I possess his land.

Mar. It Is above wonder!
Welborne was apt to sell, and needed not
These fine arts Sir to hook him in.

Over. Well thought on.
This varlet Marrall lives too long, to vpbraide me
With my close cheat put upon him. Will nor cold,
Nor hunger kill him?

Mar. I know not what to thinkeon't.
I have used all means, and the last night I caused
His host the Tapster to turn him out of doors;
And have been since with all your friends, and tenant's,
And on the forfeit of your favor charged him,
Though a crust of mouldie bread would keep him fro staruing
Yet they should not relieve him. This is done, Sir.

Over. That was something, Marrall, but thou must go further,
And suddenly Marrall.

Mar. Where, and when you please Sir.

Over. I would have thee seek him out, and if thou can
Persuade him that it is better steal, than beg.
Then if I prove he has but robbed a Henroost,
Not all the world shall save him from the gallows.
Do any thing to work him to despair,
And it is thy Masterpeece.

Mar. I will do my best, Sir.

Over. I am now on my maine work with the Lord Louell,
The gallant minded, popular Lord Louell;
The minion of the peoples love. I hear
He Is come into the Country, and my aims are
To infinuate my self into his knowledge,
And then inuit him to my house.

Mar. I have you.
This points at my young Mistress.

Over. She must part with
That humble title, and write honorable,
Right honorable Marrall, my right honorable daughter;
If all I have, or e're shall get will do it.
I will have her well attended, there are Ladies
Of errant Knights decayed, and brought so low,
That for cast clothes, and meat, will gladly serve her.
And it is my glory, though I come from the City,
To have their issue, whom I have undone,
To kneel to mine, as bond-slaues.

Mar. It Is fit state, Sir.

Over. And therefore, I Will not have a Chambermaide
That ties her shoes, orany meaner office,
But such whose Fathers were Right worshipful.
It Is a rich Man's pride, there having ever been
More than a Fewde, a strange Antipathie
Between us, and true Gentry.

Enter Welborne. Mar. See, who is here, Sir.

Over. Hence monster; Prodigy.

Welb. Sir your Wifes Nephew,
She, and my Father tumbled in one belly.

Over. Avoid my sight, thy breath's infectious, Rogue.
I shun thee as a Leprosy, or the Plague.
Come hither Marrall, this is the time to work him.

Mar. I warrant you, Sir.

Exit Over. Welb. By this light I think he is mad.

Mar. Mad? had you took compassion on your self,
You long since had been mad.

Welb. You have took a course
Between you, and my venerable Uncle,
To make me so.

Mar. The more pale spirited you,
That would not be instructed. I swear deeply.

Welb. By what?

Mar. By my Religion.

Welb. Thy religion!
The Devils Creed, but what would you have done?

Mar. Had there been but one tree in all the Shire,
Nor any hope to compass a penny Halter,
Before, like you, I had outliu'd my fortunes,
A With had sern'd my turn to hang my self.
I am zealous in your cause: pray you hang your self,
And presently, as you love your credit.

Welb. I thank you.

Mar. Will you stay till you dye in a ditch? Or lice devour you?
Or if you dare not do the feate your self,
But that you will put the state to charge, and trouble,
Is there no purse to be cut? house to be broken?
Or market Women with eggs that you may murder,
And so dispatch the business.

Welb. Here Is variety
I must confess; but I Will accept of none
Of all your gentle offers, I assure you.

Mar. Why, have you hope ever to eat again?
Or drink? Or be the master of three farthings?
If you like not hanging, drown your self, take some course
For your reputation.

Welb. 'Twill not do; dear tempter,
With all the Rhetorike the fien'd has taught you.
I am as far as thou art from despair,
Nay, I have Confidence, which is more than Hope,
To live, and suddenly better than ever.

Mar. Ha! Ha! these Castles you build in the air
Will not persuade me, or to give, or lend
A token to you.

Welb. I Will be more kind to thee.
Come thou shall dine with me.

Mar. With you.

Welb. Nay more, dine gratis,

Mar. Under what hedge I pray you? Or at whose cost?
Are they Padders? or Abram-men, that are your consorts?

Welb. Thou art incredulous, but thou shall dine
Not alone at her house, but with a gallant Lady,
With me, and with a Lady.

Mar. Lady! what Lady?
With the Lady of the Lake, or Queen of Fairies?
For I know, it must be an enchanted dinner.

Welb. With the Lady Alworth, knave.

Mar. Nay, now there is hope
Thy brain is cracked.

Welb. Mark there, with what respect
I am entertained.

Mar. With choice no doubt of Dogge-whippes.
Why do thou ever hope to pafse her Porter?

Welb. It Is not far off, go with me: trust thine own eyes

Mar. Troth in my hope, or my assurance rather
To see thee curuet, and mount like a Dog in a blanket
If ever thou presume to pass her threshold,
I will endure thy company.

Welb. Come along then.

Exeunt. Actus secundi, Scena secunda.
Alworth. Waiting Woman. Chambermaide. Order. Amble. Furnace. Watchall.
WOman. Could you not command your leisure one hour longer?

Chamberm. Or half an hour?

Alw. I have told you what my have is:
Besides being now another, not mine own,
How e're I much desire to enjoy you longer,
My duty suffers, if to please my self
I should neglect my Lord.

Wom. Pray you do me the favor
To put these few Quince-cakes into your pocket,
They are of mine own preserving.

Chamb. And this Marmulade;
It Is comfortable for your stomach,

Wom. And at parting
Excuse me if I beg a farewell from you.

Chamb. You are still before me. I move the same suite
Sir.
Kisses'em severally.
Furn. How greedy these Chamberers are of a beardlesse chinne!
I thin the Titts will ravish him.

Alw. My service
To both.

Wom. Ours waits on you.

Chamb. And shall do ever.

Ord. You are my Ladies charge, be therefore careful
That you sustain your parts.

Wom. We can bear I warrant you.

Exeunt Woman and Chambermaide. Furn. Here; drink it off, the ingredients are
cordial,
And this the true Elixir; It has boild
Since midnight for you. It Is the Quintessence
Of five Cocks of the game, ten dozen of Sparrowes,
Knuckells of Veale, Potato roots, and Marrow;
Currall, and Ambergreece: were you two years elder,
And I had a Wife, or gamesame Mistrisse
I durst trust you with neither: You need not bait
After this I warrant you; though your iourney's long,
You may ride on the strength of this till to morrow morning.

Alw. Your courtesies ouerwhelme me: I much grieve
To part from such true friends, and yet find comfort;
My attendance on my honorable Lord
(Whose resolution holds to visit my Lady)
Will speedily bring me back.
Knocking at the gate; Marrall and Welborne within.
Mar. Dare thou venture further?

Welb. Yes, yes, and knock again.

Ord. It Is he; disperse.

Amb. Perform it bravely.

Furn. I know my Cue, nere doubt me.
They go off several ways.
Watch. Beast that I wasto make you stay: most welcome,
You were long since expected.

Welb. Say so much
To my friend I pray you.

Watch. For your sake I will Sir.

Mar. For his sake!

Welb. Mum; this is nothing.

Mar. More than ever,
I would have believed though I had found it in my Primer.

Alw. When I have given you reasons for my late harshnesse,
You Will pardon, and excuse me: for, believe me
Though now I part abruptly, in my service
I will deserve it.

Mar. Service! with a vengeance!

Welb. I am satisfied: farewell Tom.

Alw. All joy stay with you.

Exit Alw. Enter Amble. Amb. You are happily encountered: I yet never
Presented one so welcome, as I know
You will be to my Lady.

Mar. This is some vision;
Or sure these men are mad, to worship a Dunghill;
It cannot be a truth.

Welb. Be still a Pagan,
An unbelieving Infidel, be so Miscreant,
And meditate on blanketts, and on doggewhippes.

Enter Furnace. Furn. I am glad you are come, until I know your pleasure.
I knew not how to serve up my Ladies dinner.

Mar. His pleasure; is it possible?

Welb. What Is thy will?

Furn. Marry Sir, I have some Growse, and Turkey chicken,
Some Rayles, and Quails, and my Lady willed me ask you
What kind of sawces best affect your palate,
That I may use my utmost skill to please it.

Mar. The Diuell's entered this cook, sauce for his palate!
That on my knowledge, for almost this twelve month,
Durst wish but cheeseparings, and brown bread on Sundays.

Welb. That way I like 'em best.

Furn. It shall be done Sir.

Exit Furnace. Welb. What think you of the hedge we shall dine under?
Shall we feed gratis?

Mar. I know not what to think;
Pray you make me not mad.

Enter Order. Ord. This place becomes you not;
Pray you walk Sir, to the dining room.

Welb. I am well here
'Till her Ladyship quitts her chamber.

Mar. Well here say you?
It Is a rare change! but yesterday you thought
Your self well in a Barn, wrapped up in Pease-straw.

Enter Woman, and Chamber-maide. Wom. O Sir, you are wished for.

Chamb. My Lady dreamed Sir of you.

VVom. And the first command she gave, after she rose
Was (her devotions done) to give her notice
When you approch'd here.

Chamb. Which is done on my virtue.

Mar. I shall be converted, I begin to grow
Into a new belief, which Saints, nor Angels
Could have woone me to have faith in.

VVom. Sir, my Lady.

Enter Lady. Lady. I come to meet you, and languish'd till I saw you.
This first kiss is for form; I allow a second
To such a friend.

Mar. To such a friend! Heaven bless me!

VVelb. I am wholly yours, yet Madam, if you please
To grace this Gentleman with a salute.

Mar. Salute me at his bidding.

VVelb. I shall receive it
As a most high favor.

Lady. Sir, you may command me.

VVelb. Run backward from a Lady? and such a Lady?

Mar. To kiss her foot is to poor, me a favor;
I am unworthy of
(Offers to kiss her foot.
Lady. Nay, pray you rise,
And since you are so humble, I Will exalt you
You shall dine with me to day, at mine own table.

Mar. Your Ladyships table? I am not good enough
To sit at your Stewards board.

Lady. You are too modest:
I will not be denied.

Enter Furnace. Furn. Will you still be babbling;
Till your meat freeze on the table? the old trick still.
My Art never thought on.

Lady. Your arm, Master VVelborne:
Nay keep us company.

Mar. I was never so graced.

Exeunt VVelborne. Lady. Amble. Marrall. Woman. Order. So we have played our
parts, and are come off well.
But if I know the mystery why my Lady
Consented to it, or why Master VVelborne
Desired it, may I perish.

Furn. Would I had
The roasting of his heart, that cheated him,
And forces the poor gentleman to these shifts,
By Fire (for Cooks are Persians, and swear by it).
Of all the griping, and extorting tyrants
I ever heard, or read of, I never met
A match to Sir Giles Ouerreach.

VVatch. What will you take
To tell him so fellow Furnace?

Furn. Just as much
As my throat is worth, for that would be the price on it.
To have a usurer that starues himself,
And wears a cloak of one and twenty years
On a suit of fourteen groates, bought of the Hangman,
To grow rich, and then purchase, is too common:
But this Sir Giles feeds high, keeps many servants,
Who must at his command do any outrage;
Rich in his habit; vast in his expenses;
Yet he to admiration still increases
In wealth, and Lordships.

Ord. He frights men out of their Estates,
And breaks through all Law-netts, made to curb ill men,
As they were cobwebbs. No man dares reprove him.
Such a spirit to dare, and power to do, were never
Lodged so unluckily.

Amb. Ha, ha; I shall burst.

Enter Amble. Ord. Contain thy self man.

Furn. Or make us partakers
Of your sudden mirth.

Amb. Ha, ha, my Lady has got
Such a guest at her table, this terme-driuer Marrall,
This suippe of an Attorney.

Furn. What of him man?

Amb. The knave thinks still he is at the cooks shop in Ramme-alley,
Where the Clerks divide, and the Elder is to choose;
And feeds so slouenly.

Furn. Is this all?

Amb. My Lady
Drank to him sor fashion sake, or to please master VVelborne.
As I live he rises, and takes up a dish,
In which there were some remnants of a boild capon,
And pledges her in whitebroth.

Furn. Nay, it is like,
The rest of his tribe.

Amb. And when I brought him wine,
He leaves his stool, and after a leg or two
Most humbly thanks my worship.

Ord. Rose already.

Amb. I shall be chid.

Enter Lady. Welborne. Marrall. Furn. My Lady frowns.

Lady. You wait well.
Let me have no more of this, I observed your icering.
Sir, I Will have you know, whom I think worthy
To sit at my table, be he never so mean,
When I am present, is not your companion.

Ord. Nay she will preserve what is due to her.

Furn. This refreshing
Follows your flux of laughter.

Lady. You are master.
Of your own will. I know so much of manners
As not to enquire your purposes, in a word
To me you are ever welcome, as to a house
That is your own.

Velb. Mark that.

Mar. With reverence Sir,
And it like your Worship.

Welb. Trouble your self no farther;
Dear Madam; my heart's full of zeal, and service,
How ever in my language I am sparing.
Come master Marrall.

Mar. I attend your Worship.

Exeunt Welb. Mar. Lad. I see in your looks you are sorry, and you know me
An easy mistress: be merry; I have forgot all.
Order, and Furnace come with me, I must give you
Further directions.

Ord. What you please.

Furn. We are ready.

Actus secundi, Scena tertia.
Welborne. Marrall.
WElborne. I think I am in a good way.

Marrall. Good Sir; the best way.
The certain best way.

Welb. There are casualties
That men are subject too.

Mar. You are aboue'em,
And as you are already Worshipful,
I hope e're long you will increase in Worship,
And be Right worshipful.

Welb. Prithee do not flowt me.
What I shall be, I shall be. Is It for your ease,
You keep your hat off?

Mar. Ease, and it like your Worship?
I hope Jacke Marrall shall not live so long,
To prove himself such an unmannerly beast,
Though it hail Hazell Nutts, as to be covered
When your Worshipp's present.

Welb. Is not this a true Rogue? aside.
That out of mere hope of a future cosnage
Can turn thus suddenly: it is rank already.

Mar. I know your Worshipp's wise, and needs no counsel:
Yet if in my desire to do you service,
I humbly offer my advice, (but still
Under correction) I hope I shall not
Incur your high displeasure.

Welb. No; speak freely.

Mar. Then in my judgment Sir, my simple judgment,
(Still with your Worshipps favor) I could wish you
A better habit, for this cannot be,
But much distasteful to the noble Lady.
(I say no more) that loves you, for this morning
To me (and I am but a Swine to her)
Before the assurance of her wealth perfumed you;
You sauour'd not of amber.

VVelb, I do now then?
Kisses the end of his cudgel,
Mar. This your Battoone has got a touch of it.
Yet if you please for change I have twenty pounds here
Which, out of my true love I presently
Lay down at your Worshipps feet: 'twill serve to buy you
A riding suite.

Welb. But where is the horse?

Mar. My Gelding
Is at your service: nay, you shall ride me
Before your Worship shall be put to the trouble
To walk a foot. Alas, when you are Lord
Of this Ladies manor (as I know you will be)
You may with the lease of glebe land, called knaues-acre,
A place I would manure, requite your vassal.

Welb. I thank thy love: but must make no use of it,
What Is twenty pounds?

Mar. It Is all that I can make, Sir.

Welb. Do thou think though I want clothes I could not have 'em,
For one word to my Lady?

Mar. As I know not that.

Welb. Come I Will tell thee a secret, and so leave thee.
I Will not give her the advantage, though she be
A gallant minded Lady, after we are married
(There being no woman, but is sometimes froward)
To hit me in the teeth, and say she was forced
To buy my wedding clothes, and took me on
With a plain Riding-suite, and an ambling Nagge.
No, I Will be furnished something like my self.
And so farewell; for thy suite touching Knaves acre.
When it is mine it is thine.

Mar. I thank your Worship. Exit Welb.
How was coozen'd in the calculation
Of this man's fortune, my master coozen'd too
Whose pupil I am in the art of undoing men,
For that is our profession; well, well, master Welborne
You are of a sweet nature, and fit again to be cheated:
Which, if the fates please, when you are possessed
Of the land, and Lady, you sans question shall be.
I Will presently think of the means.
Walk by mafing, Enter Ouerreach.
Over. Sirrah, take my horse.
I Will walk to get me an appetite? it is but a mile,
And Exercise will keep me, from being pursie.
Ha! Marrall! is he coniuring! perhaps
The knave has wrought the prodigal to do
Some outrage on himself, and now he feels
Compunction in his conscience for it: no matter
So it be done, Marrall.

Marrall. Sir,

Over. How succeed we
In our plot on Welborne?

Mar. Never better Sir.

Over. Has he hanged, or drowned himself?

Mar. No Sir, he lives.
Lives once more to be made a prey to you,
A greater prey than ever.

Over. Art thou in thy wits?
If thou art reveal this miracle, and briefly.

Mar. A Lady Sir, is fallen in love with him.

Over. With him? what Lady?

Mar. The rich Lady Alworth.

Over. Thou Dolt; how dare thou speak this?

Mar. I speak truth;
And I do so but once a year, unless
It be to you Sir, we dined with her Ladyship,
I thank his Worship.

Over. His Worship!

Mar. As I live Sir;
I dined with him, at the great Ladies table,
Simple as I stand here, and saw when, she kissed him,
And would at his request, have kissed me too,
But I was not so audacious, as some Youths are,
And dare do any thing be it never so absurd,
And sad after performance.

Over. Why thou Rascal,
To tell me these impossibilities:
Dine, at her table? and kiss him? or thee?
Impudent Varlet. Have not I my self
To whom great Countesses doors have often flew open,
Ten times attempted, since her husbands death
In vain to see her, though I came -- - a suitor;
And yet your good Sollicitor-ship, and rogue -- -- Welborne,
Were brought into her presence, feasted with her.
But that I know thee a Dog, that cannot blush
This most incredible lie would call up one
On thy buttermilke cheeks.

Mar. Shall I not trust my eyes Sir?
Or taste? I feel her good cheer in my belly.

Over. You shall feel me, if you give not over Sir,
Recover your brains again, and be no more gulled
With a beggars plot assisted by the aides
Of serving men, and chambermaides; for beyound these
Thou never saw a Woman, or I Will quit you
From my employments.

Mar. Will you credit this yet?
On my confidence of their marriage I offered Welborne
(I would give a crown now, I durst say his worship) -- - aside
My nagge, and twenty pounds.

Over. Did you so I do? Strikes him down
Was this the way to work him to despair
Or rather to cross me?

Mar. Will your worship kill me?

Over. No, no; but drive the lying spirit out of you.

Mar. He Is gone.

Over. I have done then: now forgetting,
Your late imaginerie feast, and Lady.
Know my Lord Louell dins with me to morrow,
Be careful naught, be wanting to receive him,
And bid my daughters women trimne her up,
Though they paint her, so she catch the Lord, Ple thank 'em,
There Is a piece for my late blows.

Mar. I must yet suffer:
But there may be a time. -- -- aside.

Over. Do you grumble?

Mar. No Sir.

Actus tertii, Scena prima.
Louell. Alworth. Servants.
LOuell. Walk the horses down the hill: something in private,
I must impart to Alworth.

Exeunt serui. Alw. O my Lord,
What sacrifice of reverence, duty watching;
Although I could put off the use of sleep,
And ever wait on your commands serve 'em;
What dangers, though in never so horri'd shapes,
Nay death it self, though I should run to meet it,
Can I, and with a thankful willingness suffer;
But still the retribution will fall short
Of your bounties showered upon me.

Lou. Loving Youth;
Till what I purpose be put into act,
Do not o're-prize it, since you have trusted me
With your souls nearest, nay her dearest secret,
Rest confident it is in a cabinet locked,
Treachery shall never open, I have found you
(For so much to your face I must profess,
How er'e you guard your modesty with a blush for it)
More zealous in your love, and service to me
Than I have been in my rewards.

Alw. Still great ones
Above my merit.

Lou. Such your Gratitude calls 'em:
Nor am I of that harsh, and rugg'd temper
As some Great men are taxed, with who imagine
They part from the respect due to their Honors,
If they use not all such as follow 'em,
Without distinction of their births, like slaves.
I am not so conditioned: I can make
A fitting difference between my Footboy,
And a Gentleman, by want compelled to serve me.

Alw. It Is thankefully acknowledged: you have been
More like a Father to me than a Master.
Pray you pardon the comparison.

Lou. I allow it;
And to give you assurance I am pleased in it,
My carriage and demeanor to your Mistrisse
Fair Margaret, shall truly witness for me
I can command my passions.

Alw. It Is a conquest
Few Lords can boast of when they are tempted. Oh!

Lou. Why do you sigh? can you be doubtful of me?
By that fair name, I in the wars have purchased,
And all my actions hitherto untainted,
I will not be more true to mine own Honor,
Than to my Alworth.

Alw. As you are the brave Lord Louell,
Your bare word only given, is an assurance
Of more validity, and weight to me
Than all the oaths bound up with imprecations,
Which when they would deceive, most Courtiers practice:
Yet being a man (for sure to style you more
Would relish of gross flattery) I am forced
Against my confidence of your worth, and virtues,
To doubt, nay more to fear.

Lou. So young, and jealous?

Alw. Were you to encounter with a single foe,
The victory were certain: but to stand
The charge of two such potent enemies,
At once assaulting you, as Wealth and Beauty,
And those too seconded with Power, is odds
Too great for Hercules.

Lou. Speak your doubts, and fears,
Since you will nourish 'em in plainer language,
That I may understand 'em.

Alw. What Is your will;
Though I lend arms against my felfe, (provided
They may advantage you) must be obeyed.
My much loved Lord, were Margaret only fair,
The cannon of her more than earthly form,
Though mounted high, commanding all beneath it,
And ramn'd with bullets of her sparkeling eyes,
Of all the bulwarks that defend your senses
Could batter more, but that which guards your sight.
But when the well tuned accents of her tongue
Make music to you, and with numerous sounds
Assault your hearing (such as if Ulysses
Now lived again, how ere he stood the Sirens,
Could not resist) the combat must grow doubtful,
Between your Reason, and rebellious Passions.
Ad this too; when you feel her touch, and breath,
Like a soft Western wind, when it glides over
Arabia, creating gummes, and spices:
And in the Van, the Nectar of her lips
Which you must taste, bring the battalia on,
Well armed, and strongly lived with her discourse,
And knowing manners, to give entertainment,
Hyppolitus himself would leave Diana,
To follow such a Uenus.

Lou. Love has made you
Poetical, Alworth.

Alw. Grant all these beat off,
Which if it be in man to do, you will do it;
Mammon in Sir Giles Ouerreach stepps in
With heaps of ill got gold, and so much land,
To make her more remarkable, as would tire
A Falcons wings in one day to fly over.
O my good Lord, these powerful aids, which would
Make a misshapen Negro beautiful,
(Yet are but ornaments to give her luster,
That in her self is all perfection) must
Prevail for her. I here release your trust.
It Is happiness, enough, for me to serve you,
And sometimes with chaste eyes to look upon her.

Lou. Why shall I swear?

Alw. O by no means my Lord;
And wrong not so your judgment to the world
As from your fond indulgence to a boy,
Your page, your servant, to refuse a blessing
Diverse Great men are riualls for.

Lou. Suspend
Your judgment 'till the trial. How far is it
'T Ouerreach house?

Alw. At the most some half hours riding;
You Will soon be there.

Eou. And you the sooner freed
From your jealous fears.

Alw. O that I durst but hope it.

Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena secunda.
Ouerreach. Greedy. Marrall.
Verreach. Spare for no cost, let my Dressers crack with the weight
Of curious viands.

Greedy. Store indeed's no sore, Sir.

Over. That proverb fitts your stomach
Master Greedy.
And let no plate be seen, but what is pure gold,
Or such whose workmanship exceeds the matter
That it is made of, let my choicest linen
Perfume the room, and when we wash the water
With precious powders mixed, so please my Lord,
That he may with envy wish to bath so ever.

Mar. 'Twil be very chargeable.

Over. Auant you Drudge:
Now all my labored ends are at the stake,
Is It a time to think of thrift? call in my daughter,
And master. Justice, since you love choice dishes,
And plenty of 'em.

Greed. As I do indeed Sir,
Almost as much as to give thanks for 'em.

Over. I do confer that providence, with my power
Of absolute command to have abundance,
To your best care.

Greed. I Will punctually discharge it
And give the best directions. Now am I
In mine own conceit a Monarch, at the least
Arch-president of the boiled, the roast, the baked,
For which I will eat often, and give thanks,
When my bellies braced up like a drum, and that is pure justice.

Over. I must be so: should the foolish girl prove modest. Exit Greedy.
She may spoil all, she had it not from me,
But from her mother, I was ever forward,
As she must be, and therefore I Will prepare her.
Alone, and let your women wait without. Margaret.

Marg. Your pleasure Sir?

Over. Ha, this is a neat dressing!
These orient pearls, and diamonds well placed too!
The Gown affects me not, it should have been
Embroidered over, and over with flowers of gold,
But these rich Jewels, and quaint fashion help it.
And how below? since often the wanton eye
The face observed, descends unto the foot;
Which being well proportioned, as yours is,
Inuites as much as perfect white, and red,
Though without art, how like you, your new Woman
The Lady Downefalne?

Marg. Well for a companion;
Not as a servant.

Over. Is she humble Meg?
And careful too; her Ladyship forgotten?

Marg. I pity her fortune.

Over. Pity her? Trample on her.
I took her up in an old tamin gown,
(Even starved for want of two penny chopps) to serve thee:
And if I understand, she but repines
To do thee any duty, though never so servile,
I Will pack her to her Knight, where I have lodged him,
Into the Counter, and there let 'em howl together.

Marg. You know your own ways, but for me I blush
When I command her, that was once attended
With persons, not inferior to my self
In birth.

Over. In birth? Why art thou not my daughter?
The blessed child of my industry, and wealth?
Why foolish girl, wa'st not to make thee great,
That I have ran, and still pursue those ways
That hale down curses on me, which I mind not,
Part with these humble thoughts, and apt thy self
To the noble state I labor to advance thee,
Or by my hopes to see thee honorable,
I will adopt a stranger to my heir,
And throw thee from my care, do not provoke me.

Marg. I will not Sir; mould me which way you please.

Over. How interrupted?
Enter Greedy.
Greed. It Is matter of importance.
The cook Sir is selfe-will'd and will not learn
From my experience, there is a fawn brough in Sir,
And for my life I cannot make him roast it,
With a Norfolk dumpling in the belly of it.
And Sir, we wisemen know, without the dumpling
It Is not worth three pence,

Over. Would it were whole in thy belly
To stuff it out; Cook it any way, prithee leave me

Greed. Without order for the dumpling?

Over. Let it be dumpl'd
Which way thou will, or tell him I will scall'd him
In his own Caldron.

Greed. I had lost my stomach,
Had I lost my mistrisse dumpling, I Will give thanks for.

Over. But to our business Megge, you have heard who dines here?

Exit Greedy. Marg. I have Sir.

Over. It Is an honorable man,
A Lord, Megge, and commands a regiment
Of Soldiers, and what is rare is one himself;
A bold, and understanding one; and to be
A Lord, and a good leader in one volume,
Is granted unto few, but such as rise up
The Kingdoms glory.

Enter Greedy. Greed. I Will resign my office,
If I be not better obeyed.

Over. Slight, art thou frantic?

Greed. Frantic 'twould make me a frantic, and stark-mad,
Were I not a Justice of peace, and coram too,
Which this rebellious Cook cares not a straw for.
There are a dozen of Woodcockes.

Over. Make thy self
Thirteen, the bakers dozen.

Greed. I am contented
So they may be dressed to my mind, he has found out
A new device for sauce, and will not dish 'em
With tosts, and butter, my Father was a Tailor,
And my name though a Justice, Greedy Woodcocke,
And 'ere I Will see my lineage so abused,
I Will give up my commission.

Over. Cook, Rogue obey him.
I have given the word, pray you now remove your self,
To a collar of brawne, and trouble me no farther.

Greed. I will, and meditate what to eat at dinner.
Exit Greedy.
Over. And as I said Meg, when this gull disturbed us;
This honorable Lord, this Collonell
I would have thy husband.

Mar. There Is too much disparity
Between his quality, and mine to hope it.

Over. I more then hope't, and doubt not to effect it,
Be thou no enemy to thy self, my wealth
Shall weigh his titles down, and make you equals.
Now for the means to assure him thine; observe me;
Remember he is a Courtier, and a Soldier
And not to be trifl'd with, and therefore when
He comes to woe you, see you, do not coye it.
This mincing modesty has spoiled many a match
By a first refusal, in vain after hoped for.

Mar. You Will have me Sir, preserve the distance, that
Confines a Virgin?

Over. Virgin me no Virgins.
I must have you lose that name, or you lose me,
I will have you private, start not, I say private,
If thou art my true daughter, not a bastard
Thou will venture alone with one man, though he came
Like Jupiter to Semele, and come off too.
And therefore when he kisses you, kiss close.

Marg. I have heard this is the strumpetts fashion Sir,
Which I must never learn.

Over. Learn any thing,
And from any creature that may make thee great;
From the Devil himself.

Marg. This is but Devilish doctrine.

Over. Or if his blood grow hot, suppose he offer
Beyond this, do not you stay 'till it cool,
But meet his ardor, if a couch be near,
Sit down on it, and inuit him.

Marg. In your house?
Your own house Sir, for heavens sake, what are you then?
Or what shall I be Sir?

Over. Stand not on form,
Words are no substances.

Marg. Though you could dispense
With your own Honor; cast a side Religion,
The hopes of heaven, or fear of hell; excuse me
In worldly policy, this is not the way
To make me his wife, his whore I grant it may do.
My maiden Honor so soon yielded up,
Nay prostituted, cannot but assure him
I that am light to him will not hold weight
When he is tempted by others: so in judgment
When to his lust I have given up my honor
He must, and will forsake me,

Over. How? forsake thee?
Do I wear a sword for fashion? or is this arm
Shrunk up? or withered? does there live a man
Of that large list I have encountered with.
Can truly say I e're gave inch of ground,
Not purchased with his blood, that did oppose me?
Forsake thee when the thing is done? he dares not.
Give me but proof, he has enjoyed thy person,
Though all his Captains, Eccho's to his will,
Stood armed by his side to justify the wrong,
And he himself in the head of his bold troop,
Spite of his Lordship, and his Collonelship,
Or the Judges favor, I will make him render
A bloody and a strict account, and force him
By marrying thee, to cure thy wounded honor;
I have said it.
Enter Marrall.
Mar. Sir, the man of Honors come
Newly alighted.

Over. In; without reply
And do as I command, or thou art lost. Exit Marg.
Is the loud music I gave order for
Ready to receive him?

Mar. It Is Sir.

Over. Let Them sound
A princely welcome, Roughness a while leave me,
For fawning now, a stranger to my nature
Must make way for me.
Loud music. Enter Louell. Greed. Alw. Mar.
Lou. Sir, you meet your trouble.

Over. What you are pleased to style so is an honor
Above my worth, and fortunes.

Alw. Strange, so humble.

Over. A justice of peace my Lord. Presents Greedy to him.

Lou. Your hand good Sir.

Greed. This is a Lord; and some think this a favor;
But I had rather have my hand in my dumpling.

Over. Room for my Lord.

Lou. I miss Sir your fair daughter,
To crown my welcome.

Over. May it please my Lord
To taste a glass of Greek wine first, and suddenly
She shall attend my Lord.

Lou. You Will be obeyed Sir.
Exeunt omnes preter Over.
Over. It Is to my wish; as soon as come ask for her!
Why, Megge? Megge Ouerreach. how! tears in your eyes!
Ha! drie'em quickly, or I Will digge'em out.
Is this a time to whimper? meet that Greatness
That flies into thy bosom, think what'tis
For me to say, My honorable daughter.
And thou, when I stand bare, to say put on,
Or father you forget your self, no more,
But be instructed, or expect, he comes.
A blacke-brow'd girl my Lord,
Enter Louell. Greedy Alworth. Marrall. they salute.
Lou. As I live a rare one.

Alw. He Is took already: I am lost.

Over. That kiss,
Came twanging off I like it, quit the room: The rest off.
A little bashful my good Lord, but you
I hope will teach her boldness.

Lou. I am happy
In such a scholar: but.

Over. I am past learning.
And therefore leave you to your selves: remember -- - to his daughter.

Exit Ouerreach. Lou. You see fair Lady, your father is sollicitous.
To have you change the barren name of Virgin
Into a hopeful wife.

Marg. He have my Lord,
Holds no power over my will.

Lou. But over your duty.

Marg, Which forced too much may break.

Lou. Bend rather sweetest:
Think of your years.

Marg. Too few to match with yours:
And choicest fruits too soon plucked, rot, and wither.

Lou. Do you think I am old?

Marg. I am sure I am too young.

Lou. I can advance you.

Marg. To a hill of sorrow,
Where every hour I may expect to fall,
But never hope firm footing. You are noble,
I of a low descent, how ever rich;
And tissues matched with skarlet fuite but ill.
O my good Lord I could say more, but that
I dare not trust these walls.

Lou. Pray you trust my ear then.
Enter Over. listening. Enter Greed.
Over. Close at it! whispering! this is excellent!
And by their postures, a consent on both parts.

Greed. Sir Giles, Sir Giles.

Over. The great fiend stop that clapper.

Greed. It must ring out Sir, when my belly rings noone
The backed meats are run out, the roast turned powder.

Over. I shall powder you.

Greed. Beat me to dust I care not.
In such a cause as this, I Will dye a martyr.

Over. Marry and shall: you Barathrum of the shambells. strikes him.

Greed. How! strike a Justice of peace? it is pettietreason.
Edwardi quinto, but that you are my friend
I could commit you without bail, or maine-prise.

Over. Leave your balling Sir, or I shall commit you;
Where you shall not dine to day, disturb my Lord,
When he is in discourse?

Greed. Is It a time to talk
When we should be munching?

Lou. Ha! I heard some noise.

Over. Mum, villain, vanish: shall we break a bargain
Almost made up. Thrust Greedy off.

Lou. Lady, I understand you;
And rest most happy in your choice, believe it,
I Will be a careful pilot to direct
Your yet uncertain bark to a port of safety.

Marg. So shall your Honor save two lives, and bind us
Your slaves for ever.

Lou. I am in the act rewarded,
Since it is good, how e're you must put on
And amorous carriage toward me, to delude
Your subtle father.

Marg. I am prove to that.

Lon. Now break we off our conference. Sir Giles.
Where is Sir Giles?
Enter Ouerreach, and the rest.
Over. My noble Lord; and how
Does your Lordship find her?

Lou. Apt Sir Giles, and coming,
And I like her the better.

Over. So do I too.

Lou. Yet should we take forts at the first assault
Twere poor in the defendant, I must confirm her
With a love letter or two, which I must have
Delivered by my page, and you give way to it.

Over. With all my soul, a towardly Gentleman,
Your hand good master Alworth, know my house
Is ever open to you.

Alw. 'Twas shut 'till now. aside.

Over. Well done, well done, my honorable daughter:
Thou Art so already: know this gentle youth,
And cherish him my honorable daughter.

Mar. I shall with my best care. Noise within as of a coch.

Over. A Coch.

Greed. More stops
Before we go to dinner! o my gutts!
Enter Lady, and Welborne.
Lad. If I find welcome
You share in it; if not I Will back again,
Now I know your ends, for I come armed for all
Can be objected.

Lou. How! the Lady Alworth!

Over. And thus attended!

Mar. No, I am a dolt; Louell salutes the Lady, the Lady salutes Margaret.
The spirit of lies had entered me.

Over. Peace Patch,
It Is more than wonder! an astonishment
That does possess me wholly!

Lou. Noble Lady,
This is a favor to prevent my visit,
The service of my life can never equal.

Lad. My Lord, Ilay'd wait for you, and much hoped
You would have made my poor house your first Inn:
And therefore doubting that you might forget me,
Or too long dwell here having such ample cause
In this vnequall'd beauty for your stay;
And fearing to trust any but my self
With the relation of my service to you,
I borrowed so much from my long restraint,
And took the air in person to inuit you.

Lou. Your bounties are so great they rob me, Madam
Of words to give you thanks.

Lad. Good Sir Giles Ouerreach. salutes him.
How do thou Marrall? liked you my meat so ill,
You Will dine no more with me?

Greed. I will when you please
And it like your Ladyship.

Lad. When you please master Greedy
If meat can do it, you shall be satisfied,
And now my Lord, pray take into your knowledge
This Gentleman, how e're his outsid's course. Presents Welborne.
His inward linings are as fine, and fair,
As any man's: wonder not I speak at large:
And howsoever his humor carries him
To be thus accoutred; or what taint soever
For his wild life has stuck upon his fame,
He may e'relong, with boldness rank himself
With some that have contemned him. Sir Giles Ouerreach
If I am welcome bid him so.

Over. My nephew.
He has been too long a stranger: faith you have:
Pray let it be mended, Louell conferring with Welborne.

Mar. Why Sir, what do you mean?
This is rogue Welborne, Monster, Prodigy.
That should hang, or drown himself, no man of Worship,
Much less your Nephew;

Over. Well Sir, we shall reckon
For this here after.

Mar. I Will not lose my ieere
Though I be beaten dead for it.

Welb. Let my silence plead
In my excuse my Lord till better leisure
Offer it self to hear a full relation
Of my poor fortunes.

Lou. I would hear, and helpe'em.

Over. Your dinner waits you.

Lou. Pray you lead, we follow.

Lad. Nay you are my ghest, come dear master Welborne.
Exeunt manet Gredie.
Greed. Dear master Welborne! So she said; Heaven! heaven!
If my belly would give me leave I could ruminate
All day on this: I have granted twenty warrants.
To have him committed from all prisons in the Shire,
To Nottingham iayle; and now dear master Welborne!
And my good nephew, but I play the fool
To stand here prating, and forget my dinner.
Are they set Marrall?
Enter Marrall.
Mar. Long since, pray you a word Sir.

Greed. No wording now.

Mar. In troth, I must; my master
Knowing you are his good friend, makes bold with you,
And does entreat you, more ghests being come in,
Then he expected, especially his nephew,
The table being full too, you would excuse him
And suppe with him on the cold meat.

Greed. How! no dinner
After all my care?

Mar. It Is but a penance for
A meal; besides, you broke your fast.

Greed. That was
But a bit to stay my stomach: a man in Commission
Give place to a tatterdemallion?

Mar. No bugge words Sir,
Should his Worship hear you?

Greed. Lose my dumpling too?
And buttered tosts, and woodcocks?

Mar. Come, have patience.
If you will dispense a little with your Worship,
And sit with the waiting women, you have dumpling,
Woodcocke, and buttered costs too.

Greed. This reuiues me
I will gorge there sufficiently.

Mar. This is the way Sir.

Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena tertia.
Ouerreach as from dinner.
Verreach. She Is caught! O women! she neglects my Lord,
And all her complements applied to Welborne!
The garments of her widdowhood laid by,
She now appears as glorious as the spring,
Her eyes fixed on him; in the wine she drinks,
He being her pledge; she sends him burning kisses,
And sitts on thorns, till she be private with him.
She leaves my meat to feed upon his looks;
And if in our discourse he be but'tnam'd
From her a deep sigh follows, but why grieve I
At this? it makes for me, if she prove his
All that is hers is mine, as I will work him.
Enter Marrall.
Mar. Sir the whole board is troubled at your rising.

Over. No matter, I Will excuse it, prithee Marrall,
Watch an occasion to inuit my Nephew
To speak with me in private.

Mar. Who? the rogue,
The Lady scorned to look on?

Over. You are a Wagge
Enter Lady and Welborne.
Mar. See Sir she is come, and cannot be without him.

Lad. With your favor Sir, after a plenteous dinner,
I shall make bold to walk, a turn, or two
In your rare garden.

Over. There Is an arbor too
If your Ladieship please to use it

Lad. Come master Welborne.
Exeunt Lady and Welborne.
Over. Grosser, and grosser, now I believe the Poet
Feigned not but was historical, when he wrote.
Pasiphae was enamored of a bull,
This Ladies lust's more monstrous. My good Lord,
Excuse my manners.
Enter Louell, Margaret and the rest
Lou. There needs none Sir Giles,
I may e're long say Father, when it pleases
My dearest mistress to give warrant to it.

Over. She shall seal to it my Lord, and make me happy.

Marg. My Lady is returned.
Enter Welb. and the Lad,
Lad. Provide my coach,
I Will instantly away: my thanks Sir Giles
For my entertainment.

Over. It Is your Nobleness
To think it such.

Lad. I must do you a further wrong
In taking away your honorable Ghest.

Lou. I wait on you Madam, farewell good Sir Giles.

Lad. Good mistress Margaret: nay come master Welborne,
I must not leave you behind, in sooth I must not.

Over. Rob me not Madam, of allioyes at once
Let my Nephew stay behind: he shall have my coach,
(And after some small conference between us)
Soon overtake your Ladyship.

Lad. Stay not long Sir.

Lou. This parting kiss: you shall every day hear from me
By my faithful page.

Alw. It Is a service I am proud of.
Exeunt. Louell. Lady. Alworth. Margaret. Marrall.
Over. Daughter to your chamber. You may wonder Nephew,
After so long an enmity between us.
I should desire your friendship?
Well: so I do Sir
It Is strange to me.

Over. But I Will make it no wonder,
And what is more unsold my nature to you,
We worldly men, when we see friends, and kinsmen,
Past hope suncke in their fortunes, lend no hand
To lift'em up, but rather set our feer
Upon their heads, to presse'em to the bottom;
As I must yield, with you I practiced it.
But now, I see you in a way to rise,
I can and will assist you, this rich Lady
(And I am glad often) is enamored of you;
It Is too apparent Nephew.

Welb. No such thing:
Compassion rather Sir.

Over. Well in a word,
Because your stay is short, I Will have you seen
No more in this base shape; nor shall she say
She married you like a beggar, or in debt.

Welb. He Will run into the noose, and save my labor. aside.

Over. You have a trunk of rich clothes, not far hence
In pawn, I will redeeme'em, and that no clam^^
May taint your credit for your petty debts,
You shall have a thousand pounds to cut'em off,
And go a freeman to the wealthy Lady.

Welb. This done Sir out of love, and no ends else.

Over. As it is Nephew.

Welb. Binds my still your servant.

Over. No complements; you are stayed for e're you have supped
You shall hear from me, my coach Knaves for my Nephew:
To morrow I will visit you.

Welb. Here Is an Uncle
In a man's extremes! how much they do belie you
That say you are hard-harted.

Over. My deeds nephew
Shall speak my love, what men report, I weigh not.

Exeunt. finis Actus tertii.
Actus quarti, Scena prima.
Louell. Alworth.

LOuell. It Is well: give me my cloak: I now discharge you
From further service. Mind your own affairs,
I hope they will prove successful.

Alw. What is blessed
With your good wish my Lord, cannot but prosper,
Let aftertimes report, and to your Honor
How much I stand engaged, for I want language
To speak my debt: yet if a tear, or two
Of joy for your much goodness, can supply
My tongues defects I could.

Lou. Nay, do not melt:
This ceremonial thanks to mee's superfluous.

Ouerreach within. Is my Lord stirring?

Lou. It Is he, oh here is your letter: let him in.
Enter Over, Gred. Mar.
Over. A good day to my Lord.

Lou, You are an early riser,
Sir Giles.

Over. And reason to attend your Lordship.

Lou. And you too master Greedy, up so soon?

Greed. In troth my Lord after the Sun is up
I cannot sleep, for I have a foolish stomach
That croakes for breakefast. With your Lordships favor;
I have a serious question to demand
Of my worthy friend Sir Giles.

Lou. Pray you use your pleasure.

Greed. How far Sir Giles, and pray you answer me,
Upon your credit, hold you it to be
From your Manor house, to this of my Lady Alworths.

Over. Why some four mile.

Greed. How! four mile? good Sir Giles.
Upon your reputation think better
For if you do abate but one half quarter
Of five you do yourselfe the greatest wrong
That can be in the world: for four miles riding
Could not have raised so huge an appetite
As I feel gnawing on me.

Mar. Whither you ride,
Or go a foot, you are that way still provided
And it please your Worship.

Over. How now Sir? prating
Before my Lord: no difference? go to my Nephew;
See all his debts discharged, and help his Worship
To fit on his rich suite.

Mar. I may fit you too;
Tossed like a dog still.
Exit Marrall.
Lou. I have writ this morning
A few lines to my mistress your fair daughter.

Over. 'Twill fire her, for she is wholly yours already:
Sweet master Alworth, take my ring 'twill carry you
To her presence I dare warrant you, and there plead
For my good Lord, if you shall find occasion.
That done, pray ride to Nottingham, get a license,
Still by this token, I Will have it dispatched,
And suddenly my Lord, that I may say
My honorable, nay, right honorable daughter,

Greed. Take my advice young Gentleman: get your breakefast.
It Is unwholesome to ride fasting, I Will eat with you
And eat to purpose.

Over. Some Furies in that gut:
Hungry again! did you not devour this morning,
A shield of Brawne, and a barrel of Colchesier oysters?

Greed. Why that was Sir; only to scour my stomach,
A kind of a preparatiue. Come Gentleman
I will not have you feed like the Hangman of Vllushing
Alone, while I am here.

Lou. Have your return.

Alw. I will not fail my Lord.

Greed. Nor I to line
My Christmas coffer.
Exeunt Greedy and Alworth.
Over. To my wish, we are private.
I come not to make offer with my daughter
A certain portion, that were poor, and triuiall.
In one word I pronounce all that is mine,
In lands, or leases, ready coin, or goods,
With her, my Lord comes to you, nor shall you have
One motive to induce you to believe,
I live too long, since every year I Will add
Something unto the heap, which shall be yours too.

Lou. You are a right kind father.

Over. You shall have reason
To think me such, how do you like this seat?
It is well wooded, and well watered, the Acres
Fertile, and rich; would it not serve for change
To entertain your friends in a Summer progress?
What thinks my noble Lord?

Lou. It Is a wholesome air,
And well built pile, and she that is mistress of it
Worthy the large reuennue.

Over. 'Shee the mistress?
It may be so for a time: but let my Lord
Say only that he likes it, and would have it,
I say e're long it is his.

Lou. Impossible.

Over. You do conclude too fast, not knowing me;
Nor the engines that I work by, it is not alone
The Lady Alworths Lands, for those once Welbornes,
(As by her dotage on him, I know they will be,)
Shall soon be mine. but point out any man's
In all the Shire, and say they lie convenient,
And useful for your Lordship, and once more
I say aloud, They are yours.

Lou. I dare not own
What Is by unjust, and cruel means extorted
My fame, and credit are more dear to me,
Than so to expose 'em to be censured by
The public voice.

Over. You run my Lord no hazard.
Your reputation shall stand as fair
In all good men's opinions as now:
Nor can my actions, though condemned for ill,
Cast any foul aspersion upon yours;
For though I do contemn report my self,
As a mere sound, I still will be so tender
Of what concerns you in all points of Honor,
That the immaculate whiteness of your Fame,
Nor your vnquestion'd integrity
Shall e're be sullied with one taint, or spot
That may take from your innocence, and candor,
All my ambition is to have my daughter
Right honorable, which my Lord can make her.
And might I live to dance upon my knee
A young Lord Louell, borne by her unto you,
I write nil vltra to my proudest hopes.
As for possessions, and annual rents
Equivalent to maintain you in the port,
Your noble birth, and present state requires,
I do remove that burden from your shoulders,
And take it on mine own: for though I ^^me
The Country to supply your riotous wast,
The scourge of prodigalls want shall never find you.

Lou. Are you not frighted with the imprecations,
And curses, of whole families made wretched
By your sinister practices?

Over. Yes as rocks are
When foamie billows split themselves against
Their flinty ribs; or as the Moon is moved,
When wolves with hunger pined, howl at her brightness.
I am of a solid temper, and like these
Steer on a constant course: with mine own sword
If called into the field, I can make that right,
Which fearful enemies murmured at as wrong.
Now for, these other pidling complaints
Breathed out in bitterness, as when they call me
Extortioner, Tyrant, Cormorant, or Intruder
On my poor Neighbors right, or grand incloser
Of what was common, to my private use;
Nay, when my cares are pierced with Widows cries,
And undone Orphants wash with tears my threshold;
I only think what it is to have my daughter
Right honorable; and it is a powerful charm
Makes me insensible of remorse, or pity,
Or the least sting of Conscience.

Lou. I admire
The toughness of your nature.

Over. It Is for you
My Lord, and for my daughter, I am marble
Nay more more if you will have my character
In little, I enjoy more true delight
In my arrival to my wealth, these dark,
And crooked ways, than you shall e're take pleasure
In spending what my industry has compassed.
My have commands me hence, In one word therefore
Is it a Match?

Lou. I hope that is past doubt now.

Over. Then rest secure, not the hate of all mankind here;
Nor fear of what can fall on me hereafter,
Shall make me study ought but your advancement,
One story higher. An Earl! if gold can do it.
Dispute not my religion, nor my faith,
Though I am borne thus headlong by my will,
You may make choice of what belief you please,
To me they are equal, so my Lord good morrow.
Exit.
Lou. He Is gone, I wonder how the Earth can bear
Such a portent! I, that have lived a Soldier,
And stood the enemies violent charge undaunted
To hear this blasphemous beast, a'm bathed all over
In a cold sweat: yet like a mountain he
Confirmed in Atheistical assertions,
Is no more shaken, than Olimpus is
When angry Boreas loades his double head
With sudden drifts of snow.
Enter Amble. Lady. Woman.
Lad. Save you my Lord.
Disturb I not your priuacie?

Lou. No good Madam;
For your own sake I am glad you came no sooner.
Since this bold, bad man, Sir Giles Ouerreach
Made such a plain discovery of himself,
And read this morning such a devilish Matins,
That I should think it a sin next to his;
But to repeat it.

Lad. I never pressed my Lord
On others priuacies, yet against my will,
Walking, for health sake, in the gallerie
Adjoining to your lodgings, I was made
(So vehement, and loud he was) partaker
Of his tempting offers.

Lad. Please you to command
Your servants hence, and I shall gladly hear
Your wiser counsel.

Lad. It Is my Lord a woman's
But true, and hearty; wait in the next room,
But be within call: yet not so near to force me
To whisper my intents.

Amb. We are taught better
By you good Madam.

Wom. And well know our distance.

Lad. Do so, and talk not't will become your breeding. Exeunt, Amble and
Woman.
Now my good Lord; if I may use my freedom,
As to an honored friend?

Lou. You lessen else
Your favor to me.

Lad. I dare then say thus;
As you are Noble (how e're common men
Make sordid wealth the object, and sole end
Of their industrious aims) 'twill not agree
With those of eminent blood (who are engaged
More to prefer their Honors, than to increase
The State left to 'em, by their Ancestors)
To study large additions to their fortunes
And quite neglect their births: though I must grant
Riches well got to be a useful Servant)
But a bad Master.

Lou. Madam, it is confessed;
But what infer you from it?

Lad. This my Lord;
That as all wrongs, though thrust into one scale
Slide of themselves off, when right fills the other,
And cannot bide the trial: so all wealth
(I mean if ill acquired) cemented to Honor
By virtuous ways atchieu'd, and bravely purchased,
Is but as rubbage powered into a river
(How e're intended to make good the bancke)
Rendering the water that was pure before,
Polluted, and unwholesome. I allow
The heir of Sir Giles Ouerreash. Margaret.
A maid well qualified, and the richest match
Our North part can make boast of, yet she cannot
With all that she brings with her fill their mouths,
That never will forget who was her father;
Or that my husband Alworths lands, and Welbornes
(How wrunge from both needs now no repetition)
Were real motive, that more worked your Lordship
To join your families; than her form, and virtues.
You may conceive the rest.

Lou. I do sweet Madam;
And long since have considered it I know
The sum of all that makes a just man happy
Consists in the well choosing of his wife
And there well to discharge it, does require
Equality of years, of birth, of fortune,
For beauty being poor, and not cried up
By birth or wealth, can truly mix with neither.
And wealth, where there is such difference in years,
And fair descent, must make the yoke uneasy:
But I come nearer.

Lad. Pray you do my Lord.

Lou. Were Ouerreach, stat's thrice centupl'd; his daughter
Millions of degrees, much fairer than she is,
(How e're! might urge presidents to excuse me)
I would not so adulterate my blood
By marrying Margaret, and so leave my issue
Made up of several pieces, one part skarlet
And the other London-blew. In my own tomb
I will interre my name first.

Lad. I am glad to hear this: aside.
Why then my Lord pretend you marriage to her?
Dissimulation but ties false knots
On that strait line, by which you hitherto
Have measured all your actions?

Lou. I make answer
And aptly, with a question. Wherefore have you,
That since your Husbands death, have lived a strict,
And chaste Nuns life, on the sudden given your self
To visits, and entertainments? think you Madam
It Is not growge public conference? or the favors
Which you too prodigally have thrown on Welborne
Being too reserved before, incur not censure?

Lad. I am innocent here, and on my life I swear
My ends are good.

Lou. On my soul so are mine
To Margaret: but leave both to the event
And since this friendly priuacie does serve
But as an offered means unto our selves
To search each other farther; you having shown
Your care of me, I, my respect to you;
Deny me not, but still in chaste words Madam
An after-noones discourse.

Lad. So I shall hear you.

Actus quarti, Scena secunda.
Tapwell. Froth.
Apwell. Undone, undone! this was your counsel, Froth.

Froth. Mine! Idefie thee, did not master Marrall
(He has marred all I am sure) strictly command us
(On pain of Sir Giles Ouerreach displeasure)
^o turn the Gentleman out of doors?

Tapw. It Is true
But now he is his Uncles darling, and has got
Master Justice Greedy (since he filled his belly)
At his commandment, to do any thing;
Woe, woe to us.

Froth. He may prove merciful.

Tap. Troth, we do not deserve it at his hands:
Though he knew all the passages of our house;
As the receiving of stolen goods, and bawdrie
When he was rogue Welborne, no man would believe him,
And then his information could not hurt us.
But now he is right Worshipful again,
Who dares but doubt his testimony? me thinks
I see thee Froth already in a cart
For a close Bawd, thine eyes cu'n pelted out
With dirt, and rotten eggs, and my hand hissing
(If I escape the halter) with the letter R.
Printed upon it.

Froth. Would that were the worst:
That were but nine days wonder, as for credit
We have none to lose; but we shall lose the money
He owes us and his custom, there is the hell on it.

Tap. He has summoned all his Creditours by the drum,
And they swarmo about him like so many soldiers
On the pay day, and has found out such a new way
To pay his old debts, as it is very likely
He shall be chronicl'd for it.

Froth. He deserves it
More than ten Pageants. But are you sure his Worship
Comes this way to my Ladies?
A cry within, brave Master Welborne.
Tapw. Yes I hear him.

Froth. Be ready with your petition and present it
To his good Grace.
Enter Welb. in a rich habit, Greed. Ord. Furn. three Creditors: Tapw. kneeling
delivers his bill of debt.
Welb. How Is this! petitioned too?
But note what miracles, the payment of
A little trash, and a rich suite of clothes
Can work upon these Rascals. I shall be
I think prince Welborne.

Mar. When your Worships married
You may be, I know what I hope to see you.

Welb. Then look thou for advancement.

Mar. To be known
Your Worships Bayliffe is the mark I shoot at.

Welb. And thou shall hit it.

Mar. Pray you Sir dispatch
These needy followers, and for my admittance
Provided you will defend me from Sir Giles. This interim, Tapwell and Froth
flattering and bribing justice Greedy.
Whose service I am weary of I Will say something
You shall give thanks for.

Welb. Fear me not Sir Giles

Greed. Who? Tapwell? I remember thy wife brought me
Last new years tide, a couple of fat turkies.

Tapw. And shall do every Christmas, let your Worship
But stand my friend now.

Greed. How? with master Welborne?
I can do any thing with him, on such terms;
See you this honest couple: they are good souls
As ever drew out fosset, have they not
A pair of honest faces?

Welb. I over heard you,
And the bribe he promised, you are cousend in 'em,
For of all the scumme that grew rich by my riots
This for a most unthankful knave, and this
For a base bawd, and whore, have worst deserved me,
And therefore speak not for'em, by your place
You are rather to do me justice; lend me your ear,
Forget his Turkies, and call in his License,
And at the next Fair, I Will give you a yoke of Oxen
Worth all his Poultry.

Greed. I am changed on the sudden
In my opinion! come near; nearer Rascal.
And now I view him better; did you e're see
One look so like an arch-knaue? his very countenance,
Should an understanding judge but look upon him,
Would hang him, though he were innocent.

Tap. Froth. Worshipful Sir.

Greed. No though the great Turk came instead of Turkies,
To beg any favor, I am inexorable:
Thou have an ill name: besides thy musty Ale
That has destroyed many of the Kingsleige people
Thou never had in thy house to stay men's stomachs
A piece of Suffolk cheele, or Gammon of Bacon,
Or any esculent, as the learned call it,
For their emolument, but sheere drink only.
For which gross fault, I here do damn thy license,
Forbidding thee ever to tap, or draw.
For instantly, I will in mine own person
Command the Constable to pull down thy Sign;
And do it before I eat.

Froth. No mercy?

Greed. Vanish.
If I show any, may my promised Oxen gore me.

Tapw. Unthankful knaves are ever so rewarded
Exeunt Greedy, Tapwell. Froth.
Welb. Speak; what are you?

1. Creditor. A decayed Vintner Sir,
That might have thriued, but that your worship broke me
With trusting you with Muskadine and Eggs,
And five pound Suppers, with your after drinkings,
When you lodged upon the Banckside.

Welb. Remember.

1. Cred. I have not been hasty, nor e're laid to arrest you.
And therefore Sir -- -

Welb. Thou art an honest fellow:
I Will set thee up again, see his bill paid,
What are you?

2. Cred. A Tailor once, but now mere Botcher.
I gave you credit for a suite of clothes.
Which was all my stock, but you failing in payment,
I was removed from the Shop. board, and confined
Under a Stall.

Welb. See him paid, and botch no more.

2. Cred. I ask no interest Sir.

Welb. Such Tailors need not,
If their bills are paid in one and twenty year
They are seldom losers. O, I know thy face
Thou were it my Surgeon: you must tell no tales.
Those days are done. I will pay you in private.

Ord. A royal Gentleman.

Furn. Royal as an Emperor!
He Will prove a brave master, my good Lady knew
To choose a man.

Welb. See all men else discharged
And since Old debts are clear why a new way,
A little bounty, will not misbecome me;
There Is something honest Cook for thy good breakefasts,
And this for your respect, take it, it is good gold
And I able to spare it.

Ord. You are too munificent.

Furn. He was ever so.

Welb. Pray you on before.

3. Gred. Heaven bless you.

Mar. At four a clock the rest know where to meet me
Exeunt Ord. Furn. Furn. Credit.
Welb. Now master Marrall, what is the weighty secret
You promised to impart?

Mar. Sir, time, nor place
Allow me to relate each circumstance;
This only in a word: I know Sir Giles
Will come upon you for security
For his thousand pounds, which you must not consent to
As he grows in heat, as I am sure he will,
Be you but rough, and say He Is in your debt
Ten times the sum, upon sale of your land,
I had a hand in it (I speak it to my shame)
When you were defeated of it.

Welb. That Is forgiven.

Mar. I shall deserue't then; urge him to produce
The deed in which you passed it over to him,
Which I know He Will have about him to deliver
To the Lord Louell, with many other writings,
And present moneys, I Will instruct you further,
As I wait on your Worship, if I play not my price
To your full content, and your Uncles much vexation,
Hang up Jacke Marrall.

Welb. I rely upon thee.

Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena vltima.
Alworth. Margaret.

ALworth. Whither to yield the first praise to my Lord's.
Vnequall'd temperance, or your constant sweetness,
That I yet live, my weak hands fastened on.
Hopes anchor, spite of all storms of Despair,
I yet rest doubtful.

Marg. Give it to Lord Louell.
For what in him was bounty, in mee's duty.
I make but payment of a debt, to which
My vows in that high office registered,
Are faithful witnesses.

Alw. It Is true my dearest,
Yet when I call to mind how many fair ones
Make wilful shipwreck of their faiths, and oaths
To God, and Man to fill the arms of Greatness,
And you, rise up less than a glorious star
To the amazement of the world, that hold out
Against the stern authority of a Father,
And spurn at honor when it comes to court you,
I am so tender of your good, that faintly
With your wrong I can wish my self that right
You yet are pleased to do me.

Marg. Yet, and ever,
To me what is title, when content is wanting?
Or wealth raked up together with much care,
And to be kept with more, when the heart pines,
In being dispossessed of what it longs for,
Beyond the Indian mines; or the smooth brow
Of a pleased Site, that slaves me to his will?
And so his ravenous humor may be feasted
By my obedience, and he see me great,
Leaves to my soul nor faculties, nor power
To make her own election.

Alw. But the dangers
That follow the repulse.

Marg. To me they are nothing:
Let Alworth love, I cannot be unhappy.
Suppose the worst, that in his rage he kill me,
A tear, or two, by you dropped on my hearse
In sorrow for my fate, will call back life
So far, as but to say that I die yours,
I then shall rest in peace, or should he prove
So cruel, as one death would not suffize
His thirst of vengeance, but with lingering torments
In mind, and body, I must wast to air,
In poverty, joined with banishment, so you share
In my afflictions, (which I dare not wish you,)
So high I prize you; I could undergo 'em,
With such a patience as should look down
With scorn on his worst malice.

Aiw. Heaven auert
Such trialls of your true affection to me,
Nor will it unto you that are all mercy
Show so much rigor: but since we must run
Such desperate hazards, let us do our best
To steer between 'em.

Marg. Your Lord's ours, and sure,
And though but a young actor second me
In doing to the life, what he has plotted,
The end may yet prove happy: now my Alworth.
Enter Ouerreach.
Alw. To your letter, and put on a seeming anger.

Marg. I Will pay my Lord all debts due to his title,
And when with terms, not taking from his Honor,
He does solicit me, I shall gladly hear him.
But in this peremptory, nay commanding way,
'Tappoint a meeting, and without my knowledge;
A Priest to tie the knot, can never be undone
'Till death unloose it, is a confidence
In his Lordship, will deceive him.

Alw. I hope better,
Good Lady.

Marg. Hope Sir what you please: for me
I must take a safe and secure course; I have
A father, and without his full consent,
Though all Lords of the land kneeled for my favor,
I can grant nothing.

Over. I like this obedience.
But whatsoever my Lord writes, must, and shall be
Accepted, and embraced. Sweet master Alworth,
You show your self a true, and faithful servant
To your good Lord, he has a jewel of you.
How? frowning Meg? are these looks to receive
A messenger from my Lord? what is this? give me it.

Marg. A piece of arrogant paper liketh'inscriptions

Over. Ouerreach read the letter. Fair mistrisse from your servant learn, all
joys
That we can hope for, if deferred, prove toys;
Therefore this instant, and in private meet
A Husband, that will gladly at your feet
Lay down his Honors, tendering them to you
With all content, the Church being paid her due.
Is this the arrogant piece of paper? Fool,
Will you still be one? in the name of madness, what
Could his good Honor write more to content you?
Is there ought else to be wished after these two,
That are already offered? Marriage first,
And lawful pleasure after: what would you more?

Marg. Why Sir, I would be married like your daughter;
Not hurried away in the night I know not whither,
Without all ceremony: no friends invited
To honor the sollemnity.

Alw. An't please your Honor,
For so before to morrow I must style you:
My Lord desire this priuacie in respect
His honorable kinsmen are far off,
And his desires to have it done brook not
So long delay as to expect their coming;
And yet He stands resolved, with all due pomp:
As running at the ring, plays, masks, and tilting
To have his marriage at Court celebrated
When he has brought your Honor up to London.

Over. He tells you true; it is the fashion on my knowledge
Yet the good Lord to please your peeuishnes
Must put it off forsooth, and lose a night
In which perhaps he might get two boys on thee.
Tempt me no farther, if you do, this good
Shall prick you to him.

Marg. I could be contented,
Were you but by to do a fathers part,
And give me in the Church.

Over. So my Lord have you
What do I care who gives you since my Lord
Does purpose to be private, I Will not cross him.
I know not master Alworth how my Lord
May be provided, and therefore there is a purse
Of gold 'twill serve this nights expense, to morrow
I Will furnish him with any sums: in the mean time
Use my ring to my Chaplain; he is beneficed
At my Manor of Gotam, and called parson Will-doe
It Is no matter for a license, I Will bear him out in it.

Marg. With your favor Sir, what warrant is your ring?
He may suppose I got that twenty ways
Without your knowledge, and then to be refused,
We Are such a stain upon me, if you pleased Sir
Your presence would do better.

Over. Still perverse?
I say again I will not cross my Lord,
Yet I Will prevent you too. Paper and incke there?

Alw. I can furnish you.

Over. I thank you, I can write then.
Writes on his book.
Alw. You may if you please, put out the name of my Lord
In respect he comes disguised, and only write
Marry, her to this Gentleman.

Over. Well advised Margaret kneeles.
It Is done, away my blessing Girl? thou have it.
Nay, no reply begone, good master Alworth.
This shall be the best nights work, you ever made

Alw. I hope so Sir.
Exeunt Alworth. and Margaret.
Over. Farewell, now all is cocke-sure:
Me thinks I hear already, Knights, and Ladies,
Say Sir Giles Ouerreach, how is it with
Your Honorable daughter? has her Honor
Slept well to night? or will her Honor please
To accept this Monkey? Dog? or Paraquit?
This is state in Ladies. or my eldest son
To be her page, and wait upon her trencher?
My ends! my ends are compassed! then for Welborne
And the lands; were he once married to the widow,
I have him here, I can scarce contain my self,
I am so full of joy; nay joy all over.

Exit the end of the fourth Act. Actus quinti, Scena quinta.
Louell. Lady. Amble.

LAdy. By this you know, how strong the motives were
That did, my Lord, induce me to dispense
A little with my gravity, to advance
(In personating some few favors to him)
The plots, and proiects of the downe-trod
Welborne.
Nor shall I e're repent (although I suffer
In some few men's opinions for it) the action.
For he, that ventured all for my dear Husband,
Might rustly claim an obligation from me
To pay him such a courtesse: which had I
Coiley, or ouer-curiously denied,
It might have argued me of little love
To the deceased.

Lou. What you intended Madam
For the poor Gentleman, has found good success,
For as I understand his debts are paid,
And he once more furnished for fair employment
But all the arts that I have used to raise
The fortunes of your loy, and mine, young Alworth,
Stand yet in supposition, though I hope well
For the young lovers are in wit more pregnant,
Than their years can promise; and for their desires
On my knowledge they are equal.

Lady. As my wishes
Are with yours my Lord, yet give me leave to fear
The building though well grounded: to deceive
Sir Giles, that is both a Lion, and a Fox
In his proceedings, were a work beyond
The strongest undertakers, not the trial
Of two weak innocents.

Lou. Despair not Madam:
Hard things are compassed often by easy means,
And judgment, being a gift derived from heaven,
Though sometimes lodged in the hearts of worldly men
(That never consider from whom they receive it)
Forsakes such as abuse the giver of it.
Which is the reason, that the politic,
And cunning Statesman, that believes he fathomes
The counsels of all Kingdoms on the earth
Is by simplicity often ouerreach.

Lady. May he be so, yet in his name to express it
Is a good O men.

Lou. May it to my self
Prove so good Lady in my suite to you:
What think you of the motion?

Lady. Troth my Lord
My own un worthiness may answer for me;
For had you, when that I was in my prime,
My virgin-flower vncropp'd, presented me
With this great favor, looking on my lowness
Not in a glass of self-love, but of truth
I could not but have thought it, as a blessing
Far, far beyond my merit.

Lou. You are too modest,
And undervalue that which is above
My title, or what ever I call mine.
I grant, were I a Spaniard to marry
A widow might disparage me, but being
A true borne Englishman, I cannot find
How it can taint my Honor; nay what is more,
That which you think a blemish is to me
The fairest luster. You already Madam
Have given sure proofs how dearly you can cherish
A Husband that deserves you: which confirms me,
That if I am not wanting in my care
To do you service, you will be still the same
That you were to your Alworth, in a word
Our years, our states, our births are not unequal,
You being descended nobly and allied so,
If then you may be won to make me happy,
But join your lips to mine, and that shall be
A solemn contract.

Lady. I were blind to my own good
Should I refuse it, yet my Lord receive me
As such a one, the study of whose whole life
Shall know no other object but to please you.

Lou. If I return not with all tenderness,
Equal respect to you, may I die wretched.

Lady. There needs no protestation my Lord
To her that cannot doubt, you are welcome Sir.
Now you look like your self.
Enter Welborne.
Welb. And will continue
Such in my free acknowledgement, that I am
Your creature Madam, and will never hold
My life mine own, when you please to command it.

Lou. It is a thankfulness that well becomes you;
You could not make choice of a better shape,
To dress your mind in.

Lady For me I am happy
That my endeavors prosper'd, saw you of late
Sir Giles, your Uncle?

Welb. I heard of him, Madam,
By his minister Marrall, he is grown into strange passions
About his daughter, this last night he looked for
Your Lordship at his house, but missing you,
And she not yet appearing, his wise-head
Is much perplexed, and troubled.

Lou. It may be
Sweer heart, my project took.
Enter Over. with distracted looks, driving in Marrall before him.
Lad. I strongly hope.

Over. Ha! find her Boobie thou huge lump of nothing
I Will bore thine eyes out else.

Welbo. May it please your Lordship
For some ends of mine own but to withdraw
A little out of sight, though not of hearing,
You may perhaps have sport.

Lou. You shall direct me.
stepps aside.
Over. I shall sol fa you Rogue.

Mar. Sir, for what cause
Do you use me thus?

Over. Cause slave why I am angry,
And thou a subject only fit for beating,
And so to cool my choler, look to the writing
Let but the seal be broke upon the box,
That has slepp'd in my cabinet these three years;
I Will rack thy soul for it.

Mar. I may yet cry quittance,
Though now I suffer, and dare not resist.
aside.
Over. Lady, by your leave, did you see my Daughter Lady?
And the Lord her husband? Are they in your house?
If they are, discover, that I may bid'em joy;
And as an entrance to her place of Honor,
See your Ladyship on her left hand, and make courseis
When she nodds on you; which you must receive
As a special favor.

Lady. When I know, Sir Giles,
Her state requires such ceremony, I shall pay it
But in the mean time, as I am my self,
I give you to understand, I neither know,
Nor care where her Honor is.

Over. When you once see her
Supported, and led by the Lord her Husband
You Will be taught better. Nephew.

Welb. Sir.

Over. No more.

Welb. It Is all I owe you.

Welb. Have your redeemed rags
Made you thus insolent?

Welb. Insolent to you? in scorn.
Why what are you Sir, unless in your years,
At the best more than myself?

Over. His fortune swells him
It Is rank he is married.

Lady. This is excellent!

Over. Sir, in calm language (though I seldom use it)
I am familiar with the cause, that makes you
Bear up thus bravely, there is a certain buz
Of a stolen marriage, do you hear of a stolen marriage?
In which it is said there is some body has been coozin'd.
I name no parties.

Welb. Well Sir, and what follows?

Over. Marry this; Since you are peremptory: remember
Upon mere hope of your great match, I lent you
A thousand pounds: put me in good security,
And suddenly my Mortgage, or by Statute
Of some of your new possessions, or I Will have you
Dragged in your lauender robes to the Jail, you know me,
And therefore do not trifle.

Welb. Can you be
So cruel to your Nephew? now he is in
The way to rise: was this the courtesy
You did me in pure love, and no ends else?

Over. End me no ends: engage the whole estate,
And force your Spouse to sign it, you shall have
Three, or four thousand more to rore, and swagger,
And revel in bawdy tauernes.

Welb. And beg after:
Mean you not so?

Over. My thoughts are mine, and free.
Shall I have security?

Welb. No: indeed you shall not:
Nor bond, nor bill, nor bare acknowledgement,
Your great looks fright not me.

Over. But my deeds shall:
Outbrau'd?
They both draw the servants enter.
Lady. Help murder, murder.

Welb. Let him come on,
With all his wrongs, and injuries about him,
Armed with his cut-throate practices to guard him;
The right that I bring with me, will defend me,
And punish his extortion.

Over. That I had thee
But single in the field.

Lady. You may, but make not
My house your quarrelling Scene.

Over. Were It in a Church
By heaven, and hell, I Will do it.

Mar. Now put him to
The showing of the deed.

Welb. This rage is vain Sir,
For fighting fear not you shall have your hands full,
Upon the least incitement; and whereas
You charge me with a debt of a thousand pounds,
If there be law, (how e're you have no conscience)
Either restore my land, or I Will recover
A debt, that is truly due to me, from you
In value ten times more than what you challenge.

Over. I in thy debt! O impudence! did I not purchase
The land left by thy father? that rich land,
That had continued in Welbornes name
Twenty descents; which like a riotous fool
Thou did make sale of? is not here enclosed
The deed that does confirm it mine?

Mar. Now, now:

Welb. I do acknowledge none, I never passed over
Any such land, I grant for a year, or two,
You had it in trust, which if you do discharge,
Surrendering the possession, you shall ease
Your self, and me, of chargeable suits in law,
Which is you prove not honest, (as I doubt it)
Must of necessity follow.

Lady. In my judgment
He does advise you well.

Over. Good! Good! conspire
With your new Husband Lady; second him
In his dishonest practices; but when
This Manor is extended to my use,
You Will speak in an humbler key, and sue for favor.

Lady. Never: do not hope it.

Welb. Let despair first sease me.

Over. Yet to shut up thy mouth, and make thee give
Thy self the lie, the loud lie: I draw out
The precious evidence; if thou can forswear
Thy hand, and seal, and make a forfeit of
Thy ears to the pillory: see here is that will make
My interrest clear. Ha!
Opens the box.
Lady. A fair skin of parchment

Welb. Indented I confess, and labells too,
But neither wax, nor words. How! thunder-strooke?
Not a syllable to insult with? my wise Uncle
Is this your precious evidence? is this that makes
Your interest clear

Over. I am overwhelmed with wonder!
What prodigy is this what subtle devil
Has razed out the inscription the wax
Turned into dust! the rest of my deeds whole,
As when they were delivered! and this only
Made nothing! do you deal with witches Rascal?
There is a statute for you, which will bring
Your neck in a hempen circle yes, there is.
And now'tis better thought, for Cheater know
This iuggling shall not save you

Welb. To save thee would beggar the stock of mercy.

Over. Marrall.

Mar. Sir.

Over. flattering him Though the witnesses are dead, your testimony
Help with an oath or two, and for thy master,
Thy liberal master, my good honest servant.
I know, you will swear any thing to dash
This cunning slight: besides, I know thou art
A public notarie, and such stand in law
For a dozen witnesses; the deed being drawn too
By thee, my careful Marrall, and delivered
When thou were present will make good my title
Will thou not swear this?

Mar. I? no I assure you.
I have a conscience, not seared up like yours
I know no deeds.

Over. Will thou betray me?

Mar. Keep him
From using of his hands, I Will use my tongue
To his no little torment.

Over. Mine own Varlet
Rebel against me?

Mar. Yes, and uncase you too.
The Idiot; the Patch; the Slave! the Boobie;
The property fit only to be beaten
For your morning exercise; your Footeball or
Th'vnprofitable lump of flesh; your Drudge
Can now anatomize you, and lay open
All your black plotts; and level with the earth
Your hill of pride; and with these gabions guarded,
Unload my great artillery, and shake,
Nay puluerize the walls you think defend you.

Lady. How he foames at the mouth with rage.

Walb. To him again.

Over. O that I had thee in my gripe, I would tear thee
Joint, after joint.

Mar. I know you are a tearer
But I Will have first your fangs pared off, and then
Come nearer to you, when I have, discovered,
And made it good before the Judge, what ways
And devilish practices you used to coozen
With an army of whole families, who yetliue,
And but enrol'd for soldiers were able
To take in Dunkerke.

Welb. All will come out.

Lady. The better.

Over. But that I will live, Rogue, to torture thee,
And make thee wish, and kneel in vain to dye,
These swords that keep thee from me, should fix here
Although they made my body but one wound,
But I would reach thee.

Lou. Heau ns hand is in this,
One Ban-dogge worrie the other.
aside.
Over. I play the fool,
And make my anger but ridiculous.
There will be a time, and place, there will be cowards,
When you shall feel what I dare do.

Welb. I think so:
You dare do any ill, yet want true valor
To be honest, and repent.

Over. They are words I know not,
Nor e're will learn. Patience, the beggars virtue. Enter Greedy and person
Will-doe.
Shall find no harbor here, after these storms
At length a calm appears. Welcome, most welcome:
There Is comfort in thy looks, is the deed done?
Is my daughter married? say but so my Chaplain
And I am tame.

Will-doe. Married? yes I assure you.

Over. Then vanish all sad thoughts; there is more gold for thee.
My doubts, and fears are in the titles drowned
Of my right honorable, my right honorable daughter

Greed. Here will I be feasting; at least for a month
I am provided: empty gutts croke no more,
You shall be stuffed like baggepipes, not with wind
But bearing dishes.

Over. Instantly be here? Whispring to Will-doe.
To my wish, to my wish, now you that plot against me
And hoped to trippe my heels up; that contemned me; Loud music.
Think on it and tremble, they come I hear the music.
A lane there for my Lord.

Welb. This sudden heat
May yet be cooled Sir.

Over. Make way there for my Lord.
Enter Alworth and Margaret.
Marg. Sir, first your pardon, then your blessing with
Your full allowance of the choice I have made
As ever you could make use of your reason: kneeling.
Grow not in passion: since you may as well
Call back the day that is past, as untie the knot
Which is too strongly fastened, not to dwell
Too long on words, this's my Husband

Over. How!

Alw. So I assure you: all the rites of marriage
With every circumstance are past, alas Sir,
Although I am no Lord, but a Lords page,
Your daughter, and my loved wife mournes not for it.
And for Right honorable son in Law, you may say
Your dutiful daughter.

Over. Devil: are they married?

Will-doe. Do a fathers part, and say heaven giue'em joy.

Over. Confusion, and ruin, speak, and speak quickly,
Or thou art dead.

Will-doe. They are married.

Over. Thou had better
Have made a contract with the King of fiends
Than these, my brain turns!

Will-doe. Why this rage to me?
Is not this your letter Sir? and these the words?
Marry her to this Gentleman.

Over. It cannot:
Nor will I e're believe it is death I will not,
That I, that in all passages I touched
At worldly profit, have not left a print
Where I have trod for the most curious search
To trace my footstepps, should be gu'lld by children,
Baffull'd, and fooled, and all my hopes, and labors,
Defeated, and made void.

Welb. As it appears,
You are so my grave Uncle

Over. Village Nurses
Revenge their wrongs with curses, I Will not wast
A syllable, but thus I take the life
Which wretched I gave to thee.
Offers to kill Margaret.
Lou. Hold for your own sake
Though charity to your daughter has quite left you
Will you do an act, though in your hopes lost here
Can leave no hope for peace, or rest hereafter
Consider; at the best you are but a man,
And cannot so create your aims, but that
They may be crossed.

Over. Lord, thus I spit at thee,
And at thy counsel; and again desire thee
And as chou art a soldier, if thy valor
Dares show it self where multitude, and example
Lead not the way, lets quit the house, and change
Six words in private.

Lou. I am ready.

Lad. Stay Sir,
Contest with one distracted?

Welb. You Will grow like him
Should you answer his vain challenge.

Over. Are you pale?
Borrow his help, though Hercules call it odds
I Will stand against both, as I am hemmed in thus.
Since like Libian-Lyon in the toil,
My fury cannot reach the coward hunters
And only spends it self, I Will quit the place,
Alone I can do nothing: but I have servants
And friends to second me, and if I make not
This house a heap of ashes (by my wrongs,
What I have spoke I will make good) or leaned
One throat uncut, if it be possible
Hell ad to my afflictions.
Exit Ouerreach.
Mar. Is It not brave sport?

Greed. Brave sport? I am sure it has taken away my stomach
I do not like the sauce.

Alw. Nay, weep not dearest:
Though it express your pity, what is decreed
Above, we cannot alter.

Lady. His threats move me
No scruple, Madam.

Mar. Was it not a rare trick
(And it please your Worship) to make the deed nothing?
I can do twenty neater, if you please
To purchase, and grow rich, for I will be
Such a solicitor, and steward for you,
As never Worshipful had.

Welb. I do believe thee.
But first discover the quaint means you used
To raze out the conueyance?

Mar. They are mysteries
Not to be spoke in public: certain mineralls
Incorporated in the incke, and wax?
Besides he gave me nothing, but still fed me
With hopes, and blows; and that was the inducement
To this Conumbrum. If it please your Worship
To call to memory, this mad beast once caused me
To urge you, or to drown, or hang, your self,
I Will do the like to him if you command me.

Welb. You are a Rascal, he that dares be false
To a master, though unjust, will never be true
To any other: look not for reward,
Or favor from me, I will shun thy sight
As I would do a basiliskes. Thank my pity
If thou keep thy cares, how e're I will take order
Your practice shall be silenced.

Greed. I Will commit him,
If you will have me Sir?

Welb. That were to little purpose,
His conscience be his prison, not a word
But instantly begone.

Ord. Take this kick with you.

Amb. And this.

Furn. If that I had my cleuer here
I would divide your Knaves head.

Mar. This is the haven,
False servants still arrive at.
Exit Mar. enter Over.
Lad. Come again.

Lou. Fear not I am your guard.

Welb. His looks are ghastly.

Well-doe. Some little time I have spent under your favors
In physical studies, and if my judgment err not
He Is mad beyond recovery: but observe him,
And look to your selves.

Over. Why is not the whole world
Included in my self? to what use then
Are friends, and servants? say there were a squadron
Of pikes, lined through with shot, when I am mounted
Upon my injuries, shall I fear to charge 'em?
No: I Will through the battalia, and that routed,
I Will fall to execution. Ha! I am feeble: Flourishing his sword unsheathed.
Some undone widow sitts upon mine arm,
And takes away the use often; and my sword
Glew'd to my scabberd, with wronged orphans tears
Will not be drawn. Ha! what are these? sure hangmen,
That come to bind my hands, and then to dragge me
Before the judgment seat now they are new shapes
And do appear like furies, with steel whippes
To scourge my vlcerous soul? shall I then fall
Ingloriously, and yield? no spite of fate
I will be forced to hell like to my self,
Though you were legions of accursed spiritts.

Welb. Thus would I fly among you,
There Is no help
Disarme him first, then bind him.

Greed. Take a Mittimus
And carry him to Bedlam.

Lou. How he fomes!

Welb. And bites the earth.

Well-doe. Carry him to some dark room
There try what Art can do for his recovery.

Marg. O my dear father!
They force Ouerrcach off.
Alw. You must be patient mistress

Lou. Here is a president to teach wicked men,
That when they leave Religion, and turn Atheists
Their own abilities leaue'em, pray you take comfort
I will endeavor you shall be his guardians
In his distractions: and for your land master VVelborne,
Be it good, or ill in law, I Will be an vmpire,
Between you, and this, th'vndoubted heir
Of Sir Giles Ouerreach, for me, here is the anchor
That I must fix on.

Alw. What you shall determine,
My lord, I will allow of.

Welb. It Is the language
That I speak too; but there is something else
Beside the repossession of my land,
And payment of my debts that I must practice
I had a reputation, but 'twas lost
In my loose course; and 'till I redeem it
Some noble way, I am but half made up
It is a time of Action, if your Lordship
Will please to confer a company upon me
In your command, I doubt not in my service
To my King, and Country, but I shall do something
That may make me right again.

Lou. Your suite is granted,
And you loved for the motion,

Welb. Nothing wants then
But your allowance.

THE EPILOGVE.
But your allowance, and in that, our all
Is comprehended; it being known, nor we,
Nor be that wrote the Comedy can be free
Without your Mannumission, which if you
Grant willingly, as a fair favor due
To the Poets, and our labors, (as you may)
For we despair not Gentlemen of the Play)
We jointly shall profess your grace has might
To teach us action, and him how to write.
FINIS.

