THE Churches Sleep, expressed in a Sermon Preached at the Court, in the
Celebration of the Kings Majesty's most joyful and happy entrance into this
Kingdom, the 24. of March last.

BY Anthony Maxey, Batchelar in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty in
ordinary.

HEBREWS. 10.24.25. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love and to
good works.

Not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves (as the manner of
some is) but let us exhort one an other.

LONDON Printed by T. Este. for Clement Knight, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1606.

Cant. Chap. 2. Ver. 7. I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes
and Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor waken my Love, until she
please.
FOr the readier and more perfect understanding of this verse, it shall be
requisite, very briefly, to set down the order in placing this Book, the
Title, the Subject matter, and so consequently the Occasion whereupon this
Scripture is inferred.

Touching the placing and order of this Book: in the first of Kings. 6. King
Solomon in building the material Temple, he framed three Courts: the
outtermost, a great and large Court for the common people; next to that, an
inner room for the Priests and Levites, and last of all Sanctum Sanctorum,
the holiest of holies, only for the high Priest to enter in. The same Solomon,
in building up the spiritual Temple of the Soul, he has likewise framed
three courts. First the book of the Proverbs, as a great and outtermost Court,
wherein common people, and all sorts of men, may learn, the civil and godly
course of manners and discipline; next to that Ecclesiastes or the book of the
Preacher, as an inner court, leading us on farther, and teaching us to contemn
the world; last of all, he brings us into Sanctum Sanctorum, to this Song of
Songs, wherein not every one, but such as are conversant in divine mysteries,
and delight in heavenly contemplation, they may here behold, the sweet and
mystical conjunction between Christ and his Church, between God and the
soul.

For the Title. As there is Sabatum Sabati, and Sabatum Sabatorum, so (...),
this is called the Song of Songs. The Song of Songs, for that it is soung to
the King of Kings; The Song of Songs, for that it contains the highest
mystery of all mysteries: The Song of Songs, because of a thousand and five
sonets, 1. Kin. 4 32
which Solomon did endite, of them all this is most divine most excellent. For
it concerns not any particular occasion, as the songs of Moses and Debora,
but the public and flourishing estate of the Church, and thereupon for the
excellency, the ancient fathers call it, the heavenly treasure, the hidden
Manna, and Paradise of the Soul.

In the Matter, our Subject, the holy Ghost by sweet and comfortable
allegories, does lively and affectionately express, the holy and perfect love
between Christ and his blessed spouse. So as Pliny writes, Plin. lib. ^. Cap.
25.
that the Bees do make outtermost part of their combs with the basest honey,
but do enclose the finest and purest honey within: So the outward duties of
Religion, they are contained in the morrall Precepts of the Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes, but the divine and heavenly mysteries, betwixt Christ and his
Church, they lie hidden and are closely chouched in these Parables.

The Occasion whereupon this Scripture is inferred, is this. The holy spouse,
the Church of God being in this world, as a Lilly amongst Thorns, 2. and 3.
ver.
and as an Apple tree in the wild forest, that is, oppressed with enemies,
molested with Schism, Contention, and Heresies, she does long to enjoy the
blessed presence of Christ; at length under the peaceable and glorious reign
of King Solomon, comforted with his gracious spirit, shadowed under his
protection, and satisfied with his love, Honorius
with quiet rest of heart and much content of mind, she takes her repose,
and peaceably falls a sleep.

Whereupon as S. Bernard says, Christus dignatur esse custos ac vigill
sponsae, Christ vouchsafes to become the Brides watchman or keeper. Alluding
therein to the manner of marriages in those times, where at, were used to be
sung, two kind of verses, (...), and (...), Scoliast. Tho^criti. in
Epithalamium, Helen^^.
evening verses to bring a sleep, and morning verses to waken the Bride.

But Christ in ardent affection, Cap. ver. 2.3.8.7.5.4.
and tender care over his Church, in three several places he gives this
great and solemn charge, that his Spouse now being asleep, his Church being
now in blessed rest and proseritie, no man waken her, no man cause any stir or
trouble to be raised.

I charge you O ye daughters of Ierusa. etc. In these words, there is a
Praecipe Christianis, an high Commission granted out, for to establish and
settle the good estate and peace of the Church. Wherein are to be considered
1. The Persons. First, who sends -- I, Lastly, the date. 2 to whom --
Daughters of Jerusalem. Lastly, the date.
2. Charge. 1. Manner -- By the Roes and Hindes. Until she please. 2.
Substance -- not to stir waken Christ's love. Until she please.



The Person who charge.
FIrst, for the Person who it is that charge, and to whom this commission is
directed, it is requisite to ask as the Spouse does in the fifth Chapter and
ninth verse, Who is this beloved more then another lover, that he does so
charge. To direct and persuade in matters of great weight and consequence,
there are these three required, (...), Wisdom, Love, Aristo. Rhet. li. 2. ca.
1.
and Authority. Wisdom to be believed; Love to be respected; Authority to
be feared. First, Wisdom, for that is nimbler then all things, Wis. 7.24.
and searches thoroughly, by reason of her pureness.

Secondly, Love is requisite, Cant. 8.^.
for it is strong as death, there is nothing but a man will undertake at the
persuasion of a wiseman, who does entirely love him.

Lastly, Authority is required, Aug.
for Etsi meliores sunt quos ducit amor, tamen plures sunt quos corrigit timor;
the better sort are won by Love, but the greater number are overcome by
Fear. He that gives this charge it is our blessed Savior, so says the
Spouse in the next verse, it is the voice of my well beloved: it is he against
whom for his Wisdom to direct, for his Love to comfort, for his Authority to
punish, there is no exception to be taken, for Dominus locutus est, and ego
adiuro they are all one.

And whereas he begins with a charge, we are to observe the Dialect and
Acrimonie of the holy Ghost in chargeing. Sotomaior.
For adiuratio est iurationis quoddam genus, this adiuring and charging is a
kind of swearing. Genesis 24.3.
So that as Abraham caused his servant to swear, and then charged him not to
take a wife for his Son of the women of Canaan, so here is an oath of
Canonical obedience required, that no man affiance himself, to any
schismatical or heretical Church, but only the true Spouse of Christ, she
must be, as the loving Hind, Prou. 5.1^.
and pleasant Roe in thy sight to delight in her love continually.

The words of Gods spirit, they are not otiosa supplementa verborum, nor as Job
says, words of the wind; but where the holy Ghost falls on charging, without
question there is some weighty matter in hand; Job. 6.26.
and therefore in regard of the person who does adjure and charge, when the
assembly is broken up, this charge must be thought upon to be performed.

Daughters of Jerusalem.
THE persons to whom this charge is directed, is to the Daughters of
Jerusalem, that is, by the judgment and consent of all interpreters, to the
Magistrates and to the Ministers, especially to the holy Priests, who are
attending upon the Church, as waighting women on a Queen, or as loving
daughters upon their mothers.

They are named Daughters of Jerusalem, because (...): Daughters in their
qualities resemble their mother. Arist. de ge. 4. cap. 3
Jerusalem by David it was made (...), the mother city in all Judea, in the
12. of the Revel: she is said to travail in birth, and in the 4. to the
Galath. 26. it is called (...) the mother of us all; a plain periphrasis of
the Church.

Jerusalem as appears in the 18. of Joshua, 28. it first took the name of
Iebuseus the son of Chana, and was called Iebus, Josephus Arqueri.
after it was enlarged by Melchisedech and called Salem, which signifies
Atonement, or the vision of Peace; Hebr. 7. and 2. King of Salem; that is King
of Peace. Thus then daughters of Jerusalem, are to be understood, Daughters
that resemble their mother, Daughters of Peace. What? and is it to be feared,
that Jerusalem, shall be disturbed of her own Daughters? they that profess
themselves, to be children of the holy City, and should continually pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, are they such stirrers that they must be charged? I
verily: the holy Ghost knew right well, both how and to whom to speak. For
(...), Act. 20.30
even from among your selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, and
seeking to draw Disciples after them.

When the Devil saw, his Temples forsaken and his Oracles put to silence, he
devised this as a special supply to have always his agents in or about the
Church, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. c. 51
Qui sub vocabulo Christiano, doctrinae resisterent Christianae, who under the
title of a Christian name, might ever be ready to resist the Christian
doctrine. Inimici hominis domestici eius, our own calling and countrymen, are
our most unkind and cruel enemies. Had not diverse of us, like unnatural
children shaken off that reverend obedience due to the Church our mother, but
had showed our selves (as here we are named) Daughters of Jerusalem, the holy
spouse of Christ, had never been so wounded at the heart, nor her patrimony,
so bouldly been made a pray to sacrilegious Atheists.

Whereas we should preach Christ Jesus crucified, that is, reconciliation by
his blood, holy life, repentance and good works, christian Charity, and such
like, still there is much a do, about such points, as make not to the
furtherance of the people in good life and devotion, but to the overthrow of
the state Ecclesiastical, and to the disturbance of the Church of God. It is a
woeful offspring, when the birth of the child is the death of the mother. If It
is run to his mother Progne, and be betrayed in her bosom: if when the child
ask bread, the father give a Scorpion; if the Physician minister poison; if
there be no succor in the judge, Contra solitudinem and inopiam, if one truth
be not generally taught of us all, et locum vbi consistat reperire non potest;
if still there be a difference made between the Reformed and the Formalistes;
and affirmed, that the Reformed though they lose their livings, yet they will
keep a good conscience, but the Formalists will ever be of the same religion
the king is of?

If when we celebrate the Lords Supper, we play (as they say) a pageant of our
own, and make poor silly souls believe, they have an English mass; if
Church men affirm, that our Church has in it still, so many black marks, that
the natural children of the Church cannot discern it? what hope can be
conceived, that the blessed Spouse shall ever attain, unto any settled and
joyful rest? The people in all ages, they have ever delighted to hear of the
faults and frailties both of their governors and of their teachers; it has
ever been laughing cheer to the ignorant multitude, to see strange
innouations, change in the course of religion, and men of the Church, at
variance and contention, yet all this is not sufficient to advise, but still,
even upon no occasion, diverse are ever troubling the state, and murmuring
against the government established.

Our Savior Christ, he directs this charge, especially unto us, and calls
us Daughters of Jerusalem, Bernard.
pie blanditur, ac suauiter allicit, Daughters for love, Jerusalem for peace;
teaching us thereby, humility, obedience to the christian Maiestrate, peace,
lowlines and submission to the Church our mother? so that, if we do joy in
the prosperity of our country, if we do long after the flourishing estate of
the Church (above all others) we must be knit together in unity and peace.
Gel. 5.15.
For if we bite one an other, we shall be consumed one of another.

Surely, the Lord is with King Solomon, God is with our King, he has given
him wisdom, riches, and honor, he has built him a glorious palace, Cant.
3.9.
the timber is of Lebanon, the pillars of silver, the ornaments of gold, the
work does prosper in his hands, and there remains nothing but that it may be
paued throughout, with the love of the Daughters of Jerusalem. Therefore you
that be Magistrates, Parliament men, flowers of the land, and ornaments of your
Country, here also called Daughters of Jerusalem, do you by all good means
procure the Peace of the Church. Give no encouragement to humorous men; do not
favor their disorderly proceedings; win them by your authority, persuade them
in your love, to peace and conformity. It is said of Saint Ciprian, that with
tears he bewailed those, who in the time of persecution denied Christ; much
more is their contempt and peruersenes to be lamented, who in the time of the
Churches prosperity do wilfully forsake Christ: for what is it else to
forsake Christ, but without just cause, with out any sure ground, to forsake
that blessed calling, whereof before God and men, before Saints and Angels, they
have made public profession before the Church.

Is this integrity? is this humbleness of mind, and an heart truly knit and
devoted unto God? No verily. Is in amore Dei mayor erit, qui plurimos ad eius
amorem trahit. Greg. in hom.
That man shall be accepted most in Gods love, who does win most to the holy
love of God. It is a blessed thing, to be even a door keeper in the house of
God: and it savors of an humble mind, of a sweet spirit, to become all things
to all men, by all possible means to win some. Thus did Christ teach in his
life, and thus did he perform in his death. Perdidit vitam potius quam
perdidit obedientiam. But, if it be so, that nothing can prevail with these
men, and that they will needs leave of to be Daughters of Jerusalem: then here
is not only a charge given to fore-warne them by word, but in the 15. ver.
there follows an attachment. If I charge will not serve, the take us the
foxes, Cant. 2.15
that destroy the vines, must follow: If Arons rod cannot sway, Moses must
stinge: Fitches are to be beaten with a staff, and cummin with arod. Whosoever
will not do, Eza. 7.^6.
the Law of thy God and the Kings law, let him have judgment without delay. S.
Basile says, that Magistrate is (...) with out bowels and compassion, who
suffers disorders in the church unpunished. Diverse questions, beginning only
to arise, between the Disciples of Saint John, and our Savior, holy writers
have this observation, that God in his wisdom, did suffer the death of Saint
John to hasten, John. 3 25.
that there might be no sects nor division in the Church. Chrisost. Theodo.


Very loath have I ever been, to be seen at any time to meddle in these
troubles of the Church, and therefore (the Lord knows my heart) I speak not
in bitterness to exasperate any man's thoughts against them. But in this case,
who is offended, and I burn not? by lamentable experience do I know, what
strange and woeful effects, these disordered courses have brought forth.
Diverse, in whose virtuous and lovely society, my heart has often ioyed, and
some, for whom nature would cause a man to cry out, (would to god I had dyed
for thee my brother;) some of these have forsaken both friends and country, and
others, (men of excellent parts in human learning, whereas they had purposed
to take holy orders, by reason of these contentions, they fell away, and
embraced this present world. Therefore in those things, which concern the glory
of God, the peace and prosperity of the Church: Plutarch.
Optima legum institutio, vt non solum sint, sed vt latis pureatur. As it is a
blessed thing to have begun well, so it is the crown of glory to persevere in
well doing, to persist by all good means, that as much as possible may be,
from the Orcades to the South seas, from the Irish pale to the Western bounds,
there may be one public, perfect, and Christian Peace amongst us: for fear
least as by the discord of the Arians innumerable people fell away, Dluus.
Hilar. lib. contra Constable. August.
from Christianity to Gentilisme and infidelity, so by reason of our discord,
they never cease, to fall away as fast to Atheisine and impiety.

Roes and Hindes.
OF the Persons you have heard, now comes in the charge it self: wherein
first we are to consider the Manner, which is very sweet and proper. For being
in the fields and alluding to shepherds according to the tenor of the
Canticle, he does charge by the Roes and Hindes of the field. Why we should
be charged by Roes and Hindes, (such a strange kind of adiuration) and what
is meant by them, there is great variety of interpretations, amongst all
writers. In the original tongue, Tzeboath and Ailoth, the Hebrew words they
do signify exercitus and virtutes, whereunto the Septuagints agreeing, do
translate it (...). O ye Daughters I charge you, by the royal armies, and
strength of the field.

Aponius in his 4. book, Aponius.
says, we are adjured by Roes and Hindes. For example sake, quod horu^ est
amor ardentissimus, because of all other beasts, their love, in feeding, and
keeping quietly one with an other, is most peaceable and affectionate: Per
Hinnulos and Capreas, Rupertus.
that is, says Rupertus, by the holy Patriarks; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who
in their generations were men of peace: Thomas Aquinas he expounds it, Tho.
Aqui Lyra.
by the holy Prophets and Apostles, Lyra says we are charged by Roes and
Hindes for that these beasts are enemies to poison, and fellow helpers against
such as hurt them.

Saint Bernard, Bernard sermon. 53. Beza.
he adiureth by the holy Angels, who are as swift as Roes and Hindes, Beza,
(whose exposition is very good) he says; the spirit of God, does call the very
dum creatures to witness against stirrers in the Church. Some expound Roes and
Hindes to be the chief theological virtues, adiuring us by our faith, hope,
and charity. Others they say we are adjured amore quo tenemini Sanctis, Hugo.
Cand.
by that love and reverend duty, which we do owe to the Saints and reverend
Fathers of the Church. To be short: Gregory, Gorrhan, Cassiodore, Ambrose,
Origin, Honorius, Anselmus, Angelomus, almost every author does differ in his
exposition. So that as the Poet cried out, Quid clamem? quae fata vocem? quae
numina poscam? so all authors are at a stand, and cannot tell, either in
heaven or in earth, or amongst the creatures, what to call to witness, that
they might sufficiently charge. But that they might be sure to make all men
fearful to stir or trouble the Churches peace, every one does adjure by
that which in his senerall judgment is most forcible. Amongst the rest,
Venerab. Beda.
the exposition of Venerable Beda, is very significant and religious. I charge
you by the Roes and Hindes, that is says he, per delitias agri, by the souls
and tender consciences of the ignorant and simple people, they are the Roes and
Hindes which we must hunt after, and study to take. And very fitly are they
compared to Roes and Hindes, because as, Pliny, P li. lib 8. cap 53. Solinus.
lib 3.
Philostratus and Solinus writes, they are most tender and fearful of all
beasts, affrited with any noise, checked with the least foil, turned out of
course with the cracking of a stick, presently make head another way, and when
they are once out of their wonted walk, Erranti in via, nullus est terminus,
they run they know not whither, even to their own death: Such is the nature
and disposition of common people, soon stird up, quickled awry, sometimes
running full head one way, on a sudden turned as much an other. 1. Sam. 15.24.
Act. 12.2.
Therefore it is a servile course, and bewraies a vain and proud spirit for
any, especially men of religion and understanding, to fit the fancies, and
seek to win unto themselves the applause of common people. Plato de Rep.
Plato in his common wealth forbids men, to tange up and down, to ring away
other men's Bees, yet the only glory of some men is, to get, flockers, and
followers after them, by tanging and iangling in matters of no importance.
Surely, as a weak and feeble brain, follows the waxing and waining of the
Moon, so the braine-sicke humor of the multitude is subject and pliable to
every change and revolution. Whereupon Homer compares the disposition of common
people to the standing corn, Homer.
there comes a puff, and blows it all on the one side, there comes an other
blast, and swayes it as much on the other side. It is a fit comparison made by
the Kingly Prophet. Psa. 65.7.
It is the Lord that stilleth the rage of the Sea, the noise of the Waves, and
the madness of the people; iumping therein with the Prophet Esaias 17. Chapter,
where the nature of the people is compared unto the billows (...), of the
trouble some and working Sea. So easily set a gog, so delighted with novelties,
so full of alteration and change are the affections of common people.

In the 28. of the Acts. Saint Paul whilst the Viper hung upon his hand, he
was a murderer, again, the Viper shaken off, in the turning of an hand, he was
a God. In the 3. of Ezra and the 12. the people wept because they had no
Temple: after when the Temple was builded, then they wept as fast again,
because the glory of the second was not like the first. In the time of queen
Mary, there was lamentation, and crying out, that I dolatry was set up, the
Church polluted, and the Gospel taken away: afterward when through the great
mercy of God, the Gospel was advanced, and the light thereof did comfortably
shine throughout the whole kingdom, then they murmured and cried out as fast
again, that we had no Church, no Ministry, truth was wrapped up in Ceremonies,
and all was Antichristian.

In the 19. of the Acts, Demetrius and other subtle heads of the tradse men of
Ephesus, (merely for their own gain) raised a great tumult, and getting the
people together, cried out, great is Diana of the Ephesians; presently the
people were carried with such a tempest of fury, that the city was all in an
uproar, they can and rushed whether they list in great confusion, much violence
was offered, and yet at last as appearerh in the 32. verse, the most part knew
not wherefore they were come tog there. In like sort, Nobiles qui^am praeci^u^
^ui^s ^eg^^merum ^ge unt (...) ann, 1583.
not many years agone, diverse personages of great credit and countenance (they
and their predecess^urs being long since enriched, by the revenues of the
Church and fearing to lose them) apprehending presently the success, inuegled
many weak men, young divines, tradesmen, artificers, and such like, and they
all cried out, for the Geneua discipline, and Scottish reformation in the
Churh. The ignorant multitude once stirred up, the whole land was in sects and
tumults, the state was troubled, the Prince was disobeyed, good laws were
neglected, by Libels, Pamphlets, by consealements, by treacheries, by sundry
foul disorders, violence and disgrace was offered, A book of discipline
compiled after the Geneua fashion by M. Knox, and others, rejected of the
disciplinarians and termed a devout imagination. Another book called Disciph
ecclesiae sacra verbo Dei discripta, correct d altered and amended about. 1587.
to many societies and worthy callings in this land, and yet I dare say, the
most part never knew what they did desire. Nay, I dare confidently affirm,
that the chiefest and learned sectaries of those times, and even at this day,
not six of them, did ever fully and soundly agree, in the maine points, and
manner of erecting, this their Goddess Diana, this affected discipline and
reformation. Yet behold and observe the effects.

These silly Roes and Hindes once stirred up, they flockt together and
assembled in woods; they haunted private conuenticles in the night; they had
secret Printers in every corner, the public congregation grew odious, the holy
word and Sacraments were despised: at length they affirmed plainly there was
no true Minister in the Church of England, and so some fled beeyond Seas,
others gave up their calling, lurking idly in other men's ho ses, seducing their
minds, and wasting their esta^es. While these reformers thus ran their
course, honest plain men, simple people, beholding such parts taking and
contention, seeing such acceptions of persons, and variety of opinions, they
in their ignorance stood at a gaze: some fell away to the Church of Rome,
others waxed neither hot not cold, Athisme crept in, devotion was laid aside,
God exceedingly dishonored, and the estate both of Church and common wealth
very much defaced, I say no more of these Roes and Hindes, (...).

If then we regard the salvation, of simple people, by rooting out all Athisme
and Superstition, if we tender their peaceable and Christian life, who are
(...), misse-led upon every light occasion, then we must wholly lay aside, all
contention and difference whatsoever: with one heart, with one consent, we must
all preach one and the self same doctrine, all use the same ceremonies,
thereby to win the people to Godliness of life, and holy reverence; and always
(in regard of their weakness) we must be shie and fearful of stirring in the
Church. The very Heathen have taught us discreation in this point.

Amongst the wise Grecians the difficult points of their religion, Aug. de
ciui. Del. li. 4. cap. 38
were never laid open to the discussing of the ignorant people, but closed up
with silence. Varro that notable, and learned writer, removed those books
which he wrote, touching the deepest questions and mysteries in Theology, from
the sight and knowledge of the multitude, Scholis vero ac parietibus clausit,
Aug. de ciui. Dei. li. 6. cap. 5.
he reserved them private to the learned Schools.

Above all others, the holy Apostles and aunciant Fathers of blessed memory,
were so chary in this point, hat if any doubt arose, ^f any question or
controversy fell out among them: they did not by and by set forth bitter
inuectiues and sedicious Phamphlets, they did not put up clamorous bills to
temporal courts, they did not creep and couch to lay men, for the boulstring
and bearing out of any disorders in the Church, they did not haunt and trouble
Christian Princes, with bold and unadvised petitions, but as we may see, Act.
15.
by the Apostles Acts. 15. A matter of great consequence, was orderly and
lovingly disoussed at Ierusal^m, (the School of the Prophets) and so peaceably
ended by the chief and most excellent Apostles. This president and worthy
example, was truly followed by Saint Hierome and Ruffmus, by Saint Augustin^
by Chrysostom and Epiphamus, by the good Bishop of Alexandria, in the time of
Arrius, Niceph. eccle hist. lib. 8 50. Paulus Diaco.
by Th^o^o^e who sent privately to Paul Patriarch of Constantinople: thus they
conferred peaceably together, they wrote privately one the each other, and so
(never making the people acquainted) doubts being resolved and controversies
ended every man did rest satisfied in his obedience and went peaceably on in
his several calling. These holy and grave men considered well, that the souls
of the ignorant people were precious, their minds like Roes and Hindes, easily
missecaried, soon stirred up, and quickly driven from their wonted layer,
therefore as the good shepherd in the 23. Psalm, they fed them peaceably in
green pastures, they led them not unto torrentes, to troublesome whirlepooles,
but (...) to the waters of rest, Heresbaci in Psalm. 23.
and as the original does infer to the sweet streams that run quietly.

Stir not.
THe substance of this charge, is double: First, not to stir in respect of the
danger: Secondly, not to waken, in regard of the Spouse, who is fallen asleep,
and peaceably taking rest. It is dangerous to stir, for that a rent or schism
in the Church, is like a wound in the Soul, or a great breach in the Sea,
there is almost nothing able to close it up again. Howsoever at the first it
seems of small reckning, and of no importance, yet, it never shows it self
at the beeginning in the right colors, but crescit eundo, it creeps on and
gathers strength, and we shall never read, that the primative point of any
Schism, did ever rest, or stay it self, until it came to a full periode, of
a plain heresy. Hieron. Eccli. 11 32. Niceph. eccle. hist. li. 8. cap. 5.
Nullum schisma, non sibi aliquam posted confingit haeresim. Of one little
spark is made a great fire. Arrian his heresy, it was but a spark (as
Nicephorus does write) first raised by one Alexander Bancalis, because an other
was preferred before him, yet this spark set all Asia, Afric, and Europe on
fire, and so poisoned the spawne of the Church, Cassiod. li. 1. cap. 12
in the flourishing spring of worthy Constantine, that even to this day, it
never recovered the loss again. Mahomet that Antichristian infidel, first,
began his sect with a few followers, and because Heraclius the Emperor let him
run on, Carrion. anno. Do. 641.
neglecting him as not worthy to be defeated, shortly after under color of his
religion, he over ran Asia, defaced the East Church, subverted the glorious
Empire of Constantinople, and so continues to this day the scourge of all
Christendom.

Bleidan. Bellu^ rusticanum absumpsit Germano. rum. 150000. vei est in vita
Clementis Romans Pontificis*
Did not the Anabaptists of late years. 1525. even of a small spark, raise
such a flame in Germany, that growing at length to parts taking, by the base
multitude, Temples, and cities were set on fire, banishment and proscription
inflicted upon the innocent, and at length a butchery massaker made of fifty
thousand people slain at one time, and an hundred thousand Christians murdered
at an other. They began with the Bishops, and Clergy, Bullinger.
but they ended with the deposing of civil Magistrates and destruction of the
people.

The ground and primative cause of all the contentions raised heretofore in our
Church, was at the first a small coffeehouse, a matter of private grudge, a
little spark: but by a bold admonition given at that time to the high court
of Parliament, it wakened all England, Admonition.
and set a number of tongues and pens on fire, (not with such fire as fell on
the Alter, and sanctified the Sacrifice) but with the fire of bitterness,
schism, and contention, which could never yet be thoroughly quenched to this
day.

From this spark, as from Hydra, what a number of poisoned heads sprung up:
Anabaptists, Brownists, Puritaines, Catharists, Atheists, the famille of love,
and such like. And notwithstanding those worthy and learned men, who fled in
queen Mary's time (as John Bale, Richard Cox, John Pa^khurst, William Burloe,
Alexander Nowell; John Jewel; Edwin Sands, Edmond Grindall, and very many
more) maintained the government of the Church of England, used in their holy
assemblies, the form of service, and order of ceremonies which were
established in King Edwards time, and ratified again by good queen Elizabeth,
yet behold, contrary to the judgment and course of these learned and holy men,
what strange, what fiery and stirring conclusions were raised. That the choice
of Ministers should stand upon the approbation of the people, Cart. wright.
Admonition Suppli. to the Parlia. 56.
and that they are all of equal authority: that the Church government was
utterly unlawful and Antichristian: That the Article of our faith, touching
Christ's descention into hell was foisted into the Creed: That Hacket executed.
Festidies. sunt commode abolendi.
the Lords prayer, by our Savior himself commanded, was not to be used: That
Schismatiks in Berry.
no holiday might be observed, but only the Saboth: That no Defended openly in
the University.
father or human writer might be alleged in the Pulpet: That the Book of
common Prayer, was to be abolished: That all the Ceremonies of our Church were
Popish, and to be swept away: Mart iu. r. Adm. pa. 25.
That the callings of Bishops, was an Antichristian and devilish hierarchy:
That reformation of Religion, belongs to the comminaltie: Buccha de iure
regni. Page. 61.
and that the people are better then the King, and of greater authority: That
Scottish presbetary in prison at this day.
the Presbitery and not the Prince was to be supreme governors in matters
Ecclesiastical.

This spark, what a number of Martin junior. Martin senior. Martin prote.
Martinus Epist. His Epitome. Hay any work.
seditious books, biting Libels, and slanderous Pamphlets, did it raise? This
spark amongst our selves, what heart burning, what boiling and secret grudges
(by the neglect of some, and applauding of others,) did it breed? This spark
amongst great personages, what palpable hypocrisy, Bishoprics, spoiled,
disnembred.
what soul sacrilege did it cause to be committed? This spark, what a gap
did it open, and what way did it make into the hearts of many men, first, to
doubt of the truth, and so after to be won to the Church of Rome? amongst the
Roes and Hinds; what disordered conuenticles, In London. soswich. Couentre
Ca^bridge
what profane actions, what secret whisperings, what vile treacheries did this
spark procure, Towns, Cities, Universities, the whole Land was on flame with
this spark.

In the peaceable estate of any Church, to renew any old point of heresy, to
set on soote any new opinion, any schism, or intricate question, it proves
like the cloud that Elias saw, 1. Kin 18.44.
at the first his servant looked, and he saw nothing; by and by he bad him
look again, and it beegan to arise as big as a man's fist, at length it
covered the whole sky with darkness, and immediately there followed a
storm. In like sort the most dangerous heresies that ever were, at the first
they have been raised of a small matter, and seemed nothing, but in the end
they have shadowed the face of the Church, and caused immesurable bloodshed.
Nay, it is to be observed, in the course of all ages and times, that the
greatest Monarchies, and most flourishing Kingdoms of the world, have never
received such fearful blows, and unexpected downe-fals by open and foreign
enemies, as they have done by stealing innouations and secrettreasons, first,
raised by sects and heresies, in religion. There is nothing does so knit
together the hearts of men, as the band of Faith: again, there is nothing does
cause such deadly hatred, and mortal hostility, as difference and discord in
religion. In a word, Dissension is the ordinary gate, whereat destruction
enters in. The destruction of Jerusalem, it first began with the civil
discord of Simon and Eleazer: By the dissension of the Christians in the East
Church, the Turk first entered into Hungary: and so generally discord has ever
wrought the translating of Kingdoms, and final desolation. Therefore beloved
Fathers, and Brethren all, I humbly beseech you in the name of the living God,
Submit your selves, to all manner ordinance of man, 1. Peter, 2.13. Tit. 3.1.
1. Tim. 2.1 Romans 13.1.
for the Lords sake: every man stand fast in loialtie and faithful obedience,
go peaceably on in that calling, wherein God has placed you, cease to be
contentious, and with an humble spirit, strive to walk before the Lord in
truth, and with a perfect heart. That so, the God of consolation, and peace,
who has planted amongst us the Gospel of peace, and has set over us a
religious King, a lover of peace, and has settled in his dominions a joyful
peace, may give unto his Spouse and grant unto his Church, love, unity and a
perpetual peace, for his own name and glory sake.

Waken not.
THe second part of this charge, is not to waken Christ's spouse, Cant. 8.9.
for jealousy is cruel as the grave, and if any man be so hardy and bold as
to waken his Love, it shall surely be revenged. In the 54. of Esaias. and the 5.
as Christ is there called the Husband, he that made thee is thy Husband, even
the Lord of Hosts: so Revel. 29. and 9. the Church is called the pride or the
Lambs wife, and here very graciously he vouchsafes to call her his Love.

There is much a do, many greuances or lovers be united. The Church of the
Jews, was 480. years under persecution of Pharao, and vexed by the Gentiles,
or ever it came to enjoy peace and prosperity under Solomon. The primative
Church was 300. years militant under ten grievous persecutions or ever it came
to be dormant under Constantine the great. This church of England in times
past, has seemed to be forsaken of her lover, and oftentimes since sundry
broiles, many discontentments have fallen out, or ever she might hope
assuredly, to enjoy any quiet rest indeed. She went about and sought him, Cant
3.2.
whom her soul loved, Ezech. 15
and found him not. But now as a bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so has
God rejoiced over this Land, and deckea his Love with ornaments, in a most
excellent manner, she is beecome glorious and of perfect beauty, her name is
spread through the world, and other nations do taste and are satisfied with the
breasts of her consolation. If we advisedly consider, and call to remembrance,
the bloody massakers of France, and difference of Religion still therein: the
wearisome broiles of Flanders, and unsettled estate of the Church amongst them:
The kings Ma^u^p^^ted at Rutheuer. 1, 84.
If we set before our eyes, the high indignities offered heretofore in
Scotland, to our most worthy and religious King James; the sudden and sundry
mutines, and vprores ever and anon arising from their presbiteriall discipline:
The kings Ma^e. ^esciped at Strineling, enforced to take the Castle. and in the
end to compound so his saseue.
the unstayed and discontented carriage, the poor and despised estate of such
Churchmen, as first hoped, but now cannot, with any reverend government rule
therein, then must we needs confess, happy are we in our settled peace, and
most blessed in the Godly prosperity which we enjoy.

This prosperity, this rest of the Church, under Solomon then, and such like
noble, wise, and religious Kings at this day, is compared unto Sleep, and out
of this sleep, the Church may not be wakened. For throughout this whole Song,
Christ is never said to have slept with his Spouse, neither is there at any
time mention of sleep, but presently (as in three several places) follows,
this charge; that no man waken.

There is one kind of sleep, Ovid. Homer.
which is Mortis imago. Homer calls it (...), deaths brother, or a dead sleep.
Saint Paul in the 6. to the Ephesians. 18. he terms the death of sin, (...),
the spirit of slumber: the Church of Sardis in the 3. of the Revel. is said to
be in this slumber. Our Church also was supposed to have been in this sleep,
and thereupon, those Good men, Vaux, Peircy, and Catesbie, resolved to take
punishment of the wickedness of these times and to waken us. But howsoever the
Spouse might sleep, O fearful wakning. Cant. 5.2.
her heart was waking, the prayers of the Saints continually crying, kept the
mercy of the Lord waking so that though we sleep, the keeper of Israel did
neither slumber nor sleep, He opened the eyes, and wakned the heart of his
chosen servant, to doubt of the danger, discry the plot, and to prevent the
Deadly Blow. He is delivered, the Lord is magnified, they are fallen, we stand
upright, and blessed be the God of our salvation.

There is another kind of Sleep, which is Ros naturae, the sweat or the dew
of nature, of this sleep the Physicians say, it is the repast of the body, and
the greatest comfort in nature that may be. Such a sleep, is this of the
Spouse, ex rore diuino, the dew of heaven has fallen upon her, he has given
his beloved sleep, et sucro silentia sommo procurat. Bemard.


God forbid I should come hither in the name of my God, and stand here before
this holy and honorable presence, to wound my conscience, by delivering an
untruth, or by blanching of sin and corruption, to dishonor my holy calling.
No, viuit Iehouath, The Lord knows my thoughts, I speak the truth, (as I
conceive) from my soul, to the glorious praise of our everlasting God, and to
the great comfort and encouragement of all that hear me. As it is in the
former part of this Chapter. Christ has now brought his Spouse into the wine
seller, Verses. 4.5.6.
he has stayed her with flagons, and comforted her with aples, his left hand
is under her head, and his right hand does embrace her, that is, satisfied in
great measure both with temporal and spiritual blessings, she does rest in
great prosperity. She has laid her down in peace, Psalm. 4.9.
and takes her rest, for now the Lord has made her to dwell in safety. O let
us praise the Lord for his goodness, and never be ashamed, to declare the
wonders, and to publish the blessings, which he has brought upon us this day.
Our eyes do see them, our thoughts must needs acknowledge them, and our
enemies (we find by late experience) with secret and great malice do envy
them. Give me leave therefore (I humbly beseech you) even for the glory of Gods
blessed name (whose exceeding mercy we are bound to acknowledge) and also for
a testimony of our own private duties, to make some relation of those
benefits, which we enjoy by the blessed government of our gracious
Sovereign, whose happy and joyful entrance into this Kingdom, we do
celebrate this day.

It is a plain, but an excellent principle. Euripides.
(...), Let him never take upon him, nor desire to rule, who has not first
learned to obey, and to forbear. It is well known unto us all, sundry times
has the quiet state of this Realm been disturbed, much hurly burly raised,
many treasons brued, practicing and procuring the death of our former Queen,
pretending most what, some title and interest unto the crown, but beehold,
notwithstanding, the apparent truth of his Majesty's title was openly known to
all the States in Christendom, and that long before, he might have procured
strong means, to have invested himself; Forbearancce.
with the honor and possession of the same: yet still, did he patiently abide
the Lords leisure, as one who truly feared God, he never combined with
France, nor complotted with Spain; he never stirred up, either subject within,
or foreign power without, but that which is yet very joyful to remember, and
seldom performed of natural brothers in one family, two mighty Princes,
good Queen Elizabeth, and our blessed King, most amiably they did live, and
love, (and as it were in one land) peaceably reign together.

When God had ended her days in peace, after many distracted fears, wherewith
the hearts of all beegan suddenly to be perplexed; how blessed were we in the
present succession of the crown, Succession.
the happy government whereof, did calmely come in, and peaceably arise, as
after a short night, the cheerful and fair morning Sunshine.

How secure is now the state, in the undoubted appearance of blessed Issue,
Issue.
a stay to the Land, and comfort to every good subjects heart.

Blessed art thou, Pron. 28.15
O Land (says the Scripture) whose Prince is the Son of Nobles. Royal
descent.
In the royal descent of this imperial crown, the Rose is not only sprounge
from the Red and White, descended from the noble offspring of both houses,
Lancaster and York (thereby most happily taking away all occasion of civil
dissension) but moreover happy are we in our selves, and fearful to other
nations, in the quiet and lawful union of these Kingdoms. Fantastical
humors did please themselves a while, and self conceited heads, have vainly
discoursed with idle similies, against the ordinance of God in this behalf:
but (leaving the future success, and farther conjunction to prayer,
forbearance, and time) in this one blessing, Union.
we may plainly beehold the extraordinary mercies of the Lord. For I am
undoubtedly persuaded (next after the knowledge of Christ, and the true
profession of the Gospel) this day, this day I say, is now, and hereafter
shall be, the most memorable and happy Day, that in this Land was ever
commended unto posterity these 1000. years. Indeed, the conquest of France,
has title of renown, but we know well the possession thereof was gotten by
blood, kept with charge and lost with dishonor. But by his Majesty's lawful
succession unto the crown, that which the great and deep Statesmen of
England, forecast many hundred years to compass; that which by dint of sword,
and much effusion of blood has often been attempted; that which all the
victorious Kings of England often desired, but never fully effected; that which
the example of other Christian Kings, and the wisest nations teach us; that
which the very idencity of place, language, condition, nature, soil,
affinity, and all in themselves do offer; the Lord God, who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in works, that has he sweetly brought about: without
present alliance in marriage, without tumult in war, without wrong to any
state whatsoever, Israel and Judah, Scotland and England, are both one, the
secret and wise ordinance of God has so settled it, O let the consent and
mutual love of both nations peaceably confirm it, and God in his mercy and
goodness seal it fast for ever.

Irish expeditions. ceased.
Since his happy entrance into this kingdom, how well is the whole Common
wealth eased and disburdened of the continual and troublesome charge of our
Irish expeditions:

Spanish broilcs appears.
How Christianlie are appeased, the unchristian and bloody spoils, robberies,
and murders daily committed between Spain and us.

Most Godly and amiable, is the confederate league concluded with our bordering
neighbors round about us. Confederate derate League. most christian.
To subdue Nations, and enlarge Kingdoms, by conquest and bloodshed to wicked
and tirannous Princes, it seems great glory and felicity, but by good and
Christian Kings war is never sought, but enforced by necessity. Faelicitas
mayor est, Malis faelicitas bonis necessitas. Aug. lib. 4. Aug. de ciuit. Dei
li. 4.15.
vicinum bonum habere concordem, quam vicinum malum subiugare bellantem. It is
greater honor and felicity, to retain the love of a good neighbor
concording in peace, then to continue the secret hatred of an ill neighbor
seduced by war.

Isocrates. ad Nicole
The wise Orator says. (...). Faithful and wise counselors are the most
profitable and worthy treasure, Faithful Counselors.
which any prince enjoys. And is not the Common Wealth furnished, with as
noble, faithful and wise Counselors of state, as learned, stout, Learned and
uncorrupted Lawers.
uncorrupted Judges and worthy Lawyers, as reverend Bishops, shining in their
lives and learning, as ever age afforded: Reverend Bishops.
all these (through the mild and wise government of a gracious King)
retaining their former dignities, Gospel established.
and faithfully performing their duties both to God and to their King.

Is not the truth of the Gospel, most peaceably, established and carefully
professed, with such reverend and constant joy in hearing the word, and
frequenting of prayer, as gives example to all the protestant Princes of
Christendom? To see the populous Court of a mighty King, as peaceable, well
given and religious, as the well ordered family of a private man's house, what
christian heart will not joy to hear it, and who can but magnify the God of
heaven to know it.

Marriage honored.
The sacred bands of holy marriage, are they not tenderly kept; highly esteemed,
and have they not been solemnly graced in Court, to the imitation of all the
Land?

Every great City and incorporation, and every part of the Land, is it not
replenished with Godly and learned Preachers, Learned and Godly teachers.
trained up in the universities, able in some good measure to teach, rebuke and
exhort with good discreation and judgment? What so is wanting and defective
herein, Conference as Hampto^
such has been his Majesty's Princely zeal that he has referred the care
thereof to special Committies, that with all couenient speed, Wales, Ireland
and the Northren borders, might be supplied and planted with learned and
religious Teachers?

Henry Jacob in his seditious Epistle dedicated to the King, H. Iocob.
is not ashamed to affirm that the present Ecclesiastical orders are more
friendly to Papists, Ceremomonies. Godly and approved. T. C.
Libertines and Atheists, then to the sincerity of the Gospel: an other also
of the same rank, sets it down, that we may better conform our selves in
orders and ceremonies to the Turk, then to the Papists. What a strange and
dangerous position is this? O where is discretion and piety, where is
Christian love, and holy moderation? Seeing the doctrine is sound and good in
the chief and maine points of salvation, why should any man speak so
unadvisedly, in matters of less importance? Alas we also are bound to pray
for you, to show you the right way, and woe be unto us, if (as men pleasers) we
shall speak against our own knowledge, or that others should be constraind,
to subscribe to that which is not consonant with the truth. Hear therefore and
as a wise and understanding people at length be satisfied. For undoubtedly the
ceremonies of the Church, and especially the use of the Corsse, The use of the
Cross approved by Origin. in Psalm. 38. Basi. de spir. Sanct. cap. 37. Chris.
tom. 2. hom. 55. in Mat. cap. 16. Hiero. li. 3. in Ezech. Aug. tract. 55. in
Ioh. and de veabis Dei. sermon. 18. and 53. Greg. Mag in li 3. in Job. cap 33
Ambro. li. 2. cap. 7. and other many.
so much excepted against this day, as the Standard of Christ's honor, has ever
been advanced, and borne aloft in the eye of the Church, to the comfort of all
good Christians, by the whole troop of the blessed Fathers, the Charrets, and
horsemen of Israel. And generally those ceremonies used at this day in our
Church, they are in themselves indifferent, in number few, in use decent. They
are peaceable in regard of conformity, reverend to breed denotion in the
people, and for continuance these 1500. years vncontrowlable: They are
consonant with the Scriptures, the exposition whereof, is confirmed by the
judgment of the aunciant Fathers of the primative Church; approved directly by
later interpreters, defended souldly by new writers, discussed by Kingly
conference, agreed upon by national consent, established by highest
authority, attested and made good by the approbation and judgment of other
neighbor Churches, as appears plainly in the confessions and several
articles of Heluetia, Boheme, Ausburge, France, Flanders, Heluetia. 1. art Boh.
25.15.18. Aus. art 4. Fra. art* 32 Sand. 32. Sax. ar 20 Sweuel. cap. 4.
Saxony and Sweueland.

It is a grounded principle, approved by the learned divines in all ages. In
iis rebus in quibus nihil statuit certum scriptura diuina, nobis populi Det and
Christiani principis iura tenen^ia sunt. In those things wherein the Scripture
has set down no certainty, the Laws of the Christian Prince, and of Gods
people are with all obedience to be embraced.

To proceed in this peace and prosperity of the Church, concerning the
Saboth: How generally is it observed, how religiously sanctified, even in this
great and busy City, wherein the streets may often be seen in a manner
desolate, and few stirring upon the Saboth, Saboth.
in the time of divine prayer and preaching: The painful preaching frequented
with infinite congregations, and mighty assemblies in this famous City; the
diligent and daily prayers, the devotion and thanksgiving, the readiness and
attention, in heating the word of God both preached and read even in this
place where I stand, does witness what I say. O how fair and blessed a thing
it is, for a Christian King to hear and know, all the inhabitants of his
Dominions, to be assembled upon the Saboth, to be knit together as one man,
praising, singing and rejoicing in God all their prayers well near at an
instant, as the flame of a thousand mountains, ascending aloft and peircing
the very heavens.

And is it not as lovely to behold, all the people of these Kingdoms, Industry
of the people.
with obedience to Law, and love to their Sovereign, to go peaceably on as
birds in the spring, busied every one in their several callings, and all the
week long cheerfully following their vocation?

Has not the Lord crowned year after year with his blessing, the Land giving
such increase that notwithstanding there be at this present, in this City and
Suburbs six hundred thousand living Souls, Plenty.
yet they all are well and plentifully fed, and all the people throughout the
land waxing warm and wealthy, sit peaceably under their vines, taking their
pleasure and recreation? (...). It is a ways an assured and good sign of
excellent government, when the people of any kingdom do grow more wealthy,
and become more civil and religious.

What excellent and Godly acts, stand in force, for the wise ordering and
comfortable relief of the poor? What straight and holy Canons or, Good Laws,
for the religious proceeding in all matter Ecclesiastical? What severity is
openly pronounced, and what punishment daily executed upon corrupt Officers and
powlers of the people

Has not Mercy triumphed over justice, Mercy.
and compassion to forgive (the perfect note of true Christianity) showed it
self abundantly in pardoning sundry offenses, and sparing the lives of
dangerous and hateful Traitors?

Fear admits no security: Democrit.
(...), whom all men are afraid of, such a man, stands in fear of all men. And
therefore, like a wise and right Christian Prince he does not build his safety
upon strength and power, but upon the mercy of God, upon Princely affability,
Affability
with his Nobles, and upon the love and faithfulness of his subjects. Doctor
Hill and other Papists, Jacob and other sectaries, they slanderously avouch,
that their persecutions are many, and their afflictons very grievous: and ye
behold all dissension in religion, Mild government.
has been awaies labored and is still sought, by all forberrance and gentle
means to be appeased: yea toward, all men in general, the government is
sweet and mild, and himself in his private nature, so loving and
compassionate, Ambro. de obitn. Theod.
that as Theido. he seeks to bind men unto him, not by force, but by
bounty and religion. Troublesome and sedicious spirits will never cease to
murmr and complain, Aug. de ciuit Dei lib. 1. cap 8.
but the point is: Non qualia, sed qualis quisque patiatur.

Since his blessed Reign do not our hearts secretly tell us, that we feel
and daily taste of joyful Peace, Peace.
sought by mighty Kings and embraced by foreign Nations, as in the days of
Solomon? Is not true Nobility, honorably respected? Virtue and well doing
cheerfully rewarded? Holy men and discreet daily advanced? Virtue rewarded.
the revenues of the Church lately confirmed: and diverse foundations, of
Religion already laid, as in the glorious reign of great Constantine? The Lord
is God, the Lord is God, and who is such a God as our God. O wretches, and
unthankful men that we are, we know not our own good, we weigh not the
sweet mercies of a kind and gracious God. For in these and many other
respects, which are most apparent to the view of all men, I assure my self
that his royal Majesty (whom the Lord protect with his mighty hand long to
reign over us) is now, and shall be for ever renowned amongst the most famous
Kings, that ever lived in the world: and that the Church, and common Wealth of
England, so happily governed by his Highness, is now at this day the most
Apostolic and flourishing Church, the most religious Court, the most peaceable
and upright state, that is in all Christendom: How be it when Prince and
People, when Nobility and Clergy, when all estates and degrees, do thus Godly
and peaceably go on, enjoying such blessed happiness, such quiet, and reposed
peace, would not the Sun be abashed, and the powers of nature daunted, that
Christian men, and especially such as are devoted unto God in sacred and holy
orders, some professing great holiness and austeritie, others much pureness
and great singularity, both these should never cease to disturb and waken the
churches peace? Surely it is the Lord that gives his beloved sleep, and this
sleep, this prosperity of the Church, and Common Wealth, it is a blessing
inestimable unto his people, therefore when he vouchsafes to give rest, no
man ought to waken or stir until she please, and that is never (...) until
it is plainly never. Until.
Genes. 8. The Raven returned not until the waters were dried up, that is
Never. Mat. 1.25. Joseph knew not the blessed Virgin until she had brought
forth her first begotten, that is Never, never, never let any man waken the
blessed Spouse.

The Conclusion.
But for as much, as the person, from whom this Commission is directed, is the
Metropolitan and great shepherd of our souls, Christ Jesus; the penner of the
holy Ghost the heavenly Secretary: seeing he vouchsafes to call the Church his
Love, the deepest of all the affections: her peace compared to Sleep, the
sweetest comfort in nature: seeing Christ Jesus himself, most wise, loving,
and fearful, is not content to persuade, but vehemently to charge, and yet
the attributes applied most sweet and kind, Daughters for Love, Jerusalem for
peace: seeing the Charge it self is so straightly given not one to stir, and in
no case to Waken, the Date so plainly set down, that is, must be Never,
according to the tenure of my text, in the person of Christ Jesus, I adjure and
solemnly charge: I charge by the holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who
in their generations, were men of Peace, I charge by the holy Apostles, who
have commanded us to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace: I
charge by the holy Angels, who at the birth of Christ did sing Peace: I charge,
by our Faith, Hope and Charity, which are the fruits of Peace: I charge by
that Obedience, due both to the civil Magistrate and spiritual governor, who
are by all good means to preserve and maintain Peace: I charge, by the Dum
Beasts of the field, who shall take revenge upon the disturbers of Peace:
Lastly, I adjure and charge, by the Souls of the ignorant and simple people;
the least whereof a thousand worlds are not able to redeem, that no man
despise the voice of this great shepherd this double and threefold Charge,
which concerns the flowrishing and happy peace of our country, the
prosperity and peaceable rest of the Church; the being, living, and well
being of us all.

Whosoever has any true taste of a religious heart: whosoever has any care of
his Souls Salvation: whosoever has any respect to the honor of his name, and
regard of his posterity: whosoever has any dutiful affection to his Prince
and country, let him pray rather that his tongue may cleave to the roof of his
mouth, and his right arm wither from his body, then once to be accounted
amongst the number of those, who will be seen to stir in so well governed a
state, to waken so blessed rest of the Spouse, to discontent the religious
heart of so gracious a King, and to blemish the glory of so renowned a Common
Wealth.

Ah Lord, what estate of Church or Common Wealth did ever in this world at
thine unto perfection? (...), whose desert and wisdom could ever content all
humors? wherein have not the most Noble and Christian Worthies of the world
been sought, one way or other secretly to be wronged? and who knows
(touching these late and grievous treasons,) why the Lord has suffered evil
counsel to be undertaken and with such malice and blood to be pursued?

Undoubtedly, First, it may be thought to this end, that all the people of
this Land, and every one here present, might take heed how we forget our
loving God, in the days of our prosperity, that we might learn, to stand
fast, upon the Lord, as upon mount Sion, to rely on his love, as the center of
our life, in all dangers to stye unto him, as a Bird does unto the shadie hill
for safety, that so both heart and tongue might acknowledge his gooodnesse,
and as a flood into the Sea, send thanksgiving to so dear a God again.

Secondly, Aug.
permittit Deus quod nemo impune committit, God suffers evil and wicked men
for a time, expecting their repentance and looking for their conversion, but,
if they persist, and become as Pharao was, hardened in their bloudthirsty
cruelty, then the Lord, even for his own glory, does suffer them to play upon
the hook, and dance in the snare, till at length it might be known, to all
Nations and Kingdoms, round about, that when it comes to the very point, the
Lord will rouse himself like a Giant, turn all such practices vpside-downe;
but will deliver his chosen, execute judgment upon the wicked, Psalm. 16.
and the ungodly shall be trapped in the works of their own hands. Therefore
let neither Prince nor people, be dismayed, and cast down with traitorous and
fearful rumors, but let his sacred Majesty, comfort his heart, raise up his
Spirit, and walk cheerfully upon the invincible hope, and assured experience
of the Lords fore passed love, let him hold still fast by God, and assuredly,
height and depth, edge and point, shall fall and fly before him, all his
crosses shall afford him joy, his enemies advantage, and his account shall
cheerfully be cast up for another world.

Lastly, the Lord has suffered, evil counsailae thus far to prevail, that
every private man who lives in peace and safety, might consider and weigh,
what a grievous burden it is, to sway the Scepter of a Kingdom, how the Kings
life is hunted after for our sakes, for the happiness which we enjoy, how He
and his Nobles are in continual danger, how (not for himself) but for us, for
us it is, that He and his Posterity is pursued with such deadly hatred: yet
notwithstanding, the Lord stands close unto him, he has fastened the crown
upon his head, and settled the Scepter in his hand, mauger the cruelty of all
his enemies, and the rage of the Devil himself, he will have all the world
to see, that he has set him up, to be the only means both of establishing
our happiness enjoyed, and also of discovering our danger escaped: that so,
when all the people of this Land, shall plainly see, how the Lord has set his
delight upon him: how from the very cradle he has lapped him in the bosom of
his love, how he has pulled him out of the jaws of death, from Poisen ready to
be taken, from Murdering at an instant, from the Lake of Fire, ready to be
kindled: we and all his Subjects, might be moved, to love him with a dutiful
and entire affection, to pray for him, as for our own Souls, to joy in his
prosperity, as the life of our well doing, to esteem him in our thoughts,
and honor him in our hearts as a tender Father, beeloued of God, the
maintainer of Religion, the giver of peace, the joy of his Subjects, the honor
of all Christian Princes, and that with joy and thanksgiving we might sing and
showt this day. God save our King for ever.

Now therefore O Lord our GOD, who dwell in the highest Heavens, infinite in
goodness, abundant in mercy, and glorious in praises, we magnify thy name,
and triumph in thy mercy, for that, still we do enjoy this happy day. Alas,
of our selves, what is our King, and what are we his Subjects, that from time
to time, thou should so tenderly love him, and so continually follow us,
with thy gracious and sweet mercies? We know O Lord, Riches and Honor, Peace
and prosperity, Life and Deliverance come only from thee: Greatness and
Power, Glory, Victory and Praises they are thine: and what shall we render
unto thee, our dearest God? Only this. Before Heaven and Earth, before thy
holy Angels, before all thy Saints, and Servant, here present in this
public congregation, we do bow our hearts and the thoughts of our hearts
unto thee, we acknowledge our own unworthiness, ascribing all our
happiness, and this our late deliverance to thy fatherly protection only.

We are heartely sorry, and do secretly mourn in our souls, that for all thy
kind and unspeakable blessings, we cannot serve thee as we ought, nor love
thee as we would, but we entreat thy glorious Majesty, stir up in us good
desires, increase them more and more, crown them with thine own mercy, and
we will never cease to sing everlasting priases unto thy name.

Dear God and eternal Father, be pleased, be pleased to confirm this
goonesse, and to establish this thy covenant both with our King and us thy
people for ever. For thy mercy sake, for thine own glory sake, for thy Son
Christ Jesus sake, forsake us not, neither leave us, continue for ever our
loving God, let us and the remnant of our seed after us be sealed up, in thy
merciful promise, in thy gracious and everlasting love, and that through Jesus
Christ, to whom, with the Father and holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and
thanksgiving both now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

