THE BONDMAN: AN ANCIENT STORY. As it has been often Acted with good
allowance, at the Cockpit in Drury Lane: by the most Excellent Princess, the
Lady ELIZABETH her Servants.

By Phillip Massinger.

LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde, for John Harison and Edward Blackmore, and are
to be sold at the great South door of Paul's. 1624.

THE ACTORS NAMES.
Timolion, the General of Corinth. Archidamus, the Praetor of Siracusa.
Diphilus, a Senator of Siracusa. Cleon, a fat impotent Lord. Pisander,
(disguisde) a Gentleman of Thebes. Leosthenes, a Gentleman of Siracusa enamourd
of Cleora. Asotus, a foolish Lover, and the son of Cleon. Timagoras, the
Son of Archidamus. Cleora, Daughter of Archidamus. Corisca, a proud wanton
Lady, wife to Cleon. Olimpia, a rich Widow. Statilia, Sister to Pisander,
slave to Cleora. Zanthia, Slave to Corisca. Poliphron, (disguisde) friend to
Pisander. Gracculo, Cimbrio. Bondmen. A Iaylor,
TO The Right Honorable, my singular good Lord, PHILIP Earl of Mountgomery,
Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
Right Honorable,
HOw ever I could never arrive at the happiness to be made known to your
Lordship, yet a desire borne with me, to make tender of all duties, and
service, to the Noble Family of the Herberts, descended to me as an inheritance
from my dead Father, Arthur Massinger. Many years he happily spent in the
service of your Honorable House, and dyed a servant to it; leaving his, to be
ever most glad, and ready, to be at the command of al such, as derive
themselves from his most honored Master, your Lordships most noble Father. The
consideration of this, encouraged me (having no other means to present my
humblest service to your Honor) to shrowde this trifle, under the wings of
your Noble protection; and I hope out of the clemency of your Heroique
disposition, it will find, though perhaps not a welcome entertainment, yet at
the worst a gracious pardon. When it was first Acted, your Lordships liberal
suffrage taught others to allow it for current, it having received the
undoubted stamp of your Lordships allowance: and if in the perusal of any
vacant hour, when your Honors more serious occasions shall give you leave to
read it, it answer in your Lordships judgment, the report and opinion it had
upon the Stage, I shall esteem my labors not ill imployde, and while I live
continue,

The humblest of those that truly honor your Lordship, Philip Massinger.

The Authors Friend to the Reader.
THe PRINTERS haste calls on; I must not drive
My time past Six, though I begin at Five.
One hour I have entire; and it is enough,
Here are no Gypsy Iigges, no Drumming stuff,
Dances, or other Trumpery to delight,
Or take, by common way, the common sight.
The AVTHOR of this POEM, as he dares
To stand th'austerest Censure; so he cares,
As little what it is. His own, Best way
Is to be Judge, and AVTHOR of his PLAY.
It is his Knowledge, makes him thus secure;
Nor does he write to please, but to endure.
And (Reader) if you have disburs'd a shilling,
To see this worthy STORY, and are willing
To have a large increase; (if ruled by me)
You may a MERCHANT, and a POET be.
It Is granted for your twelue-pence you did sit,
And See, and Hear, and Understand not yet.
The AVTHOR (in a Christian pity) takes
Care of your good, and Prints it for your sakes.
That such as will but venture Sixpence more,
May Know, what they but Saw, and Heard before:
'Twill not be money lost, if you can reed,
(There Is all the doubt now,) but your gains exceed
If you can Understand, and you are made
Free of the freest, and the noblest Trade.
And in the way of POETRY, now adays,
Of all that are called Works the best are PLAYS.
W. B
The Bondman.
Actus-Primi. Scaena Prima.
Enter Timagorus, and Leosthenes. Timagorus. WHy should you droope Leosthenes,
or despair
My Sisters favor? what before you purchased
By Court-ship, and fair language in these Wars,
(For from her soul you know she loves a Soldier)
You may deserve by action:

Leost. Good Timagorus
When I have said my friend; think all is spoken
That may assure me yours; and pray you believe
The dreadful voice of war that shakes the City,
The thundering threats of Carthage; nor their Army
Raisde to make good those threats, affright not me.
If fair Cleora were confirmd his prize,
That has the strongest Arm, and sharpest Sword,
I would court Bellona in her Horrid-trime,
As if she were a Mistrisse, and bless Fortune
That offers my young valor to the proof,
How much I dare do for your Sisters love.
But when that I consider how auerse
Your noble Father great Archidamus;
Is, and has ever been to my desires:
Reason may warrant me to doubt and fear:
What seeds soever I sow in this wars
Of Noble courage, his determinate will
May blast, and give my harvest to another
That never toyld for it.

Timag. Prithee do not nourish
These jealous thoughts: I am thine, (and pardon me
Though I repeat it thy Timagoras)
That for thy sake, when the bold Theban su'd
Far famed Pisander, for my sisters love,
Sent him disgraced, and discontented home.
I wrought my Father then, and I that stopped not
In the careere of my affection to thee,
When that renowned Worthy that brought with him
High birth, wealth, courage, as fee'd Advocates
To mediate for him, never will consent
A fool that only has the shape of man,
Asotas, though he be rich Cleons Heir
Shall bear her from thee. Enter Pisander.

Leos. In that trust I love,

Timag. Which never shall deceive you.

Pisander. Sir the General
Timoleon by his Trumpets has given warning
For a remove.

Timagoras. It Is well, provide my Horse.

Pisander. I shall Sir. Exit Pisander.

Leost. This Slave has a strange aspect.

Timag. Fit for his fortune, it is a strong limm'd knave;
My Father bought him for my Sisters Litter.
O pride of women! Coaches are too common,
They surfeit in the happiness of peace,
And Ladies think they keep not state enough,
If for their pomp, and ease, they are not borne
In triumph on men's shoulders.

Leost. Who Commands
The Carthagenian Fleet?

Timag. Giscos their Admiral,
And it is our happiness: a raw young fellow,
One never traind in Arms, but rather fashiond
To tilt with Ladies lips, then crack a Lance,
Ravish a Feather from a Mistrisse Fan
And wear it as a Favor; a steel Helmet
Made horrid with a glorious Plume, will crack
His woman's neck.

Leost. No more of him, the motiue's
That Corinth gives us aid:

Timag. The common danger
For Sicily being afire, she is not safe;
It being apparent that ambitious Carthage,
That to enlarge her Empire, strives to fasten
An unjust gripe on us (that live free Lords
Of Syracusa) will not end, till Greece
Acknowledge her their Sovereign.

Leost. I am satisfied.
What think you of our General?

Timag. He is a man A Trumpet sounds.
Of strange and reserude parts; But a great Soldier.
His Trumpets call us, I Will forbear his Character.
To morrow in the Senate house at large,
He will express himself.

Leost. I Will follow you. Exeunt.

ACTVS I. SCAENA II.
Cleon, Corisca, Gracculo. Corisca. Nay good Chucke.

Cleon. I have said it; Stay at home,
I cannot brook with gadding, you are a fair one,
Beauty inuites temptation, and short heels
Are soon tripd up.

Corisca. Deny me, by my honor
You take no pity on me. I shall swoune
As Soon as you are absent, ask my Man else,
You know he dares not tell a lie.

Gracculo. Indeed,
You are no sooner out of sight, but she
Does feel strange qualmes, then sends for her young Doctor
Who ministers physic to her, on her back,
Her Ladyship lying as she were enthranced.
(I have peeped in at the key hole and obserud them)
And sure his Potions never fail to work,
For she is so pleasant, in the taking them
She tickles again.

Corisca. And alls to make you merry
When you come home.

Cleon. You flatter me, I am old,
And Wisdom cries beware.

Corisca. Old, Ducke to me
You are young Adonis.

Grac. Well said Venus,
I am sure she Vulcans him.

Corisc. I will not change thee
For twenty boistrous young things without Beards.
These bristles give the gentlest Tittillations,
And such a sweet dew flows on them, it cures
My lips without Pomatum; here is a round belly,
It Is a Down pillow to my back. I sleep
So quietly by it; and this tunable nose
(Faith when you hear it not) affords such music,
That I curse all night Fiddlers.

Gracc. This is gross,
Not find she flouts him.

Corisc. As I live I am jealous.

Cleon. Jealous! of me Wife?

Corisc. Yes, and I have reason,
Knowing how lusty and active a man you are.

Cleon. Hum, hum!

Gracc. This is no cunning queen! slight, she will make him
To think, that like a Stagge he has cast his homes,
And is grown young again.

Corisc. You have forgot what you did in your sleep,
And when you wakd called for a Cawdle.

Gracc. 'Twas in his sleep,
For waking I durst trust my Mother with him.

Corisc. I long to see the man of war Cleora
Archadamus Daughter goes, and rich Olimpa,
I will not miss the show.

Cleon. There Is no contending,
For this time I am pleased, but I Will no more on it. Exeunt.

ACTVS I. SCAENA III.
Arebidamus, Cleon. Diphilus, Olimpia. Corisca, Cleora, Zanthia. Archidamus. So
careless we have been, my noble Lords,
In the disposing of our own affairs,
And ignorant in the Art of government,
That now we need a stranger to instruct us.
Yet we are happy, that our neighbor Corinth
(Pitying the unjust gripe Carthage would lay
On Siracusa) has vouchsafed to lend us
Her man of men Timoleon to defend
Our Country, and our Liberties.

Diphilus. It Is a favor
We are unworthy of, and we may blush,
Necessity compels us to receive it.

Archid. O shame! that we that are a populous Nation,
Engaged to liberal nature, for all blessings
An Island can bring forth; we that have limbs
And able bodies; Shipping, Arms, and Treasure,
The sinnewes of the War, now we are called
To stand upon our Guard, cannot produce
One fit to be our General.

Cleon. I am old and fat,
I could say something else.

Archid. We must obey
The time, and our occasions, ruinous buildings,
Whose bases and foundations are infirm
Must use supporters; we are circled round
With danger, over our heads with sail stretched wings,
Destruction houers; and a cloud of mischief
Ready to break upon us; no hope left us
That may divert it, but our sleeping virtue
Rowsd up by brave Timoleon.

Cleon. When arriues he?

Diphil. He is expected every hour.

Archid. The braueries
Of Syracusae, among whom my son
Timagorus, Leosthenes, and Asotas
(Your hopeful heir Lord Cleon) two days since
Rode forth to meet him, and attend him to
The City, every minute we expect
To be blessed with his presence.

Cleon. What shout's this?

Diphilus. It Is seconded with loud Music.

Archid. Which confirms
His wished for entrance. Let us entertain him
With all respect, solemnity, and pomp,
A man may merit, that comes to redeem us
From slavery, and oppression.

Cleon. I Will lock up
My doors, and guard my gold; these Lads of Corinth
Have nimble fingers, and I fear them more
Being within our walls, then those of Carthage,
They are far off.

Archid. And Ladies be it your care
To welcome him, and his followers with all duty:
For rest resolved; their hands, and swords, must keep you
In that full height of happiness you live:
A dreadful change else follows. Exeunt Arch. Cleon. Diphilus.

Olimpia. We are instructed.

Corisca. I Will kiss him for the honor of my Country,
With any she in Corinth.

Olimpia. Were he a Courtier,
I have sweet meat in my Closet should content him
Be his pallat never so curious.

Corisca. And if need be
I have a Couch, and a banqueting house in my Orchard,
Where many a man of honor has not scorned
To spend an afternoon.

Olimpia. These men of war
As I have heard, know not to court a Lady.
They cannot praise our dressings, kiss our hands,
Usher us to our Litters, tell love Stories;
Commend our feet, and legs, and so search upwards.
A sweet becoming boldness: they are rough,
Boystrous and saucy, and at the first sight
Ruffle, and towse us, and as they find their stomachs
Fall roundly to it.

Corisc. Troth I like em the better.
I cannot endure to have a perfumed Sir
Stand cringing in the hammes; licking his lips,
Like a Spaniell over a Firmenty pot, and yet
Has not the boldness to come on, or offer
What they know we expect.

Olimpia. We may commend
A Gentleman's modesty, manners, and fine language,
His singing, dancing, riding of great horses,
The wearing of his clothes, his fair complexion,
Take presents from him, and extol his bounty,
Yet, though he observe, and waste his state upon us,
If he be stanch and bid not for the stock
That we were borne to traffic with; the truth is
We care not for his company.

Corisc. Musing Cliora?

Olimp. She Is studying how to entertain these Strangers,
And to engrosse them to her self.

Cleora. No surely,
I will not cheapen any of their Wares,
Till you have made your Market: you will buy
I know at any rate. Enter Timagor. Leosthenes, Asotus, Timoleon in black, led
in by Archid. Diphilus, Cleon. followed by Pisander, Gracculo, Cymbrio, and
others.

Corisc. She has given it you.

Olimpia. No more, they come.
The first kiss for this Jewel.

Archid. It is your seat.

Diphil. Which with a general suffrage
As to the supreme Magistrates surely tenders,
And prays Timoleon to accept.

Timoleon. Such honors
To one ambitious of rule or titles;
Whose heaven on earth, is placed in his command,
And absolute power on others; would with joy,
And veins swollen high with pride, be entertained.
They take not me: for I have ever loved
An equal freedom: and proclaym'd all such
As would usurp on others liberties,
Rebels to nature, to whose bounteous blessings
All men lay claim as true legitimate sons.
But such as have made forfeit of themselves
By vicious courses, and their birthright lost;
It Is not injustice they are marked for slaves
To serve the virtuous; for my self, I know
Honors and great employments are great burdens,
And must require an Atlas to support them.
He that would govern others, first should be
The Master of himself, richly indude
With depth of understanding, height of courage,
And those remarkable graces which I dare not
Ascribe unto my self.

Archid. Sir, empty men
Are Trumpets of their own deserts: but you
That are not in opinion, but in proof
Really good, and full of glorious parts,
Leave the report of what you are to fame,
Which from the ready tongues of all good men
Aloud proclaims you.

Diphil. Besides you stand bound
Having so large a field to exercise
Your active virtues offered you, to impart
Your strengths to such as need it.

Timoleon. It Is confessed.
And since you will have it so, such as I am
For you and for the liberty of Greece
I am most ready to lay down my life:
But yet consider men of Syracusa,
Before that you deliver up the power
Which yet is yours to me, to whom it is given
To an impartial man, with whom nor threats,
Not prayers shall prevail, for I must steer
An even course.

Archid. Which is desired of all.

Timoleon. Timophanes my brother, for whose death
I am taynted in the world, and foulely taynted,
In whose remembrance I have ever worn
In peace and war, this liuory of sorrow
Can witness for me, how much I detest
Tyrannous Usurpation: with grief
I must remember it, for when no persuasion
Could win him to desist from his bad practice,
To change the Aristocracie of Corinth
Into an absolute Monarchy; I chose rather
To prove a pious and obedient son
To my Country my best mother, then to lend
Assistance to Timophanes, though my brother
That like a Tyrant strove to set his foot
Upon the Cities freedom.

Timagoras. 'Twas a deed
Deserving rather Trophies, then reproof.

Leost. And will be still remembered to your honor
If you forsake not us.

Diphilon. If you free Sicilie
From barbarous Carthage yoke, it will be said,
In him you slew a Tyrant.

Archid. But giving way
To her invasion, not vouchsafing us
(That fly to your protection) aid, and comfort,
Twill believed, that for your private ends
You killed a brother.

Timoleon. As I then proceed,
To all posterity may that act be crowned
With a deserved applause, or branded with
The mark of infamy; Stay yet, ere I take
This seat of Justice, or engage my self
To fight for you abroad, or to reform
Your State at home, swear all upon my sword,
And call the gods of Sicily to witness
The oath you take; that whatsoever I shall
propound for safety of your Commonwealth,
Not Circumscribed or bound in, shall by you
Be willingly obeyed.

Archid. Dip. Cleon. So may we prosper,
As we obey in all things.

Timag. Leost. Aso. And observe
All your commands as Oracles.

Timoleon. Do not repent it. Takes the State.

Olimpia. He asked not our consent.

Corisca. He Is a clown, I warrant him.

Olimp. I offered my self twice, and yet the Churl
Would not salute me.

Corisc. Let him kiss his Drum,
I Will save my lips, I rest on it.

Olimpia. He thinks women
No part of the republique.

Corisc. He shall find
We are a Commonwealth.

Cleora. The less your honor.

Timoleon. First then a word or two, but without bitterness,
(And yet mistake me not, I am no flatterer)
Concerning your ill government of the State,
In which the greatest, noblest, and most rich,
Stand in the first file guilty.

Cleon. Ha! how is this?

Timoleon. You have not, as good Patriots should do, studied
The public good, but your particular ends.
Factious among your selves, preferring such
To Offices, and honors, as never read
The Elements, of saving policy,
But deeply skild in all the principles,
That usher to destruction.

Leost. Sharp.

Timagor. The better.

Timoleon. Your Senate house, which used not to admit
A man (how ever populer) to stand
At the Helm of government; whose youth was not
Made glorious by action, whose experience
Crowned with gray hairs, gave warrant to her counsels
Heard, and received with reverence, is now filled
With green heads that determine of the State
Over their Cups: or when their sated lusts
Afford them leisure, or supplied by those
Who rising from base arts, and sordid thrift
Are eminent for their wealth, not for their wisdom.
Which is the reason, that to hold a place
In Counsel, which was once esteemed an honor,
And a reward for virtue, has quite lost
Luster, and Reputation, and is made
A mercenary purchase.

Timag. He speaks home.

Leost. And to the purpose.

Timoleon. From whence it proceeds,
That the treasure of the City is ingros'd
By a few private men: the public Coffers
Hollow with want; and they that will not spare
One Talent for the common good, to feed
The pride and bravery of their Wives, consume
In Plate, in Jewels, and superfluous slaves,
What would maintain an Army.

Corisc. Have at us.

Olimp. We thought we were forgot.

Cleor. But it appears,
You will be treated of.

Timol. Yet in this plenty,
And fat of peace, your young men never were trained
In Martial discipline, and your ships vnrig'd,
Rot in the harbor, no defense preparde,
But thought unuseful, as if that the gods
Indulgent to your sloth, had granted you
A perpetuity of pride and pleasure,
No change feared, or expected. Now you find
That Carthage looking on your stupid sleeps,
And dull security, was invited to
Invade your Territories.

Arch. You have made us see, Sir,
To our shame the Countries sickness: now from you
As from a careful, and a wise physician
We do expect the cure.

Timoleon. Old festred sores
Must be lanc'd to the quick and cauteriz'd,
Which borne with patience, after i will apply
Soft Unguents: For the maintenance of the war
It is decreed all moneys in the hand,
Of private men, shall instantly be brought
To the public Treasury.

Timag. This bites sore.

Cleon. The Cure
Is worse then the disease; I Will never yield to it.
What could the enemy, though victorious
Inflict more on us? all that my youth has toyld for
Purchased with industry, and preserved with care
Forced from me in a moment.

Diph. This rough course
Will never be allowd of.

Timol. O blind men!
If you refuse the first means that is offered
To give you health, no hope's left to recover
Your desperate sickness. Do you prize your mucke
Above your liberties? and rather choose
To be made Bondmen, then to part with that
To which already you are slaves? or can it
Be probable in your flattering apprehensions,
You can capitulate with the Conqueror
And keep that yours, which they come to possess,
And while you kneel in vain, will ravish from you?
But take your own ways, brood upon your gold,
Sacrifice to your Idol, and preserve
The prey entire, and merit the report
Of careful Steward, yield a just account
To your proud Masters, who with whips of Iron
Will force you to give up what you conceal,
Or tear it from your throats, Adorn your walls
With Persian Hangings wrought of Gold and Pearl;
Cover the floores on which they are to tread
With costly Median silks; perfume the rooms
With Cassia, and Amber: where they are
To feast and revel, while like servile Grooms
You wait upon their trenchers; feed their eyes
With massy Plate until your Cupbords crack
With the weight that they sustain; set forth your Wives
And Daughters in as many varyed shapes
As there are Nations, to provoke their lusts,
And let them be embraced before your eyes,
The object may content you; and to perfect
Their entertainment, offer up your Sons,
And able men for Slaves; while you, that are
Unfit for labor, are spurned out to starve
Vnpittied in some Desert, no friend by,
Whose sorrow may spare one compassionat tear,
In the remembrance of what once you were.

Leost. The blood turns.

Timag. Observe, how old Cleon. shakes,
As if in picture he had shown him, what
He was to suffer.

Corisc. I am sick, the man
Speaks poniards, and diseases.

Olimp. O my Doctor,
I never shall recover.

Cleora. If a Virgin,
Whose speech was ever yet vsher'd with fear,
One knowing modesty, and humble silence
To be the choysest ornaments of our sex,
In the presence of so many Reverend men,
Struck dumb with terror and astonishment,
Presume to cloth her thought in vocal sounds,
Let her find pardon. First, to you, great Sir,
A bashful Mayd's thanks, and her zealous prayers
Winged with pure innocence, bearing them to Heaven,
For all prosperity, that the Gods can give
To one, whose piety must exact their care,
Thus low I offer.

Timol. It Is a happy Omen.
Rise blessed one, and speak boldly: on my virtue
I am thy warrant; from so clear a Spring
Sweet Rivers ever flow.

Cleora. Then thus to you
My noble Father, and these Lords, to whom
I next owe duty, no respect forgotten
To you my Brother, and these bold young men
(Such I would have them) that are, or should be
The Cities Sword and Target of defense.
To all of you, I speak; and if a blush
Steal on my cheeks, it is shown to reprove
Your palenesse; willingly I would not say
Your cowardice, or fear: think you all treasure
Hid in the bowels of the Earth, or Shipwrack'd
In Neptunes watery Kingdom, can hold weight
When Liberty, and Honor, fill one scale,
Triumphant Justice sitting on the beam?
Or dare you but imagine that your gold is
Too dear a salary for such as hazard
Their blood, and lives in your defense? For me
An ignorant Girl, bear witness heaven, so far
I prize a Soldier, that to give him pay
With such Devotion as our Flamens Offer
Their Sacrifices at the holy Altar,
I do lay down these jewels, will make sale
Of my superfluous Wardrobe to supply
The meanest of their wants.

Timoleon. Brave masculine spirit!

Diphil. We are shown to our shame what we in honor
Should have taught others.

Archid. Such a fair example
Must needs be followed.

Timag. Ever my dear Sister,
But now our Families glory.

Leost. Were she Deformed
The virtues of her mind would force a Stoicque
To sue to be her servant.

Cleon. I must yield,
And though my heart blood part with it, I will
Deliver in my wealth.

Asotas. I would say something,
But the truth is, I know not what.

Timol. We have money,
And men must now be thought on.

Archid. We can press
Of Laborers in the country (men in-vr'd
To cold and heat) ten thousand.

Diph. Or if need be,
In roll of Slaves, lusty, and able Varlets,
And fit for service.

Cleon. They shall go for me,
I will not pay and fight too.

Cleora. How! your Slaves?
O stain of Honor! once more, Sir, your pardon,
And to their shames, let me deliver, what
I know in justice you may speak.

Timol. Most gladly,
I could not wish my thoughts a better organ,
Then your tongue, to express them.

Cleora. Are you men?
(For Age may qualify, though not excuse
The backwardness of these) able Young men?
Yet now your Countries libertie's at the stake,
Honor, and glorious triumph, made the garland
For such as dare deserve them; a rich Feast
Prepared by Victory of immortal vyands,
Not for base men, but such as with their Swords
Dare force admittance, and will be her Guests,
And can you coldly suffer such rewards
To be proposed, to Laborers and Slaves?
While you that are borne Noble (to whom these
Valued at their best rate, are next to Horses,
Or other Beasts of carriage) cry aim,
Like idle lookers on, till their proud worth
Make them become your masters?

Timol. By my hopes,
There Is fire and spirit enough in this to make
Thersites valiant.

Cleora. No; far, far be it from you,
Let these of meaner quality contend,
Who can endure most labor; Plough the earth,
And think they are rewarded, when their sweat
Brings home a fruitful Harvest to their Lords;
Let them prove good Artificers, and serve you
For use and ornament, but not presume
To touch at what is Noble; if you think them
Unworthy to taste of those Cates you feed on,
Or wear such costly garments; will you grant them
The privilege and prerogative of great minds,
Which you were borne to? Honor, won in war
And to be styled preseruers of their Country
Are Titles fit for free and generous Spirits,
And not for Bondmen: had I been borne a man
And such never dying glories made the prize
To bold Heroicke Courage; By Diana,
I would not to my Brother, nay my Father,
Be bribed to part with the least piece of honor
I should gain in this action.

Timoleon. She Is inspired,
Or in her speaks the Genius of your Country
To fire your blood in her defense. I am raped
With the imagination! Noble maid,
Timoleon is your Soldier, and will sweat
Drops of his best blood, but he will bring home
Triumphant conquest to you. Let me wear
Your colors, Lady, and though youthful heates
That look no further then your outward form,
Are long since buried in me, while I live,
I am a constant lover of your mind,
That does transcend all presidents.

Cleora. It Is an honor: Gives her Scarf.
And so I do receive it.

Corisc. Plague upon it,
She has got the start of us. I could e'ne burst
With envy at her fortune.

Olimpia. A raw young thing,
We have too much tongue sometimes, our Husbands say,
And she out-strips us.

Leost. I am for the journey.

Timag. May all Diseases, sloth and lechery bring,
Fall upon him that stays at home.

Archid. Though old,
I will be there in person.

Diphil. So will I.
Me thinks I am not what I was; her words
Have made me younger, by a score of years,
Then I was when I came hither.

Cleon. I am still
Old Cleon, fat, and unwieldy, I shall never
Make a good Soldier, and therefore desire
To be excusde at home.

Asotus. It Is my suite too.
I am a grissell, and these Spider fingers,
Will never hold a Sword. Let us alone
To rule the Slaves at home, I can so yerke em,
But in my Conscience, I shall never prove
Good Justice in the war.

Timoleon. Have your desires:
You would be burdens to us, no way aids.
Lead, fairest, to the Temple, first we will pay
A Sacrifice to the Gods for good success.
For, all great actions the wished course do run,
That are, with their allowance, well begun. Exeunt all but the Slaves.

Pisander. Stay Cymbrio, and Gracculo.

Cymbrio. The business?

Pisander. Meet me to morrow night, near to the Grove
Neighboring the East part of the City.

Gracc. Well.

Pisander. And bring the rest of our Condition with you,
I have something to impart, may break our fetters,
If you dare second me.

Cymbrio. We Will not fail.

Gracc. A Cart-rope
Shall not bind me at home.

Pisander. Think on it, and prosper. Exeunt.

ACTVS II. SCAENA I.
Archidamus, Timagoras, Leosthenes with Gorgits, Pisander. Archid. So, so, it is
well, how do I look?

Pisander. Most sprightfully.

Archid. I shrink not in the shoulders, though I am old,
I am tough, steel to the back, I have not wasted
My stock of strength in Feather-beds: here is an arm too,
There Is stuff in it, and I hope will use a Sword
As well as any beardlesse Boy of you all.

Timag. I am glad to see you, Sir, so well prepared,
To endure the travail of the war.

Archid. Go too sir,
I shall endure, when some of you keep your Cabins,
For all your flaunting Feathers, nay Leosthenes
You are welcome too, all friends, and fellows now.

Leost. Your servant Sir.

Archid. Pish, leave these Complements,
They stincke in a Soldiers mouth, I could be merry,
For now my Gowne's off, farewell Gravity,
And must be bold to put a question to you,
Without offense, I hope.

Leost. Sir, what you please.

Archid. And you will answer truly?

Timagor. On our words, Sir.

Archid. Go too, then, I presume you will confess,
That you are two notorious Whore-maisters.
Nay spare your blushing, I have been wild my self,
A snatch, or so, for Physic, does no harm;
Nay, it is physic, if used moderately,
But to lie at rack, and manger,

Leost. Say we grant this,
For if we should deny it, you will not believe us,
What will you infer upon it?

Archid. What you will groan for,
I fear, when you come to the test. Old Stories tell us
There is a Month called October; which brings in
Cold weather, there are trenches too, it is rumor'd
In which to stand all night to the knees in water,
In Gallants breeds the toothache, there is a sport too
Named lying Perdi^^, (do you mark me) it is a game,
Which you must learn to play at: now in these seasons,
And choice variety of Exercises,
(Nay I come to you) and fasts not for Devotion,
Your rambling hunt-smocke, feels strange altorations,
And in a Frosty morning, looks as if
He could with ease creep in a pottle Pot
In stead of his Mistress placket, then he Curses
The time he spent in midnight visitations;
And finds what he superfluously parted with,
To be reported good, at length, and well breathed,
But if retriu'd into his back again, Enter Diphilus, and Cleora.
Would keep him warmer then a Scarlet wast-coate,
Or an Armor linde with Furre. O welcome, welcome,
You have cut off my discourse, but I will perfect
My lecture in the Camp.

Diphil. Come, we are stayed for,
The General's a fire for a remove,
And longs to be in action.

Archid. It Is my wish too,
We must part, nay to tears, my best Cleora,
I shall melt too, and that were ominous.
Millions of blessings on thee, all that is mine,
I give up to thy charge, and sir, look
You, with that care and reverence observe her
Which you would pay to me, a kiss, farewell Girl.

Diphil. Peace wait upon you, fair one. Exeunt Archid. Diphil. Pisander.

Timag. Twere impertinence
To wish you to be careful of your Honor,
That ever keep in pay a Guard about you
Of faithful virtues: Farewell friend, I leave you
To wipe our kisses off, I know that Lovers
Part with more circumstance and ceremony,
Which I give way to. Exit Timagoras.

Leost. It Is a noble favor,
For which, I ever owe you, we are alone,
But how I should begin, or in what language
Speak the unwilling word, of parting from you,
I am yet to learn.

Cleora. And still continue ignorant,
For I must be most cruel to my self,
If I should teach you.

Leost. Yet it must be spoken,
Or you will chide my slacknesse, you have fired me
With the heat of noble action, to deserve you,
And the least spark of honor, that took life
From your sweet breath, still famed by it, and cherished,
Must Mount up in a glorious flame, or I
Am much unworthy.

Cleora. May it not burn here,
And as a Sea-marke, serve to guide true Lovers,
(Tossed on the Ocean of luxurious wishes)
Safe from the rocks of Lust into the harbor,
Of pure affection? rising up an example,
Which aftertimes shall witness, to our glory,
First took from us beginning.

Leost. It Is a happiness,
My duty to my Country, and mine Honor
Cannot consent too, besides, add to these,
It was your pleasure, fortifide by persuasion,
And strength of reason, for the general good,
That I should go.

Cleora. Alas, I then was witty
To plead against my self, and mine eye fixed,
Upon the hill of Honor, never descended
To look into the veil of certain dangers,
Through which, you were to cut your passage to it.

Leost. I Will stay at home then.

Cleora. No, that must not be,
For so to serve my own ends, and to gain
A petty wreath my self; I rob you of
A certain triumph, which must fall upon you,
Or Virtue's turned a hand-maide to blind Fortune:
How is my soul divided! to confirm you,
In the opinion of the world, most worthy
To be beloved, (with me you are at the height,
And can advance no further) I must send you
To Court the Goddess of stern War, who if
She see you with my eyes, will never return you,
But grow enamored of you.

Leost. Sweet, take comfort,
And what I offer you, you must vouchsafe me,
Or I am wretched; all the dangers, that
I can encounter in the War, and trifles;
My enemies abroad to be contemned;
The dreadful foes, that have the power to hurt me,
I leave at home with you.

Cleor. With me?

Leost. Nay, in you,
On every part about you, they are armed
To fight against me.

Cleora. Where?

Leost. There Is no perfection
That you are Mistress of, but musters up
A Legion against me, and all sworn
To my destruction.

Cleora. This is strange!

Leost. But true, sweet,
Excess of love can work such miracles.
Upon this Iuory forehead are entrenched
Ten thousand riuals, and these Suns command,
Supplies from all the world, on pain to forfeit
Their comfortable beams; these Rubie lips,
A rich Exchecquer to assure their pay;
This hand, Sibillas golden bough to guard them
Through Hell, and horror, to the Elizian Springs;
Which who will not venture for? and should I name
Such as the virtues of your mind inuit,
Their numbers would be infinite.

Cleora. Can you think,
I may be tempted?

Leost. You were never proved.
For me I have conuers'd with you no farther,
Then would become a Brother. I never tuned
Loose Notes to your chaste ears; or brought rich Presents
For my Artillery, to batter down,
The fortress of your honor, nor endeuour'd
To make your blood run high at solemn Feasts
With Viands, that provoke; (the speeding Philtres)
I worked no Baudes to tempt you; never practiced
The cunning, and corrupting Arts they study,
That wander in the wild Maze of desire;
Honest simplicity, and Truth were all
The Agents I imployd, and when I came
To see you, it was with that reverence,
As I beheld the Altars of the gods;
And love, that came along with me, was taught
To leave his Arrows, and his Torch behind,
Quenched in my fear to give offense.

Cleora. And 'twas
That modesty that took me, and preserues me,
Like a fresh Rose, in mine own natural sweetness;
Which sulli'd with the touch of impute hands,
Loose both sent and beauty.

Leost. But, Cleora,
When I am absent, as I must go from you,
(such is the cruelty of my fate) and leave you
Unguarded, to the violent assaults
Of loose temptations; when the memory
Of my so many years of Love, and service,
Is lost in other objects; when you are courted
By such as keep a Catalogue of their Conquests,
Won upon credulous Virgins; when nor Father
Is here to owe you; Brother to advise you;
Nor your poor servant by, to keep such off,
By lust instructed how to undermine,
And blow your chastity up; when your weak senses
At once assaulted, shall conspire against you;
And play the traitors to your soul, your virtue:
How can you stand? 'faith though you fall, and I
The judge, before whom you then stood accused,
I should acquit you.

Cleora. Will you then confirm,
That love, and jealousy, though of different natures,
Must of necessity be twins? the younger,
Created only to defeat the elder,
And spoil him of his Birthright: it is not well.
But being to part, I will not chide, I will not,
Nor with one syllable, or tear express,
How deeply I am wounded with the arrows
Of your distrust: but when that you shall hear
At your return, how I have borne my self,
And what an auftere penance I take on me,
To satisfy your doubts: when like a Vestall
I show you to your shame, the fire still burning,
Committed to my charge by true affection,
The people joining with you in the wonder.
When by the glorious splendour of my sufferings,
The prying eyes of jealousy are struck blind,
The Monster too that feeds on fears, even starved
For want of seeming matter to accuse me,
Expect Leosthenes, a sharp reproof
From my just anger.

Leost. What will you do?

Cleora. Obey me,
Or from this minute you are a stranger to me.
And do it without reply: all seeing Sun,
Thou witness of my innocence, thus I close
Mine eyes against thy comfortable light,
Till the return of this distrustful man.
Now bind 'em sure, nay do it, if vncompeld.
I loose this knot, until the hands that made it
Be pleased to untie it, may consuming plagues
Fall heavy on me, pray you guide me to your lips,
This kiss, when you come back shall be a Virgin
To bid you welcome: Nay, I have not done yet.
I will continue dumb, and you once gone,
No Accent shall come from me: now to my chamber,
My Tomb, if you miscarry: there I Will spend
My hours in silent mourning, and thus much
Shall be reported of me to my glory,
And you confess it, whither I live or die,
My Chastity triumphs over your jealousy.

ACTVS II. SCAENA II.
Asotus, Gracculo. Asot. You slave, you Dog, down Curre.

Gracc. Hold, good young Master,
For pitties sake.

Asot. Now am I in my kingdom.
Who says I am not valiant? I begin
To frown again, quake villain.

Grac. So I do, Sir,
Your looks are Agues to me.

Asot. Are they so Sir,
'Slight, if I had them at this bey, that flout me,
And say I look like a sheep, and an Ass, I would make 'em
Feel, that I am a Lion.

Gracc. Do not rore, Sir,
As you are a valiant beast: but do you know
Why you use me thus?

Asot. I Will beat thee a little more,
Then study for a reason, O I have it,
One brake a jest on me, and then I swore
Because I durst not strike him, when I came home
That I would break thy head.

Grac. Plague on his mirth,
I am sure I mourn for it.

Asot. Remember too, I charge you
To teach my Horse good manners; yet this morning,
As I rode to take the air, th'untutor'd Jade
Threw me, and kic'kd me.

Grac. I thank him for it.

Asot. What Is that?

Grac. I say, Sir, I Will teach him to hold his heels,
If you will rule your fingers.

Asot. I Will think upon it.

Grac. I am bruisde to ielly; better be a dog,
Then slave to a Fool or Coward.

Asot. Here Is my Mother, Enter Corisca and Zanthia.
She is chastising too: How brave we live!
That have our slaves to beat, to keep us in breath,
When we want exercise.

Corisca. Careless Harlotrie, Striking her.
Look to it, if a Curle fall, or wind, or Sun,
Take my Complexion off, I will not leave
One hair upon thine head.

Grac. Here Is a second show
Of the Family of pride.

Corisca. Fie on these wars,
I am starved for want of action, not a gamester left
To keep a woman play; if this world last
A little longer with us, Ladies must study
Some new found Mystery, to cool one another,
We shall burn to Cinders else; I have heard there have been
Such Arts in a long vacation; would they were
Revealed to me: they have made my Doctor too
Physician to the Army, he was vs'de
To serve the turn at a pinch: but I am now
Quite unprovided.

Asot. My Mother in law is sure
At her devotion.

Corisc. There are none but our slaves left,
Nor are they to be trusted; some great women
(Which I could name) in a dearth of Visitants,
Rather then be idle, have been glad to play
At small game, but I am so queasie stomack't,
And from my youth have been so used to Dainties,
I cannot taste such gross meat; some that are hungry
Draw on their shoomakers, and take a fall
From such as mend Mats in their Galleries;
Or when a Tailor settles a Petticoate on,
Take measure of his Bodkin: fie upon it,
It Is base; for my part, I could rather lie with
A Gallants breeches, and conceive upon 'em,
Then stoop so low.

Asot. Fair Madam, and my Mother.

Corisca. Leave the last out, it smells rank of the Country,
And shows course breeding, your true Courtier knows not
His Niece, or Sister from another woman,
If she be apt and cunning. I could tempt now
This fool, but he will be so long a working.
Then he is my Husbands Son; the fitter to
Supply his wants, I have the way already.
I Will try, if it will take; when were you with
Your Mistress, fair Cleora.

Asot. Two days sithence,
But she is so coy forsooth, that ere I can
Speak a penned speech I have bought, and studied for her,
Her woman calls her away.

Corisc. Here Is a dull thing,
But better taught I hope, send of your man.

Asot. Sir, be gone.

Grac. This is the first good turn,
She ever did me. Exit Gracculo.

Corisc. We Will have a Scaene of mirth,
I must not have you shamed for want of practice.
I stand here for Cleora, and do you hear Minion,
(That you may tell her, what her woman should do)
Repeat the lesson over, that I taught you,
When my young Lord came to visit me, if you miss
In a Syllable or posture!

Zant. I am perfect.

Asot. Would I were so: I fear I shall be out.

Corisc. If you are, I Will help you in. Thus I walk musing:
You are to enter, and as you pass by,
Salute my woman, be but bold enough,
You Will speed I warrant you; begin.

Asot. Have at it.
'Saue thee sweet heart. A kiss.

Zant. Venus forbid, Sir,
I should presume to taste your honors lips
Before my Lady.

Corisc. This is well on both parts.

Asot. How does thy Lady?

Zant. Happy in your Lordship,
As often as she thinks on you.

Corisc. Very good,
This Wench will learn in time.

Asot. Does she think of me?

Zant. O Sir, and speaks the best of you, admires
Your wit, your clothes, discourse; and swears, but that
You are not forward enough for a Lord, you were
The most complete, and absolute man: I Will show
Your Lordship a Secret.

Asot. Not of thine own?

Zant. O no, Sir,
It Is of my Lady, but upon your honor,
You must conceal it.

Asot. By all means.

Zanthia. Some times
I lie with my Lady, as the lastnight I did,
She could not say her prayers, for thinking of you,
Nay, she talked of you in her sleep, and sighed out,
O sweet Asotus, sure thou art so backward,
That I must ravish thee, and in that feruor
She took me in her arms, threw me upon her,
Kis'd me, and hugged me, and then waked, and wept;
Because 'twas but a dream.

Corisc. This will bring him on,
Or he is a block. A good Girl!

Asot. I am mad,
Till I am at it.

Zant. Be not put off, Sir,
With away, I dare not; fie you are immodest,
My Brother's up, my Father will hear, shoot home, Sir,
You cannot miss the mark.

Asot. There Is for thy counsel.
This is the fairest interlude, if it prove earnest,
I shall wish I were a Player.

Corisc. Now my turn comes.
I am exceeding sick, pray you send my Page
For young Asotus, I cannot live without him,
Pray him to visit me, yet when he is present,
I must be strange to him.

Asot. Not so: you are caught.
Lo whom you wish, behold Asotus here!

Corisc. You wait well, Minion, shortly I shall not speak
My thoughts in my private Chamber, but they must
Lie open to discovery.

Asot. 'Slid she is angry.

Zant. No, no, Sir, she but seems so. To her again.

Asot. Lady, I would descend to kiss your hand,
But that it is glou'd, and Ciuit makes me sick;
And to presume to taste your lips not safe,
Your woman by:

Corisc. I hope she is no obseruer,
Of whom I grace. Zant. Looks on a Book, kisses her.

Asot. She Is at her book, O rare!

Corisc. A kiss for entertainment is sufficient:
Too much of one dish cloyes me.

Asotus. I would serve in
The second course, but still I fear your woman.

Corisc. You are very cautelous. Zanthia seems to sleep.

Asotus. 'Slight she is asleep!
It Is pity, these instructions are not printed:
They would sell well to Chamber-maides, it is no time now
To play with my good fortune, and your favor,
Yet to be taken, as they say: a scout
To give the signal when the enemy comes, Exit Zanthia.
Were now worth gold: She Is gone to watch.
A wayter so trayn'd up were worth a million,
To a wanton City Madam.

Corisc. You are grown conceited.

Asotas. You teach me; Lady, now your Cabinet.

Corisc. You speak, as it were yours.

Asotas. When we are there,
I Will show you my best evidence.

Corisc. Hold, you forget,
I only play Cleora's part.

Asotas. No matter,
Now we have begun, let us end the act.

Corisc. Forbear, Sir,
Your Fathers wife?

Asotas. Why, being his Heir, I am bound,
Since he can make no satisfaction to you,
To see his debts paid. Enter Zanthia running.

Zanthia. Madame, my Lord.

Corisc. Fall off,
I must trifle with the time too; Hell confound it.

Asotas. Plague on his toothlesse chaps, he cannot do it
Himself, yet hinders such as have good stomachs. Enter Cleon.

Cleon. Where are you, Wife? I feign would go abroad,
But cannot find my Slaves, that bear my Litter:
I am tired, your shoulder, Son; nay sweet, thy hand too,
A turn or two in the Garden, and then to Supper,
And so to Bed.

Asotas. Never to rise, I hope, more. Exeunt.

ACTVS II. SCAENA III.
Pisander, Poliphron, bringing forth a Table. Pisander. 'Twill take, I warrant
thee.

Poliphron. You may do your pleasure:
But, in my judgment, better to make use of
The present opportunity.

Pisander. No more. Enter Cimbrio, Gracculo, and Slaves.

Poliphron. I am silenced.

Pisander. More wine, pray thee drink hard, friend,
And when we are hot, what ever I propound,
Second with vehemence: men of your words, all welcome,
Slaves use no ceremony, sit down, here is a health,

Poliphron. Let it run round, fill every man his Glass.

Gracc. We look for no wayters; this is Wine.

Pisander. The better,
Strong, lusty wine: drink deep, this juice will make us
As free as our Lords. Drinks.

Gracc. But if they find, we taste it,
We are all damned to the quarry, during life,
Without hope of redemption.

Pisander. Pish, for that
We Will talk anon: another rowse, we loose time, Drinks.
When our low blood's wound up a little higher,
I Will offer my design; nay, we are cold yet,
These Glasses contain nothing; do me right, Takes the Bottle.
As e're you hope for liberty. It Is done bravely,
How do you feel your selves now?

Cimbrio. I begin
To have strange Conundrums in my head.

Gracc. And I,
To loath base water: I would be hanged in peace now,
For one month of such Holy Days.

Pisander. An age, Boys,
And yet defy the Whip, if you are men,
Or dare believe, you have souls.

Cimbrio. We are no Broakers:

Gracc. Nor Whores, whose marks are out of their mouths, they have none,
They hardly can get salt enough to keep 'em
From stinking above ground.

Pisander. Our Lords are no Gods?

Gracc. They are Devils to us, I am sure.

Pisander. But subject to
Cold, hunger, and diseases.

Gracc. In abundance.
Your Lord, that feels no ach in his chine at twenty,
Forfeits his privilege, how should their Chyrurgion build else,
Or ride on their Foot-cloathes?

Pisander. Equal nature fashioned us
All in one molde: The Bear serves not the Bear,
Nor the Wolf, the Wolf; 'twas ods of strength in tyrants,
That plucked the first link from the Golden chain
With which that thing of things bound in the world.
Why then, since we are taught, by their examples,
To love our Liberty, if not Command,
Should the strong serve the weak, the fair deformed ones?
Or such as know the cause of things, pay tribute
To ignorant fools? All Is but the outward gloss
And politic form, that does distinguish us.
Cymbrio, thou art a strong man; if in place
Of carrying burdens, thou had been trayn'd up
In Martial discipline, thou might have proved
A General, fit to lead and fight for Sicilie,
As fortunate as Timolcon.

Cymbrio. A little fighting
Will serve a Generals turn.

Pisander. Thou, Gracculo,
Have fluencie of Language, quick conceit,
And I think, covered with a Senators robe,
Formally set on the Bench, thou would appear
As brave a Senator.

Gracc. Would I had Lands,
Or money to buy a place; and if I did not
Sleep on the Bench, with the drowsiest of them, play with my Chain,
Look on my Watch, when my guts chym'd twelve, and wear
A state Beard, with my Barbers help, rank with 'em,
In their most choice peculiar gifts; degrade me
And put me to drink Water again, which (now
I have tasted Wine) were poison.

Pisander. It Is spoke nobly,
And like a Gown-man, none of these, I think too,
But would prove good Burgers.

Gracc. Hum: the fools are modest,
I know their insides: Here Is an ill-fac'd fellow,
(But that will not be seen in a dark Shop,)
If he did not in a month, learn to out-sweare,
In the selling of his Wares, the cunningest Tradesman
In Syracusa, I have no skill; Here Is another,
Observe but what a cousening look he has,
(Hold up thy head, man) if for drawing Gallants
Into mortgages for Commodities, cheating Heirs
With your new counterfeit Gold thread, and gumm'd Veluets,
He does not transcend all that went before him,
Call in his patent; pass the rest, they will all make
Sufficient Becos, and with their brow-antlets
Bear up the Cap of maintenance.

Pisander. Is 't not pity then,
Men of such eminent virtues, should be Slaves?

Cimbrio. Our fortune.

Pisander. It Is your folly, daring men
Command, and make their fates. Say, at this instant,
I marked you out a way to Liberty;
Possessed you of those blessings, our proud Lords
So long have surfetted in; and what is sweetest,
Arm you with power, by strong hand to revenge
Your stripes, your unregarded toil, the pride,
The insolency, of such as tread upon
Your patient sufferings; fill your famished mouths,
With the fat and plenty of the Land; redeem you
From the dark vale of Servitude, and seat you
Upon a hill of happiness; what would you do
To purchase this and more?

Gracc. Do any thing,
To burn a Church or two, and dance by the light on it
Were but a May Game.

Poliphron. I have a Father living,
But if the cutting of his throat could work this,
He should excuse me.

Cimbrio. 'Slight, I would cut mine own,
Rather then miss it, so I might but have
A taste on it, ere I dye.

Pisander. Be resolute men,
You shall run no such hazard, nor groan under
The burden of such crying sins.

Cimbrio. The means?

Gracculo. I feel a woman's longing.

Poliphron. Do not torment us
With expectation.

Pisander. Thus then, our proud Masters;
And all the able Freemen of the City
Are gone unto the wars,

Poliphron. Observe but that.

Pisander, Old men, and such as can make no resistance,
Are only left at home.

Gracculo. And the proud young fool
My Master: If this take, I Will hamper him.

Pisander. Their Arsenall, their Treasure's in our power,
If we have hearts to sease 'em, if our Lords fall
In the present action, the whole countrie's ours;
Say they return victorious, we have means
To keep the Town against them: at the worst
To make our own conditions: now if you dare
fall on their Daughters, and their wives, break up
Their Iron Chests, banquet on their rich Beds,
And carue your selves of all delights and pleasures
You have been barred from, with one voice cry with me,
Liberty, Liberty.

All. Liberty, Liberty.

Pisander. Go then, and take possession; use all freedom,
But shed no blood: so this is well begun,
But not to be commended, til't be done. Exeunt omnes.

ACTVS III. SCAENA I.
Pisander. Timandra. Pisander. Why, think you, that I plot against my self?
Fear nothing, you are safe, these thick-skinn'd slaves,
(I use as instruments to serve my ends)
Pierce not my deep designs: nor shall they dare
To lift an arm against you.

Timandra. With your will.
But turbulent spirits raised beyond themselves
With case, are not so soon laid: they often prove
Dangerous to him that called them up.

Pisander. It Is true,
In what is rashly undertook. Long since
I have considered seriously their natures
Proceeded with mature advise, and know
I hold their will, and faculties in more awe
Then I can do my own. Now for their License,
And riot in the City, I can make
A just defense, and use: it may appear too
A polliticke prevention of such ills
As might with greater violence, and danger
hereafter be attempted; though some smart for it,
It matters not: how ever, I am resolved;
And sleep you with security. Holds Cleora
Constant to her rash vow?

Timandra, Beyond belief;
To me, that see her hourly, it seems a fable.
By signs I guess at her commands, and serve 'em
With silence, such her pleasure is, made known
By holding her fair hand thus; she eats little,
Sleeps less, as I imagine; once a day
I lead her to this Gallery, where she walks
Some half a dozen turns, and having offered
To her absent Saint a sacrifice of sighs,
She points back to her prison.

Pisander. Guide her hither,
And make her understand the slaves revolt.
And with your utmost eloquence enlarge
Their insolence, and Rapes done in the City,
Forget not to, I am their chief, and tell her
You strongly think my extreme dotage on her,
As I am Marullo, caused this sudden uproar,
To make way to enjoy her.

Timandra. Punctually
I will discharge my part. Exit Timandra. Enter Poliphron.

Poliphron. O Sir, I sought you.
You have mis'd the best sport. Hell, I think is broke loose,
There Is such variety of all disorders,
As leaping, shooting, drinking, dancing, whoring
Among the slaves; answered with crying, howling,
By the Citizens and their wives: such a confusion,
(In a word, not to tire you) as I think
The like was never read of.

Pisander. I share in
The pleasure, though I am absent. This is some
Revenge for my disgrace.

Poliphron. But Sir; I fear,
If your authority restrain them not,
They Will fire the City, or kill one another,
They are so apt to outrage; neither know I
Whether you wish it, and came therefore to
Acquaint you with so much.

Pisander. I will among 'em,
But must not long be absent.

Poliphron. At your pleasure.

ACTVS III. SCAENA II.
Cleora, Timandra, a Chair, a shout within. Timandra. They are at our gates,
my heart! affrights and horrors
Increase each minute: No way left to save us;
No flattering hope to comfort us, or means
By miracle to redeem us from base lust,
And lawless rapine. Are there Gods, yet suffer
Such innocent sweetness to be made the spoil
Of brutish appetite? Or, since they decree
To ruin Natures masterpiece (of which
they have not left one pattern) must they choose,
To set their tyranny of, slaves to pollute
The spring of chastity, and poison it
With their most loathed embraces? and of those
He that should offer up his life to guard it?
Marullo, cursed Marullo, your own Bondman
Purchased to serve you, and fed by your favors.
Nay, start not; it is he, he the grand Captain Cleora starts,
Of these libidinous beasts, that have not left
One cruel act undone, that Barbarous conquest,
Yet ever practiced in a captive City.
He doting on your beauty, and to have fellows
In his foul sin, has raised these mutinous slaves,
Who have begun the game by violent Rapes,
Upon the Wives and Daughters of their Lords:
And he to quench the fire of his base lust,
By force comes to enjoy you: do not wring Cleora wrings her hands.
Your innocent hands, it is bootlesse; use the means
That may preserve you. It Is no crime to break
A vow, when you are forced to it; show your face,
And with the majesty of commanding beauty,
Strike dead his loose affections; if that fail,
Give liberty to your tongue, and use entreaties,
There cannot be a breast of flesh, and blood,
Or heart so made of flint, but must receive
Impression from your words; or eyes so stern,
But from the clear reflection of your tears
Must melt, and bear them company: will you not
Do these good offices to your self? poor I then,
Can only weep your fortune; here he comes.

Pisander. He that aduances Enter Pisander speaking at the door.
A foot beyond this, comes upon my sword
You have had your ways, disturb not mine.

Timandra. Speak gently,
Her fears may kill her else.

Pisander. Now love inspire me!
Still shall this Canopie of envious night
Obscure my Suns of comfort? and those dainties
Of purest white and red, which I take in at
My greedy eyes, denied my famished senses?
The Organs of your hearing yet are open;
And you infringe no vow, though you vouchsafe,
To give them warrant, to convey unto
Your understanding parts the story of
A tortured and dispairing Lover, whom Cleora shakes.
Not Fortune but affection marks your slave.
Shake not, best Lady; for (belee^'t) you are
As far from danger as I am from force.
All violence I Will offer, tendes no farther
Then to relate my sufferings, which I dare not
Presume to do, till by some gracious sign
You show, you are pleased to hear me.

Timandra. If you are,
Hold forth your right hand. Cleora holds forth her right hand.

Pisandra. So, it is done, and I
With my glad lips seal humbly on your foot,
My souls thanks for the favor: I forbear
To tell you who I am, what wealth, what honors
I made exchange of to become your servant:
And though I knew, worthy Leosthenes
(For sure he must be worthy, for whose love
You have endured so much) to be my rival,
When rage, and jealousy counsail'd me to kill him,
(Which then I could have done with much more ease,
Then now, in fear to grieve you, I dare speak it)
Love seconded with duty boldly told me,
The man I hated, fair Cleora favored,
And that was his protection. Cleora bows.

Timandra. See, she bows
Her head in sign of thankfulness.

Pisander. He removed,
By the occasion of the war (my fires increasing
By being closed, and stopped up) frantic affection
prompted me to do something in his absence,
That might deliver you into my power,
Which you see is effected, and even now,
When my rebellious passions chide my dullness,
And tell me how much I abuse my fortunes;
Now it is in my power to bear you hence, Cleora starts.
Or take my wishes here, (nay, fear not Madam
True love's a servant, brutish lust a Tyrant)
I dare not touch those viands, that never taste well,
But when they are freely offered: only thus much,
Be pleased I may speak in my own dear cause,
And think it worthy your consideration.
I have loved truly, (cannot say deserved,
Since duty must not take the name of merit)
That I so far prise your content, before
All blessings, that my hopes can fashion to me,
That willingly I entertain despair,
And for your sake embrace it. For I know,
This opportunity lost, by no endeavor
The like can be recouer'd. To conclude,
Forget not, that I lose my self, to save you.
For what can I expect, but death and torture
The war being ended? and, what is a task
Would trouble Hercules to undertake,
I do deny you to my self, to give you
A pure unspotted present to my rival.
I have said, if it distaste not, best of Virgins,
Reward my temperance with some lawful favor,
Though you contemn my person. Cleora kneeles, then pulls off her Glove, and
offers her hand to Pisander.

Timandra. See, she kneeles
And seems to call upon the gods to pay
The debt she owes your virtue. To perform which
As a sure pledge of friendship, she vouchsafes you
Her fair right hand. Makes a low curtsie, as she goes off.

Pisander. I am paid for all my sufferings.
Now when you please, pass to your private Chamber:
My love, and duty, faithful guards, shall keep you
From all disturbance; and when you are sated
With thinking of Leosthenes, as a fee
Due to my service, spare one sigh for me.

Exeunt. ACTVS III, SCAENA III.
Gracculo leading Asotus in an Apes habit, with a chain about his neck.
Zanthia, in Coriscaes Clothes, she bearing up her train. Gracculo. Come on,
Sir.

Asotus. Oh.

Grac. Do you grumble? you were ever
A brainelesse Ass, but if this hold, I Will teach 'you
To come aloft, and do tricks like an Ape
Your mornings lesson: if you miss --

Asotus. O no, Sir. Asotus makes moppes.

Grac. What for the Carthaginians? a good beast.
What for our self your Lord? exceeding well. Dances.
There Is your reward. Not kiss your pawe? So, so, so.

Zanthia. Was ever Lady the first day of her honor
So waited on by a wrinkled crone? she looks now
Without her painting, curling, and perfumes
Like the last day of January; and stinkes worse
Then a hot brach in the dog days. Further of,
So stand there like an image; if you stir,
Till with a quarter of a look I call you,
You know what follows.

Corisca. O what am I fallen to!
But it is a punishment for my lust and pride,
Justly returned upon me.

Gracculo. How doo'st thou like
Thy Ladyship Zanthia?

Zanthia. Very well, and bear it
With as much state as your Lordship.

Gracculo. Give me thy hand;
Let us like conquering Romans walk in triumph,
Our captives following. Then mount our Tribunals,
And make the slaves our footstooles.

Zanthia. Fine by Jove,
Are your hands clean minion?

Corisca. Yes forsooth.

Zanthia. Fall off then.
So now come on: and having made your three duties,
Down I say, (are you stiff in the hams?) now kneel,
And tie our shoe. Now kiss it and be happy.

Gracculo. This is state indeed.

Zanthia. It is such as she taught me,
A tickling itch of greatness, your proud Ladies
Expect from their poor Waiters, we have changed parts;
She does what she forced me to do in her reign,
And I must practice it in mine.

Gracculo. It Is justice;
O here come more. Enter Cymbrio, Cleon, Poliphron, Olympia.

Cymbrio. Discover to a Dram,
Or I will famish thee.

Cleon. O I am pin'de already.

Cymbrio. Hunger shall force thee to cut off the brawnes
From thy arms and thighs, then broile them on the coals
For Carbonadoes.

Poliphron. Spare the old Jade, he is foundred.

Gracculo. Cut his throat then,
And hang him out for a scarre-Crowe.

Poliphron. You have all your wishes
In your revenge, and I have mine. You see
I use no tyranny: When I was her slave,
She kept me as a sinner to lie at her back
In frostie nights, and fed me high with dainties,
Which still she had in her belly again e're morning,
And in requital of those courtesies
Having made one another free, we are married,
And if you wish us joy, join with us in
A Dance at our Wedding.

Gracculo. Agreed, for I have thought of
A most triumphant one, which shall express, we are Lords, and these our
slaves.

Poliphron. But we shall want
A woman.

Gracculo. No, here is Jane of Apes shall serve;
Carry your body swimming: where is the Music?

Poliph. I have placed it in yon Window. The dance at the end. Enter Pisander.

Gracculo. Begin then sprightly.

Poliphron. Well done on all sides. I have prepared a Banquet;
Let Us drink, and cool us.

Gracculo. A good motion,

Cymbrio. Wait here,
You have been tired with feasting, learn to fast now.

Grac. I Will have an Apple for Jack, and may be some scrapps
May fall to your share Exeunt Gracculo, Zanthia, Cymbrio, Poliphron, Olympia.

Corisca. Whom can we accuse
But our selves for what we suffer? thou art just
Thou all-creating power. And misery
Instructs me now, that yesterday acknowledged,
No Deity beyond my lust and pride.
There is a heaven above us, that looks down
With the eyes of Justice, upon such as number
Those blessings freely given, in the account
Of their poor merits: Else it could not be
Now miserable I, to please whose pallat
The Elements were ransacked, yet complained
Of Nature, as not liberal enough
In her provision of rarities
To soothe my taste, and pamper my proud flesh:
Now wish in vain for bread:

Cleon. Yes, I do wish too,
For what I fed my dogs with.

Corisca. I that forgot
I was made of flesh and blood, and thought the silk
Spunne by the diligent worm, out of their intrals,
Too course to cloathe me; and the softest Down
Too hard to sleep on; that disdained to look
On virtue being in rags; that stopped my nose
At those that did not use adulterate arts
To better nature; that from those, that served me,
Expected adoration, am made justly
The scorn of my own Bondwoman.

Asotus. I am punished,
For seeking to Cuckold mine own natural Father.
Had I been gelded then, or used my self
Like a man: I had not been transformed, and forced
To play an ore-growne Ape.

Cleon. I know I cannot
Last long, that is all my comfort: come, I forgive both,
It is in vain to be angry, let us therefore
Lament together like friends.

Pisander. What a true mirror
Were this sad spectacle for secure greatness!
Here they that never see themselves, but in
The Glass of servile flattery, might behold
The weak foundation upon which they build,
That trust in humane frailty. Happy are those,
That knowing in their births, they are subject to
Uncertain change, are still prepared, and armed
For either fortune: A rare principle,
And with much labor, learned in wisdoms school!
For as these Bondmen by their actions show,
That their prosperity, like too too large a Sail
For their small bark of judgment; sinkes them with
A fore-right gale of liberty, e're they reach
The Port they long to touch at: So these wretches
Swollen with the false opinion of their worth,
And proud of blessings left them, not acquired,
That did believe they could with Gyant-armes
Fathom the earth, and were above their fates.
Those borrowed helps that did support them, vanished:
Fall of themselves, and by unmanly suffering,
Betray their proper weakness, and make known
Their boasted greatness was lent, not their own.

Cleon. O for some meat, they sit long.

Corisc. We forgot,
When we drew out intemperate feasts till midnight:
Their hunger was not thought on, nor their watchings;
Nor did we hold our selves served to the height,
But when we did exact, and force their duties
Beyond their strength and power.

Asotus. We pay for it now,
I now could be content to have my head
Broke with a ribbe of Beef, or for a Coffin
Be buried in the dripping Pan.

Cymbrio. Do not hold me, Enter Poliphron, Cymbrio, Gracculo, Zanthia,
Olimpia, drunk and quarrelling.
Not kiss the Bride?

Poliphron. No Sir.

Cimbrio. She Is common good,
And so we will use her.

Gracculo. We Will have nothing private.

Olympia. Hold:

Zanthia. Here, Marullo.

Olympia. He Is your chief.

Cymbrio. We are equals,
I will know no obedience.

Gracculo. Nor superior,
Nay, if you are Lyon-drunke, I will make one,
For lightly ever he that parts the fray,
Goes away with the blows.

Pisander. Art thou mad too?
No more, as you respect me.

Poliphron. I obey, Sir,

Pisander. Quarrel among your selves?

Cymbrio. Yes, in our Wine, Sir,
And for our Wenches.

Gracculo. How could we be Lords else?

Pisan. Take heed, I have news will cool this heat, and make you
Remember, what you were.

Cymbrio. How?

Pisander. Send off these,
And then I Will tell you. Zanthia beating Corisca.

Olympia. This is tyranny,
Now she offends not.

Zanthia. It Is for exercise,
And to help digestion, what is she good for else?
To me it was her language.

Pisander. Leave her off,
And take heed Madam minx, the Wheel may turn.
Go to your meat, and rest, and from this hour
Remember, he that is a Lord to day, Exeunt Cleon, Asotus, Zanthia, Olympia,
Corisca.
May be a Slave to morrow.

Cleon. good morallity.

Cymbrio. But what would you impart?

Pisander. What must inuit you
To stand upon your guard, and leave your feasting,
Or but imagine, what it is to be
Most miserable, and rest assured you are so.
Our Masters are victorious:

All. How?

Pisander. Within
A days march of the City, fleshed with spoil,
And proud of conquest, the Armado sunk,
The Carthaginian Admiral hand to hand,
Slain by Leosthenes.

Cymbrio. I feel the whippe
Upon my back already.

Gracculo. Every man
Seek a convenient Tree, and hang himself.

Poliphron. Better die once, then live an age to suffer
New tortures every hour.

Cimbrio. Say, we submit,
And yield us to their mercy.

Pisander. Can you flatter
Your selves with such false hopes? or dare you think
That you imperious Lords, that never failed
To punish with severity petty slipps,
In your neglect of labor, may be won
To pardon those licentious outrages,
Which noble enemies forbear to practice
Upon the conquered? What have you omitted,
That may call on their just revenge with horror,
And studied cruelty? We have gone too far
To think now of retyring; in our courage,
And during, lies our safety; if you are not
Slaves in your abject minds, as in your fortunes
Since to die is the worst, better expose
Our naked breasts to their keen Swords, and sell
Our lives with the most advantage, then to trust
In a forestal'd remission, or yield up
Our bodies to the furnace of their fury,
Thrice heated with revenge.

Gracculo. You led us on.

Cimb. And it is but justice, you should bring us off.

Gracculo. And we expect it.

Pisander. Hear then, and obey me,
And I will either save you, or fall with you;
Man the Walls strongly, and make good the Ports
Boldly deny their entrance, and rippe up
Your grieuances, and what compelled you to
This desperate course: if they disdain to hear
Of composition, we have in our powers
Their aged Fathers, Children, and their Wives,
Who to preserve themselves, must willingly
Make intercession for us. It Is not time now
To talk, but do. A glorious end or freedom
Is now proposed us; stand resolved for either,
And like good fellows, live, or die together.

Exeunt. ACTVS III. SCAENA IIII.
Leosthenes, Timagorus. Timagoras. I am so far from envy, I am proud
You have outstrip'd me in the race of honor.
O 'twas a glorious day, and bravely won!
Your bold performance gave such luster to
Timoleons wise directions, as the Army
Rests doubtful, to whom they stand most ingag'de
For their so great success.

Leosthenes. The Gods first honored,
The glory be the Generals; it is far from me
To be his rival.

Timagoras. You abuse your fortune,
To entertain her choice, and gracious favors,
With a contracted browe; Plumed victory
Is truly painted with a cheerful look,
Equally distant from proud insolence,
And base deiection.

Leosthenes. O Timagoras,
You only are acquainted with the cause,
That loades my sad heart with a hill of lead.
Whose ponderous weight, neither my new got honor,
Assisted by the general applause
The soldier crowns it with: nor all wars glories
Can lessen, or remove; and would you please,
With fit consideraton to remember,
How much I wrong Cleoras innocence,
With my rash doubts; and what a grievous penance,
She did impose upon her tender sweetness,
To pluck away the Vulture jealousy,
That fed upon my Liver: you cannot blame me,
But call it a fit justice on my self,
Though I resolve to be a stranger to
The thought of mirth, or pleasure.

Timandra. You have redeemed
The forfeit of your fault, with such a ransom
Of honorable action, as my Sister
Must of necessity confess her sufferings
Weighed down by your fair merits; and when she views you
Like a triumphant Conqueror, carried through
The Streets of Syracusa, the glad people
Pressing to meet you, and the Senators
Contending who shall heap most honors on you;
The Oxen crowned with Girlands led before you
Appointed for the Sacrifice; and the Altars
Smoking with thankful Incense to the gods:
The Soldiers chaunting loud hymns to your praise:
The windows filled with Matrons, and with Virgins,
Throwing upon your head, as you pass by,
The choycest Flowers; and silently inuoking
The Queen of Love, with their particular vows,
To be thought worthy of you; can Cleora,
(Though, in the glass of self-love, she behold
Her best deserts) but with all joy acknowledge,
What she endured, was but a noble trial
You made of her affection? and her anger
Rising from your too amorous ears, soon drenched
In Lethe, and forgotten.

Leosthenes. If those glories
You so set forth were mine, they might plead for me;
But I can lay no claim to the least honor,
Which you with foul injustice ravish from her;
Her beauty, in me wrought a miracle,
Taught me to aim at things beyond my power,
Which her perfections purchased, and gave to me
From her free bounties; she inspired me with
That valor, which I dare not call mine own:
And from the fair reflection of her mind,
My soul received the sparckling beams of courage.
She from the magazine of her proper goodness,
Stocked me with virtuous purposes; sent me forth
To trade for honor; and she being the owner
Of the bark of my adventures, I must yield her
A just account of all, as fits a Factor:
And howsoever others think me happy,
And cry aloud, I have made a prosperous voyage:
One frown of her dislike at my return,
(Which, as a punishment for my fault, I look for)
Strikes dead all comfort.

Timagoras. Tush, these fears are needless,
She cannot, must not, shall not be so cruel.
A free confession of a fault winnes pardon;
But being seconded by desert, commands it.
The General is your own, and sure; my Father
Repents his harshnesse: for my self, I am
Ever your creature, one day shall be happy
In your triumph, and your Marriage.

Leosthenes. May it prove so,
With her consent, and pardon.

Timagoras. Ever touching
On that harsh string? she is your own, and you
Without disturbance seize on what is your due.

Exeunt. ACTVS IIII. SCAENA I.
Pisander, Timandra. Pisander. She has her health then:

Timandra. Yes, Sir, and as often
As I speak of you, lends attentive ear
To all that I deliver; nor seems tyr'de,
Though I dwell long on the relation of
Your sufferings for her, heaping praise on praise,
On your vnequal'd temperance, and command,
You hold over your affections.

Pisander. To my wish:
Have you acquainted her with the defeature
Of the Carthaginians, and with what honors
Leosthenes comes Crowned home with?

Timandra. With all care.

Pisander. And how does she receive it?

Timandra. As I guess
With a seeming kind of joy, but yet appears not
Transported, or proud of his happy fortune.
But when I tell her of the certain ruin,
You must encounter with at their arrival
In Syracusa, and that death with torments
Must fall upon you, which you yet repent not;
Esteeming it a glorious martyrdom,
And a reward of pure, unspotted love,
Preserved in the white robe of Innocence:
Though she were in your power, and still spurred on
By insolent lust; you rather chose to suffer
The fruit untasted, for whose glad possession,
You have called on the fury of your Lord,
Then that she should be grieved, or tainted in
Her Reputation.

Pisander. Does it work compunction?
Pitties she my misfortune?

Timandra. She expressed
All signs of sorrow, (which) her vow observed,
Could witness a grieved heart. At the first hearing
She fell upon her face, rent her fair hair,
Her hands held up to heaven, and vented sighs,
In which she silently seemed to complain,
Of heavens injustice.

Pisander, It Is enough: wait carefully,
And upon all watched occasions, continue
Speech, and discourse of me: it is time, must work her.

Timandra. I Will not be wanting, but still strive to serve you.

Pisander. Now, Poliphron, the news: Exit Timandra. Enter Poliphron.

Poliphron. The conquering Army
Is within ken.

Pisander. How brook the slaves the object?

Poliph. Cheerfully yet; they do refuse no labor,
And seem to scoff at danger; it is your presence
That must confirm them; with a full consent,
You are chosen to relate the tyranny
Of our proud Masters; and what you subscribe too,
They gladly will allow of, or hold out
To the last man.

Pisander. I Will instantly among them:
If we prove constant to our selves, good fortune
Will not, I hope, forsake us.

Poliphron. It Is our best refuge. Exeunt.

ACTVS IIII. SCAENA II.
Timoleon, Archidamus, Diphilus, Leosthenes, Timagoras, others. Timoleon. Thus
far we are returned victorious, crowned
With Wreathes triumphant, (famine, blood, and dearth,
Banished your peaceful confines,) and bring home
Security, and peace. It Is therefore fit
That such as boldly stood the shocke of war,
And with the dear expense of sweat and blood
Have purchased Honor, should with pleasure reap
The harvest of their toil; and we stand bound
Out of the first file of the best deseruers,
(Though all must be considered to their merits)
To think of you Leosthenes, that stand,
And worthily, most dear in our esteem,
For your heroique valor.

Archidamus. When I look on
(The labor of so many men, and ages)
This well built City, not long since designed
To spoil and rapine; by the favor of
The gods, and you their ministers preserved;
I cannot in my height of joy, but offer
These tears for a glad sacrifice.

Diphilus. Sleep the Citizens?
Or are they ouerwhelm'd with the excess
Of comfort, that flows to them?

Leosthenes. We receive
A silent entertainment.

Timagoras. I long since
Expected, that the virgins, and the Matrons,
The old men striving with their age, the Priests
Carrying the Images of their gods before 'em
Should have met us with Procession: Ha! the gates
Are shut against us!

Archid. And upon the Walls Enter above, Pisander, Poliphron, Cimbrio,
Gracculo, and the rest.
Armed men seem to defy us!

Diphilus. I should know
These faces; they are our slaves.

Timagoras. The mystery, Rascals?
Open the ports, and play not with an anger,
That will consume you.

Timoleon. This is above wonder.

Archid. Our Bondmen stand against us!

Gracculo. Some such things
We were in man's remembrance; the slaves are turned
Lords of the Town, or so; nay, be not angry:
Perhaps on good terms, giving security,
You will be quiet men, we may allow you
Some lodgings in our Garrets, or outhouses;
Your great looks cannot carry it.

Cymbrio. The truth is,
We have been bold with your wives, toy'd with your daughters.

Leosthenes. O my prophetique soul!

Gracculo. Rifled your Chests,
Been busy with your Wardrobes.

Timagoras. Can we endure this?

Leosthenes. O my Cleora!

Gracculo. A Caudle, for the Gentleman,
He Will die a^the pip else.

Timagoras. Scorned too! are you turned stone?
Hold parley with our Bondmen? force our entrance,
Then Villains, expect.

Timoleon. Hold: you wear men's shapes
And if like men you have reason, show a cause
That leads you to this desperate course, which must end
In your destruction?

Gracculo. That, as please the Fates,
But we vouchsafe; speak Captain.

Timagoras. Hell, and Furies!

Archid. Bay'd by our own curres?

Cimbrio. Take heed, you be not wurried.

Poliphron. We are sharp set.

Cymbrio. And sudden.

Pisander. Briefly thus then,
Since I must speak for all; your tyranny
Drew us from our obedience. Happy those times,
When Lords were styled fathers of Families,
And not imperious Masters; when they numbered
Their servants almost equal with their Sons,
Or one degree beneath them; when their labors
Were cherished, and rewarded, and a period
Set to their sufferings; when they did not press
Their duties, or their wills beyond the power
And strength of their performance; all things ordered
With such decorum, as wise Lawmakers,
From each well-gouern'd private house derived
The perfect model of a Commonwealth;
Humanity then lodged in the hearts of men,
And thankful Masters carefully provided
For Creatures wanting reason. The noble horse
That in his fiery youth from his wide nostrells,
Neigh'd courage to his Rider, and brake through
Groves of opposed Pikes, bearing his Lord
Safe to triumphant victory, old or wounded,
Was set at liberty, and freed from service.
The Athenian Mules, that from the Quarrie drew
Marble, hewed for the Temples of the gods,
The great work ended, were dismis'd, and fed
At the public cost; nay, faithful dogs have found
Their Sepulchers; but man to man, more cruel,
Appoints no end to the sufferings of his slave;
Since pride stepped in and riot, and o'return'd
This goodly frame of Concord, teaching Masters
To glory in the abuse of such, as are
Brought under their command; who grown unuseful,
Are less esteemed than beasts; this you have practiced,
Practiced on us with rigor; this has forced us,
To shake our heavy yokes off; and if redress
Of these just grieuances be not granted us,
We Will right our selves, and by strong hand defend,
What we are now possessed of.

Gracculo. And not leave
One house vnfir'd.

Cimbrio. Or throat uncut of those
We have in our power.

Poliphron. Nor will we fall alone,
You shall buy us dearly.

Timagoras. O, the gods!
Unheard of insolence!

Timoleon. What are your demands?

Pisander. A general pardon, first, for all offenses
Committed in your absence. Liberty,
To all such, as desire to make return
Into their countries; and to those that stay,
A competence of land freely allotted
To each man's proper use; no Lord acknowledged.
Lastly, with your consent, to choose them wives
Out of your Families.

Timagoras. Let the City sink first.

Leosthenes. And ruin sease on all, e're we subscribe
To such conditions.

Archidamus. Carthage, though victorious,
Could not have forced more from us:

Leosthenes. Scale the Walls,
Capitulate after.

Timoleon. He that winnes the top first,
Shall wear a murall wreath. Exeunt.

Pisander. Flourish, and alarmes. Each to his place.
Or death or victory; charge them home, and fear not.

Enter Timoleon and Senators. Timol. We wrong our selves, and we are justly
punished,
To deal with Bondmen, as if we encountered
An equal enemy.

Archidamus. They fight like devils:
And run upon our Swords, as if their breasts
Were proof beyond their Armor.

Enter Leothenes, and Timagoras. Timagoras. Make a firm stand:
The slaves not satisfied, they have beat us off,
Prepare to sally forth.

Timoleon. They are wild beasts,
And to be tamed by policy; each man take
A tough whippe in his hand: such as you used
To punish them with, as masters; in your looks
carry severity, and awe; 'twill fright them
More then your weapons; savage Lions fly from
The sight of fire; and these that have forgot
That duty, your n'ere taught them with your swords,
When unexpected, they behold those terrors
Advanced aloft, that they were made to shake at,
'Twill force them to remember what they are,
And stoop to due obedience.

Enter Cimbrio, Gracculo, and other slaves. Archidamus. Here they come.

Cymbrio. Leave not a man alive; a wound is but a fleabyting,
To what we suffered being slaves.

Gracculo. O my heart!

Cimbrio what do we see? the whippe! our Masters!

Timag. Dare you rebel, slaves? Senators shake their whips, and they throw
away these weapons, and run off.

Cimbrio. Mercy, mercy; where Shall we hide us from their fury?

Gracculo. Fly, they follow;
O, we shall be tormented:

Timoleon. Enter with them,
But yet forbear to kill them; still remember
They are part of your wealth, and being disarmed,
There is no danger.

Archidamus. Let us first deliver
Such as they have in Fetters, and at leisure
Determine of their punishment.

Leosthenes. Friend, to you
I leave the disposition of what is mine:
I cannot think I am safe without your Sister,
She Is only worth my thought; and till I see
What she has suffered, I am on the rack,
And furye's my tormentors. Exeunt.

ACTVS IIII. SCAENA III.
Pisander, Timandra. Pisander. I know, I am pursued, nor would I fly,
Although the Ports were open, and a Conuoy
Ready to bring me off: the baseness of
These villains, from the pride of all my hopes,
Have thrown me to the bottomless Abisse
Of horror, and despair; had they stood firm,
I could have bought Cleoras free consent,
With the safety of her Fathers life, and Brothers:
And forced Leosthenes to quit his claim,
And kneel a Suitor for me.

Timandra. You must not think,
What might have been, but what must now be practiced,
And suddenly resolve.

Pisander. All my poor fortunes
Are at the stake, and I must run the hazard.
Unseen, convey me to Cleora's Chamber,
For in her sight, if it were possible,
I would be apprehended: do not inquire
The reason why, but help me.

Timandra. Make haste, one knockes, Exit Pisander. Enter Leosthenes.
Jove turn all to the best: you are welcome Sir.

Leosthenes. Thou give it in a heavy tone.

Timandra. Alas, Sir,
We have so long fed on the bread of sorrow,
Drinking the bitter water of afflictions,
Made loathsome to, by our continued fears,
Comfort's a stranger to us.

Leosthenes. Feare's! your sufferings,
For which I am so ouergone with grief,
I dare not ask without compassionate tears,
The villains name, that robbed thee of thy honor;
For being trained up in chastities cold School,
And taught by such a Mistress as Cleora,
'Twere impious in me, to think Timandra
Fell with her own consent.

Timandra. How mean you, fell, Sir?
I understand you not.

Leosthenes. I would, thou did not,
Or that I could not read upon thy face,
In blushing caracters, the story of
Libidinous Rape; confess it, for you stand not
Accomptable for a sin, against whose strength
Your o're-match'd innocence could make no resistance;
Under which odds, I know Cleora fell too,
Heavens help in vain inuok'd; the amazed Sun,
Hiding his face behind a mask of clouds,
Not daring, to look on it, in her sufferings
All sorrowe's comprehended; what Timandra,
Or the City has endured, her loss considered,
Deserves not to be named.

Timandra. Pray you do not bring, Sir,
In the chymeraes of your jealous fears,
New monsters to affright us.

Leosthenes. O Timandra.
That I had faith enough but to believe thee,
I should receive it with a joy beyond
Assurance of Elizian shades hereafter,
Or all the blessings in this life, a Mother
Could wish her children crowned with: but I must not
Credit impossibilities, yet I strive
To find out that, whose knowledge is a curse,
And ignorance a blessing. Come, discover
What kind of look he had, that forced thy Lady,
(Thy rauisher, I will enquire at leisure,)
That when hereafter I behold a stranger
But near him in aspect, I may conclude,
(Though men and Angels should proclaim him honest,)
He is a Hell-bred villain.

Timandra. You are unworthy
To know she is preserved, preserved untainted.
Sorrow (but ill bestowed) has only made
A rape upon her comforts, in your absence.
Come forth, dear Madam. Leads in Cleora.

Leost. Ha! Kneeles.

Tima. Nay, she dserues
The bending of your heart; that to content you,
Has kept a vow, the breach of which a vestall
(Though the infringing it had called upon her
A living funeral,) must of force have shrunk at;
No danger could compel her, to dispense with
Her cruel Penance; though hot lust came armed
To seize upon her, when one look, or accent
Might have redeemed her.

Leosthenes. Might? O do not show me
A beam of comfort, and straight take it from me;
The means, by which she was freed? Speak, O speak quickly,
Each minute of delay's, an age of Torment:
O speak, Timandra.

Timandra. Free her from her oath,
Her self can best deliver it. Takes off the Scarf.

Leost. O blessed office!
Never did Gally-slaue shake off his chains,
Or looked on his redemption from the Oar,
With such true feeling of delight, as now
I find my self possessed of; now I behold
True light indeed; For since these fairest stars,
(Covered with clouds of your determinate will)
Denyde their influence to my optique sense,
The Splendour of the Sun appeared to me,
But as some little glimpse of his bright beams
Couey'd into a Dungeon; to remember
The dark inhabitants there, how much they wanted.
Open these long-shut lips, and strike mine ears
With Music more harmonious, then the Spheres
Yield in their heavenly motions; And if ever
A true submission, for a crime acknowledged,
May find a gracious hearing, teach your tongue
In the first sweet, articulate sounds, it vtters
To sign my wished for pardon.

Cleo. I forgive you.

Leost. How greedily I receive this? Stay, best Lady,
And let me by degrees ascend the height
Of humane happiness; All at once delivered,
The torrent of my joys will ouerwhelme me;
So, now a little more; And pray excuse me,
If like a wanton Epicure I desire,
The pleasant taste these cates of comfort yield me,
should not too soon be swallowed. Have you not
(By your unspotted truth, I do conjure you
To answer truly) suffered in your honor:
(By force, I mean, for in your will I free you)
Since I left Syracusa?

Cleo. I restore
This kiss, (so help me goodness,) which I borrowed,
When I last saw you.

Leost. Miracle of virtue!
One pawse more, I beseech you, I am like
A man, whose vital spirits consumed, and wasted
With a long and tedious Fever, unto whom
Too much of a strong Cordial at once taken
Brings death, and not restores him. Yet I cannot
Fix here: but must enquire the man, to whom
I stand indebted for a benefit,
Which to requite at full, though in this hand
I grasped all Scepters the worlds Empire bow to,
Would leave me a poor Bank'rout; name him, Lady;
If of a mean estate, I Will gladly part with
My utmost fortunes to him; but if noble,
In thankful duty study how to serve him;
Or if of higher rank, erect him Altars,
And (as a god) adore him.

Cleo. If that goodness,
And noble temperance (the Queen of virtues)
Bridling rebellous passions (to whose sway,
Such as have conquered Nations have lived slaves)
Did ever wing great minds to fly to heaven;
He that preserved mine honor, may hope boldly
To fill a seat among the gods, and shake of
Our frail corruption.

Leosthenes. Forward.

Cleo. Or if ever,
The powers above did masque in humane shapes,
To teach mortality, not by cold precepts
Forgot as soon as told, but by examples,
To imitate their pureness, and draw near
To their Celestial Natures; I believe
He Is more then man.

Leost. You do describe a wonder.

Cleo. Which will increase, when you shall understand,
He was a lover.

Leost. Not yours, Lady?

Cleo. Yes,
Loved me, Leosthenes; Nay more, so doted,
(If clear affections scorning gross desires
May without wrong be styled so) that he durst not
With an immodest syllable, or look,
In fear it might take from me, whom he made
The object of his better part, discover,
I was the Saint, he su'de too.

Leost. A rare tempter!

Cleo. I cannot speak it to the worth: All praise
I can bestow upon it, will appear
Envious detraction. Not to rack you farther,
Yet make the miracle full; though of all men
He hated you Leosthenes, as his rival:
So high yet he prized my content, that knowing
You were a man I favored, he disdained not
Against himself to serve you.

Leost. You conceal, still,
The owner of these excellencies.

Cleo. It Is Marullo,
My Fathers Bondman.

Leost. Ha, ha, ha!

Cleo. Why do you laugh?

Leost. To hear the laboring mountain of your praise
Delivered of a Mouse.

Cleo. The man deserves not
This scorn, I can assure you.

Leost. Do you call,
What was his duty, merit?

Cleo. Yes, and place it,
As high in my esteem, as all the honors
Descended from your Ancestors, or the glory,
Which you may call your own, got in this action;
In which I must confess you have done nobly,
And I could add; As I desired; but that
I fear, 'twould make you proud.

Leost. Why Lady, can you
Be won to give allowance, that your slave
Should dare to love you?

Cleo. The Immortal gods
Accept the meanest Altars, that are raised
By pure devotions; and sometimes prefer
An ounce of Frankincense, honey, or milk,
Before whole Hecatombes, or Sabaean Gums
Offered in ostentation. Are you sick Aside.
Of your old disease? I Will fit you.

Leost. You seem moved.

Cleo. Zealous, I grant, in the defense of virtue.
Why, good Leosthenes, though I endured,
A penance for you sake, above example,
I have not so far sold my self, I take it,
To be at your devotion, but I may
Cherish desert in others, where I find it.
How would you tyranize, if you stood possessed of
That, which is only yours in expectation?
That now prescribe such hard conditions to me?

Leost. One kiss, and I am silenced.

Cleo. I vouchsafe it;
Yet, I must tell you, it is a favor, that
Marullo, when I was his, not mine own,
Durst not presume to ask; No, when the City
Bowed humbly to licentious Rapes, and lust.
And when I was of men and gods forsaken,
Delivered to his power, he did not press me
To grace him with one look or syllable.
Or urged the dispensation of an oath
Made for your satisfaction; The poor wretch
Having related only his own sufferings,
And kissed my hand, which I could not deny him,
Defending me from others, never since
Solicited my favors.

Leost. Pray you, end,
The story does not please me.

Cleo. Well, take heed
Of doubts, and fears; For know, Leosthenes,
A greater injury cannot be offered
To innocent chastity, then unjust suspicion.
I love Marulloes fair mind, not his person,
Let that secure you. And I here command you,
If I have any power in you, to stand
Between him and all punishment, and oppose
His temperance to his folly; If you fail --
No more, I will not threaten. Exit.

Leost. What a bridge
Of glass I walk upon, over a River
Of certain ruin: mine own weighty fears
Cracking what should support me: And those helps,
Which confidence lends to others, are from me
Ravished by doubts, and wilful Jealousy.

ACTVS IIII. SCAENA Vltima.
Timagoras, Cleon, Asotus, Corisca, Olimpia. Cleon. But are you sure we are
safe?

Tima. You need not fear,
They are all under guard, their fangs pared off:
The wounds their insolence gave you, to be cured,
With the blame of your revenge.

Asotus. And shall I be
The thing I was borne, my Lord?

Timagoras. The same wise thing;
'Slight, what a beast they have made thee! Affricke never
Produced the like.

Aso. I think so: Nor the land
Where Apes, and Monkies, grow, like Crabs, and Wall-nuts
On the same tree. Not all the Catalogue
Of Coniurers, or wise women, bound together
Could have so soon transformed me, as my Rascal
Did with his whip; Not in outside only,
But in my own belief, I thought my self
As perfect a Baboone.

Tima. An Ass, thou were ever.

Aso. And would have given one leg with all my heart
For good security to have been a man
After three lives, or one and twenty years,
Though I had died on Crouches.

Cleon. Never varlets
So triumphed over an old fat man: I was famished.

Tima. In deed you are fallen away.

Aso. Three years of feeding
On Cullises and ielly, though his Cooks
Lard all he eats with marrow, or his Doctors
Power in his mouth Restoratiues, as he sleeps,
Will not recover him.

Tima. But your Ladyship looks
Sad on the matter, as if you had mis'd
Your ten-crowne Amber Possets, good to smoothe
The Cutis, as you call it, and prepare you
Active, and high for an afternoones encounter,
With a rough gamester, on your couch; fie on it,
You are grown thriftie, smell like other women;
The College of Physicians have not sat,
As they were used, in council how to fill
The cranies in your cheeks, or raise a rampire,
With Mummy, Ceruses, or Infants fat,
To keep off age, and time.

Cori. Pray you, forbear;
I am an altered woman.

Tima. So it seems;
A part of your honors ruff stands out of rank too.

Cori. No matter, I have other thoughts.

Tima. O strange!
Not ten days since it would have vexed you more,
Then th'losse of your good name; Pity, this cure
For your proud itch came no sooner! Marry, Olympia seems to bear up still.

Olimp. I complain not, Sir,
I have borne my fortune patiently.

Tima. Thou were ever
An excellent bearer; so is all your tribe,
If you may choose your carriage: How now, friend,
Looks our Cleora lovely? Enter Leosthenes. and Diphilus with a Guard.

Leost. In my thoughts, Sir.

Tima. But why this guard?

Diphi. It is Timoleons pleasure;
The slaves have been examined, and confess,
Their riot took beginning from your house:
And the first moouer of them to rebellion,
Your slave Marullo.

Leost. Ha! I more, then fear.

Tima. They may search boldly.

Timand. You are vnmanner'd Grooms, Enter Timandra
To pry into my Ladies private lodgings;
There Is no Marulloe's, there. Enter Diphilus With Pisander.

Timag. Now I suspect too;
Where found you him?

Diphi. Close hid in your Sisters Chamber.

Timag. Is that the villains sanctuary?

Leost. This confirms
All she delivered, false.

Timag. But that I scorn,
To rust my good Sword in thy slavish blood,
Thou now were dead.

Pisander. He Is more a slave, then Fortune,
Or Misery can make me, that insults
Upon vnweapon'd Innocence.

Tima. Prate, you dog?

Pisander. Curres snap at Lions in the toil, whose looks
Frighted them being free.

Tima. As a wild beast,
Drive him before you.

Pisander. O Divine Cleora!

Leost. Dare thou presume to name her?

Pisander. Yes, and love her:
And may say, have deserved her.

Timandra. Stop his mouth: Exit Guard with Pisander.
Load him with Irons too.

Cleon. I am deadly sick,
To look on him.

Asotus. If he get loose, I know it,
I caper, like an Ape, again: I feel
The whip already.

Timan. This goes to my Lady.

Timag. Come, cheer you, Sir, we will urge his punishment
To the full satisfaction of your anger.

Leost. He is not worth my thoughts; No corner left
In all the spacious rooms of my vexed heart,
But is filled with Cleora: And the Rape
She has done upon her honor, with my wrong,
The heavy burden of my sorrows song.

Exeunt. ACTVS V. SCAENA I.
Archidamus, Cleor. Archida. Thou art thine own disposer. Were his honors
And glories centupled, (as I must confess,
Leosthenes is most worthy) yet I will not,
How ever I may counsel, force affection.

Cleora. It needs not, Sir, I prize him to his worth,
Nay, love him truly, yet would not live slau'd
To his jealous humors. Since by the hopes of heaven,
As I am free from violence, in a thought
I am not guilty.

Archida. It Is believed Cleora,
And much the rather, (our great gods be praised for it)
In that I find beyond my hopes, no sign
Of riot in my house, but all things ordered,
As if I had been present.

Cleora. May that move you
To pity poor Marullo.

Archida. It Is my purpose
To do him all the good I can, Cleora;
But his offense being against the State,
Must have a public trial. In the mean time
Be careful of your self, and stand engaged
No farther to Leosthenes, then you may
Come off with honor: For, being once his wife,
You are no more your own, nor mine, but must
Resolve to serve, and suffer his commands,
And not dispute'em; e're it be to late,
Consider it duly. I must to the Senate. Exit Archida.

Cleora. I am much distracted; in Leosthenes
I can find nothing justly to accuse,
But his excess of love, which I have studied
To cure with more then common means, yet still
It grows upon him. And if I may call
My sufferings merit, I stand bound to think on
Marullos dangers; though I save his life,
His love is unrewarded: I confess,
Both have deserved me, yet of force must be
Unjust to one; such is my destiny. Enter Timandra.
How now? whence flow these tears?

Timandra. I have met, Madam,
An object of such cruelty, as would force
A Savage to compassion.

Cleora. Speak, what is it?

Timan. Men pity beasts of rapine, if o're-match'd,
Though bayted for their pleasure: but these monsters
upon a man, that can make no resistance,
Are sensllesse in their tyranny. Let it be granted,
Marullo is a slave, he is still a man;
A capital offender, yet in justice
Not to be tortured, till the Judge pronounce
His punishment.

Cleora. Where is he?

Timand. Dragged to prison
With more then barbarous violence, spurned and spit on
By the insulting officers, his hands
Pynion'd behind his back: laden with fetters;
Yet, with a Saint-like patience, he still offers
His face to their rude buffets.

Cleora. O my grieved soul!
By whose command?

Timandra. It seems, my Lord your brothers;
For he is a looker on: and it takes from
Honored Leosthenes to suffer it,
For his respect to you, whose name in vain
The grieved wretch loudly calls on.

Cleo. By Diana,
It Is base in both, and to their teeth I Will tell 'em
That I am wronged in it. As going forth.

Timan. What will you do?

Cleo. In person
Visit, and comfort him.

Timan. That will bring fuel
To the jealous fires, which burn too hot already
In Lord Leosthenes.

Cleora. Let them consume him;
I am Mistrisse of my self. Where cruelty reigns,
There dwells nor love, nor honor. Exit Cleora.

Timandra. So, it works.
Though hitherto I have ran a desperate course
To serve my brothers purposes, now it is fit, Enter Leosthenes and Timagoras.
I study mine own ends. They come. Assist me
In these my undertakings, loves great Patron,
As my intents are honest.

Leosthenes. It Is my fault.
Distrust from others springs, Timagoras,
From diffidence in our selves. But I will strive,
With the assurance of my worth, and merits,
To kill this monster, jealousy.

Timagoras. It Is a ghest
In wisdom never to be entertained
On triuiall probabilities; but when
He does appear in pregnant proofs, not fashioned
By idle doubts and fears, to be received,
They make their own horns, that are too secure,
As well as such as give them grouth, and being
From mere imagination. Though I prize
Cleora's honor equal with mine own;
And know what large additions of power
This match brings to our family; I prefer
Our friendship, and your peace of mind so far
Above my own respects, or hers, that if
She hold not her true value in the test,
It Is far from my ambition for her cure,
That you should wound your self.

Timandra. This argues for me.

Timago. Why she should be so passionate for a Bondman,
Falls not in compass of my understanding,
But for some nearer interest; or he raise
This mutiny, if he loved her (as you say,
She does confess, he did) but to enjoy
By fair or foul play, what he venter'd for,
To mee's a Riddle.

Leosthenes. 'Pray you, no more; already
I have answered that objection in my strong
Assurance of her virtue.

Timagoras. It Is unfit then,
That I should press it further.

Timand. Now I must Timandra steps out distractedly.
Make in, or all is lost.

Timagoras. What would Timandra?

Leosthenes. How wild she looks? How is it with thy Lady?

Timagoras. Collect thy self, and speak.

Timand. As you are noble,
Have pity, or love piety. Oh!

Leosthenes. Take breath.

Timago. Out with it boldly.

Timag. O, the best of Ladies,
I fear, is gone for ever.

Leosthenes. Who, Cleora?

Timag. Deliver, how. 'Sdeath, be a man, Sir, speak.

Timand. Take it then in as many sighs, as words
My Lady.

Timag. What of her?

Timand. No sooner heard,
Marullo was imprisoned, but she fell
Into a deadly swoune.

Timago. But she recouer'd.
Say so, or he will sink too, hold, Sir, fie,
This is unmanly.

Timand. Brought again to life,
But with much labor; she awhile stood silent,
Yet in that interim vented sighs, as if
They labored from the prison of her flesh,
To give her grieved soul freedom. On the sudden
Transported on the wings of rage, and sorrow,
She flew out of the house, and vnattended
Entered the common prison.

Leosthenes. This confirms
What but before I feared.

Timand. There you may find her,
And if you love her, as a Sister --

Timago. Damme her.

Timand. Or you respect her safety, as a lover,
Procure Marullos liberty.

Timag. Impudence
Beyond expression.

Leost. Shall I be a Bawd
To her lust, and my dishonor?

Timand. She Will run mad else,
Or do some violent act upon her self.
My Lord her Father, sensible of her sufferings.
Labors to gain his freedom,

Leost. O, the Devil!
Has she bewitched him too?

Timago. I Will hear no more.
Come, Sir, we will follow her, and if no persuasion
Can make her take again her natural form,
Which by lusts powerful spell she has cast off,
This Sword shall dis-inchant her.

Leost. O my heart strings! Exeunt Leost. and Timagoras.

Timandra. I knew, 'twould take. Pardon me, fair Cleora.
Though I appear a traytresse, which thou will do
In pity of my woes, when I make known
My lawful claim, and only seek mine own. Exit.

ACTVS V. SCAENA II.
Cleora, Iaylor, Pisander. Cleo. There Is for your priuacy. Stay, unbind his
hands.

Iaylor. I dare not, Madam.

Cleora. I will buy thy danger.
Take more gold, do not trouble me with thanks;
I do suppose it done. Exit Iaylor.

Pisander. My better Angel
Assumes this shape to comfort me, and wisely;
Since from the choice of all celestial figures,
He could not take a visible form so full
Of glorious sweetness. Kneeles.

Cleora. Rise. I am flesh and blood,
And do partake thy tortures.

Pisander. Can it be?
That charity should persuade you to descend
So far from your own height, as to vouchsafe
To look upon my sufferings? How I bless
My fetters now, and stand engaged to Fortune
For my captivity, no, my freedom rather!
For who dares think that place a Prison, which
You sanctify with your presence? or believe,
Sorrow has power to use her sting on him,
That is in your compassion armed, and made
Impregnable? though tyranny raise at once
All engines to assault him.

Cleora. Indeed virtue,
With which you have made evident proofs, that you
Are strongly fortified, cannot fall, though shaken
With the shocke of fierce temptations, but still triumphs
In spite of opposition. For my self
I may endeavor to confirm your goodness,
(A sure retreat which never will deceive you)
And with unfeigned tears express my sorrow,
For what I cannot help.

Pisander. Do you weep for me?
O save that precious balm for nobler uses,
I am unworthy of the smallest drop,
Which in your prodigality of pity
You throw away on me. Ten of these pearls
Were a large ransom to redeem a kingdom
From a consuming plague, or stop heavens vengeance
Called down by crying sins, though at that instant
In dreadful flashes falling on the roofes
Of bold blasphemers. I am justly punished
For my intent of violence to such pureness;
And all the torments flesh is sensible of
A soft and gentle penance.

Cleora. Which is ended
In this your free confession. Enter Leosthenes and Timagoras.

Leost. What an object
Have I encountered?

Timago. I am blasted too:
Yet hear a little further.

Pisander. Could I expire now,
These white and innocent hands closing my eyes thus,
'Twere not to die, but in a heavenly dream
To be transported, without the help of Charon
To the Elizian shades. You make me bold:
And but to wish such happiness, I fear,
May give offense.

Cleora. No, for, beleeu't, Marullo,
You have won so much upon me, that I know not
That happiness in my gift, but you may challenge.

Leosthenes. Are you yet satisfied?

Cleor. Nor can you wish,
But what my vows will second, though it were
Your freedom first, and then in me full power
To make a second tender of my self,
And you receive the present. By this kiss
(From me a virgin bounty) I will practice
All arts for your deliverance; and that purchased
In what concerns your father aims, I speak it,
Do not despair, but hope.

Timag. To have the Hangman,
When he is married to the cross, in scorn,
To say, gods give you joy.

Leost. But look on me,
And be not too indulgent to your folly,
And then (but that grief stops my speech) imagine,
What language I should use.

Cleora. Against thy self.
Thy malice cannot reach me.

Timag. How?

Cleora. So, brother;
Though you join in the Dialogue to accuse me,
What I have done, I Will justify; and these favors,
Which you presume will taint me in my honor;
Though jealousy use all her eyes to spy out
One stayne in my behavior; or Envy
As many tongues to wound it, shall appear
My best perfections. For to the world
I can in my defense allege such reasons,
As my accusers shall stand dumb to hear 'em,
When in his Fetters this man's worth and virtues
But truly told shall shame your boasted glories,
Which fortune claims a share in.

Timag. The base villain
Shall never live to hear it. Enter Archid: Diphilus, and Officers.

Cleora. Murder, help,
Through me you shall pass to him.

Archid. What Is the matter?
On whom is your Sword drawn? are you a judge?
Or else ambitious of the hangmans office
Before it be designed you? you are bold too,
Vnhand my daughter.

Leost. She Is my valors prize.

Archid. With her consent, not otherwise. You may urge
Your title in the Court; if it prove good,
Possess her freely: Guard him safely off too.

Timago. You Will hear me, Sir?

Archid. If you have ought to say,
Deliver it in public; all shall find
A just Judge of Timoleon.

Diphilus. You must
Of force now use your patience. Exeunt omnes praeter Leost and Timag.

Timag. Vengeance rather
Whirle-windes of rage possess me; you are wronged
Beyound a Stoicque sufferance, yet you stand,
As you were rooted.

Leost. I feel something here,
That boldly tells me, all the love and service,
I pay Cleora, is another due,
And therefore cannot prosper.

Timag. Melancholy,
Which now you must not yield to.

Leosthenes. It Is apparent,
In fact your Sisters innocent, howeuer
Changed by her violent will.

Timagoras. If you believe so,
Follow the chase still: And in open court
Plead your own interest; we shall find the Judge
Our friend I fear not.

Leosthenes. Some thing I shall say,
But what --

Timag. Collect your self, as we walk thither. Exeunt.

ACTVS V. SCAENA Vltima.
Timoleon, Archidamus, Cleon, Officers. Timoleon. It Is wondrous strange! nor can
it fall within
The reach of my belief, a slave should be
The owner of a temperance, which this age
Can hardly parallel in freeborn Lords,
Or Kings proud of their purple.

Archid. It Is most true.
And though at first it did appear a fable,
All circumstances meet to give it credit;
Which work so on me, that I am compelled
To be a Suitor, not be deni'de,
He may have aequall hearing.

Cleora. Sir, you graced me
With the title of your Mistrisse, but my fortune
Is so far distant from command, that I
Lay by the power you gave me, and plead humbly
For the preserver of my fame and honor.
And pray you, Sir, in charity believe,
That since I had ability of speech,
My tongue has so much been enured to truth,
I know not, how to lie,

Timoleon. I Will rather doubt
The Oracles of the gods, then question, what
Your innocence delivers: and as far
As justice with mine honor can give way,
He shall have favor. Bring him in, unbound: Exeunt Officers.
And though Leosthenes may challenge from me,
For his late worthy service, credit to
All things he can allege in his own cause,
Marullo (so I think you call his name)
Shall find, I do reserve one ear for him,
To let in mercy. Sit and take your places; Enter Cleon, Asotus, Diphilus,
Olimpia, Corisca.
The right of this fair virgin first determined,
Your Bondmen shall be censured.

Cleon. With all rigor,
We do expect.

Corisca. Tempered, I say, with mercy. Enter at one door Leosthenes Timagoras
at the other Officers with Pisander and Timandra.

Timol. Your hand Leosthenes: I cannot doubt
You that have bin victorious in the war,
should in a combat fought with words come off,
But with assured triumph.

Leosthenes. My deserts, Sir,
(If without arrogance I may style them such)
Arm me from doubt, and fear.

Timoleon. It Is nobly spoken,
Nor be thou daunted (howsoever the fortune
Has marked thee out a slave) to speak thy merits;
For virtue though in rags may challenge more,
Then vice set off with all the trim of greatness.

Pisander. I had rather fall under so just a judge,
Then be acquitted by a man corrupt
And partial in his censure.

Archida. Note his language,
It relishes of better breeding then
His present state dares promise.

Timoleon. I observe it.
Place the fair Lady in the midst, that both
Looking with covetous eyes upon the prize
They are to plead for, may from the fair object,
Teach Hermes eloquence.

Leosthenes. Am I fallen so low
My birth, my honor, and what is dearest to me,
My love, and witness of my love, my service,
So vnder-valewd, that I must contend
With one, where my excess of glory must
Make his overthrow a conquest? shall my fullness
supply defects in such a thing, that never
Knew any thing but want and emptiness?
Give him a name, and keep it such from this
Unequal competition? if my pride
Or any bold assurance of my worth,
Has plucked this mountain of disgrace upon me,
I am justly punished, and submit; but if
I have been modest, and esteemed my self
More injured in the tribute of the praise,
Which no desert of mine prized by self-love
Ever exacted; may this cause, and minute
For ever be forgotten. I dwell long
Upon mine anger, and now turn to you
Ungrateful fair one; and since you are such,
It Is lawful for me to proclaim my self,
And what I have deserved.

Cleora. Neglect, and scorn
From me for this proud vaunt.

Leosthenes. You nourish, Lady
Your own dishonor in this harsh reply,
And almost prove what some hold of your sex.
You are all made up of passion. For if reason
Or judgment could find entertainment with you,
Or that you would distinguish of the objects
You look on in a true glass, not feduc'd
By the false light of your too violent will,
I should not need to plead for that, which you
With joy should offer. Is my high birth a blemish?
Or does my wealth, which all the vain expense
Of women cannot waste, breed loathing in you?
The honors I can call mine own thought scandals?
Am I deformed, or for my Fathers sins
Mulcted by nature? if you interpret these
As crimes, it is fit I should yield up my self
Most miserably guilty. But perhaps
(Which yet I would not credit) you have seen
This gallant, pitch the bar, or bear a burden
Would crack the shoulders of a weaker bondman;
Or any other boistrous exercise,
Assuring a strong back to satisfy
Your loose desires, insatiate as the grave.

Cleora. You are foul mouthed.

Archid. Ill manner'd too.

Leost. I speak
In the way of supposition, and entreat you
With all the feruor of a constant lover,
That you would free your self from these aspersions,
Or any imputation black tongued Slander
Could throw on your unspotted virgin-whitenesse;
To which there is no easier way, then by
Vouchsafing him your favor; him, to whom
Next to the General, and the gods, and fautors,
The country owes her safety.

Timagoras. Are you stupid?
'Slight leap into his arms, and there ask pardon.
O, you expect your slaves reply, no doubt
We shall have a fine oration; I will teach
My Spaniell to howl in sweeter language,
And keep a better method.

Archid. You forget
The dignity of the place.

Diphi. Silence.

Timo. Speak boldly.

Pisander. It Is your authority gives me a tongue,
I should be dumb else; and I am secure,
I cannot cloathe my thoughts, and just defense
In such an abject phrase, but 'twill appear
Equal, if not above my low condition.
I need no bombast language, stolen from such,
As make Nobility from prodigious terms
The hearers understand not; I bring with me
No wealth to boast of, neither can I number
Uncertain fortunes favors, with my merits;
I dare not force affection, or presume
To censure her discretion, that looks on me
As a weak man, and not her fancies Idol.
How I have loved, and how much I have suffered,
And with what pleasure undergone the burden
Of my ambitious hopes (in aiming at
The glad possession of a happiness,
The abstract of all goodness in mankind
Can at no part deserve) with my confession
Of mine own wants, is all that can plead for me.
But if that pure desires, not blended with
Foul thoughts, that like a River keeps his course,
Retaining still the cleerenesse of the spring,
From whence it took beginning, may be thought
Worthy acceptance; then I dare rise up
And tell this gay man to his teeth, I never
Durst doubt her constancy, that like a rock
Beats off temptations, as that mocks the fury
Of the proud waves; nor from my jealous fears
Question that goodness, to which as an Altar
Of all perfection, he that truly loved,
Should rather bring a sacrifice of service,
Then raze it with the engines of suspicion;
Of which when he can wash an AEthiope white,
Leosthenes may hope to free himself;
But till then never.

Timago. Bold presumptuous villain.

Pisan. I will go farther, and make good upon him
In the pride of all his honors, birth, and fortunes,
He Is more unworthy, then my self.

Leosthenes. Thou lie.

Timago. Confute him with a whippe, and the doubt decided,
Punish him with a halter.

Pisander. O the gods!
My ribs, though made of Brass can not contain
My heart swollen big with rage. The lie! Whippe? Plucks off his disguise.
Let fury then disperse these clouds, in which
I long have masked disguised; that when they know,
Whom they have injured, they may faint with horror
Of my revenge, which wretched men expect,
As sure as fate to suffer.

Leosthenes. Ha! Pisander!

Timagoras. It Is the bold Theban!

Asotus. There Is no hope for me then:
I thought I should have put in for a share,
And borne Cleora from them both; but now
This stranger looks so terrible, that I dare not
So much as look on her.

Pisander. Now as my self,
Thy equal, at thy best, Leosthenes.
For you, Timagoras; praise heaven, you were borne
Cleora's brother, it is your safest armor.
But I loose time. The base lie cast upon me,
I thus return: thou art a perjured man,
False and perfidious: And have made a tender
Of love, and service to this Lady; when
Thy soul (if thou have any) can bear witness,
That thou were not thine own. For proof of this,
Look better on this virgin, and consider
This Persian shape laid by, and she appearing
In a Greekish dress, such as when first you saw her,
If she resemble not Pisanders sister,
One, called Statilia?

Leosthenes. It Is the same! my guilt
So chokes my spirits, I can not deny
My falsehood, nor excuse it.

Pisander. This is she
To whom thou were contracted: this the Lady,
That when thou were my prisoner fairly taken
In the Spartan war, that begged thy liberty,
And with it gave her self to thee ungrateful.

Timand. No more, Sir, I entreat you; I perceive
True sorrow in his looks, and a consent
To make me reparation in mine honor,
And then I am most happy.

Pisander. The wrong done her,
Drew me from Thebes with a full intent to kill thee:
But this fair object, met me in my fury
And quite disarmed mo, being denied to have her
By you my Lord Archidamus, and not able
To live far from her, love (the Mistrisse of
All quaint devices, prompted me to treat
With a friend of mine, who as a Pirate sold me
For a slave to you my Lord, and gave my Sister
As a present to Cleora.

Timoleon. Strange Meanders!

Pisan. There how I bare my self needs no relation.
But if so far descending from the height
Of my then flourishing fortunes, to the lowest
Condition of a man, to have means only
To feed my eye, with the sight of what I honored,
The dangers to I underwent; the sufferings;
The cleerenesse of my interest may deserve
A noble recompense in your lawful favor.
Now it is apparent that Leosthenes
Can claim no interest in you, you may please
To think upon my service.

Cleora. Sir, my want
Of power to satisfy so great a debt,
Makes me accuse my fortune - but if that
Out of the bounty of your mind, you think,
A free surrender of my self full payment,
I gladly tender it.

Archidamus. With my consent to
All injuries forgotten.

Timagoras. I will study
In my future service to descerue your favor
And good opinion.

Leosthenes. Thus I gladly fee Kissing Statilia.
This Advocate to plead for me.

Pisander. You will find me
An easy judge, when I have yielded reasons
Of your Bond-mens falling off from their obedience,
And after, as you please, determine of me.
I found their natures apt to mutiny
From your too cruel usage; and made trial
How far they might be wrought on; to instruct you
To look with more prevention, and care
To what they may hereafter undertake
Upon the like occasions. The hurt's little
They have committed, nor was ever cuer
But with some pain effected. I confess
In hope to force a grant of fair Cleora
I urged them to defend the Town against you;
Nor had the terror of your whips, but that
I was preparing of defense elsewhere
So soon got entrance; in this I am guilty,
Now as you please, your censure.

Timoleon. Bring them in,
And though you have given me power, I do entreat
Such as have undergone their insolence,
It may not be offensive though I study
Pity more then revenge.

Corisca. 'Twill best become you.

Cleon. I must consent.

Asotus. For me I Will find a time
To be revenged hereafter.

Gracculo, Cimbrio, Poliphron, Zanthia, and the rest with Halters. Gracculo.
Give me leave,
I Will speak for all.

Timoleon. What can thou say to hinder
The course of justice?

Gracculo. Nothing. You may see
We are prepared for hanging, and confess
We have deserved it. Our most humble suite is
We may not twice be executed.

Timoleon. 'Twice? how meanest thou!
At the Gallows first, and after in a Ballad
Sung to some villainous tune. There are ten-grot-Rimers
About the Town grown fat on these occasions.
Let but a Chapel fall, or a street be fired,
A foolish lover hang himself for pure love,
Or any such like accident, and before
They are cold in their graves, some damned Dittie's made
Which makes their ghosts walk. Let the State take order
For the redress of this abuse, recording
'Twas done by my advice, and for my part
I Will cut as clean a caper from the Ladder,
As ever merry Greek did.

Timoleon. Yet I think
You would show more actiuity to delight
Your Master for a pardon.

Gracculo. O, I would dance Capers.
As I were all air, and fire.

Timoleon. And ever be
Obedient and humble?

Gracculo. As his Spaniell,
Though he kicked me for exercise, and the like
I promise for all the rest.

Timoleon. Rise then, you have it.

All slaves. Timoleon, Timoleon! Timoleon. Cease these clamors.
And now the war being ended to our wishes,
And such as went the pilgrimage of love,
Happy in full fruition of their hopes,
It Is lawful thanks paid to the powers divine,
To drown our cares in honest mirth, and Wine. Exeunt.

FINIS.

