THE HISTORY OF LEWIS THE ELEVENTH.

WITH THE MOST MEMORABLE accidents which happened in Europe during the two and
twenty years of his Reign.

Enricht with many Observations which serve as Commentaries.

Divided into eleven Books.

Written in French by P. MATHIEV Historiographer to the French King.

And Translated into English by EDW: GRIMESTON Sergeant at Arms

LEWIS THE XI FRENCH KING
portrait

At London printed by GEORGE ELD. 1614.

SEMPER ^ EADEM

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND WORTHY OF ALL HONORS THOMAS Earl of Suffolk, Lord
Chamberlain to his Majesty.
WHO begins (my most Noble Lord) and not ends the Race, receives no Crown. I
have begun to submit to your Patronage, my former endeauours: And therefore
thus continue their grace, with prescription of your honorable name. Your most
Noble disposition never giving over free and honest services; It Were
inconstancy, respectlesse, and rude to relinquish, or not ever to celebrate
you: Or to an increasing Nobility and merit, to decrease in observance and
Tribute. I have chosen now to present your Lordship with the Life of one of
those Kings, which my former French disfranchisements, and makings free in our
English, have in other sort touched at: Now selected, augmented, and more
particularly illustrated, by the nearer, and more labored insight of one of
their learned, and most profit-making Obseruers. All objections to his
labors, he has answered himself in Sequel; my pains being only to render
him truly, and with as much grace of our English representation as I might.
Naught rests but your Lordships leasurable perusal, and examination of both:
Together with my zealous desire of your honorable conceit; that all Offices,
performed on my part, in this or any other worthy subject, shall ever be
particularly confined to your chosen service, and noble acceptance. So ever
remaining in all things

Your LL. most devoted, EDW: GRIMESTON.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
ALthough that all Books which are presented unto the King, proceed not from
those excellent pens which have taken life under his reign, to advance the
French eloquence to the height of glory, no more then all Statues which were
dedicated to Apollo, in Creet, Rhodes and Cypres, were not made by the hands of
Zeuxis or of Phidias, nor the wine which was offered to Jupiter, in his
sacrifice, did not always come out of the cup, nor grew in those Vines which
he desired: yet this History, being but in her Infancy, has merited the favor
of his judgment, and of the greatest of his Court, who have taken delight to
see, as in an Astro^ab, the rising and fall of those which are on earth as the
Sun is in Heaven. This is the rampire wherein she fortifies her self
against so many affronts wherewith she has been threatened, for curious spirits
are not pleased with all kinds of writing, no more then the Planets feed upon
all sorts of vapors.

The most difficult to please will object against her, and me thinks I
understand these words proceeding out of their mouths, or from their thoughts:
why the History of Lewis the eleventh more then of any other? can they give us
a better then that of Philip de Commines? to all these exceptions she has but
one answer.

What though I give not all humors content?
A work that is great cannot please every taster:
But of so many tastes, so different,
Let it suffice me that it likes my Master.
I have not affected in this work the glory of mine own wit, I have contented
my self with that of obedience. I have made it such as you see it, his
commandment carries his reasons, and stays the curiosity of such as desires
others. This great Prince, who entertained himself and slept sometimes upon
the actions of this King, as Alexander did upon those of Achilles, and who made
no less esteem of Phil. de Com. then the Emperor Charles the fifth had done,
would have his History beautified and illustrated in the same manner that I
present it unto you, to the end that being compared with his, Judgment might
make the difference, and that of two they might frame a lively Image of that
which might serve for the conduct of a Prince. The brightness of truth appears
by the opposition of her contrary, and shadows give grace to lively colors,
examples are of more force then precepts. Cowards instruct the Courageous, and
liars make Men speak the truth. He that turns from vice encounters virtue.
Ismenias mingled both good and bad Flute-players together, to the end that the
diversity of their music might be a lesson to imitate the one and leave the
other, and that comparison might make the difference. There is nothing so
difficult as to parallel Princes; if there be any conformity in their fortunes,
it is found in their virtues, if they have attained to one end, it has not
been by the same course, and therefore they say there are a hundredth years
required to breed a great Prince or a great Captain. Lewis has carried, and
Henry does yet carry the glorious Title of the most renowned and magnanimous
Princes of their ages: but they have not purchased it by the self same means,
the difference has been great in their humors, and in their kind of
government: Both had one kind of beginning, the one of the house of Valois,
the other of that of Bourbon, two branches of S. Lewis. There was some
conformity in their first fortunes; being both retired from Court, and both
instructed in patience in the school of necessity: The beginning of their
reigns had some resemblance, for both had seen a great and mighty faction
raised against them, under two goodly pretexts, the one of the Commonweal,
the other of Religion: both have been in pain to expel foreign enemies, to
pacify domestique, and to divide their humors; but what the one has done by
policy and force, the other has effected by the iustnes of his arms, and the
mildnes of his clemency. Both were troubled to moderate those spirits, which
had yet a feeling of civil divisions: they have tried the infidelity of their
servants, and have made themselves to be feared and redoubted; but the one
has maintained the respect of his Majesty by fear and severity, and the
other by wisdom and love. The reign of the one was a Sea of sto^mes and
tempest, the other a calm, mild, and clear haven. Lewis of much did little,
Henry of nothing did wonders; Lewis thrust himself into apparent dangers to
reap doubtful fruits, Henry was never seen in any place but fortunate and
victorious Lewis meddled with all things and would see and know all; Henry is a
Prince of all hours and for all affairs: Lewis feared the fat of his people,
Henry believes that the felicity of the subject is the glory of the Prince.
Lewis the eleventh had royal virtues, but they were not all pure; his wisdom
had a touch of oun^ing, his justice of severity, his valor of rashness, his
clemency of fear, his liberaliti^ of profusion, and his piety of
dissimulation: Henry takes delight to be what he appears, and to appear what
he is, wise and foreseeing without deceit, just without rigor, courageous
without fear or indiscretion, courteous, mild, magnanimous without
pusillanimitie, liber all with judgment, and religious without hypocrisy.

Lewis the eleventh contemned the Sciences, and learning, Henry favors them,
makes choice of the best wits to restore the exercises, peoples the Colleges,
and labors to make the famous Academies of France to flourish, and the
University of Paris, the eldest daughter of Kings, the Queen of the Academies
of Christendom. Lewis was blamed for the little care he had in the breeding,
and institution of his son: Henry considering how much it does imp^rt that the
generous inclinations of my Lord the Dauphin, should be seconded with good
instruction, has committed the care to a Nobleman, which abounds in wisdom,
generositie, experience and fidelity for the greatness of that charge. He does
always hold the mind of this Prince elleuated to things worthy of his birth
and courage. France is bound unto the King, who could make so good a choice;
the election proves the dignity of the person chosen, makes the excellency of
the choosers judgment to be seen, and shows that heaven has conspired with
him to make so happy an accord of two such different ages. Lewis would not
suffer his son to understand above two words of Latin: Henry wills that his
dear son should have as much knowledge as a Prince ought to have; he causes
his younger years to be instructed in learning, by the diligence of a great and
excellent wit, who carefully and indiciously does show him what he should
know, and what he should be ignorant of: he gives him the whole world for a
lesson; for companions, the study of Emperors and Kings; for a table, the image
of glory; for Philosophy, the knowledge of humors and manners, and entertaining
him sweetly in the variety of History, which is only the Book of Kings,
frames his mind to a knowledge which should show it self more by actions then
by discourse: for as he himself says, For one that is not wedded to Arts, nor
of them is unknowing,
It Is skill enough to render them such honor as is owing.


Lewis had more care then his predecessors to fortefie his frontiers, and
forts. Henry has made great works for the beautifying of his royal houses,
and for the commodity of his people he makes his forts vnexpugnable, and has
freed his affairs from the outrages and violence of necessity. Lewis was
inconstant in his resolutions, and did sometime impair them by change. Henry
in his greatest affairs says nothing but what he does, and does nothing
without premeditation, calling upon God in his thoughts. That which is framed
in his mind remains firm. He has so much foresight as he preuents all
impediments, and has so great power as nothing is impossible unto him. Lewis
loved a country ruined rather then lost, Henry, given from heaven for the
general good of the earth, has saved, enricht and preserved the towns, which
by the justice of his arms he might have spoiled and ruined. Lewis never left
offenses unpunished, Henry has lost no part of his memory but injuries. Lewis
took a delight to cut off the heads of poppy and ears of corn which do
ouertop the rest, the torrent of his justice has often carried away the
innocent with the guilty. Henry has so used his clemency toward his
greatest enemies, as if the Justice of God should demand of him the number, he
would easily give him an account. Lewis left France so weak, so ruinous and so
dejected, as it had nothing remaining but the tongue to complain: Henry has
chased ne^de, idleness and poverty out of France, and from the necessity of his
affairs: and to conclude the parallel, there is not any nation which does not
reverence the name, admire the fortune, extol the virtues, envy the triumphs,
sing or weep for the victories, love the government, and fear and redoubt
the power of this great and incomparable Prince.

This History does truly show the diversity of the two portraits, and gives
the King an incredible content, to see that the reign of a great, mighty,
redouted; and wise King, may not enter into comparion with his, by the
difference which he has set in the order of his treasure, in the number of
his forces, in the force of his arms, in the fortification of his frontiers,
in the structures of his great buildings, and in the restablishment of the
public safety and felicity. As for the other objection which I have made as
done, it is true that Philip de Commines has related the life of this Prince
so exactly and iudiciously, as if Statius, who has written the life of
Achilles after Homer, did not maintain my design by his example, I should
yield my self vanquished of indiscretion and presumption.

Quamquam acta Viri multum inclita cantu
Moeonio, sed plura vacant, nos ire per omnem
Sic amor est, heroa velis, Sciroque latentem,
Dulichia proferre tuba, nec in Hectore tracto
Sistere, sed tota iuuenem deducere Troia.
Though his great deeds by Homers lofty vain
Be highly sung, yet much is left vnsaied:
We Will trace him all, and in Dulichian strain,
Sound how this peer was close in Scyros laid;
Nor in his dragging Hector stop our verse;
But his young Acts in all Troyes siege rehearse.
Judgment must be the poulder of separation to reduce every thing to his
element, and will show that he has not so reapt his field, but he has left
some ears to gather: In like manner I do not think that I have spoken all
things so fully, and clearly, after him, but there will yet remain something
to exercise others after me. The huntsman is commended that hunts and takes,
but he is not blamed if he has not taken all: We must yield something to the
curiosity and diligence of others. He teaches not well that teaches all.
Another spirit will happily find somethings wherewith to please himself in
this goodly ample field of the life of this Prince. I confess I have drawn
the principal pieces of this building from Philip de Commines, but the order
of the work, the Architecture, and the Ornaments are mine own. He could not
speak, of his own knowledge, of the affairs of Lewis the eleventh but from
the year, 1472. when as he left the D. of Bourgundy to serve him; but this
History speaks of the infancy of this Prince, of his retreat into Flanders,
and of all that had happened memorable throughout the world, during the three
and twenty years of his reign, and, besides many manuscripts, I have seen
the foreign Histories of those times.

The ten books are extended upon that which concerns his life, and the
eleventh upon the observation of that which was done in those times, and of
that which is done now, to show that Lewis has been as much inferior to
Henry, as he was held superior to other Kings. If all things have not bin
exactly and curiously digested, if in many places there be found defects, it
suffices to say that the work has been made following the Court, and printed
in my absence: To conclude, men's minds should not be more difficult to please
then the Gods of the ancients; He that had no milk gave them water, and he
that found no wine offered milk, salt for incense, leaves and flowers for
fruits, and fruits for beasts. He that gives what he has, and does what he
can, is bound to no more. They that content not themselves with that which
seems good, trouble themselves to seek for better. Whatsoever happen, all
these disgraces shall never tire nor daunt me: We do not leave to till and
sow the ground, although the seasons be bad and the harvest unfruitful. He
that cannot content all the world must endeavor to content himself.

AN ELOGIE OF LEWIS THE eleventh French King.
LEWIS of Valois only like unto himself and unlike to all other Kings, was
borne at Bourges, and presented at the font by John Duke of Alancon; he past
his infancy in the ruins and miseries of France, and the most sensible
afflictions of his father, to whom there was a part of the Crown remaining. At
eleven years the greatest of the Realm, abusing the innocence of his first
age, to cover their coffeehouse and ambition, made him the head of a
faction, which was so unjust, unnatural and odious unto the French, as it was
presently abandoned even by them that were the Authors, and lasted but nine
months. At fourteen years he was married to the Princess of Scotland, at
fifteen General of a royal Army into Normandy and Languedoc: At twenty one
he put all Germany in alarm, took Mombeliart, besieged Basil, defeated six
thousand Swisses and ouer-run Alsa^ia. The bays of this triumph were all
covered with blood, and soon after with tears, by the death of the Princess
of Scotland his wife.

The difficuly which he felt to submit his young and boiling humors to the
temper of reason, and his will to that of his father, drew him from the Court,
and entertained him some years in Dauphine, whereas he married Charlotte of
Sauoy, and made war against the Duke of Sauoy his father in law, drawing unto
his service some by promises, others by favor and presents, but most of all by
rigor and severity, oppressing his subjects of Dauphine with unknown charges,
so as the cyment of his designs was tempered with blood, sweat and tears. The
King, who was not insensible of Complaints, and wept by his subjects tears,
made it known that he did love his estate better then his son. He came into
Dauphine, and at the first glance of his eyes he dispersed the designs of such
as would trouble the order of nature and the Laws of the Realm.

Lewis, desiring rather to trust the enemies of his house then his fathers
bounty, retires to Bruxelles to Duke Phillip, whereas he lived six years with
Charlotte of Sauoy his wife, and there received the first blessing of his
marriage, by the birth of his son Ioachim of Valois, who dyed presently. All
this time taught him a lesson of patience, being forced to make a virtue of
necessity, learning to be wise in prosperity and constant in adversity. In the
end Charles gave him place and left him the Realm united under the obedience
of one, the English being expelled, and having nothing remaining unto them but
Calis. All the forces of this powerful house of Bourgondy did accompany him
until he had the Crown set upon his head, which he took at Rhemes. Paris
received him as it were in triumph, and all France seemed to revive again at
the rising of this Star.

The contempt of Princes of the blood, and the change of officers, the
severity in searching out things past, with the oppression of the people, were
the cause of a league which was made against him betwixt the Duke of Berry his
brother, and the dukes of Burgundy, Brittany, Calabria, and Bourbon, with the
greatest of the realm. A powerful and famous faction, which abused the
simple, made the wicked mad, and thrust good men into despair. The bad
success of the Battle of Montlehery was not able to shake the constancy and
fidelity of the subject. Paris, whose motions had always caused the rest of
France to waver, held firm, and this great storm fell, and was dispersed
before her walls. The greatest Cities of the realm, and the chief Provinces
continued constant in their duties, and the interest of private men being
contented, the pursuit of the public good was stayed. These arrows being
unbound, Lewis had good means to break them. The D. of Normandy is forced to
quit Roan, and the D. of Britain auoids the storm by his submission. The
duke of Burgundy is troubled with the mutinies of his subjects, who desirous of
innouations and change did more affect the Earl of Charolois then the Duke of
Bourgundy.

Lewis to be revenged kindles a fire in his estate, and stirs up them of Liege,
yet making show that he desired nothing more then the observation of the treaty
of Conflans: relying too much upon his wit and forces, he engaged himself
indiscreetly in Peronne, where the Castle was in show his lodging, and in
effect his prison; he saw himself forced to arm against his friends, and to
receive a law from him to whom he thought to give it. The assembly of the
estates at Tours judge of the injury of his promises, and cannot yield that
Normandy (one of the goodliest flowers of the crown of France) should be
dismembered: they declare war against the D. of Bourgundy. The King takes the
town of S. Quintin, then Amiens, and seeing that the Duke of Burgundy, in the
desolation of his affairs, was pressed to give his daughter in marriage to the
Duke of Guienne, he does not in this prosperity embrace the opportunity, but
is content to have amazed his enemy, and grants him a truce, during the which
he sees, as from the shore, that cruel tempest of England which overthrew the
house of Lancaster, whom he favored, and assured the Scepter in that of York,
succored and supported by the D. of Burgundy. The Duke of Guiennes death brake
the truce and hopes of peace, and brought all them to the brinke of death and
despair which had followed his fortune, who were reduced to such misery, as
then the most miserable, hearing the discourse, found therein consolation and
amazement. Many families were overthrown, and that rich and famous house of
Armagnac was full of strange tragedies and reuolutions. The war, furiously
inhumane, began again, and the Duke of Bourgundy armed to revenge his death
upon innocents. The town of Nesle saw heaps of dead carcasses in her streets,
and streams of blood in her Churches: Beauuais stayed the torrent of his fury,
and diuerted it upon Normandy.

The D. of Brittany, although he were governed by another head, considering the
danger wherein he was, submitted himself to the stronger, and seeing the K.
at Angiers with an army of 50000. men came unto him to demand a peace. The King
of Sicily was dispos^est of his country of Anjou, being forced to retire into
Prouence with grief to survive his Son John D. of Calabria and Lorraine, and
Nicholas Marquis of Ponte his grandchild. He does represent the estate of his
age and house in the device which he carried of an old stock which had no
green sprout to make it live, it was Rene D. of Lorraine, Son to Yoland of
Anjou his daughter. The Constable, who would divide his heart in two to nourish
and entertain the war, thrust the duke of Burgundy into fury and the King
into distrust of him, and having left the path of moderation and wisdom, he
came unto the king by that of pride and distrust, refusing to represent
himself unto his majesty but armed, nor to speak unto him but by a bar, and
upon a causey well guarded with soldiers.

The D. of Burgondy not able to live idly during this Truce seeks for work in
Germany, passes to Treues, propounds to change his dukes Crown for a Kings,
and is offended with the Emperor for refusing it: He besieges Nuze, and seeing
that the crosses, which he had in his affairs proceeded only from the King,
he persuades the K. of England to pass the seas, to renew the pretensions of
his predecessors, and to make a fatal combustion of all France. But Lewis
diuerts this storm, and makes a bridge of gold for this King to repasse the
sea, sending him home as well content with peace as he was come resolute to war.
The King reapt both honor and profit, and by his foresight disappointed the
great designs which were laid under favor of this army, and although it had
diverse pretexts, as diverse branches of the same stock of sedition and ambition,
they were all dangerous; all the kinds of this poison were mortal.

The Duke of Bourgundy was forced to accept a peace of the king, against whom
he had proclaimed war: The coal, which entertained the fire of discord was
quenched, and this head that made the winds to blow; which caused the quiet of
France to tremble, was cut off at the Grieve.

The Duke of Bourgundy, to revenge a light injury done unto the Earl of
Romond, undertakes a great war against the Sui^les, which by the unfortunate
event of three battles, made him to loose his baggage at Granson; his
reputation, his forces and his hopes at Morat; and at Nancy his life, with a
part of his estate. The King reapt the fruit of this war, having favored and
supported the Duke of Lorraine against the great designs of this Conqueror.
He seized upon both Burgundies, and upon a part of Artois, and had forced the
Archduke Maximilian to leave the low countries, and to lead the Princess his
wife into Germany, with repentance of his marriage, if the battle of Guinegaste
had not troubled the face of his affairs, and changed the designs of war
into resolutions of peace, which was confirmed by the marriage of Charles
Dauphin of France with Margaret of Austria.

Age, which never comes alone, suffers not the King to undertake any long and
difficult conque^s, and binds him to think upon the means to leave his crown
peaceably unto his Son, as it was rich, mighty, and more assured then he had
received it from his father, having beautified it with many goodly flowers, as
Burgundy, Anjou, Bar, Prouence, and the recovery of the Towns in Picardy,
and of some in Artois.

Being pressed with troubles of mind as much as with the languishing of the body,
and reduced to an estate more lamentable then lamented, in the which he could
not live, and would not dye: he straue four whole years against the force of
an incurable disease, and repulst by strange means the approches of death, to
retain life, which was but too long for his miseries, and infirmities, as it
had been too short for his designs and hopes. He was forced to yield himself
to discretion the 30th. day of August 1483. the 22th. year of his reign, and
of his age the sixtith. He carried nothing from the place which he left, but
the proud title to have freed the Kings of France from subjection or wardship,
capable to command, not a Realm only, but the whole world. He was interred at
our Lady of Clery, having obtained from Pope Sixtus the fourth an
excommunication against all such as would lay his body in any other tomb then
in that which he had built for himself, and Charlotte of Sauoy his wife. He
did often visit this last abode, and did lie in it so^metimes, that by the
meditation of death, he might descend living into the grave.

The triumphant Chariot of the prosperities of his life was drawn by Wisdom,
Justice, Liberality and Reputation; wisdom made him victorious over his
enemies, Judge of the controversy betwixt the Crowns of Castile, and Navarre:
Protector of the liberty of the Commonweals of Italy: Arbitrator of the peace
betwixt Rome and Florence, and then betwixt Rome and Venice, He added the
county of Prouence to the Crown: He undertook strange impossible designs.
Justice, always in heat by his extreme severity, did more often put the sword
of execution into his hand, then the balance of due consideration: he caused
many great men to feel his rigor whose process he began by the execution.

Liberality, opened him the hearts and gates of towns, which he battered with
his money; caused many which were distracted from him to come like Bees at the
sound of a basin: he used it to bind the English to his friendship, the
Suisses to his succors, and the Britains to his service: Reputation has held
all the powers of Europe in admiration of him, and has made him to be
redoubted of strangers, and feared of his Subjects.

Yet the differences betwixt the private and public fortunes of this Prince
were great; his fortunes were of long Time in favor amidst his prosperities:
In his reign, he was a wise, happy King, a good and a bountiful master, a
distrustful friend, a cruel enemy, and a terrible neighbor; in his house a
bad son, a bad father, and a bad husband: he had no children by Margret Steward
his first wife, and by Charlotte of Sauoy, his second, he had Ioachim,
Charles, Francis, Anne and Ioane.

The Contents of the first Book of the History of Lewis the XI.
1 Charles the 7. disinherited by King Charles the sixth his father, by the
persuasion of Isabel of Bauaria his wife. A Table of the miseries of France by
the divisions of the houses or Orleans and Bourgondy. 2. The birth of Lewis
Dauphin of France son to Charles the seventh. His breeding and marriage with
the Princess of Scotland. 3 Treaty of Arras, betwixt King Charles the 7. and
Phillip of Bourgo^dy. 4 Reduction of the City of Paris. 5 First Arms of Lewis
the xi. 6. He is carried from Loches: Trouble of the Praguerie. 7. The Duke of
Bourgondy approues not this mutiny. 8 King Charles the seventh arms against
his son the Dauphin, and takes S. Maixaint and Niort. 9. Estates assembled at
Clermont: every man seeks to recover the kings favor. 10 Repentance of the
Dauphin and the Princes of his party. 11. King Charles the seventh pardons his
son, and refuses to pardon them thut had corrupted him. 12 A new order in
the Dauphins house. 13. Instructions which King Charles gives him. 14. Seige of
Pontoise, the Academies of military exercises. The taking of Tartas. 15. The
taking of Diepe. The Kings army in Languedoc. 16. Montbeliard taken. Basil
besieged. 17. Suisses defeated at the Hospital of St. James of Basil. 18.
Truce betwixt France and England. 19. Death of Margret Steward, wife to Lewis
the eleventh. 20. Life of King Charles the seventh. The idleness of peace. 21,
Lewis the eleventh retires into Dauphine. Refuses to return at the Kings
command. 22 He passes into Flanders to Duke Philip, who lodges him at
Gueneppe. 23. Practices of Lewis the eleventh. 24. Hatred and contrariety of
humors betwixt Lewis and the Earl of Charolois. 25. Birth of Ioachim of Valois
first son to Lewis the eleventh. 26. Army of Charles the seventh. The Duke
of Bourgondy in alarm. 27. Distrustful and suspicious nature of Charles the
seventh. 28. His death; with a collection of his principal actions.
THE FIRST BOOK: OF THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI
ISabel of Bauaria, Disinheriting of Charles the Dauphin.
an ambitious Princess, and a cunning woman, but a cruel mother, Humane
wisdom (...) deceived in matters which it thinks i^ has foreseen^, Charles
the 5. had desired to seek an alliance in Germany for his son to fortify
him against the English H^ married Isabell daughter to St^phen D^^e or Bauaria,
(...) nature ^anded against Charles her son to transport he C^owne to
strangers.
had so great power over the will and weakness of Charles the sixth, her husband,
as he disinherited the Dauphin his son, and gave the Crown of France to
Henry the fifth, king of England his son in law, by a treaty made at Troie the
xxi. of May 1420. This declaration, published at the Marble table, was followed
by another of the Kings Council, which promised to use all the seuerities of
Justice against the Dauphin, to punish him for the murder of Duke John, slain
at Monstereau.

A murder, which making an altar unto Mars of all France, gave him for
offerings, not prodigious shows of vices, but an infinite number of brave men,
worthy of a more happy age, and a better end. He that knows not the History
cannot understand that of the wars, which it has caused betwixt the kings of
France and the house of Burgundy; nor of those tragical effects of malice and
hatred, which continued all the reign of Lewis the xi. But behold a true Table.

Charles the vi. Charles the 6. going from Man's in July in the extrea^most heat
of the day his head being covered with a great hood of scarlet he me^ with a
man (...) ^eaded and barelegged, (...) in white rugge at the en^ry of the
forest who staying his horse by the reyac^ said unto him. King ride no farther
for thou art betrayed. These words to a spirit weakened with care, watching,
distemperature and distrust turned his brain and made him mad. O what misery
did this poor head bring to the whole body of France.
, for the infirmity and weakness of his spirit, Distraction of Charles ^he 6.
suffered himself to be governed by Lewis Duke of Orleance, his brother, whom
he loved dearly. Philip Duke of Burgundy, Uncle to the king by the father,
grew first jealous, then an enemy to this great authority, and his hatred took
such deep root, as it died not with him, for John his son was his heir,
and swear the ruin of the house of Orleance.

The two factions are framed, Faction of Orleanois and Burgonians.
and the heads discover their hearts by their devises, the motto of that of the
Duke of Orleance, was Ie l'enuie, having a knotted staff: that of the duke of
Burgundy was a Ioyners plan with this motto; Ie le tiens: the one showing how he
would maintain his authority, and the other how he would overthrow it. The
Duke of Burgundies designs succeeded, both to the ruin of himself and his
house: He grounded himself upon the practice of the Towns, and especially of
Paris, supplanting the Duke of Orleance of all The credit and confidence which
they have in a man of commandment is the chief support of his authority, for
from thence proceeds the love of the people which is a buckler unto the (...),
and a st^ong ram^i^e against (...) and wicked.
credit and love, and seeking to make him hateful in the speeches, but worse
in the affections of the people, who were otherwise incensed against him, for
some new subsidies which he had raised.

The first effect of this cruel hatred was, that after many combustions, both
within and without Paris, Death of Charles D. of Orleans.
and even then when as they thought their minds were least inflamed; the Duke
of Orleance returning from the Queens Palace, where she then lay in, and
having past most part of the night by her, on the 20. of November 1407. fell
into the hands of xviij. murderers, which slew him.

It was a spectacle full of pity, the next day, to see about this poor sick
King, the widow Valentine of Milan widow to the Duke of Orleance, Charles,
Philip, and John her sons. Isab^l of F^ance the Kings daughter, married to
Charles, eld^st son to the Duke of Orleance, the Kings of Sicile and Navarre,
with the Dukes of Berry and Bourbon demand justice of the murder.
and her three sons, assisted by the three Princes of the blood, imploring
justice. They seek out the crime, but they find not the offenders: The Duke of
Burgundies hatred is a great presumption, that these were the fruits of his
revenge; The Duke of Burgundy flies into Flanders.
all men's eyes were cast upon his, which his conscience made him to hold
down: He draws the King of Sicile, and the Duke of Berry apart, and aduowes
the fact, he leaves Paris with five more in his company, and recouers his
country of Flanders, in great have, so as the suspicion was changed into
apparent proof.

Sone after he The Duke of Bourgondy returning into France with a great army
carried in a table two lances in saltire, the one having a s^arpe head for the
war the other a burrhead for the tourney, giving the choice of war or peace.
returns with a mighty army; they that would have condemned him, He returns
to Paris.
are now forced to seek his friendship: Paris receives him as the Demon Guardian
of her walls; he maintains puqlikely that he had caused the Duke of Orleans to
be slain, to free the estate from oppressions. A Doctor of the Sorbonne
undertook to justify him before the Kings Counsel, with so great impudence
and flattery, as it seemed he would canonize him before his Flattery gives
honors to mortal men which belong not unto them Tertullian reprocheth the
Pagans of lying and flattery which made them declare men Gods, and Tacitus
says Deum honor Principi non ante habetur quam agere inter homines desierit.
Tac. An. lib. 15. The honor of the Gods is not to be given unto the Prince,
until he has left to live among men.
death, after this followed an accord; by the which the Duke of Burgundy should
for a reparation ask pardon of the King upon his knee. The Queen, the
Dauphin, the Kings of Sicile and Navarre, and the Duke of Berry making the
like request for him, in the presence of the Children of the Duke of Orleans,
melting with tears, and weeping with sobs, to see the blood of their Father
put to compromise, and themselves forced to forget so sencible an Injury.

France was presently divided into two factions of Orleanois and Burgundians. A
league of Armagnacs
The One taking his favor and authority from the ruins and disgrace of the
other. The Duke of Burgundy has the sovereign government of affairs, and
forces them of the house of Orleans to make an offensive and defensive league
against that of Burgundy. League of Orleanois at G^en the tenth of March 1410.
the heads were Charles Duke of Orleance and his brethren John Duke of Berry,
Lewis Duke of Bourbon, John Earl of Alanson, Francis Earl of Clermont,
Bernard Lord of Armagnac, and Charles of Albert Constable of France The heads
of the Bourgundy faction were John Duke of Bourgundy and his brethren. Charles
King of Navarre son to Charles the bad, the Dukes of Lorraine, Brabant,
Britain, the Marquis of Pont, the Earls of Neuers, Vaudemont, St. Paul and
Ponthure.
The name was of Armanacks, the mark a white scarf: the cause, the Kings
liberty who was in captivity under the law and will of the Duke of Burgundy:
Challenge sent to the Du. of Burgundy.
and to the end the quarrel might be ended with less danger, loss of men, and
time, Charles Duke of Orleans sent a challenge to the Duke of Burgundy, to
fight a combat with him, and to be revenged of his fathers death. The Duke of
Burgundy, who had drawn the Queen unto his party, had noe great dificultie to
persuade the King, that the design of the house of Orleans was nothing but
ambition and rebellion; in denying him to demand succors from Henry the fourth
king of England.

The Dolphin being of years able to judge of the intentions of the one and the
other, The son in law against the father in law.
found that the interest of the house of Orleans was that of the Crown, and
that the ambition of the Duke of Bourgondy his father in law Queen Isabel
being banded against her nephews of Orleans, adhered to the Duke of Burgundy
and made the marriage of his daughter Catherin^ with the Dauphin Lewis.
was the chief motive of those troubles, wherefore he undertook to cross his
designs and to make a peace: this soul was seasond with good thoughts at the
siege of Burges, for when they told him that in a salley, which the besieged
had made, some of his servants were slain, and that the soldiers dyed of
poisoned waters, he said unto the King his Father, and the Duke of Burgundy.
That this war lasted too long, and that he would make an end of it. John of
France Duke of Berry, and Enguerand of Monstrelet notes, in what manner the
Duke of Berry came to this treaty, in his arms, notwithstanding that he was
70. years old: (for he llued above 80) having upon the^ a Cassocke of purple
with a band poudred with marigolds, and so he is painted in the gallery of the
^o^ure.
Philebert of Lignac, great master of Rhodes, employed themselves virtuously to
reconcile the nephews and the uncle. The conditions of this peace were
concluded at Burges, Peace of Burges.
and sworn in a great assembly at Auxerre, the names of that fatal faction of
Armagnac, and Burgundian were comprehended in the forgetfulness of things past,
and Philip Earl of Vertus was married to the Duke of Burgundies daughter.

But all the parts of France recover not their former health: The war renues
again, and the Dauphin is no more for the Burgundian, whose principal force
consists in the sedition of Paris and the succors of the English, who making
their profit of civil divisions, win the battle of Azingcourt, which was
called the unfortunate day of the 25. of October, 1415. The battle of
Azing-Court.
The Duke of Orleans, armed to revenge his fathers death and the liberty of
his country, was led prisoner into England, and if religion had not comforted
him, he had no less reason then Pompey, The Mitcleniens came to salute Pompey
after the battle entreating him to land, which he refused and advised them to
obey the victor, and not to fear any thing, for that Caesar was a just man,
and of a mild nature: and then turning to the Philosopher Cratippus who was
also come to see him, he complained and disputed a little with him touching the
divine providence, wherein Cratippus yielded mildly unto him, putting him still
in better hope.
to be amazed at the providence of God, which seems to favor the most unjust
party, tyranny against liberty, and covetousness against freedom: Death of the
Dolphin and Duke of Turraine.
This loss was followed by the death of Lewis the Dauphin, and of John Duke of
Touraine, the Kings second son.

By the death of these two, Charles Earl of Ponthieu saw himself in the first
degree of the Princes of the blood, and presently made show that he had been
bred up to apprehend the injury which the Duke of Burgundy had done unto his
uncle. All the Princes and Noble men which had followed the house of Orleans
came unto him, and among others, the Constable of Armagnac: but his greatest
affliction was, for the unnatural hatred which the Queen his mother bare him,
who declared her self against him Regent of the Realm, and was maintained in
that quarrel by the Duke of Burgundy: under her was that cruel massacre
committed the 12. of June 1418: whereas the Amassacre at Paris upon the
Armagnacks from 4 of the clock in the morning the 12 of June until the next day
10. of the clock. To note the Constable by the scarce which he carried they
flead a bend of his skin and tied it cross his body, his office was confirmed
to the Duke of Lorraine, and the Chancellors to Eustace de Lastre.
Constable of Armagnac and the Chancellor de Marle were slain, and the Dauphin
ran a dangerous fortune, if Tanneguy du Chastel; Provost of Paris, and his
faithful servant had not saved him in the Bastille. Paris saw it self reduced
to that miserable estate, as it seemed a retrait for Bears and Tigers.

During this fatal division, the English prevailed in Normandy and Guyenne,
Peace treated at Pouilly.
and then a peace was treated between the Dauphin, and the Duke of Burgundy;
under the assurance whereof the Duke came unto the Dauphin, being at Montereau
Faut Yonne The Dauphin sent Charles of Poitiers, Bishop of Valence, to the
Duke of Burgundy, to draw him to Monste^cau in Gasteacis, for that he had
refused to come by Tanneguy du Chastel: saying, that it were better for the
Dauphin to com to Troy. The 10. of November, 1419. he came and was slain upon
the bridge, which was fortified with 3. bars. The Duke having past the first
entered into some apprehension of his fortune, and meeting Tanreguy du Chastel,
he laid his hand upon his shoulder, saying: Behold him in whom I trust.
, and presenting himself upon his knee, Robert de Loire, taking him by the
arm, said unto him: rise, you are but too honorable; who rising, laid his
hand upon his sword to draw it forward, for that it hung too much back, then
said de Loire unto him; Do you lay your hand upon your sword before my Lord
the Dauphin? whereupon Tanneguy du Chastell stroke him so forceably upon the
face with a battell-axe, as he made him to fall upon his knee and cut off his
chin, another thrust his sword into his belly: The body being stripped was drawn
into a mill, and buried the next day.

This death revenged the house of Orleans, but it gave so great a share of the
Realm to strangers, as there remained very little for Charles, who presently
after the death of the Duke of Burgundy was declared by the king his father (at
the persuasion of his mother) unworthy to succeed unto the crown of France.

He might justly have appealed from these declarations to the Kings good
sense; but seeing him decay daily, and that he was still under the government
of this Medea, he chose rather to appeal to God, Private persons have many
Judges, kings have none but God, says M. Anthony, Dion Nice^s.
the Judge of Kings, and to his sword, lamenting with tears, drawn from the
bottom of his heart, his own misery and that of France.

This disorder, Death of K. Henry the fifth and Charles the sixth,
contrary to the reason of nature, and the laws of the realm, was followed
with strange changes. Henry the fifth dies, and 50. days after Charles the
sixth king of France. Henry the sixth king of England is crowned at Paris,
Charles the seventh at Poictiers, there were two kings in one Realm, two
parties, two armies, but the English hold Paris, and the first In all factions
the authority of the Senate is of great force. Otho, to show the difference of
his party, and that of Vitellius, said: Nationes aliquas occupauit Vitellius,
imaginem quandam exercitus habet, Senatus nobis cum est. Sic fit vt h^c Resp.
inde hosts Reip. constiterint. Tacitus Hist. lib. 1.
Senate, who thought that all authority and sovereign command was in effect
on their side; that the king had but the image, some calling him, for pity
sake, Dauphin of Viennois, and others, in mocking, King of Bourges, or Earl of
Ponthieu, there remaining nothing to make him known to be the fourth son of
Charles Charles the 6. had 5. sons, Charles, who died of a ^^^sumption, at 9.
years, Lewis D. of Guyenne, who died at 19. John Duke of Touraine, married to
Iacquet of Bauaria in the yea^e 1404. Charles the seventh borne in the year.
1402. the fi^th was he of whom the Queen was brought to bed, when the Duke of
Orleans was slain.
the sixth but a piece of the crown.

He goes to field weak of all things, of arms, friends, men and money, but
strong in right and courage to maintain the quality of his birth, which the
envy of fortune, and the conspiracy of his enemies could not take from him;
for his mother had brought him into the world under purple The Emperors of
Constantinople ordained that their wives should be brought in bed under purple
(...) Nicetas lib. 5.
and the flower deluce. There is nothing so powerful as a good cause
maintained with a good sword, nothing does so much comfort the soul in
adversity, nor moderate it in prosperity, as the judgment of conscience, when
as she fears not to have her intentions known to God and men.

But seeing himself forced to vanquish before he reign, that victories depend
of the force of Arms, and that the triumphant Chariot of Mars is not moved but
by the force of gold and iron, Four things do perpetually follow war, men,
iron, silver and bread, but of these 4. the two first are the most necessary,
for that m^n and iron cannot furnish silver and bread but bread and silver may
find men and Iron^
that the springs of his treasure are drawn dry, and the royal revenues held
by his enemies, he procures his subjects to assist him with taxes. Taxes
ordained.
The French, who have always excelled other nations in fidelity and devotion
toward their Kings, not knowing what it is to have good when they want, did
contribute freely and cheerfully to the necessities of Charles, who like a
good Shepherd was content to fleece his (...) and not to flea them.

France which had been besieged 70. years, Miseries of France last 70. years.
with the misery and calamity of war, might well have been without this
cruel division, which was no other thing then a conspiracy of the Children
Civil war is a mortal sever in an estate. This ardent desire in the
Graecians to make war in Greece, is called by Plutarch, a conspiracy against
themselves, by the which they staid with their own arms the fortune which led
them to the height of felicity, and turned their weapons against their own
bowels.
, to turn the points of their swords against their own bowels; to inuit
their Ancient enemies to the funerals of her liberty and to bring back those
cruel and bloody days for the which England has given to the two Edwards the
proud titles of Lightening, Edward the third, and the Prince of Wales.
and Eagle. There was nothing in general but miseries, confusions, amasements,
and desolation: The pesant being stripped both of flesh and fat had nothing left
but bones, and they were bruised. The History admires that even the cattle
hearing the bell, (a sign of the enemies approach) fled of themselves to
recover their retreates.

She had so lost her first excellence, as she seemed a building, of whose
beauty no man could judge, but by the pieces that remained of her ruins.
Virtue and Fortune For the greatness and continuance of an Empire, fortune, or
to speak better, providence and destiny must agree with virtue, Roma vt
ageretur sublimibus incrementis faedere pacis aeternae virtus conuenit atque
for^una, quarum si altera defuisset, ad perfectam non venerat summitatem.
Ammianus.
which in the beginning, had agreed to settle and maitaine her Empire, held no
more account of her, and conspired with her enemies to ruin her. And as too
much grief makes men to loose all feeling, the excess of her miseries, which
had no ease but custom, Custom is the only case of inevitable miseries, and
those calamities which are grown into a custom give some contents unto
miserable men.
made the French so accustomed to the darkness of servitude, as they grew
ignorant of the light of liberty, and they which were borne under the yoke,
did lay a foundation of this foreign domination by the length of their
sufferance.

In this terrible ebbing and flowing of calamities, capable to make the
strongest men faint and effeminate, Great courages grow resolwe against
misfortunes, and take aduersi^^^s for exercises of their virtue, others are
presently dejected. Tacit. Ann. l. 4
Charles continued still constant in his resolution, and God did comfort him by
the birth of the Dauphin, at Bourges the sixth of July, 1423. the twentieth Mary
Daughter to Lewis Duke of Anjou, and King of Sicile. The joy was great: the
History says, they generally cried Christmas, an ordinary cry at public
joys, in those days. It is a great proof of the peoples love, when as they
rejoice at their Princes issue, and hold the want of it a misfortune It is a
great testimony of the bounty of a Prince, when as they rejoice at the birth
of his children, or when as the want of them is accounted amongst the miseries
of the common wealth.
.

They went not to seek godfathers in the sovereign houses of Europe, John of
Alancon godfather to Lewis the eleventh.
the joy past with less brute. John Duke of Alencon, first Prince of the
blood, carried the new Prince to be baptized, and gave him the name of Lewis.
If they made some scruple to give him his fathers or his godfathers name, as it
was an old pagan error, that there was some fatallity in names The ancients had
great respect to names. They had certain dares for the impesition and
profession of names and feasts which they called Nominales, holding for a good
sign the encounter and choice of a goodly name: as Valerius, Saluius,
Statorius, and in the levy of men of war, the Consul had a care, vt primus
miles esset bono nomine. That the for most soldier should have a good name.
, and was then in credit, it may be they remembered the captivity of King John
in England, and the storms wherewith his descendants called Charles had been
shaken.

Ignorance was so bold and general in those days, as all they that have
dealt in the history, being neither curious nor diligent, have not left any
mention of the education of the Princes of France, whereon notwithstanding is
grounded the hopes of the rest of their lives. For such as they have showed
themselves in their first inclinations, such are they known to be afterward.
Seldom do they hate that in the end of their days which they have loved in
the beginning. The care of such dear and Important persons has always been
very great in the house of France, they suffer nothing that is pestilent or
infectious to approach The Egyptians did not suffer any about the Kings
children but such as were well bred, and of a generous disposition, they were
always served and followed by their Priests Children, attired in habites fit
for their profession, of great modesty and above twenty years old, to the
end that being always guiled by the Ministers of their gods they might be
retained within the bounds of majesty and virtue. HERODOT.
. This spring must water the whole State, and it is hard for them to err and
fail among so many examples of virtue, valor, and courage, which are like
whetstones to give an edge to generous natures.

He gave such timely proofs, as he made it known, that Judgment and reason
appeared sooner in Kings children Great natures discover themselves soon. So
Plutarch said that Pompey did in the flower of his youth show a venerable
greatness of real majesty in his actions and manners.
then in others, that lyllies put forth sooner then common flowers: at the
break of his morning they saw that which they should expect of him all the
rest of the day. Marriage of Lewis the eleventh.
His Father married him at thirteen years to the Lady Margaret Steward,
daughter to James the first, King of Scotland, as King Charles the sixth had
married him at eleven years. The Ambassadors being sent into Scotland to bring
this Princess, were crossed by the English, being jealous and offended at this
alliance, which renewed and confirmed those which since Charlemaine Charles the
great, Emperor and King of France, having been assisted by Achaius king of
Scotland in Spain against the S^ras^ns, and in Germany against the Saxons,
made an offensive and defensive league with him, and gave him his daughter to
wife in the year 777.
had been betwixt these two Crowns, and put them into a great apprehension,
that whilst they should be busy in France, (whereas their affairs began to
decline) the Scots might trouble them in England. They offered to yield him
Barwick and Rosbourg, with all other places which were in question, if he would
dissolve the promise of this marriage. The estates of Scotland assembled upon
this proposition. Parliament in Scotland.
The Clergy was divided, most part saying, that it was just and profitable,
that the refusal would be pernicious, and that to attain unto a good peace
with their neighbors, they must not so much regard things past as the future
and the incertainty of events. The Nobility did courageously resist the
design of the English, crying out that their enemies counsel was poison
presented in a cup of gold, a goodly pretext to ruin them, a practice to
divide Scotland from their ancient friends, and then subject them more easily
to their enemies. We must not only consider matter which are past, but those
which are also to come. And in truth they to whom fortune has never turned her
backed^e not without cause fear the doubtfulnes of variable euens, so as a
certain peace were always to be preferred before a doubtful victory), for
that the first is in our will and disposition, and the last in the hand and
power of the immortal god. The words of Hannibal to Scipio. Tit. Li^.


The English being refused of their request they fall to threats, and declare
that they had ships at sea to stop the Princess passage. Mary Steward sent
into France
This made the King resolve to send her sooner then he had intended, the estates
beseching him not to defer to trust his Daughter to his Son, who trusted
them with the guard St. Lewis being at the holy land escapt a conspiracy made
against his person by the King of the Arsacides, it was discovered and
prevented by the Scotchmen of whom afterward he made his guard.
of his royal person. She past notwithstanding the ambushes of the English,
more by the providence of God, then the foresight of men, for whiles the
English, were busy in fighting with a ship which was lade with wine for
Flaunders, the Scotts vessel past freely and landed the Princess at Rochell.
Revenge runs always against the enemy that has most offended, and in the
contention of three Nations there is always one that saues himself, and does
his business.
She was conducted to Tours, whereas the marriage was solemnized the 24. of
June. Murder of James King of Scotland
But this joy lasted not long in her fulness, news coming of the death of the
king of Scotland, being miserably murdered with six and twenty wounds by his
Uncle and Cousin, in the sight of the Queen his wife, who presenting herself
unto the murderers, and making a buckler of her body to defend her husbands,
received two wounds.

The thoughts of Lewis were in those days more inclined to Arms then to
Ladies. Nature did dispense them from their servitude, and his breeding had
diuerted him from all intemperance which makes men inferior to beasts, and
bound him to the exercise of virtue, which makes Princes superior to Men. He
had learned by the infancy of King Charles the 6. Charles the fifth, meaning to
try the generous disposition of his son, did set a crown of gold and a
scepter upon a velvet cushion, and on another an helmet and a sword, Charles
made choice of the sword and the helmet.
his Grandfather, to lay hold of a sword as soon as of a Crown. They did
gird him with it sooner for necessity then to grace him, more to defend
himself then to adorn him. So it is fit that a Prince should carry an
honorable mark In places whereas arms are in a degree of excellency and
necessity, the Prince and they of his blood should make great esteem of them
which make profession.
of the most excellent and necessary profession of his estate. He could no more
draw it but against the English, the French and the Burgundians were in the way
of an accord. The Duchess of Burgundy, Duches of Bourgundy draws her husband
to the treaty of Arras.
Infanta of Portugal, a good Frenchwoman, was the cheef instrument. She told
the Duke that he should be generally blamed, if he refused a peace offered with
honor and profit, that indiscretion would not excuse the repentance of so
prejudicial a refusal. She drew the heart of this Prince to her intention,
making it known that burning iron is not sooner quenched in water, then the heat
of collar and revenge is lost by the persuasion of a mild and moderate spirit,
and that nothing is impossible to Princesses of courage, when as their
understanding has power over their husbands. The effects are (...) they (...)
good to good and bad to bad. Tamerl^nes wife flaid him long f^^m making war
against Buazet, but being incensed by an injurious wish which he had made,
she did animate her husband by an extreme fury against him. Chalcondylas.


By her persuasions the Duke yielded unto the Kings youth the blow which he
had caused to be given being Dauphin, and the excess of his offense to the
greatness and majesty of the King, considering that forgetfulness is an Antidote
against the deadly poison of Injuries, which may ruin the soul when it does
too egerly seek revenge, and that it is a great folly to continue immortal
hatred amongst mortal men. Revenge continues injuries and makes them
hereditarie. A strange distemperature of men. Quid iuuat tanquam in aeternam
genitos, it is indicere breuisfimam aetatem dissipare? Sen. libr. 3. De ira.
What does it avail to make hatred eternal, and to lead a short life.


The Counsel of Basil employed it self, seeing that whiles France was not in
peace, Christendom should be still in trouble; They sent two Cardinals to
mediate this peace, and to exhort the Kings of France and England and the Duke
of Burgundy to cause their discords to cease and to accord their wills for the
defense of the Church; To strain their courages and tackle against the force
of the winds that did shake that vessel; that they should have pity of
themselves and of their subjects. The English growing obstinate not to leave
any thing had no part of this peace. There is nothing so difficult in a Prince
as restitution; they left the Dutchies of Guienne and Normandy King Charles the
seventh offered to the K. of England the Dutchies of Normandy and Guienne, to
hold them by homage of the Kings of France as sovereigns, and upon such
conditions as the Kings of England his Aneectors had enjoyed them in the
beginning.
to the King of England to quite the rest; but the prosperity of his affairs
does prejudice him of the possession, and the desire to continue a reueng
trouble the souls of so many persons, as reason had no more command,
Wilfulnes of the English.
opinion held the scepter. A Royalty endures no equal.

The great God of peace, who is all spirit, all light, all eye, all seeing, all
hearing, all Treaties of peace are concluded when as men hold them broken and
impossible: they be the effects of the eternal providence of that great God
whom Clement Alexandrious calls (...), totus men's, totus lu^ totus oculus, all
mind, all light, all eye.
knowing, inspired the hearts of these two Princes with the holy resolution of
Concord, and a full forgetfulness of injuries, so as the Duke seeing the King of
England too difficult made his treaty apart.

They contented in every degree the interests both of dead and living. The
King transported to the Duke of Burgundy the Towns upon the river of Sum,
whereof mention shall be often made, st. Quintin, Corbie, Amiens, Abbeuille,
and others, upon condition to redeem them for the sum of four hundredth
thousand old Crowns of gould. The marriage of the Earl of Charolois and of
Catharin the Kings Daughter, was the seal of this treaty. The marriage of the
Earl of Charolois with the Kings Daughter was the seal of this treaty, he
was then but two years old, and when he come to age he married isabel of
Bourbon. The Lady Catherine who was promised dyed at eighteen years of age,
the 28. of July and was interred at Brusseis in S. Gould.


Charles Duke of Bourbon, and Arthur Duke of Brittany with the Earl of
Richmond Constable of France craved pardon of the Duke of Burgundy for the
death of his father, in the name of King Charles the vij. It is a cruel thing
when he must take a Law from his inferior, but the good of a peace, and the
necessity of the Kings affairs forced him from all these formalities: without
this satisfaction a peace had not been made, and it was reason that he which
had done the harm should show some repentance, and serve as a table in the
history of France, that a Prince which wants piety toward God and Justice
toward men, falls always into He that has piety, and justice for the guide
of his actions frees himself happily from confusion in all sorts of affairs.
These be the glorious titles which Demetrius purchased (...), religious to the
gods, and Just to men.
confusion. The Duke said that he pardoned him for the love of God, promising
him to be his friend, enemy to his enemies, and to renounce the aliance of
England, and the deputies of the Council dispenst him of the oath which he had
made, not to treat without the King of England.

This happy and memorable peace, Peace of Arras.
sworn the 24. of November 1435. was followed with great blessings for the
French, and great ruins for the English. This was the Comet which threatened
their ruin in France, and which brought the Duke of Bedford unto his grave.
Death of the Duke of Bedford Regent in France for the English.
With the like grief six days after the treaty Isabel of Bauaria contemned of
the English and Bourgundian, for whom she had ^anded her self against her
son dyed at S. Paul house the last of September 1435. she was carried by the
River of Seine to S. Dennis, and buried without pomp. Her tomb was built in
the same place where her husbands was, and her portrait is yet to be s^ene in
the window of that Chapel.
dyed that old malicious woman the Queen mother, stepmother to the king and
Realm. She wanted means to live before her death, for being no more assisted
by the Duke of Bourgundy, the Duke of Bedford caused her to fast upon days
which were not commanded to be fasted, lying in Saint Paul house. She had
always lived full of honors and affairs, and now she dies plunged in miseries
and contempts.

The reduction of Paris was the fruit of the peace, she opened her gates unto
the King, Reduction of Paris.
which she had shut against him, for the love of the Duke of Bourgundy, for
she has dealt with friendships as with flowers, the new have always been
most pleasing unto her. The King was at Montpelier when Paris was reduced.
The The English were chased out of Paris the 27. of February 1436. where they
had entered in the year 1420.
English depart, the Lillies flourish, and the Kings will, with the laws of
the Realm are honored there. The King made his entry, and was received as
victorious of his enemies by his valor, and of himself by his clemency,
forgetting so many injuries whereby the people had incensed him.

Here I seek the Dauphin and the History does not show me him, 1437.
although it be credible that the father did not forget to have him seen in
this great occasion in his capital City, no more then at the assembly of the
estates which he called at Orleans. But I find him on horseback at the age of
fourteen years, and commanding the Kings army before Monstreau Faut-Yonne.
He took the town by assault, and the Castle by composition, and made so good
war with the English that were within it, as they gave him thanks in the
Kings presence, confessing that he had given them cause, in admiring his
valor, to commend his bounty, to the which they were bound for their lives A
Prince which saues his life whom he may kill, cannot do any thing that brings
him sooner to the height of glory and reputation, nec vlla re propius homines
ad deum accedunt quam salute hominibus danda. Cic. Neither is there any thing
which makes me^ liker unto Gods, then by giving life unto men.
.

This first beginning applauded by some old Knights, flattering this young
Alexander, who began to be discontented for that his father left him no
work to do, made him to conceive better of himself then he ought. For such
flattering opinions Flattery does so transport young Princes with a good
opinion of what they are, or should be, as it is easily converted into
presumption, and admits no counsel nor conduct.
are fruitless sproutes, and unprofitable leaves which grow too fast in these
young plants and in the end kills them.

The Father who had made him Captain so soon, repented as suddenly, for he
began to make show that he was not borne to follow but to go before.
Martin Gouge Bishop of Cleremont, Christopher of Harcourt, and the Lord of
Chaumont make him believe that his valor and courage would not suffer him to
stay there, that the more he should eleuate his trumpet of fame, the farther it
should be heard: that he could not begin any exercise of glory and
reputation to Alexander at 16. years of age defeated the Megariens, and was at
the battle of Cheronea; wherefore Demosthenes called him child. Hannibal was
but eleven years old when he made open profession of arms. We must observe
says Phil. de Commines That all men which have don great matters have begun
very young. War is a science which is not learned by discourse. It is a
troublesome practice for him that has not accustomed it from his youth. Paul:
Emil.
soon: and that he should not attend until that fortune took him by the hand
to lead him to the Empire of men, but he should go and meet her.

These Councellers were spirits that were not capable to command, nor to be
commanded, and which could not live under that great rigor of the Kings
authority, Bad counsel given to Lewis.
who knowing his humors allowed him not what he desired, and made him give ear
to such as found no other course for their greatness; and who assured him that
there was no other way for his rising then to absent himself from the presence
of his father. An advise which could not be commended, but by such to whom all
wickedness is commendable. For of badde counsels, such as was never given by men
that were Integrity, or fidelity, sufficiency or wisdom, are the two
principal qualities of good counselors: they add a third which depends of the
precedent, to have his heart free from passion and private interest.
wise, discreet, and without any private interest (three rare qualities, but
necessary for him that takes upon him to counsel another) the worst and most
pernicious is that which deuides the Son from the Father, and withdrawes him
from the duty wherewith he is bound by the laws of nature and religion The
commandment of the Childrens duty was half written in the first table, which
regards Gods right, and half in the second table, wherein are comm^ndements
which concern our Neighbors, as being partly divine and partly humane.
, nothing being able to extinguish this bond, free this servitude, nor
dispense him from the obedience due to the fathers commandments, how severe
and difficult so ever.

The Duke of Bourbon, 1411.
who would make his profit of this division betwixt the father and the son,
Charles Duke of Bourbon.
and who was discontented to see the King contemn and reject the Princes, to
favor private men, practiced this division. The Dauphin, who was bred up in
the Castle of Loches, under the charge of John Earl of March The Earl of
March was governor to the Dauphin. He wrought means to get out of his hands
and to be at liberty. They said then that King Charles should not have
married him so soon to entreat him like a child.
, saw him carried away by the bastard of Bourbon, and was content to go and to
be rid of his governor, who suffered him to enjoy convenient liberty,
thinking it unfit to treat the first son of France severely, being now great
and married.

He was led to Moulins, whereas the Duke of Bourbon attended him. Thither came
the Duke of Alencon and Chabannes Earl of Damartin, being incensed for that
the King had called him Captain of Bandilieres. These were men who after the
peace of Arras, like unto some after the treaty of Bretigny When as treaties of
peace are concluded, they must provide for the retreat of foreign troops,
el^e they will ouerrun the Provinces. After the treaty of Br^tigny in the year
1360. the English trooopes did ouerr^n and spoil France, and defeated them
that sought to stop their violenc^s at ^regnay near to Lion.
, did overcome and spoil all the whole country, leaving the peasant nothing
but his shirt. There embarked in the same ship the Earl of Vandome, the Earl
of Dunois, Bastard of Orleans, and the Lord of Chaumont, Tremouille, Boucicaut
and Prye. There resolution was not to yield him until that an order were
settled in France, the Princes in Authority, and the malcontents in favor.

If their intention had appeared in her true and natural form, her deformity
had displeased all the world, for it was nothing but a mere conspiracy of
great men, who abusing the youth of this Prince, engaged him in an unnatural
ingratitude, and thought to make him greater then either nature or God himself
had yet ordained, that under his shadow He that will enjoy the shadow of his
Prince must rejoice at his greatness, so as it be not raised upon a foundation
of Injustice and ingratitude.
, they might live at their ease, and make their profit of the public ruins.
To give some form to this illusion, they devise supposed members, and give it
for a face the All deformities and imperfections are so foul being seen bare,
as like unto them that have both their arms and ^egs cut off make other of
Iron^ or wood, even so they that have had deseignes do cover them with some
goodly pretext.
mask of reformation of disorders, protesting that they had no other intention
but to settle the Dauphin, to the end that all things might be done by his
authority, with the advice of the Princes of blood.

They had sought to imbarke the Duke of Bourgundy with them, Duke of Burgundy
refuse to enter into the league.
but he who would not revive a quarrel, if not altogether quenched, yet at the
least smothered: And knowing the folly of this design, sent them word that he
would live in peace, and that at the end of the course whereinto they were
entered, there was an inevitable downfall of rash designs we may easily
foretell the^ unfortunate events* and hopes whcih have unjust foundations
cannot long continue.
: That they should do wisely to return into the way which they had left, for
that they more they went into this, the more they should wander: that of all
the miseries that would fall abundantly upon them, they should not be He that
is the cause of his own misery has small reason to complain and few men
pity him.
lamented of any, for that they were known to be the causers: That although
there were some disorder in the state, yet could it not be so great as that
which should grow by this division, and France should be little beholding for
her help to those which had made her so sick to cure her It is a desperatee
cure when as healt^ must be beholding to siicknes and peace to Civil war.
; for that neither the disordred government of affairs, nor the vaiust
commandment of the Prince would not cause so many ruins and inconveniences as
disobedience and rebellion Ruins and miseries grow not by them that command
but by such as obey. Obedience has made Estates to prosper and flourish under
unjust and ti^ranous comm^n ^ement^. The common weal of Spa^ta was happy, not
for that their Kings commanded well, but for that this subjects obeyed well.
Theopompus.
: That for his part he could not separate himself from the King his Lord,
without forsaking himself: That his arms and forces were always at the
Dauphins commandment, so as his designs were not disauowed, and that he would
more willingly employ himself to bring him to his fathers presence then to
withdraw him.

The Princes of this league were very sorry for this declaration: For they
considered that if they could have kindled a hatred betwixt these two houses,
they would have been more violent, and yet they made this young Prince believe,
by reasons, fuller of oftentations then truth, Letters of Lewis to the good
Towns.
that all would do well. They dissembled the In enterprises of (...) ^onsi^er
the ground and justice of the cause, rather (...) the issu^ and success. The
Romans had this glory never to enter into it wrongfully. They did not so much
glory says Titus Liuius in the prosperous success as to hau^ begu^ it upon a
reasonab^e and lawful occasion.
Injustice of this war, and flatter him with sweet hopes of the event: They
write letters in his name to the towns of Auuergne, and other provinces
whereas they thought these designs would be well liked of, and this Innovation
pleasing.

But they were reeeiued of the wise with more amazement for this defection,
then desired to adhere unto them, and although there be no cause so bad but it
finds some refuge, and some one to favor it, and that which is held a crime
All the actions of men are taken by two ends, some commend them others blame
them, Coesar is commended for that he attempt^d against the liberty of Rome.
Brutus i^ blamed who opposed himself to his deseignes to revenge his contries
libert^es. Some blame Cateline for that he would have done, and others commend
Caesar for that he did.
in some is commended by others, as a public service, yet all the towns did
abhor this rebellion. They held it impossible that such a division could
prosper, and that France would be made a Theater of a new Tragedy: that the
reasons, whereof they did ground it, were like unto false stones which have
some transparant shining like unto fire, but they have neither the virtue nor
the hardness.

They found not any spirit well settled that would follow them, but every man
stopped his ears at the first brute, as if they had been enchantments. All were
amassed An unjust and rash enterprise strikes horror into good men, who foresee
the miserable events at the ignorant vulgar holds them favorable they must stop
their cares to their first pr^positions, for if they enter into the soul (...)
it with confusion* Claudendae sunt aures malis voelbus et quidem p. imis. Nam
cum initium fecerunt admissaeque sunt p^us audent. Sen.
at their boldness, and every man said that fury would draw these wild Bores
into the toil, and that the Foxes craft would not free them from the snare.

The Nobility of Auuergne give them to understand, that if the King came into
the Country, The declaration of the nob^lity of Auuerg^e.
they could do no less then to open their gates. This name of King, and such
a King against wh^ they could not arm but the relics of his victories who
had made so great proofs of his valor and courage, made the most mutinous to
tremble: A Prince whose great actions purchased the name of valiant and wise is
always feared and respected. This authority disperseth all kind of factions
and conspiracies when as carelesnes and contempt gives them life,
It was an Anuill which would wear all hammers. Every man said unto the
Dauphin I am yours without exception, reserving my duty to the Kings service.

The King could not yet dispatch his affairs with the English. The King arms
against the Dauphin.
to consider of a peace and made himself be sought unto. This trouble could
not be but to the profit of the enemies of France. He resolved to go himself
against this conspiracy, before that time and the Innovation, the ancient Idol
Caesar blamed the Gauls for a curious de^i^e of Inouations. They are said he,
very inconstant in their opinions and most commonly desire change.
of the French, had given it more force. Having fortified the frontiers against
the English he advertised his son of his duty, but good words serve but as
oil to feed the lamp of this young Princes desires.

He must use sharper terms to force obedience, Good words are of no force,
to have a difficult commandment ^bserued. He that will be obeyed in rigorous
things must use severity and authority. So says Mach^auel in the third of
his Discourses.
an unpleasing command requires not mild speches. He came to Poietiers, he
sent to the Duke of Bourbon to deliver him his son, and to the Duke of
Alencon to yield him his Towns of Niort and St. Maixant, and to both of them
to yield an account of those combustions, to come unto him, and to call their
fidellity unto them. They were far of, this storm could not hurt them. They
were no Children to be afraid of this thunder.

The Duke of Bourbon would not obey at the first summons without caution for
his obedience. He had rather have his absence To fly judgment is to confess
the fault, but oftentimes the innoc^nt teach no defense against the persecution
of one more mighty, but absence.
a witness against him, then repent him for his presence. He had a good pawn
in his possession, he had Towns and Subjects which had sworn to follow his
fortune, thinking that the war being betwixt the Father and the Son, all that
were actors in it should gain by it, at the least they should be free from
danger; for the Fathers bounty would refuse nothing to his Sons humility, and
that oftentimes fidelity was worse rewarded then There have been ages seen so
full of confusion, as they must have done ill to reap good. If virtue ^ere not
of it self a great recompense to good men, they mig^t have some reason to
repent themselves of doing well, when as their cond^tion is infe^iour to that
of the wicked.
rebellion.

The Duke of Alencon thought he should always have Niort and St. Maixant to
make his peace. He had sent la Roche to defend the Castle of St. Maixant, S.
Maixan taken by the King.
but the Town intrencht it self and put it self in arms against him. It was
presently assisted with the kings forces, who sent the Admiral Coitiui and la
Varenne Sene^hall of Poictou thither. The Castle being forced, la Roche
escaped making a show to go for succors, and the Captains which he left
within it were hanged.

The Kings forces attempted not any Town, but they took it. A Prince that
has to deal with his subjects, performs great matters in time, how diff^cult
soever.
Some endured the Cannon and were spoiled, Rion and Aigues perces opened their
gates at the first summons. Clermont and Mont-Ferrand, who had never given ear
to the persuasion of the Princes of the league, received the King.

The Estates of the Country assemble at Clermont to order this division,
Estates assembled at Clermont.
which separating the son from the father, divided one heart into two. The
King thinking it fit that a business of that importance, which concerned the
safety of them all, should be consulted of by many, Although that a sovereign
Prince may resolve of any thing of his own motion, yet it is fit he should
commun cate it. So Augustus made a pleasing sweet medl^y, as Dion sait^, of a
Monarchy and a popular state.
he appointed this assembly. There they represented freely the ruins which
threatened the Realm, and that the English had occasion to mock at the boldness
of the Princes of the blood, which had attempted against the head of their
house, and banded the Son against the Father. That it was fit every man
should return to his duty, the King by the way of his bounty, and clemency,
to them that had offended him; by that of justice to his estate, to serve To
reign: is to serve. Tiberius comprhend^d the duty of a Prince in three words,
and three kinds of subjects. A good Prince who is ordained for the safety of
his subjects, must serve the Senate, serve his subjects in general, and serve
every private man. To serve the Senate is to follow their Council: to serve
all, is to procure the public good: and to serve every man, is to do him
justice that demands it.
the which he was ordained of God, as well as to command: and the Princes by
that of obedience and repentance, with amendment for their faults, that,
although the iustest cause to arm against the Prince were unjust, yet the King
should consider that a great Prince should apprehend nothing more then to see
his subjects ill satisfied A private man is pleased in satisfying himself, but
the condition of a Prince is bound to content his subjects, and to sa^isfi^
such as are malecont^nt.
of his actions.

These reasons pierst the hearts of the most distracted. The Princes fearing to
be abandoned, Every one desires grace of the King.
their party growing weak and decreasing daily, they sued for grace unto the
King: He offered it them by the Earl of Eu, who did negotiate their accord,
and did persuade them to go to Clermont to receive his commandment: whereunto
they yielded, so as they might be assured. The King was so good as he gloried
to be undeservedly offended, by men who reduced to their duties very
profitable; he gave a pasport for the Duke of Bourbon and Alencon, but not for
Tremouille, Chaumont, nor Prye, whom he held to be the Authors of this
trouble, and of the assembly at Noion. An assembly at Noion of the Duke of
Alencon, Anthony of Chaban^s Earl of Dampmartin, Peter of Am^oise Lord of
Chaumont, John de la Roche, Seneshall of Poictou, and of the Lord of Trem^uille.
They complain that they are abandoned, and inflame the blood of this young
Prince, in such sort as seeing the Dukes of Bourbon and Alencon, return to
conduct him to Clermont, he swore that he would not go, A Prince must have
care of them that have followed him. Monstrelet upon this occasion writes
those words. When the Daup^in understood it, he said unto the Duke of Bourbon,
My fair Gossip, you have no thanks to tell how the matter was concluded, and
that the King had not pardoned them of my household.
but would seek to do worse.

When the King saw that he came not, that the prefixed day was past, and that
the English, who besieged Harfleu, called him into Normandy, he would
temporise no longer, but suffered his Army to spoil the Duke of Bourbons
Country. His foreward did besiege and take Vichy. Cusset and Varennes yielded.
The whole country of Rouanna obayed: Clermont and Mont-Ferrant persisted in
their fidelity, from the which no Town may in any sort separate He cannot be
held faithful, that for any respect w^atsosoeue^ has ceased to be so. Senec.
it self, but it presently loses the glorious title of faithful.

The wilfulnes of this Prince ruined the country, every man found his
desseigne unjust, and the affection he bare unto his servants unjust, the
consideration of whom should be of more force then that of the public good,
for the which they might sometimes strain Justice it self. To observe Justice
in great ma^te^s, they must sometimes leau it in lesser.
Wherefore the Duke of Bourbon and Alenccon persuaded him to submit this
affection to the Kings will, and the interest of his servants to his
discretion, entreating the Earl of Eu to be a means that the king would be
pleased that might be done at Cusset, which was not performed at Clermont.

The King grants it: The Da^phin restored to favor.
They come, and present themselves unto him, bending their knees thrice unto
the ground before they approach, beseeching him to pardon them. This humility
Humility only pleades for great persons. Monstrelet speaks in this sort of
this pardon. Being come into the chamber where the King was, they kneeled
thrice before they came unto him, and at the third they entreated him with
great humility to pardon them his indignation.
did wipe out of the kings heart the feeling of such sensible offenses. He
embraced them, and said unto the Dauphin, Lewis you are welcome, you have
stayed long: go and rest you, we will talk to morrow with you.

But he protracted no time to reprehend the Duke of Bourbon, Repreh^nsion of
the D. of Bourbon.
drawing him a part Great men will be praised in public and reprehended in
secret.
he put him in mind of his faults, he notes him the place and the number,
being five, he reprocheth unto him the injustice and indiscretion of a design
which sought to put the father under the sons government; adding that if that
love and respect of some did not withhold him, he would make him feel his
displeasure.

What could he answer? The very feeling of his fault did press him. The
offender must yield to the justice, and the Innocent to the force of the
stronger. He renues all the vows of his obedience, and affection, and submits
his will unto the kings, he commends his bounty, so apparent by the number of
his offenses, and so necessary for them that had offended, whose preservation
did serve as an increase to his glory, and a trophee to his clemency They to
whom the Prince gives life, live not but to the glory of his clemency.
.

The next day the Dauphin presents himself unto the king, who did not entreat
him as nurses do children which flatter them when they fall. He did let him
understand that his fall had carried him to the inevitable ruin of his honor
and fortune, if the bounty of a father had not as much will to retire him, as
the justice of a king had reason to punish him: In a word, he said he would
cease to be a good father unto him, if he did not begin to be a better son
He that is good must strive to be bette^, for when he does not begin to g^ow
better, the^ he ends to be good.
: and that he desired not to be held good, for not punishing the bad.

The Dauphin assuring himself of his fathers bounty and clemency speaks no
more but for his servants, The Dauphin will not leave his servants
to whom safe conducts had been refused. The king declared that they had made
themselves unworthy of his grace; that they had deserved to be made an example
to others, as the authors of this rebellion, which had made the wicked
impudent, and brought good men to despair: Yet there must be a distinction A
Citizen of Sparta (...) Ch^rilaus highly commended for (...) bounty. And how,
s^id he, can he be good, seeing he is not severe unto the wicked. It is as
great cruelty to pardon all the world, as not to pardon any. Senec.
made betwixt the effects of clemency and bounty, that for their punishment
he was contented not to see them, and that they should retire themselves unto
their houses.

The Dauphin held firm against these torrents of his fathers choler, and lets
him know that if there be no grace for his servants, he desires not any for
himself. From this opinion Opinion is the falling sickness of the mind: that
is the Cave which co^taines the wind^ from whence the tempests of the mind
come, that is to say, disordinate passions.
which is they Cave from whence the winds issue which torment his soul: or
rather from the impression which his servants had given him, that in being
resolute he should have whatsoever he desired, Opinion causes terrible
motions in the soul.
he drew this young and rash speech: I must then my Lord return, for so I have
promised. To whom the King answered coldly. Lewis go if you will, the gates
are open for you, and if they were not wide enough I would cause sixteen or
twenty fadome of the wall to be beaten down, to make you a greater passage: I
am your father, your will depends upon mine. The fathers will i^ sovereign
over that of the Son. The power of the Father was in old time absosolute
among the Romans, Persians, and Gauls over the lives, deaths, goods, liberty,
actions, and honor of their children.
I find it very strange, that you have engaged your word without knowing mine,
But it imports not: The house of France by the grace of God is not so
unfurnished of Princes, as it has not some that will show more affection then
you have done to maintain her greatness and honor.

This young Prince desired rather to be held a bad Son then a bad master.
Wilfulnes of the Dauphin.
We must believe that these clouds did not break without some rain, and that
this fire of choler, and love, was not quenched without tears. The Duke of
Bourbon, who knew how to distinguish Kings are offended when the subjects will
have their children march equally with them. The high Priests in the beginning
of the year made public prayers for the health and prosp^ritie of the
Emperor. Tiberius blamed the^ sharply, for that they had added the names of
Nero and Drusus his successors, hearing it impatiently to see you^h march
equal with his age. Aequam adolescentes Senectae suae impatienter indoluit.
Tacit.
betwixt the authority of the one, and the age of the other, and would not
that there should remain any conceit in the Kings mind, that this wilfulnes
was supported by his Council, at the same time took the oath of Allegiance,
promising to leave the Dauphin, and all intelligences and leagues contrary to
his Majesty's service.

The Dauphin could do no less then apply himself to the obedience and
humility which God and Nature had ordained him. He humbles himself.
The King kept him near him, changed all his officers, except his Confessor
and his Cook, set good gards about him, that no bad thing might enter into his
ears, Hearing is the entry unto the Soul, good or bad Counsels have no
other passage. When the gardes of these gates are won they triumph over the
sort. Ad summam sapiens eris fi clauseris ^ures, quibus ceram parum often obdere,
Firmiori spissamento opus est, quam vsum in sociis Vlissem ferunt. Senec.
and he caused them to be observed that came near him, to the end he might
call them to an account for the bad Impressions they gave him.

He gave him men, The King reformes the Dauphins house
better known and recommended for their wisdom and Integrity, then for
their cunning and subtlety, Good men are always necessary about Princes,
they must chase away factious spirits, who are more fit to disorder then to
settle affairs. It is also good to have them that are cunning and politic,
to employ them against deceivers.
commanding them to have a care of this young Prince, who was of a good
disposition, but very tractable, and might easily be diuerted. Many vicious
inclinations creep into men's minds, whereof we must no more blame Nature,
then the Vine, when as the Wine grows sower, or Iron when it rusts. How good
soever the disposition be, it corrupts and is spoiled if it be not entertained,
and education does always frame men after her own fashion, notwithstanding
any lets of Nature.

They that are about this Prince, He is watched least he fall.
by the Kings commandment, keep him so short, as notwithstanding that Will be
a prerogative of humane liberty, The will which is in her liberty, and
depends only on the power of reason, a^mes at things which are desirable and
to be affected. The name of virtue among the Grecians came from that of desire,
for that it is properly and chiefly to be desired.
he durst not will any thing contrary to his duty; And for that the Dukes of
Alencon and Bourbon had promised by the treaty to yield up unto the King the
places which they held, they having no other security but the Kings word, and
clemency, the Army was not dismissed before that all was executed: Which being
done a Peace was proclaimed, and this revolt (which they called the Praguerie)
suppressed in less then nine months.

The Dauphin remained still near the King, he served him, and followed him in
diverse occasions. It was an incomparable happiness It is a great contentment for
a King to come to that age to fashion his successor, and to make him partaker
of his experience and authority.
for him, to see his way made unto the Crown, and to learn how to live under
so good a father. Parts which frame a Prince.
The practice of war under the conduct and instruction of so valiant a
Captain, and so wise a King, the essential parts which frame a Prince,
counsel, force, reputation, The same things which support the frame of an
Estate, as Council, force, and reputation, are the essential parts which
fashion a Prince. Council teaches him the true forms how to reign well;
force consists in the (...) of six conditions which make him mighty, the which
are, to to have his estate loving great, armed, rich and settled. Reputation is
the glorious brute and of that efficacy as opinion gives it credit and respect
among other Potentates.
and the instruments to reign, which be, first knowledge, to look into the
nature of subjects; secondly, wisdom to give them fit laws; thirdly order of
arms; fourthly the art to make war; fifthly, industry to maintain peace;
sixthly, diligence to foresee accidents; seventhly, means to amplisie his
Empire; eighthly, judgment to know the iealousies and interests of States;
ninthly, dexterity to temporise inconuenients; tenthly, quicknes to resolve;
eleuenthly, celeritie to execute; twelfthly, constancy in matters resolved;
thirteenthly, force in adversity; foureenthly, moderation in prosperity;
fifteenthly, and so firm a knowledge of divine things, that superstition make
him not fearful, nor liberty rash.

He led him to the siege of Pontoise, the Accademie of the most memorable
exploits which had bin seen in those times. Siege of Pontoise.
The English having indiscreetly Eue^y man commits errors, the French have, and
the English also in the deciding of their affairs. King John refused the offer
which the Prince of Wales made him, to yield up all which he had conquered, and
the spoil. He would beside all this have the Prince and four of the chief
Noblemen of his Army yield at his discretion. This refusal was followed with
the loss of a battle, and the taking of the King. King Charles offered the
English in the conf^rence at Calais, to leave them all that they held, in doing
him h^mage, they refused it, and had neither the one nor the other.
refused the kings offers, who left them the quiet possession of that which
they held in France, reserving only the sovereignty; were declared enemies to
all parts. Paris being freed from their command, desired to see them out of
Pontoise, and therefore they supplied the king with money to expel them.
Behold an army of twelve thousand men before Pontoise, good souldiars, and
inured to dangers, who could both encounter, and pass them without fear, and
knew better how to dye, then to kill, the best and only part of valor.

The approches to Pontoise were not so well guarded, but Talbot enters and
relieues Talbot releeues Pontoise.
it both with men and victuals. The Duke of York, Lieutenant General to the
King of England, presents himself at Cenery and Hotonuille with 8000. men. He
sent a Herald unto the King to signify unto him, that either he should accept
of a Battle, or raise his siege. In this first fury of the French, there was
not any one but said that it were better to eat roots Perseverance forces
places, Caesar's soldiers being before Duras, they had no bread but a root
called (...), they within the town^ laughed at the (...) of the be (...), being
so ill furnished. But they told them, that as long as they found such roots
about Duras (whereof t^ere were (...)) they would not dislodge.
and die, then to raise the siege. But the King would not hazard any thing.

The river was betwixt both Armies, the King caused the bridge at Beaumont to
be guarded, the only convenient passage for the enemies Army. The Duke of
York had small boats to pass over his soldiers beneath the bridge toward
the Abbey, yet with such difficulty as ten men had been able to hinder a
hundred. But the order was so great, and the night so favorable, as the Army
was in a manner all past before the Sentinels had given the alarm. A happy
passage, and which struck such an amazement into the Kings Army, as the
Captains were more busied to wonder how the English had past, then to keep
the rest from passing A (...) and admiration are weak Arms to stay as enemy.
Tit. Lin. observes how the Romans pass a river whilst that the Spa^iards
wonder and consult what they should do. Qui tumultum iniicere (...) in ipso
(...). Tit. Li^. who might have caused a disorder in the very passage of the
river.
. from constreining him, The King raises the siege.
seeing there was a river betwixt both. He wanted not-courage, but judgment to
embrace the occasion and opportunity. Agisilaus being demanded what parls made
the commander of an Army excellent and brauc: he answered, courage against his
enemies, and counsel* with judgment in occasions that a^e offered.
He dislodged from Maubuisson, leaving Charles of An^on and the Admiral of
Cottiuy with 2000. men in the fort of St. Martin, and so retires to Poisy. The
Duke of York follows him, thinking to engage him to fight, but the King will
not change his resolution, which was not to give a battle but to take
Pontoise. When as the Duke of York sent to offer battle unto the King, he
made no other answer but that seeing he had such a desire to fight, he should
have (...) belly full and sooner then he looked for.


The Duke of York passes at Mante to victual and refresh the besieged. The
King remained, scorned by the English, and contemned by the Parisians, who
repent themselves for the money they had given him, unprofitably, for the
charges of this enterprise. The greatest of his Court murmured, for that he had
retired so unseasonably. He sees his reputation so blemished as he resolves to
take the place, or to dye there: he returns thither within ten days after,
causes the Town to be battered in three places, and a breach being made goes
himself to the assault, hazarding all for all. He was forced to play the
soldier to be a King: unless he would of a King become a soldier, and try how
insupportable repentance is, not to have done, in an opportunity, that which
can no more be done when it is past, and how she scorns at those ouerweaning
wits, which think in all places to join authority to wisdom, imparting
nothing to necessity. The Kings Necessity binds a Prince to cast ^imselfe
into dangers. In the wa^re which the Emperor Albert of Austria had against the
(...), they demanded of him to whom he would give the charge of his army: he
answered. If any other then my self were your Captain you would no more call
me Archduke of Austria AEneas Silu. ^ib. 3. de (...).
affairs were not in such terms as he should be ashamed to be whereas the
Cannon might glance by his crown, Charles bragd of the wounds that he
had^receiued in the war and showed them, Timoth^us an Athenian Captain said, I
was ashamed before S^mon that an arrow came from the walls and fell near unto
me, for that I had advanced farther then was fit for a commander of an Army
Plut:
nor to trouble his thoughts to consider how he should escape out of danger,
nor how much it did import that he should escape.

The besieged cannot withstand the fury of the assault, Pontosse taken by
assault.
they enter, they kill the enemies and save the Citizen, they hear not those
cruel words, let the friend perish with the enemy. Those whom the fury of
arms could distinguish and know for French were saved, and the English slain:
But it is hard in these encounters, (...) with fury, and foming with revenge,
to observe any Image of justice in sparing his friend or his host. (...) that
great Capta^ne who never slew any one vanquished, held him a wicked men, how
good a Citizen soever that did not spare his friend or his host.
.

They speak of God when they go to a charge or an assault, they recommend them
selves unto him, they pray unto him, and they make vows. At their return they
speak no more of him then if he had not been present. But the first thing and
the first action which the King did at his entry, was to give God thanks,
acknowledging him the sole author of this victory, The glory of (...) belongs
to the God of Batte^^s* The King of france have always been careful of this
duty. Phillip Angust^^: after the Battle of Bouines caused the Church of our
^ady of victory to be built (...) unto Senl^s. K. Lewis the twelfth built a
Chapel whereas he won the Battle of Ghiaradadda, under the name of St. Marie of
victory. King Francis the 1. did the like upon the place of battle whereas he
defeated the Suisses at s. Dona^.
without whom he had been as much troubled with his own Subjects, as with the
enemy: For the Duke of Bourgundy was not so well reconciled as he desired not
to raise the greatness of his house upon the ruins of the Kings affairs and
the greatest of the Realm had already made secret assemblies to reform the
disorders whereof every one had complained.

He assembled all the Princes, The King rewards his ser^ants.
Noblemen and Captains, he commended them that had done well, After a victory
a Prince must take knowledge of such as have done him good service, honor and
recompense valor and blame cowardice. Luce orta (says Liui. in his 6. Book)
vocatis clafico ad concilium, mili tibus, Manlius primam ob virtutem Jaudatus
donatusque.
and thanked the^ for the fidelity and proofs which they had shown, he made
many knights, and gave to the Lord of I^longe the place of marshall of France,
and a pension to him that entered first into Pontoise by the breach. If the
History knew his name she would give him a murall Crown, and would do him the
like honor as the Parthians did to him that mounted first upon the walls of
Seleucia. The names of such as go to apparent dangers for the public safety,
should not be forgotten in a history, and yet they remain unknown, (...) they
be not noted by some other quality then a simple soldier. Plutarch remembers
the name of Surena, who first sealed the wall of the great City Seleucia, the
reason is for that he was the second among the Parthians next the King.
.

The King led the Dauphin to Tartas, being assieged by the English, and then to
Limoges, teaching him still that wisdom and temporising surmount all
difficulties, The Dauphin besieges Tartas.
and that it is a more excellent thing to settle his estate in peace then to
spoil and wast his enemies contry. With the instructions and maxims of his
father, who had given him in his infancy good governors, and in his youth good
counselors. Great Princes having had good masters being little, and wise
Counselors being great have effected great matters.
. he made him capable of the actions of a Prince, to command well, and to carry
the commandments of the King his father into Languedoc, to frustrate the
practice of the Earl of Armagnac. Bastard of Armagnac fauord by Lewis the
eleventh.
The Bastard This Bastard was made Admiral of France by Lewis the eleventh who
gave him the Earldom of Coming and the government of Guienne: whereof be
disposest John Duke of Bourbon his Brother in law.
of this house advertised him, that the Earl of Armagnack treated of some
alliance with the English. Jealousy upon such aduertisements are always
excusable, and there is nothing that does so much bind the wisdom of Princes,
as to foresee that great houses do not ally themselves against their liking,
and transport unto strangers the goods which should remain in their estates,
which cannot be carried away without prejudice unto them. Such practices are
more easily prevented then broken when they are made.

The house of Armaignac is ancient, rich, and mighty, in Guienne, and her
beginning is found in that of the Crown of D. Sancho, surnamed the great King
of Naturre, having conquered some land in Gascogne on this side the Pyrenees
gave it unto Garsias his son, Earl of Armagn^c in the year 1013. he made
his second son Arnold Garcias ^arfe of Estarac, whose dissent is entered into
the house of Foix and a branch of Candalle.
Navarre. John 4. Earl of Amagnac Constable of France had bought of John Duke
of Bourbon the Earldom of Lisle Iourdain in the year. 1421. for 38000.
crowns of gold, of 64. to the mark. He had married Isabell of Navarre: The
greatness of his house, and that of his alliance, made him presume, during the
troubles of France, (when as every man cast his eyes upon the pieces of her
shipwreck) to qualify himself, Prince by the grace of God, and to seek the
alliance of the English by the marriage of his daughter. The King, who made no
difference betwixt treason and such allyances, sent Commissioners to make the
Earls process as guilty of high treason; having offended against the Laws of
France Marriages treated with strangers without the Kings permission, have been
dangerous for them that treates it. Valeran of Luxembourg Constable of France
was disgract by King Charles the fifth, and King Charles the sixth dislik^ the
treaty of the Duke of Berries daughter with the Duke of Lancaster Philistus for
this reason was banished out of the estates of Denis King of Sicile
which forbids any Nobleman to make any marriage with strangers without the
Princes consent.

The King sent the Dauphin thither, who besieged Lisle Iordain and took the
Earl of Armagnac. Earl of Armagnac a prisoner at Lisle Iourdain.
His son fled into Spain, John de Meaux, second President of the Parliament
of Toulouse, had heard the Earl of Armagnac upon his practice, and had drawn
from his own mouth the truth of the principal points. He thought that he
should be quit for this confession, Natures well bred are ^asily bound by
favors, they would have cor^upted Lewis. King Charles his father gives him part
of the government of the estate and of his affairs, by which means he was
drawn from thoughts contrary to his duty and the peace of the estate.
and that the President (having no other force then that of Justice) could do
him no great harm, but when he saw himself a prisoner in the Dauphins power,
he said that whatsoever he had confessed was against his own conscience and
the truth, having only spoken it with a desire to recover his goods which the
King had seized on. After he had expiated this offense in prison, the King
restored him his liberty giving the Earldom of Foix for a caution. The
Dauphin at his return from this voyage was sent into Normandy with the title
of Lieftenant General. But we must observe that he was twenty years old
before he had any government, and that the King gave it him only to disappoint
the deseignes of such as would have drawn him elcewhere, and did busy
themselves more then he himself did in the estate wherein he was.

He chased the English from Deep, The Dauphin taken Deep.
and this victory did presently carry the generosity of his courage and the
happiness of his conduct throughout all the Provinces of France, whereas nothing
did diminish the greatness of this growing reputation, but this reason, that
being son to so brave a father it was not strange to see him so valiant. The
French said that the father had need of such a son and the son had need of
such a father. The King glories to have made him with his own hand and to see
his instructions so well followed, he augments his authority, and praises his
command, and sends him into Languedoc The Dauphin goes into Languedoc,
with a thousand Lances whereas his sword made his way. He staid not his
courage at small A Prince must fly vanity and seek the effect ^f a so^lid and
true glory, nam vt ^^uitatis est in mem aucupart rumorem omnes vmbras etiam
falsae gloriae consectari, sic ieiuni est animi lucem splendoremque sugientis,
iustam gloriam qui est fructus verae virtutis honestissimus repudiare. Cic.
(...) Pis. For as it is a lightness to hunt after vain f^me and all the
shadows of falce glory, so it is a weakness to refuse just glory, which is the
honeslest fruit of true virtue.
matters, his fall could not be but very high. As he disdained glory of small
price, and reputation which cost little, so he did earnestly seek that which
grew from great and goodly actions, and which were the just fruits of true
virtue.

The English, 1443.
grown weak, make a truce, during the which Lewis goes to seek exercise
without the Realm, and becomes head of the French and English to be revenged
on those who during the worst estate of his fathers affairs had troubled him,
and to favor the war of Sigismond Duke of Austria against the Suisses. The
Duke of Austria had married Radigonde of France, eldest daughter to King
Charles the seventh: in fau^ur of this alliance be entreats him to succors
him against the suisses.


He remembered that the Earl of Montbelliard had entered the Frontiers of
France toward Langres. He cries quittance with him, takes and spoils
Montbelliard and gives the government to John Thibergea^ captain of his
Archers: He oueruns, the Bishop of Bassils country, for that he had maintained
the party of Amide Duke of Sauoy Amidee Duke of Sauoy in the year 1437.
retired to Repaille into a monastery of Moncke; of S. (...); and took their
(...), A gray gown, a long Cloak, a gray hood, a short corne^, and a red cap
upon his hood, but upon his gown he car^ed a great girdle of gould, and upon
his cloak a Cross of gould, being accompanied by tw^ty of his fauourits
attired like the Monks. He reserved unto himself the title of the Duke of
Sauoy and the sovereign authority over his Estates. He was c^osen Pope at the
Council. The election was signified unto him the 11. of December 1439. He came
to Basil the 24. of June. was crowned the 24. of July, said his first Mass
and made Cardenal^ the 27. of November. He went to hold his sea at Lausa^a 1442.
who by the sufferages of the Bishops prelates and Doctors of the Council had
been made Pope and named Foelix the fifth, against Pope Engenius, and who
before his retreat into his Monastery of Ripaille, had done all he could to
favor the English.

The Suisses seeing so mighty an enemy at their gates, attend not until he did
advance, but look which way he would turn the head of his forces. The Lord of
Ramstein receives him at Altkilch, a Town which he held by engagement of the
Bishop of Basil for 12000. florens. The Nobillity of the Country comes unto
him, and to be revenged of the people, and to preserve their howses, they offer
him the service of their swords. The Armies used incredible inhumanities upon
this poor people, who gave the name of Flears unto the men of War The
soldiers who spoiled the frontiers, and the Countries of Basil and Ferrette
at diverse times were always called by one name Schindern, Flears, and by
mockery Armeniacken.
.

The Town of Bassil knew well that the council would draw this storm upon
them, Good order of them of Basil.
and that King Charles the seventh would revenge the degradation of Eugenius
the Pope: and therefore they omitted nothing that might serve for their defense
and safety: they made a bulwark at the Port of Spalen, and rased all that was
about the Town which might help the besiegers: they appointed two Bells, one
for war, and the other for fire, by the first every one knew whither he
should go, by the second Churchmen and Monks only were bound to run to the
fire. They caused a proclamation to be made in the country, that whosoever
would bring his goods and provision into the Town, the Bourguemasters would
be bound to restore it again, or to pay the just price, if necessity forced
them to use it Whereas there is concord betwixt the towns and country, not
only of (...) in certain things, but in all that (...) the common prfit, a
for^aine enemy shall find great difficulty to work any great effects, for
all conspire (...) him.
.

The house of Austria had cast the Apple of discord among the Suisses. Zurich
Suisses besiege
was allied to Sygismond Archduke of Austria, the Cantons of Berne, Lucerne,
Vry, Suuitz, Vnderual, and Glaris, came to besiege Zurick, to force them to
renounce this alliance. Being at this siege they are advertised that John of
Rechberg in the beginning of August had surprised the Town of Bruck, in the
Country of Ergueu, belonging to the Canton of Berne, that he had committed
great cruelties there, and had sent the spoil by water to Laustemberg: and the
chief prisoners to Farnsberg. The common feeling they had of the private
offenses of their Allies, suffers them not to dissemble this injury. He that
attempts against the least Hamlet of this commonweal, gives an Alarm to all
the Cantons: they ran thither as if the fire had been in their own houses.
The Law of alliance, which is that of friendship, requires that friends and
allies should apprehend (...) embrace one another good or larme. Their duties
and interests should be common, as (...) in the ship of one-common-weale, the
which suffers not any one to save himself apart, nor that they which are at
the poope should not be moved with the water which enters i^ at the prow.
They sent four thousand men to besiege Farnsberg, Reekberg, who was within
it, let them know upon their first approches that he was no man to yield. He
knew well that the Army of France was not far off, and that the Swisses had
work enough elsewhere.

Burkard Monchen whom the French called Burgo the Monk, Lord by engagement of
Landsec, was as it were the guide and Marshall of the Army. He pressed the
Dauphin to come before Basil, thinking that at the sight of so many men they
would rather seek to capitulate then resist: 1441 Basil besieged by the
Dauphin.
for the Army consisted of 20000. horse: the Histories of Germany make
mention of 30000. Basil Basil made the first alliance with Bern and Soleure,
in the year 144^ The house of Austria was offended, say^ng that they did
in^ringe the Articles of the golden Bull.
sends speedily to demand succors of the Suissees which were before Farnsberg.
They sent them one thousand and six hundred men, whom the Siegneur of Halwil
calls peasants: Thuring de Halluuil in a letter which he did write unto the
Marqu^s William, and to the Town of Zurick the day after the Battle, call^
the Suisses Bauten Pesants.
The which were twice incountred and charged by the Earl of Dammartin, first
in the plain of Brattelen, when as they thought to pass at the break of the
day, and the second time near unto the Village of Mutents half a league from
Basil, Suisses repulse the Earl of Dammartin.
but they marched so close, and in such good order, as it seemed to the
Caualery which offered to charge them, that they went against a rock, or an
armed wall A Battalion of foot well ordered is called a wall. Antiqui^murum
di^erunt pedestrem exercitum Veget. Dion spe^king of the fourth Legion called,
Pytique, gives it the title of a warlike wall. (...).
.

They of Basil gave them notice that they should be careful how they did
advance, that it would be a great rashness for them to seek to force through
so mighty an Army, which held all the passages. But the Suissees believe that
the Lion is not so furious as he is painted: Being encouraged, and glorious of
that which had so happily succeeded, in the morning they will not hear speak
of staying, and much less of retyring. The brauest courages show themselves in
dangers: Not to yield, but to resist the sharpest and most dangerous accidents,
is a sign of a great courage. Romanum est agere et pati fortia.
It belongs only unto them to do and endure difficult things. They are more
inquisitiue of the place where the enemies are, then of their numbers, and
holding all manner of stay for a kind of cowardice, they march directly
toward the Town, and finding the passage at the bridge stopped, they swim
over the river of Bisrein The Townes-men of Basil were in counsel how to draw
in their succors without danger. Munster says that the Suisses being upon a
little ^ill, seeing their enemies come upon them, they repulst them unto the
Hospital of S James.
.

The Romans would not have commended this fury; they held it unfitting for the
greatness and Majesty of the Empire, and Emperor of their armies, to pass
rivers otherwise then upon bridges, having gardes set at either end Germanicus
said that to wade through rivers did wrong the reputation of a general of an
Army. Caesar nisi pontibus pre^idiisque impositis dare in discrimen Legiones
hand Imperatorium ratus.
. For this only reason, and without any other necessity Caesar made a bridge
upon the Rhin, and was nothing amazed at the breadth, swiftnes, nor depth of
this riuer^ The Suisses were much troubled with the water and the enemy, before
they could recover the banks, Battle of S. Ieams Hospital.
and then by the favor of a little Hill they slip into S. James Hospital.
They of the Town, for that they would not fail to releieue them who came so
freely and generously to their succors, sent forth two troops to meet them:
but there was an Ambush of eight thousand horses laid for them, able to have
broken the Battalions of Suissees, if they had been as equal in number The
number of soldiers in a Legion, have been diverse. In the time of Romulus it
was of six thousand foot and 600. horse, of 4000. during the Commonweal. That
which Scipio led into Affrike was of 6000. And two Legions in Caesar's Army
made not 7000. men.
as they did imitate in order the Roman Legions. They that were in guard in the
Towers of the Town advertised them of the danger, and made them return.

The Suisses had barticadoed themselves in the Church and Hospital of S.
James; Suisses defeated.
But the French forced them out by fire. They fought long at the hedges and
walls of the gardens, they endured three assaults, and repulst the two first
valiantly, but they were charged with great resolution, and at the third they
were forced and all cut in pieces: yet the most miserable sold his skin
dearly. Aeneas Siluius Committitur atrox et miserable praelium, exdunturque ex
vtraque parto quamplurimi. Horrendum auditu est. Euellebant sanguinolentas ex
corporibus suis sagittas Suitenses, ac truncatis manibus in hosts irruebant
nec prius amm^m exhalabant, quam occiso^em ipsi occidistent. Erat retro
Suitenses murus quidam het^^ sancti Ia^bi, quo illi se tutos ab vna p^te
rebantur solumque in fr^nte pugnabant. Sed Teutonic^ qui cum Armeniacis erant
intrantes hortum, murum perfodiunt, Suitenseque a tergo feriunt, que res magna
causa ruinae Suitensium fuit: pugnatur tum ante tum retro, iam viro vir imminet
nee iam eminus sed cominus ferrum stringitur.
who was then Secretary to the Council, and afterward Pope, says they could
not without horror and amazement behold that cruel butchery of men, in the
which the Suisses drew the arrows all bloody out of their bodies, and stabd
them furiously into their enemies bowels and so died together. No man was
slain but he slew. No man breathed forth his last gasp without the content
of being revenged, comforting his death in that of his enemy. The Dauphin said
that he had never seen men more furious, more strong, nor more resolute: there
were but sixtene saved, who coming into the Contry were taken for runawayes
which had forsaken the Camp. And notwithstanding any thing they could allege
yet every man said unto them, they should have dyed with the rest. They could
not be held honest men who had brought back their heads from the danger where
their companions, had been slain, as Philopemen could not think well of him
who had fallen alive into the enemies hand. Those that fled from a battle were
always odious to all nations. These (...) Suisses although they saved
themselves with fighting were contemned as Cowards. The name of (...) tiger a
forsaker of the camp is a great reproach among the Suisses.
The Combat continued ten hours.

Burkard Munch of Landscron Conductor of the Army riding over the place of
battle and over the heaps of deadmen, Insolence in the victory punished.
the Beauer of his helmet being up, full of insolence and pride, he said: Here
we has in Roses, The Annalls of the Bishopric of Basil report the wo^aes of
Burka^d (...) badden vvix in ^osen, or Hie ^^che ich in dcu Ros^a^ten, velchon
(...) bor^erten greeet.
or as some write, beholding the Castle of Landscorn and Munchenstien. I set
the Rose bushes which my Predecessors have planted. A Suisse, lying among the
dead Carcases, and half dead, hearing these words of crue^l disdain, strives
to get up on his knees, and with the remainder of his courage and life casts a
stone, with such violence at his face, as he overthrew him. He was carried to
Landscron and there he died. Another seeing one of his Companions ill entreated
by four soldiers ran thither; freed him from the danger, and carrred him away
dying upon his sholders Erant qua^^or Armeniaci qui Suitensem vnum
insequebantu. Iamque illum telo (...) et supra corpus graffa^entor, (...) euis
comes ar^ep^a bipenn^ in quatuor illos fertur ex quibs duos obtruncauit, alios
vero in fugam dedit, ac deinde ^emianime corpus super humeros recipit et (...)
hostibus (...) ad suos AEneas Sil. Munsterus.


It is not certain how many were in the Suisses Army: Haluuil the Suisse,
says that they were 4000, the Chronicles of France speak of 5000. But
whatsoever it were, neither France nor England had any great cause to triumph
for this Battle: For they lost as many men as they must kill of the enemies to
merit a triumph. A Triumph was not given for any victory except they had slain
5000. enemies, Val^^ius says. Neither did they give it unto the Victors when
as the victory had and cost much blood, and therefore Titus Liu^u^ ia his 16.
says, that it was refused to Artillius.
The Army that was before Farnsperg, hearing of this defeat, raised the (...)
and retired.

The Dauphin continued three days upon the place of Battle, and to cover the
number of men which they had lost, caused them to be buried in diverse places,
as at Arlesheim, Reinach, and Esch: Two Earls were interred at Montbelliard,
two at Isenheim, The grand Pryor of France was slain at this Battle, with
many other Noblemen. They of Basil demand leave to take a view of the dead men
and to bury Among the Grecians he that demanded a dead body to bury it, lost
the fruit of the victory, end renouned the triumph. Plut. de Niceas and
Age^l^us.
them, he would not refuse peace unto the dead, seeing he was willing to grant
it unto the living Aeneas said unto the La^ius, who came to entreat him to have
their dead bodies to bury them, Pacem me exa^^mis and Martis sort perempti
oratis, equidem and (...) concedere velim. you pray to men slain in the wars
I peace should give, yea willingly I would grant it them that live.
, and that there was no likelihood that he would grow obstinate at the siege of
Basil nor against the Suisses. The begging Friars were appointed for this act
of piety. They made three pits to bury them in. There were some that did
breath three days after the battle. They found some half burnt in the ruins
of the Hospital, many in the hedges, and a great number in the River of Birs.

The Dauphin went to refresh himself in Alsacea. His Court was at Ensisheim,
and the Army lodged so at large in the country, as it held from Montbelliard
to Haguenaud. Coun^^l of Basil seeks an accord with the Dauphin.
The Emperor assembled the Princes of the Empire at Ments to consult of the
means to expel the strangers out of Germany. The Council of Basil sent The
Counci^l of Basil sent the Cardinal of Arles and Bishop of Basil unto the
Dauphin, who did mediate a truce for twenty dai^s.
Embassassours unto him to persuade him not to trouble the assembly, to the
which France was bound for the peace it had with the house of Bourgundy. His
Deputies were at Basil to understand the will of the Fathers upon this accord.
They of Berne and Soleure came thither, yet there was nothing concluded but a
truce of some few days.

The Emperor Frederick, gave the Dauphin to understand that if he did not
retire himself, the Empire would proclaim war against him. The Nobility of
Germany, who had drawn the French and English into the country, began to be
weary of their guests, who drank their wine without paying, and made vergys of
their Vines. Mulhouse Mulhouse was sometimes an imperial ^own, the Bish^p of
Strausburge was governor, and it was called (...). It allied it self with the
Suisses in the year 1464. and then in the year 1506. it was made fellowburgis
with all the Cantons. Stump. lib. ^. of the Suisses commonweal.
freed it self from this storm, refusing to receive the Dauphins troops.

When as he saw that all the Empire began to rise against him, The Dauphin
retires into Lorraine.
and that the Suisses were like to have their revenge for the battle of S.
James of Basil, he went into Lorraine, to see King Charles his Father who was
before Mets, being resolved to revenge the King of Sicile, who was much
incensed against this Town, for that they had favored the Earl of Vaudemont
against him.

The English who had refused a peace, 1445 Truce betwixt France and England
prolonged.
took such taste in a truce A truce is the bait^ and charm of peace. It is in
the liberty of Princes to make it, but when as the people (...) thereof it is
hard to (...).
as it was prolonged for five years. Such as took delight in the public
miseries, for that they were profitable unto them, were not content, they would
have the tempest cease, but they still desired some wind to raise the storm.
We do not always find spirits of that integrity, but they prefer their
private profit before the public good. Men of this excellency have been ever
engaged in great tempests, the number of them which have come to a safe port to
make others have been very small. They grow like the Phoenix at the end of five
hundred years A wise man such as the Stoics discribe him, never was nor never
will be. Quis sapipiens sit aut fuerit, nec ipsi Stoici solent dicere. Cic. And
as great things happen rarely, Seneca says, that fortasse tanquam Phaenix
semel 500. annis nascitur. Sen.
.

Whiles that Rome was well governed, the profession of Arms was in time of
peace for an exercise, and in the time of war for necessity and glory,
every man returned to his affairs having yielded an account of his Arms,
witnessing still, that he carried them not for his own private good, but for
the service of his country. The civil wars troubled this order, and
therefore they said that Caesar and Pompey were held better Captains then good
Citizens, and greater in valor then in integrity. France was never fruitful
of such spirits as have willingly made war to have peace, and have not
troubled the peace to make war Marshall discipline should be well observed if
it did always consist of men who after the war made no difficulty to return
to their trades and labor, but the liberty and disorder in war is so great
as it is hard to draw them to the rules of Duty, and therefore war makes
thieves, and peace hangs them.
.

During this Truce a marriage was made betwixt Henry the sixth King of England,
Marriage of Henry the sixth and Margaret of Aniou.
and Margaret of Aniow Daughter to Rene King of Sicile. The Earl of Suffolk
came to fetch her at Nancy, the King was there present, and the joy was great:
but as any great joy has still some great sorrow attending it, and pleasures
strangle when as they embrace most straightly. Joy is commonly the beginning of
sorrow, at rivers of fresh water die in the salt sea; the sweetness of life ends
with sorrows that are bitter.
King Charles received so great an affliction for the death of the Dauphins
wife, Death of Margaret Stuard.
and his heaviness was so apparent, as the whole Court did participate thereof.

But there was more then tears to witness that he loved this Princess, and
that the remembrance of her should not end with weeping Affection is not tried
by tears only. To ceace to weep is not to forget. the remembrance is too
short, which lasts no longer them tears.
, for he received the Princesses of Scotland her Sisters with all kinds of
honor, whom she had greatly desired to see. They came at the time of her
Funerals, and finding themselves, as it were unknown, in a country whereas
that which should make them to be known and respected was wanting, they dyed
for grief. All consolations made their greefes comfortles, We must give time
and air to sorrow to euaporate it. In those which are extrem^, it is a part of
the grief to hear of consolations.
and made them desire that the Queen their sister, being in the bosom of the
earth, had them upon hers. But the King to witness that the affection which he
bare unto their Sister was not dead, made them to feel the effects. He married
the one to Francis Duke of Britain, and the other to Sigismond Archduke of
Austria. John Duke of Brittanie sent Ambassadors into Scotland to treat the
marriage of his Son with Isabel daughter to the King of Scotland, at whose
return he enquired what the Princess was? Who made report, That she had
beauty sufficient, a body well disposed to bear children, but she had no
ready speech. To whom he answered, That she was as he demanded, and that he
held a woman learned enough, if she could make a difference betwixt her
husbands doublet and shirt. Annal. of Aquitaine.


It is impossible to find truth in an enemies tongue. The judgment of two
Historians of England.
Honey how sweet soever it be, is sharp and offensive to a mouth vlcered with
passion and slander. Edward Hall, and Grafton, two writers of England, seeing
that their imposture would take no hold upon the manners and actions of this
Princess, have indiscreetly written, that she was unpleasing to her husband.
Buchanan in the tenth book of the History of Scotland, says that two
Historians of England, having as little sufficiency as modesty, have been so
Impudent as not finding any thing wherewith to slander this Princes have said:
Ob oris graueolentiam marito fuisse ingratam.
But there are records yet to be seen both in France and Scotland of the
grief which Charles the seventh, and the Dauphin his Son had for her death,
and Monstrelet speaks as of a Princess who excelled in beauty both of mind
and body. She favored the good wits of her age, Alain Charretier was held at
that time one of the first of the Court, and this Princes did esteem him so
rare, as she honored him with a singular favor, for passing by a Chamber
whereas he slept upon a form she kissed him, and to satisfy the amazement of
the Ladies of her train she added, I kiss not the man, I kiss the mouth from
whence have come so many goodly Discourses. Yet it was one of those mouths
which have learned to talk and not to be silent There is no such itching of
the spirit as a desire to write. It is not cured but by silence. Eusenius
demanded of Apolonius Thianeus, why he did not settle himself to write, for
that said he I have not yet learned to hold my peace.
. This warlike and Marshall season was debarred both of learning and learned
men: For whereas war speaks, learning is silent. The Provinces, troubled by
arms, neither teach nor are taught, and the money which should serve for the
stipend of public Readers is employed for the musters of soldiers The
Emperor Leon, made an answer to one that counseled him to employ his treasure
in the entertainment of soldiers, vtina^ meis temporibus eueniat stipendia
militum in doctores artium absumi. I would it might happen in my time that the
stipends of soldiers might be employed upon Doctors of Arts.
.

The years of Truce being expired, The war renues.
the war was renewed with all violence against the English. The History
speaks nothing of the actions of Lewis until his retreat into Dauphine,
neither are the causes thereof well expressed. She has well observed his
discontents. His Father held him somewhat short, and his actions were not so
temperate, The wretched life of a great King.
but they gave him some cause of suspicion, that he had a desire to be master
The opinions of children should be limited in that sort, as it is not lawful
for them once to think to advance the time, they must suffer heaven and the
order of nature to work.
.

The King being come to an end of his affairs, would recompense the
troublesome nights which he had past A troubled youth requires a quiet age, he
that has lived in the waves, desires to dye in the Port.
, when as melancholy had dried up his bones; that all his demeanes were
engaged; the chief forts of the Realm in the power of the English, that his
table often failed, and that he lived in such frugalitie, as he had no need
of excellent Cooks, such as those of the Romans were, 1446
for they found him not with three or four Dishes like unto Charlemaine, but
with a mess of Pottage made with a rumpe of Mutton, and a couple of Chickens
roasted for his whole service The sobriety of Charlemaine has been commended,
he had but four dishes, he drank but thrice and never betwixt meals, he did
eat some fruits after dinner. Eghinard.
.

The great toils which he had past deserved some good days, but he sought
them not in his family, nor in his children Rest after their travels is just
and lawful, but it is most sweet in his own house. And therefore Hercules was
represented playing with a little Child. The family has cons^iations. Bella
plane accinctis obeunda, sed reuertentibus post laborem, quid honestius quam
vxorium leuamentum? TAC.
. His spirit plunged it self in delights, He gives himself to delights. and
to Ladies.
for the which like unto another Jupiter, he transformed himself into diverse
shapes, unworthy of his Majesty, and although he was impatient of servitude,
as all Kings be, yet he vowed himself to the service of Ladies which followed
the Queeene: Above all their appeared the fair Agnes, beautiful in the flower
of her age, and as lovely as worthily to be beloved The Object of Love is
Beauty, and Beauty is the mark of many desires. It is for blind men to
demand why Kings love fair things.
. She stole the Kings heart, who made her Mistress of the Castle of beauty, as
she was Queen of all the beauties, but beauty was in her a bad Hosts in a
goodly lodging.

The History which should not be curious to lay open matters which are
distasteful, Modesty of the History (...) the Kings lo^es.
has been so careful of the Kings respect, and of the honor of this Lady,
as it has spoken very lightly of that which in those days was known to all,
and published by few, It only says, that for that she appeared always
richly attyred, was one of the Queens maids, and that the King saw her often,
they thought she was wholly the Kings The fair are easily suspected of
incontiuency for that chastity and beauty do not always agree.
. That her eyes were the Altars whereon he made his vows under the vales of
Night and secret.

The Author of the History of S. Dennis says, that by the duty of his charge
(The History of France in those days was written by Monks, as it was at Rome
by the High Priests) By the policy of Rome, the charge of the History, and the
Anualls did belong unto the High Priests. Res omnes singulorum aunorum man*
dabat literis Pont. Max. Cic. 3. de Orat. Penes Pontifices scribendae Historiae
potestas suit. Fla. Vopis.
. He informed himself most curiously of his most inward servants, making some
of them swear whether the common brute were true, from whom he had learned
what he had written. That Charles loved her only for her gallant humor, She
was excellent in many pleasant conceits, but especially in her speech and
incounters, which is one of the gestures of Love.

Strangers, whose testimony in these Occasions is as free from flattery as it
is subject to Hatred, have spoken no more plainly. Oliver de la March says,
that in the year 1444. the Duches of Bourgundy passing into Flanders saw the
French Queen at Chalons. Where they had great and private conference together.
There is some kind of case in the conference of troubles and afflictions.
For they had one grief and one disease, and there were reasons for their
i^alonsies, for that the King had given unto Agnes de Soret, a train
comparable to that of great Princesses, and the Duke was very loving, and had
many base children both sons and daughters But who sees not that flattery
has falsified the Annals of those times? And that the little which they
report is sufficient to assure that Charles and Agnes knew where to meet and
to have news one of another; they were not troubled to write upon the marbles
of Churches and on the Mercuries of the high ways. Pithius is on the right
hand, and Pithias on the left: Princes who think they may say, if it please it
is lawful, have sometime greater want of enterprises then of fortune.

The King, which held a peace miserable which gave not some rest, stole some
hours in his affairs to employ them in his loves and gardeus. He went no
farther to seek for palms and bays, he would not have any but from the hands
of this Lady. She had a daughter: Mont strellet says that she was not auowed,
Charlote Base Daughter to Charles the seventh, and Agnes Sorter, was married to
the Earl of Mauleurier, son to Peter, or John de Brese, Seneshall of
Normandy.
and the Author of Lewis the eleuenths Chronicle, writes that she was married
to the Seneshall of Normandies son.

Young Princes have always discoursers, which speak of every thing, not to
dispute thereof but to tax it, who carrying their thoughts to the future,
never speak of the present, but with distaste and disdain Pleasures are
enemies to liberty: We should be our own if they were not ours.
. These droanes buz continually about the Dauphins ears, and raise up in his
soul unlawful murmurings against the Kings delights. They made him believe
that Charles could neither love himself, nor any other, so long as he loved
fair Agnes. The Dauphin could not dissemble his discontent, The Dauphin enemy
to fair Agnes.
A malicious spirit looscth no occasions to do ill, they seek them.
and this cunning woman, for the safety of her fortune, did all she could to
seize upon the fathers love: And that he should not receive any grace but at
her discretion, least that her disgrace should grow by their accord.

The King by the bad offices of this Lady, who incensed the Fathers wrath
against the Son, and sought occasions to content his dislike, who by the
jealousy which he had conceived, that a son of thirty years of Age did
tread upon his heels, saw him no more, but with an eye troubled with way
wardnes and despite, Princes, who have children grown to age should not use
toward them the austere gravity of fatherly authority, whereby denying them
the honor of their familiarity they deprive themselves of the sweetest
conversation of Princes should breed up their children in a lively and not a
falned and constrainted affection toward them, they may always cause
themselves to be feared, but they were better to purchase love. There are says
Michael de Montagne so many defects in age, so great weakness and it is so
subject to contempt as the best purchase item make is the affection and love of
his own: command and fear are no more his arms.
life: For whom do they keep this love and proof of affection? Fear they
that it will shorten their power? and that God and Nature and the Laws have
not well provided to maintain it? If they have loved them in their infancy,
when as they could not distinguish of the force and respect thereof, why do
they take from them the knowledge when as age gives them the feeling, and
commands them to yield unto this love the tributes of the same love, fear and
obedience? Many young Princes, dying, have left unto their Fathers this
troublesome grief, nay rather this reproach, that they have never let them know
that they loved them amidst these austere courses. The Dauphin, by reason of
his age and his disposition, being tractable and quick, was carried to sudden
alterations, during the which he only considered the quality of the first
Son of France, and not the authority of the King, Although the father stray
in many things from that which he ought, yet the sons ought rather to think of
that which he is bound to do rather then of that the father has not done.
nor the reverence of the Father. R. Gaguin, He strikes her.
writes, that during these impatiencies, he stroke fair Agnes at Chinon.

They add to these discontents an other occasion which made him leave the
Court. Anthony de Chabanes Earl of Dammartin, a man valiant, but not able to
endure, was in the greatest favor in Court, and these favors had taken such
deep roots The favor of Courtiers must take deep rooting before it be
settled. This seed of a Princes favor lies long before it springs. It seems
often to flourish when it has no roof, so as the first paffe of choler or
disgrace over throws it.
as they were able to resist the most violent storms of Envy: Virtue and good
fortune had always held the helm and sails of his navigations. The troops
which he led had been well beaten upon the fronter of Bourgundy. The Dauphin
said unto him by way of jest, yet without bitterness, (for he knew that this
spirit would be easily moved) Every jest that contains truth in it offends,
although it he spoken by a superior. The more men's cour ages are raised up,
the less they endure, and the longer they remember it. (...) facenis irridete
follius quarum apud praepotentes in long^^^ memoria est. Tac. An lib. 5. (...)
wont to scoff at Tiberius, (...)
neither did he dwell upon it, (for jests should end when as they begin to move
laughter) How now Earl of Dammartin, by the faith of my body the Marshall of
Bourgundy has unshod you, he does contrary to other Smithes who shoe horses;
and he vnshooes them. You say well answered the Earl, but I have gotten ten
thousand crowns to make new shoes for my horses.

He was very inward with him, and of that credit, as meaning to be revenged of
any one that had offended him, Revenge against the Seneshall of Normandy.
he imparted his deseine unto him and gave him money to execute it. The
Chronicle Martinienne speaks plainly of this proceeding. A rack which every
Prince should shun if he will not make shipwreck of his reputation. To cause
an enemy to be slain is an act of fear and not of bravery.
It is a proud abstinency to refuse his prince, but a great misery when it is
for the recompense of a service which subjects the consience under the tyranie
of repentance and remorse. James of Chabannes Lord Steward of France blamed his
brother for this match making, by the which he gave his friends cause to repent
themselves for the esteem they had made of him. He that does an act to ruin
his reputation, forces many to repent themselves of the admiration and esteem
they have had of him.


The King was advertised, and not able to dissemble an Act so unworthy the
generosity of the blood of France, Excuse of the Dauphin to accuse Chabannes.
which knows not how to shed blood neither for delight nor revenge, but only
for necessity, Tyrants says Seneca shed blood for pleasure, and Kings for
necessity.
reprehended him bitterly. The Dauphin to excuse himself accused the Earl of
Dammartin saying, that it was by his counsel. The Earl, desuring rather to
wrong his fortune then his honor, did not accord with the Dauphin, but told
the King that therein he had but given ear and obayed. The Dauphin seeing
himself discovered and contradicted, said unto the Earl, reserving my duty
to the King my Lord, you have lied. The reproach of a lie is the most sensible
offense that may be done by words, but it is neither weakness nor baseness to
endure it of his prince, it were indiscretion to be moved therewith. Yet the
Earl of Dammartin sought to revenge those words with this speech. Reserving
the respect I owe unto the King, if you were not the Kings son, I would make
answer with my person against yours, The Dauphin leaves the Court.
but if there be any gentleman of your house that will charge me with this
matter, I will make him say the contrary. The King judging by their
countenances the truth of their intentions, commanded the Dauphin to absent
himself for four Months A Prince which has many Children, great and capable
to command, should not keep them about him: he must give them some object to
consume their ambition: The idleness of Court gives them vicious inclinations
and had deseignes. Wherefore Tiberius absented himself Vrbano ^uxu
laseiuientem, His spirit began to grow disordered by the excess of the City
and idleness which make men humerous.
from Court and to go into Dauphine. The Dauphin going out of the Kings Chamber
bare headed, and his heart full of revenge and collor, spoke these words. By
this head which has no hood I will be revenged on those that have cast me out
of my house. And he kept his word, for he was too true in his threats and
promises of revenge. He did never love that which he had hated, and his
disposition was far from that generous precept, that we must hate to love more
ardently. We must not (...) hate, but we w^st so dispose of hatred, as it may
be converted into more ardent friendship.


Whether the Kings jealousy, or the dislike of fair Agnes, the words of the
Earl of Dammartin, or spies, or flatterers, had caused the absence of Lewis,
the father bare it with much grief and repented himself that he had no more
regarded his own age then the age of his son, and that he had never showed
him his face but fraught with waiwardnes, not opened his heart but full of
wrath and disdain. The youth of Primers has their laws and privileges. The
fathers severity should not seek to break them quite, but to bend them
gently. He that had nothing refused to his own youth, should not deny all
things to his sons.


Time which should have cured this wound, The Kings grief for the Dauphins
absence.
did but augment the grief. He is victorious over foreign enemies, but he
has in his heart civil war, which is more cruel. He has given peace unto
France and his soul is in trouble. It was a great grief not to see himself
assisted and served by a son, so great and so valiant, in those goodly
occasions which he ended so happily, to make all France French, Battle of
Firmigny.
The siege of Rone, and the reduction of all Normandy in one year and six
days, having remained English the space of 30. years; the battle of Firmigny
The Battle of Firmigni the 15. of April 1450. whereas there were slain in
the place and put into 14. pits 4574. english except 12. or 13. that were
prisoners Our Histories report this battle diversely, we must give credit to
that geadly old piece of tapestry which is at Fountainble au whereas the whole
is represented. A thousand fighting defeated 6000. English.
which for the death of 8. or 10. Frenchmen gave the victory against the
English, of whom there were 4574. slain upon the place: The Conquest of all
Guienne: The siege of Chastillion, whereas Talbot The English called John
Talbot their Achilles. He is interred at VVhitechurch to whom they have given
this Epitaph. Orate pro anima praenobilis Domini D. Iohannis Talbot quondam
Comitis Saloprae. D. Talbot. D. Furniual, D. verden, D. Strange, de Blaemere,
at Marescalli Franciae qui ^biit in bello apud Bourdeaur. the 7. of July. 1453.
the Achilles of the English was slain: whose name does yet terrify the
little children in Guienne: The taking of Bourdeaux, with other great and
goodly occasions, which should have been as so many fields of Marathon to
Lewis.

The king seeing that he made no have to return, Complaints against the
Dauphin.
grew easily into a conceit that he had some desseine: he is glad they should
flatter his judgments and allow of his apprehensions. Princes have always
about their ears men-pleasers which have words for all incounters, and know
how to make maskes for all faces, and buskins for all feet. They make
complaints unto him of the rigorous commands of his son, oppressing his
people with all sorts of charges to have wherewith to maintain himself. They
told him that he sent aduertisements to the Dukes of Bourgundy, The Counrty of
Dauphiny did long feel of the discommodities of the Dauphins abode there, for
the King held him short and would not hear of the complaints he made of his
necessities, so as for his entertainment he drew rigorous subsideis out of
Dauphine.
Alencon and Bourbon, and that he received from them; that the clouds were
gathered together for some great storm. The poor father believes all, and
fears all, making proof that there is nothing more insupportable then the
infidelity of his own blood: and as the Lion is never moved more furiously
then at the sight of his own blood, so when this young Prince sees his blood
Conspiracies which pass beyond the respects of nature are cruel. Of man's
blood may be made a most violent poison against man.
diuerted from the veins and spirits which nourish the heart, he enters into
extreme passions of grief, the which he does hold cruel, for that they do
not cause him to dye soon enough. He is advertised that the Dauphin has sent
into Sauoy for men and money. The Earl of Dammartin sent into Sauoy.
He sent the Earl of Damartin to the Duke, to let him understand that he would
hold the succors which he should give him for an injury. The Duke answered The
Annulles of Bourgandy report that King Charles being at Feurs in Forest, Lewis
Duke of Sauoy came to see him, where there were two marriages concluded, the
one of the Dauphin and the Lady (...) of Sauoy, and the other of the Lady (...)
of France the Kings daughter with Ame Prince of Piemont.
, That he did not carry his affections against his duty, and knew how to order
his desires to his power, and that he had no other, but to his majesty's
contentment. The Dauphin had married his daughter, and yet the Kings respect
was greater with the Duke then the consideration of this alliance.

The King sends to the Dauphin to have him come, and the Dauphin promises at a
certain time, but the term being come, the effects of his promise are excuses
and delays. The King sends the Earl of Damartin to seize on his person, and
the Lord Chastillon to command in the Province. The diligence in the execution
of this commandment put the Dauphin in danger to be taken at Oranges, but
having made show to go a hunting he deceived the ambush which the Earl had
laid for him, The Dauphin did rely in two noble men who did counsel and
conduct him. Lewis of Chalons; and John de Lestore a bastard of the house of
Armagnac. He was at Oranges when he was advertised of the Earl of Dammatius
coming.
and escaping their snares he took another way, and with six or seven
gentlemen recovered St. Claud. If he had fallen into his fathers collor, he
would have used him with more rigor then he thought. But he went nor without
making it known that he would one day make the Earl of Dammartin repent it.
The offense which Princes receive are deeply engraven in their memories in
brass, gratia onori vltio in quaestu habetur. The Dauphin had a feeling of
that which the Earl of Dammartia did him, in executing his fathers
comandements and was revenged so soon as he came to the Crown.
And that it was not the respect of his father made him fly from his fathers
wrath, but the very weakness of the Earl of Dammartin, saying, that if he had
had half his forces he would have met him.

Being at S. Claude he (...) unto the King that he desired, with his
permission, The Dauphin retires into Flanders.
and the means that he should give him to make a voyage against the Turk. It
was at such time as all Christendom did mourn for the loss of that City
which had been sometimes the Metropolitan of the world After the example of
Rome, Constantinople was called the head of the world, and new Rome and was
honored with the like dignities and prerogatives lib. 1. de priuil. Vrb. Sid.
App. Salve sceptrerum columen, Regins orientis, orbis Romatui, The Emperor
Constans nephew to Heraclius, resolving to restore the seat of the Empire to
old Rome, said that they must honor the mother more them the daughter. (...).
Zonarasin the life of Constans.
and the common star of the universe: The Queen of all Realms, the fair
daughter of that fair mother Rome, the new Rome, Constantinople, which at the
the time of her desolation was nothing but a great mass of stone made subject
to the Tirant of the East, who having filled it with all impieties and
cruelties has made it the vnexpugnable dongeon of his tirranny and cruelty.
Charles sends word unto his son that if the desire of glory and reputation
carried him to this enterprise, he had lost great and goodly occasions against
the enemies of France, the Dutchies of Guienne and Normandy having been
reduced during his absence: as for the voyage of Turkey he might not undertake
it unless he were assisted by his Nobility, the which he had cause to employ
elsewhere.

And to speak the truth Lewis lost much time which he should have employed to
serve the King and the Realm, or to make new Empires tributary to France. He
should not have been in any place but in armies, and the father should no more
meddle but with the Counsel of affairs, and to command bonfires to be made
for his sons victories: Nature gave unto the one wisdom and experience for
his part, and to the other force and execution. Age should resolve and youth
execute. The one has sorce, the other wisdom. (...). Arist. Polit. 6.


Lewis avoiding one danger fell into another, and as Caesar found himself
among Pirates thinking to fly from Scilla, He trusts his enemy.
so he saw himself at the discretion of the Marshall of Bourgondy, after that
he had escapedthe ambush of the Earl of Dammartin, who loved him not, and had
charged his troops when as they advanced upon the marches of Bourgundy,
whereof the Duke was so jealous as he could not endure that the French should
approach them, knowing well that a Prince loses much of his reputation within,
which does not stir when he is set upon without A Prince which suffers
himself to be molested upon his frontier may also prepare himself to endure
the contempt of his reputation among strangers, and of his commandments and
designs amongst his own subjects. And Caesar commends the Germans, for that
they would not suffer any one to approach near their frontiers.
. A power which is not feared by strangers is not well obeyed by subjects.

But he was in that estate as he thought it safer to trust his enemies then
his Fathers servants: Who conducts him into Fladers
He is found to plant his foot upon the precepts which fortune presents unto
him, and to get out of this Libia, he trusts himself unto Ravens Alexanders
army being in Egypt had Ravens for their guide. Plutarch says, that they
followed the wandering soldiers, and never ceast crying and flying about them
until they had brought them into the right way.
, he was beaten and pursued by the Puttocke, the protection was sacred, and it
is inhumanitie to deliver a suppliant. Wherefore they assured him, and then
they conduct him with safety unto Brussels.

Duke Philip being advertised of his coming, He is honored as the son of
France.
he dislodged from Deuenter, he sent the Earl of Estampes unto Louuaine to
meet him, and soon after the Earl of Charalois to accompany him. The Duches
of Bourgundy, the Countess of Charolois and the Lady of Rauestain received him
at Bruxelles. A day or two after the Duke arriues, and the Dauphin gets down
the stairs The Princes of the blood of France go equal with others how great
and mighty so ever they be. Oliver de la March says, that the Duke of
Bourgundy went to meet the Emperor Frederick when as became to Bezancon and
that seeing the Emperor come a far of, be vnc^uered his bead, and approaching
near he bent himself down upon his saddle powell with all the reverence that
might be. Adding a reason for that he did not light, that he was the third
Son of King John of France
to salute him, for the which the Duke was very sorry, and held this honor
greater then he should receive of a Son of France, the presumptiue heir of
the first crown of the world. And he knew well that they that were issued
from thence did not conceive any thing greater then themselves, and did not
humble themselves to other Princes but by eurtesie.

This Ariuall was in the beginning of the year 1456. He is lodged in Gueneppe.
The Duke lodged him at Gueneppe, near to Bruxells, and sent his Ambassador to
the King to advertise him thereof, and to beseech him to pardon Lewis, The King
made no other answer, but that the Duke should have a care not to feed the
Fox which would devour his hens. Many thought that the Father and Son had
intelligence one with another, and that Charles was glad that Lewis should
discover the desseignes, and observe the actions of the Duke of Bourgundy and
his sons. Whatsoever it were, they kept him carefully, as an hostage of the
quiet and prosperity of their affairs A Prince assures the treaties and
affairs which he has with one that is more mighty, when he can draw into
his power some one of his children or his nearest kinsmen. They be gages and
hostages which they always respect, and fear to loose.
. Time now teaching them that it was more profitable, and more safe to
maintain themselves in the estate wherein peace had settled them, then to seek
the increase thereof, which is not done without pain, nor preserved without
danger.

The King believing that if he were pressed by necessity in a foreign country,
He is disposest of his revenues in Dauphiny?
he would return the sooner to his fathers house, went into Dauphiny to seize
upon the Towns and means wherewith he might be relieved. All men came unto
him, such as had promised to hold good, said, that they would not offend the
Father, to content the Son The people consider but the present, whereunto
they accomodate their thoughts and affections, at the sight of their first
master they forget the new.
. But fearing that the same necessity would bring him back in fury, as he
had gone away in choler, and that he would fortify himself in some place: He
assured himself upon all the passages and frontiers: he did prohibit the
governors to receive him with any strength, and did punish James Caeur, very
severely, who had subjected his heart, purse, and fortune to his wills, and had
made himself too passionate a minister of his youthful affections John de
Seres says that the Signiors of Loudun and S. Pon^ Gentlemen of Viuarez dying
very old, said that they had beard, the one of his Uncle, the other of his
Grandfather, both household servants to the Dauphin, that the true cause for the
which James Coeur was so entreated, was, for that he had been too familiar
with Lewis, as one of the Ministers of his youthful delights. Others have told
me that fair Agnes ^ad ruined him.
.

Charles Earl of Charolois, He agrees not well with the Earl of Charolois.
the Dukes Son, bred up also as Lewis in the French liberty more then in a
Laconicall discipline The laconical discipline says Plut. was hard and
painful, but it taught children to obey, and therefore Sparta is called the
Tamer of men.
, had not always his affections conformable to those of his Father, neither
did he accord well with Lewis: He had been much governed by them of the house
of Croui, the which was one of the most apparent in the country, as drawing
their extraction from the crown of Hungary. Lewis a great Prince to
insinuate, did not cease till he had won, and drawn them to his affections.
The Earl of Charrolois found it, and advertised the Duke his Father, who would
not believe it, and if he did, yet he dissembled the belief, applying
himself to the humors of this Prince, for we must not feed a Lion, or we must
please him It is indiscretion to bandy against a power which we have supported
and raised: Aristophanes brings in Pericles ghost aduising the Athenians not to
feed the Lion or to please him.
.

The Earl of Charrolois from that time frowned at them of Croui, and there
grew so great an Antipathie of wills in the minds of these two Princes, as all
the remainder of their lives they were but fained friends. They of Croui made
an altar of refuge of the Dauphins favor, against the Earl of Charalois, and
thought that, notwithstanding that they were great, both in Alliances and
means, yet they had need of some greater support, as the heavens how excellent
soever they be, have need of the motion of the first mouer, Disposition of the
Earl of Charolois.
besides the Nature and assistance of their own intelligences. Lewis could
counterfeit and dissemble his passions so cunningly, as the Duke (who had an
excellent judgment) could not discover any thing. But the Earl of Charrolois,
being of a harsh disposition, suspicious Suspicion and facillistie is to
believe all things, Suspitionum and credendi temeritas. Ta^. ruins friendships
and the most firmest affections.
and boiling, made them of Croui to feel the indignation which he durst not
euaporate against Lewis who favored them. It burst forth at such time as they
settled the estate of the Earl of Charrolois house. The Duke would have Philip
de Croui, Son to John de Croui, set down for the third Chamberlain, in the
absence of the Lord of Auchy the first, and of the Lord of Formelles the second
Chamberlain. The Earl of Charrolois entered Anthony Raulyn, Lord of Eimeries.
The house was divided, some followed the Fathers will, and others the Sons A
controuer sie between two private Noblemen, is able to diujde the opinione of a
whole Court. That which was betwixt Chimay of Emeries, who should have the
first place in the absence of the L. of Auchy, first Chamberlain to the Duke,
was so affected as the father was for the one and the son for the other.
. The Duke seeing the danger which might grow by this adoration of the sun
rising, made it known that he was both master and father, commanding his Son
to bring him the Roll, and in his presence cast it into the fire, and then
willed him to go forth. Monstrelet says, that the Duke commanded the Earl of
Charolois to cause Croui to martch in his rank. I will not, answered the
Earl, they of Croui shall never govern as they have done, and that the Father
(being offended at an answer so bold and of so little respect) he would have
fallen upon his Son, but not able to get him he commanded him to avoid the
country.

The Son departs full of murmuring and despite, the Father coming to
himself and seeing that his Son returned not, Displeasure of the Duke of
Bourgundy to his Son.
goes to horseback all alone, sad and pensive in a raynie night, rides through
the country, to let the Dauphin know the grief he had, and his Son the
choler wherein disobedience had drawn him. Whatsoever the Son does yet must
the Father always show himself a Father, and matters are very foul and
strange when as he is forced to forget the duty of a Father.
. He lost himself in a wood and lay all night in a Collyars cabin, with
hunger in his belly, and choler in his head. He came the next day to
Seuenbergh, a little town of Brabant, whereas he found one of his huntsmen,
who conducted him to Guinneppe, where as the Dauphin (the cause of all this
trouble) besought him to pardon the Earl of Charrolois. The Duke would have
held the refusal of so just a request cruel, being made, by, and for a person
so near unto him, As it is unpleasing to entreat a stranger, so is it a very
sensible discipleasure to be refused of his own.
, for he could not but love his only Son, in despite of his youthful and
wayward affections. He required no other satisfaction, but that he should
dismiss two servants William Bithe and Guiot of Vsie, who retired themselves
into France.

Soon after the Earl of Charrolois bred another subject of choler in his
fathers heart, Wandering of the Dauphin being a hunting.
he was come from hunting without the Dauphin, and had suffered him to wander
in a wood, thinking that he had been before. When the Duke saw him return
alone, he blamed him sharply, and commanded him to go presently to horseback
to seek the Dauphin. They sought him long by torchlight, and found him on the
way to Bruzells conducted by a Pesant. The Dauphins wandering was in the night
abeue eight leagues from Brussels. The Duke caused him to be sought for with
torches: the next day he gave a crown to the Pesant which had conducted him.
.

The Duke was exceeding glad to see him return, for he knew that he should be
always bound to yield an account of so precious agage, and that he might be
assured whilst he held him he might have what he desired from the King. Birth
of Mary of Bourgundy the 13. of Feb. 1457
God sent the Earl of Charolois a Daughter, for the first fruits of his
marriage; the Duke entreated the Dauphin to christen her Mary. This birth did
moderare the grief which the Lady Isabel of Bourbon her Mother had conceived
six months before, for the death of her Father Charles Duke of Bourbon.
Charles the first Duke of Bourbon dyed in the end of the year 1455. he was
Son to John the first Duke of Bourbon and of Bo^na of Bourgundy, daughter to
Philip the hardy. He married Agnes of Bourgundy Daughter to John Duke of
Bourgundy, and had five sons, and five daughter. His sons were. John the
second Duke of Bourbon. Lewis, who died young, Peter Lord of Beauien, Charles
Cardinal of Bourbon Archbishop of Lion, and Lewis Bishop of Liege. The
Daughters were (...) Princess of Orange; Catherine Duchess of Gueldres,
Margaret, Countess of Bresse and Duchess of Sauoy. Isabel wife to Charles
Duke of Bourgondy and Mary married first to the Duke of Calabria, and
afterward to Gaston de Foix.
. The King was offended for that he did not yield him his Son, and desired
some occasion to let him know his discontent, the which he did not dissemble,
when as the Duke sought to punish the Gantois for a rebellion, commanding him
to suffer them to live in peace, as being under his protection.

The Dauphin thought the time of his return into France long, and had sworn
that he would not make that voyage until his Father were past unto another
world. 1459.
The first year of his abode there, Charlotte of Sauoy, Daughter to the Duke
of Sauoy was brought to Namur to consumate the marriage which had been
concluded five years before. One of the goodliest parts of civil society is
marrage, the first gate to enter into it is love, there is none to go out of it
but that of death. And for that in the marriages of Princes they regard more
the interest of subject and estates, then their own content, It happens that
their loves are not so pure and free.
A marriage which being made unwillingly, was continued without love. When the
Duke of Bourgundy gave the Dauphin his pension of 12000. Birth of the Dauphins
son at Gnenneppe in June 1459.
Crowns, Oliver de la March writes that it was upon condition that he should
marry her which shows that he had no great desire. She was delivered of a
son who was named Ioachim, the Duke of Bourgondy was so glad of this news as
he gave a thousand Lions of gold to Ioselin du Bois which brought it. He was
the Godfather and the Countess of Charrolois the Godmother. The Insant dyed
presently after, and left the father very sorrowful, who being not then in
those distrusts which age brings, desired to see him great, knowing well that
the Children which were borne late are soon Orphlins. The loss of this
infant, which first had given him the name of Father, was so sencible unto him,
as Phillip de Comines says, that he made a vow never to love any other woman
but his own wife, and yet in many parts of his Cronicle we see him among
women, we find some lost, some married, and their husbands from base fortunes
raised to great dignites, with many other actions which argue not a continency
equal to that of Alexander Alexander being persuaded to see Darius daughters
who were fair and young, made answer, I will have a care not to be vanquished
by women seeing that I have vanquished men.
, who being a victor would not see those beauties which might vanquish him: nor
to that of Cyrus They entreated Cyrna to see Panthea, which he refused to do,
and being told that she was very fair, it is, for that reason (said he) I may
not see her for if I do visit her now that I have leisure, she will bind me
another time when I shall be full of affairs.
who would by no means see her, who he thought might bind him to see her more
then once.

The King bare the absence of his son very impatiently, it was a thorn in
his heart which time could not pull out. Death of Ladislaus King of Hungary.
He grew sick, and his sickness was seconded by a great affliction, for the
death of Ladislaus Sorrow creepes suddenly amidst joy, whiles they treat of a
marriage at Toure betwixt the L. Magdalen of France, and King Ladislans, his
Ambassadors receive news of his death, on Christmas (...). 1457.
King of Hungary, to whom he had promised the lady Magdalen his daughter. After
his recovery he thought that all the cause of his ill grew from the Duke, whom
he accused to have drawn away his son, and corrupted his good nature,
resolving to seek a remedy rather with deeds then words.

He levied a great army, and no man knew how he would employ it, the duke
fearing that it was to make some enterprise upon the towns of the river of
Sum, which had been given him by the treaty of Arras, staid not to demand
the reason In occasions which press, we must not loose time with words; men
of courage should not have their hands on their tongues but their tongues in
their hands.
, he arms and goes into Picardy to provide for the safety of his towns, and
to hinder the Kings entry with forces.

The King sendes word to the Duke of Bourgondy, that he was in arms to take
into his protection the goods of the Lord of Rodemart, Princes have always
pretext^ to make war, and he that will break with his friend never fails to
find occasions.
The Duke answered that he was no subject of France, that his lands lay in the
Duchy of Luxembourg, that the King should speak more plainly, and that he
desired to know whether the king had a will to keep the treaty of Arras or
not. The King had a desire to have his son otherwise then by the hazard of
Arms, or breach of a truce, which cost so much blood and drawn so many Princes
into danger. In the assembly of Arras for a peace between King Charles the
seventh, and Philip Duke of Bourgundy were present the Embossadors of the Pope,
of the Council of Basil, of the Emperor, and of all Christian Princes. They
numbered about four thousand horses
He feared to engage hmselfe in new miseries and to bring France to the hazard
of shipwreck which she had escaped. He went to the west of his life, and knew
that the greatest of the Realm had their eyes turned to the East: Age had
coold his military heat, the vigor of his nature was without edge, the blood
of his courage was nothing but slegme: Princes are men, and borne men, wherefore
their best qualities and dispostions are mutable and in the and discover their
inconstancy.
And although that this first force of his spirits was not altogether dejected,
yet was it much altered, France did still produce some fantastic humors
unknown to other Provinces, as Egypt does bring forth Beasts, and Nile Fishes,
which are not found in other countries nor in other Rivers.

The house of Bourgundy had been so beaten with the like storm as it desired
to continue in this calm, Declar^tion of the house of Bourgundy.
the covetousness of great men was glutted with the calamities of innocents, The
people are for the most part innocent of the causes of war, and they suffer
all the calamities. The couet^usnes of Soldiers is never satisfied, but with
the miseries of innocents. Calamitatibus insontium expletur auari^a. Tac. lib.
2.
the most greedy of troubles were forced to commend rest. It would have seemed
hard unto the subjects to see themselves overwhelmed so suddenly with waves. It
is always dangerous to take from the people the ease and commodities wherein
they live. The judgment of Tiberius was long in suspense before he could
resolve to draw the people from the sweetness of peace to the discommodities of
war. Tac. says, Populum per tot annos moliter habitum non audebit ad
durio^avertere.
. The Duke would not leave a doubtful peace with his subjects, he desired to
be satisfied of the Kings intention, saying, that if they forced him to raise
an army, they should bury him in his arms, that he had no will unto it
unless he were forced, that the Trumper should make no noise, if violence were
not offered, and that this Echo should remain quiet in the ease of
solitarines, but if they moved him he would not be silent until that they who
had caused him to speak did first hold their peace.

These practices past away, and the King was glad that they raised no storms,
not holding it reasonable to resolve to war more by the occasion which he
had, then by the inconveniences which he did foresee All occasion to make war
should not be rashly nor ambitiously sought for, what show of profit soever
they had. It is better to have a care to keep subjects in peace, is people
towns, and to increase the commerce, so discipline soldiers and together
tre^s^re together least he be surprised in necessity.
: besides being now oppressed, not with years, but with cares, which seems to
be inseparable accidents of the life of great men, and the excess of those
pleasures which Nature had made short, for that they are pernicious, he
suffered himself to be carried away with melancholy and waywardnes, two
rocks against which the vessel suffered shipwreck, He grew wayward after
the condemnation of John Duke of Alencon to lose his head the tenth of October
1458. After which, melancholy and heaviness had seized on him, he changed the
troubles of his life into a perpetual prison at Loches, and gave his goods to
his wife and children John D. of Alencon was condemned for that he would have
brought the English into France. The clear sighted said, that his misfortune
grew rather from Iealausie, or from the love which he ^are unto the Dauphin who
governed him by his counsels.
.

The Dauphin being well advertised of all that passed at Court, grieved at the
misfortunes of his godfather whom he loved. The desire to see a change did much
disquiet him. Claude of Seyssel Bishop of Marceilles under the reign of Lewis
the twelfth says, that the Dauphin and they that followed him, desired nothing
more then his Fathers death: some enquired by Astrology, some by Negromancie.
He had many politic inventions to augment his Fathers cares and caused his
suspicion to turn into fears Great courage should not easily receive
suspicions, and Seneca says that it is the act of a timorous soul to turn
suspicion into fear.
. He knew that the Earl of Dammartin was as it were the Kings King, and he
found means to bring him into jealousy with the King, whose brain being
weak and very moist, did easily receive such impressions In matters of state
Princes enter easily into icalousies of their most trusty servants, and
suspicion is a bone which age of it self does willingly gnaw upon.
, He wrote a letter unto a Lady whom the King loved and sent it unto her by a
Franciscane Friar which he wittingly delivered to the Earl of Main, enemy
to Dammartin, who showed it to the King The chief points of this letter
reported by the Chronicle Marti^ienna are, I have received letters from the
Earl of Dammartin, whom I make show to hate. I pray you tell him that he
serve me still well, as he has always done, I will think of those matters
whereof he did write unto me, and he shall very shortly receive news from me.
: It was full of terms of so great trust in the Earl of Dammartin, as the
King not considering from whom it came, nor by whom it was presented, commanded
the Earl of Dammartin to retire himself, then being informed by the Dauphins
secretaries that this Prince had no greater enemy, and that he had not written
unto him, he did easily believe that it was an act of his bad Son who had so
much troubled him, as it was the ordinary argument of his complaints. Some few
days before his death he recalled him: apprehension bred no less amazement
in him, then his life gave him affliction.

The advice which a Captain gave him that he could not live long, K. Charles
resolves to dye of hunger.
and that there was a conspiracy plotted against his life, did so distemper
and torment him, as he could not live without fear and trembling There is no
torment so much to be feared as fear, and what auailes it to fear that which
is inevitable? to fear death is to call it, for the fear of death is a
perpetual death.
. And imagining that they meant to poison him, he deprived himself of eating,
and brought himself to so great a weakness, as when they would have caused him
to take any thing to restore him, the passages were so shrunk, as that which
he would have done willingly happened unto him by force and against his will,
and it may be said that he died of hunger The Earl of Dammartin who was
retired to his house at St. Forgeau came to see the King the day before his
death, persuading him to take something, who told him that he would take a
Cullis from his hand, if he saw it made, the which he presented unto him, but
he could not swallow any thing, the conduits were so stopped.
, the 21. of July. 1461.

Dying he recommended to the Earl of Dammartin his younger Son, whom he
called the little Lord, to whom he desired to leave the Crown, knowing the
spirit of Lewis to be terrible and an implacable enemy to his best servants.
God would not suffer him to trouble the Order of Nature, to revenge his private
affections, nor to run the fortune of Alphonso Alphonso believing by the
rules of his Astrology that the youger of his sons would be the more capable
to reign, named him his successor, whercat the elder was soineensed as be
caused the Father to dye in prison, and slew his Brother.
King of Castill, who having preferred the younger before the elder, forced him
to be a parricide and a fratricide.

Charles the seventh was the restorer of France, France has given him the
title of Victorious.
of a Town of Bourges he made a whole Realm, he expeld the English, who of
the whole piece, which they held, kept nothing but Callice. He had the honor to
have pacified that great and deadly schism, against the which were held the
Counsels of Constance and Basil. A time of such strange and terrible confusion
as no man could say that Rome was where the Pope remained, as they were wont to
say that whereas the Emperor was, there was Rome, During the Schism of three
Antipopes they might say Imperiumque suis a sedibus errat. Claud. But they
could not say that the authority of the church was whereas the Pope remained,
for there was a Scisme: as they were wont to say that where the Emperor was
there was Rome, (...). Herod. lib. 1.
for there was a Pope in Spain, one in France, and two in Italy. He ordained,
by the advice of the Prelates of France, and caused to be confirmed and past
at the council of Basil, the pragmaticke sanction The orders which the
council of Basil made for the government and discipline of the Church were
not generally received, Germany and Italy would none of them. King Charles
caused as assembly to be made at Burges, by the advice whereof they were
observed and published in Parliament the seventh of July 1438 under the name of
the Pragmatick Sanction.
.

With the like zeal as he labored for the peace of the Church, he desired to
revenge the injury which it had received in Asia and Europe by the arms of
Amurath and Mahomet. Pope Nicholas, and Pius the second, exhorted this Prince,
as Elezeus did Ioas, to shoot his arrows against the East, but he was so
troubled for his just defense against his neighbors, as he had no means to
think thereon. Among the observations which they give for the leuies of
Soldiers, they have respect to the air and the place; hot countries produce
men of more understanding then courage, and could do the contrary. A good rule
for them that have diverse provinces to choose, but to make it general they
must take them where they find them.
They also give unto this Prince the honor to have set an order for his
troops, for seeing that the number of his soldiers were so diminished, as his
could not equal those of his enemies, he made leuies throughout all his
villages, taking one laboring man out of threescore, who were bound to arm
and pay him, and he was freed from taxes. Necessity, in whose school he had
learned great experience, dispenst with him for the observations which are made
in the choice of soldiers. These were called Frank Archers, who being well
led did great services, being able to endure all pain, as being bred up in
discommodities and wants, without cunning or malice. They began their
profession at the siege of Vernon. The defects which are observed in the life
of this Prince, as the griefs of Kings The reigns of Princes do not continue
and end always as they have begdnne, The first five years of Neroes reign
were just, Constant was good ten years, cruel twelve, and prodigal ten.
, do not always encounter ends like unto their beginnings. His loves and his
diuersions could not hinder it, but that France has given him the well
deserved title of Victorious.

The end of the first Book.
THE CONTENTS OF the Second BOOK.
1 KIng Lewis his going into France, His entry and Coronation at Rheims. 2 The
Duke of Bourgundy does him homage, and follows him at his entry into Paris:
magnificence of the Parisians upon this occasion. 3 Estate of the Kings
affairs with Pope Pius the second. Reuocation of the Pragmatique Sanction. 4
Discontent of the Noblemen of the Realm upon the Kings first actions. An
observation of his Humors. 5 His voyage and designs in Brittanny. 6 Oppression
of the people, by new inventions of Subsedies. 7 Strange and furious
reuolutions in England betwixt the houses of Lancaster and York. 8 Edward the
fourth expels Henry the sixth King of England. 9 He seeks to marry the Queen
of France her Sister, and takes a widow in England. 10 The King goes to
Bourdeaux and there treates a marriage betwixt his Sister, and the Earl of
Foix. 11 Troubles between the Crowns of Castill and Arragon. The Earldom of
Rousilion engaged to the King. 12 The Kings of Castille and Arragon refer
their differences to the King. 13 Enteruiew of the Kings of France and Castille
upon the River of Vidaazo. 14 The King returns to Paris, redeemes the Towns
upon the River of Sum and visits the Frontiers. 15 The Duke of Bourgundy
comes to the King at Lisle, to demand his advise touching a voyage which he
pretended to make against the Turk. 16 Ariuall of Lewis Duke of Sauoy at
Paris. 17 The King declares his pretentions upon the sovereign rights of
Brittany. 18 The Earl of Charrolois stays the Bastard of Rupembr^ at the
Haage. 19 Ambassadors from the King to the Duke of Bourgundy upon diverse
complaints. 20 The Duke of Bourbon first author of the league of the common
weal. Death of Charles Duke of Orleans. 21 Charles Duke of Berry, the Kings
brother, retires into Brittany. 22 His Letters to the Duke of Bourgundy, and
his declaration upon the taking of Arms. 23 Death of Pope Pius the second, to
whom succeeded Paul the second, a Venetian.
THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI.
THE SECOND BOOK.
A Death which brings Scepters and Crowns, 1461
does not always meet with sorrow and tears. When there is a question of the
succession of the Realm, An heirs tears are sone dried up.
a desire to reign does presently dry up the tears which the law of Nature
draws from the eyes There is no water whose spring is sooner dried up, then
that which flows from a profitable mourning.
. Lewis longed too much to be at home, to be grieved when as they brought him
news that Charles the seventh had quit him the lodging. He had already spent
two third parts of his age in obeying, he held the rest very short to command
and to end at; in great enterprises worthy of his quality Life is very short
for great entrriprises; and inconstancy makes it much shorter.
. He entertained the Iuie of his hopes in the ruins of this old building: he
did not hope for any light but by the eclipse of this Sun, and his vows
were no let, that his Father was not already among the God The Romans held
their Fathers dead in the number of the Gods, and their Images were reverenced
as persons deysied. Wherefore among the predictions which Antonin had of his
adoption and successim to the Empire, they note that, In somrio saepe monitus
suit penatibus suis Adriani simulacrum inserere. Capitol. He was often
admonished in his sleep that he should place Adrians Image among his
boushould Gods.
.

And what can a Kings eldest Son desire but to reign? every object less the^
a crown is unworthy of his birth, Lewis comes into France.
but the wishes are unnatural and monstrous upon unjust effects. To desire for
a crowns cause the death of him of whom he holds his life, is ingratitude and
impiety. The same day that Charles dyed, Lewis was advertised of his death They
that have written that these news were sent by Charles Duke of Aniou, Father
in law to Charles the seventh, are mistaken, both in the name and matter, for
Lewis Duke of Anion lived since the year 1417.
. He went presently to horse to go into France, fearing least Charles his
brother should make his profit of his absence. The Duke of Bourgundy and the
Earl of Chartolis accompany him with four thousand horse, chosen out of the
flower of all the forces of their Estates and the Princes their friends. He
makes his entry into Rheims.
He entered into Rheims the fourteeene of August, The King arrived at Rheims
the 14. August, and caused himself to be anointed the next day. A remarkable
diligence. They cannot go too speedily to so great a Feast. The Duke of
Bourgundy being followed by the Earl of Charolois, the Earl of Neuers, the
Earl of Estampes, the Duke of Cleues, the Earl of St. Pol, and many other
Noblemen, went out of Rheimes to the Abbcy of Saint Thierry to meet the King.
being attired in white and crimsin damask, upon a white courser caparonessed
with the arms of France. The next day he was anointed and crowned. The peers
of the Church were there in person. The Duke of Burgundy Deane of the peers.
The Duke of Burbon held the place of the Duke of Normandy. The Earl of
Angolesme for the Duke of Guienne. The Earl of Eu for the Earl of Tholousa.
The Earl of Neuers for the Earl of Flaunders, and the Earl of Vandosme for
the Earl of Champagne. The King is anoin^ed and Crowned.


The ceremony of his coronation was beautified with an other which they found
very new and strange. The King is anointed and Crowned.
The King drawing his sword presented it to the Duke of Bourgundy and intreates
him to make him Knight. He gave this honor of Knighthood to an hundred and
seauenteene Gentlemen, the first were the Lord of Beauieu, James of Burbon, the
Earl of Geneua, the Earl of Pontieu, the Earl of Witembergh, John of
Luxembergh, and to the Marquis of Saluces Son. From the Coronation they went
to the Royal feast, whereas the twelve peers were set on either side the
King. At the end the Duke of Bourgundy kneeled down, entreating the King to
forget the injuries of such as had offended him during his Fathers reign. This
request is reported by Monstrelet in these terms. When the tables were taken
away, the noble duke of Burgundy, using his accustomed gentleness, in the
nobillity of his courage, kneeled down before the King, and entreated him for
the honor, passion and death of our Savior, that he would pardon all those
which he held suspect to have set discord betwixt his father and him, which
request he granted reserving seven persons
He answered there are seven which I cannot pardon. Revenge had mounted with
him to the Royal throne, he had not trod it under foot, he carried it in his
head, it was in his mind, like unto those stars that were fixed about the
pole. He finds it not so sweet to recompense the good as to revenge the bad.
The King cannot forget the injuries which they had done unto the Dauphin. A
royalty should make me^ forget forepassed injuries. The Emperor Adrian being
come to the Empire said unto his enemy which was before him. Euasisti, thou
have escaped. Quos in vita priuata ^n^micos habuit, Imperator neglexit AE.
Spart. And Lewis the twelfth said generously, it is not fit that a King of
France should revenge the injuries done to a duke of Orleans
.

Two days after the ceremony of the Coronation the Duke did him homage for his
countries which held of the crown of France, and offered him others which he
held in Souerainty. The Duke of Burgundy was received to fealty and homage by
King Lewis the eleventh and to be Peer and Deane of the Peers of France, by
reason of the D^^^ie of Burgundy the 17. of August. 1461.
From Rheims the King went to Meaux, then to Saint Dennys, and made his entry
into Paris, where they did number twelve thousand horse which followed him.

All the pomp and magnifficence which was made at this entry did represent
as well the simplicity and ignorance of those times, as the greatness and State
of Paris. Good wits in such occasions do not represent all things so plainly
to the eye, as there does not remain some thing wherewith to content
curiosity, by the pain it has to seek, and the pleasure to find and to
divine at the intelligence of their inventions. Brokers were then more
necessary then paynters, for they did only set persons of diverse ages and sexes
for all kinds of histories. A Virgin was sufficient to represent the City of
Paris, as we find not any more in books, nor in ancient medalls for Rome,
nor Athens; and there were five to signify Paris, every one carrying a letter
of it name. They were conducted on horseback by a Herald, toward Saint Ladros
Church, and there presented unto the King. The Cronicle says, that they had
all personages fitted to the signification of five letters making Paris, and
that all spoke unto the King as they were appointed.

The Frontispice of S. Denis gate was beautified with a great ship in the which
were the three Estates in three Persons which made the Prosopopeia, Ridiculous
representations.
and Iustce sat in the prow who spoke unto the King. On the top of the Mast
there was a Lilly, out of the which came a King conducted by two Angels. At
the fountain du Ponceau, they gave wine and Ippocras to them that past. The
Chronicle uses thee words in this place. A little within the Town at
Fo^taine du Ponceau were wild men and women which did fight and made many
countenances; and there were also three fair^ maidens representing mermaides
naked: where they might see the fair white pap separated round and hard, which
was a pleasant sight* and they had pretty speech^^ and near unto them were
certain f^ll Instruments, which made great melody. And to refresh such as
entered into the said Town there were diverse pipes in the said Fountain casting
mike, wine and lippocras, whereof every man drank that would: And beneath the
said Fountain right against the Trinity there was a passion by men without
speech, Christ being hanged on the Cross and the two thieves on the right and
left hand.
There were also three Virgins like Mermaides all naked, and at the Trinity was
the passion of Jesus Christ represented by a living man, being tied unto a
Cross betwixt two thieves. At S. Innocents Fountain there was a Hind put
forth, being followed by a great cry of Hounds and Huntsmen. At the Burchery
was the Bastille of Diepe, as the most glorious trophee of this Princes youth.
Passing over the Changers Bridge, which was covered over head, they let fly
two hundred dozen of small Birds.

The King went to pray in our Ladies Church, he supt and lodged in the Palace,
and the next day he went to the Tournelles in St. Anthonies street, where he
made a new world, changing his chief Officers, The Duke of Bourgondy and the
Earl of Charolois made a great part of the pomp, they and their trains being
so ritchly appointed, as there were not any more stately. The King made show of
great love both to the father and son, but there was so great a diversity of
manners and humors betwixt Lewis and Charles, as this harmony lasted not long.
En^y and Jealousy which trouble great men will not suffer the one to rejoice
at another good. Themi^tocles not able to endure Cymons prosperity dyed
through Impatiencie.
Into their most sincerest affections, Jealousy, which is the poison of
friendship, did always creep: There was nothing pure nor perfect, the
prosperity of the one was a troublesome cross unto the other.

The King came unto the Crown like a new heir to his fathers possessions,
Lewis seeks for the rights of the Crown.
who does not so much affect his kinsmen and tutors, as he desires to see his
Registers, examine his accounts, and know if he does enjoy all the rights of
his successions: from these first words they judge what his designs and
actions would be. Not only by the first actions, but by the first words of a
Prince coming to the C^owne they judge of the future: so the word which
Seuer^s spa^e, L^boremas, and that of Pertinax, militem^s, were taken for
signs of war or peace in the Empire. AElms Spart.


The Pomp and magnificence of this public joy being ended the Duke of
Bourgondy and the Earl of Charolois took their leaves of the king to return.
The Duke went into Flanders and the Earl of Charolois to Diion, Death of Mary
of Aniou Queen of France.
and then to St. Claude, the King to Ambois to see the Queen his mother, whose
dowry he assigned upon the County to Xaintonge and the Town of Rochell: she
did not long enjoy this assignation, passing from this life unto a better. Her
death aflicted them, who knowing that this King did all of his own head, and
that he had no other Law then his will, desired her a longer life, for her
presence had been a causey to stop these torrents. The great name of mother
well bred and of understanding is a great restraint unto a Prince: Tacitus
says that after that Nero had lost his mother he fell to all dissolutions and
excess. Qua^ mal^ co^rcit as qualiscunque matris reuerentia tardauerat.
Se^anus did also keep Tiberius in awe and the same author says, that he gave
himself to wicked and unseemly things, postquam remoto pudore, et metu suo
tantum ingenio vtebatur, when as having banished shame and fear, he followed
his own wit.
It falls out ill with a Prince who sees nothing betwixt God and himself
whereof the respect should restrain him, and be a bridle unto him. She had
endured much before her death. The Chronicle of Lewis the eleventh commends her
patience under her husbands reign and humors, but she could not dissemble the
discontent which she received at the pleasure of her Augustus They demanded of
Liuia, Augustus wife, how she had done to win and enjoy Augustus. To whom she
answered, in doing willingly whatsoever pleased him, and dissembling the
plesures which he took in secret Dion.
As a good constitution of the body does easily endure both heat and cold, so
the force and vigor of the mind does without any great pain resist these
crosses and discontents, which are thorns amidst the roses of marriage. This
passion seazing upon a weak spirit and without defense, transports it to
dislikes and extreme hatred.

About the end of the year he went to Tours, the Earl of Charolois after his
return from pilgrimage came thither to him; where after they had spent some
days in the pleasure of hunting, he had the Commission of Lieftenant General
in Normandy with 36000. Crowns for his entertainment. This gift was without
asking. The benefits of Princes are sweeter offered then granted. He had but one
third part paid, which defect made him to fail in his affection, and
transported him to other thoughts. Men are more discontented to see themselves
frustrated of things promised then of those which are but hoped for. In the
one there is but mis^ap, and they complain only of fortune: In the other
contempt and they challenge him that has broken his promise.
He went to Rouen to take possession of his government, It was at Tours that
he began to frame his intelligences with the Duke of Brittanny. These two
Princes were young, both discontented, and they which know one another, salute a
far off. The Earl of Charolois did confer secretly with Romille
Vicechancellor and Ambassador of Brittany, to whom he gave the seal of
alliance wherewith he shall be soon reprocht.

Lewis entered into France a friend to all his neighbors. There was not any
but Pope Pius 2 Pius 2. called a Councile at Manto^a in the year 1459. to
consult of the means to resist Mohomet 2. who had made great ruins in
Hungary, Albania, and Constantinople.
who let him know that he could not be so, Pius 2. presses the abolition of
the Pragmatike Sanction.
if the pragmatike Sanction were observed. To understand how France has lost
that which she had preserved so dearly, we must take the discourse somewhat
higher. The Pope had called an Eugenius the 4. in the year 1443. gave the
Inuestitiure of the Realm of Naples to Alphonso King of Aragon, with the two
Sicities Bartho, Flaccius in the life of Alphonse the 5. Pins. 2. gave the
inuestiture of the Crown of Naples to Ferdinand bastard to Alphonso King of
Arragon, Alexander 6. confirmed it to Alphonso 2. who left it to Ferdinand of
Aragon, and he held it when as Charles the eight conquered the Realm.
an assembly of Princes at Mantoua, to consult of the means to make war
against the Turk, land to prevent the great deseignes which he had against
Christendom. King Charles the seventh sent his Ambassadors thither, Prelates,
Knights, and Doctors, to let them understand his intentions for the general
good of the Church. They made a private request unto the Pope, that if he
would be pleased to give the inuestiture of the Realms of Naples and Sicile to
King Rene, who had been wrongfully dispossessed against the hereditary rightes
of the house of Aniou, the which the King desired the more earnestly, for that
besides the affection of blood which bound him to love his kinsman and brother
in Law, he saw that the general cause of Christendom would be much fortefied
against the common enemy, for the Duke of Calabria (the son of Run) entering
into the inheritance of his predecessors propounded to advance his arms, and
to expel the Ottomans out of the Empire of Constantinople, when as they
thought that the Christian Religion was at her period, and could go no farther.
Albunasat said that the Christian Relligion should last unto the year, 1460.
Abraham the Jew said that in the year, 1464. the Jewish religion should be
in her glory and liberity, when as it was most afflicted.
An enterprise whereof they had great hope, as well for the generosity of this
Princes courage, as for that he was in an age fit and capable of such actions
whereby the holy Sea might reap great profit, the possessions depending of his
patrimony being by this meanesrestored unto him.

The Pope upon this proposition This Act was imparted unto me by Gaspar Dauvet
Siegneur of Marets Stuard of the kings house. The chief clauses are reported
here in the margent Post qua^ plurimade laudibus Francorum. S. D. N. praeclare
dixerat, adiecit etiam loqui in fanorem partis aduersae antedicti. D. Regis
Rentai, de gra^di exaltatione ille gitime natorum aliqua in ijs interserendo
quae potius tacenda fuisse videntur.
having made a long discourse in commendation of the French, The Popes
affection to the house of Arragon
he added many things touching bastards, favoring covertly those which usurped
the rights of the house of Aniou, and then falling upon the decrees of the
councile of Basil and of the Pragimatike sanction, he said, that it was a spot
which did blemish the beauty of the face of France, and under pretext whereof
the Authority of the Apostolik Sea was disgraced, the forces of Christian
Relligion were weakened, the unity and liberty of the Church violated and
trodden down, and therefore he was forced to speak, Popes threat against
France.
least his silence should be reputed a conniuence or carelessness, and that
the wound which might be cured grew not incurable, and he should be forced to
abstain from all intelligence and communication with the French, alleging
this passage of Scripture. Alleging, that it is written in the old law: Surper
omnem anima^ quae mortua est non ingredietur Pontifex.
The high Priest shall not see a dead soul, and shall not be whereas there is
sin, or a perseverance or obstinacy in sin.

At the same time the Pope made a Bull by the which he declared all
appellations to the Councile an execrable abuse, and never before heard of, His
Bull against appellations to a council.
This constitution begins thus Execrabilis and pristinis temporibus (...)
tempes^ate nostra inoleuit abusus, vt a Romano Pontifice Jesus Christi Vicario,
cui dictum est in persona B. Petri. Pasee ones ^eas, etc. and quodcunque
nonnulli spiritu^ rebellioni^ imbuti non sanioris c^piditate iudic^i sed
commissi enatione pece^t^ ad futurum Concilium prouocare presum^^^.
invented by spirits of rebellion, not for any desire of abetter judgment, but
to escape for sins committed, being a ridiculous thing Quis il Iud ridiculum
indicauerit quod^d concilium apell^tur quod (...) est neque seiture quae
futurum fit? Pius II. Constable. execrabilis.
to frame an appellation to a Concile which was not yet assembled, neither knew
they when it would be, and that by this abuse the excess remained unpunished,
rebellion against the first Sea was supported and all Ecclesiastical
discipline in confusion, wherefore by the advice of the Cardinals and
Prelates, which were then at Mantoua, he did forbid such appellations, as
erronius, detestable and pestilent, and charged them with censures which
received the Acts, or did favor them.

The Kings Ambassadors took these words for cracks of thunder and infalliable
threats of excommunication, and having reported them unto King Charles the
seventh, his council did believe that he had resolved to curse both the King
and his realm, and all those that should cause the decrees of the Councile of
Basil to be observed, wherefore it was concluded that John Dauvet his
Attorney general in the Court of Parliament, should protest against his
threats, to avoid the scandales which the Church and Christendom might
receive, reserving in all things a respect unto the holy Sea, and the obedience
which is due unto the Pope, conformable to the holy decrees.

That the Pope should be entreated Summis desiderus op^at regia Maiestas vt
idem, S. D. N. cu^ ^acris generalibus concil^^^ pace^ foneat and suis
te^poribus Ecclesia^ Dei salubri^er regere and dirigere curet, sicuti sancti
sui pre decestores facere studueru^t, and pace^ et vnirate^ ^nimo da^ seruare
querat.
and exhorted to consider duly of the importance of this resolution, before he
did proceed to cut off such a member from the body of Christendom, and how
much it did import him to keep peace with the Councils, and not to suffer the
unity of the Church to be violated at such a time when as all the forces of the
infidells were banded and united against her concord. Turks make their profit
of the divisions of Christendom*


That as the King Ipse enim D. N. Re^ qui semper pa^is vniuersae Ecclesiae
desideratissmus est. sicut magnis laboribus et sumptibus pa^^m et vnitatem
inter sacra Concilia and ^el. rec. D. Papam Eugeniu^ ac consequen^er D.
Nicolau^ successore^ eius prosecutus est vt illi in sede Apostolica pacifici
manner e^t sic nunc vehemeter cupit vt sacti simus. D. N. modernus succede^s
praefatis Pontificibus pace^ manu te^ere and conseru^re laborer*
had labored, more then all Christan Princes, with much pain and great
expense, to mayntaine a peace, and unity betwixt the councils and Popes,
Eugenius and Nicholas, to the end they might remain quiet in their seats. In
like manner he desired that the Pope should confirm this peace and good
union, causing those lets to cease which were against the Cannons of the
Pragmatike Sanction, made by a general consent, and to consider that such lets
came only from those that affected more their own private commodities, then
the health of souls, and could not endure that the Popes should march with the
Councils in the unity of Spirit, as they had in former times done, when as
their temporal care was not so great as it is now, and that they did zealously
seek the Kingdom of God before all things. To^lat differe^tias quae aduersus
Ca^ones universally co^sensu editos per non nulloru^ affectus quae r^^tiu^ plus
priuata commoda quam salutem animarum suscitantur, impediuntque ne summi
Pontifices cum generalibus co^ciliis in vnitate spiritus ambulent, eorumque
decreta seruent, sequantur ac predicent sicut olim profit ha^tur ac
promptissime facere solebant, dum non erat tanta commodorum temporal um
sollici^^do and ante omnia (...) Dei ^ttentius quae rebatur.


That the King desired the Pope would call a Council in a place of safty and
liberty, whereas the Pre^ats of the Church, and learned men fearing God, Money
levied under the pretere of war and ill employed*
having charge to be there, might speak their opinions brotherly and
charitably in tranquillity of mind, upon the occasions which should be
presented, such assemblies being necessary to provide for means to resist the
desseins of the enemies and persecutors of Christian Religion. For although
that under this pretext they had levied great sums of money after diverse
manners; Diuersae pecuniarum summae modis varus huins rei pretexta hacternus
petitae et collatae suat
yet Christendom had received no ease. Besides the ten years in the which
the Council of Constans had or dained that they should hold a council were
expired.

That the King propounded to submit himself to all that should be determined
and or dayned by the council, to the end that so good an order might be settled
in the Church, as God might be better served and christian people more
edified; And to the end the council might be in all liberty, it was necessary
to choose a place of easy access for all that would come. That it was not
credible (as many have pretended) that the Pope was resolved to have it held in
the church of St. John Lateran Vt aut em prefatum concilium rite celebrari
possit necessarium est ipsum in tali loco constitui vt omibus pateat plena
libertas. Nec creden^um est in veritate subsistere quod no^nulli ferunt S. D.
N. velle in Laterano universal concilium celebrare, cum locus ille fere
omnibus nationibus Christianorum accessu difficilis sit and frequenter pestibus
subditus, Stante que contradictione quam summus Pontifex aduersus canones
conciliorum agere videtur, non il^ie esset plena deliberandi libertas, attenta
etiam certa Liga quae aduersus Illustrissimum D. Re^atum Regnum Siciliae and
suos here des and successor es facta (...) quam and ipse S. D. N. vt dici^ur
aperte souer and suttine^ and Ligaeinsdem caput and principalis hetorie
asseritur.
seeing that the city of Rome was of hard access, in a manner, for all the
nations of christendom, The Pope a party.
and many times subject to great plagues, besides that, the chief question
being touching the contradiction which was made to the Cannons of counsels,
their opinions could not be free; and the King was well advertised of the
league which was made against Rene King of Siciie and his children, whreof they
made the Pope the head.

That when as a place of liberty and safety should be chosen in some other
Province, the Pope, if he thought good, might transport himself thither, with
less pain then he should receive if he continued his design to go in person
into the East for the good of Christendom, or elce he might send his Legates
as his predecessors had formerly done. That the last Counsels having been held
in the towns of Italy and Germany, Many general Councels have been held in
France and we find in the History of the Church the Council of Lion 2. Orleans
4. and 5. Tours, Paris, Auuergne.
reason would that now it should be held in France, as Pope Nicholas the fifth
had promised, and therefore the King offered to provide amply for all that
should be necessary.

That his Majesty could not imagine that the Pope by his new Bull against
appellations to the Council had any thought to interdict the use in such sort,
as in no case, no not when there was question to maintain the Orthodoxall
faith, or for the extirpation of Schism, or the reformation of the universal
Church, in the head and members, for the wrongs which Popes might do unto
Princes and there estates, it might not be lawful to fly unto this remedy
Neque etiam existimandum est ^undem S N D. per littera^ quas Mantuae publicasse
fertur que incipiunt Execrabilis et Inauditus etc. voluisse prohibete vt in
nullo casu five tang at conseruationem Orthodoxae fidei five extirpationem
Scismatis, five vniuersalem reformationem Ecclesiae in capite et in membris
super grauaminibus quae per aliquem summorum Pontificum inferri contingeret
Principibus liciat quouismodo habere recursum ad iudicium plenarii concilii;
cum sub generali prohibitione non veneant ea quae speciali expressione
indigerent.
, seeing that under general prohibitions they could not comprehend matters
which required a more special and particular expression, and principally those
which did regard the offenses of Religion and the unity of the Church, and
which favored Scismes and troubled the universal estate of the Church.

Wherefore if the Pope attempted any thing against the observation of the holy
decrees of the pragmatick Sanction, the King meant to fly to a Council,
Protestation of the King to fly unto a Council.
vbi vero idem D.N.S. cui potestas data est in aedificationem non in
destructionem eam conuertere vellet contra ipsum D.N. Regem aut viros
ecclesiasticos vel etiam seculares ipsius dominii constitutos and sibi subditos
and adhaerentes propter obseruationem Cannonum grauare et molestare. Protestor
ego Johannes Dauuet Procurator Regius generalis and in part specialis nomine
antedicto and per notarios subscriptis de talium sententiarum ac censurarum
nullitate iuxta canonicas Sanctiones. etc.
and until it had determined thereof, he protested of the nulity of all
censures, according to the form of the Canonical Sanctions, the which in many
cases declared the sentences and censures of Judges and Pastors void, yet
submitting themselves to the judgment of the universal Church.

That if the Pope should refuse, and would defer the calling of the Council,
the King declared that he would exhort all Christian Princes, to labor jointly
for this Convocation, yet hoping that the Pope having duly considered of this
just and necessary instance, would not put him to that pain.

To make this protestation more sollemne, and to show that the King did affect
it, France the Sanctuary of Popes
and that the Pope should have a care not to incense a realm which had always
been the sanctuary and refuge of Popes, Gregory 3. deman^ed succors of Charles
Martel against Luytprand King of Lombards who was forced to yield the lands
which he had usurped of the Church Carol. Sigonius lib. 3. de Regno Italy An.
739. Plat. Pepin his son forced Astolpho King of Lombards to restore the six
gouerments of Rauenna to Pope Stephen ^. and he made war against Guai^ier
Duke of Aquitanie who usurped the goods of the Church. Regin. Sigebertus.
Charlemaine defended Adrian against Didier King of the Lombards, and restored
Pope Leon. C. Volumus 2. Q. i. Adrianus did. 63. Lewis the gentill and Charles
the bald ga^e great succors to Pope John 8. Paul Emilius. Pope Gela^ius 2. went
into France to demand succors of Lewis 8. against Henry the Emperor, Platina in
Gelatio 2. Innocent 2. and Eugenius the third, being driven out of Rome came
into France, and the Kings of France have the honor to have restored seven
Popes to their sea^es. And France has lodged the 70. years in Auignon* Paloti
de rubros Nauarra.
who had never found more speedy and better succors against their enemies then
the sword of France, and who have with reason called this Realm the admirable
quiver bound to Gods side, out of the which he draws his chosen arrows to
shoot them with the Bow of his mighty arm against Infidells: His majesty would
that Andrew de Laual, Lord of Loheac Mareschall of France, should be present
with many other men of quality, Stephen Che^alier Treasurer general of France,
and John Barbin Advocate general in Parliament. It was made in the presence of
John, Abbot of the Monastery of St. E^oy de brave, of the order of Premontre,
and of Peter Quesnot, pryor of the priory of St. Savior, near unto Bray upon
Seyne.

Soon after the new reign of Lewis the eleventh made it known that things
maintained so religiously by King Charles Charles the seventh was made Lord of
the observation of the Pragmaticke Sanction, and if death had not prevented
him, ^ew^s resolved to call an National Council to have it better observed.
, Pope Pius the second, exhorts K. Lewis to abolish the pragmatick Sanction.
were not religiously respected by him. The Pope having well observed it,
caused him to be exhorted to respect the holy Sea, and to apprehend the danger
of excommunication. He sent his Nuncio unto him to persuade him, and to put him
in mind of the name of most Christian, which his predecessors had carried, and
which the Council of Mantua had newly confirmed to King Charles his Father.

They found the pursuit of this reuocation more unfit for Pope Pius the
second, Pius the second d^^a^owes his own writings.
then for his predecessors, for he himself had been the instrument of these
Decrees, he had been present at the resolutions, he had written them, and
undertaken the defense of the Council of Basil, against that of Eugenius.
They did always object unto his Nuncios that it was a shame to gainesay
himself, to overthrow the work of his own hands, and that Dignities had
changed the Maxims of conscience. Wherefore in the end of April 1463. he made
a declaration containing a great repentance of that which he had done in the
Council of Basil against the Pope This Bull was directed to the university
of Collin, to the which he wrote many things against Engenius, ending with these
words, Haec est nostra sententia filii: haec credimus, and profite^ur: haec
iam senes, et in Apostolatus aeque constituti, pro veritate asserimus si qua
vel nobis, vel aliis conscripsimus aliquando, quae huic doctrinae repugnent,
illa tanquam erronea, and ^uueneli animo parum pensata iudicia reuocamus, atque
omnino respu^mus*
, and directed it to the University of Collin. He excused himself by his
youth, coming but newly from the Schools, the force of the persuasions of so
many great prelates whom he saw banded against Eugenius, the example which had
seduced him, and ignorance which should excuse him, thinking not to err after
so many great Doctors, and especially of the School of Paris, whose reputation
was then very famous, and of the universities of Germany Nos homines, and vt
homines errauimus, neque imus inficias, multa quae diximus, scripsimus, egimus
damnari posse, verum non vt Arrius, ^^thyces, Macedonius, aut Nestorins, and
alia blasphemorum turba, ex animo damnatum viam eligim^s, seducti peccauimus,
vt Paulus, and ignoranter persecuti fuimus Ecclesiam Dei, and Romanam primamque
sedem, propter quod prostrati ante oculos diuinae pietatis, supplices oran^us,
Delicta inuentutis me^, ignorantias ne memineris, and pudet erroris, paeniteut
fecisse vt male dictorum scriptorumque vehe menter poenitet, plus scripto quam
facto nocuim us.
Who declared Eugenius unworthy of Peter's chair, for that he had broken and
hindered the course of the counsel which he himself had called, and refused
to approve and effect their decrees. But that now knowing this Error, he
coniured all the world to note the distinction betwixt Aeneas Stluius, and Pius
the second, betwixt a private man and the great Vicar of Jesus Christ, betwixt
the errors of a youth without experience and the thoughts of an age touched
with the Spirit of God: Then having made a great repentance of his opinions, he
published his belief of the Popes, Authority, Words of S. Bernard.
and said of the person of Eugenius the fourth, that which S. Bernard had said
of Eugenius Tu es sacer dos magnus, summus pontifex, tu princeps Episcoru^, tu
haeres Apostolorum, tu primatu Abel, gilbernatu Noe, Patriarchatu Abraham,
erdine Melchisedech* dignitate Aaron, auctoritate Moy^es, iudicata Samuel,
potetestate P^t^us, Unction Christus. Tu es cui claues traditae, cui oues
creditae sunt. Sunt and alijquide^ coeli ianitores, and gregum pastores, sed tu
tanto dignius quanto and differentius vtrumque prae illis nome^ haereditasti*
Habentilli signatos sibi greges singuli singulos, tibi vniuersi crediti vni
sumus. Nec modo ^uium sed et pastoru^, tu vnus omniu^ pastor. Haec Bernardus ad
Eugenium 3. scribit, cui suprema^ and omnimodam in ecclesia potestatem
concedit, quod ille in tertio testatur Eugenio, hoc nos de quarto, and omnibus
aliis Romany Pontificibus profitemur.
the third, Thou art the great Priest, the Sovereign pastor, the prince of
Bishops, the Heir of the Apostles, thou art Abel in primacie, Noah in
government, Abraham in the Patriarchat, Melchisedech in Order, Aaron in
Dignity, Moses in Authority, Samuel in Justice, Peter in Power, and Christ in
unction.

Notwithstanding all these goodly words and the great reasons wherewith the
Nucios were armed to let the King know the great wrongs he did unto himself,
The ^talians called the Council of Basil a conuenticle
to break with the Pope, in favoring the Decrees of a Council, which Rome
held to be but a Conuenticle, a monopole, and Schism: They found not any one
in his Council, which thought it fit to break such wholesome Decrees, and the
King, who had been with King Charles his Father at the assembly at Bourges,
remembered how carefully they had been examined, solemnly published, and
profitably observed five and twenty whole years. The Pragmatick Sanction was a
law also for all the accidents of the policy of the Church, a sovereign balm
for all the ulcers, The sum of the Pragmaticke Sanction.
which avarice, dissolution and ignorance might cause in her members. Frustra
i^hiberetur inferioribus, ^^ipse qui alu^s debet esse omnium bonerum and
virtutum exemplar, non abstineret. Vt enim ille sanctissimus and doctissimus
Leo Papa, inquit* totius familia domini status and or, do nutabit, si quod
inquiritur in corpore non inuenitur in capite. Integritas enim praesidentium,
salus dignoscitur esse inferiorum. Pragm. Sanct. tit. de collatib. frustr.
And for that they labor in vain to keep the body in health if the head be
sick, it did somewhat restrain the Popes authority, binding him to hold a
Council every ten years, and to observe the Decrees which should be made, yea
that which the council of Basil had made touching the Elections,
Reseruations, and Collations of benefices. It did forbid expectatiue graces,
and citations to the Court of Rome, but in certain great causes, and as for
Appellations they did no more pass the mountains, the Pope did appoint Judges
upon the places for Appellants which depended immediately upon the sea of Rome,
and as for others they might appeal to the next superior.

It took from the Pope a great part of the profits of his Chancerie;
forbidding the payments of vacances and Anuates, and reserving only the just
fees for expedition of Bulls. Pope Eugenius considering the consequence of this
Decree, sent his Nuncios to the Council of Basil, to have it suspended; but
the fathers entreated him not to suffer such an abuse any longer, then
declaring such as should pay them Simoniacall: it added, that if the Pope did
scandalize the Church, in contemning the observation, it should be referred to
a Council Etsi quod absit Romanus Pontifex, qui prae caeteris vniuersalium
conciliorum exequi and custodire debet canones, aduertus hanc sanctionem
aliquid facien. do ecclesiam scandalizet, vt generali concilio deferatur.
Caeteri vero pro modo culpa iuxta canonicas sancti. ^nes per suas superiores
digna vltione puniantur: Prag. Sanct. tit. de Annat. Non fiant.
. It would not allow the Pope to make Cardinals after his own fantasy, but
with advise of the other Cardinals, that there should not be above four and
twenty chosen out of all the churches of Christendom, to the end the number
should not abase the esteem of so great a dignity, which made them which were
advanced companions to the Pope; and the hinges whereon the gates of the church
were set Statult sancta synodus vt deinceps Cardinalium numerus adeo sit
moderatus, vt ne sit grauis ecclesia nec superflua numerositate vilescat, qui
de omnibus Christianitatis partibus, quantum fieri commode poterit, astumantur,
vt notitia rerum in ecclesia emergentium facilius haberi and super his maturius
deliberari possit, sic tamen quod numerum 24. inter eos qui nunc sunt, and ad
assume^dos, non excedat. Ita quod de vn^ natione vltra tertia^ partem respectu
Cardinalium pro tempore existentium, ac de vna ciuitate et dioe cesi vltra vnum
inde oriundum and de ea natione quae nunc vltra tertia^ partem habet vsque ad
ipsius tertiae pattis reductionem else ne^queant.
. The quality of Cardinals.


It would have them also thirty years of age, lawful and not deformed in
body nor defamed in manners, Doctors, or Licentiates, in the one or the other
law, with a rigorous examination, and that the third, or at the least a fourth
part should be Divines; not suffering them to receive the Nephews of Popes,
or of Cardinals that were living. The congregation of the French Church being
assembled at Bourges found this Article too rigorous. It did also ordain due
recompenses for learning and merit. And that there should be Prebends in
Cathedral and Metropolitan churches for Divines to read and preach, and that
graduates should be preferred to provisions of benefices. It did not allow that
commonalties or provinces should be interdicted for the offenses of private
men, or of Magistrates, nor that excommunications should be of force, before
the sentence had been pronounced and published. It disposed of that which was
necessary for the ornament, policy, and direction of Divine service, it did
punish (but gently) public concubinaries, having been first advertised to
reform themselves Publici concubinarii, says the Council of Basil,
intellige^di sunt non solum hi quorum concubinatus per sententiam aut
confessionem in iure factam seu per rei euidentiam quae nulla possit
tergiuersatione celari notorius est, sed qui mulierem de incontinentia
suspectam tenet and per super^orem admonitus eam non a dmittit. Prag. Sanct.
Publici. tit. de concubinariis.
. They were freed for the privation of the fruits of their benefices during
three months. Pope Pius the second was not to be blamed if he did so earnestly
press this reuocation, and his Ministers did often solicit the King, filling
his conscience with fear of excommunication, and telling him continually that
there was neither Justice, necessity, nor profit, that could give the title of
a law to that which was ordained without authority, and that it was a sin
to subject his subjects thereunto. The Cardinal of Albie managed this
pursuit: La Balue Hierom Garimbert Bishop of Galicia has written these words
of Balue, essendosi infignorito dell animo dele Re, simulamente loteneus in
conti^^o disparer con la sede Apestolica per vligar p^i il Papa a riconoscer la
Reconciliatione dall opera, and dall autorita sua, per consequente a gratificar
lo del capel rosso, come fece.
who had great credit with the King, interposed great difficulties, to make the
Pope know that the effect of his intensions depended of him. But as soon as he
had promised to make him a Cardinal, he did fit his head to that hat.

La Balue being of a turbulent Spirit, The Bishop of Eureux undertakes to
satisfy the Pope.
being desirous to trouble the affairs, and to excel rather in Authority
then merit, went to the parliament to have this reuocation pass, S. Roman the
Kings Attorney General opposed himself, whom they threatened with the loss
of his estate, and to make him repent it. He who desired that all things should
fail him rather then to fail of his duty and the dignity of his charge,
said unto Balue, I had rather loose my estate, my goods and my life, then to
do a thing contrary to my duty and the good of the Realm. What Pris^us
Heluidius Priscus Heluidius was advised not to come unto the senate, he
answered, It is in the Emperors power not to make me of the Senate, but whiles
I am a Senator he shall not let me from going to the Palace, You shall be
suffered, said the other, to go, so as you speak not. Helu. I will not speak
a word if they demand nothing of me. But they will ask you. Helu. And I will
answer what I shall think fit. If you speak, they will put you to death.
Heluid. And when did I brag that I was immortal? You shall do your duty and I
mine. It is in you to kill me, and in me to die without fear, it is in you to
banish me and in me to go unto it cheerfully.
could have answered more generously?

The University of Paris made her Remonstrances unto the king not to suffer
the decrees, conformable to the purest constitutions of the Church for
discipline, policy, and liberty, to be broken. In this great agitation of
mind, the Popes Ministers promised the king that the reuocation of the
Pragmatick Sanction should be made without prejudice of the ancient liberties
of the French Church, and that the Pope would send a Legate into France, to
confer the provisions of Benefices, so as the French should not be bound to
send money to Rome.

The king upon this assurance consented to the abbrogation. Pragmatick Sanction
abolished and dragged through the streets of Rome.
The Cardinal of Alby was sent to Rome with charge to tell the Pope, that the
King submitted all the business of the Church, and the goods thereof to the Holy
Father, to use in this Realm, prout vellet, as he pleased, without any regard
of the liberties of the French Church. But being satisfied, he had no care to
give the king that contentment which he promised and suffered the patents to
be shamefully drawn through the streets of Rome: Behold how choler spares
not even insensible things. They shaddowed this choler with a reason that the
Pragmatick Sanction was bred in a time of Schism and Sedition. The courts of
Parliament of France, which have the rights of the church as it were in
protection, did not allow of this reuocation, so as it was never observed, and
the Clergy did not observe the Popes command upon this subject In the
beginning of Pope Leo his Bull, we read this. Licet Pius. 2. Nunci^s ad clarae
memoriae Ludouicu^ 11. Franciae Regem Christianissimum destinatis, t^ntis
eisdem persua serit rationibus rationibus, vt Rex ipse Pragmaticam Sanctionem
tanquam in seditione and Scismatis tempore natam suis patentibus literis
abroga^erit, tamen hui^smodi abrogatio nec etiam literae expeditae per
Praelatos and personas Ecclesiasticas dictiregni receptae non fuerunt, nec ipsi
Praelati and personae Ecclesiast^cae illis parere, nec monitis Sixti,
Innocentii and Iulii aures praebere, sed eidem Pragmaticae constitutioni
inhaerere voluerint.
. The Bulls of Sixtus, the third: Innocent, the eight: Alexander, the sixth: and
Iulio the second were fruitless. The Decre of the Council of Lateran served
to no purpose, and this Pragmatick Sanction ended not before the Concordants
were past at Bolonia, betwixt Pope Leo the tenth, and king Francis the first.

They did judge by the kings first actions, 1461.
what the manner of his government would be, The King discontents the Nobility.
and that he would beautify the diuinations of his reign with other trophies
then of clemency Clemency is the Ornament of the reign of Kings, they should
begin with it. Nouu^ imperium occupantibus vtilis clementiae ^ama. Tacit. lib.
4. Hist.
. He disappointed in a manner all the officers and servants of king Charles
his Father, taking a great delight to undo that which he had raised, and to
raise that which he had pulled down. He gave Berry only to his brother for his
portion, upon condition that it should return unto the Crown if he dyed
without issue male. There was a time when as the Kings of France left unto the
Princes of their blood the proprieties of their portions, Philip of Valoi^ left
the County of Valois to Charles his younger brother. Philip the Fair was the
first that ordained by his C^dicill that the County of Poictou, given by him
with other lands to his younger son Philip of France, who afterward was K.
Philip the Long should return to the crown for want of Heirs male, upon
condition the King which should then reign should marry his Daughter.
He took the Seals from Iuuenall of Vrsins, and gave them to Peter of
Moruilliers. The Duke of Alencon was a prisoner in the Castle of Loches, whom
he set at liberty. He caused the Earl of Dammartins process to be made, and
after that the Court of Parliament had condemned him to dye, he gave him his
life, upon condition that he should employ the remainder in the I Will of Rhodes
for the service of Christendom, and should put in caution: but not able to
find any, he had the Bastil for his prison, from whence he escaped in the
night by a hole which he had made in the wall, at the same time when as the
Duke of Berry passed into Brittanny. Taneguy of Chastell Taneguy of Coastel
Nephew te him that ^l^w the Duke of Bourgunay was master of the horse to K.
Charles the seventh, he retired into Brittany where the Duke made him his high
steward and Chamberlain.
being discontented for that he was not satisfied the money which he had
advanced for the funerals of Charles the seventh retired himself to Francis
Duke of Brittany.

This Prince had succeeded to Arthur of Brittany Earl of Richmond his Uncle,
Francis the second Du: of Brittany.
and was well informed of the humor and designs of Lewis, and therefore in the
beginning he sent his servants throughout the Realm disguised in the habites
of Iacobins and Franciscans, to move the people to look unto the beginning of
this Reign, and to conjure them to defend their liberty with tooth and nail
The Ambassadors of Sparta, being sent to Xerxes, said unto Gidarne who
commended the felicity of such as served the King. If thou did know Gidarne
what liberty were thou would counsel us to defend it, not with the lance
and target only, but with our teeth and nails.
, aduising them that this King entered into the Realm, as into a country of
Conquest: that he held all that pleased him to be lawful: That he forced great
men not to obey but to serve: The people not to be governed but tiranized, and
to prepare themselves to live in such sort as they might say they had not any
thing.

Being advertised of the Duke of Britains practices, The Kings voyage into
Brittany.
he went to see him, under color to visit the Church of S. Savior of Redon.
Devotion was the pretext, and a desire to know the Dukes country and forces the
cause of this Pilgrimage It is a great advantage to know the forces of an
estate which one means to assail, and to measure them with his. It was the advice of Xenophon. Chabrias said that thereon consists a part of the Generals
duty.
. He was not resolved to leave him in peace. He knew well that, three or four
years before, he had sought to make himself a companion to King Charles the
seventh, having refused to do him homage upon his knee, and without his sword
for the Duchy of Brittanie In the homage which Francis the second Duke of
Brittany did unto King Charles the seventh at Mo^bason in February 1458. John
of Estoteuille said unto him. My Lord of Brittanie you should put off your
girdle, And Chauu^n Chancellor of Brittany answered, He ought not, It were an
innovation, he is as he should be.
: he had also discovered that he and the Earl of Charolois had given their
faith, to run the self same fortune, although that the remembrance of the
Death of the Duke of Orleans his grandfather by the mothers side, had been
able to dissuade him from the house of Bourgundy, and that it had been better
for him to join with his Cozens, the Dukes of Orleans, and Angolesme, and to
continue his design upon the Duchy of Milan, to recover his grandmothers
inheritance, whereof Francis Sforce had ceazed Francis Duke of Brittanie, son
to Richard of Brittanie, and Margaret of Orleans, Daughter to Lewis D. of
Orleans, and Valantyn of Milan had undertaken to make war against Francis
Sforce. An^al of Brittanie.
. The Venetians and Borso of Este Duke of Ferrara gave ear to the propositions
which they made, giving hope to assist the rights of the house of Orleans.

These first years of the Reign of Lewis were very sharp, and those which
followed altogether insupportable. Great men were deprived of their Dignities,
Rigor in the beginning of Lewis reign.
and the meaner oppressed with great charges. There was covetousness for men of
merit, and prodigality for the rest. It is good after a prodigal Prince to
have one that is cou^tous, who may restrain those excessive pr^fusion, he that
finds not any thing to give cannot be liberal.
He said he would gather money together to redeem the towns upon the River of
Some. He had known what a crown was worth, and how many pieces would make
one: They that have past by the indiscretions of necessity, proceed very
discreetely in their expenses. If all the time that he had been banished from
the Court, he had no want of necessary things, so had he no great abundance
superfluous.

His sparing was the lights which swelled by the leanness of all the other
members. The complaints of the Rigor When as the people are oppressed they dare
not accuse the Princes rigor but cast their complaints upon that of the time
of the time, became murmurings against the severity of the Prince. Every one
lamented the Reign of Charles, and desired rather the end then the continuance
of that of Lewis: Great men began to make it known that they could not live
long in that servitude, and showing themselves more sencible of the contempt
The nature of man is more sensible of contempt then of loss. The Senators of
Rome were more discontented for that Caesar entered into the Senate without
saluting them, then for the enterprise which he made upon their liberty.
which was done them, then of the miseries which the meaner sort suffered, yet
they found no better pretext of their private interest, then that of the
public.

The King did not attend the consent of the Realm to have money, he took it
without asking. They were not tributes of Love, Princes find pleasing names
for things which are bitt^r and hard. Edward the fourth in posed upon the
Realm of England a tribute which he called a B^^euolen^^. Every one did
contribute as he pleased, and according to his gifts they did judge of his
Love to the King. He that gave much loved much. Edward made use of this tribute
against the French and found great succors, Polid. lib. 24. and 26.
but of Rigor and constraint, thinking that France was a meadow which he might
mow at all seasons. A great sedition troubled the city of Rheimes, against
those which had raised customs. The Commissaries were slain and their
Commissions cast into the fire. The King sent Soldiers, disguised like
Merchants and laborers, who entering by diverse ports, joined with the Lord of
Mouy their commander, who caused a hundredth of the most seditious to be
hanged, suppressed the sedition The most frequent and known causes of sedition
and muten^ gr^w from new charges and excessive impositions.
, revenged the Kings service, and settled his authority there, the which had
not been impugned but for the natural impatiencie of the people, to endure
that whereunto they were not accustomed.

All France was quiet, Combustions in England.
and beheld as from the shore the tempests which were in England and Arragon.
The King was glad to entertain the war far from him, and to assist the
house of Lancaster in England, and the house of Arragon in Spain, whiles that
the clouds and winds prepared to draw the storm upon his own head. England
for the division of the houses of York and Lancaster, saw at that time such
terrible changes and accidents, as it is a wonder the Realm did not pass
under some foreign command, and that they did not cry quittance with him,
seeing there is no surer means to ruin an estate then civil discord Civil
Divisions transport and change estates. Spain under the reign of fourscore
and twelve Kings has been torn in as many pieces as it has had Realms.
France has changed thrice. England has been commanded by the English, Danes,
Saxons, and in the end by the Normans. The Empire has been past from the East
unto the West* Naples has been under the power of the French, Germans,
Arrag^nois, and since of Castitians.
.

But France had yet so many bad humors in her body as her disposition was more
dying then living. When as the English ceast to afflict her, they began to
quarrel and to ruin one another. The end of foreign wars was the spring
and renewing of civil, Henry of Lancaster, son to Henry the fifth, found
himself without a crown, notwithstanding that in his infancy he had been
crowned with that of France and England. Richard Duke of York, an Ambitious
Prince, and who had both credit, courage, Good things and which are commendable
of themselves applied to il are per^itions Sepius industria acvigilancia noxiae
quoties parando Regno fingatur. Tac. lib. An. lib.^.
industry and vigilancie, qualities to be suspected in an Ambitious spirit,
became head of a great faction, the intentions whereof he colored with the
only zeal of the public good, to change the bad government of the Realm,
and to deliver England from the insolency of the Duke of Somerset, who alone
governed the helm of the affairs, whilst that the King suffered his spirits
to be transported, not to delights and voluptuousnes but to carelesnes An idle
Prince is a ways contemned. Three things says Ze^ophon make him excel over
his subjects. (...).
. His careless life incensed his subjects hearts, and his idleness distasted
all men of his reign. The estate was like unto a sick body which is so pressed
with his infirmity, as he is forced to trust him that comes to let him blood,
and cannot attend the Physicians which are far off, In violent diseases we
may not attend far fetched remedies.
although they answer him that they will come and cure him.

Such as were discontented with the present, Conspiracy against King Henry the
sixth.
and desired to see some change applied themselves to the Duke of Yorks
desseigns and intentions, and among others Richard Neuell Earl of Salisbury,
and Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick his brother, who had wisdom and courrage,
rare parties for a great desseigne, and therewith such great credit among the
people, as it was thought that not any one in England durst do that which
these would undertake. The Duke of York having cast his bell made the sound
thereof to be generally heard, he struck such a terror into the Court, and
made the wicked so audacious, as the King (who had never tasted of Domesticke
troubles; his spirit being like unto a ship Courages tried in dangers are to
be commended. A ship is never esteemed which has never felt of a storm.
which had never sailed but in a calm) was amazed and confounded, and not
holding himself safe in the City of London, by reason of the inconstancy of
the people, and the great credit which this faction had gotten, resolved to
leave it. The Duke of York besieged St. Albons The battle of St. Albons began
early in the morning and continued until 9. of the clock, in the year 1556
Edmund D. of Sommerset, and Henry Earl of Northumberla^d were slain.
, the two armies meet, Henry the sixth defeated
and the Kings is put to rout with the loss of their chief commanders. He
lamented greatly for the Death of the Duke of Sommerset.

After this victory the Duke of York, who had made declaration that he had
no other intention then the public good of the Realm, and that his arms
were not to offend the Prince, accompanies King Henry to London as a Conqueror,
and freed from the Rule of the Duke of Sommerset, which shows that he had not
taken arms but to free the King and the Realm, who was ready to submit
himself to the mildest yoke, seeing that he could not remain free. The
miseries of civil division reduced Rome to that estate as having no hope ever
to recover her liberty, she sought for nothing but for the mildest ser^itude.
. He left unto Henry the name of King only, for all the authority was in his
hands, he gave to the Earl of Salisbury the Office of Lord Chancellor of
England, and to Richard Neuell his Son the government of Callis. He disposed
of public charges as he pleased, still giving them unto those of his faction.
In the end the king discouers the Duke of Yorkes design. Queen Margaret his
wife, who had been advertised thereof, lets him understand that he did
temporise but until the party were made to ceaze both of the king and Realm,
and among his partisans the king was held but for a Tyrant: As if his Reign
had been by usurpation or constraint Among many differences betwixt a King and
a Tyrant they put this, that a King raigns with the love an^ consent of the
people, and a Tyrant rules by constraint.
.

The king imparted this to his principal servants, D. of York retires from
the Court of England.
who were of advise to restrain this great authority which the Duke of York
had within the Realm; The Duke being suddenly advertised thereof retired
secretly to Wigmore in Wales, Richard Neuell to his Castle of Midleham in the
North County, and Richard Earl of Warwick to Callis, so as the cruel
seditions in England grew more violent then before, during the which the French
spoiled the coasts of Kent, and James king of Scotland, invited by the same
occasion, entered by Roxborge. The same cause which made this war ended it The
sha^pest Civil wars are pacified when as strangers meddle to gain by them.
The two parties agree against the third, and although the Prince be offended,
yet it is better to remit the punishment.
. The king of England let the Duke of York understand that the civil discord
and the bad intelligence which was betwixt them, had opened a gate to the
enemies to invade England; that the common danger did bind them to unite their
forces to defend it, and that he was contented to forget all matters past,
upon hope of a better conduct hereafter, English cease their civil discords to
war against the French.
excusing himself that matters had not always gone directly, being impossible
for a Prince to observe all the kinds of Justice and equity Many things unjust
of themselves are made just when they are countenanced by necessity or profit,
wherefore Plutark observes, That if there were question to accomplish all the
kinds of justice, Jupiter himself might not in that case be a Prince.
.

The Kings intention was allowed by all men; the Duke of York being loath to be
the author of the ruins of the Realm, declared that all his affections tended
to his greatness and quiet, and to take away all occasions of doubt, He came
unto the King to London with the chief of his faction. The fear of a foreign
war quenched the civil There is no such indiscretion as to hazard ones own
to get another man's, and to draw forth the blood which is needful for the life
of the body. It is more glory for a Prince to maintain himself them to grow
great. Preservation and safety is the essence of an estate, profit it but an
accessory
. Men's minds, altered with things past, grew milder, and all their wills were
united in one accord for the defense of the Realm, detesting the discord which
had drawn them into a war which was not necessary, nor could be happy,
and made them a prey and triumph to their ancient enemy.

But as the fire of sedition is never so well quenched, but there remains some
sparks in the ashes, Troubles renewed in England.
which kindle again if they be a little blown, and that there be always some
which delights in troubles (for that it is their rest, Seditions commonly are
fed and supported by three sorts of men; First, the heads of factions;
Secondly, they that cannot live in safety in the time of peace; Thirdly, they
which are out of the press and find themselves free from dangers.
) and in danger for that they come not near them, being like unto those rivers
which enter into the sea and do not mingle their streams, the Duke of York
and the Earl of Salisburie being retired to their houses after this accord,
were presently forced to leave them, to revenge an affront done to the Earl of
Warwick at Westminster, where he had been set upon by the kings guard, and
forced to save himself by the River of Thames with the hazard of his life.
They said that Queen Margret was the author thereof, being very desirous to
ruin the Nobility of England, and to overthrow the chief howses A King should
maintain great families, neither can he suffer the^ to be w^onged, but he
shall weaken the greatness of his majesty, whereof the Nobility is the cheese
pillar. In all estates the Nobles have been respected and distinguished from
others even amongst the Thracians; the genl^emen went only upon horseback and
at Rome Noblemens wives went in Littors.
who were the pillars of the Realm.

The war began as soon as it was declared. The three Richards are in field,
King Henry having levied great forces comes to York. Andrew Trollop; who was
come from Calleis with the Earl of Warwick, thinking to serve the King, when
as he saw their arms turned against him, left the Earl of Warwick to follow
the King, who in moment scattered his enemies and forced the Duke of York to
pass into Holland, there to attend until his Partisans had raised the ruins
of that party. Battle before London whereas K. Henry was defeated.
Presently after the three heads of the faction return into England, with an
intent to vanquish or to dye, they present themselves at the gates of London,
they give and win a great Battle whereas the Victors saw ten thousand men
slain, and as many prisoners. King Henry, who seemed to have been raised up
to show the inconstancy of Fortune and the misery and vanity of man, remained
at the Victors discretion. The English remembering that his grandfather had
caused King Richard to dye in prison, began to acknowledge the judgments of
Gods justice, who punishes the Children for the offenses of their fathers
Henry Earl of Harford and Duke of Lancastre took arms against Richard the 2.
seized on him, puts him into the Tower of London and caused himself to be
crowned King* and after that he had forced him to resign the Crown he sent
him to Langle^, where he was murdered.
.

In this great prosperity the make falls from the Dukes face. He speaks
plainly, Duke of York declared Regent.
that whatsoever he had done was grounded upon the rightes of the house of
York, the which belonged unto him: The Parliament did then consider the justice
not the fortune, and respected the Majesty of the King though he were a
prisoner, entreating the King to rest satisfied with the Regency of the Realm
and to assure the succession to his house after the death of Henry. He accepted
the declaration of the Parliament, but considering that Queen Margaret had a
great Army on foot, to set her husband at liberty, Battle at Wakefield.
he resolved to fight with her. He gave her battle at Wakefield, against the advice of his Council, who entreated him to stay until the troops, which his
son Edward, Earl of March, brought him were arrived. Presumption troubles
his spirits, with a motion contrary to that of Reason, which should have
diswaded him from fighting The violence of courage is dangerous upon the point
of a battle, for it darkens the clearenes of Judgment, and does easily change
it to the trouble of reason and to that perturbation which the Philosoph* call
(...) ^ Some have written that the Queen caused the head of the Duke of York
to be cut off carrying a Crown of paper: others say it was the Lord Cliffords
deed.
: for their forces were not equal although in the courage of the Commanders
there was no other difference but that of sex. No, no; it shall not be said
that the Duke of York, who had so often fought in France without any other
trench or defense then his own arms, is shut up, that he attends a woman and
does not go forth to fight with her. He spoke this and went forth with 5000.
men, and met her. The Combat in the beginning was terrible and furious. The
Queen cuts off the Earl of Salisburies head.
The Queen showed her self among the troops, exhorting the Soldiers to
honor and glory. Richard Duke of York was slain, and Richard Earl of
Salisbury, whose head soon after the Commons, who hated him, cut off, the which
with many others of the same faction was set upon the walls of York, to be a
terror and an example to other Rebels.

After this victory, the Queen, whose courage was elevated upon the
apprehension of all sorts of dangers, 2. Battle at St. Albons.
and who held them less then the captivity of her husband, resolves to loose
her life or to restore him to liberty. She goes directly to London, and coming
to S. Albons she encounters the Earl of Warwick, who advanced to succor his
general, with the same courage that she had defeated the Duke of York, she
charge the Earl of Warwick, puts him to rout, and frees the King. The
excellency of courage shows it self when as the soul is carried beyond all
shows and apprehensions of dangers, fortitudo contemptrix est timendorum.
Senec. Epi. 89.


Edward Earl of March being advertised of the death of the Duke of York his
father, refused not to tread in his steps, and to embrace the toil, Edward
Earl of March succeeds the Duke of York his father in his authority.
from whence he expected his greatness and glory. He staid in the Province of
Wales and expelled Jasper Earl of Pembrooke. The Earl of Warwick joined with
him, and with all their forces he came to London, where he was received with
incredible joy and acclamations. He was one of the goodliest Princes of his
time, and in great reputation, his bounty, courage and liberality, were
powerful charms to win men's hearts, the English thinking that having him
they had all, and that their felicity was tied to the long continuance of his
Reign. A Prince can desire no greater proofs of the affection of his people,
then when he believes that nothing can sail him, so as he fail not them.
From thence are come these goodly acclamations, Augusto Constantine D^te nobis
seruent, vestra salus nostra salus, ^od. Theod lib. 7. tit. 20. In te omnia,
per te omnia Antonine habemus A El. Lamprid Dion. reports an excellent one
(...), we have all in having you.
He is proclaimed King, and for that he would have no companion in his
royalty, he resolves to fight with King Henry, and marched directly to York,
lodging in a little village called Touton. Henry being prepared to receive him
would not show himself for that it was Palm sunday, desiring to spend that
day in the service of God, but the soldiers seeing themselves so near would
not refer the party until the next day. They come to hands, the combat
continued ten hours, and the victory, having been long doubtful and in
balance betwixt both Armies, suddenly inclined to Edward, The King and Queen
seeing all their troops put to flight they saved themselves in Scotland with
their servants The Regent of Scotland led K. James the third. to meet with
King. Henry the 6. and Q. Margaret. The good reception with the succor which he
received, caused him to restore Barwick to the Realm of Scotland.
and from thence Margaret passed into France to her father to demand succors.
Henry the 6. flies into Scotland.


Edward returned triumphing to London, and caused himself to be crowned King
at Westminster the 28. of June 1461. he called a Parliament, where all that had
been decreed by King Henry the sixth was revoked. After that Henry had gathered
together some forces in Scotland, he returns into England, being followed by a
great number of his old servants. The Justice of his cause gave him good hope
He that has reason on his side is always accompanied with good hope, he
pursues his quarrel with more courage and assurance, be exposes himself to
all dangers, and his subjects serve and succor him more willingly, and in all
accidents the justice of his cause does comfort him.
but he was repulsed with great dishonor by John Marquis of Mountague.

King Edward being advertised of the practices of Margaret, both in France,
Scotland and England, to restore her husband to his crown, he sets guards upon
the Ports and passages of Scotland to stop her entry, but as there is no
misery more insupportable then the remembrance of what we have been, King
Henry bare this change of condition so impatiently, as not apprehending the
danger neither of his life nor of his first captivity, and not considering
that fortune had never done him so much good but might do him more harm
Miseries do but begin when as they seem to end. There is not any man but may
have more harm then he has had good. Neminem eo Fortuna pronexit vt non
tantum illi minaretur quantum permiserat. Sen. Epi. 4.
, he returned into England in a disguised habit, where he was discovered,
taken, and presented to Edward, Hen. the sixth put into the Tower of London.
who lodged him in the Tower of London. If he had thought that he had gone
forth as he did to get the crown, he would have given him one of copper made
fast to his head with four nails The Emperor Henry the sixth being in Sicile
discouer^d some conspiracy against him and his estate. He caused the chief of
them to be apprehended and to punish his ambition, he set a crown of copper
upon his head, and caused it to be fastened with four nails. Nic. li. 2.
.

Queen Margaret, to effect her design, had drawn some succors from Rene
King of Cicile her Father. The King lent her son two thousand pound sterling
at Chinon, upon condition that as soon as King Henry should recover Callice,
he should deliver the government thereof to Jasper Earl of Pembroke, or to
John of Foys Earl of Candalles, paying him moreover forty thousand crowns.
But all this prevailed nothing, the King remained a prisoner, and the Queen
had much ado to save her self with the Prince of Wales her Son Monstrellet
says, that Queen Margaret, her Son, and La Varenne were met by thieves, that
she said unto a thief that met her, bold my friend save the son of thy King,
that she went to Scluce and from thence to Bourges, and that the Duke of
Bourgundy caused her to be co^ducted to her Father.
The Princes of the house of Lancaster retired themselves whether their feet
and despair carried them. Some were seen in the Duke of Burgundies Court in
misery, Misery of the house of Lancaster.
begging their bread. Fortune how cruel soever can do no worse unto a Prince,
then to reduce him to the apprehensions of hunger, Ph. de Commines says, he
had seen a Prince of this house of Lancaster follow the D. of Bourgundyes
train and without hose, begging his bread from house to house, and that being
known they gave him a small pention to live on.
The beasts are freed from it, The fishes pay no tribute to pass from Rivers
into the sea. Swallows flying through so many regions dyed not of Hunger. It
is a pitiful thing that men, and the chief among men, have difficulty to
live, and to find what to eat and drink, and wherewith to cloth themselves
Nature comprehends all the necessities of the world in these three words: Non
esurire, Non sitire, Non algere, not to be hungry, thirsty, and cold, all the
rest is superfluous.
.

Edward in this great prosperity of affairs troubles not his judgment, but
considers that the house of Lancaster was ruined without hope of recovery, and
the Red Rose withered: That it was impossible ever to rise again, if it were
not assisted with the forces of France. Wherefore he desired to make his
alliance with the king, and sent the Earl of Warwick to demand Bonna of
Sauoye the Queens sister in marriage. Edward falls in love with a Widow.
But during this negotiation, Love, which may be held a kind of fury, Love is
put in the rank of Melancholy diseases and kinds of fury, it peruerts the
judgment, and confounds the good with the evil.
for that it troubles the judgment, carried the affections of this Prince to
the service of a Lady who would have held her self much honored to have
served the Queen of England, and yet she had the ambition to be so. Fortune
agreed with her beauty. Being widow to Sir John Gray, her age bound her to
follow rather the life of the Dove then of the Turtle, The Empress Barba, wife
to Sigismond the Emperor being told after the death of her husband, that she
should imitate the Turtle If I must said she initate beasts why rather the
Turtle then the Dove or the sparrow. Aeneas Sil. de dict. Sigismondi et
Frederici Imper.
for her first marriage had scarce touched the flowers of her beauty, nor of
her youth. Edward did not live but for her, his heart received no law but from
her eyes, to whom he did submit the full disposition of his fortunes. She being
powerful in the charms of love let him presently understand that she did not
accept of the sacrifice of the hearts of Kings, but of the Altar of honor,
that he might not hope to have her for a Mistress, if he would not assure her to
make her his Queen.

They that love ardently are easy and tractable, He that loves refuses not
any thing. In love there is force and pleasure, force constraines the will, and
pleasure deceiues the judgment.
they spare neither words nor oaths. Edward transported with this fury,
forgets the suit which he made in France, and changes all his wills into the
obedience of this Lady, who seeing her self to command over the Kings heart,
assures her self to reign soon in his Realm. He is not capable to refuse
her any thing. The wind of her disdaines, and the couldnes of so fair a
mistress may well quence the fire in the beginning, but being once kindled it
gives it nourishment and increase. In the end Edward promised to make her
Queen, and his promise was presently followed with the consumation of the
marriage, to the great amazement of the Nobility of England, who thought the
King was bewitched, Beauty and grace are the mighty charms of love said
Olimpias the mother of Alexander. Love which grows from amorous drinckes
continues not. Plutarch gueth these Epithites (...). short, toublesome, and
changeable. And he says it does easily change into hatred and disdain.
and wished him a more honorable alliance. Lewis took it ill, and the Earl of
Warwick was so grieved, as from that time he was wholly the French Kings, who
by his counsel plotted a revenge which shall show it self in the year one
thousand four hundred seauenty one.

Marriages and alliances, unworthy of the greatness of Princes, cause murmurings
and discontentments in the people. The people which love their Princes rejoice
at their victories and prosperities, They are aflicted at their losses
especially if they do any thing which may impair their honor, as when they
treat of alliances unworthy the greatness of their houses. Tot luctibus funesta
ciuitate p^rs maero^is fu^t: quod Iulia Drusi filia quondam Neronis vxor,
dempsit in domum Rubelli^ Blandi, cuius Auum Tiburtem equitem Romanum plerique
meminerant.
Rome did mourn generally when as Iulia, daughter to Drusus the son of
Tiberius, and widow to Nero son of Germanicus, married with Rubellius Blandus
whose Grandfather had carried no other title then of a Knight.

The great Calm which was in France, King Lewis goes into Guienne.
did notwithstanding presage a great storm, and gave the King means to visit
some of the provinces of his realm; he went to Bordeaux, whereas he treated of
a marriage between the Lady Margret his sister and Gaston of Foix, who was
son to Elenor of Aragon, daughter to John King of Aragon and Blanch Queen of
Navarre. He accepted this Alliance for that this young Prince was valiant and
coragious, and that the successions of the Crown of Navarre, Foyx, Berne,
Bygorre, and other Lands lying in France did belong unto him. The Earl of Foyx
sent his Ambassadors and Deputies to the King being at Bordeaux to conclude the
treaty. The chief condition of the Marriage was that the children which should
be borne without distinction of mal^ or female should succeed in the counties
of Foix and Bygorre.


He past to Bayonne to end a controversy between the 2. Kings of Navarre and
Aragon, 1462.
and Henry King of Castile his Nephew. A controversy begun with great spleen,
and was continued with the like, and had not ended without excess if he had
not dealt in it, for the parties flattered themselves in their pretentions,
were blind in their interests, and found that the obscurenes proceeded rather
from the thing then their own blindness. But behold the causes and the effects.
After the death of Charles the third Charles the third King of Navarre taking
delight to build at Olita died suddenly in September 1425. the threescore and
four year of his age, and the thirty nine of his reign, he was buried at
Pampeluna.
King of Navarre, the Crown past from the house of France and Eureaux into
that of Castile and Aragon, not without trouble and discord. John, second son
to Ferdinand of Aragon, married Blanch, Infanta of Navarre, presumptiue heir
of the Realm of Navarre, and widow to Martin King of Sicilie, and it was
agreed by a treaty of marriage, that in case she should die before her husband,
he should reign the rest of his life in Navarre after king Charles the third
his father in law.

Of this marriage was borne at Pegna, Charles Prince of Viana born.
Charles Prince of Vianna, a title belonging to the eldest Son of the King of
Navarre Charles the the third King of Navarre ereected Viana into a
principality, and did affect it to the eldest son of Navarre in the year 1421.
, as Dauphin to that of France, The Asturiez in Castille, and Wales in England.
Charles the third, his grandfather, made him to be sworn heir of the Realm
by the Estates after the death of John his Father. Charles being dead, John was
declared King of Navarre by some, and Blanch his wife was acknowledged Queen
by others, yet both were crowned at Pampeluna.

John had great wars with his brother the King of Castille, Marriage betwi^t
the Prince of the Asturies and Blanch of Navarre.
who did confiscate the lands which he held in Castille, John Earl of Foyx
reconciled them, by a marriage betwixt Henry Prince of the Asturies, son to
John King of Castille, and Blanch Daughter to John king of Navarre By the
constitution of the marriage of this Princess which was of 42112. Florens of
gold, we may judge in what estate K. Charles the third had left the Realm of
Navarre.
: The marriage was celebrated with great pomp and solemnity, but the Prince
was unable to consummate it; The which the Princess did long dissemble. She
had great cause to complain of this want, and to wish her self to be a widow
or her husband unmarried The dissembling of couiu^all imperfections is very
seemly and especially in a woman, Tullia a great Roman Lady is blamed for her
ordinary complaints and murmuring at her husbands disabilitie De viro ad
fratrem de sorore ad viru^, se rectius viduam and illu^ caelibem futurum. Tit.
Liu.
, but like an other Eusebia she did long suffer for the disabilitie of
Constans, desiring rather to wrong her youth and beauty, then her modesty.

A while after Blanch Queen of Navarre died, and king John married again with
Ione Henriques. Charles Prince of Viana, fearing that his alliance would keep
him back from the hope of reigning, and from the inheritance of the Queen his
Mother, did not dissemble his discontent A desire to reign makes the father
jealous of the son, Plutarc says in the life of Demetrius, that the greatest
and most ancient of all Alexanders successors did glory that he feared not his
son, but suffered him to approach near his person holding a Iauelin in his
band.
, pretending that by the laws of the Realm his Father by marrying again had
lost the fruit of the Crown. Behold all natural affection is altered betwixt
the Father and the Son. The desire of rule makes them enemies, the Father
grows jealous, and would not suffer his Son to come near him armed. On the
other side, this second wife, seeing her self mother to Ferdinand, did what
she could to show that she was mother in law to Charles What will not an
ambitious mother do and undo for her children. D. Ioane lying in the bed of
death by reason of a Cankar which did consume her, remembering what she had done
to assure the Realm unto her Son, spoke often these words with sighs, which
are reported in the 21. book of the history of Spain. O my Son thou have cost
me dear. For him she had caused Don Charles to be poisoned.
, and never ceast until this young plant were qu^^^ht by the nipping cold of
her bad intentions, seeking to have a share in the regencie of the Realm in
the absence of the king who had revived the war in Castille. Hence sprung
those two great factions, Factions of Beaumont and Grandmont.
that of Beaumont which followed the intent of of the Prince against the King,
and that of Grandmont which was for the father against the son, so as
presently the Realm was divided into two kings, and two constables, Lewis of
Beaumont Earl of Lerin was Constable to the Prince, and Peter of Perault was
Constable to the king.

The kings cause, as the better and more just, remained victorious, the Prince
being twice overthrown is forced to fly to Alfonso king of Arragon,
Valencia, Sardinia, Maiorca, Minorca, and Sicile, he had recourse unto his
clemency, and besought him to pardon him. The king, who could not forget the
love of a Father unto him who showed the duty of a Son, receives him, but
he had new aduertisments that he made secret practices to trouble him,
wherefore he sent him prisoner unto the Alferie of Saragossa, from whence he
was drawn by the Cattallans who took arms for his liberty, Charles of
N^uarre poisoned by his mother in law.
but he went out of the prison to enter into a grave. Charles Prince of Viana
died being forty years old, a valiant Prince, a great Historian, a subtle
Philosopher, and a good Poet, he translated Aristotle's Ethics into the
Castilain tongue, and he wrote the History of Navarre unto the time of King
Charles his Grandfather.
For the very day of his delivery he was poisoned and dyed with much
repentance for that he had rebelled against the king his father.

The Infant Don Ferdinand was acknowledged heir of the crown of Arragon. They
of Cattellonia took arms to revenge the death of Prince Charles. The
seditious, who blow the cole of this desection, said that his soul walked in
the night through the streets of Barcellona complaining that the Queen his
mother in law had separated it from his body, by the violence of poison. The
Queen who was come to Girona saw her self besieged with Prince Ferdinand her
Son, and the Tower wherein she was retired furiously battered. The king
seeing this great revolt of his subjects, entreates Lewis the eleventh to
succor him with men and money, he ingageth the Counties of Rousillion and
Sardaigne unto him for three hundred thousand crowns. King of Navarre demands
succors from the French King.
The king sent unto him Gaston Earl of Foix, Prince of Berne Gaston Earl of
Fo^x married the second Daughter of John King of Navarre and of Queen Blanch
his first wife.
, and son in law to the king of Navarre, who freed the Queen and raised the
siege of Gironna.

The Cattellanes, nothing tractable to endure the humors of their Prince, made
a proclamation against the king, declaring him fallen from all the authority
which he might have over them, and a murderer of his own son, and violating
the laws of the country,, They of Cattellonia* decla^ed the K. an enemy unto
the country by diverse informations and proceedings against his actions, and
the murder of his son, the which they sent to Pope Pius the second.
They sent to Henry King of Castile to embrace their defense and protection,
submitting themselves under his obedience, and offering him the crown of
Arragon, beseeching him to add unto the just title, which their election gave
him unto the Realm, the right of Arms, they alone do purchase Empires, There
are five kinds of Titles to Realms: the first by Arms so Cyrus, Alexander
an^ Caesar, made themselves Monarchs: secondly, by the grace of God, and in
this manner reigned Moses and David: thirdly, by succession: fourthly, by
election: and the fist by the nomination of the Prince. Marc. Anthony named
Lucius Verus for his successor: Dioclesian Maximinian: and Gratian Theodosius.
and being gotten defend and preserve them.

He gave them for succors two thousand and five hundred horse under the command
of John of Beaumont Prior of St. John of Navarre, The K. of Castill aides the
Cattellans.
when the French and the Castillians met near unto Ixar, they would not fight
No man can dispose as he pleases of Auxiliary troops, they have respects
contrary to the design of such as employ them.
, and the French entreated the king of Navarre to take it in good part if they
sought rather to end then entertain their quarrels.

The Earl of Foix, who was brother in law to the king of Castill, and son in
law to the king of Navarre, disposed the two Princes to refer themselves to
the judgment of the French king. They yielded, sending their ambassadors to
Baiona, where the French, king was, an honor pleasing to the humor of Lewis who
would be interessed in all things and very dear to the reputation of France,
which was in possession, not only to judge of the controversies of foreign
crowns, but also to give kings unto those which had not any The realms of
Christendom have taken Princes out of the house of France to reign over them.
Alphonso son to the Earl of Tollousaraigned in Spain, the house of Eureux in
Navarre, the Dukes of Normandy in England, they of Aniou at Naples and Sicilie.
The Empire of Constantinople was held three years by the French. They have
reigned a hundred years in Sora Cipres and Palestina. Charlemain and Lewis the
gentle have added unto the Empire of the Gauls all Italy, Bohemia, Hungary
and Germany. In a word the seat of Popes have been in France.
.

The king of Navarre went not from Saragossa, Lewis the French K. made
arbitrator betwixt the Kings of Castill and Arragon.
nor king Henry from St. Sebastians in the province of Guipuscoa; relying upon
that which their Ambassadors treated. The king having conferred of the
controversy betwixt them, and of the causes which had moved the Cattellans to
revolt, did judge in such sort as to reconcile the parties, it was necessary
they should meet and speak together upon the frontier. The enterview was at
Endaia, whereas the sentence given at Bayona was read by Aluaro Gomes. The
Cattellans were not content with this Judgment, saying, that as the king of
Castille had abandoned them, so his Ambassadors had betrayed them. The king of
Navarre being offended for that he was condemned to yield the town of Estella
to the king of Castille, Enteruiew of the Kings of France and Castill.
to the prejudice of the revenues of the crown of Navarre, made the estates of
Navarre protest of nullity.

King Lewis reaped the greatest profit of this action: for he practiced and
drew unto his service some Ministers of these two kings, and made them his
pensioners The King of Castille suffered himself to be governed by the great
master of Castille and the Archbishop of Tolledo. King Lewis made much of them
to be informed of the state of Castille, or at the least to drew them to his
devotion: It is the least a Prince can attend of one that comes to see him.
. This assembly did not confirm the affections which the crowns of France and
Castill had had together. The friendship and alliance betwixt the French and
the Cast^llans have continued long. Upon which assurance K. Charles the sixth
sent his Ambassadors to John King of Castill, in the year 1418. to (...)
succors against the English*
The Castillians, who could not lodge at Bayona with the French without
quarrelling, did not forbe are to scoff at them at this enteruiew upon the
River of Vidasa. The river of Vid^so di^ides the two realms, the Spaniards
hold it is all theirs.
The King of Castill past the River and came unto the king. The Castillians
seeing him attired in cloth, and very short, with a hat differing from the rest
and for a Jewel an image of lead, imputed it to miserablenes. Apparel does
often minister cause of laughter. The Siciliens did not esteem of Gilippus
their general seeing him simply apparelled in a poor cloak, wearing long
bayre, yet Sy^^^^s says, that the ancient Kings were known and distinguished
rather by the mind then the pomp and (...) (...) Syn Orat (...) regno
There are Nations whereas they contemn the Prince, if he be not so
gorgeously attired as if he should show himself upon a theater. It is
impossible to abstain from laughter looking upon the portraites of the
Emperors of Greece, which are so covered with Pearl and precious stones, as
they can not be known but by their beards. The French finding also the
habites of the Castillians unpleasing, their king very hard favored, and their
manners insolent and full of African pride. Of all this there could grow no
great Alliance, for such enteruiewes are always noted more by the alienation
of minds, then by alliances of estates. The two Princes are observed by two
Nations, that which pleases the one disliketh the other. (...) King, said that
he deserved to be Emperor, and called the Emperor a little man and a (...)
Prince. Sa^. lib. 15.
They are contemned sometimes even by them that follow them, when as they
observe in the other something that is more gallant.

Thus France fortified and enlarged her frontier with the County of
Roussillion, notwithstanding that it was sufficiently assured on that side both
by the great rampiors which serve for bounds, and by the weakness and
barrenesse of those provinces, An army cannot come out of Spain. on this side
the Pyr^ne mountain^s out it will be half defa^ed, the Provinces where it shall
be (...) and by w^tch it shall pass are so ^arren as (...) can hardly feed the
inhabitants.
But she lay open toward the Low Countries, The duke of Burgundy holding in
Picardy, by engagement, five important towns, Amiens, Abbeuille, St. Quentin,
Corbie, and Pontheau, for the sum of 400000. ovld crowns of gold and of 64.
to the mark.

Although the King found not that in his coffers which provident and wise
Princes should leave unto there successors to mayntaine and assure their
estate, Redemption of the Towns upon the River of Some.
As a body cannot move without si^ewes, so a Realm cann^t maintain it self
without tr^asure. Wise Princes have always had care to leave unto their
successor. Cyrus left fifty millions of gold. Tyberius 67. Occhus King of
Persia 80. millions, and David 120.
yet he disposes himself to redeem them. There was some difficulty on
either side. For the king had no money, and the Duke had no will to leave these
goodly places. The Earl of Charolois thinking that his father had been
persuaded thereunto by them of the house of Croii, held them for his enemies,
and made an assembly against them at Cambrey. The father supports and
countenanceth them, he murmures, and storms, and quits them both court and
credit, and so retires to Gaunt. The estates of the country depute men capable
to restore him to his fathers favor, for that this division could bring
nothing but ruin to the state, and content to the enemy. A division which
grows among persons whom Nature has united, gives subject to (...) enemies to
make their profit. ^^^^ratus being in had terms with his children* knew that
his (...) he assembled his council and (...) after this manner. I have desired
to reduce my children to reason and to their duties, but now seeing that they
are wilful and obstinate. I pardon and will do what they will have me. Plut.


The Earl of Charolois being accompanied by many Noblemen of the country came
unto the Duke being at Bruges and craved pardon. His repentance and humility
would not suffer him to be refused. They of Croi^ felt the smart, which falls
upon those that sow division betwixt persons so near allied. When the king
had drawn out of many purses the money necessary for this redemption,
Redeeming of the towns engaged.
he sent it to Hedin, whereas the Duke was, and came thither presently after
himself. The Duke entreated him to continue and confirm the officers which
had been preferred during the engagement. The King promised it, but his
intention was not to keep promise, but so far forth as the good of his
affairs did permit, nor to assure himself in the affection of those which
depended of him of whom he could not assure himself Monst^let says that the
King gathered together a greatness of treasure (...) for there was (...)
Chancerie, nor famous Merchant in France, but he did (...) that commanded for
the D^ in the towns redeemed, were put from their places, the Captaineship of
(...) which (...) held, and that of Mortague which Hault (...).
.

Many things past which the Duke of Bourgundy, being impatient, could not
dissemble. He sent Chimay to complain and to let the King understand that he
was neither of age nor humor to be exercised by the continuance of injuries in
the school of Patience. Chimay let the King know that the Duke his master was
not insencible of his actions, and spoke of his virtues and courage, as of a
Prince that was invincible and incomparable, borne of another fashion then
other men, like unto the Lunarie women of Herodotus. Herodotus speaks of
certain Lunarie and extraordinary women who laid eggs which brought forth men
fifteen times bigger then those of the ordinary ^^ature.
The which made the King to ask him if he were of harder steel then other
men? Yea Sir, answered Chimay, for if he were not harder, he never durst have
attempted to have nourished you five whole years against the threats of a
great King such as your father was.

The Earl of Charolois did not bear this restitution so patiently as his
Father, he cannot divert his thoughts. Amiens is the object of his eyes; in
his Feasts and Bankets his heart is still upon Peleponesus. Cleomenes King of
Lacedemonia being at a feast where there were two Orators, one demanded of him
which of the two had discoursed best* for my part said be my mind was upon
Peloponesus.
After the King had redeemed the Towns* engaged, and changed the officers and
Governors, which the Duke had placed there, not being able to trust them, who
had been made by one, who had given so many crosses to France, There is no
treaty of accord or alliance that can free the hearts of Princes from the
distrust they have one of another.
he would see Arras, and lighted at the town gate, going on foot to our Ladies
Church: He remained eight days in the City, and had some cause of
coffeehouse, for that they had refused lodging to his Harbingers, saying
that they were not bound by their privileges before that all the Innes were
full. Entering, there were many banished men presented themselves to have
Pardon, but he told them, that it depended upon the will of the Duke his Uncle,
wherein he would not attempt any thing.

He visited the Church and Abbey of St. Vaste: in those times Kings went to see
religious men, for religious men went not out of their Cloisters to see Kings,
The King goes to Arras.
Charles the 6. besieged Arras in July 1414. Lewis Dauphin of Vienna his first
son was there with the Earls of Orleance, Bourbon, Bar, Bauaria and Charles
of Albert Constable of France. The Town was yielded by a treaty of peace
published on twesday the fourth. of Sept. following.
without the Town he also saw the place whereas king Charles the fixth his
Grandfather had encamped and lodged when as he besieged Arras in the year
1414. 1463.
They observe that he would not lodge in the Bishops Palace, but in the
Officialls house, taking more delight in small lodgings then in great.

From Arras he went to Tournay where he was met by 3000. men every one carrying
a Flowerdeluce embroydered, He is received with great pomp into Tournay.
as a sign that their hearts were all French: This Town bragging that they
had never known any other command then French. There the Lord of Crouy came
unto the King, who made him Lord Steward of his house and gave him the County
of Guisnes. In the beginning of Lent, and at the end of the year, whose
beginning was then accounted from the resurrection, the King went to Lisle,
whether the Duke of Bourgondy came to confer with him of his voyage to the
holy land. Cr^ysado published against the Turk.
Pope Pius the second, continuing the designs of Calixtus the third, had
published a Croysado to releive the Christians of the East Calixtus the 3.
persuaded all Christian Princes to make war against the Turk, he sent Lewis
of (...) a ^rier to Vs^m Cas^an King of Persia and Armenia, and to the great
Tartar^ he exhorts them with such vehemence as they were resolved Platin.
He invited all the Princes who embraced his design with such resolution as
Mahomet was terrified with the great preparation. The devise of this C^oysado
car^ied these words Dieu la veut, God will have it, Mahomet was so amassed as
writing to Pius the second he said. I am not guilty of the death of Jesus
Christ, and do abhor the Jews who crucified him.
The Pope declared that he would go thither in person. Croysado published
against the Turk.
But great Cosmo de Medicis said that it was the design of a young man in a
great age. The Kings of Naples and Hungary were resolved to accompany him. The
Duke of Bourgondy promised also to be of that party, and demanded advise and
leave of the King, who represented unto him the discommodities both of his age
and voyage, finding him much broken to begin such a building. The age must be
considered in great and l^ng enterprises. Marcus Cras^us found King Deiotarus
in the Realm of Galacia, who being very old built a new City, who said unto
him in mockage, O King me thinks you build very late, beginning at the last
hour of the day. To whom the K. answered suddenly. And you O Captain came
not forth very early to make war against the Par^hians. For Crassus was above
60. yeare^ old.
But the Duke carried his courage beyond all these difficulties. The king
propounded so many unto him as he diswaded him for a year, assuring him that
after that year he would give him 10000. men entertained for four months,
to accompany him. The Duke of Bourgondy, for that he would not give the Pope
any subject of discontent, sent Anthony his Bastard thither with 2000. men.

The king left the Duke of Bourgondy at Lisle and returned to Paris. Duke of
Sauoy comes into France.
He found Lewis Duke of Sauoy the Queens father at St. Clou, who was come to
see him, and to complain of Phillip his younger son, who for that he had a
more generous and active spirit then the elder had won the hearts of the
chief of the Noblemen of Sauoy and of his Subjects: The Duke of Sauoy was a
simple and a mild Prince. Amy Prince of Piemont his eldest son, was of the
same hum^r and had great inclinations to solitari^^s. Phillip his younger
Brother giving greater impressions of his generosity, and courage was followed,
by all the great men of the Country.
upon this complaint the king commands Pr^^ce Phillip to repair unto him,
Lewis Duke of Sauoy dyed at Lion the 24. of January 1466: his heart and bowels
were interred in the Celestins Church which he had caused to be built. His body
was carried to Geneua and laid by Ame of Lusignan his wife.
and he comes with speed, being arrived he was sent prisoner to Loches. The
Duke being well satisfied to see his son lodged (whereas he repented him of
his ambitious and extrauagant humors) returned into Sauoy and two years after
dyed at Lion, whereas he attended the king who was at Molyns. Amy his son
succeeded him.

The king being at Paris made it presently known that he was not to endure
that which the necessity of time had caused his forefathers to suffer to the
prejudice of the rights of the Crown, and having prepared his designs, he
made choice of the occasion to execute them: To have a will to do, and
disposition to know how to do, and yet to attend the occasion of well doing it
the act of a Prince of great patience and wisdom.
he sent Moruillierre, his Chancellor, to the Duke of Britain, to let him
understand that if he called himself any more Duke of Britain, by the grace
of God, if he continued to coin any gold, The Duke of Britain as a
sou^raigne Prince had right to coin ^^^uer, but that of gold was reserved by
treaty to the Crown of France, the great whereof should be expres^. Charles
the fifth gave it to the Duke of Berry who did coin pieces of gold stamp^ with
a sheep, which Bodin aff^rmes to be the finest gold that ever was since within
this Realm.
or if he hindered him from leuying of taxes and from the collation of Benefices
in his country, he proclaimed war against him. The Duke being amazed at this
demand, answered that it was so great and of such importance, as he could
make no answer without the advice of his estates, entreating the King to give
him three months respite to assemble them.

But this was to plead law to men that were armed. Po^pey being in Sicile
pressing the Mammartines to acknowledge his authority they sought to avoid it,
pretending that they had privileges and ancient Decrees from the people of
Rome, to whom Pompey answered in Choler, will you plead law unto us who have
our swords by our sides. Plut.
The King had an Army upon the frontier, The Duke was pressed and surprised, yet
resolute rather to loose himself then to quit that which his fathers had
purchased for him: wherefore he thought to make answer unto the Kings
intentions by arms rather then by words. He advertised the Duke of Bourgondy
of the estate of his affairs, and coniurd him to think of their common
safety, seeing that the Kings design was to entreat them alike and to ruin
them.

Romille Vice Chancellor of Brittanny made many voiages into Flanders upon
that subject. The King, who had eyes and ears in every place, being advertised
thereof, commanded the Bastard of Rubenpre The King sent a sea Captain and the
bastard Rube^pre with him into Holland, he landed at the Hage with three others
in his company. He was examined what he was and whence he came, but he made
some difficulty to discover his name and the cause of his coming. The Earl of
Charolois being their caused him to be apprehended as a Pirate.
to pass with a ship along the Coast of Holland to surprise Rommille, and to
bring him unto him or to kill him.

The Earl of Charolois being at the Hage in Holland, Rubempre staid at the
Hage.
Rubenpre lands with three other disguised like a Merchant. The Earl caused
him to be stayed, and gave it out that he had attempted by the Kings
commandment to take him or to kill him. At such time as the Duke was at Hedin
with the King, it was generally bruted, and the king was blamed for this
design in open pulpit by the Preachers of the multitude, who intermixed their
discourses with matters wherewith they should not meddle. It is an
insupportable abuse to make the word of God an instrument of sedition, to move
men's minds to follow the passions and interests of the world, being only
ordained to guide them in the ways of salvation: Of such Doctors or rather
busy bodies, we may say with La^^tantius. lib. 3. cap. 30. Facessant omnes
isti qui vitam humanam n^n instruunt sed turbant. Let all these be silent which
rather trouble then instruct man's life.
Oliver de la March the Dukes chief steward, having made many voiages upon
this occasion, could not hold his peace, but spoke what he thought to the
prejudice of the Kings honor. The Duke upon this advertisement, fearing to be
staid, parted secretly from Hedin without the kings leave or priuity.

The King was offended at this injury done unto Rubenpre, and at the repors
which were diuulged upon his voyage into Holland. Complaints and discontents of
the King.
It had been a timiditie both dishonorable and dangerous to dissemble. In
fearful and enduring hum^rs contempt is infallible. They fear not to wrong
him who has no care to revenge it.
He sent Moruillier his Chanceller, the Archbishop of Narbonne and the Earl of
Eu to the Duke of Bourgundy, to complain of the detention of the Bastard of
Rubenpre, and for that he had suffered his Majesty's name and respect to be
wronged publicly and taxt: That Oliver de la March and a religious man had
spoken il of him, and that the Earl of Charolois had allied himself unto the
Duke of Brittany. These were the complaints whereon their embassy was grounded.

Moruillier represented the Kings intentions with much bitterness and passion,
quallifying this intelligence of the Duke of Brittanie and the Earl of
Charrolois with no milder name then crime and conspiracy, adding that he could
not conceive why it had been made, but for that the Earl of Charolois was
discontented for that his pension was not paid him The Earl of Charolois was
much moved at that word which imputed his discontent to a matter due, which the
greatness of his courage made him to contemn, thinking that Moruillier would
infer thereby that he could not live without his pension.
.

The Earl of Charrolois thinking that his silence would prejudice himself and
wrong his friends defense, Impatience of the Earl of Charolois.
did still interrupt Moruilliers discourse. The father, who had bred him up
more to hear then to speak h, staid his impatiencie to give Moruillier
leisure to discourse of the Kings complaints with the like heat as he had
begun them. The Duke having heard him with patience, answered, coldly and
wisely, that the bastard of Rubempre being charged with crimes, had given his
son cause to doubt of his stay in Holland where he had been taken, a
country which did not acknowledge any other Sovereign then himself laqueline
Countess of Henalt and Holland was wife to two ^usba^ds the Du.^o^ Gloucester
brother to the D. of Bedford, and the D. of B^abant. Being d^famed for her
adulteries she declared Philip Du: ^f Burgundy heir to her countries, Henalt,
Holland, and Zeland in the year 1426. The first cause of the bad intelligence
which was betwixt the Burgu^dians and English and reconciled Philip and Charles
the seventh.
: That Oliver de la March was borne in the Franche County Oliver de la March
was son to Philip de la March, who served the house of Bourgundy fifty years,
and is author of the obs^ruations which are published in his name.
and was not answerable before any Judges of France: That if he had erred
against the Kings respect he would cause him to be punished. And as for the
preacher of Bruges he knew not what was become of him, and that he was a man of
that condition as his conscience would not suffer him to lay hold of him.

The Earl of Charolois did still interrupt Moruillier in his discourse, who
told him that he was come to speak to the Duke his Father and not to him.
Whereupon the Earl entreated his father to suffer him to speak, I have
answered said the Duke for thee, as in mine opinon a father should answer for
his son, yet if thou have so great a desire, think of it to day, and to
morrow speak what thou will. He would not have his son carried away with
those blind guides Choler and Ia affairs of consequence, and especially when
one that is more mighty is to be satisfied, nothing is to be answered
suddenly nor with choler. They suffer troubled water to settle that it may be
clear. Choler and precipita^ion are enemies to Counsel.
Precipation.

Moruillier persisted in the bitterness of his discourse, forgetting nothing
that might be said to blemish and disgrace a Prince. He showed that the
Bastard of Rubempre had been sent by the King to stay the Vice Chancellor of
Brittanie returning out of England: That having landed at the Hage in Holland,
the Earl of Charralois had been too suspicious. The Duke answered that the
Bastard of Rubempree had been found faulty. As for his Son, the Earl of
Charolois, if he were suspicious, he had it not from him but from his mother,
who was a very suspicious and distrustful woman, and yet notwithstanding if
he had been at the Hage at the passage of Rubempre, he had done no less then
his son D. Isabella, Infanta of Portugal, daughter to the King Don John was
married to Philip Duke of Bourgundy in the year 1429. and was mother to
Charles.
.

Moruillier complained also, that the D. went from Hedin without taking leave
of the King, and against that which he had promised. Ha, said the Duke, with
some little perturbation and heat, finding himself touched with the breath of
his word. Nothing can be reproched more sensible to a Prince then the breach of
his word, who should rather fail himself then his promises, wherein he should
be (...) less i^dicious then constant.
I never promised any thing but what I have kept. And fearing that in speaking
this they should find that he was moved, he added smiling, that he had never
failed of his word but to Ladies, that having promised the King not to go from
Hedin, he had added this condition if there came no other news. That the
discovery of the Bastard of Rubempre and other important matters had caused
him to go to horse.

Hereunto Moruillier, The D* co^plaines of the Kings breach of his word.
seeing you have always showed such affection and goodwill unto the King, let
him not now believe the contrary, in refusing so small a thing as he demands.
It is true said the Duke I have never failed in my affection and love unto the
King, but I may well say that he has never granted me any thing that I have
demanded, and has kept nothing of that which he has promised me, When a
Prince has an opinion not to hold any thing that he promises he may say
that ^e has put himself out of the commerce and negotiation of all sor^s of
a^^aires, for no man can treat with him that has nothing valuable but words.
There is nothing but distrust and jealousy of his actions, detracta opinione
probitatis
witness the towns engaged which he should have suffered me to enjoy during my
life.

And for that Moruillier did still infist to have Rubempre, the which was a
matter of consequence against the Dukes sovereign command. Peter of Goux a
knight and master of the laws, said, that although the Duke was vassell unto
the King for some lands, yet he had others that did not acknowledge any other
Sovereign but himself, holding of the simple grace of God who had honored him
as well as the King with the Image of his eternal government A royalty is the
figure of eternal g^uernment and the Image of the Divine monarchy, And
therefore Kings have been held as the fathers of the people. Aristotle in the
third book of his Pol^^^ckes says, that a realm is the power of one that
does govern the co^monweal^, not seeking his own p^iuat^ profit, but that of
his subjects.
That the Duchies of Brabant, Luxemburgh, and Lotrech: the Earledomes of
Bourgundy, Henalt, Holland, Zeland and Namure were sovereign countries. Yet he
is no King said the Kings Ambassadors, to whom the Duke answered, I would have
the world know that it was mine own fault if I be not, yet will I not tell how
or by what means.

The next day the Earl of Charolois presented himself unto his Father in the
presence of the French Ambassadors, kneeling upon a Cushion of Velvet, an
exemplary act of Reverence and Humility of a Prince of thirty years old unto
his Father, and which assures this truth: That who so will be honored of those
which be under him, should not fail to respect and honor those that be above
him. The scope of his discourse was to justify himself for the taking of the
Bastard of Rubempre, and the confederacy betwixt the Duke of Britain and
him, wherein he protested he had no other design then the Kings service, and
showing that his condition had wherewith to content himself with his own, and
contempt of an other man's; there being no less glory in the contempt then in
the possession, It is for great courages to contemn Riches. The shortest way
to riches is to contemn Riches. It is easier to disdain then to possess all.
he added that it was not for any discontent he had for the taking of his
pension from him, for that, with the favor of his father, he could live
without the Kings bounty.

Whereupon, Departur^ of the French Ambassadors.
the Duke entreated the Ambassadors to tell the king that he besought him not
to believe any thing lightly against him and his son, and to hold them
always in his favor. An Ambassador must never suppr^sse words of bravery nor
threats which be hears spok^ by the Prince unto whom he is sent.
They presented a banquet unto the Ambassadors, the History says, wine and
spices. When they took their leaves, the Earl of Charolois spoke these words
unto the Archbishop of Narbonna, Phil. de Com. lib. 1.
one of the three Ambassadors, recommend me most humbly unto the Kings good
grace, and tell him that he has sought to disgrace me by his Chancellor, but
before the year be past he will repent it.

From these little sparkles grew that great fire of the war of the
commonweal. The Duke of Burbonne The visits of great persons are suspicious.
John Duke of Bourbon making show to go see the Lady Agnes his mother at
Bruxells treated the league of the public weal with the Duke Periculosae su^t
secretae coitiones.
who was the intellectual agent, The D. of Bourgundy comes to see his mother
at Bruxells.
faining to go see his Mother at Bruxells, conferred with the Duke, but did
not discover the secret, saying only, that the Princes had no other intent but
to present a petition vnthe king to reform the disorders of the state and to
have forces ready, to the end he might know how many were interressed in this
reformation. Such as entered into this league knew one another by a silken
point which they carried at their girdles.

Although the king had spies in all places yet knew he nothing of these
conjunctions and assemblies. Princes are within and not above the world to see
all that was done. They must be above the heavens to know the ecclipses by
themselves and not descend low to see the effects The effects of great designs
do often break forth before the causes are discovered. A vigilant Prince does
always use peruensions and diuersions.
. The league was borne before he knew the conception, he did not apprehend
that it should show it self on the Burgundians side, for he considered, that
although the son were violent and ill affected toward him, yet the father
wanted no judgment to restrain him, and judging that the air could not be
troubled but toward Brittanie, he assembled both the Princes of his blood, and
the chief of his Noblemen at Tours about Christmas 1464. and propounded unto
them the great occasions he had to prevent the designs of the Duke of Brittany
The King as Montstrelet says, made this assembly to complain that the D. of
Britain had said, that he had a design to make war against the Princes and
to dispossess them of their lands.
.

It was at this assembly that Charles Duke of Orleans could not forbear to
speak for the Princes of the blood, See Claud. Saysell in the life of Lewis
the twelfth.
beseeching the king not to doubt of their loyalties and affections. The king
was offended at this remonstrance, and rejected it with words full of spleen,
bitterness, and contempt. The Duke of Orleans being thus roughly handled, and
grieved that in an age of threescore and ten years, he was not heard by him
whose grandfather had vouchsafed to hear him in his youth, could not endure
them, not considering that they came from the mouth of his king, who was not
bound to fit them to his humor, and that he must swallow them sweetly without
murmuring, for the demonstration of the offense does but augment it. He died
for sorrow two days after, the fourth of January 1465. He was interred at
Bloys, his bones were carried to the toombe of his Father at the Celestins at
Paris, the 21. of February, 1504. by the commandment of king Lewis the twelfth
his son: After the battle of Azincourt he remained five and twenty years
prisoner in England. The English would not deliver this Flower-deluce without
ransom, and to redeem him the D. of Bourgundy paid three hundred
thouthousand crowns. What a change* John Duke of Bourgundy depriues Lewis of
Orleans of his life, Philip Duke of Bourgundy his son gives liberty to
Charles of Orleans, and to make the bond perfect, he gives him the golden
fleece, and marries him to his Niece Mary of Cleues, she was the third wife,
having before his imprisonment married Is^bel of France, widow to Richard King
of England, and Bonna of Armagnac The afronts which are received from great
persons must not only be disgested patien^ly, but also after a constant
manner, murmuring auailes nothing. Many have made of scratchings incurable*
wounds, and oftentimes the injury is doubled, and renewes when as they make it
known that it is received according to the design of him that does it.
By Mary of Cleues he had Lewis the twelfth, his only son, and two
Daughters. Mary was promised to Peter of Bourbon, and afterward married to
John of Foix Vicount of Narbonne, father to that Achilles of France Gasto^ of
Foix Duke of Nemours, and of German, Queen of Arragon. Anne of Orleans was
Abbess of Fonteue^aud.


The Duke of Bourbon having opened the passage to this design of the war of
the commonweal, The Duke of Berry retires into Brittany.
they attended no more but to see the head. Charles of France the Kings brother
being at Poictiers, and making show to go a hunting whiles the king was in
his devotions, steals away and goes unto the Ambassadors of Britain. John of
Rommille, vice chancellor of Britain, and Tanequy of Chastell, who were come
to have a Prolongation for other three months to make answer to the kings
demands, carried him away speedily by the means of the Lord of Lescon a
Gascoine, and led him into Brittanie. The King being gone in devotion to our
Lady of Pont in Limosin, the Duke of Berry retires into Britain.
He was but eighteen years old, he held life so short, and that of Princes,
which live in subjection so troublesome, as if he did not speedily know what it
was to be a master the knowledge would ever come to late. He was welcome, for
this was the firebrand which they must cast to set France on fire. The Duke of
Brittanie promised him the service of his person, and all the succors of his
forces.

He declared the cause of his departure by letters which he wrote to the Duke
of Bourgundy, and to the other Princes of their intelligence. The most apparent
was drawn from the bad government of the affairs, whereof the Princes of the
blood It concerns the Princes of the blood to look into the disorders of the
estate and to assist the King faithfully to rearesse the^: whiles there is heat
in t^is blood we may hope for the life and continuance of the body.
, which have the chief interest and care of the whole body, should apprehend
the dangerous events, and had subject to complain to see unworthy men, without
honor, or merit, to deal in that which should pass by their hands, and to
leap over their heads to great offices: That his arms and his desires had no
other object but to restore order unto the Realm, and there withal to ease
the people of their oppressions, the which he could not otherwise hope for, but
in making the King know in the beginning of his reign At the C^mming of new
P^aces they make demands and pursuits for that which they desire the rest of
the Reign, for when they are well settled they will no more bear speak. That
(...) Petcennius having prepared his companions to mutine he said Quando
ausuros exposcere remedia, nisi no^^m et nutantem adhuc Principem vel armis
adirent. Tacitus lib. 1. Annal.
the extreme necessity whereinto it was brought. His will was manifested more
amply by his letters to the Duke of Bourgundy which Monstrellet setts down in
these terms.

Most dear and well-beloved Uncle I recommend me unto you. I let you understand
that of late I have often heard the clamors of the Princes of the blood my
kinsmen and other Noblemen of this Realm in all estates; of the disorder and
pitiful government which now does reign by the council of men, being about
my Lord, full of all lewdnes and iniquity; who for their own profit and
private disordered affections have drawn my Lord into jealousy and hatred
against you, me, and all the Noblemen of the said Realm, yea against the
Kings of Castile and Scotland, so long allied unto the Crown The most ancient
alliances of the French have been with the Scots and then with the Castilians.
The Crown of France has had pretentions upon Castille at the inheritance of
the Lady Blanch of Castile mother to St. Lewis.
as every man knows. In regard how the authority of the Church has been
kept, Justice done and administered, the Noblemen maintained in their rights and
privileges, and the poor people supported and freed from oppression, I write
no more unto you, for I know you are sufficiently informed, and I am grieved at
the said things, as I ought to be, as he whom it does so near concern as
every man does know, The Children of one family are interessed in the (...) and
the Princes of the blood in the government of the estate.
and desire to provide for it by the Counsel of you, of the said Princes and
kinsmen and other Noblemen, who have all promised to aid and serve me not
sparing body or goods for the quiet of the Realm, and the public weal
thereof, and also to save my person which I found to be in danger. For
incessantly and openly my said Lord and they about him spoke such words of me,
The words of such as are nearest unto a Prince make men judge of his
intentions. The Duke of Berry hearing that the servants of the K. his brother
spoke freely against him, thought that their discourses were framed upon his.
Good words entertain friendship and bad dissolues the^.
as I might with Reason have cause to doubt: I therefore left my said Lord, and
am come unto my good Cousin of Britain, who has given me so good and
commendable reception as I cannot sufficiently commend it, and is resolved to
serve me with body, goods and all his power to the good of the said Realm and
public weal. And therefore my most dear and well-beloved uncle, my intention
and desire is to employ my self with you and the said noblemen my kinsmen,
whose counsel I will use, and not otherwise, to restore and redress the said
desolate Realm, knowing that you are one of the greatest of the Realm, whom
the good or ill do easily concern, and Deane of the Peers of France, The Duke
of Bourgondy is first Peer of France, in this quality he made a protestation
to King Charles the sixth saying that he might not asist at the judgment of
the K. of Navarre, which did only belong unto the Peers.
a Prince renowned for honor and justice, as it appears by your great deeds,
conduct and government of your great signories, knowing that the disorders of
the said Realm, have and do displease you as reason is: I would desire with
all my heart to have an assembly with you and other noblemen my kinsmen, that
by your counsel we might provide for all matters, which for want of order,
Justice and policy are at this day in all the estates of the said Realm, His
design of arming to reform disorders.
and for the ease of the poor people, The opression of the people was not
great being only for matters which were not accustomed.
who can bear no more, and to set such an order in all places as it may be
pleasing unto God, to the honor, felicity and good to the said Realm, and to
the retribution of honor and perpetual commendation of all those that shall
employ themselves. I do entreat you, most dear and loving uncle, that in this
matter, which is great for so good an end, it would please you to aid and
assist me, and to cause my brother in law of Charolois your son to employ
himself in my aid, as I have always assured my self he will do: And to the
end that you and I may meet (which is the thing I most desire) for that my
intention is shortly to enter into the Country, and to keep the fields with
the other Princes and noblemen, The Princes and Noblemen of this party were
Charles the Kings brother, Phillip Duke of Bourgondy. Francis Duke of
Britain. Charles Earl of Charolois. John Duke of Bourbon. John Duke of
Calabria. Peter of Bourbon Lord of Beauieu. Charles Cardinal of Bourbon. The
Earl of (...), the Duke of Nemours, The Earl of Armagnac. The Earl of
Albret^. The Earl of Dammartin. The Earl of St. Paul. The Prince of Orange.
The Earl of Newchastell. The Bastard of Bourgondy.
which have promised to accompany and aid me. I entreat you that you will be
pleased to leuy and draw forces out of your Country toward France, and in case
you cannot do it, that you would cause my said brother in law of Charolois to
come with a good power of men, and withal to send unto me one of your Counsel
which is faithful to assist for you in all matters which other Princes of the
blood shall think fit to be done for the good of the said Realme^ And by whom
you may be still informed of my good and just intentions, the which I will
govern by you and other Princes of the blood and no otherwise: And that which
my said brother in law in your absence shall do or say for the public good
of the Realm Under the Consideration of the public wea^e many which had
been put from their places made use of their interests. N^w Princes do
commonly f^ile in these changes. If the Prince succeeds a good Prince, whose
reign has been just and happy, then needs no change, if he were not so, he
must not employ such as we his Ministers, and therefore Galba was blamed to
have employed the chief counselors of Neroes cruelties and wickedness.
and ease of the poor people, I will maintain unto the death, and thereof you
may be assured. Most dear and loving uncle let me always understand if there
be any thing wherein I may pleasure you and I will do it willingly, praying God
to give you a good life and that which you desire. Written at Nants in Brittany
the 15. day of March, the subscription was. Your Nephew Charles: and on the
top. To mine Uncle the Duke of Bourgondy.

Such was the language which they that were about this young Prince made him to
hold, Death of Pope Piu^ the second.
who knew well how to commend the good, and to excuse and flatter the evil
which he did, and who indiscreetly drew him to designs, whereas the danger was
certain and the profit doubtful.

The Pope had made his profit of this division, if death Pius the second died
at Ancona, Platina says that be spoke unto the last gasp, and dispu^ed long
with Lawrence Rouerella Bishop of Fe^ara a learned Divine, Licerit ne extremam
vnctione^ iterare qua semel invnctus fuerat. Dum Basileae pestilentia
grauissime egrotaret. Whether he might reiterate the extreme unction, wherewith
he had being anointed, being sore sick of the Plague at Basil.
had not disappointed a desseine which he had to reduce France wholly under the
obedience of the Sea of Rome, and to deprive it of the rights and privileges
which does free it in temporal things, for in those which concern the
spiritual and orthodoxall Faith, she has always been a dutiful and obedient
daughter. This Pope was lamented of all Christendom, for he had great
conceptions for her glory and liberty in those places where she was oppressed
under the tyranny of the Ottomans. Being at Ancona to imbarke himself for the
voyage of the Croisado, after that he had given audience to the Ambassadors of
France and of the Duke of Bourgundy, who excused themselves that they could not
serve in person in this voyage, a slow continual Fever, which had long held
him, deprived him of life. He had no cause to grieve that he had lived, for
that his life had been honored with so great and worthy actions as he might
rightly say he had not been borne in vain.

They only blame him for that being Pope he had contradicted that which he had
written being a private person, His birth and fortune
with so great Passion, as he discribed Pope Eugenius to be the wickedst man
in the world AEneas Siluius in the beginning of the second book of his
Comentaries of the Council of Basil says that Me^tita est iniquitas Gabriell
(Eugenius was called Gabriel Condelmar) et perdidit cum Dominus in malitia sua
quosynodali sententia ex Apostolica s^de precipitato factus est Dominus in
refugiu^ Ecclesiae suae. And in the end of the first, Necessarium fuit illud
decretum ad reprimendam Romanorum Pontificum ambitionem and vt de^^ceps animam
a temporalium rerum sollicitudi^e retraherent
: and his deposing a profitable and fit action for the church. He was issued
from the Picolhomini, of Sienna, and seeing that his father had been expelled
the City with many others of certain families revolted by the mutiny of the
people, he resolved to seek his fortune at Rome, where she has always done
great miracles. He was first of all Secretary to Dominike Grap, and followed
him to Basil, when as he came to complain that Pope Eugenius refused him a
Cardinals hat, which Martin the fifth had given him. The masters poverty forced
him to take another: He placed himself with the Bishop of Noara, but seeing
that he was in like manner persecuted by Pope Eugenius, he left him and did
serve Nicholas Cardinal of St. Croix: and followed him to Arras, when as he
was sent by Pope Eugenius to reconcile the French King to the King of England,
and the Duke of Bourgundy.

At his return finding that he was in no grace with Pope Eugenius, His
dignities and commissions.
he came to Basil, where he was employed in the goodliest actions of the
Council, he had the charge of Abreuiator, Secretary, President in the chamber
of the faith, In the Council of Basil there were four chambers or four
assemblies which they called four deputations, that of the faith, of Peace, of
reformation, and of common affairs. Every chamber had a president, which was
changed every three months.
and Orator in diverse sessions. When there was Question of an embassage to any
Prince or commonweal there was not any one but He fit for it. He was sent to
Amedeus Duke of Sauoy, then to the Emperor Frederick, to Pope Eugenius, to
Philip Vicecount Duke of Milan, and to Alfonso King of Arragon. It was he which
persuaded the Emperor Frederick to go to Rome to be crowned there. Frederick
sent him to Sienna to receive Ellenor of Portugal his wife, and afterward
into Bohemia to pacify a controversy which was grown, for that the Emperor
Frederick did not restore them their King Ladislaus The Emperor Frederick
seeing the troubles and schisms in the realm of Hungary seized upon the young
King Ladislaus, and gave him in charge to Eneas Siluius.
.

He was sent to the diet of Ratisbona, whereas Philip Duke of Bourgundy
assisted, His oration to arm against the Turk.
he laid open the necessities of a war against the Turk with such efficacy
and eloquence, as many Princes resolved to employ both their lives and goods:
But these sudden resolutions went presently into smoke: Platina says that
all which heard him were wonderful resolute to this war, Veru^ hoe natura
co^per. tum est, eorum animos cito residere quoru^ affectus facile mouentur.
But it is found true by nature that their minds are soon changed, whose
affections are easily moved.
He also pacified a great complaint which Germany made against the Pope, and
the which has been since continued, the Princes and comminalties of the Empire
being resolved not to acknowledge him in the policy and direction of
spiritual things, if he did not first grant them the same rights which Italy
and France had by the Pragmatick Sanctions. The Emperor found their first suite
just, and was soon drawn to yield unto it. Aeneas Siluius changed his
opinion, representing unto him that there was more honor and safety for him to
have good correspondence with the Pope, then to favor those who would diminish
his authority whereof the Emperors were protectors. These complaints were
pacified, and revived in the beginning of the Emperor Charles the fifths
reign, when as they presented unto the Popes Legate being at Nuremborg A.
Remonstrance under this title. Sacri Romani imperii Principum ac procerum
grauamina aduersus sedem Romanam.


He was Archbishop of Sienna, His bad affection to Lewis the eleventh.
and after the death of Calixtus was advanced to the Popedom in a manner
without thinking of it. He began with the assembly at Mantua, whither all the
Princes of the Empire sent their Ambassadors. He made open show that he loved
not France, as has been said, and this affection continued after the death of
Charles the seventh: for Ludouieo Gallorum regi aduersatus est, quod libertatem
Ecclesiae minuere conaretur cum ab eo antea Pragmaticam Sanctionem Ecclesiae
Romanae pernitiosissimam pestem extorsisset.
Platina says, that although he had wrested the Pragmatick Sanction out of the
hands of Lewis the eleventh, yet he did not forbear to cross him, for that
he thought to diminish the liberty of the Church. Paul the second, called
Peter Barbo, a Venetian, succeeded him.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF the third BOOK.
1 THe Wisdom of Lewis the eleventh upon the troubles of the League of the
common weal. 2 He sounds and discouers the intentions of the King of England.
3 He labors to divide the heads of the League and beginns with his Brother. 4
The order which he set to preserve Paris. He passes into Bourbonois, besieges
Ryon, and treats with the Dukes of Bourbon and Nemours, 5 Entry of the Duke of
Bourgondies army into Picardy, that of Brittany musters at Chasteaubriant. 6
Battle of Montleherry. The victory is uncertain and in a manner equal. The
Earl of Charolois is hurt. The place of Battle remains to him, with a great
disorder of either side. 7 Observations of that which happened both before and
after the battle. 8 The King passes the night at Corbeil, and goes the next
day to Paris. 9 The army of the league lodged at Estampes, whereas the Dukes of
Berry and Brittanny arrive. 10 It passes the River of Seine and besieges
Paris. 11 The Princes let the Parisians understand the causes of their arms
and demand a conference. Paris sends her Deputies to St. Maur. 12 The Kings
army breaks the Conference, and assures Paris, yet he resolves to grant all
they should demand, and to desperce this Army. 13 Enteruiew of the King and the
Earl of Charolois for a peace, and the needles fear of the Dukes army. 14
Supplies of men and money sent by the Duke of Bourgundy to the Earl of
Charrolois. 15 The Kings second meeting with the Earl of Charrolois. 16 Peace
concluded and sworn at Bois de Vincennes. 17 The Duke of Berrij is received
into Roane with the Duke of Brittanie, and the Earl of Charrolois returns
into Flanders. 18 The King returns to Paris, and makes the Earl of S. Paul
Constable of France. 19 The Earl of S. Paul cannot live in peace, and takes
for a maxim of his conduct to entertain the two Princes in war. 20 Discords
betwixt the Dukes of Normandy and Brittanie.
THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI.
THE THIRD BOOK.
WHO so succeeds a good Prince has a great advantage over the affections of
his own subjects, The love the children for the fathers sake.
how rough and difficult soever his reign be. They hold themselves so much
bound to the fathers bounty, The bounty of a Prince does so bind the hearts,
as even after his death they yield prootes of their affection to their
children, although wicked Cambises was beloved for the love of Cyrus his father
and Co^ modus for the respect of Marcus Aurelius.
as they do patiently endure the sons rigor. France did owe her liberty to
King Charles the seventh, he had freed her from the miseries of war, she did
acknowledge no other restorer then him: This respect retained many in their
obedience and duty, who suffering themselves to be carried away with this
torrent of the league, Sedition must be be smothered in the beginning.
had become fools for company and by infection: For the people is a sea which
moves with the wind, yet never follows if some one goes not before, This
beast the people have so many beads, that although it has great and terrible
forces yet it is base and cowardly if it be not stirred up and led, vultus
sine rectore praeceps, pauidum socors, Tacit.
but the number seemed but too great, and it had multiplied speedily if the
Kings wisdom had not foreseen it. Conspiracy in the beginning is like unto
rain which enters into a small cranny on the top of the house, and being
neglected in the end expels the master thereof. The King did consider hereof,
for being advertised of his brothers retreat, he knew well that the party was
made against him if he did not oppose himself: That what appeared not, might
be greater then what was in show, and that besides the Princes of his blood,
many Catylines had drunk in the same cup the wine and blood of this
conspiracy. Every conspiracy has cruelty, and blood has been taken for the
seal and oath that bind the conspirators. Salust says that Catyl^n mingled
wine with blood in a cup and presented it to his associates, I^de (...) post
execrationem omnes degustauissent, sieuti in solemnibus sacris fieri consueuit
aperuit consiliu^^^^
His first resolution was to divide that which he could not break. He sent
to the Duke of Bourbon to come unto him; Who for that he would use no
dissembling (a great and powerful virtue in these corrupted ages) would not
disguise his intentions, nor represent them otherwise in words then they were
in his heart. He was the first mouer of all these spheres, he had first given
his voice and vows to this general revolt of France, he had offered to hang a
bell at the Cats neck, In great resolutions there is danger to give the first
voice, and hazard to execute that which is resolved. It is more safe to follow
then to lead, Insiita mortalibus natura propere sequi, quae piget inchoare.
Tacit. And if they be reduced to the conduct of an other it must be with the
restraint of his own wisdom. Ne consil^is alterius regi recuses, Est illius
atque esto tuus, tuumque serua. In post tuo velle, modum in velle alieno.
when as every man expected who should dare to do it, and had more desire to
end then to begin. If he had made any show of repentance or fear in this
beginning, the rest which had martcht in his steps would soon have turned
their backs.

He answered that he had the same design with the other Princes for the good
and profit of the public weal, entreating the King to excuse him if he came
not to Court, and for a greater declaration of his will he ceazed upon the
revenues of Bourbonois, and stayed Iuuenall des Vrsines Lord of Traynill, Peter
of Oriola, and the Lord of Crussoll prisoners, making it known that Ambition
has no other Law then the fancy of the Ambitious, and takes away the mask
from all respect. When the King saw that there was no means to reclaim these
Princes, and that the Duke of Bourgundy was in arms, he advertised all the
chief noble men of his Realm, and wrote unto the Clergy, to the governors
of Provinces, Letters from the K. to the governors of the Provinces and towns.
to the Magistrates and towns, who faint and lose their courage for a little,
As a little fear makes the people to faint, so a weak hope makes them
return, by nature they are fearful and do not think what they shall do to
endure but to fly the danger.
that they should not suffer themselves to be carried away with the false
shows of the enemies of the estate, who had suborned his brother to engage
France in those desolations from the which it was but newly freed: That if they
which had suffered themselves to be abused in this revolt, did not bethink
themselves, there wilfulnes would make them unworthy the clemency which he
offered them: That with the grace of God and the fidelity of his good
subjects, he assured himself to abate and disperse these bad designs.

Then considering that this league did consist of those who had sometimes
called the English into France He that has two enemies must agree with the
one, the better to prevail over the other. The Roma^ns did never fight against
two; Hercules could not do it. After the Parthian war they began that of the
Marcomanians. They would not break with Antlochus, who had wronged them before
they had ended ^ith Philip.
to have a share of the shipwreck, The King seeks to the King of England.
that the old enemies favoring the new, he might fall betwixt the Anuile and
the hammer, he sent to the King of England dissembling cunningly the wrong
which he had done him, when as in demanding Bonn^ of Sauoy Richard Earl of
Warwick was sent into France in the year 1464. to demand Bonna of Sauoy in
marriage of King Lewis the eleventh, for K. Edward. The King granted it, but
during this negotiati^n the King of England fell in love with a mean
gentlewoman, widow to one Gray a Knight, Daughter to Richard Rivers, and
^aqueline eldest Daughter to Peter of Luxemburgh, Earl of St. Paul.
the Queens sister for his wife he had married an other: He intreates and
coniures him not to assist this new rebellion, the which like to a puff of
smoke would vanish as soon as it should begin to rise.

Edward being already engaged to the Duke of Bourgundy let the King understand
that he was a sharer with him. Edward the fourth declares himself for the
Burgundian
He sent the same letters which the King had written unto him to the Duke of
Bourgundy, promising to assist him as constantly as his forefathers Edward the
third King of England, w^nne the battle of Cressy the 26. of August, 1346.
France lost 1500. Gentlemen, all were not slain, but all were defeated. The
Prince of Wales his Son won the battle at P^icters ten years after, the
9. of September 1356.
had done. This young Prince felt a boiling desire in his heart to perform
that in France which other Kings of his name had done. He was glad to find
without the Island an exercise for turbulent spirits to entertain and quench
that furious heat of fighting. He that commands a warlike Nation must find
exe^cise for his soldiers abroad, if he will not suffer them to take it at
home. There is not says Tit. Liu. in ^is thirteenth book an^ great and mighty
Potentate that ca^ le^g continue in peace, for if ^ee has not some enemy
abroad he shall find at home.


He knew well that the Duke of Berry his brother should be the King of this
Tragedy, that they would bring him still upon the stage, and make him play
all parts according to the humor and invention of the Duke of Brittanie, of
the Earl of Charolois and of the Duke of Bourbon: Wherefore he sought to
flatter him, and to draw him out of the Brittans hands, and to that end he
went to Angers: there wanted no letters, promises nor good words: Youth and
inconstancy are si^^ers of one m^tber, this young Prince had nothing constant
in him.
fair speeches hurt not the tongue. If the Duke of Berry had not been well
guarded and watched, he had left his friend as suddenly as he had done his
brother.

At Angers he was advertised that the Earl of Charolois levied men, that the
Duke of Brittany armed his subjects, and that the Duke of Bourbon had declared
war against him in seazing upon his servants, his Towns and treasure. He
gave order for all three, and proceeded therein without precipitation, he did
march In affairs of Importance they must go and not run, descend leisurely*
and not cast themselves down headlong. Precipitation is a shelfe covered with
the slupwracks which she has caused in great occasions.
but not run, and did remedy all without disorder: He commanded the Earl of
Neuers, and the Marshall Ioachin to lie in Picardie: he left Rene King of
Sicile, and the Earl of Maine upon the fronters of Brittanie, and went
himself directly to Bourges, where they would not suffer him to enter, and
from thence unto Bourbonois, with an intent to set upon the Duke of Bourbon,
who had first revolted and was the weakest. In such reuolts the first blows To
disperse a fa^^^on speedily, they must first set upon t^ose that fortify it.
Seianus said that there was not. Aliud gliscentis discordiae remedium quam si
vnus alterne maxim pro^pti subuertirentur. Tacit. l. 4.
which are given upon the principal Actors, amaze and humble the rest.

Paris was still in his mind, The Kings care for the preservation of Paris
and that great City which gave a Law and motion to all the rest was
perpetually before his eyes. He repented him that he had gone so far off To
prevent small inconueen^es they must not neglect greater affairs. Tiberius
said, that an Emperor must not for the Rebellion of one town or two, abandon
Rome the chief of the Empire, and running here and there where the mischief
reigns, seem amazed.
hearing that the Army of the league did march. He knew that it consisted of
humors, that in former times she had raised strange, mutinies, and that his
brother had friends there, the Bourgundian Pentioners, and the Brittan
Intelligences: That it was a body so full of bad humors, as a small matter
might alter it. As diseased bodies cannot endure to be touched, so vlcered
minds are troubled upon light occasions. Sen.
He requests, exhorts, and commands every man to have a care of her
preservation. And for a greater declaration of his love to that City, he
causes the Chancellor to tell them that he is resolved to send the Queen his
wife thither to be brought in bed, as the place which he loved above all others
in his Realm. If the whole world were a ring, Paris should be the Diamond.

He went to St Porein to prepare himself for the siege of Ryon whether the
Duke of Bourbon was retired. His voiag^ into Bourbonois.
The Princes and Noblemen of the league did succor him with all their forces.
If the Duke of Bourbon had been able to engage the King in Bourbonois, he had
given the Earl of Charolois means to join with the Duke of Brittanie, and to
effect what they intended.
The Duke of Bourgundy gave leave to the Duke of Beauieu, and to the Cardinal
of Bourbon to levy men in the French county. He was also assisted with the
Duke of Nemours forces, and by the Earls of Armagnac and Albret.

The King being at S. Porcin, the Duchess of Bourbon, his Sister, came unto
him, beseeching him not to make trial upon her husband what a great King may
do, and to give him means to show as great proofs of his resolution to his
service, as he made show to be come to make him feel the effects of his
displeasure. She was so powerful in her persuasions as the King (who desired
rather to commit his affairs to wisdom then to fortune) A Prince what
advantage so ever he has must ^olow that advise which represents the least
danger. It is a great error to shut ones eyes to wisdom, and to submit
himself to the Indiscretion and inconstancy of fortune.
was content not to pres^e the yielding of the Town of Ryon to eagerly,
Dutchesie of Bourbon obtaines a peace from the King.
and did not seem very difficult to yield to some kind of treaty, the which
was well sworn but ill performed by the Duke of Nemours, who having the truth
of the oath in his mouth retained the impiety of treachery in his soul. A
defection which the King will never forget, neither shall it be expiated
without the loss of his head.

The King made this accord to go speedily to Paris, and to stand surely upon
the midst of the hide, A Prince must not remain upon the fronter of his
Estate and abandon the center. Calanus the Gymnosophist, seeking to persuade
Alexander to this maxim, caused a dried Ox Hide to be laid abroad, setting
his feet upon any side he removed him with the other: but being in the midst
he stood firm. Inferring that when as Alexander was upon one of the fronters
of his Empire, the other mu^ined. Plut,
being advertised that the Earl of Charolois came on, he sent Charles of
Harley to assure the Parisiens of his coming, and of the accord which he had
made with the Duke of Bourbon and Nemours, the Earls of Armagnac and Albret.
He began by them the execution of the Council which he had taken to disvnite
and disperse those heads, and to give way to those torrents. Without doubt if
he had been patient to attend their first furies, all had disbanded more
suddenly then they assembled Many which assail are more mighty then one that
is assailed. But if he has means to tempo^ise and to endure their first
fury, he shall prevail, and the other will be scattred and ruined.
.

The forces which were soonest ready came from them which held themselves most
wronged. The Earl of Charolois had a thousand and four hundred men at Arms,
Army of the Earl of Charolois.
every one of the which had five or six great horses, with eight or nine
thousand Archers chosen out of a greater number; for every man would march,
but the best were entertained. In this choice should appear the love they have
to the honor of Arms, and to the good of the State, for many Captains have
soldiers to serve the King in his Armies, whom they would not employ in their
houses If there be not choice judgment and distinction in the leuies of
souldi^rs, the Princes service cannot prosper. Vegetius imputes the ruin of
the Empire to this carelesnes, Huic (says he) (...) vbique ab hostibus
illatae sunt clades dum longa pax militem incuriosus legit, dum possefloribus
indicti tyr^nes, per gratiam aut dissimulationem probantur, talesque sociant
Armi^, quales Domini habere facti dicunt. Veget. Lib. 1. cap. 8.
.

The Duke of Bourgundy caused the Earl of Charolois his son to march, and at
his departure he said unto him. Go my Son in a happy hour, Words of the
Duke of Bourgundy.
and resolve to die rather then to fly, if you fall into any danger, you shall
not be abandoned for the want of a hundred thousand men. Words of power to give
courage to one that had been borne without it. Words of infallible assurance
spoken from a father, whose love admits no comparison, all other friendships
are but wind. He did wisely look unto the future, which Princes do not
always, they do seldom look unto that which shall befall them, and do not
think that great assents have great downefals. The E. of Charlois entered into
France with an army of fifteen thousand men, he besieged Nesle in Vermandois,
and took it, and past by Noion and Mondidier. The Earl of Neuers his Cousin
found himself to weak to stop his entry into Picardie, whereas all the
people seemed ready to set up Statues The people follow a victory: They of
Samos erected a statue to Alcibiades in Iunos Temple, but when he was defeated
they gave another to Lysander his enemy.
for the Victors, and to acknowledge him that should be most fortunate or most
strong.

The Earl of Saint Pol having taken Pont Saint Maxence by composition, or
rather by the treachery of the Captains which were within it, the Army past
the river of Oyse, and entered into the Isle of France. The Earl of Charolois
carried the title of Lieutenant general to the Duke of Berry. These first
bruites In new occurents reputation has great effects. In nouis ceptis
validissima est fama Tacit. lib 13.
gave great reputation to his desseins; he made a general proclamation of
liberty, and exemption from taxes. He caused the Rowles to be burnt at
Laigny, and made a declaration that all should be free, causing the salt to be
distributed at the Merchants price: He that will draw the people to his
devotion, and build a foundation upon their loves, must free them from
oppressions, for they hold eeuery one that hurts them for an enemy, and never
judge of the equity of the war, but by the good which they receive.
upon these proclamations the people thought they should have an end of their
miseries, but they were but cries a far of, and vanished coming near, like
unto those noyses which upon certain coasts of the straight of Saint George
terrefie those that are a far of, and when they come near they hear not any
thing. The Princes of the League entering into France cried liberty for the
Commonweal, and exemption for the people, but coming near to treat they
spoke noe more of it. The pretexts of civil war are always goodly and
plausible, but when they are considered, they vanish and have noe substance.


Ioachin Rouvant Marshall of France, Marshall Ioachin enters into Paris.
did always coast the army, but a far of, and having noe means to attempt
any thing nearer, he cast himself into Paris with a hundred and ten lances.
The Earl lodged at Saint Denis, whereas the other Princes had promised to
meet him, to consult of their affaiers, his army was lodged thereabouts. He
presented himself in battle before Paris, the amazement was great, and the
skirmish terrible even unto the gates. Hauthourdin thought that the town was
to be taken in this amazement for they began to shut up their shops. A giddy
headed fellow ran through the streets crying the enemy was entered, and with
One word of amazement or bad pr^sage is punishable, this man was whipped through
the streets of Paris, the Chronicle says that the King cried out to the
hangman whip him soundly for he has well deserved it.
fear many fell into fevers. The King was well served in this occasion by the
Marshall Ioachin and Charles of Melun. Prrisiens amazed.
Many, as it happens always in civil divisions, played the temporizers, saw
the storm coming, and fitted themselves for every Element.

It was thought good not to attempt any thing until the Kings brother and the
Duke of Britain were come. They march slowly, and the Earl complained of
their stay, Stay of the army of Brittany.
saying, that they had broke their word, for they had promised to be together
in arms before Paris at the feast of St. John. Romille Vice Chancellor of
Britain excused his Master, and filled up blanks signed to keep the Earl
in breath, and to give the Duke time to assemble forces at Chasteaubriant, where
he mustred his army, observing strictly the severity of discipline It is
impossible in civil war exactly to observe military discipline, if excess be
punished in one party, the souldi^r who ^^ues nothing but disorder flies unto
the other. Ci^ilibus bellis plus militibus qua^ docibus licer. T^cit. lib. 2.
Histo.
although it be in a manner impossible in civil wars, whereas the soldiers can
do more then the Captains.

A resolution being taken to join with the troops of Britain, the Earl of
Charolois seized upon the bridge of Saint Clou to pass to Estampes, where a
Lady aduertized him that the king had past Orleans, Battle of Montlehery
and came withal speed to enter into Paris: He resolved to attend him, and
lodged at Longiumeau, sending the Earl of Saint Pol to Montlehery where he
made choice of a place of Battle betwixt both. On twesday the 16. of July, the
King arrived at Chastres, he desired to enter into Paris, or to go out of the
realm, King Lewis the eleventh said that if he had not entered into Paris he
had gone (...) seek succors in Italy of the D. of Milan has great f^iend. It
may be he w^ld not have taken so desperate a resolution, but would have
considered that he had to do with men which would not live long together
without some dispute.
if he might not do it: And for that he would not hazard any thing amidest so
many discontentments and infidelities, he had commanded Breze great Seneshall
of Normandy not to fight, who notwithstanding this prohibition, told one of
his friends that he would bring the two Princes so near together, as he should
be a very able man that could part them. He was slain with the first, and he
is produced for an example that seldom does that succeed well which is don
against the order and commandment of the Prince.

On the seventeenth of July the Seneshall presented himself earlely in the
morning upon the way to Montlehery. The Earl of Saint Pol, who led the Earl
of Charolois foreward, found himself engaged, and could not turn head to come
to the place of Battle, as the Earl had commanded him; it was so pressed, as if
he had made show to refuse to join; all had been in disorder. He put his
troops in battle in a plain, which is on the side of Chastres, he caused the
heads of wine vessels to be beaten out Wine is a dangerous munition, for a day
of Battle: The Commonweal of Sparta forbad the use of it in war where they
must have a good foot and a good eye, and wine troubles the one and weakens
the other. Aristotle says, either none at all or very little.
to make his soldiars drink, he planted stakes in the front of his Battallions,
and put his carriages behind, having the forest of the one side. His Archers
left their horses, and so did their brauest Caualiers, holding this manner of
fighting of the English, for the worthiest proofs of courrage and valor. The
English did always fight on foot. Be^rtrard of Gu^s^lin and the men at arms
of his time did the like. The old French Caualary, which has been so much
esteemed, have been in a manner always beaten when they have incountered
foote-men, unless they left there horses, example at Courtraie against the
Flemings, at Crecy and Poi^tiers against the English.
If he had charged resolutly, the kings forward had bin put to rout, for when
it appeered first, there were not above four hundred coming down
scatteringly by the vallee of Tourson. Opportunity of fighting neglected.
They might have been charged and defeated without all hope of succors, the
way being too narrow for the body of the army which followed, But the small
skill of the men at arms to mount and descend (the which horsemen should
chiefly practice) made them to loose much time, for they that had left their
horses took them again, when they considered that they should need them
either to poursue or to fly, and that their courages might be fortefied by that
of their horses. Courage should come from the man and not otherwise; The horse
helps something. The Sarmatians fighting on foot could not find room enough
to fly, but on horse back there were none more valiant.
In the mean time the Kings army grew great, and the Earl of St. Pol was
sorry that he had so long forborne the charge, and neglected the advantage He
that can take the advantage which the situation of the place gives him fights
happily. Alexander at the Battle of Pyles in Caramania having vewed the
situation of the place, said that the victory was infallibly his, and it was
true Curt. lib. 3.
which the place and time gave him.

The Earl of Charolois being advertised that the Kings army appeared, took
the Alarm more whotly then the Signior of Contay, a wise and temperate
Gentleman, had given it him, bringing him this advertisement. Order of the
Battle changed.
He forgot the order and changed it, and gave not himself time to make fast
his caske, coming in all have to the Earl of Saint Pol about seven of the
clock in the morning, where he found his troops at work, being sorry it
should be said his enemies should come sooner to him, then he to them. Some
came and told Philopaemen, the enemies are with us, to whom he answered. And
why say you not that we are with them. Pl^


The skirmish continued above four hours, and gave means to them that were
far off to come time enough to the feast. Earl of Charolois charge the
Kings forward.
The Earl of Charolois fearing that the Marshall Ioachin, who was at Paris,
would come and charge him behind A wise Captain must look as well behind him
as forward The words of Sertorius. They say also that a Captain should have
eyes at his back.
resolved to free himself of that which was before him, and to repulse the
forward which appeered beyond Montlehery. He charged and beat them into the
village, and caused some houses to be fired, the flame and smoke whereof being
carried by the wind against the French, forced them to turn their backs, and
to recover a dich, whereas the hedge gave them means to cover themselves and
to breath.

The Earl of Charolois charged both flanks resolutly, and the French withstood
him and repulst him. The men at arms of Bourgundy were newly raised, His
horsemen ill trained.
capable to see their sheelds a long time white and without charge, Among the
Romans they knew the old men at arms by their shields which were figured, the
young carried them plain, we find in the old fables of France and Spain that
new Knights did, in like manner, carry white shields, until that some exployt
of valor and courrage gave them means to put in some charge.
of a thousand and two hundred there were not fifty that could charge their
lances. They put themselves in disorder, and falling upon their Archers brake
their ranks, This error of the Ca^alerie has bin after noted. Plutarke says
that Brutus men at arms which were Geules in the Battle against Pompey
disordred their own footmen.
The carriages, where they were entangled among the baggage, and the stakes
which the Earl of St. Pol had planted, Archelaus having planted stakes in his
camp did so incumber the horses, chariots and Elephants of Sylla, as he
defeated them easily.
and compassed in by a troop of Bourgundians, who beat them down with battle
axes.

The Earl of Charolois had charged with such fury, as his men were out of
breath when they came to join, forgetting the appointed order to pause thrice.
This order has bin observed among the ancients to march slowly, making some
stays, and not hastily when they go to a Battle. Marcus Crassus in blamed by
Plutarke, for that he did otherwise.
All that were on the right hand toward the Castle were put to route by him,
French put to rout on the one side and Bourgondians on the other
and on the left hand all that were under the command of Rauestein, brother to
the Duke of Cleues, were broken by the French. The Nobility of Dauphine and
Sauoy did the King good service, and the Kings presence and good words The
words of a King on a day of battle are burning firebrands; cast into the most
frozen hearts, There is not faith On^sander, nether trumpet nor drum which does
more encourage them to fight. But they must not use any great discourses which
do rather cool then comfort.
wrought wonders, else all had gone to route.

The first piece of victory was so pleasing to the Earls taste, as to have more
he ran a mile beyond Montlehery after them that fled, A General of an army
should not abandon his camp to follow them that fly. Alexander had like to
have miscarried in the last defeat of Darius for having followed the chase of
his enemies too rashly, he was in great danger. Cyrus had always men appointed
to follow them that fled.
contemning the advice of an old Gentleman of Luxembourg called Anthony the
Britton, who held him lost if he past any farther.

The French rallied themselves again together, to renew the fight, and to
vanquish or loose all. He pressed still forward, desiring rather to repent him of
his Fortune, then to have shame for his victory. Q. Curtius gives unto
Alexander (...) se brane and hardy wo^ds. I had rather repent me of my fortune,
then be ashamed of my victory.


The Lord of Contay spoke more boldly unto him, and caused him to return.
Repassing through the village he went to charge a troop of footmen; who
seeing him come fled. A soldiar let him know that he would not give his life
for nothing, striking him on the breast with his Pert^^isan, whereof he showed
the mark at night. Then passing toward the Castle he saw the archers of the
Kings guard, where at he was much amazed, thinking that the victory had bin
absolutely his, and that there was not any more resistance. He turned on the
one side to come unto the place of Battle, but there fell suddenly upon him
Every man runs where the general is, even ashippe wanting a Pylot and hel^e
dot^ soon yield to the violence of the waves so he that can by policy and
good advice find means, to beat the chief of his enemies, the rest will
soon faint. Polib. lib. 3.
twelve or fifteen men at arms, Earl of Charolois hurt and in danger to be
slain or taken.
who at the first slew Philip of Org his Guidon, and hurt him in the throat.
Yield my Lord, cried Captain. la Hire and Gilbert Grassar we know you well
enough. The beuer of his helmet being not made fast in the morning descouered
all his face. He made noe answer but with his sword, and this summons to yield
inflamed his courrage to defend and free himself. John Cade^ son to a
Physician of Paris, big, heavy and strong (three goodly parts which the History
gives him) being mounted upon a puissant horse, passes through them, Oliver de
la Ma^ch calls him Robert Cot^rea^ ^^nne to the Earls Phi^^tion.
diuides them, and saues his master. This Act of valor and fidelity was
presently rewarded, for the E. of Charolois made him a Knight. He came to his
camp There is no^ retreat in a day of Battle but to the camp, for ^ee that
leaves it has lost the field. How many armies says the Consul Paulus
^emilius, have there bee^^, which having had noe good success in the battle,
but bin driven into their sorts by their enemies, yet ^ sallying forth
a^terwards ^ they have put them to rout who held themselves victors Tit. Liu.
lib. 44.
all bloody, and his men repaired unto him in small bands and tired, the
footmen complaining that the men at arms had in the morning dis^rdred them,
and trodden them under their horses feet, A wound gotten in a good place is
glorious. Baies, chains no^ grownes are not always carried, but such marks
are never left at home. Such as beheld Serto^ius who had lost his eye, few with
his loss a testimony of his valor.
and the Earl seemed much pleased to have received a hurt on the face for a
perpetual mark of his prowess.

The French recovered the dich where they had so valiantly contended and as it
were divided the fortune of the combat. But they were amazed to see themselves
without a head, Brut of the Kings death
and the bruit was that the King was dead: This brute was grounded, for that
the Seneshal of Normandy, who ware his apparel and arms to confirm his
loyalty, The King grew into some jealousy that the Seneshale of Normandy was
of the league, and spoke of it, to whom he answered, Si^ to show what I am,
give me your coat of arms to save your life, for your enemies seek but after
your person.
had been slain in the beginning of the encounter, when as the Bourgondians
knowing well that if the king were overthrown the rest could not stand, had
charged furiously whereas he showed himself. This fear augmented the number
of the runneawaies; and made them to fly who should rather want life then
courrage. The Earl of Maine, who was suspected to have intelligence with the
enemies, and Montauban a Britton led away the reereward. Their courages fell to
their feet: not any one had the heart to strike stroke in saving his life to
save his honor. To make a feightlesse dish^norable, it must be done like unto
the Parthians or Scithians, who shoot in flying, and saving themselves
speedely they always fight, and so take away the infamy of their flight. Plut.
in the life of Crass.
The flight was of eight hundred men, which deprived the King of the honor of
an absolute victory, and of the means wholly to ruin his enemies.

The rest wauered betwixt fear and duty. The King appeared in this amazement,
The Princes presence cheers the soldiers hearts. It is the Planet of Mars from
whence great courages* borrow the constancy and ass^rance of warlike Virtue.
and by his presence gave courage unto his men, who from that time cared more
how to vanquish then to live, how to fight then to save themselves. The enemies
had more anoyed them that fled then the rest: as Fortune does sooner suppress
them that yield unto her then them that resist.

The Earl of St. Pol leaves the forest whether he was retired, and comes to
the place of Battle, with an order befitting men, and not with violence which
is proper to fools and beasts, To go unto military actions r^shly and without
judgment is no valor; ^easts and fools go (...). That which nature makes
proper to valor, turns to rashaes, i^ reason does not govern.
both parties were so tired as they stood at the gaze. They made some shot with
their great Ordnance. Disorders common in both armies.
The Earl had more men in his Army then the King, but he alone was worth
10000. his presence assuring that which was much shaken, No good can be
expected of an army that is scattered but the Princes presence. In this battle
of Mont^berry without the King who animated his me^ with good words all had
fled. Phil. de Com.
the amazement was great on either side, a desire to save themselves from
danger did press the French as well as the Burgundians, and many did their One
told Pompey that to come unto him and to leave Caesar he had abandoned horse
to whom Cicero said. You have done more ho^or to your horse then to your self
to make him know the reproach of flying and desertio^.
horses the honor to remain in the fight, when as they stale away.

The Earl had none but horsemen, he wanted footmen, slings For the inhabitants
of the Islands Balea^res called now Maiorca and Minorca had been held most
cunning with slings He sola genti^rm^ sunt, et vnum ab Infantia studium: cibum
puer am tree non accipit, nisi quem ipsa monstrante percussit. Flo. lib. 3. cap.
8.
or bowmen to dislodge the French from the hedge and ditch: The King retires to
C^rbeil.
A hundred men had been able to force them. He had whole troops remaining,
neither were the Kings all broken. If he had Eagles remaining, so had he not
to do with pies, We must always consider in comparing of forces with whom we
have to deal, and not regard the number. Nonius after the Battle of
Pharsalia, said unto Pompey. We have yet seven Eagles, that were good said
Pompey, If we were to fight with Parrats or Popingaies.
but the night made them take another resolution. The King was conducted by the
Scottish men to Montlehery, there to refresh himself, for he had past the day
without meat or drink, as he had done some nights before without rest. He
went to Corbeil to his bed, the Earl thought that he would remain upon the
field, and this belief was confirmed by the light of fires which he saw there
long after, for the fire falling into a barrel of poulder had burnt some
Carts along the hedge.

The disorder was great of either side, as it happens always in these
incounters, Inequality of Recompenses after the Battle.
sooner seen then foreseen. What victories were gotten and what battles
won in those days without disorder? None but the Romans could brag that they
never committed error is war. Absit in^^dia verbo. et Ciuilia Bell a sileant,
nunquam ab equite host numqua^ a pedite, nunqua^ aperta Acie nunquam equis
vrique locis labora^imus. Tit. Li^. lib. 9.
The king Lost of his horsemen, and the Earl footmen, and the number of the
dead were 3000. Goodmen were honored, cowards blamed, and runawaies punished.
But as Princes are men as well in the distribution of Cowards as in the
distinction of punishments, In the recompense of merits as well as in punishing
of faults Princes do not always observe such Justice and equality, but they
make it known that they are men and no Angels.
some lost their offices for flying, who saw others rewarded which fled twenty
miles farther. There was a man of quality noted in the kings Army, who fled to
Lusignan and never rested, and a Bourgundian as far as Quesnon.

The field was covered with 3600. men slain. Repast of the Earl of Charolois
among the dead bodies.
They were feign to remove four or five bodies to set the Earl down upon two
bottells of straw, and to give him meat. It was a Princely table, and a
millitary feast, which he should desire, that will justly and gloriously carry
the title of General of an Army. Sobriety is one of the parts necessa^y to the
pe^fection of a great Captain. The frugality of Julian the Emperor is much
commended in the History. Mamertinus in his Panegyric says that be took
delight to eat of the provisions of the Army, to be s^ruca by the first that
came, and to drink of any cup Gaudebat Castrensi cibo ministro obuio et poculo
fortuito. Amian. Marcelinus says, that he did sometimes eat such things as
would have did. fled a Pioner. Et ^mperatori non e^ pediae ciborsi ex ^egio
more sed sub columellis tabernacu^is cenaturo pultis pottio p^rabat ex^go^
etiam munifici fastidienda Gregatio
He that is called victorious has nothing about him but bodies dead or dying,
among which there are some that call for drink. What good cheer could he make
in a place all covered with horror, in an unseasonable time, and in so general
an amazement? To them that said he had the field, and that he held it all
night. He had reason (answered the King) to lie upon the field seeing he had
neither Town nor Castle for retreat. A word spoken wittily and to purpose did
show wisdom necessary in the General of an Army, to disguise the advantages
which the ennemy may have over him, to make them less, and to turn them to
another sense then they are commonly taken. It is an Argum^nt of a settled
judgment to have w^rds able to disguise accidents which hap, in such sort as
the amazement which may grow may be turned into resolution. The earth
trembles, an army is amazed. See you not said Sempronius Gracchus how our
enemies are amazed the earth sha^^es under their feet. At the battle of
Cerignoles, fire fell among the munition. The great Captain taking it for a
good presage, said. Noi habbiam^ vinto; Id^io e^ annuncia manifestamente la
victoria dandoci segno che non ci bisogna piu doperare la^tilleria Guic. lib. 5.


Many things observed in this Encounter show that executions are not
answerable to Counsels, Observations of this Battle.
and that there is a great difference to fight by discourse and to command in
field. The order of the battle was changed. The Conduct of war how discreet
and indicio^ soever it be cannot command accidents. But they must have a care
never to change the order of the Army. Philippe of Valois lost the battle of
Cr^cy for that he changed the order; the Earl of Alencon took it ill that the
footmen of Genoua were put in the foremost ranks.
It was said they should take breath on the way, and the Earl made them to
march speedly through the Corn, which was high and strong, so as his men were
so wearied as they had more need to lie down then to stand. And although the
Princes had disputed the victory unto the last point of valor, yet knew they
not to whom the trophee did belong, and they might say that the Earl of
Charolois had lost the Battle, but the King had not won it.

Night increased the Bourgondians amazement, seeing themselves to have no
defenses nor trenches, Counsels in perplexity.
but dead carcasses. They were in a great perplexity what they should do,
every man found difficulties, and Fear is a Crystal glass which represents
all things to be greater, more doubtful, and difficult, and wholesome counsels
are not well executed by men that are troubled and fearful. Add this reason
of Guicc^ard. Nelle come auer^e diuenta ogni di maiore ill timore, et le
di^ficulta di chi estato unto, In adverse fortune the fear grows always
greater and the difficulties of him that is vanquished.
fear made them greater then they were. They held a Council along the hedge
upon a piece of timber. The Lords of Crequy and Hautbourdin, spoke of Duke
Phillips, the Earls father, first carrying arms at St. Requier, who recovered
the next day that which he had lost the day of Battle, It was to prepare this
Prince to the glorious emulation of his fathers valor and to bind him not to
dislodge. The Earl of St. Pol said that they must take the way to Bourgondy,
and leave some part of their carriages to retire more speedily. His reason was
grounded upon the apparent danger they were in to remain without victuals
betwixt Paris and the Kings forces: Many were of the same opinion, and yet they
that were sent to take view of the Kings army were not yet returned, and that
their opinions should begin whereas their reports ended.

It was dangerous to give advice in a matter where the issue might bring
reproach to the sincerity of the Council, for the wisest advice does not
always succeed happily, A fatal accident makes a good Counsel to be blamed
and they that judge by the events will mock at wisdom which has bee^e
vnf^rtunate, and will commend rashness which has succeeded well. Cauta potius
concilia cum ratione quam prospera ex casu placeant. Tac. Lib. 2. Wary Councels
with Reason do more p^ease then prospe^ous by chance.
and many times rash Counsels fall out well. But it were better to stumble
with reason, then to go firmly with hazard, their opinions were all doubtful,
and their minds much perplexed. Counsell^ of the Lord of Contay.


The Lord of Contay said that this retreat could not be made without disorder,
that as soon as it should be bruted through the Army, every one would grow
amazed and fly; that the most diligent should not go twenty leagues before he
were staid, or slain. That the safest course was to pass the night with a
good guard, and at the break of day march directly to the place where the King
should be, that they must vanquish or dye, and that to leave the field were to
quit and loose all. The victory belongs to him that keeps the field, although
he had b^ene beaten and broken. Paulus Aemilius speaking to ^is soldiers
says. Castris erutus etiams^ pugnando aci^m vicisset pro victo habebatur. Tit.
Liu. lib. 9.


This Council, seeming more generous, and hardy, was commended and followed by
the Earl of Charolois, who commanded every man to rest two hours and to be
ready at the sound of the trumpet: Oliver de la March says that when Contay
had given his opinion, day began to break. Such as had been sent to discover,
bring word that the King was not far off, and that they had seen the fires
in his army, they send others, and every man seems resolute to fight, but the
greatest part had more desire to fly, and who so had left to their choice to
fight or to fly, or had suffered the^ that fainted Chabrias not willing to
rely upon his soldiers whom he new to be n^w caused a proclama^ion to b^e
made through the Army, that whosoever was ill at ease should lay aside his
arms, all the cowards were sick; he used them to make a number, but the
faction ended he cassiered them. Poliaenus lib. 4.
to lay aside their arms, the Battalions had grown very thin.

In the morning they were advertised that there was not any one in the village
of Montlhery, Montleherry abandoned.
and that all were gone. Agis seeing that they of Argos whom he had vanquished
did rallie themselves to come again to the fight, and that his soldiers were
amazed. Courage my friends (said he) seeing the Victors are amazed, think
how the vanquished tremble. Pluarch.
They that an hour before said that they must not press the enemy, and seemed
much amazed, were the first that cried, go let us run after them. They grew
assured and hardy for company; boldness returned unto them after the danger. The
day discovered the fears and heaviness which night had concealed. The Earl of
Charolois encouraged every man. He thought that seeing there was amazement in
his army which he held to be victorious, there was despair in the Kings which
he held to be scattered and lost. But such as had lost would not hazard any
more, they murmured against the heat of this Prince, who was obstinate to
fight, and could not retire upon his loss, but made himself miserable upon
hope of good hap in the recovery of that which he had lost. Ambition Ambi^ion
is never so high^ but she thinks still to mount: That which seems to be the
top is but a step to her. Cui assecut^ satis fuit quod optanti ^^i^ium
videbatur. Sen.
sees nothing too high, neither does it find any thing too difficult, that
which seems great in desiring, seems little when it is in her power.

That which confirmed the courages of the most resolute, Duke of Britain
expected.
was the assurance of succors from Britain, but many thought that this ill
fortune would stay it. The Earl of Charolois entertained them with the
assurances he had of the armies marching When an army or Town is in
expectation of succors they must always assure that it comes, and although
they should have news to the contrary, yet the commander in his wisdom must
give it out otherwise. Syphax sent word to Scipio that he could not succor him
and and that he was for Carthage. Scipio entertained his Ambassadors
courteously and gave them presents to make his me^ believe that Siphax came,
and that his Ambassadors did return to hasten him.
and when he had not any, nor other news, yet matters were reduced to those
terms as he must tell them it was near. He caused a Friar to make show to
come out of Britain, who said that he had left the army so near as they
should see it the same day. But the fear and amazement was so great as they
could not believe it. This policy A lie how little soever it be believed does
profit much. And news brought by a person least suspected of lying are soonest
received, at the least they do for a while suspend their judgments.
if it did not augment the courage, yet did it the patience of them that were
most danted, and the lie did profit for the small time it was believed, the
great desire they had to see the troops of Britain made it be received
without confideration, as money which is received by esteem and common
approbation, although it be not of weight.

The King went from Corbeil to Paris as soon as he saw what course the Earl
of Charolois took, He arrived there on thursday at night, The King comes to
Paris and is feasted.
and supt in the house of Charles of Melun his Lieftenant general in the Isle
of France, this was his triumphing feast They used to prepare a triumphant
feast for the victors, whereas the first place did belong unto him for whom it
was made, and the Counsulls were entreated not to be present, for that in their
presence this honor could not be given to any other. Plut.
where they drank to his health, as to Jupiter the Deliverer. The Assembly of
Noblemen and Ladies was great, he related his great dangers, his diligence and
toil. He drew tears of joy and pity from the hearers, every man said all is
well, The King reported his adventures, and in so doing spoke and declared many
goodly words and pitiful, where at all wept abundantly. Chro Martin.
seeing the King is well. The health of a good Prince is the health of his
Estate, the people said of Alexander Seuerus. Salu^ Roma quia saluns est
Alexander. Lamprid.
He assured all his servants that he would never cease until he had chased
all his enemies out of his realm.

Yet his design was to do what he could to end it other-wise then by Arms.
He sent the Bishop of Paris to the Earl of Charolois, Bishop of Paris sent to
the Earl of Charolois.
to let him understand that he desired to know to what end he was entered into
his Realm with so great a troop, for that he could remember that when as he
went into Flanders, in the time of King Charles the seventh, his Father, he
was not followed with so great a train. He commanded him to let him know the
injustice of his desseine: That he undertook a war under color of the
publik-weale, to undermine the whole estate, and to set fire of the house to
drive them out that cleansed it: That there was no such Phrensey as to make ones
self sick to use remedies, Peace is sweet after war, but much more
proffitable before. It is better never to have been an enemy, then to be
reconcyled.
being natural for a sick man to desire health. But for him that was found to
make himself sick upon hope of cure, was folly and madness. The Bishop of
Paris went, and having represented unto the Earl of Charolois the Kings
intentions and complaints. Say unto the King, answered the Earl (fretting the
bitterness of his ambition with humanity and myldnesse) Princes desirous to
reign, have made servitude sweet with courtesy and mildness. By this
poisoned myl^nesse Caesar over threw the commonwealth of Rome.
that I am not come to do any ill, but to procure the good of his Realm,
having lived in such sort with mine army, as noe man has occasion to
complain: that being as I am, able to serve and succor my friends, and to anoy
mine enemies, I am not bound to yield any other reason of my desseignes. But
not to conceal them from him, I am here for two reasons, the one not to fail
of my word to the Princes, which have taken arms for the public good, the
other to have two men which the King has favored and supported against me:
Private inter^st* are always mingled with the sublike causes of war. The E.
of Charolois was an implacable enemy to the Earl of Neuers and the Lord of
Croy; be added this hatred to the causes of war.
If I be come well accompanied it is to defend my self in France from that
harm which the king would have done me in Flanders: That when he came he was
received honorably, richly and quietly, and then was not that done unto him,
which he had a will to do unto me: That in a word France had more need of a
warlike and armed liberty, then of a quiet and miserable servitude.

After the Battle the Earl of Charolois caused the whole army to be lodged
at Estampes and there abouts. Arms of the League loged at Estampes.
The commodity of this lodging saved that which one more discomodious had lost,
^f time and occasion give leave to chose a lodging to stay there, they must
consider two things, which the ancient Romans have always observed in their
lodgings. The helthfulnesse of the place for one, and water with commodity of
victuals for the other. They knew what places were not helthfull, observing
their situation and the complexion of the inhabitants.
In this place as the Earl of Charolois spoke unto Mounsieur at a window, with
great attention and affection, a Britton cast a squib which struck against the
bar where they leaned, and being amazed at this accident, they thought it
done of purpose to hurt them. The lodging was presently environed with
soldiers to guard them. There was a dilligent search made for him that had done
it, who being only covered with his inocency, descouered himself and said
that it was but a squib which he had cast to show them pastime, whereupon this
great amazement was turned to a jest.

All their forces being united they took council how they should employ them.
Their opinions were always applied to their passions and desseines. Charles
the Kings brother weary of the war.
An ordinary mischief in enterprises where there are many commanders. The
plural^ty of heads is always rumous and unprofitable, every one seeks to
prefe^re his own reasons and counsels. They do and undo indespight on of
another. T^ndendo ad sua quisque consilia cum aliud alii videtur. ad inuasione^
lo^um hosti apperiunt. Tit. L^u. lib. 4.
That of the duke of Britain was not answerable to that of the Earl of
Charolois. Monsieur seemed already weary of the war, he lamented those that
were slain, hurt or maimed in the army, which showed that matters were
represented to his imagination of another color, in the undertaking then in
the executing. Matters when they are conceived and proiected have an other f^ce
then when they are executed.
He wished that they were to begin, greeuing that they made him the cause of so
many miseries, A generous spirit is not sensible of the ruins and desolations
which grow by war and civil broils. The Duke of Berry was heavy seeing so
great a number slain and hurt in the Battle of M^ntlehery. The first
slaughters of war stick terror into them that have not seen them.
as of humain miseries the most lamentable is that which proceeds from his
fault that complains. He had kindled the fire, yet could not endure the flame,
he had begun the tragedy, nay rather a cruel game, whereas men made but a
sport to force, spoil, burn and kill. He is not esteemed a soldiar that
cannot do all this in civil wars, the most wicked of all others, whereas by a
fatal disorder they saw the fathers bury their children. When Craesus was
prisoner to Cyrus, by this reason that in the time of peace the children buried
the frather, and ^n war the fathers bury their children, be preferred peace
before war. And of all wars civil is the most unjust, i^humaine and
furious. Summu^ Brute naefas ciuilia bella fatemur. Luc.


These words were well observed by the Earl of Charolois, King of England
sends the garter to the Earl of Charolois.
who from that time persuaded himself, that there would be noe great
difficulty to reconcyle the Duke of Berry to the King his brother, wherefore he
sent unto the King of England, although he were his enemy, for that he had
favored the house of Lancaster, he accepted the Order of the Garter, which he
ware all his life, and sought his sister in marriage, although he had noe will
to marry her, but being engaged in this proposition he was taken at his word,
that which in the beginning was but a mere will, became necessity. William of
Cluny a Prothonotary was employed in this treaty, as in many other great
occasions, to recompense the which the Duke of Bourgundy demanded a Cardinals
hat for him, and sent Philibert Hugonet Bishop of Mascon to Pope Sixtus the
fourth, who seeing the great oppositions which Cardinal Latin of Vrsins made,
he fell into some hope to attain unto that dignity, the which he demanded and
obtained.

A resolution was taken to go directly to Paris, He that will do any great
effect in an enemies estate, must go directly to the heart, and not busy
himself upon the fronter.
the Army leaves Estampes, passes by Saint Mathurin of Larchant, and Moret in
Gastionis. These two small towns were appointed for the Dukes of Berry and
Britain. The Earl of Charolois was lodged at Piguet in a large meadow, fast
upon the river of Seine. The Marshall Ioachin and Sale^art could not stop their
If there be any thing that does import in the conduct of an army and binds a
general to be careful, it is the passage of rivers which may not be waded
through, in the which there are a thousand inc^nueniences. Among many means
which Veg^tius sets down, he advises to carry small boats of one piece, and
plankes to ^ay upon them. Vege. lib. 3. cap. 7.
passage, for they had much Ordinance to make their way, and there were none
but some few horses on the other side to hinder them. In all this he was
assisted by the wise council and experience of the Earl of Dunois, who was an
Ulysses in policy, and an Achilles in valor. He caused small boats and wine
pipes to be carried in carts.

In the midest of the river of Seine there was an Island in the which he lodged
through the favor of his Canon, remaining there all night with fifty men at
arms, Passage of the army into the Isle of France.
and the next day he finished his bridge unto the other bank. The building of
this bridge brought reputation to the army, for that Prince seems either very
weak or very fearful, which gives an army leisure to make a bridge. As there
is shame not to hinder it, so there is glory to finish it. The Romans who were
rightly borne for the conquest of the world, were so Jealous of their honor at
the passage of rivers, as they never passed over their Legions but upon
bridges, To pass rivers without a bridge was held unworthy the greatness and
Majesty of the Roman people. Caesar; Nisi po^tibus presidiisque impofitis dare
in discrimen legiones haud Imperatorium ratus^
and after that they had planted gards upon the approches. At this passage the
army was fortified by nine hundred horses, led by John Duke of Calabria, Son
to Rene King of Sicile, four hundred Crosbow-men Germans, and five hundred
Swisses. The first Swisses which carried arms came to serve the league of the
commonweal. Phil. de Commines says that they wan credit for them that came
after, for they behaved themselves most valiantly in all places where they came.
They hold that their were an hundred thousand horse in this army.

They took Pont Charanton, whereas the quarters were given unto the troops to
besiege Paris. The Earl of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria held all the
bank of Seine from Charanton to Conflans. Disposition of the leagues Army.
The Camp was enclosed with a number of carts. The Dukes of Berry and
Britain were lodged at S. Maur, and all the rest toward S. Denis. The
Princes did presently let the Parisiens understand why they were in Arms, for
the which they gave such plausible pretexts, and offered so many offices Offers
made to a multitude must be of (...) things as please them. They offer offices
to the inhabitants of Paris: Phil de Comines gives the reason. That offices are
more desired in that City then in any other in the world, for such as have
them, make of them what they can, and not what they ought, and there are
offices without wages which are sold for eight hundred crowns, and others
which have final wages are sold for more then their wages can amount unto in
fifteen years.
and preferments to them that favored their designs, as having let them know
that they desired to confer together to consult of the means to reform the
disorders of the Realm, the City sent her Deputies, whereof William
Chartier, Bishop of Paris, was the chief.

There was some Ceremony used in it. The Princes assembled at St. Maur.
Assembly of the league and Deputies of Paris.
The Duke of Berry was set in a chair, the Duke of Brittanie and Calabria on
the one side, and the Earl of Charolois on the other, with his Cuirasse and a
rich mantle over it, and these three stood. If this conversation had been
suffered, says Phil. de Com. the Princes might have said the Town had been
won, for the people would soon have turned to their party, for many reasons,
and by consequence the whole realm.


John, Bastard of Orleans, and Earl of Dunois, propounded in the behalf of
the Princes that the design of their league tended only to the public good,
and that it was necessary to understand one an other, and to have free entry
into Paris to treat and confer together: that the fittest means depended of
that Convocation of the Estates, entreating them not to be amazed if they
presented themselves before their City in Arms, having no other intent but to
cause the King to give ear Marc Anthony, says, that although all sedicious,
be dangerous, yet that is just and necessary, when the people being oppressed
dema^ss reliese from the whole congregation of citizens lawfully assembled.
to the good and wise counsel which they would give him for the public good
of the Realm, the which they said was ill governed, laying many imputations
upon the King.

If the King, Conference broken by the Kings presence.
who was gone into Normandy to raise his troops, had not come as a Prince
should come to fortify a people amazed and wavering, this first conference had
given the Princes of the league a great advantage, for the City yielded to
receive them and their men, paying and living without excess, but being
arrived, no man durst once speak of a conference or an accord, and such as
dealt in it repented themselves, being forced to depart the Realm. The Bishop
of Paris lived in disgrace with the King, It was not a cloud When Athanasius
was banished by the Emperor Julian, he said unto his friends that came to sorrow
with him in this disgrace Courage my children this is but a little cloud which
will vanish presently. Nic. lib. 10. c. 19.
to pass with the first Sunshine, for his darkness continued his whole
life, and the King showed some feeling thereof after his death, having caused
his Epitaph to be altered.

He was content to have kept Paris from failing, and would not search out too
curiously neither the names nor the number of those that had managed this
design. Never says the Sigr of Hail la^ did the Parrisiens hold the better
party, neither did they ever any thing well but this time; for they were for
the King whom they supported and relieved.
He considered that in so great a City there must needs be some bad spirits,
There is not any City says Tit. Linius which has not bad Citizens, but the
multitude is always ignorant and gross.
and that in public offenses the number takes away the punishment. He let the
most capable understand that he was King, and that he had no need to have the
Princes come in Arms to reform his Estate, that none of them could love his
subjects so much as himself, that by the grace of God he was the father, and
to let them know what they might hope for of the mildnes of his reign, the
Parisiens privileges did abolish the impositions raised since the reign of
king Charles his father. Normans will live at discretion within Paris.
True it is the Parisiens could not well agree with the soldiers that were
within the City, Towns besieged have many times suffered more by them within
it then by the enemy. Such was the estate of the Lu^^^^ans de^^^ded by the
Epir^ts. Tit. Liu. lib. 8.
the chief garrison was of Normandy, who would live in Paris as in a country
of conquest, threatening to do any thing, and they were not fearful to any
but to their hosts. There can be no great expla^s expected against an enemy
from a soldier that is insolent and insupportible to his host, as were they of
Vitellius, whom Tac. calls Hospitibus tantu^ metuendos.
The Bourgesses were moved and prepared for their defense, as well against
them within, as their enemies abroad. The people hold all them for enemies that
trouble them, and know not how to endure: they of Paris were not then so apt to
suffer, as they have been a hundred and fifty years after, for the first day
that the Princes army appeared before the city A people shut up is subject to
loose patience, and to revolt againsth* s^prince when be sees the enemy to
spoil^ his possessi^ns abroad, and that ^e is tormented by the^ within that
guard him. Wherefore he must be kept in awe by two means, vigor and mildnes,
by the scare of worse and hope of better.
. The King telling certain Bourgesses that were in guard at St. Antonies gate,
that the Bourgundians should not annoy them as they had done, a Proctor of the
Chastelet having more feeling of the wine that was lost, then of the blood that
was spilt, answered, Yea Sir, but they gather our The vines about Paris were
gather^d the first daics of the siege, before September, although the gropes
were not r^ps. The Chronicle says that the wine was very small, and that they
called it wi^e of the Bou^gondians year.
Vines and eat our grapes, and we cannot help it. It were better replied the
King, that they eat your grapes, then to come and take the silver which you
have hidden in your sellers. Paris has always loved her ease, and to take her
gain from her Great towns are not kept in obedience and awe but by the mea^es
which the people have to gain. Cleon could do much in Athens, for that he
flattered the common people, using them like an old man and giving them still
some means to gain Plur. in the life of Niceas.
were to draw her out of her Element. They are prompt upon the first terrors,
and are sooner sick of opinion then effect, more things amaze them then hurt
them.

The Army showed it self every day as it were in Battle in that great plain
toward St. Anthonies, and to make it seem greater the horse-boyes tarried not
at home, but some seemed gallant, whom hunger tormented, and many had wind in
their bellies as well as in their heads. It was observed then for a strange
thing that the army which thought to famish Paris, Paris famisheth the Ar^^ie
which would have fami^hed it.
had been famished without Paris: so commodious is the situation of this City
and was so well chosen by her first founders. The first care of them that build
Cities, is for the Commodity of victuals: The Ingenor Democrates persuaded
Alexander to build a town upon Mont Ath^s. Alexander commended this design,
but how said he shall the Inhabitants live, wherewith Democrates was
confounded, and Alexander mocking his Architector, built Alexandria near unto
the sea, and the River of Nil. Phil. de Commin^s observing that the siege had
caused no dearth of victuals in Paris and that the City did furnish them
abundantly admires the situation.
The King who in the guiding of this Ship has his eyes always lift up to
heaven and his hands at the helm, was more resolute to defend himself then to
attempt any thing, yet he made a trench from Charanton beneath Constans with a
little fort at the head of it, where he lodged four thousand Archers, with
some Ordinance, which made the Princes to keep their chambers, for it played
in their quarter. The Dukes of Berry and Brittanie came in the morning to the
Earls lodging to hold a Council, where they dined and departed not but by the
favor of the night.

This was all that the King did, for he held it not fit to hazard any thing,
he knew this great and gaping breach would exhale contagious vapors, that it
would not be closed up with the death of one man alone, but would swallow a
million, that he had rather save his subjects then vanquish his enemies. A
Prince should always have in his mind, even in the heat of Combats, that
royal saing of Scipio which Anthony the Gentle did so much esteem. Se malle
vnum seruare Ciuem quam mill hosts occidere. Iul. Capitol.
So great a conspiracy would that choler should strain the sinews of his
soul, and that he should refuse peace to them who demanded nothing but war,
but he represented unto himself the deadly bitings of incensed necessity;
that the blood which should be spilt in this war flowed from his veins,
that the blows would fall upon his members, and upon part of his bowels: That
it is a goodly thing to suffer himself to be vanquished, when the victory is
dangerous to the victor.

He resolved to make their Camels drink the water which them selves had
troubled. They propounded a peace with goodly conditions. The Princes make show
that they desired not war but for the public quiet, and to live without
wrong. They made many truces to treat that, they which lasting but little was
not much distinguished from war, A short truce favors more of war then
peace. Ign^uum tempus, nec p^ce laetu^, nec bellis exercitum; Cognatae induciis
Insidie sunt.
as the midst does always lean more to one of the extremes then to the
other. The treaty was begun by diverse, but the King ended it, who one morning
came by the river to Conflans.

Before he went out of the boat he said unto the Earl who attended him on the
bank. Enteruie^ of the King and Earl of Charolois.
Brother do you assure me that? to whom the Earl of Charrolois answered, I as
a brother. The word of an enemy is a dangerous assurance, K Lewis the eleventh
had no other to go into the Princes Army which were just against him. If there
confidence has undone some, it has bin successful to others, and Scipio
Africanus went upon this assurance to Siphax, who although he were abaroarian
and a cruel enemy to the Roman name, yet the mildnes and generositie of
Scipio made him a friend. Ladislaus King of Bohemia went freely to Mathias King
of Hungary his capital enemy, to end controversies which could not be
determined at Olmutz, and they became great friends. Dubrau. lib. 2^
He received the King with much respect, and the King spoke unto him with great
mildnes, which made his heart apt for any impression, so great is the force of
words, and so well he could handle his tongue, the which he used as a pensill
for all colors.

He that will have effects according to his own heart, must not spare words to
his liking that may give them. Men's spirits are governed by words, as a ship is
governed by the helm, and a horse by the bit, and we cannot say what power
the sweetness of words have over the mind of man. Words are the Instrument by
the which the mind of man is animated, thrust forward and held back. A Prince
that knows how to use them has a great advantage in all that he treates, and
when it is acompanied with such sweetness as gravity is not wronged, it works
what it lists in the hearts of men.
The King, framing his speech to this tune, said unto the Earl. Brother I know
that you are a Gentleman, and of the house of France: why my Lord, answered the
Earl. For that, said the King, When the fool Moruillier spoke so boldly unto
you, you sent me word that I would repent the words he had spoken before the
year were past, you have not failed, and before the time. The King spoke these
words with a countenance so free and full of affection, although his heart were
full of indignation and spleen, as the Earl took delight in it. He disauowed
Moruillier, and took the seals from him. Princes play with their subjects,
and disauow them when as their negotiations are not answerable to their hopes.

He did walk long by the rivers side, betwixt the Earl of Charolois, and the
Earl of St. Paul, and heard their Intentions. The King who thought nothing well
done if he were not an Actor, went to the Earl of Charolois, preferring the
necessity of his affairs, before the consideration of his quali^^, for he held
that the honor and glory of an action depended on profit. Yet they had deputed
some of either side to treat: For the King were employed Charles of Aniou Earl
of Maine. The Signeur of Pressigny President of the Acounts and 10. Dauuet
President of the Parliament of Toul^s^. For the Princes the D. of Calabria, the
Earl of Dunois, and the E. of St. Paul.
The Earl of Charolois demanded the Duchy of Normandy for the Duke of
Berry, and the river of Sum for himself, little for the public, and much
for private men. The King told him plainly that he would never consent to
dismember the Duchy of Normandy, but he was content to restore him the Towns
of Sum: and finding that the Earl of St. Paul was the Oracle of the Counsels
and will of this Prince, he offered him the office of Constable. By these
offers the strict bond of this league began to be dissolved, for there is
nothing so fast bound but it is undone when as one string begins to slip. The
King did and spoke all things so cunningly, mingly offers with threats, and
courtesies with braueries, as the Earl applied himself to his intentions.

The day after this first conference This conference of the King and the Earl
was the end of the war. It was not thought fit the King should seek unto the
Barle, but to do his business he past all formalities, and would not commit that
to hope which he might do by discretion. What does it import to ascend to any
place, to use stairs of wood, or ston, or whether the key be of gold or iron,
so as it open.
, the Earl of Charolois mustred his Army, Muster of the leagues Army in view
of the King.
whether the King came with thirty or forty horse, commending those goodly
forces. The Earl of Charolois speaking unto them used these words. My masters
you and I are for the King our Sovereign Lord, to serve him when soever he
shall have need of us.

The Kings offers bred a jealousy betwixt the Princes of the league, every man
cared for his own affairs. The Earl of Charolois saw one day upon his
conferences and propositions three Councels and three bands, whereat he was
discontented, saying, that there should not be any thing secret in his
presence: During these conferences and enteruiewe. Isabell of Bourbon Countes^e
of Charolois died, the Earl mourned, and the King did comfort him. This death
gave some more facility to the peace, for the marriage of the Earl with the
Lady Anne of France, the Kings eldest Daughter, was propounded, with the
transport of the Counties of Bry and Champagne In marriages of the daughters of
France, Kings have sometimes given money, and sometimes lands of the Crown upon
condition they should return. Charles the fifth gave to his two eldest
daughters a 100000. franks of gold, and to the rest 60000. Charles the sixth gave
eight hundred thousand to Isabell married to Richard the second King of
England. King John gave the Contie of Somiers in Languedoc to Isabel his
daughter, married to the Duke of Milan. Lewis the young gave to Margaret his
daughter married to Henry the third King of England the Contie of Vexin.
for her dowry and preferment, which the Kings Predecessors had never done in
marrying their daughters. The Earl of Charrolois affected nothing more, but
upon the doubt which was made unto him of the alienation of these two
Provinces, he sent William Hugonet, and John Carandolet to Paris, to know if
these two pieces might be separated from the Crown. The King gave them all the
assurances they could desire, but he showed that his intent was not to lodge
his daughter in a house which he could not love.

The conditions of the accord being treated after this manner with the Earl
Charolois, as he who had all the power in his hands, every man stood upon his
guard. The Earl was advertised of the kings designs, and there was still some
one which discovered the Earls unto the King. In civil wars Councels are
not secret, and the most hidden are diuulged, every one has some friend on the
contrary party.
A page came at midnight to the river side crying, that they should be set upon
by all the forces that were in Paris. Dukes of Berry and Brittanie armed once
during this war.
This cry gave so hot an Alarm, as no man doubted it. Monsieur and the Duke of
Brittanie showed themselves armed, which else they had never done, and so past
through the army, to find the Earl of Charolois, and the Duke of Calabria,
who had sent skouts to discover, These men troubled with the darkness of the
night, and the general fear Caesar sent Consydius at the break of day to
discover the enemy, and going, fear surprised him, so as he returned, with all
speed, and although he had not seen any thing yet he said that the enemy had
already gotten the top of a mountain whereas Caesar meant to long, and that he
knew that by their Arms and Ca^^s, and with knowldege of the Gaul^s. Caesar
^ib. 1. of the wars of Gaul.
being near unto Paris took thistels for the pikes and lances of an Army
put in Battle, and so returned sweating, to tell them that all Paris came
upon them. John Duke of Calabria came unto the Dukes standard, who like a
courageous Prince, believing that which he desired, spoke after this manner.
Now we are come to that which we have always desired, behold the King and all
the people sallied out of the City, and marching, as our skouts report, and
to the end every man may have courage, even as they sallie out of Paris, we
will measure after the City Ell, which is the greatest measure.

The Duke of Bourgundy upon some advertisement that the Duke of Berry and
Brittanie might make their accord apart, as the Kings design was only to
divide them, he held it not fit to leave his Son in that Estate as he should
be forced to do any thing upon necessity, He that suffers himself to be
surpris^d by necessity, does no more any thing freely, his councels and
actions savor of a troubled judgment.
and that if he were fortified with men and Arms, he should keep his
confederates in awe, Succors of men and money sent to the Earl of Charolois.
and make his conditions more assured. To make a peace honorable and with
advantage, it must be done in arms and that he whom they will wrong may say
boldly, I will not do it.
He sent him a hundred and twenty men at Arms led by the Lord of Saueur, a
thousand five hundred Archers, and sixscore thousand crowns, the which would
have made him more difficult in the Treaty, if they had come before the
conclusion.

It had been concluded that Monsieur should resign Berry unto the King,
Duchy of Normandy given to the Kings brother.
and have the Duchy of Normandy, and that John Duke of Bourbon should enter
into the Castle of Rouen The Duke of Bourbon entr^d into Rouen by the Castle,
the widow to the signior of Brezay S^n^shal of Normandy favored this entry,
contrary to the ^ing^ intention. The Bishop of Bayeux, and John Hebert General
of the Finances of France advanced the same design. All offended the K. and
repented the displeasure they had done him.
during the treaty, but he entered also into the Town. When as the King saw
that the Normans had allowed of this change without those difficulties and
moderations which he expected, he sent word unto the Earl of Charolois that he
desired to meet with him near unto Con^^ans. He came, and the King said unto
him, that the Peace was made seeing his Brother was in Rouen. This did so
please the Earl of Charolois, Earl of Charolois in a danger not foreseen.
as unwittingly hearing and speaking with affection of this accord, he found
himself at the entry of the Bulwark, which was at the end of the trench which
the King had caused to be made, by the which they might enter into the Town.
The long black cloak which he carried for the loss of his wife, seemed in a
manner to mourn for his liberty.

He was much amazed, but he dissembled his fear and his amazement all he
could, fearing that if the King perceived it, he would hold himself wronged,
and it may be proceed farther. The chief men that were in the Army held
their master lost, and represented unto themselves that which had hapened to
his Grandfather at Montrea^ Faut Yonne. Ani^iury must be dissembled when as he
that receives it is not in case to revenge it, and that he is in danger to
receive a greater if he make show of it. So Agripina seemed not to perceive
that Nero would have slain her.
Choler forced the signior of Neufchastell, Marshall of Bourgundy, to use
these words. If this fool and mad man has undone himself, we must not follow
him, nor ruin his house nor his fathers affairs, let every man think of his
own safety and of an honorable retreat: No man can hinder us from recovering
of the frontier.

The joy was exceeding great when they saw him return. This Marshall seeing
him, said unto him, that he was not at his service but by loan, so long as his
father lived. A young Prince must be reprehended by such persons whose age,
experience, and authority give power to speak freely, but the acknowledgement
of the error must cause the reprehension cease, the which must not be done
publicly, least it breed contempt, and that they which should be confirmed in
an opinion that their commanmander has nothing imperfect, grow doubtful of
his conduct. So all hold speeches and free aduertisements to a delicate Prince,
that cannot endure to be grieved by hearing, are dangerous.
Chide me not, answered the Earl. Heacknowledgeth his error and is ashamed.
I confess my great error but I found it so late as I was near unto the
Bulwark. The Marshall of Bourgundy added, you have done it without me. The
Earl of Charolois held down his head and made no answer, for that which he
had done exceeded the bounds of all judgment. The King was commended to have
dealt so justly, and the Earl of Charolois to have committed himself so
freely into a strongers hands.

The conditions of the peace being all concluded, the King gave to the Earl
of Charrolois the Castle of Bois de Vincennes for his assurance, promising to
come thither the next day. He came, where also were the Dukes of Berry and
Brittanie and the Earl of Charolois, the ports were well guarded, and the
approches fortified, and the King was in the like fear in the Castle, as the
Earl of Charolois had been in the Bulwark. Every man thought that the
Public weal, Treaty of peace concluded at Bois de Vincennes.
which had been so much exalted in this league, should be preferred before all
other conditions of the Treaty. But it is a folly to think that what is
desired of many can succeed, when it depends of the affections of few men,
Matters done hardly succeed but according to the intent of the first mouers.
Private interests and designs band against public intentions, and seldom is
it seen what all desire is executed by few.
which have diverse designs. They talked thereof when as all was done. The
Earl of Charolois had the Towns of either side the river of Sum, Amiens,
St. Quentin, Corbie, Abbeuille, the county of Ponthieu, Dourlans, St. Requier,
Creuecaeur, Arleux, Monstreuil, Croton, and Mortaigne, to be redeemed for two
hundred thousand crowns, after the death of the Earl of Charolois. The King
to retire these Towns had nine months before paid four hundred thousand
crowns. Monsieur did homage unto the King for the Duchy of Normandy. Election
of thirty six D^^uties to consult of the remedies of the commonweal, and the
ease of the people, the King promising to confirm all that should be done by
them.


The Duke of Britain held some places in Normandy, which he kept still, for
he said he had contributed more, for the charges of the war, then all the
rest.

The Convocation of the estates was resolved, and in the mean time it was held
fit to choose 36. persons, Reformation of the disorders of the realm.
of all the orders of France, to provide with the Earl of Dunois for the
disorder of Justice and the reformation of the estate. The King made no
difficulty to grant all they demanded reserving unto himself the liberty to
hinder it. His intent was to divide the forces of the league, and then to turn
over his books of the sword and dagger, The Emperor Caligula had two secret
books, the one was called the sword and the other the dagger, wherein they
were noted that should be put to death with those kind of Arms Suet. cap. 49.
where were written in red letters, their names which had offended him during
his retreat into Flanders, and his fathers reign, which had followed his
brother and the Princes of the league, and especially they that had received
him so easily into Normandy: King Lewis the eleventh held Normandy the most
important Province of his Realm, he gave it to his Brother but to delay him,
it was to fair a piece to give for a portion. Philip de Commines says, he had
seen raised in Normandy fourscore and fifteen thousand pound sterling.
for he would not for any thing have consented to give him that Province, if he
had not been assured of their constancy that held the chief places.

But the Normans, who did always think that their Country did well deserve a
Duke, consented to this change for the desire they had to have a Prince, which
should remain within the Province. There were but three which desired rather
to leave their houses then to change their master. Justice had greater power
in their souls then wisdom. The Seneshall of Normandy, the Balyfe of Rouen,
and one named Picard, who was afterward General of Normandy. The History owes
them this testimony of honor, To do well among men of honor is easy and
ordinary but not to suffer himself to be transported with the coruptions of
the time nor to follow the violent passions of a multitude but to desire the
good, to dare undertake it and to effect it in a bad season, in the which vice
is honored with the recompense of virtue, it is an infallible argument of a
spirit wonderfully disposed by nature to all good and commendable things.
the which is the more considerable, for that there is some difficulties to
retire ones self out of a press that runs headlong, and that the imitation
and example of ill, presents it self always with much heat.

At their departure from Bois de Vincennes, Departure of the Earl of Charolois.
every one to took his course, the Dukes of Normandy and Britain went to
Rouen, the King did accompany the Earl of Charolois to Villiers the fair.
They lodged together for a proof of the confidence they had one of another.
The King was the weaker having but a small troop, but there was order that
200. men at arms should come to accompany him to Paris. An act of wisdom, as
commendable as those of precedent conferences, and trusts had been dangerous:
for in such occasions there is nothing more safe then not to give any advantage
to his adverse party to wrong him: All assurances of friendship, faith and
promises which may be drawn from an enemy are good and profitable, but by
reason of the inconstancy of men and time there is none better, then so to fit
himself as he may have noe means to hurt him.
The Earl of Charolois hearing thereof was troubled, and caused his men to
arm and stand upon their gardes, Upon the suspision which the Earl of
Charolois had of this' troop Phil. de Com. speaks thus. It is almost
impossible that ^. great Noblemen can agree together, for the reports and
iealousies which they have continually: And two great Princes that will
entertain friendship should never see one another, but send honest and
discreet men, who shall entertain them, and repair their errors.
Morning being come, the King bad the Earl farewell, and returning with them
that came to fetch him, he freed him from al subject to distrust his intentions.

He entered gloriously into Paris, The Kings return to Paris.
to have so happily calmed the storm which threatened him, and two days after
his arrival he caused them to feast him at supper in the Townehouse. The
greatest personages were invited with their wives, he thanked the Parisiens
for their fidelity and constancy in so important an occasion: he commended them
that had done him good service, It is a great content for good men to see how
the Prince esteems their courage and fidelity.
and among others Robert of Estouteuille, to whom he restored the Prouostship
of Paris, which he had taken away, he having held it during the reign of King
Charles his father. He displaced the first President of Nanterre When as Lewis
II. came unto the Crown, he made Helias of Tourette first President, who dyed
soon after, and this place was given to the President of Nanterre, at the suit
of John of Bureau a Knight, Segneur of M^nglat.
and gave that charge to John Dauuet first President of Tholousa: he took the
seals from Moruillier, and restored them to Iuuenall of Vrsins, from whom he
had taken them.

The treaty Treaty of Conflans proclaimed at Paris the 28. of October 1465.
signed and sworn was proclaimed, and thereby the war for the public weal
was ended, Contentment of private men maks them forget the public.
contenting the interests of private men. The King desired to quench the fire
of this division rather with silver then with blood, and tears of his
subjects. To the Duke of Bourbon was assigned the like pension that he received
of Charles the seventh. Anthony of Chabannes Earl of Dammartin, was restored
to his lands and soon after made Lord Steward of France, in the place of the
lord of Crouy. There was never so great a marriage but some dined ill, some did
what they listed, and others had nothing. Phil de Com. lib. 1. Cap. 14.


Many others suffered themselves to be vanquished by the King, thinking
themselves more happy to fall under his power, then to escape, Those that were
subdued by Alexander were more happy (...) they that escaped his power, for
these had not any one to free the^ from their misery, and the others were made
happy by the Victor Plut.
for they were freed from miseries, and such as remained with the Earl of
Charolois could not hope for any great felicity, knowing his Counsels and
designs to be unfortunate, and it seemed his head was not made but to aflict
and ruin his body. Earl of St. Paul made Constable of France.
And for that the Earl of St. Paul was as it were Arbitrator of all the Earls
Councels, the King won him, offering him the sword of France, which Valeran or
Luxembourg Valeran of Luxembourg Earl of St. Paul was made Constab^e of
France. Anno, 1411. two years after be y^elded up the sword to Charles Earl of
Albret and Suylly, from whom King Charles the sixth had taken it.
had sometimes carried.

It is the first dignity of all the orders of France, First dignity of the
State.
he carries the sword not in a scabberd behind the King as they do before the
Duke of Venice, to show that the use and authority depends of them that follow
it, but naked before the King, who alone commands to draw it and to put it up,
when he pleases, as having the only power of the sword over his subjects. That
of his Justice remains in the hands of his sovereign Courts, for the
punishment of Crimes wherewith he meddles not: Jupiter does not strike, hurt,
nor condemn any man. Not only the Princes eyes but his pictures and his
statues A Prince should abhor all that is inhumane and cruel. The Emperor
Claudius caused Augustus Image to be taken from the place whereas slaves were
punished, which had slandered their Masters under the Empire of Caius or
Tiberius, to the end it should not be violated nor behold those punishments.
Dion.
should be far from executions. The Kings of France have held this course to
reserve unto themselves pardons, benefits and rewards, leaving the distribution
of punishments to their officers.

Lewis of Luxembourg was declared Constable at the marble table, he took his
oath, and his authority was verified by the Court of Parliament. As Arthur
Arthur of Britain was chosen Constable of France, by the suffrages of all the
Princes and great Counsel, and although the King was then troubled in his
judgment and the seals of France stamped with the Queens picture, yet by
letters of pr^u^sion. But the keeping of the Kings sword is given for the Kings
s^rvice, in fealty and homage and to be the chief in war above all next unto
the King.
of Brittanie Earl of Richmont was the first whose letters of Constable were
there published, so Lewis of Luxembourg was the first that took his oath
there. We must not judge of a man's fortune by the glory of such dignities,
they be pieces of Crystal, which as they glister so they will break. To
hold a man happy that enters into great charges, is to give the name of the
image to the mettle which is not yet molten. We must see him come, live and
run to the end of the course, to know what the issue will be.

With this charge Lewis of Luxembourg was wedded to his own ruin, and did
himself add much unto it, for notwithstanding that he were bound unto the
King both by reason and oath, Affection of the Constable St. Paul.
yet (as it is hard but the tree will retain something of the soil where it
first took root Strangers (...) not at the first leave their affection to
their party although they quit it. Solon would not allow a stranger to be a
Bourgesse in Athens, if he were not banished from his Country.
) the affections of men being like unto a stream which ouerflowes and waters
a field and is nothing the cleerer: He still kept a natural inclination to the
service of his first Prince, grounding his affections upon one maxim, in the
which he found his ruin in stead of greatness, whereunto he aspired.
Theramenes an Athe^^an the son of Aignon, for that he was not firm in his
opinions, holding sometimes one party, sometimes another, was called Cothureue
which is a kind of buskin used in Tragedies fit for either foot. Plu^. in the
life of Niceas.
He thought to play Theramenes an Athe^^an the son of Aignon, for that he was
not firm in his opinions, holding sometimes one party, sometimes another, was
called Cothureue which is a kind of buskin used in Tragedies fit for either
foot. Plut. in the life of Niceas.
Theramenes in this Tragedy, to remain a neuter betwixt these two great
Potentates, to make them quarrel when he pleased, to judge of the blows, and
to keep himself from danger, thinking to be always supported by the one when
the other should seek to ruin him, and to make both of them depend so upon his
will, as as he should prescribe them a law of war and peace when he
pleased, nt considering that newtrality, which may be commended in a prince,
when by reason of wisdom or weakness he cannot do otherwise, is mere
treachery and treason in a subject, who can have but one master.

It was a great misery for him to be betwixt two Princes which could not
agree. He that is in this estate is not like unto the town of Siria, Pliny
says that the town of Palmira in Syria remained without touch amidst the
powers of the Roman and Parthian Empires.
which was nothing anoyed being environed by the Armies of the Romans and
Parthians. He finds his condition oftentimes like unto the miserable mariner
of Tire, whom one wave cast out of the ship, and another brought him in again.
His humor did favor his bad fortune, wavering always amidst the uncertainty of
his resolutions, and a spirit of contradiction.

When he was freed from one business he entangled himself with another, His
bad conduct and vnsortunate end.
well in France, ill in Flanders, and as the clouds turn always either into
wind, or to rain, his enterprises ended always in tears or sighs. In a word
he made a trade of the profession of arms, and did not take them to have
peace, but to make the war continue. Whilst that Rome was well governed
(which was until the time of the Gracchi) there was never Captain nor
Soldier which made a trade of war, when it was ended every man returned to his
first exercise. A^tilli^s Regulus being General of the Army in the last war
against Carthage, demanded leave of the Senate to return unto his houses to
manure his grounds which his farmors had left wast.


When as he saw that Counsels are not esteemed by Princes but according to the
events, He kindles the firebrands of war.
he desired to make his to be allowed by some favorable occasion. He sees the
Duke of Bourgondy busy in war against them of Liege, he knows how much the
King is offended at the practices and Intelligences which the Dukes of Normandy
and Britain had with his enemy, he therefore Counsels him to make war
against them, to make work in their own estates, and to kindle a fire in
their own houses, to the end they should not have leisure to cast it against
their Neighbors. These two Princes in the beginning were great friends, Of
great friends are made the greatest ennemies; hatred folowes and accompanies
friendship. Chilon could him that vanted he had no enemies. That he should also
have noe friends. Plut.
but as great hatred grows from great friendship, they did so jar in the
division of the fruits of the peace, as they continued not long together. The
Duke of Normandies servants, who had served King Charles the seventh, could
not endure the Brittons for companions. The Duke of Britain would be
respected as the instrument of their good fortune. Seeing these two Princes
could not remain Neighbors, they would never have been associated in the
Empire. An admirable and sole example of trufriendship. Dioclesian and Maxim.
Emperors entered the Empire together, commanded together, and lef^. it with one
accord.


The Duke of Normandy was advertised that the Duke of Brittanie had a design
not to leave him, and that the Earl of Dammartin undertook to lead him into
Britain. He was then at Mont St. Catherines attending until the preparation
which they made for his entry were finished, but when he had sent notice
thereof to them of Rouen, they would not defer his entry a minute. They set
him on horseback without a foot-cloth, and led him to the Cathedral Church in
a black velvet gown, where they swear obedience unto him, the Brittons were
out of countenance to see their designs made frustrate. The King made his
profit of this bad intelligence. He came into Normandy, Normandy yielded to the
King.
and within few days forced his brother to depart. The Earl of Charrolois was
much grieved that this division had lost Normandy, Ruins caused by division
are reparied by concord. The Dukes of Normandy and Brittanie c^sidering that
they had lost Normandy by their had int^lligence, reconcile themselves. It is
imp^ssible says Phil. de Com. by this diuisi^n that many Noblemen can long
live together, if the^e be not one head above them. A Prince having command
over 10000. men, and means to entertain the, is more to b^e feared then ten
all^es and confedera^s having every one six thousand, for that they have so
many things to accord betwixt them, as half the time i^ spent before they
conclude any thing.
for he believed that that Province being out of the Kings hands he was
weakened a third part. Monsieur had no other refuge then Britain, being poor
naked and dispossessed, which moved them to pity, that were too weak to relieve
him, and support him against a Brother who was so great and mighty.

The Earl of Charrolois was not long in suspense whether the King would hold
all that he had promised: for having sent Imbercourt and Carondolet unto him to
put him in mind of the promise of marriage of his daughter, they found that
she was promised to Peter of Bourbon Lord of Beaujeu. The King told them that
he would marry her better cheap then the Earl of Charolois would take her,
and that Champagne and Brie, were too good to be dismembered from the Crown.

If men could judge as truly as suddenly of all things, What should remain
for the providence of God to decide? Every man thought that France would never
escape this Apoplexy, which if it did not bring death, would at the least end
with a Palsy, but her destinies were otherwise set down in the eternal
tables of the great God, the father of time, the true Saturn The Romans held
Sat-rne to b^e the God and father of truth and did sacrifice bare-headed unto
him, to show that there is not any thing hidden from him.
which must be worshipped bare-headed, and knows only the periods and ends
of Estates. After the glory, which belongs wholly to his bounty, We must
commend the Kings wisdom and judgment, who remained so stayed in occasions,
where as the coldest spirits would have been inflamed to run upon their
enemies. He played Sertorius against Metellus. Metellus sought only to fight.
Sertorius refusing the Battle cut of his victuals, took his water from him,
and kept him from forage. When he thought to march, he stayed him, when he was
lodged, he annoyed him in such sort as he forced him to dislodge, if he laid
siege to any place, he found himself besieged through want of victuals.


France never saw so many men assembled to ruin her, but she showed that her
foundations were good. The forces that were before Paris were so great and so
many as they might well be admired both of friends and enemies: for it was an
apparent demonstration what this Crown can do against the conspiracy of all
others. Yet Paris did feel of this storm long after, and was so unpeopled by
this war, and by a plague which happened in August 1467. as the king to
repeople it drew strangers thither with great privileges, as such as had been
condemned by justice, Vnpeopling of Paris.
by the assurance of impunitie, and all, as the Chronicle says, according to
the privilege given to all banished men remaining in the Towns of St. Malo
and Valenciennes.

The fidelity of Paris saved the Estate, for if she had refused entry unto
the king, he was resolved to retire into Suisser-land, or to the Duke of Milan.
It is true that as it happens always in Civil wars In civil wars there are
but to many occasions offered to be jealous of them of whose loyalty they sh^ld
least doubt. Kinsmen grow faithless. Your servant may be of that party which
you fear. M. de M.
whereas distrusts and iealousies grow without sowing, the religion of secrecy
was not observed, for the Princes were advertised of all the resolutions that
were taken against them, yea of the time and of the sally which should be made
upon their Army in three several places; the first and the greatest toward
Paris, the second toward Pont Charanton, and the third by Bois de Vincennes.
Wherefore all this siege the king was ever in Jealousy They watch in vain for
the safety and defense of a Town besieged, if fidelity sleeps at the gates,
the guard must be committed to them whose loialtie is well assured.
for that one night he found the Bastille gate open toward the field. The
Chronicle says it was on Thursday the 29. of September. He was conceited it
had been done by Charles of Melun, but he made no show of it. Wise Princes
should not lightly call in doubt two such dear and precious things, as the
reputation and loyalty of their servants. It is hard to repair and recompense
the injuries done to faith and reputation. Famae et fidei damna maiora sunt
qua^ quae estimariqueant. Tit. Liu.
Phil. de Commines says notwithstanding that the king had not a better servant
that year then this Charles de Melun, and the Chronicle attributes to his care
the honor to have saved Paris.

The best blows which were given at this siege were drawn from his head, and
from the wise resolution which he took, not to have any thought but to divide
the company, he had forces sufficient to fight with all the Princes together
without pain or peril, they had not yet past their Apprentiship in war.
Only the Duke of Calabria knew something, having learned it unfortunately in
the war of Naples. The Earl of Charolois had in his youth followed his
Father in his Armies and Battles, but a long peace had made him forget more
then he knew. As for the Duke of Berry and Brittanie, the amazement wherein
they were when as the Canon played upon their quarter, made it known that
war was not their Element. The History has observed that after the Army
had past the river of Seine, the Earl of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria
troubled themselves much to have the soldiers march in order, and represents
them so well armed as they seemed to have a great desire to fight. But when it
describes the equipage of the Duke of Berry and Britain, it makes a right
Prosopopeia, serving only for the number and pomp. They did ride, says Phil.
de Commin: upon little nags at their ease, carrying for the most part but
little light Brigandins, yet some said they had nothing but little gilt nails
upon Satin, that they might not weigh, yet I know not the truth. He that goes
to the war without his Arms shows that he has no desire to come near
blows.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF the fourth BOOK.
1 Entry of Queen Charlot into Paris. She is accompanied by Ame duke of Sauoy
her Brother, and Bonna of Sauoy her sister. 2 Rebellion of them of Liege and
Dinand. Their Insolency against the Duke of Bourgondy: The severe punishment
of their folly. 3 Death of Phillip Duke of Bourgondy, greatness and felicity
of his estate, his bounty and reputation in Europe, his chief Actions. 4 Entry
of Charles Duke of Bourgondy into Gand, sedition for the abolishing of
customs. 5 Wisdom of K. Lewis the eleventh to descouer the desseines of the
Dukes of Britain and Bourgondy. His Army in Brittany. 6 New revolt of them
of Liege. They consult whether they should put their hostages to death. An
Embassage from the King to the Duke of Bourgondy, touching that. The taking of
the Town of Liege and the desolation thereof. 7 The Ganto is acknowledge their
errors. The Duke makes his entry there armed; The King deuides the Dukes of
Normandy and Britain from all Intelligence with the Duke of Bourgondy. 8.
Enteruiew betwixt the King and the Duke of Bourgondy at Peronne, his perplexity
in the apparent danger wherein he was, he treats with the Duke of Bourgondy and
accompanies him to Liege. 9 The Liegeois beseeged by the King and the Duke of
Bourgondy, their furious sallie they are surprised, spoiled, and slain. 10 The
King returns to Paris, his words leaving the Duke of Bourgondy, continuation
of the war in the Contry of Liege. 11 A brief recital of the chief
actions, life, and death of Alexander Scanderbeg King of Albania.
THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
PARIS was all in Feasts and Joy for the happy success of the Kings affairs,
who had so wisely pacified the winds which threatened his ship with
shipwreck, but much more for the discharge which he made of certain soldiers
and impositions which the people found insupportable. On Saturday the third of
August 1465. the King remitted the fourth penny of the wine to the eight, and
took away all impositions except of Marcha^dise of the six farms in gross
These public joys were doubled by the Queens entry into Paris. Queens
entry into Paris.
She went by Bote to our Ladies church, past to the Celistins, and so to the
Tournelles. She was accompanied by the Duke Ame her Brother, and the Lady Bonna
of Sauoy her Sister, married to John Galeas Duke of Milan. The History of
these times, as curious to represent the order of Feasts that were made, as
that of Battles, Paul Aemilius observed a wonderful order and disposition in
feasts, saying, that there was the like suff^ciencie of Judgment to know how
to order a Battle fearful to the enemies, and a feast p^easing to friends,
for the one and the other d^pend of good judgment, to know how to order things.
Plut.
as if the knowledge of the one gave as great proof of sufficiency as the
other, reports the magnificence, and adds that in the house of John Dauuet the
first President they had made four bathes (they were always acknowledged
among the delights) for the Queen and for the Ladies. Her indisposition and
that of the time would not suffer her to bathe. One of the bathes was for the
Ladies of Bourbon and Sauoy, the other for the Daughter of the Lord of Monglat,
married to the son of Nicholas Balue, brother to the Bishop of Eureux, and
Perrete of Chalon a Bourgesse of Paris. This woman is particularly named in
diverse places of the History, and here she has her share in the delights and
pleasures of the bathes.

The Duke of Sauoy procured liberty for his Brother Philip, whom the King
married unto Margarete the third Daughter of Charles Duke of Bourbon, and of
Agnes of Bourgundie, but the content of his liberty was not of such force in
his remembrance as the distaste of his imprisonment, the apprehension whereof
made him to follow the humors of Charles Duke of Bourgundy against the King.
Ame dyed three or four years after in the Town of Orleans of a Flix. Ame the
third dyed at Orleans about the end of June 1471. he left 2. sons Philebert
and Charles under the government of the Lady Yoland of France, Sister to Lewis
the eleventh.


But whilst that France enjoyed this quiet, which the King had purchased in
dispersing these terrible winds, her ancient friends felt the storm, and yet
she had no means to relieve them, for that she would not open the wound which
began now to close up, nor favor the examples of rebellion against a lawful
Prince.

They of Liege not thinking the war should last so little betwixt the King
and the house of Bourgundy, Liege Reuolts against the Duke of Bourgondy
had done all acts of hostility against the Duke of Bourgundies subjects,
preferring always their own interest He that knows well how much his own
interests concerns him, will never have it march after another man's.
before a strangers. The King had promised them two hundred men at Arms, every
one having three horses at the least, to spoil the country of Henault, and not
to treat any peace without comprehending them.

Upon this assurance, and a presumption, that their town was impregnable The
people do always presume of their forces with an ouer-weening and rashness.
The Iuhabitants of Nouogarde the chief City of Russia said braggingly, Men can
do nothing against God nor us, but John Basileus K. of Muscouy made them to
change that language. Crant lib. 13. Vand. cap. 15.
and themselves invincible, they sent a Herald to Bruxells, to proclaim war
against the Earl of Charolois, and threaten him with fire and blood. In his
absence the Duke received and read the letters, and then delivered them again
unto the Herald, saying, that his Son was in France, and that he should
carry them unto him if he list. He returned to Liege, from whence he was
presently dispatched with the like letters against the Duke himself, and all
his Allies.

These threats were suddenly followed by the effects, they entered into the
Dukes Contry, with all kinds of outrages and inhumanities. To commend this
Prince or to speak well of the house of Bourgondy, Army of the Duke of
Bourgondy against the Liegeois.
were crimes which could not be expiated but by death. The poor peasants were
slain like sheep, for no other reason but for that they are his friends and
cannot like of the rage of these wolves. The Duke arms, and by his
commandment the Dukes of Cleues and Gueldres, The Earls of Nassau and Horn,
with the Marquis of Roselin. They press these snailes in such sort as they
dare not put forth their horns of Rebellion, and keep themselves within their
walls with repentance that they had so soon gone to field upon hope that the
King (who had then another task in hand) would assist them, and that they
should not want means nor courage to defend their liberty. Liberty does
animate men's minds, and fill their hearts with courage and valor, that defend
it. In the famous Battles of Miltiades, Leonides, and The* mistocles for the
liberty of Greece, the number has yielded unto Courage.


They of Dinan, subject unto Liege were no less mad against the Duke upon the
news which ran, and which was as soon believed as received, that the Earl
of Charolois had been defeated at Montleherry. They made an Image very like
unto the Earl, and carry it with great shoutes and cries near unto the walls
of Bouinnes, Indignities and Insolences of people r^nolted.
where they set up a Gibbet and hang it thereon, calling him whom it did
represent, Traitor, Vi^laine, and Bastard. The veriest rascal made the
greatest noise. They made also another image for the Duke the which they did
set upon a high piece of wood, cryng out See here the seat of that great tond
your Duke. An act which cannot be too severely punished by justice, nor
remitted by repentance upon hope of amendment. In these co^motions there is
nothing b^t fury, no courage nor valor. Certatim vt quisque animi ignauus,
procax est ore T^cit. Hist. lib. 2.


This furious mockery against the Prince, was followed by all kinds of cruelty
against his subjects of Bouines, who thinking to aduize these madmen to return
unto their duties, they first sent the Herald of their town to persuade them,
and then a little boy with letters signed. They cut off the head of the first,
and ^are the second in pieces. O inconstant people! what is there cruel and
barbarous but thou committest in thy fury? Men would not kill aspicks nor
vipers if they might be tamed and made harmless, when there is no hope of
amendment Clemency is injurious, and Justice always necessary, whereas the
public is wronged crimes whose Impunity draw on others are irremissible.


The Duke (although he were exceeding old) thought that he could not dye
honorably unless he were revenged of the ingratitude and rebellion of Dinan.
The Duke bu^eegeth Dina^, takes it and ruins it.
He caused himself to be carried thither in a litter, leading an army of
28000. horse and a great number of foot, he takes the town, ruins it and
casts 800. of the Inhabitants into the river of Meuze A Prince should never
dissemble an open rebellion, for he that does not punish a rebel in such sort
as he may no more rebel, must be held to have little wit and less courage.
and they which did not end their miseries now in dying remained to dye daily,
The miserable man is beholding unto death, it frees him from miseries.
Tamberlan slew as many lepers as he found, that they might have an end of their
miseries, and infect no more by their co^tagion. Calcondile. For the same
reason Dracula Prince of Valachia shut a great troop of Beggars into a ^arne,
and set it on fire, having made them all drunk. Bonsin. Lib. 3.
being nothing beholding to them that meet^ng them suffered them to live.

The Liegeois apprehending the like usage yielded unto the Duke, having made
show that they would give him battle, Liegeois give 50. Hostages.
they gave him fifty hostages for assurance of the fealty which they promised,
and six hundred thousand Florins of the Rhin, paiable in six years.

This war ended, the Duke of Bourgondy ended that of his life, and changed it
into an eternal peace, Death of Duke Philippe.
in the 72. year of his age, the 48. of his reign, the 15. of July in the
year 1497. Phil. de Commines says that the Liegeois gave 300. Hostages, the
number was but 50. whereof 32. were of Liege, six of Sainctron, or St. Trid,
six of ^ongres, and six of Hesselt.
He left his house in the height of felicity, rich in alliances, honor,
friends, and reputation, gold in his coffers, and iron to defend it. It is
nothing to have gold if they have not Arms to keep it. Craesus showed his
treasure to Solon, who seeing it to be of an infini^e value, demanded where was
the iron and steel to keep that gold.
It was not an estate gotten by hazard, and increased by injustice: There are
some estates which have been begun by hazard, and augmented by injustice.
It had the foundation of them in the Realm of France, the continuance seemed
immortal. Greatness of his house.
But Architectors dye, and the buildings remain. This greatness did not pass
the fourth Male, it was disinembred into many pieces, the chief fell to the
house of Austria. He had three wives, Michelle of France, daughter to King
Charles the sixth, Bonna of Arthois, daughter to Phillip Earl of Eu, and
Isabella of Portugal, mother to Prince Charles, in marrying of whom he settled
his thoughts for marriage, and took for his motto, Autre N'auray, but he did
not forbear the exercise of his loves, so as his iniust intemperance begat
eight sons and four daughters.

This Prince was valiant and hardy, whereof he made good proof in that great
and troublesome war, which he undertook against France, the which continued
82. years without respite or truce. A war which made mountains of dead
Carcasses, and rivers of blood in France, into the which he said he had entered
against his mind, desiring rather to employ his arms against Infidels, as he
did in the holy League, Julian Caesarin Cordinall of St. Ange and Legate to the
Pope with Ladiflans being at Buda, made a new league among the Christians to
ruin the Ottoman name, into the which he had drown Pope Eugemus the 4. The
duke of Bourgundy, the Venetiant and the Gene^^ois.
to succor Hungary against Amurath.

He made it known by his device of many fufills or irons to strike fire,
fastened to a flint which cast forth flames, whereby he would say that his
humor was addicted to mildnes and to peace, if they did not force him to war,
as the fufill retains his flame if he be not touched, But does presently
thrust it forth when it is struck. He lived in such credit and authority
among the sovereign Powers of Europe, that although he carried not the title
of a King, yet he marched equal with the greatest Kings, and if he had would
might have had his estates erected to a Kingdom. When as Pope Eugenius the
fourth saw that most Christian Princes were banded against him, he fled unto
the Duke of Bourgundies protection and presented unto him the miraculous Host
which is in the holy chapel at Dijon.

A good Prince beloved of his subjects, His bounty courage and moderation.
whom he did not entreat according to the power which he had over them The
greater a Princes power is, the more his liberty should be restrained. The more
mighty a Prince is over his subjects the more mighty his subjects make
themselves against him.
respected of strangers with whom he could live, but blamed to have been the
Instrument of the cruel Tragedies which had been acted upon the Theater of
France. He justified his Arms by the revenge of his fathers death, slain by
Charles the seventh, being Dauphin, upon the bridge of Monstreau Faut Yonne.
But he did not revenge it upon the Lady Michelle The injury of kinsfolks to
the wife is sometimes revenged by the husband upon his wife. The D. of
Bourgundy loved not his less, notwithstanding that the sight of the Sister did
for three years together reuiu^ the injury of the Brother.
his wife, Sister to Charles, neither did he love her less, having no intent
that innocence should be mingled with the memory of the offense.

Charles succeeded him, if the children retain the complexions of them that
have put them into the world, Humor and disposition of Charles his son.
as the grain which is cast naked into the earth, does notwithstanding bring
forth the straw, stalk, and ear from whence it came. This Prince being borne
of Philip and Isabell of Portugal must needs be of a fantastic temper. The
Father was hardy, the Mother distrustful, they wondered how she could bear
him nine months in her womb, seeing the humor of this Prince could not rest
one hour in a place.

Princes desire to begin Princes which enter newly into a realm must think that
their reputation depends of the beginning. They must give them selves to such
high and eminent Actions, as they may settle a belief in their neighbors that
they are not only capable of the fortune which they have found, and which they
hold, but they have wisdom and courage to augment it with anything that time
and occasion shall offer.
their reign by some famous action wherein their is both hardines and good
fortune, they will that all they do in the beginning may be a president, for
they judge of the issue by the entry. His entry into Gand.
He thought that of all the towns in Flanders there was not any one where he
was so beloved as in Gand, and therefore he would begin the entry and visiting
of his Towns there, assuring himself that he should be received there with
so great proofs of affection and obedience, as it would be a lesson for all
the rest to frame themselves to the like duty. For the people do wonderfully
desire the first view of their Princes, The peoples hearts are filled with
incredible joy at the sight of their Prince. The law^s have held it fit to
moderate the expenses which the excess of joy does breed in such occasions. Si
Sacros vultus inhiantibus forte popuilis inferimus, hoc sine immodico pretio
nunciari exipique sancimus. L. 1. C. Publicae Letitiae. Lib. 12.
and the Prince should desire that his subjects fly not from him like a wild
beast which comes out of his den, but that they fly before him, as before some
goodly light.

He knew not that to demand wisdom of a multitude, is to seek it of a mad
man To demand wisdom of a multitude, is to seek government in a mad man* In
the common weal of Athens wise men propounded, and fools determined.
: He had forgotten the proverb of the humor of them of Gand, that they love
their Princes Son well, but not their Prince. Whilst that Philip lived,
Charles was their Sun rising, but the same day that the Son entered into the
Fathers place, he found the change of their affections. Their obedience was
but at discretion Inconstancy which is common to people, is more remarkable in
them of Gand for the many mu^inies and reuolts they have made against their
Princes.
and they thought that he could not hurt them unless they would endure it.

Being deceived in his conceit he entered the Town of Gand, Custom of the
Guntois.
he found the gates open, but their hearts shut to his commandments, neither
did they stay long to let him know it. Duke Phil^p had made war against them
two years, and in the end they were forced to receive conditions, which they
held very hard, and withal an imposition upon the Corn for the charges.
Sedition cloaked by Religion.
The receipt was made in a little house called the Toll-house. The most
seditious who would eat their bread with all liberty, A multitude never
remains long in an estate which seems unjust and intolerable unto them,
W^ere there is no will there can be no bond. That which is done by force
lasts no longer then the present necessity Haud credi potest vllum populu^
in ea condition cuius cum peniteat diutius quam necesse sit mansurum. Tit. Liu.
go not to the Duke to demand abolition of this impost, but under color of
a procession which they made the day after his entry they take the case with
the bones and relikes of a Saint of their devotion, come to this house and
strike the case against it, saying that the Saint People have often covered the
causes of their mutinies with some respect of religion.
, to cut off a great circuit of the Procession would pass through the house,
wherewith in an instant they ruined it to the ground. The rest of the mutines
were in Arms in the market place to favor the passage of this Saint and to
oppose against any one that would hinder it.

The Duke advertised of this tumult comes to a house whose window did open unto
the place, The Duke comes to hear of the sedition.
where he spoke unto these mutyns, and commanded them to carry the relikes of
their Saint unto the Church. Some take it up to carry it away, and others
hinder it. He desires to know what they would have, and not any one dares
speak alone, In the co^motion of a people if there be not one head that leads
them, there is not any one that days answer, when the people of Rome rety^ed
to the holy mountain, the Senate sent to know the cause of this retreat. Not
any one had the courage to answer: and Tit. Liu. says, That they wanted not
matter of answer, but they wanted one to make the answers.
but altogether. They were but confused complaints and insolent answers,
demanding Justice against some private men, as in these Commotions there is
always some one charged to be the cause of the public miseries. He promised
to do them Justice, commanding them to disarme and to retire. But they grow
obstinate, and continue their eight days, at the end whereof they present
themselves unto the Duke demanding that all which the Duke his Father had taken
from them might be restored, which was the threescore and twelve banners of
their trades, and the renewing of their privileges.

To refuse this was to hazard himself to their fury, and they let the Duke
understand that whether he would or no, the Councels were taken, being
resolved to take that which they demanded, for he had no sooner spoken the
word to grant them They must sometimes grant unto the people that which ^hey
desire as they do unto children (...) cry, and to mad men which rage. But when
a sedition is pacified they take away justly, which they had allowed unjustly.
their banners, He is forced to grant them what he will take away.
but at the same instant they saw them planted on the market place. Thus the
Town of Gand, from whence the Duke would draw examples of fidelity and
obedience, seemed to the rest for a mirror of revolt and sedition, for seeing
that the Gantois had sped well with this boldness, many other Towns did the
like, and slew some of the Dukes Officers, who was forced for the time to seem
to be ignorant It is a gracious kind of pardoning not to take knowledge of an
offense.
of that which these mutyns had done, who deserved to be entreated with such
rigor, as they should have nothing remaining free, but the sights of their
repentance.

With the like wisdom and dexterity as the King had divided the forces of
the Princes that were in league against him, The King separates the heads of
the league.
It is an act of great providence in a Prince to break off the communication
and intelligence which may be betwixt tow personages which are mighty, and of
turbulent spirits.
he labors now to break their intelligences. He sets such good gards upon the
passages, as the Duke of Brittanie is forced to cause such as he sends to the
Duke of Bourgundy to pass first into England and then to Calice. In this great
circuit, before their aduertisements be given, the Councels be united, the
occasions lost, and the mischiefs without remedy. He has his eyes open on
every side, as he is sever They must punish crimes when they are committed, and
hinder conspiracies in the breeding.
to punish crimes when they are committed, so is he vigilant to break
conspiracies before they be made. He resolves to plague them one after an
other, and to let them know that he repents soon or late that attempts against
one that is more mighty.

The Duke of Normandy being retired into Brittanie bare and naked, was
sufficiently punished with the Councels of his youth. The Duke of Brittanie
held himself too weak to support him against so mighty a brother, the
Deputies which he had sent unto the King to entreat him and to move him to
pity, had brought nothing back but that they saw much coffeehouse in the
King for that his brother demanded a portion with his sword in his hand. The
King who was then toward Mont St. Michael sent an Army of fifty thousand men
into Brittanie. The King sends an Army into Brittanie.
As the Duke of Alencon had given passage unto the Brittans so his Son the
Earl of Perch yields the same town of Alen^con unto the French, whereat
Monsieur was so offended, as he called him the right Son of his Father.
Infidelity is so odious, as it makes the Actions of the children which are
borne of them which have been attained to be suspected, and suspi^ions in
others are crimes in them.


Brittanie was ouerrunne above thirty leagues compass. The Duke of Brittanie
coniured the Duke of Bourgundy to succor him, but he could not do it, being
engaged with the Liegeois, who rather tired with war then vanquished, had
made a new revolt, and spoiled Liny, upon the assurance the King had given them
of his protection. He had sent them four hundred lances under the command of
the Earl of Dammartin, of Salezard, of Conyhen, Leigeois supported by the king.
and Vignoles, and six thousand Archers. The Constable of St. Paul came and
joined with them with some troops.

They played the mad men and did not consider the danger their hostages were
in, whom they had given for the assurance of their obedience and fidelity. The
Duke held a Council whether he should put them to death. Consultation to put
the Hostages of Liege to death.
The question require good deliberation, for if he had been constant in his
first resolution they were undone. And therefore in such difficulties a Prince
should never be present to make his opinion When as a Prince will do^ any thing
by Council, he should not be here, for his pres^nce hin^ders the liberty of
their opinions, especially when the question is of the death of any one
accused. Tiberius would not that Drusus his Son should give his opinion first
in Lepidus cause a^cused of treason. So when Piso was commanded to speak his
opinion touching Granius Marcellus, being accused to have set his Statue higher
then the Emperors. He said (directing his speech unto the Emperor, And you Sir
in what^ rank will you give your opinion, for if you speak last I fear my
opinion will be contrary to yours. Quo loco censebis Caesar, si primus habebo
quod sequar si post omnes, vereor ne imprudens dissentiam.
known, to the end it may not be followed as a Decree, and that such as will
contradict it may do it freely. The Marshall of Bourgundy and the Signior of
Contay, concluded to have them put to death, grounding their opinion upon this
reason, that so strange a revolt should be extraordinarily revenged, that
these Mutyns were unworthy of the Princes Clemency, and that the bonds whereby
they contained such wild spirits in their duties, must be taken in the terror
of punishments, ^There are crimes as diseaeases which require violent and
extraordinary cures. It is not good always to use to great mildnes in the
peoples folly and madness. Dennis of Syracusa scorned at that sh^me, saying that
the chains of demands wherewith Estates were bound, are the terror of
punishments and Arms.
and Arms.

The Innocence of the Hostages found favor in the opinions of the Earl of St
Paul, and the Sigr of Imbercourt, who detested this cruelty against the poor
Bourgesses which had willingly sacrificed themselves for the public, persuaded
the Duke to take God of his side; this reason was sufficient, and words were
superfluous to oppose against it. But in these occasions, whereas all is
disputable, it is good that the Prince have more then one or two of his
Council, to the end that wandering opinions may be set right by others, for
men are no Angels There sometimes escape from the wisest absurd and
i^considerate opinions, and therefore the Council of one ^lone is dangerous,
the which must consist of diverse heads. For the spirits of men have their
seasons as well as their bodies, and the wisest man living is not always wise.
without passion, they bring them with them in all their Actions, and sometimes
hatred or envy, fear or hope; the waywardnes and indisposition of the person
are as it were the moulds and forms of Councels. Besides there are many which
do not speak but after others.

The mildest and most just opinion was followed, and the Hostages sent back to
Liege, being advised not to meddle in the contagion of the infidelity of
others, and to tell them that if they abused their Princes clemency, they
should feel his rigor. One of the assistants The Sigr of Co^tay was reputed a
wise and discrect Knight, they had never noted cr^e^tie nor indiscretion in his
(...); and yet he was (...) for this cruel Council, and his death they
imputed to a just judgment of heaven, according to Phil. of Commines.
at this Council foretold the death of the Sigr of Co^tay within a year, Death
of the Sigr of Contay.
for that he had concluded the death of the Hostage, and it was true.

In the mean time the Duke of Brittanie cried out for succors. The Duke of
Bourgundy sent unto the King to entreat him to cease that war, and to
consider that the Duke of Brittanies cause was his. The King to pay him with
the same reason, sent him word that if he would leave the protection of his
brother and the Duke of Brittanie, he would abandon the Liegeois. The
Constable of St. Paul, and la Balue carried this message, to whom the Duke
answered, that he could not abandon his friends. Nor we ours, replied the
Constable, you choose not, but take all, you will neither have us succor our
friends, nor make war against our enemies. Well, said the Duke going to
horse, the Liegeois are in field, I have proclaimed war The Heralds which
proclaimed this war, carried in the right hand a naked sword, and in the other
a flaming torch, a fearful threat of fire and blood
against them with a naked sword and a flaming torch, I will fight with them
before three days pass, if I loose the battle you may do as you please, but
if I win it, you shall leave the Brittons in peace.

The Duke besieged Saintron, Siege of Saintron.
the Leigois being 30000. came to succor the besieged, and lodge in a great
Village environed with a marish a mile from the Dukes Army, there they are
charged and repulsed even unto their trenches with the shot of Arrows and
Canon, but when they that assailed had no more arrows, the Liegeois recovered
courage, charged them with their pikes, and in an instant slew five hundred,
and made the rest to waver betwixt flight and amazement.

The Duke seeing his foreward turn their backs, caused the Archers of the
battle to advance, by whom the Leigeois were beaten and slain to the number
of nine thousand. A number according to the truth, not to flattery and
passion, which sometimes makes Giants of Dwarfes The true number of the dead in
a battle is seldom set down, the victors make ^t greater, and the vanquished
lesser, and many as Phil. de Co^mines says, to flatter Princes, for one slain
number a hundred. The number of the dead in the Battle of Marignan was never
truly known. The Fr^ch said that they had cut half the Suisses Army in
pieces which was of 25000. men. The Suisses say that being returned into their
country they found but 5000. wanting and that the French had lost more.
Gradenic says, that in all there were 22000. Justin numbers above 15000.
Suisses, and Guichardin as many. A variety which proceeds either from error or
passion.
. The rest retired to Liege, and if there had not been a Moore betwixt them and
the Dukes horsemen, Saintron yields to discretion.
yielded to the Dukes discretion, delivering ten men to his Justice. Whose
heads saved the rest, and served for an example against their rebellion: He did
the like to Tongres which yielded upon the same condition, and in this
decimation Decimation was invented to punish a multitude in such sort, as the
fear might seem general to all the Offenders, and the punishment to a small
number: all felt it not but every man feared it.
some of those hostages were found which he had sent home.

He presented himself before Liege, Liege yields and demands pardon.
one of the mightiest and best peopled towns of the country. The Dukes
presence made some resolve to trust unto his clemency, and others to fear his
Justice. Three hundred of the most apparent of the City are sent in their
shirts, barefooted and bare-headed to crave pardon for the rest, submitting
the Town unto his discretion, without any other reservation then from fire and
spoil.

The Duke who knew that a multitude is sooner vanquished by mildnes then by
cruelty, Nothing is (...) by force. (...) makes ^em wild, P^^icles won the
people by the eyes and ears, and the belly by Plays, Comedies, and Feasts.
granted what they desired, but when as he sent Imbercourt to enter into it, he
found refusal and iniutious words at the gates, for the inhabitants were not
yet well resolved, and feared that the Duke, whom they had so offended, would
not keep his word, and that the Town should be subject to the miseries of
fire and spoil. He past the night in great perplexities, and had much ado to
have his life and the patience of this people continue until day. Still these
mad men came like violent waves upon his lodging to cut all them in pieces that
were within it, and did negotiate this accord. Imbercourt busied them with
offers of new conditions, upon which they entered into new conferences, In
tumultuarie Commotions of a multitude, you must rather seek to win time then
to contradict and contest. Wise men have fit occasions to divert and break
these furi^us waves.
and then suddenly they run out of their Towne-house to the walls,
euaporating in injuries and villainies the heat of their frenzy against their
Prince. Their rage being rather tired then past, about two of the clock after
midnight they were content to yield, so as they might be assured from fire and
spoil.

Imbercourt assures them that the composition should be observed: upon this
assurance they receive Imbercourt who seized upon the gates, Walls of Liege
beaten down.
and set gards there. The Duke enters in triumph, they beat down twenty
fadomes of the wall to make a breach, the Towers beaten down, the walls
opened in diverse places, new laws, new Impositions and a new world. That A
speedy resolution to that which cannot be avoided molifies the pain, and to
obey voluntarily is to take away that which is rough and troublesome in
servitude.
goodly statue set up in the public place as a mark of liberty was
transported to Bruges for a fatal memory of this desolation, which happened on
S. Martins day. 1467. upon which were graven these Verses.

Desine sublimes vultus attollere in auras,
Disce meo casu perpetuum esse nihil:
Nobilitatis ego Leodis venerabile signum
Gentis et in victae gloria nuper eram.
Sum modo spectaculum ridentis turpe popelli
Et testor Caroli me cecidisse manu.
They of Gand became wise at the cost of them of Liege, Gantois profit by them
of Liege.
and passing from a forced obedience to a voluntary The Earl of Flanders
having besieged Gand, and refused to take them to mercy, if they came not all
jointly together barefooted in their shirts to demand it, made the^ resolu to
sally out upon him: five thousand being led by Philip of Artauelle de^eated
40000. men, and entered pel-mel with them into Bruges. The Earl was hidden in a
poor woman's garret and led out of the Town in a disguised habit.
they found the yoke more easy. The Duke entered there with great pomp, and
the Gantois acknowledging their fault, went as far as Bruxelles to meet him,
presenting unto him the seventy two Banners of the trades for the which they
had made that famous mutiny after the death of Duke Philip, and which had
been formerly taken from them: they submitted their privileges to his
discretion, paid 30000. Florins to the Duke, and 6000. to them that were about
him, neither had they so good an issue of their revolt as in the time of
Arteuelle.s Yet their privileges were confirmed, except that which they call
of the Law, by the which of six and twenty Aldermen they had the election of
two and twenty, and the Duke of four only; which caused such ordinary
mutinies and reuolts in the Town, calling none to public charges but such as
were of this furious and mutinous humor, who held the hearts of the Citizens so
divided, as one should sooner have joined together the pieces of a broken
Crystal, then the designs of their minds. He sent the Banners to Bullen
upon the sea, to accompany those which his father had caused to be laid
there in remembrance of the like rebellion.

He made his entry into Gand armed and victorious. Entry of the D. of
Bu^^gundy (...) Gand.
The Kings Ambassadors came thither unto him, to entreat him not to meddle with
the affairs of Brittanie nor Normandy: winter was spend in these conferences,
but the King not able to temporize any longer, nor to give time unto his
enemies to join together, enters into Brittany, and takes Chantoce, with
Ancenis. The Duke of Bourgundy advanced to S. Quentin to succor his Allies.
Treaty of the Duke of Berrie and Brittanie.
The King held them so short as he made them resolve to treat with him, and
laying aside their interest, It is certain there is not any one of whom we
may not obtain what we desire, if he be not thereby interessed howsoever the
public be interessed.
he draws from them a renonciation of all Alliance with the Duke of Bourgundy.
He would not have it said that he was armed to do nothing, for one enemy he
makes three. He was wonderfully incensed against the King, who always prepared
him such bankets, and was discontented with the Dukes of Normandy and
Brittanie, who had made an accord without him, terming them faint-hearted and
without judgment. The King made him cease his Arms for sixscore thousand
crowns which he gave him, the which he did accept the more willingly, for that
he desired to enjoy in quiet the first contents of his marriage with the Lady
Margaret Margaret Daughter to Rich: of York and Sister to the K. of England was
married to Duke Charles in July 1468. She made her entry into Bruges being
conducted by six Knights, Adolphe of Cleues, James of Luxemburg, Anthony
Bastard of Bourgundy, Peter of Baufremont Earl of Charny, Philip Pot and
Philip of Creuecoeur.
of York Sister to King Edward, who was come to Bruges.

The King sent Cardinal Balue and Taneguy of Chastell unto him, to have his
consent unto an interuiew, thinking that if he might speak with him, he
would wholly draw him from the Protection of the D. of Brittanie, with whom he
was discontented, and would not regard that of the Duke of Normandy which was
more hurtful then profitable unto him.

The Duke took no taste in this enteruiew, being (as he said) well advertised
that the King had sent his Ambassadors to them of Liege to solicit them to a
new revolt, Balue and du Chastell let the Duke understand that the Liegeois had
been so handled the last year, as it was incredible they would fall into the
like miseries, and if they had any such desire, this enteruiew of the two
Princes would make them desist. Which reason made the Duke consent to receive
the King at Peronne. As soon as Cardinal Balue and du Chastell had acquainted
the King with the Dukes resolution, he set forward to meet him, and parted
from Noion upon a letter which the Duke wrote unto him with his own hand, for
the assurance of his coming, Error which the K. could not repair but with
danger.
stay and return. An error which was seconded with many errors, In errors of
importance the first step disorders all. It is more easy not to enter then to
get forth. One error follows an other, and that of judgment brings that of
the heart.
and an error of an ill settled judgment, and one of the most remarkable of the
life and conduct of this Prince. He went to se a Prince whom he had newly
offended, what could he hope for but to see himself forced to repair this
wrong? He had sent men to Liege to make it revolt, he should have given over
this practice, and consider that if it did succeed, Peronne should be an
infallible prison to him, from whence he should never be freed until he had
done reason unto the Duke, to the blemish of his courage and honor. It is a
dishonor to be forced to disauow his own thoghts and intentions. The K. had
sent men to trouble the D. at Liege, he had done it through indiscretion, now
he is forced to pacify it, and to stay the business more then he thought to
advance it.


If this consideration were not able to stay his voyage, yet it should have
bound him to seek for other assurances then in words and paper; Two errors the
K. committed in the assurance of his person.
and remember that he himself had not much regarded that which he had
promised at Constans, that they might yield him the like measure, and that
there is nothing so light as an oath, when as the breach thereof presents some
private commodity. The desire of profit, of revenge or pleasure, is the ram
which overthrows an oath. Neither of the three does moderate the pain. The
divine is undoubted misery to periures, and that of the world is shame.
Moreover he had no child, and committed his life unto a Prince, whose
Ambition would have confounded heaven and earth to reign, he gave it in guard
to him who would ruin his estate, holding it more commendable to be rash then
a coward. The rashnet of a private man may be excused when it has no train:
The life of Sparta depends not upon that of Calicratidas, but that of a prince
which is the spirit that gives life and motion to an estate, is always blamed


It is the second error which he committed in the conduct of his own safety
for he had trusted the Princes that were in league against him, He comes to
Peronne to the Duke
coming to parle with them at Bois de Vincennes, who desired to seize upon the
royal authority, and to govern France at their own pleasures. He went
thither without any gards, It is dangerous to trust the faith of a prince who
has been an enemy, he being the weaker. Tosime blames Valeria^ of
indiscretion, who went to Sapor with a small troop.
being accompanied by the Duke of Bourbon, the Cardinal his Brother, the
Cardinal of Balue, the Earl of S. Paul and the Governor of Roussillon. The
Duke received him without the town, and conducted him to the lodging which he
had caused to be prepared for him. Presently after arrived the Bishop of
Geneua, the Earl of Bresse, the Earl of Romont, all three brethren to the
Duke of Sauoy, the Marshall of Bourgundy, the Seigr of Lau, Poncet of Riuiere,
and the Siegr of Vrfe, all carrying St Andrews Cross, and in their hearts
some apprehension of wrong. The King had kept the Earl of Bresse and the
Signior of Lau in prison, and he had taken Pi^^ll from the Marshall of
Bourgundy.
The King being advertised hereof grew very distrustful, and had his thoughts
troubled and confounded with repentance, There is not any thing more unworthy
wherinto a Prince may fall then repentance, especially in errors which may not
be twice committed.
for that he had not better considered of his voyage. He sent to entreat the
Duke to lodge him in the Castle, for that all these Noble men that were come
did not conceal it that they were his enemies. The Duke was glad that the King
had made choice of the lodging which he durst not have given him, He is lodged
in the Castle.
and entreated him not to doubt any thing.

The two Princes gave order to their Councels Princes which have any
controversies, should refer them to their Councels, to avoid the bitterness
and ^eat wherein to contention may draw them.
to consider of the means to end their quarrels. They renewed the Treaty of
Conflans, whereunto some few things were added in regard of the Duke. But
Monsieurs condition grew better, for in exchange of the Duchy of Normandy he
had. Champagne and Bry with all the rights, and the Duke of Britain entered
into the Treaty as an Allie.

Matters standing upon these terms, news came unto the Duke that the Kings
Ambassadors had made them of Liege revolt, The Leigeois in this revolt made
more have then the King expected, for his designs were not yet well digested,
and he held them not so able.
that they had seized upon the Town of Tongres, imprisosoned their Bishop,
Cousin german to the Duke, and slain fifteen or sixteen of his Chanons and
servants. The Duke caused the gates of the Town and Castle to be shut, fayning
that some one had taken a Casket of Jewels: he fortified his guards about the
Castle, and told some of his trusty servants that the King was come thither to
deceive and betray him. The K. in a manner a prisoner.
He was so transported with Choler, as if the first to whom he reported these
news would have cast oil into the fire, The first motions of Princes in their
choler, pass speedily to resolutions of revenge when they encounter men that
comfort and encourage them.
and had not rather quenched then kindled the wood, he had resolved to do what
he had said against the King. But there were not any but Phil. de Com. and two
grooms of his chamber, who did not aggrauate any thing.

If never King of France has seen the image of fear but upon the front of
his enemy, it now presents it self in the eyes of Lewis, who stood amazed in
a sad mediation of his error, complaining his misfortune with that of Charles
Hubert E. of Vermandoi^ caused Charles the simple to dye in prison. King Lewis
his son to revenge this injury called an assembly of the Princes and chief
noblemen, and propounded this question which he seemed to receive from the K.
of England, to have his advice: What punishment that farmer descrued who having
invited his master to come unto his house had put him to death. All concluded
that the crime was punishable, and Hubert said that he ought to be hanged, You
shall be (said the King) you have condemned your self. And he had noe sooner
spoken the word but he was hanged.
the simple being lodged at the foot of the Tower where he had been
imprisoned. He made some offer to pacify the Duke, and to give hostage to
procure such satisfaction from the Liegeois as was fit.

He had friends in the Dukes Council, The advice of that which was done in the
D. counsel, came as it was said from Phil. de Commines.
and casting twelve or fifteen thousand Crowns among them, And he himself
writes after this manner. The King had some friend which advertised him that he
should have no harm if he did yield unto those two points, but if he did
otherwise, he thrust himself into very great danger.
he was by that means advertised of the Resolutions which were taken: whereof
the mildest and most moderate were not pleasing unto him. The first opinion was
that they should keep promise with him, so as he would declare himself an
enemy to them of Liege. The second that being offended as he was, it was
dangerous to give him liberty, to revenge himself, The third that they should
send for the Duke his brother, and the other Princes to consult what was to be
done. In the end they past by this straight, that he was constrained (and it is
the greatest violence that may be done unto a King) to consent unto a a war
against them of Liege, who had relied upon his protection.

The Duke continued three days in great alterations, and past the third night
in such disquietnes as he did not unclothe himself, but lay down upon his
bed, then rising suddenly he would walk and talk to Phillip de Commines, his
Chamberlain, whose integrity and moderation did serve to calm those violent
storms that troubled his soul. He was wholly French, Philip de Commines
became a Partisan to the King, who drew him into France, gave him the signory
of Argenton in Poictou, and the Seneshalship of the same Country.
and from that time some thought he resolved to retire himself into France.
But it is not credible that there was any treachery in him. The vptightnes and
sincerity of his writings frees him from suspicion. If he had been blemished
with infidelity and ingratitude, vices which dissolve al humane society, All
the greatest reproaches are comprehended in these two words, Ingrate and
treacherous. Nihil aeque Concordiam humani generis dissociat et distrahit quam
hoc ingratitudinis vitium. Sen.
the King had not trusted him with so many great and important affairs.

The Duke went early in the morning unto the Castle to the King who was
already advertised of what he would say unto him, and had time to think of his
answer, and to fit it not so much unto reason as to necessity, Amazement should
never be seen on a Princes forehead. He should be master of his words, but
much more of his countenance, for his looks do often contradict them, and
betray the secrets of the heart.
and above all to carry so even a countenance, as the Duke should not discover
that he had any ill game, or that he had any apprehension to loose, for if he
had thought that he had made him afraid, he would have done him a mischief
Many times a bad design begun is not ended; when as he that does it thinks
that he is not discovered. And it is a maxim grounded more upon experience
then Conscience in such occasions, not to do so much, or to do more.
all together.

The Duke was accompanied by the Lords of Crequy, Charny, and la Roche. He
could not by the humility of his words, so well dissemble his proud and
threatening gesture, The Duke coniures the King to go to Liege
but the trembling of his voice discovered the motion and storm which choler
caused in his heart: ^ And then there is no great reason in humble words and
respective countenances when as the effects are contrary, and that the inferior
braues the superior, To what end s^rues respect and humility of words, if the
action be proud? The day when K. John w^^ taken at the battle of Poict^ers,
the prince of Wales served his majesty at supper bareheaded. The King entreated
him to sit down. It belongs not to the subject answered the Prince and yet he
held him prisoner.
He demanded of him if he would hold the treaty and come to Liege, to help to
revenge him and the Bishop of Liege his kinsman of the Liegeois who by reason
of his coming were revolted. The King granted it, the Peace was sworn upon
Charlemaignes cross, and the whole town was full of joy for this accord: the
12. of October 1468. 1468.
Oliver de la March reports this otherwise then Phillip de Commines. The King
(says he) was not well assured, but as soon as he saw the Duke enter into his
Chamber, he could not conceal his fear, but said unto the Duke Brother, I am
not safe in your house, and in your Country; and the Duke answered, yes sir,
and so safe, as if I should set an arrow come toward you, I would put my self
before you to preserve you. And the King said unto him, I thank you, for your
good will, and will go where I have promised you, but I pray you let the peace
be presently sworn, betwixt us. Then they brought the Arm of St. Leu, and the
King of France swear the peace betwixt him and the Duke of Bourgondy and the
Duke of Bourgondy swear the said peace, and promised to keep and entertain it
with and against all men. The next day they parted and came to Cambray
Notwithstanding their speeches unto the Duke of Bourgo^dy that he should be
blamed to break the assurance which he had promised the King, he still
answered. He has promised me, and he shall hold it, I will make no
Conscience to force him. Peter of Goux his Cha^cellor, was one of those which
counseled him not to off^nd the King. Oli. de la March.
and entered into the Contry of Liege in the beginning of winter. The King had
no forces but his scottish guard, and 300. men at arms. The Duke held a
Counsel in the sight of Liege, what he should do. Some were of opinion that he
should send back part of his Army, for his forces were too great against a
demantled town, which could not be relieved, seeing the King was with him. He
gave no credit to this Counsel and it succeeded well, for he could not be too
strong having a mighty King by him It was never a w^se and advised resolution
to hazard all his fortune and not all his forces.
and being in danger to loose all if he had been too weak distrust was
auailable.

The Duke commanded the Marshall of Bourgondy who led the foreward, Siege of
Liege.
to lodge with in the City, either with their wills or by force. The Pope had
a Nuncio within the City, to end the Controversies which were in a manner
perpetual betwixt the Bishop and the people, who changing his power and
forgetting his duty, upon a design to have this Bishopric, exhorted the
inhabitants to defend themselves, and caused them to make a sally with such
fury, as they that were without had no hope to enter but victors. Clearchus
made a sally and put all his (...) in battle, then he commanded the gates to
be shut and the keys to be cast over the wall, to take all hope of entry from
the Soldiers, until they had lost or wenne.
This Sally was so unfortunate, as he repented him of his Council, and
apprehending the danger, gets out of the town and flies away, but he was
stayed by the Dukes men, who promised to them that had taken him to make their
profit, using no speech to him. But whilst they contended for their shares in
his ransom, they came unto the Duke being at Table, who blamed that in
public which he had commended in secret, Popes Non cio set at liberty.
declaring the prize not good: and causing the Bishop to come unto him, ^he
honored him and caused all his goods to be restored, leaving repentance unto
the rest, who had not done that without brute which they should have done There
are some things to be done before they ask if they shall do them. It is the
answer which Pompey, supping with Anthony in a ship made unto an officer, who
told him that he had a good opportunity to be revenged of them, and that if he
would there should not one remain.
before they asked leave.

The marshall of Bourgondy and I^bercourt win the suburbs and march directly
to the Towne-gate, which stayed not until that necessity should force the
Inhabitants to demand a peace in mourning gowns, Although the Athenians had no
reputation of great courage, yet they never demanded any accord but in mourning
robes pressed with extreme necessity.
upon their first approach the Deputies present themselves to Parle, The
beseeged demand a Parle.
but hope and desire of spoil would not give them hearing. Night surprised the
assailants before they were lodged, and does so disorder them as they know not
whether to go, but calling one another in confusion, they gave courage to the
besieged to make a Salley. He that charge first by night has the advantage
for it is alwaies^ presumed that he is the stronger^ flight does commonly
follow amazement. The night has no shame.
They arm some for fear, others without fear, Sallie made by them of Liege.
and issue out upon them by diverse places, for their walls being razed the
year before, gave them passage, where they slew seven or eight hundred. Four
Can^ons discharged against the gate along the great street, cry quittance, and
keep them from coming forth, who through favor of this first Sally had a
great desire.

Yet for all this they that were come forth would not retire into the Town,
but barricadoed themselves, or as Phillip de Commines says, insconsed
themselves with wagons which they had won, and remained there until day.
John de vilette In sallies the Commander should always stand firm to
maintain the besieged in their duties by his presence, and to favor their
retreat, having a care that being repulst the enemy does not enter pel mel with
them. When as they of Liege had lost their head in the first sally, their
defense was desperate.
the sole Commander of the people was hurt and slain. The suburb was kept by
the Marshall of Bourgondy, who had committed a gross error, having given no
better order for his lodging The first duty of a good Captain is to know how
to lodge his men. For this only respect Hanibal in the judgment of Phirrhus,
was the first Captain of Greece next to Alexander.
a principal part of the duty of a good Captain. The Prince of Orange was
hurt there, and in this action the History gives him the glorious surname of a
man of virtue, as it commends the valor of the Lords of Lau and Vrfe, and
reprocheth the contempt of honor to above two thousand men, who under favor of
this night had sacrifized their safeties and honors to flight.

This first defeat aflicted the Duke, and he would not that the King should
have known it, if he could have concealed it amidst so many passions and
diverse Interests. The Dukes troops ill entreated in the suburbs.
Believing that the brute was greater then the loss, he went himself to tell
it him. The King was very glad, but this joy was more grounded upon discretion
then justice, for if the Dukes designs had not prospered, the King had had
cause to repent him, and therefore he did apply his spirit to the motions of
the Dukes, approving that it is a hard servitude for a great man to force
himself to the humors of his inferior.

He was advised to go and refresh his foreward, plunged in the mire, besieged
with hunger and benumbed with cold. The Duke sent 300. horse with some
victuals to refresh them that were ready to faint, A famished soldier has
neither courage nor force to fight. It was a great negligence in the Dukes
Captains to have engaged the soldiers so near the enemy, and not provide to
make them eat. Asdruball lost his men against Scipio by this defect. Vliffes
blames Achilles for that he would lead his men to the war before they had
eaten.
having not eaten of two days. He came also and lodlodged in the midst of the
suburb, and the King in a farm half a mile off.

This first night about midnight there was a hot alarm although it were in the
heart of a very sharp winter. The King showed himself unto the Town as soon
as the Duke, Alarm given and the King goes to horse.
and they were amazed at his diligence, the name of King and his presence put
the Duke out of countenance. The Duke says Phil. de Commines, held not so
good a countenance, as many men wished, for that the King was present and took
the word and authority of Command.
The Adamant has no virtue near unto the Diamond, the King would not seem
other then a King, he takes the word and commands what should be done. It is an
act of a great Captain in accidents not forescene to reduce things speedily
into order.
No other but he in so sudden an accident could have assured the amazed, and
that with such judgment, courage and majesty, as they saw he knew well that
he was borne to that end, and that in such occasions the best blows are
drawn^ from the head. In war they do not fight only with the force of Soldiers,
but with the Art and wisdom of the General.
Some cried they are here, others said they come by such a port, the night
made all doubtful, and aug^ented the amazement. The King commanded the
Constable to go directly to such a place with such men as he had, for (said
he) if they come, that is their way. But they saw not any one, the King retired
to his quarter, and the Duke to his.

The next day the King came and lodged in a house near to that of the Dukes,
The King and Duke lodged together.
who fell into such a distrust of this neighborhood, as he lodged 300. This
change of lodging and these approches do strangly disquiet the Duke. He feared
that the King would cast himself into the town, which had relied upon his
protection, and that he had some design against him, at the least that he
should intend to retire before the Li^geois were subdued and punished.
men at Arms, and the best of all his troops in a barn betwixt them, having
passages made in diverse places to issue forth.

The Liegeois foreseeing that they could not avoid their ruin, resolve to
encounter and meet with Death, to fell their lives as dear as they could, and
to surprise the two Princes in their own lodgings whither they might go of an
even ground, for although they were both great Captains, yet had they not
cared to entrench themselves. A remarkable fault in 2. great Captains to have
no tre^ches at the siege of Liege, being doubtful long and difficult.
The Liegeois had no head, they took hazard and despair for their guides, and
therewith the masters of the two lodgings where the King and Duke were, their
intent being to surprise them, and to kill them, or to lead them into the Town
before their men should be able to relieve them.

The night, which is always contrary to these incounters, All Incounters and
Combats by night, should be avoided. Caesar did not undertake any thing to
execute it by night, and Anthony said that if the Ports of Cremona were open,
yet would be not enter but by day.
was favorable to them as assaylants. The order was, that six hundred of their
best Soldiers should go out by the walls, Sally of the Liegeois.
and about midnight march directly to the lodgings of these two Princes,
without any stay, and kill the Sentinells. And that at the same instant the
people should sally forth by the Port, with the most fearful cries Cries are
profitable in fighting, not in marching, by the cries they have often judged of
the issue of Battles, as they were more or less (...). An unequal and faint
cry having pauses, has often discovered fear, says Tit Liu.
they could make, to give courage to the execution of this design. The King
and Duke of Bourgondy in danger to be taken or ^laine.


They go forth by the breaches of the walls about ten of the clock, they
take and kill most of the Sentinels, but in steed of going directly where they
were commanded, as they might have done without any resistance, they stay at a
pauillion whereas the Duke of Alencon was lodged, behind the Dukes lodging,
and at the barn which was betwixt the Kings and the Dukes. This error for the
trenches put the two Princes in danger to be slain, they be necessary to
hinder the sally of them within, and the succors that come from abroad.
Without all doubt, says Phil. de Commines, if they had not stayed in these
two places, but had followed those two posts which were their guides, they had
slain the King and the Duke of Bourgundy, and defeated the rest of the Army.

The Duke who resolved to give a general assault the next day, had commanded
all his men to disarme and refresh themselves, and he himself had put off his
Cuirasse, which he had not done since his arrival, so sweet and easy great
toiles The heads of an army should be more hardened and laborious then others.
Alexander marched often on foot in the head of his Army, but as Cyrus Father
says, travels must not be measured a like in the bodies of them that command,
and of their soldiers, neither are they so grievous to the one as to the
other, for that honor maks them more easy unto a co^mander, for that he knows
well that what he does shall come to the knowledge of of all the world. Zenop. in
Cyroped.
are in great enterprises. The noise which they had made at the Duke of
Alencons pauilion made many to arm, To execute a great design which requires
diligence, they must never stay upon any occasion, unless it be an inui^cible
necessity, by their turning to Alensons Pauillion, they gave an Alaru^ and
awake those whom they had surprised sleeping.
yet notwithstanding the gate and windows of the Dukes lodging were assailed
with great violence.

In this attempt they use great Art, some crying, God save the King, others,
God save the Duke, and many, God save the King and kill, to put the two Princes
in distrust, their people into confusion and to kill one another. Cries which
caused more fear in the Duke then the danger was great, and his servants knew
not to what party the King stood affected. The two hosts which led them were
slain at the first, Valor and fidelity of the Scotishmen.
the King came not forth, the Scottishmen fought This was a new recommendation
of the Scottishmens fidelity. An Act which may be compared to that of the
Romans which environed Crassus, saying, that never any Parthians Arrow should
touch his person, until they had first slain them one after an other. Plut.
valiantly at his feet, and made bucklers of their bodies, against this
enraged multitude, and not knowing any one, slew as many Bourgonians as
Leigeois. Night will not suffer them to distinguish friends from enemies. The
blows are for the most part vain and without encounter, and the most valiant
slain by the most fearful. Tit. Liu.
The people which should have issued forth by the gate, were kept in, and the
rest were cut in pieces, the King and the Duke talked together being amazed at
their rashness, and finding that if they had been led their design had
proceeded farther, and that they had to deal with men that were more powerful
by despair then by conduct.

They retired, the Duke having an intent to give an assault, and the King to be
present at it, The K will be at the assault.
notwithstanding that the Duke persuaded him to retire to Namur until that the
Town were taken. The King answered them that spoke unto him, that although he
doubted of the event, for that the number of the people was great, being pressed
by two powerful and violent motions, despair, and boldness, and had already
made known how dearly they would sell their lives, When as a multitude begins
to know that matters are reduced to these terms as nothing ca^ happen but
misery, they assure themselves in dangers, they change their boldness into fury,
and their hopes into despair.
yet he would be present with the rest, and had no reason to go to Namur. He
might have safely retired, for he had a hundred Archers, a good number of
Gentlemen, and three hundred men at Arms. Yet for more danger then he
apprehended he would not have made one dishonorable step. The respect of his
honor There is not any great courage but starts at this word Honor. A Prince
must go into all places where his reputation is engaged. The King says Phil.
de Com. where it co^cerned his honor would not be blamed of cow^dise.
and that great desire of glory (the only Object of great spirits) was more
dear unto him then his life.

About eight of the clock on Sunday morning being the 30. of October 1468. the
sign for the assault was given the inhabitants having no thought that they
would trouble their rest on Sunday, The Earl of Montfort, who was caled John
the valiant, D. of Brittany, sent to entreat the Earl of Blois his enenmy, to
refer the Battle which he meant to give him, until the next day, for that it
was Sunday, and St. Michels feast, and it was one of those days, on the which
the Countess of Blois his wife had forbidden him to fight, but the Earl of
Blois would not believe any of them, and was slain there. This hapened in the
year 1364.
(a day by the scrupulous of that time held unfortunate to fight in) and
moreover much tired, for that every day they had been in guard, and now they
were gone to dinner. They were surprised without any resistance, every man
saving himself either in the Forest of Ardennes, or in Churches, he that
escaped the fury of the sword, fell into that of cold and hunger, and all tried
that in vain King Ferdinand going out of Naples with Don Frederic, the Queen
his Grandmother, the Princess Joan his daughter, and embarked in the Galleys
to recover the Island of Ischia, which the Ancients called Enaria, thirty miles
from Naples, had no other words in his mouth but this Verse of David saying,
That Sentinels and gards avail not, if God keep not the City.
men keep the City if God take not the care.

The Duke being master of the City came and conducted the King unto the
Palace. This prince fitting his words unto the time and to the Dukes humors,
commended his victory, and spoke to all that past of the Dukes valor and good
conduct, who took a wonderful delight to have a King for a Panegyrist. The
Town was reduced to that estate as it might serve to posterity for an example
not of conservation, Ruin and desolation of the Liegeois
but of extreme misery. The gates and walls were overthrown, the ditches
filled up, the privileges revoked, the laws changed, and all the Churches
(except the Cathedral) spoiled. The Duke caused it to be kept by some of his
household, against the soldiers, who sought to force the two doors. A strange
thing to see churches Seeing that God ought to be feared and worshipped in all
places, that which belongs unto his service should also he religiously
respected even in the Armies. Zenophon says, that Agesylaus would not allow
them to touch any Temples in the enemies country.
in danger among Christians, whose impieties are such as even the most
Barbarous Nations do abhor them, for they have always respected holy
places, but it was so perverse and corrupted an age, as there were men without
souls, and souls without religion.

The Duke not able to restrain this fury slew a soldier to make the rest
dislodge, all was reduced to a vast and fearful wilderness. The Duke repented
himself of the cruelties which had been committed in the fury of the Sack,
and offered for an expiation the St. George wherewith St. Lamberts church in
Liege is at this day adorned. The King, five days after the desolation of a
country which relied upon the succors of his power, and which stumbled into
servitude, for it could not go straight in liberty, Liberty is to be desired,
when as they that will not be subject to have means to live free, but as Plato
says Epist. 8. Many have fallen into servitude, for that they could not use
their liberty well.
took leave of the Duke, and told him, that if he had any more cause to use
him that he should not spare him, but if all were done, he desired to go to
Paris to have their Treaty verified, yet hoping to meet again the next Summer
in Bourgundy. I will said he, The King desires to return to Paris.
that we remain a month together to make good cheer. Princes as all other
men are by nature subject to passions and alterations, and not able to endure
the toil of the body and mind long without tiring, and have need of some rest
and recreation. It is that which K. Lewis the eleventh in this place calls good
cheer.
The form and manner of his words did much help the matter, for he delivered
them with an open countenance, and a heart which seemed free, which did bind
the Duke to please him. An Act of incomparable wisdom, to fit his words and
actions for the necessity of the time and place wherein he was, and humility
in these actions does no wrong unto a great Prince, Humility abates nothing of
a princes greatness, for either he that humbles himself is inferior, and then
it becomes him well, or superior but brought to such a straight, as he is
forced to be^d and if he escapes, he greeues not at his humility, although that
do him good who has entreated him with pride and arrogance.
which knows there is no other means to continue with spirits that are
insolent of their fortunes, but dissembling.

The Duke also knowing the humor of this Prince, murmured still, Treaty made
without liberty binds not.
and made his distrust known, he did consider that bonds of promises made by
men which cannot say they are in liberty are light, that force has no power
to prescribe a force sufficiently noted in the solemn words of the oath
whereunto they desired the King should consent, that in case of contrauention
to the Treaty, all his subjects should retire from his obedience, and adhere
to the Earl of Charolois. And therefore he would that before the kings
departure, their Treaty should be read and read again, and all the points
expounded In Treaties of peace they must understand one an other well. Al words
must be made plain, and those that are comprehended or excluded expressed.
and that upon all he declared his intention. Advise my Lord if there be any
thing whereof you repent, A breach in the observation of forced promises is not
dishonorable, and he wants force that observes them.
it is at your choice to do it or leave it. I desire to add one Article in
favor of the Lords of Lau, Vrfet, and Poncet of Riuiere, that they may be
restostored to their lands and offices, I am content, replied the King, so as
the Earl of Neuers and the Lord of Croui may be also restored. The Duke, who
bare a deadly hatred to these two, spoke no more of the rest, and the King
declared that he would observe the Treaty. In Treaties which are made by
equals impertinent demands are choked with the like demands.


He had so great a desire to be far off, as to make no stay of his
departure, he made no show of discontent. He concealed his grief so cunningly
as it was impossible to judge that he felt any. The Duke used some complements
to excuse himself for that he had drawn him to the war of Liege. Excuses
of the Duke.
He had need of very artificial poulders Words of excuse and complements in
actions which cannot be excused, are like spices and sauce of a delicat taste
to meat which is tainted.
to make this sauce pleasing, the gilding took not away the bitterness of these
pills. He did accompany him a mile; at their farewell, and imbracings, the
King to show his affection and trust, Words of the K. at his departure.
said unto him; Sir if my Brother which is in Brittanie were not contented with
the portion which I give him for your sake, what would you have me do: The
Duke answered, if he will not accept it, I refer my self to you two, and
care not so as he be satisfied. These words being spoken somewhat roughly were
well considered by the King, who from that time resolved not to lodge his
Brother in Normandy too near to England, nor in Champagne too near to
Bourgundy.

The Duke continued the rigor of war upon the country of Franchemont, War
in Franchim^nt.
leaving the Town of Liege on fire, The Duke appointed three thousand foot to
burn the Town of Liege, and to desend the Churches. It was fired thrice, in
three several quarters. They reserved three hundred houses for the Priests,
with whom many inhabitants lodged. Phil. de Com.
not excepting any thing but Churches and the houses of such as attended the
divine service. Impiety respects sacred things after that liberty has profaned
them. Fab. Maximus having spoiled Tarentum and made it desolate, with all
kinds of cruelties. When his Secretary came to ask him. What shall we do
with our enemies Gods, he answered, let us leave the angry Gods unto the
Tarentins Plut. in Fabio.
They respected the Temples after they had offended him who was worshipped
there, by all sorts of impieties. Whilst that the soldiers warmed themselves
at this fire, the rest endured incredible cold in the Mountains of
Franchemont, whereas the wine being frozen in the hogs-heads, Sharp Winter*
it was cut in pieces with Axes, and carried away in hats and baskets without
decrease. Oliver de la March writes that the Dukes tysan was frozen in silver
flagons, and that the force was so great as they brake.

At the same time the death of the King of Albania was spread over all Europe.
Death of the King of Albania.
Lewis was much grieved, for that he alone stayed the Turks fury, who were
cruel scourges to punish the disorders of that depraved Age. He was the
youngest Son of nine children to John Castriot Voysane daughter to the King of
the Trib^le^ a part of Macedonie, and Bulgaria, having conceived George
Castriote, drempt that she was delivered of a serpent, of such greatness as he
spread over all Epirus.
, who commanded at Croy the chief Town of Albania: who gave him with his
Brethren to Amurath to assure the faith of his promises, being forced to yield
under the yoke of that command.

Amurath, George Castriot circumcised and caled Scanberbeg.
the Nabuchodonosor God has used the power of infidels to punish his people,
and by diverse means he has given them power to trouble them. He raised
Nabuchodonosor to ruin the Israelits, and therefore leremie calls him his
servants, although he were most cruel.
of the Israelites, made them all be circumcised and change their names, George
was called Scanderbeg, that is to say Alexander Lord: and as Alexander he began
betimes to make such proofs of his valor Scanderbeg was instructed in all the
exercises of war before the force of his body could show what his courage was.
He also learned the Turkish, Sclamonian, Arabia^, Greek and Italian tongues.
as every man thought that his military toils, would make him worthy of that
name, that he would end more Battles in effect then the Princes of his time had
seen painted, When Cicero spoke of Po^pey, he said that he had brought more
battles to a happy end, the^ others had read in Histories, and conquered more
Provinces then any one before him had conceived in his wishes, that he had
triumphed almost as many times, as he had followed the war years.
that he would win more victories then others had encountered dangers. He was
Sangiac, the first dignity next unto a Basha, then was he sent into diverse
expeditions, and known to be the sole author of all the good success which
happened in Greece, Asia, and Hungary, there being nothing in the Art of
war, but in the end came to his knowledge.

But this great valor had almost undone him. Amurath apprehended it to have
such a Prince near him; and the enemies of his courage, but more of his hopes,
said that he nourisht a domestic enemy, to weaken his intentions, and
disappoint his intelligences. He put his Brethren to death, being resolved to
make him run the like fortune, if he had not made it known by his carriage
that he had no other thought nor passion but that of his service, and that his
Father After the death of John father to Scanderbeg, Amurath seized upon the
Realm of Epirus, and put a garrison into Croy. Scanderbeg dissembled the
grief of his fathers death, the taking of his estate and the murder of his
Brethren and so from that time he resolved to pull that Crown from Amurath.
and his Brethren did revive in the affection which he bare unto him. Amurath
puts Scanderbegs brethren to death.
And when as Amurath, to sound him, had offered him the crown of Albania, he
said, that he preferred the honor of his service, before all the Scepters and
Empires of the world, and that he felt his hand fitter for a sword, then his
head for a Crown.

This answer pleased Amurath, He grows fearful of his valor.
but it freed him not from all his fears which the greatness of his spirit
imprinted in his soul, as often as he returned from any exploits of war, which
were more admirable then imitable. Wherefore having resolved to make war
against George Lord of Misia Misia is commonly called by the Turk Segoria, and
comprehends Seruia, Bosnia, Russia, and the Prince is called Despote of Seruia.
he made him General of his Army, as well for that he had not any one more
capable, as also to be rid of him, thinking that being forward and fiery by
nature, he would thrust himself into dangers, from which he should not free
himself, for his brave and generous Captain, like an other Cato Cato as Tit.
Liu. says would be every where and execute every thing in person, sparing
himself no more then the least of his soldiors, having no other advantage over
them but the honor of his commandments.
would see all himself, and had no other advantage in military labors, then
to have the honor to command them, and to be the first to execute them. But as
often as he went, so often did Andrinopolis see him return laden with honor
and victories. A remarkable work of Gods providence, to preserve this brave
courage for his service.

At length Scanderbeg, Scanderbeg leaves the Turk.
who had always the heart of a Christian and an Albanois, being weary to live
in the continual disquiettings of so many distrusts and conspiracies to kill
him, resolves to quit Amurath, Sca^derbegs retreat was in the year 1444. he
conferred with Huniades of his enterprise that under a color of making war
against him he might retire on his side.
whereupon he joined with Huniades Prince of Transiluania, He ioynes with John
Huniades.
and with him defeates the Basha of Romania, who had fourscore thousand men:
he caused his Secretary to be taken, and setting a dagger to his throat,
forced him to write letters to the Governor of Croy, carrying a commandment in
Amuraths name to consigne the place unto him.

The Governor of Croy obayed and received Scanderbeg, Entry of Scanderbeg into
Croy.
all the Infidels were put to the sword, and the Christians preserved, and such
as would become Christians. He besieged the other places of Albania, and in few
days with much pain and no money, he recovered his forefathers estate, and
made the black Eagle The house of Scanderbeg carried an Eagle sables in a field
gules. When as the people of Albania, saw them in his Exsignes, and Standards,
they presently renewed the ancient affection they bare unto their Princes.
with two heads to be seen in all places.

Hitherto he had fought for himself, now he fights for Christendom.
Ladislaus King of Hungary and Poland entreats him to assist him against
Amurath, he was hindered by Huniades John Despote of Transiluania, otherwise
called Huniades, being disco^tented with the King of Hungary, for that certain
places in Seruiae which had bin granted him in reward of his virtue were
detained from him, refused passage to Sca^derbeg to ioin with the Christian
Army.
Despote of Transiluania, neither did the cause of the war seem just, for it
brake a peace solemnly sworn with Amurath. Battle of Varna.
It was decided in the valley of Varna on the limits of Misia, or Segoria,
upon the Euxin Sea within four days journey of Andrynopolis, to the
dishonor of the Christians, who were put to flight, but the triumph cost
Amurath so many men as his joy was turned to repentance.

If he made some triumph, Scanderbeg reapt the profit, for seeing that he had
retired his forces, he went to field, These say that Amurath having escaped
this danger grew more sad then he had been accustomed and being blamed by his
followers he answered, I would not win after this manner. Amurath caused a
pillar to be set whereas the Battle was given, with an inscription of the
victory, and at this day the heaps of dead men's bones are to be seen, which
show that the slaughter had been wonderful.
and made such sharp wars as the Turk wrote unto him, rather to stay his
exploites, then to threaten him with revenge, and yet his Letters were full of
reproaches and pride, Letters from Amurath to Scanderbeg.
the ordinary Passion of an incensed spirit. He swears that if he will
return unto him he will forget all his offenses past, for that he is more
mindful of the services he has done him, then of his ingratitude: he offers
to leave him the Town of Croy, and the Lands which his Father held, upon
condition that he should yield up all the other Towns of Albania and Misia.

These letters were received with that contempt they deserved. The letters
begin after this manner, Amurath and Ottoman Sovereign of the Turks and
Emperor of the East, sends no salutations to Scanderbeg his ungrateful
nurschild. He says that he knows not what words to use to him for that he
does not merit any good for his ingratitude, and a rough and sharp speech would
make his arrogant nature more insolent.
Scanderbeg thinking that Amuraths fear who grew old, and broken, had made him
to write them, having a desire to leave his Empire in some safety, Scanderbegs
answer.
yet he made him an answer, and after that he had told him that he should
remember the good which he had received from him, if the numbering did not renew
the remembrance of a greater number of ills he concluded with these words.
Such fortune as it shall please God to give us we will bear: In the mean time
we ask no council of the ennemy of that we intend to do, neither do we sue
for peace of you, but hope with the help of God A Christian Prince should not
refer any thing to fortune, but to the providence of God, who is the only
cause of all causes and guids al things after his will, the moouable by their
motions, the immovable by their firmness the voluntary by their liberty, and
the reasonable by their will.
to have victory over you. Within a while after he was victorious, overthrew
great armies which Amurath sent into Epirus, the first led by the Basha Ferise,
and the other two by Mustapha.

He won the Battle of Drinon against the Venetians, Battall of Drinon in
Dalmatia
and used this victory so well, as the Venetians to make him raise the seege
from before Dayne, Dayne is a little Town planted upon a high hill, as in a
manner all those of Epirus be, yet the soil of it is fat and the air good
and wholesome, they have store of Venison and bees, and all kinds of trees and
fruits.
which was in their protection, yielded that he should have a part of the
Country of Scutarii which was very commodious for him.

Amurath besieged Sfetigarde where as Scanderberg flew in single Combat, Seege
of Sfetigarde.
Ferise Basha General of the Army, yet it was taken and presently besieged
again by Scanderbeg, but he was forced to raise the siege, This dislodging was
very dishonorable for Amurath, and very glorious for Scanderbeg, who was
honored much for it by christian Princes, namely by Pope Nicholas the fifth, and
Ladislaus King of Hungary.
being advertised that Amurath came into Epirus with Mahomet his son to
besiege Croy.

After that his Artillery was cast, the Town battered, many assaults given and
maintained, and the ruins of the Assaylants blown up and laid open, Amurath,
tired with the tediousness of the siege, offers to retire and to leave Albania
unto Scanderbeg, with the title of a Realm, so as he would do him homage and
pay tibute, Scanderbeg, who held himself nothing inferior to the Emperor, as
long as he was more powerful Cato reduced to that extremity in Vtica as his
friends advised him to make an Accord with Caesar. It is for them, said he, to
sue that are vanquished, as for me, I will hold my self inuinsible, as long as
I am stronger in right then Caesar.
then he in the justice of his arms, found these offers so contrary to the
honor of his religion, as he rejected them courageously, saying that he would
never endure that the name of an Albanois should be defamed with such a
blemish, no not if Amurath would give him half his Empire. Death of Amurath
before Croy.
This answer with the little likelihood there was to vanquish the obstinacy of
the besieged, did so aflict Amurath as he dyed, complaining of his hard fortune
Among the precepts, which be left to Mahomet his son, he did often reitterate
these words with abundance of tears. That he should never contemn an enemy
not knowing any thing in all his life whereof he did repent him, and should
repent in the other world, but that he had contemned Scandebeg.
that after he had given subject to all the world to speak of his triumphs
against the Grecians and Hungarians, he saw himself now forced to yield up
his soul before the walls, half ruined, of a petty Castle, Croy the chief
Town of Albania is situated upon the top of a mountain in a manner
inaccessible of every side.
in the view of an enemy which had been his slave.

The memory of Amurath past away with his tears. Mahomet succeeded him, and
whilst he studies something worthy the beginning of his Empire, Scanderbeg
labors to fortefie Croy Croy the chief Town of Albania is situated upon
the top of a mountain in a manner inaccessible of every side.
and to repair her ruins, but Mahomet gave him no long liberty to do it, for
he presently sent Acmat his Basha to visit him with an Army of 12000 horse. If
the number had been greater it had not served but to increase the number of
the dead or prisoners, for Scanderbeg having taken the General prisoner, They
say that Scanderbeg had it in particular in all his incounters and military
actions, always to begin his first stratagems of victory with the death of the
head, saing, That the head should be first cut off, and the rest of the body
will fall alone, and that he knew no kind of living creature, that could
survive the head being taken off.
a maxim which he held for the first of military stratagems, Mahomets Army in
Hungary
the defeat of the rest was not difficult.

He attempted the siege of Sfetigarde, and after that of Belgrad, the one and
other expedition brought him no profit but repentance, and notwithstanding that
he had the worst, yet he sold Mahomet his victory so dear as he was forced to
say that his Army had nothing but the name of triumph. Constantinople taken
He turned his forces toward Constantinople where he made the victory
horrible, by all kinds of Brutish and barbarous inhumanities, which caused the
most stayed and modest spirits to be amazed If the Infidels prosper, if they
raise themselves upon the ruins of Christians, yet may we not murmr against
the eternal providence, Stay humane rashness, it is not lawful to pierce into
the secrets of Gods Judgments, nor to define when, how, nor how long it is fit
the wicked should flourish.
at so visible a testimony of the favor of heaven against those whom the
eternal Justice had chosen to repair the ruins. The long patience of the
Almighty, and his sufferance of the wicked has forced many to murmr against
his providence, that he does not cast those rods into the fire wherewith he
has scourged his children. The stay of the wickeds punishment does wrong unto
Gods Justice. Deus sua sibi patientia detrahit plures enim Dominum idcirco non
credunt quia seeulo iratum tam diu nesciunt. Tertul. de pacientiae*


The Conquest of Constantinople made him resolve to ruin Epirus, but Mahomet
sped so ill, War renewed in Albania.
and was so often beaten, as he sought a peace or truce of Scanderbeg, during
the which, past the troubles of Naples betwixt the French and the Arragonois.
The Venetians wronged by this Accord, press them to break with Mahomet, the
war is renewed, they fight to maintain the Christian liberty, All war says
Polybius lib. 11. is made either to preserve liberty, or for fear of falling
into servitude.
and to avoid the Turkish servitude. Mahomet sent Baillaban, to whom he
promised the Crown of Epirus, A pitiful atteration of things, to see a
Prince who had lately come into Europe with a mighty army, and had refused a
short truce unto the Emperor of the Turks to be now forced in his old years
to abandon his Country, and to go far to see^e for succors, being always
accompanied by Langey Archbishop of Durras.
so as he could make away Scanderbeg.

He made four voyages and was as often beaten, the number giving place to
valor. Scanderbeg demands succors of the Pope.
But in the end Scanderbeg seeing that Croy could not hold any longer against
so mighty an enemy, and that Albania was all covered with troops of Infidels,
he went away in a disguised habit to demand succors of the Pope.

Paul the second had no great pity to see these sad and mournful relickes of
so many Princes, and of so many heads of Macedon and of all Greece, nor of the
common necessity, and eminent peril of Christendom. The Venetians apprehended
it more sencibly, and gave some succors to Scanderberg, with the which and
that which he drew from his Allies of Epyrus, Macedonie, Sclauonia, and
Dalmatia, which might make about 13000. and four hundred good men, he returned
into Albania and freed Croy, before which Baillaban was slain.

Mahomet sent Allibey and Arabey thither with 20000. Turks, he had profited
little there if death Scanderbeg being ready to take from the Turks the town
of Valmes lately built by Mahomet, and being come to Lissa,, he fell into a
violent fever.
jealous of Scanderbegs glory had not surprised him by a sickness not daining to
assail him in arms. In this indisposition he assembled his Captains and
recommended his son unto them, Sickness and death of Scanderbeg.
whom he would have conducted into Pouillia until he came to age, leaving him
under the Venetians, government: And for his last words he said unto him. That
if he were good he gave him a Realm most firm and stable, if otherwise very
weak and feeble. yielding up his last groans the 17. of January, 1467. he
gave an amazement to his enemies.

This Prince with small forces defeated great Armies, who beside the good
qualities of the mind, for Judgment, Conduct, and Council, The Turks came
running about Croy, some horsemen went out of the town by Sca^derbegs
commandment the enemy thinking he had been there in person grew amazed and
fled through the mountains although they were 15000. horse and left the
booty they had taken from the Scutariens.
had an admirable strength, of body, comparable only to that of the ancient
Champions, Force and dexterity o^ Scanderbeg.
Biton, Biton carried a great Bull upon his shoulders. Pau^anias. Fusius
Saluius went lustily up a ladder with 200. pounds weight in his hands, 200. at
his feet, and as much upon his shoulders. Pliny. Seruilius did sight 23. times
body to body, and was always Victor. Plut.
Fusius Saluius, Seruilius. Talking with Ieams Picenin General of the Duke of
Calabrias Army, he did lift him above his head, like a child of six years
old. He had a Cimiterre with the which he had done miraculous deeds as cutting
of the head of a Boar at a blow, and of a wild Bull, which was famous for the
ruins it had done in the Country, having hurt and slain many that assailed
it. This dexterity, force, and agility of body continued all his life, and
exercise Exercise does continue the dexterity and disposition of the body long,
Philopemen of whom Plutarch speaks, was nimble in his age by great exercise.
made it in the beginning of his age in a manner equal to that it had been in
the prime of his youth.

After the siege of Croy they presented unto him in chains, Iouyma and Hedert
the Brother and Nephew of Baillaban, this representing unto him the cruelties
which they had committed upon his subjects, put him into such choler, as
having not the patience to attend any other hand, he cut them both asunder by
the wast at one blow. He punished them with the like pain that their Prince
did punish Christians. Mahomet made one man die as it were of two deaths, he
made them to be cut off by the wast at a blow, of tentimes it happened that he
dyed of two deaths, for Chalcondile says, you might see either part live long
after the blow.


During the Truce he had with Mahomet, he sent him this Cymeterre for that he
desired to see it, having heard say that with it he cut any arms asunder. The
strongest arms of his Country would try if it were true, and finding not the
virtue which was ascribed unto it, he sent it back again disdainefully,
thanking him for a thing which he held to have been better. Scanderbeg
answered. The virtue of my sword depends of mine own arm, which I cannot send
him, for that I reserve it against mine enemies.

It was an increase of glory and reputation to the common weal of Venice to
see Kings and Realms under their charge. But at that time they did an act of
providence Providence is one of the most apparent effect, of wisdom. Prudents
postumus dicere prouidentes.
which shows that wisdom has long held the helm of that Estate. They did
adopt for daughter of the commonweal the heir of Marc Cornare, and married
her to the King of Cypres, after whose death and of the afterbirth his son,
she was acknowledged for Queen, and made present of her Crown unto the
Venetians, her fathers by adoption.

From this action followed two diverse effects, the one of great joy to the
Venetians, the other of extreme afliction to Charlotte of Sauoy the French
Queen, who by this act saw her Brother as it were exiled from Cipres, and
separated from the Queen his wife. The History is long and tragical, but thus
in brief.

By the like accidents that other realms have been made desolate, the Crown
of Cipres fell from the house of Lusignan, James of Lusignam King of Cypres put
Peter his brother to death, and being told him that the Genouois were entered
into his Palace with arms, and had some design upon his person he put many
innocent Merchants to death a cruelty which made the Signory of Genoua to arm
against him. Bolius writes the History at large.
in the which it had long remained. A Fratricide was the cause, for James of
Lusignan having put his brother to death to reign alone, added other violences
to this cruelty, which made him odious to the people, and forced the Genouois
to arm against him, Cruelty makes the Princes of Lusignan odious.
to revenge an injury done unto certain Merchants of their Commonweal. He
was dispossessed of the Crown, his brothers Children restored to the Realm, and
he himself carried prisoner to Genoua, where he had one son who was King of
Cipres, King James of Lusignan had one son named John or James who was K. of
Cypres, and Anne married to Lewis Duke of Sauoy, son to Amidee, John had one
daughter named Charlotte, who was first married to John King of Portugal, and
after his death to Lewis of Sauoy.
and this son one daughter, whom he left sole heir to the Crown. She was
married to Lewis of Sauoy, son to Lewis Duke of Sauoy, and to Anne of Cypres
Sister to King John.

Lewis embarked at Venice to pass into Cipres, to take possession of his wife
and Realm. James base son to King John, Bishop of Nicosia, past into Egypt
to have succors from the Sultan of Egypt who made him to be proclaimed King of
Cypres, Letters of the Soulda^ to the King of Cipres.
prepared a great Fleet at Sea to go into Cypres, and wrote in these terms to
King Lewis. Thou art come out of the Western parts, to possess another man's
Realm in the East, and to spoil the heir of his just inheritance, which is
in thee a foolish enterprise. The Island of Cypres is tributary unto me, and it
belongs to me to dispose, assure thy self if thou do not dislodge presently
thou shall dye by the sword of Egypt. If thou have a desire to carry away thy
wife, I am content, upon condition that thou do not attend a second Summons.
This barbarous letter deserved no other answer but by the sword, Persuasions
are unprofitable when as Justice is inferior to force.
but Justice being forced to yield unto tirrany, King Lewis by the means of
the great master of Rhodes, let him understand that by the Christian laws the
Realm did be long unto the lawful daughter, that the Bastard was excluded, and
that they pretended not to change any thing of the rights which he had over the
Crown of Cypres as Protector. After that the Christians affairs were ruined
in Soria and the East, the Kings of Cypres of the house of Lusignan put
themselves under the protection of the Soldiers of Egypt.
This reason had pacified him, being resolved to quit the Protection of the
Bastard. But Mahomet sent him word, that it was a thing worthy of his greatness,
and profitable to their common religion to restore this Prince to his Estates,
exhorting him to remember the injuries which they of that Nation, and those of
Lewis his house had done unto the Mahometans, protesting that if he had a
desire to have peace with Christians, he should be sure to have war with him.

The assistance which the Souldan of Egypt gave unto the Bastard, was the cause
that he was presently acknowledged by them who could not oppose against his
power. He commanded over their bodies more then their hearts, which being full
of fear, were also so of wishes and desires of his death who made them fear.
Fear is a bad guard for them that command. For they that fear study still how
they may be rid of him that keeps them in fear, Quem metuunt oderunt, que^
quisque odiit periisque expedit
Lewis was forced to quit the field, and to retire himself into the Castle of
Cerines, where he was besieged by the Bastard, who seeing it impossible to take
this place, and that all the Princes of Christendom were offended at this
usurpation, he sent his Ambassadors ^ope Pius the second to yield him
obedience, and to beseech him to hold him in the rank of Catholic Kings. The
Pope would not see them, but sent them away with bitter words.

Hereupon Lewis saw himself forced to retire to the Duke his Father, King and
Queen of Cypres driven out of their own Realm.
and the Queen Charlotte to Rome to seek succors, but the divisions of Italy
hindered that which they desired, and stayed her there during the time of Pius
the second; of Paul the second, and of Sixtus the fourth, and Lewis remained at
Ripaille. Pope Pius the second It was t^oght that Lewis D. of Saucy had some
secret spleen against Pope Pius the second, for that he had been Secretary to
his father when he was but in base condition, and had abandoned him to follow
Eugenius his enemy.
said, that he had been chased out of Cypres, for that his father had failed
of his promise at the assembly at Mantoua for the holy war, and that the same
Lewis his Son being then near unto Mantoua, and having not vouchsafed to see
him, and demand his blessing; he had said by prediction unto the Ambassadors
of Sauoy, that it would happen his Son would loose the Realm of Cypres, for
a punishment of that the father did, and that one day he would demand those
succors in vain from others, which his father had denied unto the Church. The
Bastard seeing himself in quiet possession of the Crown of Cypres, remembered
that Marc Cornaro, a Gentleman of Venice, had assisted him in his necessity,
with ships, Good deeds never dye in great courages, others forget the good and
remember the ill. Quid autem est eo miserius, cui beneficia excidunt, here^t
iniuriae. Sen.
money, and Council, Catherine Carnaro, adopted by the Venetians.
and had given him means to go unto the Souldan of Egypt, he resolved to
marry his Daughter named Catherine, whom the Senate of Venice after the death
of Marc Cornaro her Father, had adopted as their Daughter. The marriage was
treated with the consent of the Siegneurie, who gave her a great dowry: this
marriage was made in the year 1466.

James King of Cypres fell sick of a bloody Flix,, and seeing that his cure
was desperate, he had not the trouble which great Princes as well as private
men have when they die, to know to whom he should recommend his realm, having
the Senate of Venice wholly at his devotion, but it troubled him what his
successor should be, which was yet in the mothers womb. Princes have no less
need then mean persons of strong consolations, to help them to depart the
world, and to leave their affairs in some safety.
Mocenigo assured him that neither the Venetians forces nor his private service
should never fail him. After his death Charlotte demanded succors of the
Venetians, the Duke answered that the Siegneurie was bound to defend her who
was her adopted Daughter, and that King James had instituted her heir with the
fruit in her womb: That moreover he wondered that she understood not that rights
of Realms were debated rather by Arms then by Laws, In former times when
they have demanded of conquerors of Provinces, the titles of their Co^quests,
some have showed them their Canons, and others their swords.
and that the Realm of Cypres had not been solely to her, but also to the
Geneuois, who at that time held a great part.

The widow of King James was presently troubled with new Combustions within
the Realm. A Bishop of the house of the Gotholans, Tumults in Cypres.
who had great authority and credit in the Island, being Ambassador to
Ferdinand King of Naples; when as King James dyed, propounded to marry the
Bastard of the deceased King of Cypres. Many were of his party, but the wiser
sort were contented to pass these rocks with open eyes and deafeeares. There
are some things which are good to be seen, but dangerous to be harkened unto.
They saw the ruins whereinto they did run, and did not give ear to the
promises and enchantments that were made them. The design of marriage took
effect, The Cipriots seized upon the Kings Palace, and made his base daughter,
being but six years old, sure to King Ferdinands base son; and gave him the
title of Prince of Galilee.
but that of the royalty was prevented by the Venetians, who sent Mocenigo
thither. The courage of the conspirators quailed, their judgment failed them
at his arrival, their last refuge was flight. The sovereign Authority
remained peaceably in the Queen, who in acknowledgement of the succors she
had received from Venice, Presents of the Queen of Cypres to Mocenigo.
presented Mocenigo with a Target richly wrought, and a standard of the same.

She was brought in bed of a Son who dyed at the end of the year. By this
death she remained Queen alone under the Protection and defense of the
Siegneurie of Venice. Ferdinand King of Naples seeing that his first design
did not succeed for the marriage of the Bastard, he sought the Queen widow
for his Son, employing in this Treaty Riccius Marineus a Neapolitaine,
Ferdinand K. of Naples seek the alliance of the Queen of Cypres.
a very dear friend to the deceased King, and Tristan Cybellet a Cypriot who
had a Sister attending on the Queen. The General of the Venetians Army
being advertised of their practices, and what they intended, caused them to
be stayed, and sent them presently to Venice. Tristan fearing some more
shameful death poisoned himself with a Diamond which he swalowed drinking salt
water after it.


George Cornaro, Brother to the Queen was sent into Cypresi, to assist his
Sister and to dispose her to free her self from troubles and the Realm from
danger, in retiring her self to Venice, and leaving the Crown to the
Government of the Siegneurie. She who had been bred up after a royal manner;
Queen of Cypres exhorted by her brother to go to Venice.
and who knew the great difference that was betwixt a Venetians life and that
of a Sovereign Princess found this proposition very strange, and the
Venetians ambition unjust to desire to have Kings and Realms under their
protection The highest degree of greatness and glory whereunto a popular or an
Aristrocraticall Estate may come unto, is to have Kings under their Domination.
The Romans did not disposses Kings of the Realms they had conquered, and
Tacitus gives the reason, v thaberent instrumenta Seruitutis and Reges.
. But when her Brother let her understand that if the Siegneurie of Venice did
abandon her protection, as it might do if she did not follow her Councels,
she was in danger to become a prey unto the Turk, and to serve as a triumph
and spectacle to the people of Constantinople: That she should not rely upon
Christian Princes, who would all love the Island and the Realm rather then her
self, and she should believe that they, courting her Crown rather then her
fair eyes, she were to blame if she did not prefer a quiet life and safe
abode before an uncertain Royalty, an assured rest before honor, which was
but wind, and a title which was but a vapor.

To persuade her, the History says, that to the reasons of fear and danger,
he added those of vanity, adorned with stuffes of immortal glory. What
greater honor, these are the words of G. Cornaro, and what a nobler
commendation can you leave of your self hereafter. then to have given so
goodly a realm unto your That spirit is weak which thinks there are any
reasons forcible enough to persuade it to quit acrown.
country? and that they write in the History of Venice, that Catherine Cornaro
has honored and augmented the Venetians Estate with the Realm of Cypres. Then
he represented unto her the danger and infallible disgrace of her house,
Councels how pure soever they be do still savor of the passions and private
interest of them that give them.
if she did not grant it unto the commonweal, for that every one would
think she had been diuerted by her Brother in whom she had great confidence.

These words entered into the Queens heart and framed a resolution to go to
Venice and to make a present of her Crown unto the Siegneurie. Resolution of
the Q. of Cypres.
The Standard of St Marc was set up in the Market of Famagosto, and the Realm
of Cypres became a Province to Venice. Catherine Cornaro Q of Cypres received
honorably into Venice by the Duke Augustine Barbarico. She entered into the
Bucentaure, a honor which never had been done to any Venetian woman.
The Queen made her entry into Venice in the Bucentaure, Entry of the Queen
of Cypres into Venice.
being honored by the Senators and the great Dames of the City. The Council
of ten presented unto her ten pounds weight of gold, and appointed fifty for
her entertainment in the Castle of Azolle upon the hills of Treuisan.

Thus the Commonweal of Venice purchased a rich Crown without any pain,
employing nothing but her wisdom, with the which she has always preferred
easy conquests, before the most glorious, if they were without hazard. It is a
curious observation that the Estates do commonly retain the humor of their
first founders. The City of Rome has been always possessed with an ambitious
desire to reign, for that her founder was full of it, who not content to have
recovered the Realm of Numitor his Grandfather, cast his eyes presently upon
Alba, and upon the small Estates which hindered the extention of this first
command. The Estate of Rome increased suddenly as Polibius observes. The
Romans having once gotten the command of all Italy, in a short time they made
all the world subject. (...). Polib. Lib. 7.
So as the first profession was Arms, which has not been discontinued by
posterity being desirous of glory and command. It seemed that all other
virtue except military had been defended. Contrariwise the founders of the
Commonweal of Venice were men which had no such ambitious thoughts, but loved
peace and quiet, who being afflicted with the long calamities of Italy and the
inundation of the barbarians, had cast themselves into these Fens of the
Adriatike sea, and seized upon many small Islands which were caled Venetie, they
lived there a time, contenting them with an assured rest in a place which
nature made inexpugnable, The situation of Venice is by nature inexpugnable,
she is guarded without walls or garrison, and has alone for so many ages
remained unviolated.
and which has always braued the attempts of the mightiest Princes of the
world.

This first inclination not to arm but for their own defense, has made them
contemn Arms, and has made them more careful to maintain themselves in
peace, then to enlarge their Empire. Who so will consider of their first
enterprises shall find them limited with a desire only to maintain and
defend themselves. The Art of war says Cardinal Co^tarin, has been banished
out of the Co^monweale of Venice, but it has bin done inse^sibly within these
two hundred years, for before they have been very war like especially against
the Genouois. By this contempt of the Art of war, they are constrained to
employ foreign forces, and they choose not a Captain among the^. The which
they do, least that private me^ having forces under their command, should
attempt something against the state.
Their first wars against the French were only for the defense of their
liberty, when as Pepin K. of France past the mountains to subdue the Lombards,
and when as the Huns came like a violent flood upon Italy, only the commonweal
of Venice opposed it self like a rampar against these furious inundations, and
it is no wonder if being forced to resist such furious attempts she had noe
means to think of other Conquests. Jealousy for the command of the Sea, held
it long in quarrel with the Genouois. And as in her first beginning she had no
care but to fortify herself at Sea against the injuries of the firm land, so
all her Conquests have been by Sea. An error and negligence which some that
have come after have better considered Francis Foscarin Duke of Venice, was
wont to say Che non potea la Republica crescere molto di potenze, se non
hauesse nell imprese di Terra impiegate le sue forze: la quale cosa perch no^
have a prima fatts, pero era stata molto ritardata, et impedita quella
grandezza, alla quale, se tale consiglio hauesse preso piu per tempo, po teua
caminare felicemente.
and have thought that this Commonweal had begun too late to enlarge it self
upon the maine land, and to make profit of her neighbors ruynes. The two
principal intentions which she has had for the greatness of her estate, to
maintain her self free, and to become rich, have succeeded, for the one she
has always maintained her self strong at Sea, there being no other means
to anoy her, and she has continued her traffic, without the which she could
not continue, and this goodly flower of liberty had been withered by the
idleness of her subjects. The industry of merchandise should be no less
honorable unto them then tillages to the old Senators of Rome, and both the one
and the other in their labors and traffic have produced famous examples of
public virtues. We must give unto Venice the glory of the best government of
all the Estates of the world, the form and order of her politic gonernment is
in all parts so well disposed, and observed, as this Common weal (amidst so
many diverse accidents of good fortune and bad) was never troubled with any
discord or domestic division, which have aflicted Aristocraticall Estates, and
driven governors of Commonweals into such fears and distrusts, as the
Palace where they have assembled to resolve of public affairs, has been
often dishonored with the loss of their lives, or liberties. After that they
of Miletum had expelled their tyrants, they settled an Aristocraticall Estate
but the people did still muti^e against this kind of Government, and the great
men did still live in such fear as they could not hold a Council in safety
but in ships. The Lords of Samos were murdered by the people when they were
in counsel.
Inevitable storms in estates, which depend not of the power of one alone,
whereas the lesser are always kept under by the greater, and the poor cannot
long endure the felicity of the rich, who so will keep the poor people in
such obedience must after the example of Rome allow them a share in the estate.
The government of Rome was divided betwixt the Consulls, Senate and people,
with such a conformity of their duties and common Offices, as never common
weal was better instituted. The power of the one was bridled and restrained by
that of the other. Nulla efferre se pars supra caeteras valet, nequie
impotenter superbire, omnia quippe in (...) statu manent, cum aliorum
cehibiatur impetus, aliine in se quoque insurgatur perpeuo metuunt.
The Venetians have made them subject by means very pleasing unto them, they
have in a manner the best part of the liberty, and their pleasures are not
limited but by excess, they do their affairs quietly, and the Senate has all
the care to maintain them in liberty and rest. The greatest disdain not them
that are meaner, they contract Allyances together, and do not restrain them
from certain public charges. There is a great temper betwixt Aristocratia
and Democratia: For the Government retayning little of the one and much of the
other, is freed from disorders and corruptions which have always troubled
civil tranquillity.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF of the fifth BOOK.
1 THE King considers of the Prejudice which he receives by the observation of
the Treaty of Peronne. 2 Assembly of the Estates of the Realm at Tours, by
whose advice the Duchy of Guienne is given to the Duke of Normandy. The Duke
of Bourgundy adiourned to the Parliament at Paris. 3 The Court of Parliament
complains of the reuocation of the Pragmatick Sanction. 4 Institution of the
Order of S. Michel, the first Princes and Noblemen were honored, and the
Knights bonds. 5 War resolved by the Estates, and begun against the Duke of
Bourgundy. 6 A strange change in England. The Duke of Clarence Brother to King
Edward, and the Earl of Warwick take Arms against the King. 7 Margaret wife
to Henry the sixth, the Duke of Clarence, and the Earl of Warwick come into
France for succors. 8 Henry the sixth at liberty, and Edward expelled the
Realm. 9 Exploits in Picardie, and war proclaimed against the Duke of
Bourgundie. 10 The Constable persuades him to give his Daughter to the Duke of
Guienne. 11 Army of the Duke of Bourgundy before Amiens. 12 A marriage sought
betwixt the heir of Castille and the Duke of Guienne. 13 Birth of Charles
Dauphin of France. 14 Practices of the Constable to break the promises of
marriage made in Castille. 15 Death of Pope Paul the second. 16 New designs to
draw the Duke of Bourgundy into the Towns of Picardie. 17 Promise made by the
King to restore Amiens, and S. Quentin. 18 Death of the Duke of Guienne,
changes the affairs. 19 Observation of the Duke of Guiennes life, and the
severity of the King his Brother. Strange death of Gilles Son to John the
sixth Duke of Brittany. 20 Troubles in Navarre, the King sends forces thither.
21 Letters written by the King to the Earl of Lude. Siege of Parpignan: Peace
betwixt the King, and the King of Arragon. 22 John Earl of Armagnac expelled
his Country, and the pitiful discourse of his fortune and death.
THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE Duke of Normandy was no sooner advertised that the King had promised by
the Treaty of Peronne to give him the Contries of Champaigne and Brie for his
portion but he presently besought him to give him leave to go thither, and
not to suffer him to languish any longer, for the enjoying of his rest and
quiet, the chief part whereof consisted in not being troubled to seek it. It
is a part of rest not to be in pain to seek it.


The King who had promised nothing freely, thought to discharge himself of his
promises at a better rate. He won the Sigr. of Lescun, He that will win a
Princes heart, let him first win the chief ministers which possess him, who
are as it were the eyes by the which he seees, and the ears by the which he
hears and vndrstands.
who was his Brothers whole Council, The King winnes his Brother by the
practice of Odet of Rye.
to persuade him to be conformable to his intentions, and to rest satisfied not
with that which he desired, but with what should be offered him. Yet this
practice was not so secret but the Duke of Bourgondy was advertised by the
Cardinal Bal^e, a double heart and a turbulent spirit full of passion, who
wrate unto him that the King treated with his Brother, that they made no
mention of him, and that he should look to his business. This letter being
surprised, lodged him in a Cage of Iron Cardinal Balue was committed to prison
in April, 1468. The Commission to examine him was given to Tanequy of Chastel,
governor of Roussillon: William Cousinot, the master of Torsy, and Peter of
Oriolo General of the finances.
for a prison from the which he was not freed but by the Popes intercession,
and toward the end of this reign. These Cages were of his invention, Wicked
and bad inventions, fall upon the inuentors, the forger is fettered is
fettered in his own (...), Arantius Paterculus is roasted in his brazen horse.
part wood, part iron, and covered with plates of Iron, so Perillus was roasted
in the bull which he had invented.

The King being returned into France, whereas they talked of his indiscretion
and great credulity in trusting his enemy, set a good countenance of it, and
made show that what had been done at Peronne had been as beneficial unto him
as if it had been resolved, in Paris, To make show to do that willingly which
was extorted by force is an act of wisdom, not to loose the credit and
opinion which is bad of him, to be advised and always equal.
but to put other fancies into the heads of the Parisiens and other discourses
into their mouths, he caused a proclamation to be made by the trumpet, that
all birds which are kept in Cages, as Pyes, Iayes and such like, should be
brought unto him to Amboise. They that had the Charge of this commission,
should inform themselves what every Bird could say, and where it had been
taken and taught. It is good to divert brues and the peoples discou^ses, but
oftentimes if they be not allowed to speak that which is true, they invent
fables which are more prejudicial. Fractis apud Cremona^ rebus prohibuit per
ciuitatem sermones, eoque plutes ac si liceret vera narraturi quia vetabantur,
atrociora vulgauera^^. Tac^t. Hist. l. 3.
An act of judgment which did prevent many inconfiderate speeches, A
ridiculous Edict 19. Nouemb.
which would have been used against this Prince, for that he had thrust
himself so rashly into his enemies power, and brought himself to that estate,
as he was like unto the Elephant who paies his ransom with the Iuory of his
teeth.

To repair this error and to prevent his Brother, and the Duke of Bourgundy of
their pretensions, he labors to break the Treaty, but he will do all with
solemnity, and if he must cast forth the Thunderbolts of war, it shall not
be done without the Council of the Gods, A Prince should not alone* resloue to
make war. Jupiter did not cast forth his lightning without the Council of
twelve Gods. The Kings of France did not undertake any war but with the advice
of the twelve Peers.
imitating the wisdom of his Predecessors, who did not undertake any war
without the advice of a Parliament. So Pepin past the Alps to succor the
Pope, so he armed against the Saxons, so he expelled Gaifre out of Aquitaine,
so Charlemaine went against the King of the Lombards, and the Duke of Bauaria
having first acquainted the Parliament with these designs. 1468 Convocation of
the Estates at Tours.


To this end he assembled the Estates of the Realm at Tours, The Estates
assemble for one of these three reasons, for the regencie of the Realm, in the
Kings minority, for the reformation of the realm, and to provide means to
succor the necessities of the Crown. It is a body of three Orders and has
been always observed among the Gauls.
the pretext was to prevent the ruins of the Realm, but the essential cause
was to resolve two things, a portion for Monsieur, and the restitution of the
Towns upon the river of Some, both depending upon this Law which is one of
the pillars of the Estate. That the Lands of the Crown are inalienable, and
portions are not given but with condition to return again for want of heirs
masle. A Monarchy suffers no division, nor estimation, for the yongers portions
of the house of France are not divided, but for want of Masles return to the
Crown.


The tongue has done great services to this Prince in diverse actions,
Eloquence natural to K. Lewis the eleventh.
in this (yet without any Art or affection) It is necessary for the Prince to
speak well but without affectation, his eloquence should more appear in the
facillitie of his own nature, then in any curious Art, for there are more
parts required to make a man eloquent, then to make a Cuptaine; to know and
discourse of particular things we must understand the general.
he strikes fire to inflame the coldest spirits, to what he will, and speaks
to all the Deputies, and lets every man know the importance of the Duchy of
Normandy, and the prejudice which other Provinces received when it was in the
power of the English, with the incredible to i will which King Charles his Father
had past to wrest it out of their hands. That although he did not hold his
brother to be of so bad a disposition as to have intelligence with them,
Importance of the Duchy of Normandy.
yet he knew well that they of his intelligence bad great practices in England,
that he might have children which should not be of his humor, being most
certain that the Princes of the same blood extend their thoughts farther then
they should, Ambition never takes root but in hearts that are vigorous, hardy
and desirous of innovations. When as it incounters with any pre-eminence of
blood, or favor of the people, it is (...) to retain it.
or may go, aspire to great matters, and are not content with their condition.
That for these reasons he could not leave the Duchy of Normandy. That his
promises in that regard should be soundly understood, and that affairs of
State were not managed with such scrupulous considerations. That he offered
notwithstanding to give him such a portion as the Estates should advise, making
them Judges and Arbitrators therein, but above all he commanded that the laws
of the Realm should not be infringed. The Realm of France is seated upon a
triangular basis, the Salique (...), the holding of the Estates, and the
revenues inal^enable.


Having thus prepared their minds, he opens the Estates, and came thither with
greater Majesty then he did ever show in any action during his reign. A Prince
cannot add too much in such great occasions, for besides that this light does
please, it dazels and transports men's minds, he must always hold himself in
admiration, it is a toil which is never set but some one is taken. His throne
was upon a stage three foot high, and railed in, containing all the breadth of
the upper end of the hall, his chair was of blew velvet pouldred with
flowers-de-luce under a cloth of estate of the same, and upon three steps. He
was attired in a long robe of white Damask imbrodered thick with fine gold of
Cypres, with buttons of gold, and furred with fables, a little black hat of his
head, with a feather of gold. On either side of him were the Cardinal of St
Susanne, Bishop of Angers, and Rene Duke of Anjou and King of Sicile. At the
foot of the Kings scaffold were set. The Vicont of Narbonne, George of Pem
(...) the Lords of Tancaruille, Chasttillon, Buell, Longueuille, Lauall, Aigle,
C^aon, Cru^^ol, and la Forest


The Prince of Piedmont a young Infant was upon one of the steps, Princes which
were about the King.
and of either side stood the Earl of Foix, Prince of Navarre and the Kings
brother in law, with the Earls of Neuers and Eu, The Earl of Dunois, high
Chamberlain of France, was by reason of his gowt set upon a little stool
behind the King of Sicile, with many other Noblemen.

There were two other places rayled in, the one in the midst of the Hall
near unto the Kings for the Princes of the blood, the Constable, the
Chancellor, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Archbishop of Jerusalem, the
Archbishop of Tours and other Bishops, In the second place railed in, were the
Marquis of Pont, the Earl of Perch, the Earl of Guise, the Earl of Vendosme,
the Earl Dauphin, and the Earl of Montfort.
The other being great and spacious which did inuiron the first of either side,
was for the Deputies of the three Estates. Betwixt the Kings Theater and that
of the Princes, were two forms directly against the King, on the one were the
Peers of France, and on the other were the Officers of the Crown.

Every man being set It is observed that the Earl of St Paul Constable of
France was at the upper end, and next unto him Mon^^urde Tray^ell, Chancellor
of France, in Crimson velvet co^es, and a little beneath the^ on the same
form, the Archbishop of Tours, the Bishops of Paris, Char^res. Perigueux,
Valences, Limogis, Senlis, Soissons, Air, Anranches, Angoulesme, Lodeue,
Neuers, Again, Cominges, Bayone and others.
and all the greatest of the State humbled before the Prince, like unto the
rods and Maces of the ancient Magistrates of Rome, In the assemblies of the
people of Rome, the Magistrates did hold down their rods and M^ces in sign of
humility, and spoke standing the people being set, showing that they had no
power to command, and all Magistrates dealt by Petition, using these words,
velitis, Iubeatis.
the Chancellor rose from his place and presented himself upon his kneee on
the right side of the King, who told him in his ear what his intention was.
Oration made by the Chancellor.
He made the Estates acquainted therewith in a long Oration the Deputies
being prepared upon the Kings instructions find that they neither could nor
ought to grant unto Charles of France the Duchy of Normandy for his portion.
It was said that it should remain unto the Crown, and the King was entreated
to maintain the ancient laws of the Realm, concerning his Patrimony, holy,
sacred and inalienable either by contracts, or by prescription of time, and
against any whatsoever, and that the Princes of the blood should not therein
have any more favor nor privilege then private men, That which may make an
alienation perfect and give ^ title of just possession, does not comprehend
those demands which are inalienable and may be reunited, although the
alienation were made for ever, and yet the purchaser shall not recover the
price of the thing alienated
the King himself being bound by oath at his Coronation not to alienate any
thing, and in doing so, to give unto his Brother a portion with the title of a
Duchy or an Earldom the which should be worth twelve hundred pounds
starling a year, and a yearly pension of four thousand and eight hundred
pounds starling, without drawing it to consequence, This clause of consequence
was superstuous and shows from what respect it came. For the portion was so
small, as no man would make it a President. There are houses in France, where
the younger sons would not be so satisfied.
for the younger brethren of the house of France.

The King gave the Duchy of Guienne, besides the river of Charante, Guienne
given to the Kings Brother
the country of Agenois, Perigort, Quercy, Xanictonge, the Government of
Rochell and the Bailewike of Auins, he changed the Parliament of Guienne from
Bourdeaux to Poitiers. This resolution was carried to Monsieur, and to the
Dukes of Brittany and Bourgundy his confederates, Monsieur was so ill and so
desirous to change the air, as notwithstanding that he found small profit in
the change of his condition, yet would he not refuse it. the Lord of Lescun
persuaded him to reconcile himself unto the King, and to accept of what he
should give him.

The Estates did also resolve that the Duke of Bourgundy should be adiourned to
appear in person before the Parliament at Paris, Adiournement of the Duke to
the Parliament of Paris.
to do right unto the Earl of Eu, Charles of Artois Earl of Eu dyed without
children in the year 147^ He was taken prisoner at the Battle of Azincourt
and remained three and twenty years in England.
for St. Valery and other lands which he detained. The King was well pleased
with this resolution, for that he knew well that when the Duke should see
himself charged in this manner he would make an answer according to his
humorfull of contempt, and that some grose-headed fellow executing his
commission indiscreetly for profit, would move him, and provoke him to do
something whereat the Court should be offended and urged to seek reparation.

The same Court of Parliament sent John Loyselier, Complaints for the
Pragmatike Sanction.
The Deputies of the Court of Parliament let the K. understand that the
abolitio^ of this Pragmatick was shameful and injurious, for the France had
never had in like causes Ordinances which had taken their authority from the
universal all Church. That as long as she had observed this Pragmatick, she
was full of all prosperity, and feared of her enemies whom she had chased out
of Normandy and Guienne, and had seen Prelates of such holiness, as they had
done miracles.
and John Henry Counselors of inquests, to represent unto the King, and to the
Estates the great prejudice which France had received by the abolition of the
Pragmaticke Sanction, that it was deprived of a rule which comprehended all the
liberties and freedoms of the French Church approved in the Conciles of Basil
and Constance: That by the cessation of such decrees, France must needs look
for some great confusion of the Ecclesiastical Order, and a general
impouerishment by the transport of gold and silver beyond the Alps. But the
King having obtained what he desired against his Brother and the Duke of
Bourgundy, he carried his thoughts to other things then to that which the
Estates expected for the good of the public, In these Estates they did not
think of the public good nor of the peoples ease, who complained, for Lewis
levied much more then King Charles.
and dismissed them giving order for the intelligences which he had upon Amiens,
Abbeuille and St. Quentin.

Then representing unto himself how much the discontentments of the great men
of this Realm, had ruined his affairs he invented a means to unite their
minds to his will and to keep them firm by new bonds of honor and fidelity,
Institution of the order of St Michell.
the which he found in the order of St Michael making it not only a
recompense for virtue, like to the Consulship of Rome, but a mark of the
Nobility of blood and extraction. The dignity of Consul at Rome, was as
Valerius said unto his soldiers. Premium virtutis non sanguinis, and went to
seek out the virtuous in any house and at any age.


Princes should have things in their mere disposition which should be out of
the commerce of their subjects, 1469
and whereunto they may not aspire but by the degrees of Virtue. Honors which
may be recovered for money, are no more honors, for the sale may make them
fall upon unworthy heads. The sale of honors makes them to be less esteemed,
virtue to be contemned, and sufficiency less necessary, every one thinking
that he may attain unto it for money.
It is a great disorder when as such as are advanced, cannot say that they are
bound unto their virtue, although they have glorious shows, and that is not
held rare which may be recovered for money. Glory is the desire of great
courages. Caesar would have scorned him that should have given him gold, but
he dyed with desire to have a crown of bays.


Fortune may impouerish the greatest houses of Christendom, but the honor
which they hold from their Ancestors remains for ever, and a branch of Laurel
which remains of their fathers Crowns, is more dear unto them then any other
thing. We see not any Prince reduced to that necessity, as he prefers silver
before honor. And that King has no great power in a Realm whereas they obtain
all for coin.

The King making himself General of this Order, The King great master of the
order of St Michel.
would also have them that were nearest unto him honored. By these orders the
Prince becomes a companion to the whole College. Tiberius made an order of
Knights which were caled Augustales, and made himself, grear master, and to
the end it might have more reputation, he would have Drusus his son, with T.
Claudius and Germanicus his nephews to be of it. Tac. An. Lib. 7.
He gave the first collar of the Order to Monsieur his Brother, the second to
Charles Duke of Bourbon and Auuergne. He thought to draw in the Dukes of
Bourgundy and Brittany, but they would not be bound to appear at the Chapter.

With this Order were also honored the chief Noblemen of the Realm. First
knights of St Michel.
The ancient order of France was of the Knights of the star, institututed by
King John surnamed the good in the year 1351. the 6. of January, the Knights
wear a star of gold in their hats, and upon their cloakes, and the device
was Monstrant regibus Astra viam. A hundred and eight years after Lewis the
eleventh made the order of St Michel the 1. of August 1469. A hundred and ten
years after that Henry the third instituted the Knights of the holy Ghost, and
in the year 1579. After an Age all things grow old.
Lewis of Luxenbourg Earl of St Paul and Constable of France, Andrew of Laual
Lord of Loheac Marshall of France, John Earl of Sancerre Lord of Bueil, Lewis
of Beaumont Lord of Forest and Plessis, Lewis of Estouteuille Lord of Torcy,
Lewis of Laual Lord of Chastillon, Lewis Bastard of Bourbon Earl of
Roussillon, Admiral of France, Anthony of Chabannes Earl of Dammartin, Lord
Stuard of the Kings house, John Bastard of Armagnac Earl of Comminges,
Marshall of France and Governor of Dauphine George of Tremouille Lord of Craon,
Gilbert of Chabannes Lord of Curton Seneshall of Guienne, Charles Lord of
Crussol Seneshall of Poitou, Taneguy of Chastell Governor of the Country of
Roussillon and Sardinia. The King reserved to make up the number of six and
thirty Knights to his Election at the first chapter.

The Duke of Bourgundy at the same time received the Order of England; and the
Duke of Brittanie that of Bourgundie, the one instituted by Edward the third:
Edward the third instituted the Order of the garter of five and twenty Knights,
in the year 1348. Philip that of the golde^fleece, in the year 1428. of one
and thirty Knights, Amedee of Sauoy caled the green Earl, that of Anunciado,
in the year 1409. of fourteen Knights.
the other by Philip Duke of Bourgundy. As this Order had one head, so had it
one certain and determinate place, one habit, one mark or Ensign, of
Officers, one form of reception, one oath and one rule.

The place was the Church of Mont St Michel, The place for the assembly of the
Order transferred since to Bois de Vincennes.
as well for that the place was then noted to have never yielded unto that
yoke of the ancient enemies of the Crown of France, as also for the King
Charles the seventh, said, that being upon the bridge of Orleans when he
entered with the Virgin Joan, he saw (not by any fantastical visions of
Southsayers like to Caesar Caesar going to the war against Popey, a
South-sayer came unto him transported and said. ^ Caesar, thou shall ouerecome.
It was true, and Caesar soon after writing unto his friends sent them this
word. Veni, vidi, vici.
but truly) that Arke-angell fighting on his right hand. He appointed seats
for the chief of the Order and Knights in the Quier of the Church, with their
Arms above their seats.

The habit was a long cloak of white Damask down to the ground, The habit of
the order
with a border imbrodered with cockle shells of gold interlaced and furred with
Ermines, all of one length and one fashion, with hoodes of Crimson vellet and
long tippets, the hood of the chief of the order was of Murry Skarlet. The
Knights a^^ired in this habit, are bound on St Michels Eve to come unto the
Palace of the chief of the Order, to conduct him to the Euensong, and the
next day to Mass, whereas every one offers a pe^ce of gold for his devotion.


The mark or enseigne was a collar of Gold, Mark of the order.
They are always bound to carry the collar, but when they travel, remain in
their houses, or go a hunting, then they may wear the Image of the Order in a
silk ryband.
in the midest of which upon a rock was the Image of Saint Michael in gold,
which hong down upon his breast, all amounting to the value of two hundred
Crowns in gould, without any enamell or enriching with stones, which collar
should be carried daily about their necks uncovered, upon pain to cause a
mass to be said and to give seven souz six deniers for Gods sake. In
armies, voiages and in their private houses it was sufficient to wear the image
of Saint Michel at a little chain of gould or a silk ryband.

The officers were a chancellor No man might be Chancellor of this Order if he
were not an Ecclesiastical Prelate, as an Archbishop, Bishop, or some notable
dignity in a Cathedral or Collegiall Church, or a Doctor of Divinity or
Canon Law.
to keep the seal of the order, Officers of the order.
to carry messages, to make propositions in chapters and Assemblies, to inform
of the Actions of Knights, to admonish and correct, to gather the voices in
elections, and the proofs of Nobility. A register to write and inrowle the
acts of the Order, all the commendable prowesses and worthy deeds of the head
and knights their faults, Iustifications, corrections and punishments. A
Treasorer The Treasurer must keep a Register of the gifts and good deeds which
the Knights shall do unto the Order.
which shall have in his custody the titles, Relics, Jewels, Ornaments,
Tapistry, and Lybrary of the Order. A King at arms called Mont Saint Michel
who shall have six score pound starling a year pension, to carry the letters
and commandments of the Order, to inform of the prowesses of Knights and to
make his report.

The reception and the oath; After the decease of a Knight verified of his
worthy deeds and merits. They proceed to the election of an other to supply his
place, the voices are given and received by writting in open chapter, The
voices for the Election of a Knight are given in scroules, and put into a basen
of silver which the Chancellor holds.
and the Chancellor declares who has the greatest number, if the rigor of
such informations had lasted always, time which blemisheth the goodliest
actions, and weakens the strongest laws, had not altered any thing of the
beauty and integrity of this Order. They had not called it in contempt a hood
for all heads, for Nobility and virtue could not desire a quallity which
brought them more honor and greatness, when as he that merits to be chosen is
advertised of his election, he presents himself unto the Chapter, and
addressing himself unto the King, speaks these words. Sir, or my Lord, if he
be of the blood.

I have seen your letters that by your favor and of your most honored
Brethren and Champions of the worthy and honorable order of my Lord Saint
Michel, Bond of a Knight receiving the Order.
I have been chosen When the Knight chosen is absent, the King sends the
Herald of the Order unto him with letters which carry the common consent of the
order for his Election, with a Copy of the Statutes of the order, to advise if
he will enter and bind himself by oath to the sovereign and members of that
body.
into the order and loving company, wherewith I think my, self much honored,
and do reverently and thankefully accept it, and do thank you as much as I
may, offering my self ready to obey and to do all that I ought and may
touching the said order. Whereunto shall be answered by the said Sovereign,
being accompanied by the greatest number of Knights that may be. We and our
Brethren, Companions of the order, for the good renown we have heard of your
worthy deeds, virtues and merits, hoping you will persevere and augment them to
the honor of the order and commendation of your self, To defend the rights of
the Crown.
have chosen you to be perpetually, (if it pleases God) a brother and
companion of the said order and loving company, wherefore you must take the
oath which follows. That withal your loyal power you shall help to keep,
sustain and defend The Knights owe^ personal service unto the King, in all
his enterprises, but where there is some urgent ^et.
the dignity and rights of the crown and royal Majesty and the authority of
the sovereign of the order and of his successors Sovereigns so long as you
shall live and be of the order.

You shall employ your self with all your power to maintain the said order in
state and honor and shall labor to augment it, The affairs of the Order.
and not suffer it to decaie, so long as you may prevent it. If it should
happen which God forbid, that any fault should be found in you, for the which
according to the customs of the order A Knight convicted of any reproachful
act, is deprived of the order and the Choler taken from him. The causes for
which be may be degraded ar heresy, treason and flight on day of Battle. The
Knight which is unjustly wronged by the King, and from whom he can obtain no
justice, He must deliver up his collar, and leave the order not offending it
in any sort, but taking his leave honorably.
you were to be deprived, sommoned and required to yield up the said collar,
in that case you send it to the said Sovereign, or to the treasuror of the
Order, Degradation in Case of offense.
and shall never after the said Somation carry the said Collar, and all other
pains and corrections which may be enjoined you for other less offenses, you
shall bear and fulfill patiently, and not bear (by reason of the said things)
any hatred against the Sovereign, Companions and Officers of the Order.

You shall come and appear in all Chapters, The day after St. Michaells ^east
the Chapter of the order should be held, there the Knights are enjoined to
keep the Councellls and corrections secret. All the Knights are commanded to
go forth one after another, the last come going first, and the Sovereign
last. An the Chancellor informs himself in taking the other of all the
Knights, and of the Sovereign himself, of the words and actions of the
Knight that is gone forth, to know if he has done any thing, Against the
honor, renown, estate and duty of Knighthood.
Conuentions, and Assemblies of the Orders, Assistance at Chapters and
observation of Orders.
or shall send according to the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order, and
shall obey the Sovereign and his Deputies in all reaso^able things concerning
the duty and affairs of the same Order, and shall with your loyal power
accomplish all the Statutes, Points, Articles, and Ordinances of the Order,
which you have seen in writting, and heard read, and do promise and swear in
general, as if you had taken an oath upon every point in particular.

Which things the said Knight shall promise and swear in the hands of the said
Sovereign upon his faith and honor, The Collar habit and cloak of him, that is
to be reciued shall be ma^e ready, and laid before the Kings s^at, upon a
Carpet of Crimson T^ffata or Sa^ten hanging d^wne at either and, and the said
collar and ^obes shall be perfumed with incense, after that the Priest has
perfumed the Altar. Art. 82. of the amplifying the Statutes of the Order in the
yeaar 1476.
having his hands upon the Cross and the holy Euangill, which done the said
Knight newly chosen, shall come reverently before the Sovereign, The Kings
words in giving the Collar.
who taking the Collar of the Order shall put it about his neck, saying or
causing these words to be said. The Order receaues you into this amiable
company, and (...) token thereof gives you this present Collar God grant you
may carry it long to his glory and service, advancement of the holy Church, and
increase of the honor of the Order and of your merrits and good ^ame: In the
name of the Father, the Son and holy Ghost, whereunto the said Knight shall
say Amen God give me the grace. After which the eldest Knight shall lead the
said Knight newly received unto the Sovereign, who shall kiss him in sign of
perpetual love, and in like manner all the Knights that are present shall do
the same in order. Bonds of Knights reciprocal.


Besides this the knights are bound to certain respects one toward another:
They did promise at their entry into the Order to serve the King as their head
in all occasions both within and without the Realm, and the King did promise
to maintain them in their goods, Lewis the el^uenth bound himself not to
undertake any war, nor any other matter of importance without making i^
known to the Knights of the order.
lands, and estates, as his Brethren and companions, and not to attempt any
war without their advise.

He thought to hold those hearts (which had been distracted) fast bound unto
him, but infidelity was so bold and so contagious, as all the respects of honor
and conscience were too weak to restrain her from drawing them from their
duties, who say the laws of their birth were most bound unto it. It was a
difficult thing for good men to bridle themselves from running into ill, so
licentious was the time, To doc well when as virtue reigns and good men are
honored, is ordinary and easy, but not to suffer himself to be infected with
the corruptians of the time, but to have a good intent and to dare undertake it
and effect it in a bad season* is the true sign of a generous spirit.
and so hard a matter it is to do well, when as every man glories in doing ill,
and that crimes become examples and customs.

John Duke of Bourbon continued his intelligence with the Duke of Bourgondy,
and advertised him of what the King practiced upon the Towns in Picardy. The
Constable used all his practices betwixt the two Princes, Intelligences
continued betwixt Bourgondy and Bour^on.
fearing that if the Kings Choler found not some subject to work upon
abroad, it would fall upon the nearest that were about him: That a long peace
would cut off the entertainment of his soldiers, making him unprofitable to
the King and without reputation in the realm promising unto himself that
whilst the war continued he should govern all. The perpetuity of his charge
which could have no other end but with his life, held him not in those
apprehensions, wherewith their minds are troubled which hold them as a Wolf
by the ear, Charges which are above others should be short least they should
grow insupportable and insol^nt. Those which are but temporary hold them that
enjoy them in there duties, and the perpetual makes them forgetful.
Peace alone makes a civil war in his soul, wherefore he assures the King,
that when he pleased he would recover him St. Quentin, by the means of some
places which he held about it* and would speedily execute the intelligences
which he had in Flanders and Brabant.

War being concluded by the Estates at Tours, Wars proclaimed.
it was as soon begun as proclaimed. The Duke being at Gand received the
Citation to appear in person at the Court of Parliament who caused the Usher
of the Court to be imprisoned, having adiourned him as he was going to Mass,
and being mad to see himself made equal to the meanest of the Realm, he
resolved to appear with his sword in his hand, and to transport the war as
near his Judges as he could.

The Kings practices began then to break forth, many declared themselves
French. Baldwine Bastard of Bourgundy retired himself unto the Kings service.
The Duke is surprised.
The Duke of Brittanie had made an accord with him. Accord of the D. of
Brittanie with the King at Ance^is the 18. of September. 1468.
The Duke of Guienne was satisfied, and if he could not have all that he
desired, he was content with that which did suffice him. The ease of great
Princes must be considered by their content. They have but too much so as they
think they have enough. One demanded of Zeleuchus what Revenues he had, to
whom he answered. As much as I need. Plut.
The Constable sent word to the Duke of Bourgundy that all was lost; that there
was no relief for him in England, being fallen into the same convulsions which
had in a manner smothered it in the year 1461.

Edward being bound to the Earl of Warwicks virtue for his fortune made him a
sharer, Troubles in England.
and gave him goodly pieces depending of the Crown, and the continuation of
the government of Calice, with fourscore thousand Crowns rent to increase his
revenues. Yet the Earl of Warwick did not hold these recompenses
proportionable to his great services, being moreover discontented for that the
King having sent him into France to seek the Kings Alliance by the marriage of
Bonna of Sauoy The King of England sent the Earl of Warwick into France, to
demand Bonna of Sauoy daughter to Lewis Duke of Sauoy and the Queens Sister in
marriage.
had mocked him in marrying with Grayes widow, the which Lewis made sensible to
the Earl of Warwick to the end this complaint might be as a thorn of
discontent in his heart.

And as Princes take delight to pull them down whom they have raised and
advanced, and do not willingly suffer such high heads of Poppie to grow in
their gardens. Edward grew jealous and an enemy to this great authority which
had cherished and made speed under the shadow of his. He brake quite with him,
and some say that having attempted against the honor of a Kinswoman of his, Of
wrongs which make the greatest impression in the heart, those which regard ^he
honor of L^dies are most sensible. Polidore Virgil w^ites thus of this attempt.
Nec abhorret a veritate Eduardu^ tentasse, vt aiunt, nescio quid in domo
Comitis, quod ab honestat^ omnino abesset, cum homo esset qui facile puellas
oculis adiiceret, easque deperiret.
the Earl of Warwick being wounded in so sensible and tender a part began to
distaste the service which he did him, and repenting him of that which he had
formerly done, he retired from Court into his Earldome of Warwick, The Earl
of Warwick reuolts.
whereas his hard fortune made him know the difference of his friends, In the
disgrace and crosses of fortune friends are known Namertes answered him that
required a rule to know them by. (...) Plut.
and where he shows that a great courage had rather die revenged, then live
with the reproach of a wrong or an affront.

The Duke of Clarence the Kings Brother, the Archbishop of York, and the
Marquis of Montague came unto him. Every one brought his complaint with him,
and the ulcer he had in his heart against Edward. The Earl of Warwick
represented unto them the miserable estate they ran into, if they did not
labor to restore King Henry to his Fathers throne, and themselves to liberty.
To bind the Duke of Clarence to this design, he gives him his Daughter. He
makes a league with the Du^ of Clarence.
Proximitie of blood did sufficiently bind the other two, being his Brethren,
whose friendship he might account among the sweet fruits of his felicity. It
is a part of the sweetness and felicity of life, to see Telemachus recounting
his miseries, among which he reports that he is (...). without a bro^^er. Plut.
The party was made and the resolution taken upon the consideration of things
present and to come, was that he should go to Calice, and in his absence they
should make some stirs in the Province of York, to the end he might have a
subject to come thither and to arm. The pretext of rising was for the denial
of some Corn which they of the Earl of Warwicks faction refused to pay for
the entertainment of St Leonards Hospital in York, and there were others
which did murmr, giving it out that what should serve the poor was spent by
great men. Sedition can have no just causes, but the most apparent are when as
private men make their profit of that which belongs to the public. In a word
it is inequality and Injustice.


This refusal did so incense the people, Commotion in Yorkshire.
as in a short time there were fifteen thousand men in arms which marched
directly to York, to have reason of them which refused to pay what they ought
unto the Hospital. But when as they found themselves too weak, An Army at
the ga^es of London.
being a multitude of seditious and mutenous fellows, who are naturally
cowards, and having no Canon to force an entry, they past to London to demand
Justice of the King, with torches of rebellion in their fists. Se^ition is
always saint and cowardly, and cowards are ever most seditio^s. Quantu^ ^abes
ad ^ustinendum labore^ miles, tanto ad discordias pro^ptior Tac. Hist. Lib. 2.


The Earl of Warwick was no sooner advertised of these broiles, but he parted
from Calice with the Duke of Clarence, and came and joined with this multitude,
who wanted not any thing but a head. King Henry's presence and the Earls did
countenance the faction, and increase it with a greater number, with the which
he resolved to give Battle, to recompense the errors, ruins and occasion
past. He that knows how to give a Battle recouers ^is reputation, if it were
blemished, it restores him if he be ruined, and excuses all errors which he
has committed in war, for a Battle won defaceth all misfortunes and reproach
of other precedent actions.
The Earl of Pembroke, whom the King of England had sent, not to fight but to
punish those rebels was put to route and they had the victory. Richard Lord
Rivers father to Queen Elizabeth, and his son John Wooduille, with some
other Gentlemen lost their heads.

The King sought to make some accord with the Earl of Warwick, and upon the
assurance which he gave him, neglected to keep good guard in his Camp, the
which should not be omitted even among friends. Love goes naked by day and
armed by night, Crates said that love went al day naked but at night he carried
a Cuirasse, and that a prince which trusts in the love of his subjects may by
day go in safety and without fear, but by night he should have his guard.
The Earl of Warwick having observed this careless guard by his spies he
undertook to charge him by night, ^dward defeated and taken prisoner.
with so great advantage, as killing all he found in the trenches he came
without any resistance to the place where the King was, whom he took prisoner
and led away. But for that they could not make good use of this fortune, they
ruined themselves and undid King Henry, for whom they had taken Arms: God, who
has a special care of Kings, deprived them of Judgment, for although they
knew well that it was impossible to settle King Henry peaceably in the Realm
during Edwards life, yet could they not keep him so well but he escaped,
having corrupted his gards with hopes, and goodly promises, whereof great men
are no nigards when they have need of their inferiors.

Edward being at liberty, recouers York, where he was received with joy,
which was as great as it was unexpected. From thence he went to London to
confirm their wills whom his captivity had made to waver, and considering that
victory does always favor them which have the advantage both of Council and
force, A prince has a great advantage over his enemy when he exceeds him in
Arms, and that he has the Councils and executions sooner ready then he.
he raised a might Army, and went to seek out the Earl of Warwick, Earl of
Warwick defeated.
whom he put to rout, and returned triumphantly, the victory was made famous
by the death of ten thousand men.

Queen Margaret, Prince Edward her Son, the Duke of Clarence and his wife,
the Earl of Warwick with their children and friends were forced to fly. They
came to Calice, but the Earl of Warwicks Lieutenant would not receive them,
nor scarce suffer them to carry two bottels of Wine for the Duchess of
Clarence, who was delivered of a Son whilst the ship rode at an Anchor. This
rudenes and indiscretion did so please King Edward and the Duke of Bourgundy,
as the one sent him authority to command as Governor of Calais, and the other
a good pension to increase his entertainment.

The Earl of Warwick, who was much esteemed in France, and in great credit
with the King, for his worthy deeds which had made his reputation great and not
easy to be shaken, Reputation is a Colosse which is hardly raised by reason
of its weight buy when it is up it sta^ds firm and supports it self by his
own heaviness. It is hard to lay the foundation and to raise it, for it
can^otlast upon light actions. That of the E. of Warwi^k must needs be great,
having twice chang^d the estate of England, and as it were disposed of the
Crown.
sent unto the King to receive him. The King seemed to have a great desire to
see him and succor him. He landed at Diepe, and was conducted with all his
troop to Amboise. The people flockt upon the highways to see those
mournful relikes of Troy. Every man had heard speak of the desolation of the
house of Lancaster, they did regard them as Prodigies of fortune whom she had
chosen to be pitiful examples of her inconstancy.

Within six months the King gave them means to return into England, The K.
given succors to K. Henry.
with such forces as Edward durst not affront them. He was forced to quit the
party, and seeing how dangerous it was to stay until the Earl of Warwick
came unto the gates of London, he retired into Holland to the Duke of
Bourgundie, carrying nothing with him but a hope to return. It is a poor
equipage for a Prince which goes out of his estate with hope to return, but a
retreat of this sort against a Prince that is stronger is honorable Valentinean
the second left Aquilea to Maximin and fled into Thessalonica with Iustina his
mother where he obtained succors of the Emperor. Theodosius, who restored him
to the Contrie. Sigon. Lib. 9. Imp. Occident.


Behold Henry the sixth drawn out of prison and set in the royal throne, Henry
the sixth (...) it l^bertie and Edward expelled.
but he continued but six months, for Edward being relieved with ships and
men from the Duke of Bourgundy, returned into England, and presented himself
before the gates of London, where he entered victorious. The Duke of Clarence
left the Earl of Warwick The Duke of Clarence being in France was solicited
and won by a Gentlewoman which came out of England from the King his Brother
and he (...) that belong in England he would turn to his side side.
King Henry was murdered in the Tower, his son was detained prisoner, Death
of King Henry the sixth.
and soon after slain. The Earl of Warwick was slain upon the place, and
the Queen^ was a prisoner. Thus the Realm which Edward had lost in eleven
days, was recovered in one, so true it is that Estates change in a moment, The
euersions and conuersions of the estates are most comm^^ty (...). Breui bus
momentis su^ma verti possunt. Tac. lib. 8. An.
and that it is hard to make good use of things ill (...).

During these Tragedies, the King who wished they had continued longer, the more
to weaken the Dukes designs, and to humble his thoughts, continued the war
which he had begun in Picardie. The Constable who would needs be a necessary
evil Hibrea a wise Citizen of Messala a Town in Caria said smiling to
Eutidianus a man very profitable but difficult and insupportable, in the
government of public affairs, that he was a necessary evil to the Town for
that no^ man^ could endure him for his roughnes, nor ^liue without him for his
good gouerme^t.
to these two Princes was glad to let the Duke understand what he could do.
Amiens and St. Quentin taken.
He took St Quentin, Amiens opened her gates unto him, Abbeuille (the Cittadell
of Picardy) had entered into the same party, if Philip of Creuecaeur, Lord of
Cords, had not entered. The Duke not holding himself safe in the midst of
the Constables friends, retired to Dourlans, and from thence to Arras.

Being there he received a letter from the Duke of Guienne containing these
words. Labor to content your subjects and then care not for you shall find
friends. The Duke seeing himself thus surprised and dispossessed of the Towns
which he did so much esteem, entreated the Constable not to press this war
so hotly, nor to do the worst he could, and to consider that the King without
any precedent offense had taken arms, and broken the treaty of Peronne, before
that he had disclaimed his friendship. The Romans before they made war.
Renunciabant amicitiam. Germanicus being wronged by Piso Governor of Soria,
sent him word that he was no more his friend.


The Constable being glad to see the pride of his first master humbled,
Policy of the Constable of St. Paul.
makes the danger greater then it was: he threatens him with an inevitable
ruin, if he did not open his eyes to those expediments which he propounded
unto him, letting him know that in the darkness of his infidelity he did always
reserve a good day for his service. I never knew (says Phil. de Commines) that
man have a good end that sought to terrify his Master, and keep him in
Jealousy.


Yet will he not declare himself to be other then a good Frenchman, for to
manage his business with honor, the leap was too dangerous from St. Quintin
to Brussels. The passage from one contrary to another is never made without
violence, Men's thoughts pass not suddenly from one extreme unto an other,
they go by degrees.
there must be a mean betwixt both to unite the two extremes. He promises to
serve the Duke in effect, in serving the King in show, and to make known the
fruits of his service by the bad intelligence and division which he would
still entertain and was already framed betwixt the two brethren the King and
Mounsire, the only means for him to be in safety and his estate in peace. The
hatred and discord of brethren is the ruin of States all well as of private
families. This mischief has bin long in the world, the examples are borne
with it. And if two brethren could not agree together in their mothers womb, it
is no wonder if two brethren being armed quarrel*


But to end this war which was begun, and would continue with such cruel
effects, He counsels the Duke to give his daughter to the Kings Brother.
against him, there was no other help but to win Monsieur in giving him his
daughter in marriage: that all his desires should aim at this mark as the
true end of his contentment, from the which he might wander by many ways, They
say we may come to one end by diverse means. But to hit one mark there is but
one direction, the straightest lines are the shortest: we may miss by diverse
means, aiming too high, or too low, on the right hand or on the left. It is
even so in the actions of men.
and could not attain unto it but by this Alliance, that if he were so
resolved he would follow his party, and bring his head to his service, with
the Town of St Quentin and a good number of his servants, In a word that he
would do any thing, yea set fire of the Temple of peace, There are servants
^ound sit for all assaies and without condition. C. Blosius said that he would
do all that Tiberius Gracchus should command him, yea he would burn Jupiters
Temple if ^e would Val. Max. lib. 45. 7.
if he pleased.

He should not have persuaded the Duke of Bourgondy to this marriage with
reasons of fear and amazement. A great courage does never any thing to show
that he fears. This course was odious unto the Duke, but much more unto the
King, being offended that the Constable would make such an alliance, and not
acquaint them with it, for the same fault a Nobleman, of the same quality and
dignity, lost his head in Spain. Amongst the causes for the which the
Constable of A^alos was beheaded at Vailled^lit in the year. 1453. They mark
for that he presumed to make the marriage of the Son of D. Pedro of Portugal
without the permission of the K. of Castile his master.


The Duke had other thoughts then to marry his Daughter. Many believed that he
would not do it whilst he lived, contenting himself to leave her pleased in
this liberty, Desseins of the Duke upon his Daughters marriage.
to hold many hopes in servitude, for he entertained them that might assist him
or anoy him with goodly discourses of this alliance. The Daughters of
Sovereign houses are not married to all them they are made sure unto. When as
they wondered why Hercules of Este Duke of F^rrara had married Lucretia daughter
to Pope Alexander the sixth, having been made sure to three husbands, and was
then widow to Gismond Prince of Bisselli whom the Duke of Valentinois had
^^aine, the only consideration of the safety of his estate and of his affairs,
took away the amazement Guichard. Lib. 5.
Princes in marrying do not regard their pleasure, but the necessity and profit
of their affairs.

But seeing the Constable propound no other remedy but this marriage of
Monsieur and his daughter, and that yielding unto it he should fill the world
with a belief that he had consented for fear of his enemies, A free spirit
cannot endure ^o be forced. Vt in Principa^^ beatis^imum est non cogi ita
miserrimum non suaderi.
he began then to hate him deadly and to swear his ruin.

The King who judged of the future by the knowledge of things past Things past
carry a light before judgment, which searches into the obscurity of future
things. The world goes always after his manner*. There is not anything spoken
or done, but has some ancient example. Things go and come under diverse
names, and other coullers, ^^ut a wise man does discern^ them.
trusted him no more, for he had discovered that in this war he regarded his
own private interest more then the good of his service: that he had made
himself the instrument of an alliance, which was so much the more unpleasing
unto him, for that he meant to keep him in Jealousy with his brother and to
hold his greatness suspect.

Although the Duke of Brittany did still intertaine the Duke with fears and
amazements, sending him word, that the King had desseins upon Amiens, Bruges
and Brussells, that he was resolved to beseege him, These aduertisements were
delivered unto the Duke of Bourgondy by mouth, by a footman of the Duke of
Britains. To whom the Duke answered suddenly, that his master was ill
advertised, and that the Towns whereof he spoke were too great to be beseeged.
where he should find himself deceived, even in Gand, The King discouers the
Constable.
yet he went to field with his Army, being resolute to pass the river of
Sum upon a bridge which he had made at Piqueny, and to fight with the King
if he sought to hinder him.

He remained six weeks before Amiens saying that he attended until the
King (who was then at Beauuais) should come and force him to dislodge: But the
King, by his temporizing, let him know that he did not fight by the fortune of
his enemies, but by his own. A Prince should not suffer himself to be
driuento that extremity as his e^nemy should prescribe him a Law, and bind him
to fight. Biorix King of the Cimbrians seeing the Consul Marius to lie still
offered him Battle: But Marius answered that the Romans were not accustomed to
fight at their enemies pleasures. Romanorum reos est suo non hostrium Arbirrio
dimicare.


The Town was fortified with the presence of the chief men of the realm, the
Constable, the Lord Steward, the Admiral and Marshall were within it with one
thousand and four hundred men at Arms, and four thousand frank Archers:
They had resolved to sally forth upon the Duke, and to engage him betwixt the
king and them, Se^ge of Amens.
but the King would not: his mind was so resolute to end or to continue the
war, as any wavering might cause his will tend to the one side or the other.
When themind is in suspense betwixt doing and not doing, a small matter turns
the balance. A l^ght reasonor any president makes the weight, but there is a
great difference betwixt the irresolution and suspencion of the mind, which
grows by the concurrence and equality of reasons.


When as a mighty Prince does not all he can unto his inferiors, it argues,
that either he has some great desseine to circumuent him, or that war is
unpleasing unto him: Wherefore the Duke (being advertised that the King had
not allowed of this desseine) sent Simon of Quingey with a letter of six lines
written with his own hand, in terms of great humility and exceeding grief
to see that war begun under coullor of his service to satisfy another man's
passions, adding that he believed, if the King had been well informed of all
things he would not have done it. The King who would not do all he could
(for oftentimes he that would have all loses all) A Prince should not desire
to have the extremity of all things. The wise men of Italy say. Volere
ostinatamente ill sommo di turte cose. Sometimes in thinking to draw more fruit
from an occasion then it can in honesty yield, it ruins the affairs.
took delight in this letter, having discovered the practices of his Brother,
of the Duke of Brittany and the Constable; wherefore he sent back Simon of
Quingey with good words and granted a truce to the Duke of Bourgondy which sent
every man home, A Truce granted dissolues the Armies.
the King into Touraine, Monsieur into Guienne the Duke into Flanders, and the
Constable to Saint Quentin, where he still continued his practices, and not
only tormented himself with his own discommodities, but with that which
succeeded happily to either of these two Princes. A miserable folly and a
foolish misery of those which are not content to torment themselves with their
own miseries, which are but* too great, but they afl^ct themselves with the
felicities of other men.


The King who knew well that the Duke of Bourgondy made his Brother the
packhorse of his passions, sought to put him out of hope to marry his daughter,
Marriage sought in Castille.
and persuaded him to seek the marriage of the King of Castiles daughter. The
K. desired the Marriage of Isabella Infanta of Castile with his brother but she
was married to D. Fernando Prince of Arrag^n, King Henry treated for his
Daughter D. Ioane
Monsieur submitted his will to the Kings, and Deputies were sent into Castille
to King Henry the fourth. The King had for his part the Cardinal of Alby and
the Lord of Torcy: The Duke of Guienne gave his procuration to the Earl of
Bolloigne, and to the Lord of Malicorne, to consent unto this marriage and had
never beheld the Bride, Princes drink these waters without seeing them.

This poursute was pleasing to the King of Castile, who was offended that his
Sister D. Isabella had married to Ferdinand of Arragon without his consent, The
King sends Ambassadors into Castile*
and took it for a great honor that she whom the Grandes of Spain held, and
who in effect was the supposed Daughter of Castile, should be wife unto the
French Kings brother, having no means to lodge her in a better house.

He commanded the Archbishop of Seuill, the Bishop of Siguenc and the master
of the order of S. James, to treat the marriage with the Ambassadors of France.
All being concluded, the King would have the promises made in a great Plain,
The Princess D. Ioane was brought into the field by the Marquis of Santillana
who had her in charge and to whom the King gave in recompense of his service
three Towns of the Infantasgo, Al^ocer, Valdolinas and Salmeron.
near unto the Monastery of Paular enual de Locoia in the view of an
incredible multitude which came thither.

The K. having renewed his declarations against his sister D. Isabella, and
confirmed to his Daughter D. Ioane the title of Princess and heir of
Castille, the Cardinal of Alby addressing himself to the Queen her mother,
besought her to swear whether D. Ioane were the Kings daughter or not. She
swear that she was. He made the like adiuration unto the King, who affirmed
the same. They had not any need to seek for the Jews waters of probation The
Jews to prove adultery had probation waters as they caled them. The adulterous
woman drinking thereof did burst The Ge^mans tried if their Children were
lawful making them swim upon the river of Rhin.
nor to make this Virgin swim upon the River to know the truth of her birth.
And yet upon this affirmation all the Grandes at that time kissed her hands, and
she was again sworn Princess of Castille. In this quality the Cardinal of
Alby made her sure to the Duke of Guienne, the Earl of Boulongue promising and
receiving the promises for him.

Whilst the King labored to provide a wife for his Brother, Birth of Charles
the 8.
God sent the King a Son, Charles Dauphin of France was borne at Amboise the
14 of July, or as the Annals of Aquitaine* report the last of June. 1470.
Charles of Bourbon Archbishop of Lion was Godfather, and gave him his name.
This birth revived the King, who began to grow old, his Majesty was more
respected, factions were weakened, Monsieurs hopes recoyled, and France wholly
preserved by these two great and special favors of heaven, valor and
prosperity, or virtue and fortune, which have made her reputation to pass
through so many ages. Valor without the which a great enterprise cannot be
ended, laid the foundation of the Monarchy of France and prosperity with^out
the which the best settled estates are not assured, preserues it.


The Constable seeing that by Monsieurs marriage with the Daughter of Castille,
Constables new practices.
all his designs vanished into smoke, labors with all the capacity of his
judgment to dissuade him from this alliance, letting him know that it was
dishonorable by reason of the unlawful birth of Bertraiamina, (for so they
called her) and dangerous for the hatred which he should purchase of D.
Ferdinand, and D. Isabella declared Kings of Castille, with the like Art he
represented unto him the greatness he should expect by the marriage of the
Princess of Bourgundy. Death of Pope Paul* the second.
Pope Paul the second died Paul the second dyed of an Apoplexy, the 28. of
July 1471. having reigned 6. years and ten months
during this poursuite, and after that he had yielded unto it, he was suddenly
surprised by death having held a Consistory and eaten two melons at his
dinner. His election was as unexpected as his death. Cardinal Scarampi who was
his enemy, Cardinal Lewis Scarampy Patriarch of Aquilea was enemy to P. Paul
the second being yet a Cardinal. Lewis reproched to Peter the sumptuousnes of
his buildings, and Peter said that he had rather exceed in that then in dice,
playing, wherein Lewis took great delight.
did in the beginning of the Conclaue break off the proposition which was
made, and yet contrary to the ordinance of elections, the suffrages agreed
upon the same subject which they had rejected, and the contention which had
begun, the Conclaue ended. This Pope showed a great generosite, for being
chosen, and seeing that the gowt, or rather shame and coffeehouse hindered
this Cardinal from coming to the adoration, he went to meet him, embraced
him, assured him of his love, and to forget all matters past.

This Pope augmented the pomp of the Court of Rome, he gave Scarlet
foot-clothes to the Cardinals Mules. Platina says that he loved not learned
men, and called all them heretics that made profession; and therefore he
suppressed the College of Abreuiators which was full of great excellent spirits.
The feeling which Platina seemed to have of this injury did wholly ruin his
fortune, in the affliction whereof he wrote a letter unto the Pope, ^latinas
letter had th^se words. Si tibi l^cuit indicta causa spoliare nos ^mptione
nostra iusta e^ legi^ima, debet and nobis licere conqueri illatam in^uriam
in^^stamque ignomini^m eiecti a te ac tam insigni co^^umelia aff^cti, dilabemur
pa^sim ad reges ac Principes eosque adhortabimur vt tibi consilium indican^ in
quo potissimu^ rationem reddere cogatis cur nos legitima possessione
spoliaueris.
full of bitterness and without respect.

This Pope was also taxed to be very greedy of money, Paul the second a great
builder.
and not to have held the iustest means to get it, and yet his magnificence in
the sumptuous building of the Palace of St. Mark, and in the reparation of
that of S. Peter freed him from blame with such as know that magnificence is
the daughter of liberality.

The promises being broken in the Castille the poursuite of the marriage with
the Duke of Bourgundies Daughter was followed by the Constable with great
vehemency, who could not endure that any other should deal in it. He
represented unto him the greatness and commodity of the Estates which this
marriage would bring him after the death of his brother and father in law, and
makes him to apprehend it in such sort, as this young Prince, who filled not his
fantasy with small imaginations, continued his first poursuite of an alliance
with duke Charles, assuring him that it would produce great effects for their
common fortunes and profit. An apparent and important profit is a great motion
to divert the effect of a promise.


The Duke of Brittanie promised unto himself the honor of the mediation for a
matter which did profit few men and offended many. The King had no desire his
brother should be so great. The Kings of France have in former times repented
themselves for that they had made their brethren so great. Charles the ^ifu
gave to Philip the hardy the Duchy of Bourgundy, which K. John had united
unto the Crown, and ma^ied ^im to the heir of ^lande^s. The house of
Bourgundy grew so mighty as it would equal it self with that of France.
The King of England sent often to the Duke of Bourgundy to diswade him from
this alliance, entreating him to consider that the Duke of Guienne, Design of
the King of England.
succeeding the King who had no children, and holding the countries belonging
to the house of Bourgundy, England did foresee her ruin and destruction.

The Duke of Bourgundy would have no such son in Law, he gave a desire and
appetite to all men with one hand, and took all hope from them with the other,
he promised her to all and gave her not to any; he made use of his daughter to
entertain the love of Princes, and to pass over his affairs with more
success, to repair by policy the defects he found in his own strength,
thinking that his weakness did dispense him of his word, and that fraud was
glorious against his enemies. Deceit which makes an enemy receive an affront is
as commendable as it is to be blamed when it deceives him that is not so
declared, whereas they say that fraud is glorious in war, it is not to be
understood in breaking words and promises, but of politic, fained, and
artificial stratagems.


But he had no desire to marry her, propounding unto himself in this marriage
more the advancement of his own design, then the contentment of his daughter,
he promised her to Maximilian son to the Emperor Frederic, Princes
pretending to marry the Daughter of Bourgundy.
and inclined much to that party, to do his business in Germany, where he
desired to purchase some credit, for at the same time Sigismond ArchDuke of
Austria had engaged unto him for fourscore thousand florins, the Country of
Alsatia and Brisgaeu with the County of Ferette. The Country of Alsatia,
Brisg^^, the black Forest and the Contie of (...) or Forest. Were engaged by
Sygismond Archduke of Austria for 80000. flori^^ upon condi^ion that the D. of
Bourgundy should not alter any thing of the Laws and Customs of the Country
in the year 1496
He promised her in like manner to Nicholas son to the Duke of Calabria, to
draw him from the Kings alliance, who had promised him his eldest daughter, To
the Duke of Guienne to trouble the Kings of France, and England, and to Phillip
Duke of Sauoy, for an other design: Yet the practice was so followed by the
Duke of Britain and the Constable, who promised in regard of that marriage to
draw him into Amiens, and S. Quintin as he gave his word to consent unto it,
and at the same instant he assured the King of England that he would not do
it, his words upon this subject were never of one tune, It was a witty
comparison of him that said that men's actions were like notes of music
sometimes in spaces and sometimes in lines, sometimes above and sometimes
beneath, and never or seldom straight for any long continuance.
and did not accord with his heart.

The Dukes of Guienne and Brittanie, being well advertised that their hopes
were crossed by the King of England, gave the Duke of Bourgundy to understand by
their Ministers that without the assistance of the English, they were strong
enough, and had sufficient intelligence to force the King to do him right, and
that the principal end of their Arms, being for the public good of the
realm, they could not have that success which they expected employing their
ancient enemies, and that so long as they had forces and means in France, it
was not needful to seek them in England. W^ilest that we may pass without
succors we should not seek them. Plato in his Laws forbids to dig for water in
a neighbors house before that he had sought it in his own.


These words were delivered unto him by Vrfe in the behalf of Monsieur,
Whereupon the Duke said, to Philip de Commines, Behold the Lord of Vrfe
presses me to make mine armies as great as I can, and tells me that we shall
do great good unto the Realm, do you think if I enter with the company that
I shall lead that I shall do any good? Philip de Commines answered smiling. In
my opinion no: Then the Duke said, I love the good of France better then my
Lord of Vrfe thinks, for whereas there is but one King I would there were six.
He would gladly have had the whole piece, Ambition strives to divide and tear
in pieces that which she can not break nor carry wholly away.
but knowing the impossibility, that the ascent was too steep, and the top
too slipperie he had no care but to break that which he could not wholly
enjoy. There is not any one of so great a courage, but thinking to make
himself a King he trembles, the ascent unto a royalty is slipperie, the top
shaking, and the precipise and fall fearful.


He prepared great forces, and the King sent his into Guienne, being incensed
that his Brother had restored the Earl of Armagnac to his lands, which had
been confiscate, and he spoils both the one and the other. He wins his chief
servants the more easily to chase him out of Guienne. The Duke of Guienne pressed
the Duke of Bourgondy to succor him, the Duke sent unto the King to entreat him
to suffer Monsieur to live in peace, The King answered that he had no intent
to alter any thing of his brothers portion, but to keep him from attempting
beyond his bounds. And behold a remarkable point of wisdom in this Prince,
whilst the Duke prepared his army he sent Peter D'oriole Chancellor of France
unto him, and the Lord of Craon to make an ouerture of an accord. A Peace
treated and a promise made to restore Amiens.
A peace was treated, and the King promised to restore Amiens and Saint
Quentin, the duke was so much grieved for the loss of these two towns, and
had so great a desire to recover them, as in regard thereof he granted
whatsoever they would.

The hearts of men lie on the left side, they are full of deceit* Sincerity and
freedom is ra^e in men's intentions. They have reason to say that their wills go
not right. Their hearts lie on the left side. Aristotle in his first book of the
history of beasts says that man only has his heart on the left side, and all
beasts have it in the midst of their breasts.
Truth, freedom and loyalty are rare, unknown and exiled qualities. It were
baseness not to dare to be lie his promises, nor to accommodate his words to
profit rather then to Justice, These two Princes sought to deceive one another,
It is simplicity to speak all, but it is mere wickedness not to speak what
we think. It is a basnesse of the heart when a^ the word belies the thought.
the King had no will to restore any thing, promising unto himself that an
infallible accident would preserve him that which a peace took from him. The
duke of Bourgondy wrote underhand to the dukes of Guienne and Brittanie, that
the abandoning of their protection, and friendship, which he had promised was
but feigned, that his affection was always pure and firm to maintain them.
Neither of them held himself bound to keep his word but to effect his
business, and in this bargain they spoke not all they thought.

Simon of Quingey, who had commandment to go unto the Duke of Britain to
renew the hopes and protestations as soon as the peace should be effected
pressed the king much to swear it. Temporising of the King profitable.
The king, who had made profit of the time, deferred it from day to day, he
lick't and fashon'd this little bear at leisure. Quingey who knew his Masters
mind durst not importune him. The king went slowly, he took not half the
wind he might have taken to arrive at a prefixed time at the port of his
desseigns, thinking the winning of time very necessary for him that will effect
his business, that it cannot be bought to dear nor too long attended. When as
the Barbarians demanded money of Sertorius going into Sp^ine for his passage
through their country, such as were with him grew into choler, saying that is
was too great a shame and indignity that a Proconsull of the people of Rome
sh^ld pay a tribute unto those wicked Barbarians, but Sertorius regarded not
the shame which they pretended, but answered. That he bought time, which
whosoever aspired to great matters, should hold most dear, and so contented
the Barbarians with money, after which he made such speed as he seized upon
Spain. Plu.
He temporized so cunningly as he at tayned to what he desired. And behold a
post which brings news that the Duke of Guienne is dead: a death which changed
the face of affairs, and deprived the Duke of all that he promised unto
himself.

It happened the twelfe of May 1471. and the manner so violent as his members
turning contrary to their propper motion by strange convulsions, Death of the
duke of Guienne.
wholly disfigured his body, his teeth, hair and nails fell off before his
death. It was thought to be by poison. Being on a summers day at Saint Severe
with the Lady of Montsoreau, the Abbot of Saint John d' Angely (who was one of
the Dukes favorites) at his after-noones drinking presented a goodly Peache
unto his Lady, she took the one half and steeped it in wine, and gave the
other to Monsieur. She dyed soon after, but the Duke continued longer, yet so
sick, as his death was bruted the very day that he had taken this deadly
morcell.

If the King were pleased with this death we may gather by the words which he
spoke a little before, when as news was brought him of the King of Castilles
brothers death. He is but too happy to have lost his brother. It was Al^onso D.
Alfonso second, son to John second K. of Castille and brother to Henry dyed
of the plague at Cardegnosa a Bourrough near to A^ila the fifth of July 1468.
he was sixteen years old, and had bin declared King three years before, his
death was not without suspicion of poison.
who had been chosen King by the Castillans and by the League made against
king Henry. This word of Brother was unto him as a goodly name to signify a
bad thing, if he wept they were tears of joy, and if they were not feigned they
were presently dried up.

The little care he seemed to have to punish such as were accused to have
poisoned him, confirmed an opinion that he was content, and made many believe
that this death came by his commandment, to assure the quiet of many by the
death of one alone. It is a great misery for a Prince when he sees himself
forced to be cruel unto his own blood, to assure the quiet of his estate.
He commanded the Bishop of Angers Secretary to bring him the proceedings
taken before his Master and Lewis of Amboise upon this death, Claude of Seysel
in that which he has written of the History of Lewis the twelfth says upon
this occasion. Many there are which said, but yet I dare not affirm it, that
he caused his said brother to die of poison, but it is most certain that he
never had any confidence in him whilst he lived, and was not grieved at his
death.

The course of his life was so short as fortune had not time to poursue him
long: Observations of the Duke of Guyennes life.
she followed him betimes and never ceased until he was daunted and dejected
finding that misery is the proper portion of a man's life, yea of the greatest.
There is nothing but misery in man he is borne unto it. They write that the
wives of M^xico when they are brought in bed assu^r their children of their
misery in th^se three words. Infant thou art come into the world to endure,
suffer, endure and hold thy peace They sing ^his to (...) a sleep.
He had noe constant spirit to defend himself from these affronts, he was as
tractable to all perswations, as the King his brother was cunning and stayed.
The History of Britain says that for a truth he had noe courrage, and that
inconstancy did properly belong unto him. He did dictate soudenly what he had
received and allowed. Constancy is the s^ale of Actions: It is of spirits as of
bodies, neither the one in rejecting council nor the other in casting up meat
c^n be nourish^d and entertained.
He was not like to his Father in fortune, nor to his Grandfather in courrage,
nor to his Brother in wisdom. It is a wonder to see how children degenerate,
and how nature delights in these contrary productions, making cowards, ignorant
men, and wicked proceed from the blood of Princes which are valiant, wise and
good. So vinegar comes from wine. A good tree brings not forth bad fr^t^, and
ye^ we see that from ^ood fathers come bad children. The Jews proverb is
Homets ben iin, v^neger is the son of wine. Natum crebro tanquam ex industria
malis ebonis, agrestes ^ doctioribus and ceteris. ^u vic. torin Caliguls.


Impressions were very easy in this lightness. The rigor which King Lewis the
eleventh showed unto him, made him give ear to such as sought to find their
own contentments in his discontents. It is Injustice in a Sovereign brother
not to provide for the entertainment of his younger, whom he should put in the
number of his forces and felicities. They are of the same blood and grounded
upon part and portion of the successiue rights, but they have never prospered
which have troubled the house for this, and conspired with the members against
the head.

Twenty years before this death France had seen a notable example in
Britain. Tragical end of Giles of Britain
There is no danger to lay the History a little aside. Giles John the fifth Duke
of Britain left three Sons, Francis Peter and Giles.
son to John the fifth Duke of Britain, and Brother to Francis the first,
being not well pleased with his portion retired himself to Guildo a Castle
near unto the sea by Matignon.

The Duke his Brother makes King Charles the seventh believe that he was there
to favor the English with advice and intelligence. Upon the first suspicion of
any ones fidelity, they presently ad the communicati^n of friends. They do
exactly reuise actions past which deface or confirm the doubt of the present.
A belief which might easily be settled in the soul of a jealous King, for
that this Prince had been bred up in England, and the king had given him the
Order of the Garter, and the office of Constable. Process made to the Prince of
Brittany.
Upon this first impression the king sends to take him, and delivers him into
the Dukes hands, who sends him prisoner to Chasteau Briant, commanding his
Attorney General The Duke demanded of the Attorney General what should be
done in this process. The good man answered that he did not see what might be
done and that by the custom the elder had no criminal justice over his younger
brother, and that the Duke could not call him to his Justice. An answer which
was more simple the^ true. H^st. of Brit. lib. 11.
to make his process for treason, but there was no crime nor any accuser.

The hand which had hurt him sought to cure him. The king being informed of
his innocence, labored for his deliverance. The Duke durst not refuse him,
but being ready to be set a liberty, his enemies suppose letters from the king
of England, whereupon the king changes his advice, and causes him to be kept
more straightly in the Castle of Touffort. There he is made to languish and
endure greater extremities then those of the Quarries of Siracusa, The usage of
such as were shut up in the Iayle of the Quarries of Siracusa was very
stra^ght, for they had but two dishfuls of barley, and one of water allowed
them by day^ lut. in the life (...)
for they refused him water, and if he had bread, they were the scraps of a
poor woman who hearing him cry for hunger put them in at a window, which was
upon the ditch side. His gardes who had undertaken to starve him, seeing it
continue to long, Gilles of Brittany adiournes his Brother before God
strangled him. They gave him leisure to think of his conscience, he charged
a Friar to adiourne his Brother to heaven, seeing there was no Justice on earth
for his innocence. Gilles of (...) for (...) speech charged a Friar to go
unto D. Francis the first, and to tell him in what estate he had left him, and
the miseries he endured by injustice, that he could have no right, but referred
all to the judgment of God, before (...) he called him.
The Duke appeared.

Death pulling this thorn out of the kings heart, gave him means of more
rest, if his spirit had been capable of rest. It carried him into many places,
A spirit which is not restrained to certain designs, lives in continual
disquietnes. Phil. de Commines* speaking of this Prince says these words. The
time that he rested his understanding labore^, for ^e had to do in many ^aces,
and did as willingly busy himself with his neighbors affairs as with his
own.
and thrust him into sundry designs, meddling with his neighbors affairs as
with his own. True it is he had great crosses by them that were nearest unto
him. Imprisonmen^ of the Duke of Alencon.
John the second Duke of Alencon, the first Prince of the blood, was sent
prisoner to the Louure, for conspiring with the Kings enemies, and at the same
time they saw other Princes afflicted with the like Domesticke diseases. Lewis
was nothing sorry to disquiet them, he did what he could to fill up the
measure of their cares, having no respect to make enemies, so as they came to
his Mill.

John the second King of Navarre and Arragon had prosperities and adversities,
Troubles in Navarre.
both public and private, so variable and diverse, as it could not be said
whether he had more of the one then the other, his youth was tossed, and his age
was not quiet, but still his courage remained invincible in the greatest fury
of the storm. They that make profession of wisdom and faint in adversity
are like unto Pilots which grow sick during a storm


Charles the only Son and presumptiue heir of the Crown of Navarre took
Arms against him to be King. Charles Prince of Navarre makes war against his
Father.
Henry the fourth King of Castille who had married his eldest Daughter favored
his rebels of Barcelona, and Gaston Earl of Foix, husband to Elenor his second
daughter, seeing him busied against the Castillans sought to dispossess him of
the Crown of Navarre. D. Pedro of Portugal was chosen King and dyed at the
siege of Tortosa. After that the A^ragonis had declared K. John, vnwort^y the
crown, as the murderer of his own son, they did choose D. Pedro the third
Constable of Portugal son to D. Pedro D. of ^imbra.
Rene of Anjou Duke of Lorraine and Earl of Prouence, being desirous to
recover the Title of a king which he had lost at Naples, accepted the same
election by the advice of King Lewis the eleventh, and sent the Duke of
Calabria his Son into Spain with French troops, which joining with them of
the county of Roussillon besieged Girone. The French besiege Gi^onne.


The Arragonois were beaten and defeated, and the Prince D. Ferdinand son to
the King of Navarre in danger to be taken prisoner. At the Battle of Denia the
Prince D. Ferdinand was prisone^, Roderic of Reb^ledo caused himself to ^ee
taken in his place, to give him means to escape, and the King redeeme^ him for
ten thousand florins.
Winter came on, the Duke of Calabria retired his troops to Perpignan, he
made a voyage into France to have new forces, and returned with ten thousand
men with the which he forced king John to raise the siege from before Peralta,
the which was wonderfully pressed with their Ordinance, and having made a great
breach, the assaylants assured themselves to force it at the firt assault. The
night before it should be given, the Duke of Calabria entered with such fury
into their quarters without discovery, the Sentinels being a sleep, It is
easy to make a surprise when as Sentinels be a sleep. The Romans considering
that the safety of the Army or Camp depending of their vigilance, had cries
and trumpets to keep them waking. There were some also that went the round with
bells to the same end. Of all which we find examples in Tacitus Hist. 5.
Polibeus lib. 2. stratagem of Clearchus. Thucidid li. 4.
as every man sought how to save themselves. In combats by night the amazement
is so great as he that begins first wins. The King fled away bare headed
toward Figueres. France made bonfires for this victory the which was seconded
by the taking of Girona, Death of John D. of Calabia.
but within few days after they lamented the death of the Duke of Calabria,
who dyed at Perpignan of a pestilent burning Fever.

When as the King of Arragon had ended a Civil war against his subjects, he
found himself engaged in war against the French. King Lewis the eleventh
being often importuned with the ordinary complaints which were made of the
insolences of the French, The inhabitants of Perpignan entreated John King of
Arragon, either to give the K. other p^wnes for the assurance of his money
which he had lent, or to suffer them to retire themselves.
which were at Roussillon, and that the inhabitants of Perpignan being revolted
against the garrison, had forced them to retire into the Castle, he sent the
King word that he should pay him his three hundred thousand crowns and retire
his country, or that he should make him an absolute sale, or give him caution
for the payment. The King of Arragon finding either of these conditions very
harsh, answered that he could not yet vngage the country, and that it would be
no honor to him to alienate it, being a part of the Crown of Arragon, and
that it was a matter never heard of to press a King to gave Caution, the pawn
being sufficient.

The King taking this answer for a refusal, prepared to war, and made his
preparation slowly, to have a more speedy victory He that will demand any
thing of an enemy must not be disarmed, neither must he prepare hastily to
war to vanquish more speedily. Diu apparandum est bellum vt vineas celerius,
quia longa belli preparatio celerem facit victoriam. Senec.
. With the like care as he armed for an offensive war against the King of
Arragon, he gave order for a defensive, and to furnish the Town of Perpignan
with victuals and necessary commodities to maintain a siege, and gave the
command thereof to the Lord of Lude. The Letter which he wrote unto him upon
that subject deserves well to be considered of, being drawn from the
original and full of passages which discover the humor of this Prince, the
order and conduct of his affairs, and the manner of writing of those times.

My Lord Governor, The Lord of Lude as may be seen by the subscription of this
Letter was Governor of Dauphine and Chamberlain to K. Lewis (...).
the Earl of Cardonna and the Castellan of Emposta are arrived at Paris. Kings
Letter to the Lord of Lude.
I have sent Monsieur Daire and the Siegr of Bouffille unto them, to know and
understand of them if they came to make any good appointment, or whether they
came to deceive me and to dissemble. The said Bouffille is returned unto me,
and as far as they can find they bring not any good news, and their
intention is only to entertain me with words, until they have gathered in
their coin. And therefore I must play Mr Lewis, and you Mr John, and whereas
they seek to deceive us let us show our selves more politic then they. In
regard of my self I will entertain them here until the first week of May,
and in the mean time you shall part with all the speed you can, and shall draw
together a hundred Lances in Dauphine to lead with you, and cause them to be
led by Monsieur de S. Priet, or by Pouillalier, or by them both together, that
is to say, fourscore Lances by S. Priet, and twenty by Pouillalier, or all to
him alone or to both together, as you shall think the matter may be best
conducted for my profit, for I refer this Article to you.

I send you a Letter which I write unto them by Beauuoisin, whom I charged to
tell them and to do what you shall think fit. And for the payment of the said
hundred Lances, A hundred pound starling.
you must speedily find a thousand Livers to give them at their departure,
for they shall make but a road to spoil and burn the corn and then return,
which is ten francks a month for every Lance: And seeing they have no Archers,
and continue but eight or ten days, it must suffice them, it is fit to find a
means to recover the said thousand Francks either by confiscation of Corn or
otherwise. And if it should come to the extremity that you could not find it
before you want, take it upon the accounts of the Treasurer of Dauphin^, to
whom I write expressly: but use such diligence as the said men at Arms may
part the 25. day of this month, and if you take any money up in Dauphin^ I will
repay it. My Lord Governor, the greatest service you can do me is to use such
speed as you may burn all their Corn betimes, for thereby they shall be
forced to speak plainly.

I have spoken unto Captain Odet Daidre, who is well content to go thither, I
send him unto you with his hundred Lances to assist you to make the spoil, in
my opinion when you are all together you are enough.

I send Yuon Diliers unto Monsieur de Charluz to raise an hundred Lances in
Lanquedoc. I do also write unto de Charluz to gather together of his Franc
Archers the nearest to those marches, to the number of three thousand, and that
he cause them to march into Roussillon with you, and that all be ready to part
the 25. of this month of April. And for the payment of the hundred Lances of
Lanquedoc, and of the said Franc Archers, I write unto the General and
Treasurer of Lanquedoc that they cause four thousand Francs to be delivered
unto them, that is to say a thousand Francs to the hundred Lances; and to the
said Franc Archers 3000. Francs.

I do also send Destueille to Monsieur Dalby, who carries a commission
directed to him, to Monsieur Charluz, and to the said Destueille, and to every
of them, to cause great store of victuals to be carried to Narbona and other
places of the fronter, to the end the men at Arms may have no want: but you
must have a care that under co^llor thereof none be carried to Perpignan.

I have given charge to the said Beauuoisien to be governed by you, and in case
that Mousieur de S. Priet lead the hundred Lances of Dauphin^, the said
Beauuoisien shall bring unto me Hardouin de la Iaille, whom I have written to
S. Priet to send me.

I have sent unto you Raoulet of Balparque, and Claux the Canonier to assist
you, employ them well, and spare nothing. The Seigr of Bouffille shall part
within two or three days, and in my opinion with those hundred Lances, with
yours, those of Dauphine, Lanquedoc, and of Captain Odet, with the three
thousand Franc of Archers, you shall have forces sufficient to spoil and burn
their whole Country, and to take and beat down their paltry places, or ruin
and burn such as you cannot beat down.

I do also write unto the General, Treasurer and Officers of Languedoc, that
they do whatsoever Monsir Dalby and you shall command them. Beauuoisien shall
tell you the rest. Farewell my Lord Governor, I pray you let me understand of
your news. Written at Senlis the 9. of April V. Lewis, and underneath: N.
Tilhart.

The Kings army besieged Parpignan Siege of Parpignan.
D. John King of Arragon maintained the siege, the Prince D. Ferdinand came to
succor him, and forced the French to retire; Lewis hearing of this shameful
retreat, commanded his Captains to return speedily^, and to take the place or
to die there. The siege continued eight months, the besieged were wonderfully
pressed with famine, for when as they had eaten horses, dogs, Cats, and Rats,
they devoured their flesh that were slain at assaults, chosing rather to dye
after this manner, then to return under the command of the French. Famine and
yielding of Parpignan.
Yet their obstinacy was no hinderance from letting the K. suffer them to feel
the effects of his Clemency, receiving them upon composition, even when as
they could no more. The obstinacy and fury of a Town besieged, should not
hinder the bounty and clemency of a Prince. Laurence Palatin of Hungary,
being amazed that the Emperor Sygismond left them their lives and goods, and
held them for good subjects whom he had vanquished, answered in this manner. I
kill my enemies in pardoning, and in doing them good I bind them. Aeneas Sit.
lib. 3. Com.
So the Cont^e of Roussillon remained to France all the reign of King Lewis.
King Charles his Son restored it to King Ferdinand. Charles the eight yielded
the County of Rossi^lon to Ferdinand King of Arragon, and did acquit him of
the same for the which he was engaged, this was in the year. 1494.
It had cost the King his Father many men and much money. His Chronicle relates
that it was said in those times, that the Contrie of Arragon was a Churchyard
unto the French. Philip de Commines says that in the Contie of Roussillon
there died many good men, for this war continued long*

A Peace was mas made betwixt Lewis and D. John King of Arragon and Navarre,
Ambassadors from the King of Arragon sent into France.
whose Ambassadors being come into France, were well received and graciously
used by the King, who gave them two cups of gold waying forty marks, As a
weak Prince should not make any show of his forces, so he that is mighty
glories to show what he can. The King out of one City of his realm musters a
hundred thousand men in Arms, the 20. of April 1470.
and esteemed worth three thousand two hundred crowns of gold, and to the end
they might judge of the whole piece by a pattern, he caused them to see the
Inhabitants of Paris in Arms, they did muster a hundred and four thousand
men, the Original says they were all in one liuerie in red Casacks and white
Crosses.

The fortune of the house of Armagnac was entangled in that of Arragon. John
Earl of Armagnac expelled his Country.
John Earl of Armagnac had married Ioane of Foix Daughter to Gaston Earl of
Foix and D. Leonora of Arragon. This alliance could not defend him from the
indignation of King Lewis the eleventh in the fury whereof he found first the
loss of his liberty, then of his goods, and lastly of his life.

The King could not forget with what vehemence he had followed the Bourguignon
party in the war of the Common weal, after that he had promised to retire
himself from all Leagues and associations, contrary to the Kings intentions,
nor with what affection he had followed the youthful follies of the Duke of
Guienne his brother, who had restored him to his lands, contrary to his
commandment.

In the year 1469. one called John Bon of Wales in England brought letters
unto the King, which King Edward had written to the Earl of Armagnac, Accused
by a welchma^.
and the answer which the Earl made him. The King reading them with the
passion wherewith he was possessed, and easily believing one man alone To draw
many heads in question upon the report of one tongue, is an act of extreme
and odious Justice. Grave militibus visu^ quod in causa falconis multos milites
ad vnius serui testimonium occidi preceperat Pertinax Iul. Capitol.
to ruin one who was worth many, and who would cost him much, thought that
Infidellity was noe new thing in a spirit who had already showed the proofs,
and without further inquisition sends the Earl of Dammarting with twelve or
thirteen hundredth Lances, and with ten or twelve thousand Franc Archers to
seize upon the Earls person, lands and estate.

Being come into the Town of Rhodets, he put the whole Country into the Kings
hands, His lands put into the Kings hands.
changed the officers, and caused a Proclamation to be made by the sound of a
Trumpet, that noe man of what estate or condition whatsoever should advowe
himself servant nor officer to the Earl of Armagnac, nor make any poursute
for him, upon pain of confiscation of body and goods. There is nothing so
powerful nor fearful as a publik declaration of the Princes hatred against
any one, especially among a people which esteem not their Governors but by the
authority and credit they have with their Superior.
In these extremities there is not any man that will willingly loose himself
for another. Good men are loath to draw their friends into danger. As it is an
office of frendshippe to run into danger for ones friends, and rashness to go
into perils without occasion, so it is cruelty to bring others into danger.

The Earl of Dammartin made booty of all the places and Siegneuries which did
belong unto the Earl of Armagnac. If he took his part, as some taxed him he
did contrary to the duty of a General, who should content himself with the
glory of the command and execution The glory and honor of well executing the
commandments of his Prince, serves for a booty, in the distributio^ whereof he
that commands must consider that there is not any thing for himself.
Themistocles seeing a great number of Collers and chains in the enemies Camp
said unto him that did accompany him. Take off the^ for you are not
Themistocles.
and leave unto the soldier that which concerns profit.

The Earl of Armagnac seeing that he must have time to clear these brutes,
He retires to Fonteraby.
and that oftentimes Innocence is forced to yield unto a sudden event, We must
give time to broils to make them vanish away when there is no means to
resist. Innocence it self is troubled when she is surprised. Relinquenda
rumoribus tempus, quo senescant innocents recente inuidiae impares. Tac. An.
Lib. 2.
was advised to go out of the Realm and to retire to Fonteraby with his wife,
being loath that his person should be at the Earl of Dammartins discretion, who
being advertised of his flight, past on, and seized upon the town of
Lestore. The Court Parliament of Paris upon the informations of the
Intelligences which the Earl of Armaignac had with the enemies of the Realm
decreed a personal adiournment against him. His process was made by reason of
his contumacy, The first default was obtained the 24. of November 1469. the
second the 19. of February* 1469 the third the 6. of August 1470. and before
that the E. of Da^martin had seized upon all the County of Armagnac.
and by a sentence given the 7. of September 1470. he was condemned to loose
his head. But he was in a place of safety, whereas the sentence could not be
executed, having an intent to let them know, which had condemned him, that he
was alive.

After that he had for two years space endured the miseries and discommodities
which they suffer which are expelled from their own houses and live in a
strange country, having tried that the wandering stars were as unfortunate as
the fixed, There is no such sweet abode as ones own house. They which bold
them happy that run from Province to Province, are like unto those (says
Plutarch) which judge the wandering fl^rres more fortunate then the fixed.
and sought by all means to return into the Kings favor: Returns into
Guienne under the Dukes protection.
when as he saw that by the resolution of the Estates, held at Tours, the Kings
brother left Normandy, and took Guyenne for his portion, and that he was
arrived at Bourdeaux, he thought that he could not find a better refuge nor
portion then with him, he acquaints him with the misery of his life, which was
such, as living, his life was nothing but a living death, It is not life to
stand al^waies in fear ^ fall in to the hands of a mighty enemy, which has
long arms, Ita viuere vt non sit viuendum miserimu^ est. Cic.
and the power which his enemies had against his innocence. The Duke of Guienne
pitied his estate, and gave him provision to be restored to all his lands.

This displeased the King, who saw that the Duke of Guienne joining with them
whom he held enemies to the Crown, and continuing his poursute of marriage
with the Duke of Bourgondies daughter, Army of the King in Guienne.
might revive the League which he had smothered. This fear A Prince can make
no greater show that he fears his vassal then when ^hee retires from him.
Alexander by bis proclamation gave leave to all bannished men to return into
their Contries except the Thebanes, and therefore Eudamidas said that Alexander
feared none but the Thebans. Plut.
caused him to send 500. Lances with Footmen and Canon unto the fronter of
Guienne, deferring a more private revenge against the Earl of Armagnac until
another time.

He felt it cruelly after the death of the Duke of Guienne, when as the King
sent the Lord of Beaujeu, Brother to to the Duke of Bourbon, Seege of Lestore.
the Cardinal of Alby, Bishop of Aras, the Seneshals of Tholousa and Beaucaire,
the Lord of Lude, with many other Captains, and a great number of Soldiers
with Artillery, who laid siege to Lestore and conti^^ed it six or seven
months.

The Earl of Armagnac sent them his Chancellor being Abbot of Pessant The
Deputies for the Earl of Arma^gnac were the Abbot of St. Denis and Bishop of
Lombes, with the Lords of Barbasan, Raulsac and Palmarieux.
to tell them that it was not needful to employ such great forces against him,
The Earl desires a safe Conduct to justify himself.
that the Kings commandments should find no resistance in his contry, that all
was under his obedience and disposition, yea his person, so as it would please
the King to give him good security, that he might go unto him to justify his
life and loyalty.

The offers were not accepted, It has been always found strange that a
subject whose will should be converted into obedience and his reasons to
humility, should capitulate with his Prince. The Duke of Nemours, the Earl of
St. Paul, the Duke of Britain, and the Earl of Armagnac repented it to late
the Capitulations of an Inferior being then more odious then they have been
since with Kings. All the Contry was ouerrunne, spoiled and ruined, and yet the
Earl would not suffer his people to defend themselves, declaring always that
he was the Kings servant, desiring nothing more then to justify himself,
offering to deliver up the Town of Lestore, and for a greater declaration of
his will, he caused the white Cross and the Arms of France, to be set upon
the Towers and Walls.

The Lord of Beaujeu and the Cardinal of Alby seeing that without hazarding the
Kings forces they might enter the place, Accord made with the E. of ^rmagnac.
by an accord which the King was not bound to keep, This Maxim That a Prince
being forced to make a peace or treaty to his disadvantage may fall from it at
his pleasure, had already taken footing in the counsels of Princes.
they entered into treaty with the Earl of Armagnac, and it was agreed: That
the said Lord of Beaujeu, as Lieutenant to the King, having special power so
to do, did pardon all crimes and delicts which he might have committed against
the King, as well in adhering unto the Duke of Guienne The Earl of Armagnac had
followed the D. of Guienne in the war of the Common weal, and since had
termed him self his Lieutenant General.
as otherwise. That noe trouble nor hinderance should be given to himnor his
servants going nor coming. That he might go safely unto the King with a
hundred or sixe-score Horses, without Arms to justify himself of those
crimes wherewith he was charged, according to the offers made by him. That the
Lord of Beaujeu and the Cardinal of Alby should obtain all Letters and
expeditions necessary for his better assurance. That in the mean time he might
remain in his Country of Gascoine in what place he should think good, except
the Town of Lestore, the which should be delivered into the hands of the Lord
of Beaujeu.

It was also agreed that in case they gave him not this assurance, A man of
quality should desire nothing more then to make his innocence known, and to
see himself purged from all accusa^ion. For the consideration of their honor
many have desired to be araigned.
or that the things promised were not effected, the Town of Lestore should be
restored unto him. The Lord of Beaujeu having received the Kings commandment
upon this accord, and the assurance demanded, Lestore recovered by the E. of
Armagnac.
he sent it unto Barran, whereas he then was, by the which it was granted him
to go unto the King with threescore horse. But in steed of going thither, he
executed an enterprise, which he had upon Lestore, by the means of John D.
Aymier. The younger brother of Albert surprised it, In the Earl of Armagnacs
defense, it is said, that seeing that the Lord of Beauieu commanded him to
void the Country, he required him to restore him the Town of L^store seeing
that he had not any Town whether to retire himself, and that it was delivered.
and took the Lord of Beaujeu with the Noblemen and Gentlemen that were with
him prisoners. D' Aymier was quartred at Tours, and the younger brother of
Albert, being Lord of St. Basile, lost his head at Poitiers.

Hereupon new forces ar sent to the Cardinal of Alby and to the Seneshals of
Toulouza and Beaucaire to beesiege Lestore. The siege continued three months,
and the Cardinal seeing that force would not preuale, To make men subject
either force or fraud must be used, Sparta was forced by Alexander, Siracusa
deceived by Denis.
he added policy, for Towns and Commonweals loose their liberties and are
made subject by the one or the other. They propounded again the precedent
condition of the accord. A second accord made with the Earl of Armagnac
The Abbot of Pessans, Bishop of Lombes and Chancellor to the Earl comes on his
part to treat; they granted the assurance which he desired to go unto the King;
a bolition of all things past, and of the services which he had done in the
Duchy of Guienne against the King, pardon for the Noblemen and Gentlemen of
his party, and of all that had been done in the surprise of the Town of Lestore.
This treaty justified the E. of Armagnac if it had been represented, but it was
not seen. They say that the Earls Secretary, who had it in his custody, was
threatened to be ^ast into a well, if he delivered it not to the Cardinal of
Alby.
In consideration of this he delivered up Lestore unto the King. The articles
were signed by the Cardinal Ranfort, Balsac, Gaston of Lion, and John Daillon
Lord of Lude, on Thursday the fourth of March 1472.

In execution of the treaty the Earl of Armagnac delivered unto the Cardinal
the Castle of Lestore, caused his men to disarme, and retired his Cannon,
making all the ports to be set open to the Kings men. They that trust are
easily deceived. The wise prepare themselves for dangers in assurances. In ipsa
securitate animus ad difficilia se preparat.
At this entry there was a great disorder, the treaty was broken, Earl of
Armagnac slain under the assurance of a treaty.
the Earl of Armagnac was slain in his house, and cast naked into the
streets, the Townespoiled, the Countess of Armagnac carried prisoner into the
Castle, and within few days after was delivered of a Son before her time,
the Castle and walls of the Town were razed, and it was fiered in every
place, and in the end all were entreated with that liberty which the rigor of
war permits against Towns and people that rebel. Razing, burning, and
sacking, are the ordinary punishments of rebellious Towns. Alba was razed,
Carthage burnt, the V^iens were r^oted out. So we find in the Roman History
upon the punishment of reuolts and seditions, Muri deiecti senatus abductus.


Charles of Armagnac the Earls Brother was carried prisoner to the Bastille.
Charles of Armagnac a prisoner and mad.
This Imprisonment which continued foureteen years bred him wonderful
sorrows and grief, and as the passage is not great from melancolly to madness,
his spirit grew weak, and made him incapable to rouse the enemies of his
house. They gave him certain Noblemen of the Country to be his governors.

Many have written the Taking of Lestore, and the death of the Earl of
Armagnac after an other manner, and such, as if they which had undertaken to
justify his memory had held it true, it had not been forgotten in their
Apology. The Pagans did so much respect others as they held a Periur^d man to
deceive the Gods. In sui ran^um perinde estimandum, qua^ si Iouem fesellicet,
Deorum Iniurias Diis curae. Tacit. The more promises are colored with strange
^aths and mysteries, the more they are to be suspected. The Accord made betwixt
the K. of Navarre, and Charles Regent of France, was sworn upon the Sacrament.
They say therefore, that the Cardinal of Alby entered into some treaty with
the Earl of Armagnac for the assurance whereof he used a damnable policy,
Treachery most damnable.
for seeing that the Earl feared to fall into the Kings hands, he swear his
promises by the most sollemne mysteries of his Religion, giving half a
consecrated Host unto the Earl and himself taking the other half. That in
the mean time the soldiers slipped into the Town, and that the Earl, meaning
to charge them, fearing a surprise, Until the capitulation be made, all
policies, all surprises are allowed. They laugh at them who suffering
themselves to be surprised in those bargains, cry out of disloialty. In
courses of hostility there is nothing more excellent then deceipte, nothing
more safe then distrust.
they cried out for succors, the Kings Army entered by the breaches which the
cannon had made, the Town was spoiled and ruined, all were put to the sword,
and the Earl slain. The Lord of Beaujeu with the other Gentlemen prisoners
were delivered.

Such was the Tragical and fatal end of the Earl of Armagnac. Fortune, who
desired to overthrow the greatness of his house, blinded his eyes that he could
not apprehend the dangers which did threaten it. She had not a more powerful
instrument then the hatred which the King bare him. A hatred conceived long
before, nourished and augmented, by many free and hardy actions. He was
therefore environed with so many perplexities and perturbations as he needed no
more to let him know her constancy, and to ^make her not as straw which smoakes
Affliction hurts some and ^rofits others, as in the same fire. Auruin rutilat,
et palea fumat, et sub eadem tribula stipulae ^o^min^untur, frumenta purgantur.
We must not consider that which is endured, but he that indures, and after what
manner Tantum interest non qualia sed qualis quisque patiatur. Nam pari modo
exagitatum exhalat horibiliter C^num et s^a^iter Fragrat vnguentum. Aug.
but as a precious metal which shines and is purified in the fire. They were
so extreme as if in the beginning they had let him see the least part, or the
choice of a cruel death, with what a resolution would he have embraced this,
to avoid the miseries of the other? The most violent torments which a body can
suffer are but light scratchings in respect of the burning wounds of the hearts
grief. His Conscience gave him deep ones, for they write that he had offended
not only the Kings Majesty by this third revolt, but also that of the living
God by a notable villainy, Incest of the Earl of Armagnac.
marrying with his own Sister under a false dispensation. They say that
Ambrose of Ca^bray Feferendarie to Pope Calixtus the fourth gave this
dispensation for money, for the which he was accused and imprisoned in the
Monastery of Mont Oliuet.
A conjunction as abominable now by religion, as it was in former times to be
desired by the reason of necessity. We read in the 17. Book of the City of
God an excelent passage upon these incestuous marriages. Commixtio* sororu^ et
fratrem quanto sit antiquior compellente necessitate, tant^ postea facta est
damnabilior religione prohibente.


Presently after the death of King Lewis the eleventh Charles of Armagnac his
brother besought King Charles the eight to restore him to the lands and estats
of the house of Armagnac, and to be admitted to answer the accusations laid
against his brother showing that by the severity of King Lewis the eleventh and
by the great credit which his enemi^s had, Memory of the Earl of Armagnac
restored.
he could never obtain a safe conduct to come and justify himself. King
Charles by the advice of the Princes, Prelates and other Noblemen of the Realm
granted it, the third of April 1483. and he was restored to the possessions
of the house of Armagnac. After whose death many pretended the succession. The
Pretendants were Catherine of Alencon Countess of Laual. Charles D. of
Alencon, Charlotte of Armagnac, wife to Charles of Rohan. Alain of Albret. The
Cardinals of Luxembourg. Louise of Lion wise to Charles bastard of Bour ^on
Seneshall of Thoulouza. Francis Philebert of Seissell.
Afterward the Court of Parliament by a decree of the seventh of September
1510. The Court of Parliament declared the goods of John of Armagnac forfeited
to the King, and the seventh of Sept. 1470. Forty years after on the same day
they receive his heirs to purge his crime, and to rasie his memory.
received them to justify the Earls memory.

Charles Duke of Alencon, whose Grandfather had married the Earl of Armagnac's
Sister, drew his iustificacion from the same reasons by which he was accused.
They said he had received Letters from the King of England, and that John Bon
had brought them unto the King, with the answer. His innocence therein was
very apparent, for if he had received his letters and would have made any
answer he would not have given them back unto the bearer. They were cunning
practices, said the Duke of Alencon, of such as have governed Lewis the
eleventh to tempt the fidelity of the Earl of Armagnac and to have a share in
his spoil. That if John Bon had been a true messenger to the King of England,
as he made show to be, he had not carried the Letters unto the king.

That the Earl of Armagnac was naturally an enemy to the English, Earl of
Armagnac a great enemy to the English.
and being at Font arabic, he carried himself in such sort toward them, as
men wondered how he could be banished for favoring them. He that will justify
himself must live in such sort among them where he is exiled as his
Innocence may be apparent, and his return more easy. There have been
banished men, who for the Integrity of their lives have been more happy among
strangers then in their own houses.
He would not suffer his servants to confer or converse with the English
which did traffic in that Contrie: and it hapened one day as the young men of
Bayonne were come to dance before the Countess of Armagnac, his wife, an
English man having a red cross upon his breast slipped into the hall, with the
people who are accustomed to follow dances. The Earl who held the meeting of
an English man with a red Cross for as bad a presage, as the ancients did a
Moore with a crown of Cypres, The ancient Superstition held it a bad presage
to meet with a M^ore, as Plutarque notes in Brutus. The Emperor Seuerus meeting
a Moore carrying a Crown of Cypres on his head. Iratus ab occulis remoueri
precepit et coloris eius tactus emine, et Corona.
commanded his Gentlemen, namely Carbon and petty Santignem to drive him out,
and as they ran after him with their naked daggers, Mauleon his Stuard stepped
betwixt them, saying that they were in a strange country, and that the
Townes-men might rise against such an act, which the Earl of Armagnac seeing,
he took his Stuards staff and chased the English man out of his lodging,
making him to leap down the stayres.

That being parted from Fontarabie, to go unto the Duke of Guienne, by chance
he found an English man at the Sea side, whom he caused to be taken and carried
him prisoner to Lestore, only for that he was an Englishman.

King Francis the first, King Francis quit his pretensions to the Contie of
Armagnac.
Marguerite of Orleans or of valois the only sister to King Francis 1. was
first married to Charles D. of Alencon, and next to Henry the second of that
name, the 26. King of Navarre.
the first year of his reign, by his letters pattents given at Compeigne in
February 1514. resigned unto the Duke of Alencon and to the Lady Margaret his
wife and their children, all his interest, upon certain conditions, the which
happening, it fell to the house of Albret.

John Duke of Alencon was so wonderfully grieved at the miserable fortune of
the Earl of Armagnac, as all his affections grew cold to the Kings service,
and carrying always from that time this ulcer in his breast he sought the Duke
of Bourgondies protection. All which did but hasten his misery and the loss
of his liberty.

We must end this discourse with these words, that the reputation of the
services of the Lords of the house of Armagnac done to France against the
English, freed him from all suspicion of intelligence with them, being most
certain that they were never no good English men, they have always resisted
them, they have spent their lives and goods to expel them out of the realm,
and had detested them, having slain their Predecessors cruelly and inhumainly.
Bernard E. of Armagnac Constable of France for maintayning the quarrel of the
Crown, was slain at Paris, and flead. He served the King so courragiously as
all good Frenchmen were called Armagnacs.
But such was the misery of the Age as they must aduow that which was believed
more by conjecture then by assistance. He that is held of all men to be wicked,
is forced to do wickedly.

All waters return into the sea from whence they flow. This goodly Province of
Armagnac consisting in the lands which are called the Counties of Armagnac and
Falensac, base Armagnac, Perdiac, Biran and Baran in the Viconties of Lomagne,
Auuillar, Fesensaguet and Brouliois. In the Siegneuries of Lectoure, Auzan, the
base river whereas Castellnau stands, and Malbourquet, Aure, Magnoac, Barrouce
and Nestes is wholly come to the crown of Navarre, under the reign of Henry
of Albret King of Navarre, Earl of Foix and Armagnac.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF of the sixth BOOK.
1 THe Duke of Bourgondies discontent for the death of the Duke of Guienne. 2
Cruelties committed at Nesle in Vermandois. 3 Memorable Seege of Beauuais. 4
Spoil done by the Duke of Bourgondies Army in Normandy. 5 The King draws the
Duke of Britain from all intelligence with the Duke of Bourgondy. 6 Ambitious
desseines of the Duke of Bourgondy, for the which he goes to the Emperor
Frederic to Treues. 7 Assembly at Bouuines, and the Resolution taken against
the Constable. 8 The King and Constable parle upon a causey, having a bar
betwixt them. 9 New desseignes of the Duke of Bourgondy in Germany. 10 The King
stirs up the Arch Duke of Austria, the Suisses, and some Towns in Germany
against the Duke. 11 Peter of Hagembach, the Duke of Bourgondies Lieftenant,
beheaded at Brissac. 12 Army of the Duke of Bourgondies in the County of
Ferrette, and upon the fronter of the County of Bourgondy. 13 Places taken and
burnt by the Kings troops upon the fronter of Picardy and in Artois. 14
Embassage sent by the King unto the Emperor Frederic, who makes answer by an
Apology. 15 Continuation of the Siege of Nuze: the Constables policy. 16
Edward King of England passes into France, and sends Letters of defiance unto
the King. 17 Wisdom of the King to avoid this storm 18 The Duke of Burgondy
leaves the siege of Nuze. 19 The Constable fails of his promis made to the
King of England and the Duke of Burgundy. 20 Ouerture of a peace betwixt the
two Kings, and conferences of their deputies. 21 The King labors to make the
Duke of Burgundy understand the Constabels double dealing. 22 Truce for nine
years betwixt the two kings, wherewith the Duke of Burgundy is discontented,
and the words he had upon that subject with the King of England. 23 Good
cheer made to the English at Amiens. 24 Enteruiew of the two Kings upon the
Bridge of Pyquigny to swear the peace. 25 Words which escaped the King upon
the treaty of the peace.
THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
IF the death of the Duke of Guienne had not put this exception into the Kings
mouth, Matters are changed, his word which was The simple word of a Prince
binds him as much as oaths do priua^ persons. Alfo^so Panormi in his life.
as much as all the oaths of his religion, bound him to restore Amiens and St
Quentin to the Duke of Bourgundy. The Duke, who was then in Ar^ues to recover
them, seeing that the King had changed his mind, resolved to loose all, or to
have all.

He wrote unto the Towns to rise against him, and speaks more unworthily of
him, Death of the Duke of Guien^e breaks the Treaty.
then Artaban K* of Persia did of Tiberius, Suetonius writes that Artaban
railed of Tyberius by his letters reproaching him with his mu^thers, Parricides
cowardice and veluptuous^esse, Parricidia, caedes ignauiam and Luxuriam.
he exclaimes of him as a Tyrant over his subjects, a Murderer of his brother,
and perjured of his promises, and in this fury he begins to make war by fire,
which he had never done. A kind of hostility unknown to Christians, and to
those generous Nations which carry not their sword to kill, but in fighting, To
spoil the vanqu^shed, to put them tora^some* and to wast their countries is
the justice of war, but this was never allow^d after a victory, when as an
enemy yields. It is a wicked thing says Plato in his commonweal, to burn,
spoil and make one an others country wholly desolate, it suffices to carry
away their annual frui^s.
and who hold that the fewer they kill the more there remain to honor their
triumph.

He besieged Nesle in Vermandois, Cruelties committed at the taking of Nesle.
into the which the King had put a Captain called Petty Picard with three
hundred Archers of the Isle of France, who defended the Bourguignons assaults
valiantly, but being pressed by necessity, he accepted of a composition for
himself and his men, to depart with their lives and Arms. But the treachery
was strange being followed by an excess of brutish cruelty. As soon as the
besieged were disarmed, the Bourgundians ^lue them. Every man thought that the
Church should have been a Sanctuary unto him, every man ran thither, and the
soldiers made such a slaughter, as the blood ran in all places. The Captain
and his companions were hanged.

The Duke was no less pleased with the blood then the sack of the Town.
Entering into the Church he spoke these words more fitting for a Busiris, then
for a Christian Prince, and of the blood of the most Christian Kings. In the
Chronicle of Lewis the eleventh these words are read upon the desolation of
Nesle. On Friday the 12. of June 1472. the Duke of Bourgundy entered the church
on horseback, the which was half a foot deep with the blood of poor
Creatures which lay naked and dead there: And when as the said Bourguignon saw
them in this manner, he began to smile and said that he saw a goodly sight, and
that he had with him many good butchers.
Behold this is goodly, I have good Butchers. Inhumane words of the D. of
Bourgundy.
The grief for the death of Monsieur, and for the loss of S. Quentin,
transported him to these outrages, which then were noted by the Cassandras of
those times, to be the chief cause which provoked Gods Justice to cut off the
course of his days in revenge of innocent blood. A cruel prince continues not
long. The Emperor Anastasius the fourth, was so, and had no religion. In the
end an old man with a sower countenance appeared unto him in his d^eame, and
said unto him, for thy impieties I cut off fourteen years of thy (...), and he
dyed instantly. Paul Diacre. Lib. 15


As this Princes heart was inflamed with choler, so his cruelties continued,
for having caused Nesle to be razed, he presented himself before Roy, which
yielded without defense. Louiset of Balagny, Mouy and Rubempre, who had about
two hundred Lances, went forth with the loss of all that was within it. The
victors gained by this booty above an hundred thousand crowns. From thence
he thought to surprise Beauuais; the measure of the ladders were as ill taken
as his designs. Choler carrying him to rashness, when as the iud^e^ent is
darkened with Ch^ller, Crue^ty makes it to take strange resolutions.
Valentinean was cruel because he was choleric, As soon as any word was
spoken crosly unto him, Choler transported ^im beyond the bounds of reason and
was the cause of his death, all his inward parts were found dried up and burnt.
and that unto indiscretion having failed in his first design, he desired,
says Phil. de Commines, to take it by assault and burn it. He caused them to
discharge two pieces of Ordinance, which made a great hole in the gate, whereas
the besieged defended themselves courageously, and in the end set fire of it,
Siege of Beaunais.
which troubled the assailants, so as they could not stop the approches toward
Paris. An error which ruined their design. An error which a General of an
army should foresee, and which had undone Caesar before Alexia, Caesar won
great reputation at the siege of Alexia, where he did besiege and was besieged.
There were a hundred and seventy thousand men within the Town, and three
hundred thousand without, yet he kept them from joining, and forced the Town
to yield. Plut.
if he had not prevented it. An error which was the preservation of Beauuais,
and did show the injustice of the enterprise, and that there is in heaven an
all-seeing eye, which blinds malice. Innocence were in a hard case, if
wickedness were always accompanied with wisdom, she has more fury and
rage, then conduct and resolution to hurt.

These approches remaining free, Succors sent by the K. to Beauuais.
the besieged were relieved with victuals and munition from Paris and Orleans,
Orleans relea^ed Bea^^ais with a hundred pipes of wine. Paris with Pioners,
Canons, Poulder, Bows and Arrows.
and with good numbers of foot and horse. The chief honor of these succors is
due unto the memory of the Earl of Dammartin, and to the Marshals Ioachim and
Laheac, who being followed by many other Captains were no sooner entered, but
hearing the assault, left their horses with women which kept them, and went
directly to the walls to repulse the enemies and their assault, the which
continued from seven of the clock until eleven before noone, on Thursday the
9. of July 1472. in the which the Duke of Bourgundy lost fifteen or sixteen
hundred men.

The next day The History names them that were at this succors, the Earl of
Dammartin, the Marshals Ioachim, and Loheac, William of Vallee, Crusol,
Rubempre, Estout^uille, T^rey, Bueill, Salezard, Vignoles and Croy.
Captain Salezard performed a generous Act: Occasion, Brave exploits of
Captain Salezard.
We must always watch for occasions and embrace them, Vespasian did often use
the words which Pittacus had taught him, (...) Know the time, they said at
Rome, I came in time. As we must not under take any thing before an occasion,
so we may not let it pass.
without the which it is folly to undertake, and also folly to let it slip
gave him the means. The loss of so many men in this assault, the expectation
and fear of worse had struck a great amazement into the assaylants army. He
made a sally at the break of day, surpriseth the enemy in his Camp, fires
it, kills all he incounters, wins two Bombards wherewith the Town had been
battered, two Serpentines, one great Canon of Brass, which they called one of
the twelve Peers, which the King had lost at the Battle of Montlehery.

Although that in these occasions many have no more share in the pain and
peril, An unprofitable presence ought to have no share in the glory of a
painful action.
then the fly has in the labor of the Ox, or the running of the horse, yet
all say we have pursued, we have vanquished, and every man ascribes unto
himself the best part of the glory. The men which were at the siege of
Beauuais could not deny it unto women, Courage of the women at Beau^ais.
for they presented themselves valiantly, and more then manlike upon the
walls, casting wildfire stones and scalding oil and water upon the enemies.
There was to be seen in the Iacobins Church of Beauuais an ensign which a
woman called Ioane Foucquet wrested out of an Ensigne-bearers hands who had
gotten to the top of the wall. This did show that virtue makes no distinction
In Platoes Commonweal, women are called to politic and military charges.
Antistenes did not distinguish masculine from seminine virtues
of sex, and that there are women to be found, which may teach men to live
and die.

The Duke of Brittanie had promised the Duke to come before Rouen If the Duke
of Guienne had not dyed, says Phil. de Com. I believe the K. would have bin
much troubled, for the Brittons were ready, and had greater intelligence within
the Realm then ever, all which failed by reason of this death.
to help him to besiege it. Spoil done to the Duke of Burgundies Army.
The Duke of Bourgundy went, but he appeared not, for Monsieurs death had made
all his desires subject to the yoke of fear and reason, so as he was contented
to burn all that quarter of Normandy, even unto the gates of Diepe.

The same furies of war which the Duke had caused to be seen in Normandy
were heard upon the frontier of Champagne, whereas the Earl of Roussy, the
Constables son, led them. The Earl Dauphin of Auuergne did the like in
Bourgundy, and in all places the victory was not famous but by the lamentable
estate wherein the vanquished were left.

The King had affairs That victory is famous which does subdue an enemy, and
not make him perpetually miserable. The Consul Popelius stripped the Ligurians
of their goods, and sold them as slaves, having vanquished them. The (...)
found this Act to be cruel and revoked all that had been done, concluding
Claram victoriam vincendo non saeuiendo in afflictos fieri. Tit. Liu.
in diverse places: when as he turned head against the Duke of Bourgundy, he was
sure to have the Duke of Brittanie at his heels, and having separated them
with a design to pacify the one and content the other, he sees them united
again to make war against him. The Duke of Brittanies Ambassadors came unto
the King being at Pont de See, and brought words and offers of affection and
service on the Dukes behalf, who feared that the King would make some sudden
invasion, The D. of Britain demands a peace.
having an army of fifty thousand men ready to fall upon his country.

The King with all his forces A Prince should never do all that be may against
his enemies.
would not do what he might do against these gyant-like enterprises,
reserving his thunderbolts to an other season. The more slowly Princes take
Arms, the more difficult it is to draw them out of armies; he resolved to
vanquish without fighting, and considering that the Lord of Lescun was the
first link of the chain of the Duke of Brittanies Council, that all the
judgment, conduct and experience in Brittanie did lie in the person of this
Nobleman, Phil. de Com. speaking of the Lord of Lescun says, that there was
neither judgment nor virtue in Brittanie, but what proceeded from him.
who after the death of the Duke of Guienne his master had retired himself to
the Duke of Brittanie; a good and a loyal French man, who never would consent
that the places of Normandy should be given unto the English, he thought
that if he could draw him to his service, the accord which he should make with
the Duke of Brittanie would be more firm, and withdrawing him from the Duke of
Bourgundies alliance he should make him so weak as all his forces would not
suffice for his defense. The King draws the D. of Brittanie from the Duke of
Bourgundies alliance
There When as the Prince has won him that is in most credit and authority
with him with whom he treats he does work his affairs safely and with
advantage.
is nothing so easy as to bring one whether necessity drives him. The Lord of
Lescun being won gives the Duke his master to understand that there is no other
safety for his affairs but the Kings protection. The accord was made so as the
Duke might have eight thousand pounds starling. The Lord of Lescun had a
pension of six hundred pounds starling, four thousand crowns in ready money,
the Order of S. Michel, the Earldom of Cominges, half the government of
Guienne, the Seneshallships of Vennes and Bourdelois. The Captainship of one of
the Castells of Bourdeaux K. Charles the seventh having taken Bourdeaux again,
he caused two Castles to be built. Castle Trumpet toward the Sea, and that of
Du Han toward the firm land.
which King Charles the seventh had caused to be built, and those of Bayonne
and St. Seuert. Essars and Souppleinuille, instruments of this negotiation,
were also rewarded, Phil. des Essars a Gentleman of the house of Brittany had
4000. Crowns given and six score pounds star^ing for yearly pension, with the
Baillewike of Meaux, and was made Master of the Rivers and Forests of France.
Souppleinuille who did belong to the Lord of Lescun, had six thousand crowns
in gift, a pension, and offices fit for his quality.
the Kings bounty could not suffer any service to pass without recompense.
Truce annual betwixt the King and the Duke of Bourgundy.


The affairs of Brittany being compounded, the King went into Picardie. It was
his and the Duke of Bourgundies custom every year to make a truce for six
months, in the beginning of Winter: during the which there were many voiages
and conferences to quench the causes of war, which they held to be shut in
the Constables thoughts, who began to stand in fear of the Duke and to keep
aloof from the King. Philip de Commines says that the Chancellor of Bourgundy
came to make it, but as it was the first year of his coming to Court, he was
not very curious to understand the truth, the which is drawn out of the
Articles that were published and signed by the Earl of S. Paul Constable of
France, and by Philip of Croy deputed for the King, and Guy of Brunen Lord of
Imbercourt, and Anthony Rollin Lord of Emery for the Duke of Bourgundy. The
Deputies promised to cause this Truce to be ratified by the first of December,
it ended the first of April following, betwixt which they should meet at
Amiens This assembly was appointed in Amiens the first of December 1472. to
treat a peace and the restitution of St Valery which the D. of Bourgundy
demanded.
to treat a Peace.

The Constable following the intention of the King his Master, and that which
had been treated with the Lord of Lescun, would not have the Duke of Brittany
comprehended in the Truce among the Allies of Bourgundy. The Deputies showed
that the Duke of Brittany their Ally did rely upon them To forget Allies in
Treati^s and Accords is an injury against the law of friendship. Vnde maiores
cum qui socium fe^ellisles in virorum bonorum numero non puta^^erunt haberi
oportere. Cic. our Elders did not hold him worthy to be put in the number of
good men that deceived his companion.
that they could not forget them in the number of their friends; that he had not
disclaimed their friendship; that they held him yet for their Allie, and that
he had often abandoned them by Letters and words, and yet had been firm to
them in effect. That youth did inflame his blood, but reason did still reclaim
him. That the Duke did then name him among his Allies, leaving it to his choice
by the first of February whether he would be comprehended among the Kings
Allies or the Dukes. There was no remedy. The King would have fifteen days to
name his Allies, and eight days after to add such as he should forget.

The Duke of Bourgundy, Ambitions designs of the Duke of Bourgundy.
who would spend the time of Truce in great imaginations, which filled his head
with fumes, and his heart with perpetual flames, propounded to allye himself
unto the Emperor. He desired to extend the bounds of his Empire from one Sea
unto the other, his spirit went still on and never looked back. It is an error
in Princes that they seldom or never look behind the^. They consult upon the
passage, but never upon the return. Leopold Archduke of Austria talking how
he should pass an Army of twenty thousand men into the Can^on of Su^its.
Kune of Stock his i^ster said unto him: I will not follow thee thou talkest
how thou shall enter, but thou never dreamest how thou shall come forth.
Leopold was defeated a^ Morgarten. Munster. The like was said unto K. Francis
the first by Amaril, upon his proposition to pass the Alps.
He held himself King already of one part of Gaul, he devoured all Germany
in Imagination: God had given him great Provinces which he thought deserved a
more stately Title then of Duke of Earl: for the obtaining whereof he made a
voyage to Treues to the Emperor Frederi^, having made a very sumptuous
preparation for the solemnity of that public declaration of King of
Gaule-Belgicke.

He came thither about St Michell in the year 1473. the Emperor went to meet
him, D. of Bourgundy goes to the Emperor to (...).
conducted him into the Town, and offered him his lodging. The Duke was
contented to return and lodge in a Monastery without the Town. To have that
which he pretended he offered unto the Emperor the marriage of his Daughter with
the Archduke Maximilian his son, who succeeded him in the Empire. It was an
Act of wisdom in the Duke A Prince should always provide that his successor
be not uncertain Ne successor in^erto ^it. This certainty preuents, practices
and partialities.
, to provide for the succession of his Estates, seeing that he had but one
daughter, but it was vanity to buy the Title of a King so dearly. The crown,
the Scepter and other royal ornaments were made, there was no let but in the
Emperor why the Duke did not use them, but having demanded unpleasing
conditions, their enteruiew brake off, and neither Royalty nor marriage
succeeded.

The Emperor not to delay him and abuse him, refused him the Crown suddenly,
Although* they hold sudden refusals to be the best, and that he which denies
speedily abuses least, yet when he that is refused mighty and may be
revenged, they must win time wherewith all things are accommodated.
departed secretly from Treues, and embarked upon the Rhin without giving him
any answer, The Emperor mockes at the dukes demand.
not thinking himself bound to bid him farewell that was come without his
priuitie. The Duke was left alone with his mouth open to the air of his hopes,
swearing by S. George that Frederic should repent it, and that he would have by
force that which he refused him upon his entreaty and merit. They continued a
month together, the public discourses were of the means to make war against
the Turk, the private past about this Royalty. Thus they parted both as much
discontented, as they seemed pleased at their meeting. Cranzius who writes this
enterview has these words. Tandem minori alacritate digresti quam congressi
sunt visi, In the end they parted with lesser joy then they came to gether.


The Duke of Bourgondy visited the Lands that were engaged unto him, The Duke
passes by the County of Ferette.
where his soldiers entreated the poor Peasants so cruelly, as from that time
every man studied how to return to his first master: The Duke was no sooner
gone out of Brisac, but the soldiers spoiled the town, committing a thousand
insolences and bu^nt the Augustins Monastery.
Colmar refused to open her gates. He past his Christmas at Brisac and there
ended the year 1473. In the beginning of the next he returned to Montbelliard,
from thence to Besancon and then to Dijon.

The ministers of both Princes foreseeing that whilst the Constable lived Peace
would be uncertain, 1474.
and that one and the self same Sun would see it spring up and dye, they
make religious remonstrances and full of Conscience unto their masters, and
dispose them to a good reconciliation, for the which by their consents there
was a conference appointed at Bouuines, Assembly at Bouines.
This Conserence of Deputies for the K. and Duke of Bourgondy at Bouines, in
the year 1474. was sought by Imbercourt to revenge the injury which the
Constable had done him at Roy.
near unto Namur. The King sent the Lord of Curton, Governor of Limosin, and
John Heberge Bishop of Eureux. For the Duke of Bourgondy came William Hugonet
his Chancellor and the Lord of Imbercourt.

The first proposition was to make away the Constable who was much aflicted for
the Duke of Guiennes death, it was the swarm which gave him both honey and
wax. A great authority cannot maintain it self in a season when it is not
respected: that of the Constable could not continue but in war: war was his
element, it entertained his Estats, and made him to be respected both of the
King and the D. of Bourgondy.
They held him to be a spirit of discord from whence came all Inventions to
make peace of no continuance and war everlasting, Resolution taken to do
justice of the Constable.
and to maintain his authority in Confusion. They said that he was like unto
the bay tree in the haven of Amicus which they called mad, for that one branch
of it being put into a ship, all that were in it fell to iarres and division.
whereupon they resolved that who so could first seize on him, should put him
to death within eight days after his taking, or deliver him to the other
party, to dispose of him at his pleasure.

The best resolutions vanish away as soon as they are discovered: The
Constable had an inkling of this proposition, Great affairs should be managed
with secrecy and judgment. The resolution taken at (...) against the Constable
was not secret, he was advertised, and by this means anoided the storm which
threat^ed him, but this was but to defer an inevitable mischefe.
and assembled all the tricks and devises of his brain to break off this
assembly: he advertised the King how the Duke had sought him, The Conble
creepes into the Kings favor
to draw him to his party, and of his great attempts to shake his loyalty, and
with what constancy and generosity he had rejected his offers, having no
desire to affect any greatness more assured nor any assurance more happy then
the service of his King, without the which there is not any thing in the world,
that deserved his love or remembrance; beseeching him. Not to believe the
passions It is necessary to have a sound and perfect Judgment to discern with
what intention aduertisments are given, which concern the loyalty of a man of
credit, for oftentimes they are the practices of Enemies to make them
frustrate. When a Prince is jealous of his good servants, he remains at the
discretion of others Zenon used this policy against Phalaris.
of the Deputies of Bounines, who set his head to sale to make a cruel
sacrifice thereof to the Duke of Bo^rgondies re^enge, and to satisfy his
discontent for that he could not draw him alive unto his service, nor persuade
him to so base a treason against his Prince.

The King believed him the more easily, for that he knew well that the Deputies
of Bouines were the Constables enemies in particular, and desired to find their
revenge in his disgrace, with the two Princes.

The private A man that has power and authority, and aspirces to more cannot
endure to be ^rost or contradicted. Crastus being in an assembly which was
held ^or the dividing of the gouernme^ts of Provinces, seeing himself
gainsayed by another, be flrooke him on the face with his first, and sent him
away all bloody. Plut.
hatred grew for that the Constable in an assembly held at Roy had given the
lie unto the Lord of Himbercourt. A lie given ^ the Lord ^ Himbercourt.
A man of authority and great dignity will not be contradicted, all the reins
of patience break, but truth is so precious an ornament unto thersoule, as
when it is disroabed thereof it is no more known. A liar is like unto a
counterfeit piece, no man will take it: and when as the tongue has once
learned to lie and to gainsay her Conscience, it is hard to reclaim her. Every
lie, especially in a gentleman, deserves degradation of Arms for a Month, or
bannishment from Court and algood company for certain days. Alfonso K. of
Castile son to King Ferdinand being at Burgos in the year 1368. made an
order of Knighthood which he called the order of the hand, where among other
statutes there were three remarkable. That the knight should be always true,
and that he that should tell a lie, should go a month without a sword. That a
Knight should always have good arms in his^ Chamber good horses in his
stable, a good la^ce at his gate, and a good sword at his girdle, upon pain to
loose th^e name of a Knight: That who so had eaten any stinking things, as
Garlic and Onyons should absent himself a month from the Court, and not sit
at the Knight tables.


Whereupon the King who considered what force this injury might have with
Himbercourt, dispatched a Gentleman presently with commandment not to probeed
in any resolutions which concerned the Constable, The Constable gets a sa^e
conduct to come unto the King.
whom he commanded to come unto him and gave him all assurances which he
demanded, he so much desied to draw him from the Precipice whether his
Ambition led him.

The King came near unto St. Quentin, spending the time in hunting about
Noion, Compeigne and la Fere, to busy himself during his expectation of the
Constable, who knowing the humor of this Prince to be full of revenge and
disdain, and that contrary to the nature of Caesar he never forgot injury,
he did capitulate for his safety of going and returning with conditions too
hardy for a subject. His health was in humility, and he sought it in pride, It
is a great error in a Prince to entreat a subject like unto a Sovereign
Prince. By enteruiewes of such inequality, there cannot grow any thing but
contempt of the greater and undoubted danger for the inferior
which made his precedent faults to be more apparent, and the least to be
reputed great.

They were forced to make a bar upon a Causey three leagues from Noyon, He
comes unto the K. upon a Cauley.
toward la Fere upon a river where the Constable had caused the Foards to be
rais^d. This bar did assure that which was on his side, for the King had
twice as many men as he, not daring to limit the number of those that should
follow his majesty.

He came first unto the Causey, and the King sent Phillip de Commi^es to make
his excuse for that he made him attend. The King came presently after and found
the Constable armed with his Cuirasse under a loose Cassock, and followed by
300. Gentlemen. An act of a distrustful spirit and a guilty Conscience. Bodies
which are easy to purge are also to cure, but when the humor resists the
Physic, the cure is very difficult. The Constable was sick of a burning
Fever of Ambition, the humor which entertained it was pride, instead of purging
it, he nourished it withal that might augment it, presenting himself before
his Prince, as before his companion.
A vassal should never In certain Nations barbarously wise, no man how great
soever presents himself before the King but in a tat^ered roabe which couers
his good garments, to the end that all the po^pe should remain in the King.
show himself with too much pomp or too great a train before his Prince. They
are well advised who do therein rather follow the way of the ancient simplicity,
then the new policy and vain ostentation which the flattery of the late-come
has so much commended. But in the most perfect judgments we see great
imperfections. To stand always firm and never trippe, is an admirable and
divine thing.

The King observed the Constables bravery, yet made no show of it, The King
dissembles the Constables pride and insolency.
and for that he held dissimulation the chief of all royal virtues, he did
not forbear to commend his wisdom and government, desiring that he should
believe the contrary to that which his heart thought. It is a means to reclaim
a spirit which has strayed from his loyalty and du^y, not to seem to doubt of
either of them, a servant has been of^times made faithful in thinking him to
be so.
Five or six Noblemen and Gentlemen which were at this Parle, grew amazed at
his arrogance, which in the end would ruin him that did rely upon it, would
overthrow this Colosse, and break it in as many pieces as it had designs.

It was a very sensible discontent unto the King It is a Coros^ue to a great
Prince to see a treacherous subject treat and capitulate with him, like unto
enemies. Tiberius could not endure it in Tacfarinates although he had great
advantages in Affrike demanding certain Towns of safety and retreat: he held
himself contemned and the Senate of Rome wronged (says ^acitus) to see that a
trecher and a thief treated with him like a just enemy. Quod deserto et Predo
hostium more ageret.
to see that a subject who had left him, treated with him like unto a just
enemy. As he advanced on his side of the bar, the Constable did the like to
meet him, and doing his duty to his majesty he began to make his excuse, for
that the just apprehension of his enemies bad designs, The Constable excused
himself for that he came armed.
who were about his majesty, and not able to charge him with any crime, charged
him with envy, had forced him to come in that equipage, and to seek a place of
safety and an assured train, least their bad intents should be more powerful
then his majesty's wisdom and bounty: That he knew many built their hopes upon
his grave, and the succession of the office of Constable Many times great men
have no greater enemies then their great offices and dignities. Those that
effect them handie to their ruin My house of Albe (said a condemned Citizen)
is the cause of my miseries.
A quality which he desired not to hold but for his majesty's service, and to
make it known that it could not be conferred upon an honester man: That in
all things which did concern the service of so great a Prince, and of so good
a King, his affections should be without bounds

The King received him graciously, entreated him as his equal, and seemed not
to come with the majesty of a King. The King received him graciously.
He past Majesty must always accompany a Prince, and if he will abate any
thing it must not be in public. The Emperor Adrian was grieved when they took
from him the content to lay aside Majesty and be familiar with his servants.
Dyon.
the bar for a greater proof of his confidence, and said unto him: That he
was welcome, that he would not have him return without all the assurances that
he could desire of his love: That he would forget all that was past, and
respect him as the man whom he did esteem most, and held most profitable for
his Realm, that whatsoever he should do for him would be less then his merit
and desire. These words which seemed to come from the heart and from the purest
of the Kings thoughts, bewitched the Constables senses, so as he could not
consider that Princes do cover their disdain with false and deceitful
imbracings.

The Constable seeing that he had past so many sands and shelfes without
shipwreck, was nothing the more humble, not caring to oppose his modesty
Courtesy appeaseth hatred, modesty Envy, Virtue Contempt, and wisdom
teaches to march straight betwixt ennie and contempt.
to the envy of some, nor his discretion to the contempt of others. He past the
bar on the Kings side, followed him to Noion, and renewes the promises of
fidelity which he had made to abandon all Intelligences and practices which he
had with his enemies, and gave a promise in writing unto the King. They were
the seals whereof they spoke in those times, and are so often seen in the
History of Alliances and Treaties of Peace. This being done he returned to St.
Quentin* being amazed in himself how the King had so cunningly dissembled The
dissembling of apparent faults and which cannot be disguised is dangerous for a
Prince, for he whose fault be d^ssebles grows more distrustful and fears
that it is to take revenge at a more convenient time which fear makes him
resolve to prevent it, Valens having discovered some soldiers faults did not
punish the^, yet he accused them least that dissembling should make them
resolve to do worse. Et ne dissimulans suspect^or foret.
so bold an affront.

The King sad that with patience and letting him alone he would effect his
will. When as resolution and custom encounter with power and authority, there
is nothing impossible. Moreover a great courage masters all, things go from
one extreme unto another, that which is raised up falls, the hard is
mollified, the obseure, profound and secret is discovered, we must only win
time which does daily produce changes contrary to men's immaginations, yet the
Kings servants murmured that he had endured the contempt of a Vassal. That a
subject, said they, should be so rash, as to demand assurance to come unto his
Prince. The Suisses Caesar would not rest satisfied with the Suisses promises
without bestages. Diuico one of their Co^manders answered for them that they
had learned of their elders always to receive hostages and not to give, and
that the people of Rome would know what to say. Caes. lib. 1.
were grieved (although ruined and in disorder) to give it unto Caesar, saying,
that they had been accustomed to receive and not to give. What Insolency and
presumption after that he had obtained assurance to choose out a place of
advantage upon a Causey, guarded with soldiars, presented himself armed unto
his master, and at need three hundred Gentlemen against him, who had no means
but by the fees In France the fees are notable signs of the Princes sovereign
power: they were in former times but for life. Hugh Capet made them hereditary,
upon condition that they should serve in the war.
which they held, and are not entertained among his men at Arms, but with his
money? That a King should endure a bar betwixt him and his Vassal to talk
together, you will not believe it, you that shall live after us, and endure the
pain of such an indiscretion. A great Prince, who dares not refuse his subject
any thing, is faint hearted. To give all that is demanded is the act of a man
that is not of himself but depends of another. Mucho pide el loco, mas loco es
elque lo da. A feale demands much, but he is more fool that gives it.
It is an act of a free courage to refuse something of a great Prince, to know
what should be demanded or denied, and above all not to grant that lightly
which being once given cannot be recalled, nor taken away. O Constable, thou
have done, thou have done so bold an act, as thou should be careful it
should not be known that thou had once presumed to think it.

The King dessembled all, and although he would willingly have forgotten it,
yet he tried how difficult a thing it is not to remember an offense. He could
not loose that which he could not keep, and always his memory was full of the
portraits of the Causey and Bar, The King still remembers the Causey and
bar.
but he would give the sinner time to repent. As soon as a subject of quality
stra^es from his love and duty, they must seek to reclaim him but first by
mildnes before rigor. It is good to take time to be advised. The second
thoughts correct the first. They (...) Cecinna for too great heat in the
punishing of offenses giving them no time to repent. Proximam quamque culpam
antequam penteret vltum ibat. Tacit. Lib. 17. The first offense was punish^d
before they could repent.
The event does judge of his Counsel, for by the mildnes of his words, and his
good usage of the Constable, he kept him from a leap which he was ready to
make unto the Duke of Burgundies discretion.

Yet the King did study of this insolency. The Constable desiring rather to
err in advancing himself too much, then too little, We may faite equally in
esteeming a thing too much or not enough.
showed his contentment. Modesty requires that the great contentmens which are
r^ceiued by the (...) good countenance, should not be showed by the excess of
joy and insolency: the pleasure of the m^^d which is invisible, should
participate of her nature and not be seen.
The King kept his discontent secret, and bridled his choler, upon this
consideration; that a revenge deferred may be executed: and being once executed
it cannot be recalled. He keept his design to be revenged very secret under
shows of great love; yet resolved not to dye before he had trodden the
Constables pride under his feet, and that he had made him stoop, and eat the
ground, and his fingers to remember himself of his duty, and that he must not
play with his prince, no not with his picture. Any thing that concerns the
Prince, is sacred, it is a crime to touch it without respect. It was a Capital
off^nce to sit near unto Augustus statue, and to have carried his im^ge into
any place that was not hon^rable. (...) says. Haec quoque Capitalia eran;
circa Augusti simulachrum seruum sedisse vestem mutasse, nummo vel anulo
effigiem impressa^ latrinae a^^lupanari intulisse


The Constable on the other side grew more insolent and glorious, his servants
said that their master was safe, that in this action the King had showed that
he feared him, that the storm from which side soever it came, would still pass
over his head and never hurt him; that his merits would shield him from all the
practices of his enemies that no man durst attempt against his person, and in a
word, that they could not be without him. They did not consider that they
never sped which striued to go before all men and would not follow any. The
torment of an ambiti^ious man is double, he fea^es to come after others and
desirs to go before all. Seneca speaks eloquently. Ambitus tumida res est vana,
ventosa, nu^lum ha bet termimum: Tam solicita est ne quem ante se videat, quam
ne se post alium. Sen. Epist. 4. Ambition is a swelling thing, vain and windy,
it has no hounds. It is as careful not to see any o^e before it, as not to
see it self after any.


At that time there was a truce betwixt the King and the Duke of Burgundy, New
designs of the Duke of Bourgondy
the King had no thoughts but to unite the wills and affection of his subjects
to his service, and to punish the obstinate. The Duke of Burgundy, who had set
noe other limits to his ambition, but the point of his sword, was in
Guelderland, a Province which Arnold Duke of Guelders, to punish the vanaturall
ingratitue of Adolph his Son, a prisoner at Gand, with a just exheredation,
had given to the Duke at his death.

These designs did rise one upon another, like mountains of billows which
break of themselves, they were infinite, and the execution of one was the
beginning of another, his spirit A spirit which is every where is no where. To
end one design (...) must not begi^ many. There is a diff^rence betwixt doing
many enterprises and many things.
wandering every where, was never settled in any place, he desired that which he
had not so vehemently, and did hope for it so impatiently, as he did not care
for that which he had gotten, he played always and did not know the fortune
of the game, yet could he not retire himself.

He had a goodly Army at that time, of his own subjects and strangers
English, and Italians: Presumption, which does always corrupt the Judgment,
darken reason, blind the understanding, and stir up will against judgment,
made him When as Ambition has placed the seat of his Empire in the ^antasie of
a Prince who has youth, forces and courage, it makes him resolve upon all
sort; of designs, and will not suffer him to have any bounds (...) measured
hopes.
imagine that there was not any greatness in the world that could be comparable
to his. He resolved not to see any thing betwixt Bourgundy and Holland but
under his power, he promised all this unto himself in taking the Countries of
Colleyn and Lorraine. He held the County of Ferrete by morgage from Sigismond
Arch Duke of Austria. The Princes of Germany, who had not said any thing,
whilst that this Prince was busy with his forces along the River of Meuze,
could not now be silent to see him in this design to pass the Rhin. When as
the forces of a great Prince stir extraordinarily, then less estates unite
themselves closely together. The increase of a warlike Princes estates makes
other Princes jealous. To exceed the bounds of his Empire is an alarm to his
neighbors. Augustus advised Tiberius to rest^aine the Roman Empire within
certain limits: whilst that the Duke of Bourgondy made war in France the
other Princes stood at a gaze, but when b^e discovered his design to extend
farth^r, they sought to hinder him.


The Duke besieged Nuz, and colored his design with the pretentions of the
Archbishop of Colleyn against the Landgraue of Hesses Son, but there was noe
other title but that which ambition carried on the point of his sword, he had
noe other design but to block up Colleyn and to mount up the Rhin as far as
Basil.

Many advised the King to hinder the increase of this Princes greatness: 1474.
the Counsels ^auored of their humors that gave them, Counsels ^auour of the
passions of Counselors. It is discerned in the dis^ases of an Estate as well
as in th^se of the body. Tullius Marcellinus being sick of an ineu^ able
disease, called his friends together to determine of his death. Vnusquisque
aut q^ia timidus erat id illi suadebat vt ^ibi suasisset, aut qui^ adulator et
blandus id confilium dabat, quod deliberanti gratius fore su^picabatur, Sen.
Epi. 77. Every man either for that he feared persuaded him that which he
himself would have embraced or being a flatterer be gave that Council which he
thought would be most pleasing unto the party.
the fearful told what they would have done in the like occasions,
flatterers did fit their opinions to his taste. They which marched more
sincerely; and whose wisdom and experience had refined their Judgments, told
the King that he should wish there were more ambition An ambitious enemy must
have more work made him then he can compass. ^ Max me whereof Lewis the
eleventh made good use, against Charles D. of Bourgundy.
in the Duke then he had, having no better means to be revenged of him then to
suffer him to proceed in the trial of his design against Germany, for it was
a Rock on the which his designs would break; that he should find opposition
there, that having taken one place he would attempt an other, and would never
be satisfied with one enterprise, that the more he should be engaged the
further he would engage himself. In a word he would see himself reduced to
these tearmas. To embrace too much and to hold little.

The King, who knowing well that the Dukes profoundest ears and cogitations
were to draw the English into France, The Duke of Bourgon die draws (...)
english into France
sought unto him for a prolongation of the Truce. Either of them sought to
circumuent his companion, To deceive an enemy with hopes, and propositions of
an accord and Truce is hold wisdom, but the Romans could not allow of any
profit which it brought them. Veteres, says Tit Li^. nouam istam sapientiam
improbaba^r, nec astu magis, quam vera virtute bella gessisse ma^^res etc. The
ancient did not allow of this new wisdom, neither did our elders make war
more by craft then by virtue.
their talk was of Truce, but their thoughts tended to war. The Duke pressed
by the English to come into France to join his forces with theirs, said, that
he could not yield unto it, excusing himself upon his word given unto the
English.

Upon this refusal the King prouides him work of all sides; He puts Rhene
Duke of Lorraine in mind of the injury the Duke haddone him in holding him
prisoner. The King stirs up enemies against the Duke of Bourgondy
Rene incensed with this remembrance, sent a Herald presently to defy him. In
like manner the King persuaded the Archduke Sigismond to redeem Ferrete and
the Towns of Basil, Strausborug, Colmar and others interessed in the Duks
designs, to furnish the money, to free the Country from so troublesome a
Prince, The King was well served (...) this negotiation by one called Julius of
Silligny a Suisse borne, he was Bishop of Lion and afterward of Grenoble.
and themselves from so terrible a neighbor. By this means the Duke was
stripped of the Provinces engaged, and disappointed of the conqest of Germany,
whereof his people had already made a Map. When as Princes make a design to
conquer a Conquer a Contry, they which desire the execution talk of it
continually, and represent it in pourtrait. The Atheniens did nothing but talk
of the Conquest of Sicile, when as the voyage of Niceas being resolved he did
draw out upon the ground the form of the Island, numbered the ports and the
means it gave to attempt upon affrike. Plu. in the life of Niceas.
At the same time that this remboursment was appointed and the money consigned,
the Archduke Sigismond caused Peter Hagembach the Duks Lieutenant General in
all the Countries engaged to be taken prisoner. His Process was made by seven
and twenty Judges, two of each Town Strausbourg, Basil, Schletstart, Colmar,
Kentzingem, Freibourg, Neuuembourg, Soleurre, Berne, eight of Brissac, and the
President of Ensisheim. Their proceedings in Justice was speedy, the fourth of
May they committed him to prison, and put him to the rack, on the ninth, they
brought him before his Judges, and gave him an Advocate. Death of Peter of
Hagembach Governor of Ferette.
Thy accused him of many violences, insolences, and concussions, and having noe
means to justify himself, they condemned him to lose his head. There was noe
help, he must undergo it. He carried for his device three Dice, with this Motto
Iepasse. Peter of Hagembach lost his head at Brisach the 9. of May 1474. by
torch-light. His Laqueis and servants carried his device of three dice, with
this motto Iepasse. At that time this distique was published. Omnis spes
fallax, sed fallacissima ludi Hagembach Ich pass, spes stulta fuit,


He past indeed the most cruel in excess and cruelty, His crimes and
injustice.
his cruelty to men, and his impiety to God, brought him to this scafold to be
a mornfull president of the wretched end of an vnrestrayned, unjust, and
unsupportable power, and that to command people long and safely it is better
to desire to be loved then feared, After that Philip King of Macedonie had
vanquished the Cities of Greece, they councelled him to put in good Garrisons
to assure his Conquest. I had rather, said he, be called gentle for a long
time, then Lord for a short.
to be good then mighty.

Lewis made all the instruments of these counsels to work, he was the
master-whele of these great motions, and thought so to distract the Duke of
Bourgundies mind into diverse parts, as he would forget the designs which he
had in France, and that he should be at rest whilst his enemy was in troble.
The death The greatest policy of State is that which the most pollitick
Roman Emperor did practice. Pacem in Vrbe, bellum pocull habere. to have
peace in the City and war a far off.
of Hagembach did much offend the Duke, he commanded his servants which were
in Bourgundy to over run the Country of Ferrete.

Upon this commandment the Marshall of Bourgundy of the house of Neufchastel,
Army of the Duke of Bourgondy in the County of Ferette.
one of the four Ancients of Bourgundy, They have given the honor of
antiquity, nobility, valor and greatness to four houses of Bourgundy, Vicune,
Chal^n, Neufchastel and V^rgy.
came about Montbeliard to have the place yielded unto him, and towld the
Governor that if he did not yield it, he would bring the life of the Prince of
Wirtemberg into danger, whom the Duke had caused to be taken near unto
Luxembourg. Henry of Wirtemberg taken prisoner in the war in his youth by
Charles Duke of Bourgondy in the year 1474. Eberhard his uncle held his
prisoner in the year 1499. Munster says it was for madness. He dyed in the
year 1519. and was father to George Earl of Wirtemberg.
He answered that this Prince was not justly taken prisoner in any good war,
that he had Brethren interessed in the guard of the place, and to whom he was
bound to keep it. A brave answer. He that commands a place should not leave
it, but like an honest man. The blood of his children spilt before his face
should not move him. In the year 1292. Schane Castille brother to Sancho King
of Castille, beseeging Tariffe, sent word to Alfonso, father to G^^ man,
Governor of the place, that if he yielded i^ not he would put his only son
whom he held prisoner to death: Alfonso answered. I will not fail of my duty
for a hundred Children, and if thouthen be so greedy of the blood of mine,
here take my sword and use it. Soon after being at diner with his wife he
heard a great noise, and supposing it to be the enemy, he went directly to the
wall: where they told him that they had seen his son slain: I had thought
said he that the enemy had bin entered the town, and so returned without any
sign of trouble in amasement. An admirable constancy.


They of Basil being advertised that the Duke of Bourgundy practiced
Montheliard to be assured of the passage, sent men thither. The Marshall of
Bourgundie gave the Contie of Ferrete in prey to his army. Laague made against
the the Duke of Bourgundy.
The Suisses being assembled at Lucerne, could not suffer their neighbors to
be so ill entreated. They declare war against the Duke of Bourgundy and send
him the Pattents which they call friends brief, Letters of enemies. The
Marshall of Bourgundy made answer thereunto, and felt the blows as soon as
the threats.

The first of November the troops of the Cantons and other Towns their
confederates against the Duke of Bourgundy, came to Basil which furnished them
with Canon and Munition, Hericourt taken by the League.
and then they marched directly to besiege Hericourt, a Town belonging to the
Marshall of Bourgundy, who presented himself with 10000. men to raise the
siege, but he was repulst with the loss of above two thousand, Stephen of
Hagembach, brother to him that was beheaded, yielded the place upon composition
to have his life saved. Many were carried prisoners to Basil, and burnt alive,
by judgment of the Magistrate for crimes which cannot be too severely
punished. There is noe wickedness that is new, but has some president. In
former times we have heard speak of all the the disorders and villainies which
are now committed by soldiars. The Chronicle of Basil says, that these men
were burnt for Sodomy, forcing of women, and for that they had profancd
Churches, and trodden the holy Sacrament under foot burnt, murdered and sowed
up women's privy parts.


In those times they made noe war in winter, the soldiers retired to their
garrisons, It began again in April the next year very furiously, and the
King was forced to enter into it. The Germans and Swisses complained that he
stood gazing on them that fought: Kings army in the Duke of Bourgundies contry.
every one labored to ruin the house of Bourgundy, whose greatness made all
men envy, and whose dissipation promised proffit to many. A mighty Prince that
is envied of many maintains him self hardly, and that state which is least
envied is most durable.
The Emperor Frederick put men and victuals into Nuz, and presents himself
with all the forces of Germany to make the Duke dislodge. The King makes war
against him in Picardy, Bourgoundy and Artois. The Duke of Lorraine sends him a
defy. The Swisses beseege Pontarlier upon the river of Doux, they take
Blammont, Orb brings them the Keys, and in two months they become Masters of
nine towns or Castells. The Bourgoundians burnt, 40. villages about Pourrentru
and Montbeliard and spoiled all the Mountain.

All this amazed him not, the more enemies the more Triumph. The greatness of
his desseignes made all difficulties small. They could not represent unto him
so many inconveniences, but he did hope for more profit by this German
war. Places taken by the kings troops in Picardy.
The King took the Castle of Tronquoy by assault: Mondider and Roye yielded
by composition. Corbie endured 3. days battery. Those two towns were burnt,
contrary to that which Phillip de Commines had propromised them in the Kings
name, making the capitulation. It was not his intent to have this war
continue long, but to force the Duke of Bourgundy to prolong the truce, and to
content himself with two or three enemies which he had without the Realm. It
was not that which the Kings friends desired, for they were discontented to see
him a newter, whilst that he encouraged them to fight, and this newtrality did
not diminish the number of enemies, nor of friends. Although that neutrality
does not bind friends nor ruin enemies, neque amicos parat, neque inimicos
tollit, yet when a Prince has means to be as he may be (...) he exceeds
either in greatness and dignity, ^r in force and power the^ that conte^d, he
has always the honor to be arbitrator and judge. But for petty Princes
neutrality is dangerous. They must either be the strongest or with the
strongest.
On the other side the Duke of Bourgondy feeling the secret blows which the
King gave him, desired rather to have him an open enemy. He was also so full of
revenge and indignation against the King, who had gathered together all the
clouds, and wyndes to raise this storm against him, as he would rather have
troubled Hell, then not to let him know the fury of his passion. His
resolutions were so strange as they did not promise him other safty then
danger. Danger in the continuance of the seege of Nuz: danger in a new war
against the Swisses, and danger to serve himself with the succors of England,
which he attended impatiently.

The King commanded the Bastard of Bourbon, Bastard of Bourbon makes w^^ in
Artois.
Admiral of France, to carry a burning besome into the countries of Artois and
Ponthieu, upon the advice which a Lady gave him, Philip de Comines says that
they gave credit to this woe man, for she was woman of state, but he commends
not her deed, for that, says he, she was not bound unto it. She received
great losses in this war, which the King repaired,
the which she repented: for she was singed in the flames of that fire which
she her self had kindled. At the taking of Arras James of Luxembourg, the
Counstables brother, with the Lords of Contay and Caroucy were taken prisoners.

The King sent John Tiercelin, Embassage sent by the King to the Emperer
Frederick.
Lord of la Brosse unto the Emperor Frederick, to advise of the progress of
his forces against the Duke, and to inuit him to do the like for his part,
that they might divide his spoils betwixt them; the Emperor taking for his
part the Provinces which depended of the Empire, and the King those which did
hold of his Crown.

This Ambassador, more faithful to him that sent him, then pleasing to him to
whom he was sent, reapt noe great fruits of his Legation. An apology for an
answer.
The Emperors answer was by this Apology. Three huntsmen going to take a Bear
which did anoy the country, had drunk freely upon credit in a Tavern upon an
opinion of profit which they should make in selling the skin, and their Host
increased their reckning, Example is a very good means to persuade, and may be
framed not only of things done, but of those that are sayned, as fables be
which delight and instruct Stesiarus used the^ in discoursing to the Imeriens,
Esope to the Samiens, and Menenius Agrippa to the Romans.
coming near the cave where they thought to surpize him, the Bear came out
unto them, and so terrefied them, as one got into a tree, another fled toward
the town, and the third not so good a footeman, fell flat on the ground as if
he had been dead, for he had heard say that this beast pardons dead folks, as
the Lion does them that humble themselves. The Bear put his mussell to his
nose and ear, to judge if he were dead, and thinking him to be so, for that he
held his breath, he left him. He that was in the tree and had observed all,
asked his companion what the Bear had said in his ear, he told me said he,
that we must never make bargin for the Bears skin until he be dead. Whereby
he would let this Doctor understand that they must first take the Duke, and
then talk of dividing his spoil, and that there is noe wisdom which holds
firm when they must resolve upon that which is to come. It is folly to
deliberate upon things not yet hapened; he that aims so far off never hits the
white, we may well foresee diverse accidents, but the variety is so great, as
two or three may happen so little foreseen, as they may change all other
resolutions.


The Duke continued the seege before Nuz, meditating furious reuenges against
them that had so ill entreated his subjects. That great exployt of Arras where
he had lost his chief commanders, did much afflict him, and the mischief had
bin greater if the Constable had not moderated it with an apparent falling from
his duty and loyalty to his King, who had commanded him that when as the
Bastard of Bourbon should enter into Artois, he should beseege Auennes in
Hainault. He spent two or three days in that seege very carelessly without
watch or guard. If there were courage and resolution in his troops, Caesar said
that he desired modesty and obedience as much in a soldiar, as prowess and
courrage. Caesar. lib.
there was little order and obedience. He retired to Saint Quintin,
Intelligence of the Constable with the Duke of Bourgondy.
fearing to loose that retreat, he excused himself upon an enterprise which
he said he had discovered, I heard his man my self by the Kings commandment,
who told so many apparent signs as he was in a manner believed and that one
of the^ was suspected to have said some thing unto the Constable which he should
have concealed. Phil. de Com. lib. 4. cap. 4.
of two soldiers who bragged that they had been commanded and seed to kill him.

He remained at Saint Quentin contynuing the traffic of his faith with the
two Princes. He sent the Duke word that he was very sorry the King made his
profit of his absence, and he did advertise the King that the Dukes affairs
were in good estate, thinking he should find noe other safety then in the
fears and alarumes which he gave them. But when as he saw that this Lion
Adversity humbles great men and makes them mild, as a quarte^ ague, breaks the
fury of a Lion.
notwithstanding any fever or shaking that he had, grew nothing more myld, he
thought that there was noe means for his safety, but to keep a loose, and
that his last refuge was to rely upon his first master, to whom he had
offered entry into S. Quintin, thinking that his Brother James of Luxembourg
would go thither with some troops, and not carry Saint Andrews cross.

He made these bargains when as fear pressed him, and that he knew not whom
to trust to divert the Kings desseignes, but when as the Danger was past he
would noe more hear speak of his promises, and keept both ware and silver. He
abused the Duke of Bourgundy thrice with such fictions, his brother being taken
prisoner at Arras descouered it so freely unto the King, as it was a means to
moderate the rigorous usage A gracious and kind usage maks the misery of a
prison more easy and supportable. Plut. in the life of Niceas
which a prisoner of that condition might have. He was willing to shroud
himself under the Duke of Bourgondies protection, but he did foresee the
storm would be so great as the leaves of the tree would drown him that should
creep under it. He did apprehend nothing so much as the Kings quiet, and peace
of the realm. He gave advise unto the Duke to draw in the English to his
succor and to revenge his Injuries, and upon this advise the English were
solicited very earnestly to pass the sea.

Edward King of England who was in his soundest years, Edward K. of England
passes into France. 1475
active and vigorous for a great design, lays hold of this occasion, in the
which he did hope to recover the rights which his Predecessors had purchased
for him upon the crown of France. He was soon persuaded to pass the sea,
thinking he should have no more pain to conquer a part of France, then he had
to reduce all England under his obedience. The remembrance of the succors
which King Lewis the eleventh had given unto his enemy, added to the old
quarrels which have made deluges of blood in this Realm, would not suffer him
to pause and consider of the Justice or injustice Traian said they should never
enter into an unjust war. He alone of all the Roman Emperors never lost
Battle.
of his enterprise. False Assurances given by the Duke a Constable.
The Duke of Bourgundy assured him to join with his forces, the Constable did
represent unto him the Kings weakness and wants, offering him. S. Quentin to
refresh him. Behold a great Army at Dover ready to pass. It did consist of
fiueteene hundred men at Arms, fifteen thousand Archers on horseback and a
great number of foot, all good and resolute soldiers having once continued
any time on this side the sea. English very ready to pass into France.
It was in his own will to make it greater, There are none more simple nor
unhandsome then the English when they pass first, but in a short time they are
very good soldiers, wise and hardy. Phil. de Com. l. 4. c. 5.
for there is not any enterprise in England that is seconded with more vows
and voices, then that which is made against France. All the world runs unto
it, their purses are not tied but with leaves of Leekes, for the King cannot
exact any thing of his subjects but with the common consent of his Parliament,
unless it be when he makes war in France. True it is that having employed
some part of the money, levied for this war, about the affairs of his house,
and finding himself scanted, he invented a mild course to have money, calling
together the richest of the Realm, and representing unto them the greatness of
his design, with the glory and profit which the realm might hope for,
coniuring them to assist him with their means, and that in this occasion he
should know them that loved him, although that he should be but a dispenser or
Stuard A Prince is but a receiver and distributer of the public money, and
they that give it regard more the public necessity then the Princes private
commodities Aristotle calls, him (...). Custodem dispensatorem vt communium
non vt propriorum Polit. lib. 1. cap. 11. A keeper or distributor of that which
is common not proper.
of that which they should give, and he called this Tribute a Benevolence: some
for shame, others for vanity, and some through zeal filled his Coffers.

The Duke of Bourgundy sent ships out of Holland and Zeland to pass the Army.
It made a number of forty or fifty thousand men, and threatened to do double
effects. The Constable gave the King to understand that this Army of strangers
should land in Normandy, and his advertisement seemed the more credible, for
that the King knew that the Duke of Brittanie had conspired with the King of
Englands designs.

Hereupon there arrived a Herald who brought Letters of defiance from the King
of England, Letters of defiance from the King of England.
Letters full of bravery and boldness, and puffed up with the Duke of Bourgundies
passion, and the style He brought unto the King a Letter of defiance from the
K. of England in a gallat style which I think was not done by any English man.
He required the King to restore him the realm of France which did belong unto
him, to the end he might restore the Church, the Nobility and the people to
their ancient liberty, and ease them of their troubles and charges, and in case
of refusal he protested of the miseries which should follow after the manner
and form accustomed is like cases. CHRONIC.
of some bad Frenchman. He demanded the Realm of France as his ancient
inheritance, he declared his Arms to be just to recover it, and to set the
French at liberty, and to deliver them from the oppressions which they endured.

The Letter being read the King drew the Messenger apart, and spoke unto him
alone with words of such Emphesie as he left an opinion in him that the King
of Englands enterprise, having no support but the weakness of the Duke of
Bourgundy, the dissembling Constable, and the passion of some English, would
not find any great credit in France, and so he sent him back with a present of
three hundred Crowns and thirty else of Crimson Velvet, so full of good will
as he promised not to return but to offer him a peace. The Chronicle says
that the King sent unto King Edward the goodliest Courser he had in his stable,
And after that an Ass, a Woolfe and a wild Bear, all signs of affection and
of other thoughts then war and hatred, for it is as great a testimony of
friendship to receive a present as to give. He that gives, offers friendship,
and he that receives it accepts and binds himself to love. Wherefore among all
the pride of the Romans they have noted this; to disdain* the presents which
came not from friends. Pharnax sent a Crown of gold to Caesar, who sent him
word that he should first do that which he was commanded, and then send him
presents which Roman Emperors after the happy success of their enterprises
were accustomed to receive from their friends.


This great Prince, desiring rather to save a Citizen then to kill an hundred
enemies, was resolved not to hazard any thing but money, preferring the price
of an assured Peace before a doubtful victory, and notwithstanding that his
Army was great and mighty, being in number above an hundred thousand men, yet
would he show himself a Hercules The Priests of Hercules Temples in Sicile
told the Syracusans that they should be victors if they did not affai^e first,
but did only defend themselves, for that Hercules had prevailed in all his
Enterprises defending himself when they come to assail him. Plut.
rather in defending then assailing. He knew the body was not well purged from
those vicious humors: Considerations of the K. to have a Peace.
that there were yet great winds to raise tempests and Earthquakes, that
France was not without it, like unto Egypt.

This descent of the English had three great passions to move it: Ambition;
Revenge and fear. The King of England commanded in his Army, and Ambition
commanded the King of Englands heart, who promised unto himself the conquest
of the whole Realm. The Duke of Bourgundy rejoiced to see the English revenge
his quarrel, as they had before a wrong done unto his Grandfather. The
Constable thought that he could not otherwise appease the growing fear, which
presented unto him an infallible loss both of life and fortune, but in
kindling these troubles.

The King found himself much troubled to avoid this storm, Wisdom of the
King to avoid the storm.
he must needs content these three passions. He had many servants of whose
fidelity he did not doubt, It is a great advantage for a Prince against the
coffeehouse of great men, to have the hearts and affections of his subjects
firm. He may well assure himself against few enemies, but against a general
what safety. Quello che ha per nemici pochi facilmente senza and ^olti scandali
si as^icura: ma chi ha per nemico universal, non si assicura may. Guicciard.
lib. 11. Cap. 16. He that has few for enemies, may ea^sly and without any
great scandal recover himself, but he that has a generality for (...) can
never be secnred.
there was no rebellion discovered within any towns, yet there were many great
men which promised unto themselves that the English would take revenge of their
discontents. He feared that S. Quentin would be a prey to his enemies. He was
no less troubled to keep the Constable from failing, then to seek means to
punish his fault. He sent to have him come unto him, The King sends for the
Constable.
to join their Councels together; and to prepare for a just defense against
his enemies, promising to give him the recompense which he demanded from the
County of Guise.

The Constable let the King understand that he desired nothing more then to be
near his Majesty, to yield him the duty of his service, and to make new
vows of fidelity and obedience unto him, so as it would please him to swear
upon the cross of St Laud that he would not do, He will have the K. swear
for his safety.
not suffer any harm to be done unto him. Constantine would not go to the
Court of Michel Paphlagon Emperor of Constantinople before he had made him
swear his safety upon the wood of the true Cross, upon the Image of our
Savior, and upon the letter which he had written. Angarus. Cedren. Ann. Pa.
607.


It is in the City of Angiers where the people hold this old belief, that
whosoever swear upon this cross and forswear themselves, die miserably
before the end of the year. The King sent the Constable word that he had
sworn never to take that oath to any man living, and that there was not any
other but he would willingly take, although he should rely upon his word.
Princes will be trusted of their word. It is a great rashness in a subject to
make his Prince swear, and every oath as Plutarke says, is like a torture
given to a free man.


This refusal did sufficiently discover the Kings intent, and the Constable,
knowing that he had once made no difficulty to take the same oath for the
Lord of Lescun, thought that there was no other safety for him then not to come
near the King, and not to see him but by his picture.

In the mean time the English army past the sea, and landed with so great
difficulties as they spent three weeks there, and if it had incountred any
let, with that speed and diligence that the affairs Caesar being arrived in
England, having cast another admonished his Lieutenants and Colonels to
d^ligence, for sea causes, being very sudden and mutable, they must be
executed in an instant and in the turning of an eye.
of the sea, which is sudden and mutable, requires, it had been dispersed of it
self. One ship alone of Eu took two or three English.

But the King understood not sea-matters, and they that had charge of his
armies less then himself. The French have never done any great exploits by
sea, although that their coast be greater then that of their neighbors, and
that it is hard for a Prince that is not strong at Sea, To be strong at sea is
much more available the ^t land for the getting and keeping of a great estate.
The realm of Portugal is grown mighty by Navigations. The Commonweal of
Genou^ had extended her limits far, is civil diss^ntions had not stayed
their designs by Sea.
ever to ecrease or maintain his Empire. If France had took delight at sea
she had made the Flower-de-Luce to flourish far off, The French have
contemned Navigations.
but this contempt of nauall expeditions has clipped her wings with the which
she should have flowne so high as all the world had been amazed. They did
believe in those days that who so was valiant at Land could not be so at Sea.
A very prejudicial error, for a Captain that has been accustomed to fight
with the winds, sea and men, will sooner become a Captain at Land, where they
fight only with men, then a land souldior will become a good Seaman.

When as the King of England was landed at Calice, The D. of Bourgundy is pressed
by the English.
and found not the Duke of Bourgundy, he held it for a scorn, and even then he
discovered his weakness, and sent him word that if he did not advance he would
force him to think of that which he did not desire.

Behold this Prince reduced betwixt two extremes, all the wisdom of man could
not show him a mean. He found it dishonorable to dislodge from before Nuz, and
he found it dangerous not to join with the English. God had stricken him with
an amazement for the good of France, for if he had attended the English at
their passage, and not undertaken the voyage of Germany, those two Armies
joined together had been able to do that which divided was impossible. When as
the King of England pressed him to come with speed, the Emperor offered him
battle to make him raise his seege from before Nuz. At the same time when as
both Armies were in view, and that Albert Duke of Saxony, who carried the
Standard of the Empire, and Albert Marquis of Brandebourg pressed the Emperor to
command a chargr, the Trumpets whom they attended to give the sign sounded the
publication of a peace, He is forced to raise the siege of Nuz.
the last day of May. The secret Article carried this condition, that the Duke
should give his Daughter to Maximilian and declare her heir of al his Estates,
if he dyed without any son. Munster says that the Emperor for the desire he
had of this marriage did not all the harm he could unto the Duke, and that he
gave him ten thousand florins. The Duke said that he did not retire but to obey
the admonition which the Pope gave him by his Legate, to whom the place was
delivered, to color his dislodging with some show, the which was the more
troublesome unto the Duke, It is a disgrace to dislodg after a long
continuance, which alone should force Towns. But he gave the Duke this
contentment that his enemies were not comprehended in this Treaty. A
conditionibus Pacis exclusi sunt Lud. Franc. Rex, Sigismundus Exarch. Austriae.
Out of the conditions of peace were excluded Lewis the French King. Sigismond
Archduke of Austria, Rene Duke of Lorraine and the Suisses.
for that he knew the town was reduced to extremities, having neither
patience, not bread, for above ten days, having endured a whole year all the
attempts of the assailant, and all necessities which do afflict and make
desperate Towns which are sharply besieged.

He came posting with a small train to Calice, He comes to Calice to the King
of England
being loath to let the King of England see into what estate his wilfulnes at
this siege had brought his Army. The Duke of Burgundies army had been
weakened at the siege of Nuz with the loss of four thousand men, the
remainders did ouerrunne the countries of Lorraine and Bar whilst with a small
train he went to K. Edward to Calice.
The Constable, who had presented a planke to pass the English into France,
now draws it back. He had promised that as soon as the Armies were joined he
would open the gates of S. Quentin, and he shootes at them that approach by the
Dukes commandment. And yet to give a goodly name to a deformed thing It is a
great pity said Cato ((...) his opinion against Catelyue) that we are come
unto those times where they do attribute the name of wicked things to good.
Salust. in Catel.
he seeks to make him believe by Lewis of Creuille whom he sent unto him
expressly, that he had showed reason and discretion in the failing of his
word, that if he had received his men without some kind of resistance he
should make himself unprofitable for his service, loose the credit which he
had with the French, and the opinion and esteem which the King made of his
fidelity: The Constable assures the Duke of his service.
That nothing could change his affection, whereof he would give him such
infallible proofs against all men, and without any exception, beseeching the
Duke that the Letter which he sent him might serve for an assurance of the same
intention to the King of England. These words vowed and sworn with vehemency,
held the spirits of these two Princes in balance notwithstanding that they
doubted the contrary. There is nothing difficult to believe when it is
affirmed constantly and boldly sworn by any one, although he were held a
deceiuer. The efficacy of an oath if it do not beget credit in the mind, at the
least it breeds a suspension and doubt of the contrary. Guiceiardin says in
his first book. ^o non credo pu^ quasi ^ssere qu^llo che multo e^^icacimentes
afferma non faccia (...) negli animi de terminati a credere ill contrary. I do
scarce believe it can be, but that which is (...) with great efficacy will
breed some doubt and ambiguity even in those minds that were resolved to
bele^ue the contrary.


Charles assured Edward that if they did advance St. Quentin was theirs. They
that presented themselves first with an opinion to enter, The Constable fails
of his promise to the K. of England and Duke of Bourgundy
were forced to return their backs with speed and retire to the Army which
followed. The King of England cried out of treason, and even then resolved to
be mindful of revenge. A failing in (...) and faith is (...) forgotten, and
the remembrance has always for assessors Choler, and Revenge. Darius for
that he would not forget the wrong which the (...) done him, had always a Page
(...) ^^uld him in his care when he sale down to meat. Sir remember the
Athenians.


The Duke of Bourgundy gave excuses and said, that the Constable had a good
intent, and that the place deserved some ceremonies, that he would not purchase
that reproach to have yielded at the first sight of the enemy, and that he knew
his humor not to attempt any thing, but when he may do it safely, profitably,
and honorably.

He thought otherwise in his heart, and Edward knowing well that the Constable
deceived them, The K of England repents that he believed
did not conceal it that the duke had done him wrong to imbarke him upon his
assurances. The Duke take his leave, under a pretext to go fetch his forces,
and retired into Brabant to pass at Mezieres into the Duchy of Bar. The King
of England did not like of the reason of his sudden departure, knowing well
that the Dukes affairs were in no good estate, and might impair. The English
were amazed and discouraged, as they are commonly which ground their
enterprises upon the promises and passions of strangers. They that have needs
of foreign succors promise wonders to engage them, and do not commonly
perform half their promises.
Their wills wauered betwixt hope and repentance. For all the Towns whereof
they promised themselves the conquest, and which they had sometimes held, they
had only Perronne, and that was but by way of passage to refresh them. The
season was incommodious. The Duke of Brittanie remained quiet to see the game,
and who should win. He had incensed the King too much, who had new drawn, from
a Secretary of England, two Letters written by Vrse, The Duke of Brittanie
promised to loyne his forces with those of England, and to receive 3000.
English. This design was discovered by two letters written by Vrse, who then
served the D. of Brittany.
the one unto the King of England, and the other to Hastings his Lord
Chamberlain, which discover his practices, and the promise which he had made
to join with the English.

All these reasons make Edward incline to a peace, he has some about him would
gladly have re-past the sea: His chief servants were not very eager of war,
and remembering the entertainment at S. Quentin, they found that the English
were too blame to trust in the French against the French, and to believe that
Ravens will pick out one another eyes. The Ceremony was, who should speak
first, there was not any one betwixt these two Princes that would attempt this
mediation, they thought that he which should first demand a Peace had confessed
himself vanquished. There is a great disparitie betwixt the affair of Princes
and private men, their rules and Maxims are very different, like to the Kings
of Thrace, whose Gods which they serve are not the Gods of the common people.
The dissemblance of the affairs of great men sh^wes it self in many respects
and ceremonies which are not considered among private persons. The King of
Thrace is distinguished from his su^iects by the difference of the s^ruice of
his Gods, he has his apart which his subjects are not suffered to worship.


Haward and Stanley, Occasion which caused an ouerture of a Peace.
who were nearest about the King of England, offered an occasion to break this
Ice: They had taken a Groom of the Kings Army, who was sent back without
ransom, as the first prisoner of the English. Being at liberty and ready to
depart, Haward and Stanley said unto him. Recommend us to the good grace of the
King your Master, if you may speak unto him. He failed not, and the King
remembering what Garter had said unto him, found that his velvet had wrought.
These salutations drove him into a great perplexity. Whatsoever comes from an
enemy is to be suspect. He caused the messenger to be put in Irons, fearing
that he was a spy; he is sounded into, and curiously examined by his most
confident servants: he himself speaks unto him, and finds him constant
without varying. This perturbation of mind held him until the next day with
the which he sat down pensive to his meat. Posture of Lewis the eleventh,
when he was pensive.
When as he was in his deepest cogitations, the mind did so neglect the
actions of the body and left them in such disorder, as no man would have taken
him for a wise man. Phil. de Co^. represents in these worlds the grace of K.
Lewis, when he had any fantasy in his head, As soon as he was set at the
table and had studied a little as you know he did in such sort as it was very
strange to them that did not know him, for without knowledge of him they would
have held him unwise, but his deeds witness the contrary.


After that he had been a while pensive, he told Philip de Commines that he
should take away the table, and went to dine in his chamber, causing the
servant of the Siegneur of Halles to come unto him, of whom he demanded if he
would go into the King of Englands Army in the habit of a Herald. He had
bethought himself of this man to whom he had never spoke but once, and
notwithstanding that Phil. de Commines told him that in his opinion he had
neither stature nor grace, yet would he not any other. Judgment of the King
to distinguish spirits
He had made choice of him as of a man of good understanding, and who had, as
the History says, a sweet and pleasing voice. He considered that if the
charge he gave him did not succeed, he should quit in disauowing him, and make
it known that he was but in a disguised habit like unto Comediens. They
demanded of Polistratidas Ambassador of Sparta if he came in the behalf of the
commonweal, or of himself, he answered eloquently. (...).
If you grant me that which I demand, said Polistratidas, I will cause my self
to be aduowed, if not, I let you understand, that I have no charge.

He would not accept this charge for any thing that Philip de Comines could say
or promise him, he fell upon his Knees as if he had been condemned to die.
When as the King thought this man was in a good humor, he sent the master of
his horse for the banner of a trumpet, to make him a coat of Arms, for the K.
was not curious, nor accompanied with Heralds and Trumpets as many princes be.
Phil.: de Com. l. 4. c. 7.
The King came and spoke with him, and won him at the first word, A Herald
sent to the King of England.
promising him money, and the office of an Esleu in the I Will of Rez. He must be
attired, and there was some trouble to make him a coat of arms, and more to
send him away secretly and not to seen, but most of all to instruct him in
that which he should say. His coat of arms was in a bouget behind his saddle,
having commandment not to put it on until he did enter into the English
army. Philip de Comines observes in this place the little care and curiosity
the King had of the marks of the greatness of the Majesty of Kings, when he
says that there was not a coat of arms to be found in all his camp, and
that they were forced to make one of the banner of a trompet to attyer this
Herald. Souueraigne powers were never without them. Princes have always had
marks of greatness and majesty. The Senate ordained four and twenty Sargents to
march before Augustus. Before that the Roman Emperors had fire and a diadem
for marks of majesty, they had maces and rods environed with boys. Excubiae
arms cetera Anlae, says Tacit, watching Arms and the rest of the Court.


Being come into the army, he was conducted to the king of Englands tent: they
demanded of him what he was, whence he came, and what he would. His coat of
arms made answer to the first demand, and for the rest he said, that he had
commandment to speak unto the King, and to address himself to Haward and
Stanley. The King of England was then at diner, in the mean time they made the
Herald good cheer, and then presented him unto the King to deliver his charge.
Instructed by the Signeur of Argenton.
We must stand to that which he has written that did instruct him, and who
has reported it after this manner.

That the K. had long desired to be in friendship with him; and that the two
realms might live in peace: and that never since he was King of France, The
Heralds speech to the King of England
he had not made war, nor attempted any thing against the King nor the Realm
of England, excusing himself These Prepositions seem nothing generous, they
argue fear and ere unworthy of a great Prince, who should let his enemies know
that he did not demand nor accord any thing by force. But Phil. de Com.
excuses the K. and says, that: If God had not disposed the King to choose so
wise a party, the Realm had been in great danger. Then he adds. We had then
many secret matters among us whence had sprung great inconveniences unto the
Realm and that suddenly if the accord had not been soon made, as well from
Britain as other places. And I verily believe by matters which I have seen
in my time that God had and has a special care of this Realm.
for that he had formerly entertained the Earl of Warwick, and said that it
was only against the Duke of Bourgundy and not against him. He also let him
understand that the said Duke of Bourgundy had not called him, but to make a
better accord with the King, upon the occasion of his coming, and if there
were any other that had a hand in it, it was but to repair their errors,
tending to their private ends: and touching the King of Englands interest they
cared not what became thereof, so as they might make their own good. He also
laid before him the time and winter which approached, and that he knew well he
was at great charge, and that there were many in England both of the Nobility
and Merchants which desired to have war in France. And if the King of England
should do his endeavor to harken to a treaty, that the said king would do
the like, so as he and his realm should remain content: And to the end he
might be better informed of these things, He demands a pasport for a
Conference.
if he would give a pasport for an hundred horse, that the king would send
Ambassadors unto him well informed of his will, or if the king of England
desired it should rather be in some Village midway, betwixt both Armies, and
that the Deputies of either side should meet there, he would be well content,
and would send a safe conduct,

Many thought that King Edward would have said unto the Herald. We will talk
in Paris. Arsaces K. of the Parthians sent to tell Crassus that if he were sent
by the Romans to make war against him, he would have no peace: but if he
came of his own free will to possess his Contry, that then he would suffer
them to depart with their lives and goods, whereunto Crassus said bravely. I
will make you an answer in the Town of Seleucia: the Parthian Ambassador
began to smile, and showing him the palm of his hand, he said. Crassus thou
shall sooner see hair grow in this hollow of mine hand, then the City of
Seleucia in thine.
but this first ouerture was so pleasing, Ouerture of a peace betwixt the two
Kings.
as he granted pasports for the Deputies of the conference. England had rather
forced then persuaded him to the Chimeras of this war. He had levied great
sums of money for his passage, the war drew them out of his cofers, peace
kept them there and added more. Civil war had so weakened and impouerished
England, as at need they could neither hope for men nor money. He had caused
some of the Deputies of the Commons of England to pass with him, Reasons which
persuaded the English to peace.
they were already weary of the war and to lodge after the manner of
Soldiers. These men did allow of this proposition of Peace, and said that it
was just and reasonable, It is a weakness in a Prince to make it apparently
known, that he desires a peace. It is indiscretion to refuse it when it is
just. If a Peace be just and honest, says Polibius 4. it is in truth good and
goodly: yet must they not do any thing that is unjust and unreasonable, nor
suffer any shameful thing to be done to enjoy it.
that it were indiscretion to refuse it, and that they should be contented to
have reduced the French King to seek a peace with the King of England, for
that a great King cannot humble himself more, nor descend lower, then to seek
his enemy for a peace.

Pasports were dispatched of either part, and the Deputies entered into
conference in a Village near unto Amiens, in view of both armies, which were
but four leagues asunder. The Bastard of Bourbon, Admiral St. Pierre: and
Heberge Bishop of Ereux for Lewis; Haward, one Challenger, and Morton who was
afterward Chancellor of England for Edward. The Ouerture of the assembly was by
a demand of the Realm of France, which the English said did belong unto them,
grounding their pretensions upon those of Edward the third Edward the third
King of England son to Edward the second, and to Marguerite or Elizabeth of
France, disputed the Regency and Royalty in the year 1328.
who as son to Elizabeth daughter to Phillip the fair, had first disputed
the Regency, and then the succession of the Crown, against Philip of Valois,
thinking to overthrow the ancient order of the Salike Law. The Salike law
excludes women from the succession of the Crown, it carries these words.
Nulla portio hereditatis mulieri veniat, sed ad virilem sexu^^ tota terrae
hereditas perueniat. Let noe portion of the inheritance come unto the woman,
but let all the inheritance of the land descend unto the Male.
The English from a General demand come unto a particular, and restrain it to
the Dutchies of Normandy and Guienne. It was answered that as Edward had no
interest to the whole, so his felony had deprived him of the parts. Edward the
third did homage to Philip of Valois for the Dutchies of Guienne and Normandy
calling him his dear Lord and Cousin, in the Cathedral Church of Amiens the
6. of June 1333.


As the King was resolved not to give them any land, so would he not refuse
whatsoever they reasonably demanded in money, when there is no question but of
money, a Prince should not be sparing nor difficult. The safety and felicity
of an estate is not measured by a certain price. A Prince should not respect
money to send away an enemy; and rather then to give him any part of his estate
with the which he may live in fear to loose all he should hazard any thing.
He winkt at all that, as well as at sundry other formalities which the
majesty of the Crown of France would not have suffered to pass in another
season, for in all this negotiation Edward gave him noe other style but his
Cousin Lewis of France.

He offers them threescore and fifteen thousand Crowns for the charges of
the Army, Articles of a peace betwixt France and England.
the Crown being 33. solz a piece; the marriage of his Son the Dauphin with
the Princess of England, and a Pension of fifty thousand Crowns yearly
until the marriage be consummated. These offers were accepted, a Truce was
concluded for nine years, and Hostages given by the King of England for the
retreat of his army. There was also a Compromise upon a penalty of three
millions of Crowns to determine and compound their Controversies within three
years by the judgment of four Arbitrators. Charles the seventh had expelled
the English out of France by the sword, and Lewis has sent them away with his
pen. We come to one end by contrary means. Charles the seventh expelled the
English by force, and Lewis with store of crowns. Hanniball by cruelty ruled
Italy, and Scipio by mildnes Spain.


The Constable thought that these mists, The Constable sends unto the King.
entertained by the vapors of his policies would have lasted longer, and he
was much grieved that the Sunshine of peace had dispersed them. He sent Lewis
Cre^ille a Gentleman of his train, and John Richer his Secretary unto the
King, to let him understand that he never had any design but to serve him
faithfully, that the proof or his service was the refusal he had made unto
his enemies of the entry into St. Quentin, The King descouers the Constables
double dealing to the duke of Bourgondy
but he was of opinion that they should find some means to send back this
storm beyond the Seas.

The King who desired to have the deceiuer deceived, Deceivers are always
deceived. They whom they deceive watch to requite it, and their own deceit
ruins them. Hanniball after the death of Marcellus wrote to the Salapiens
under Macellus name (whose seal he had gotten) that he would come unto their
Town. The next night Crispin Lieutenant to Marcellus, who knew the deceits of
Hanniball, gave notice of his death. Hanniball came to the gates of Salapia,
the first ranks who could speak the Roman tongue, demand entrance. The guard
being advertised and making a good show, suffered six hundred to enter, then
letting down the Port-cullis, they cut them in pieces. Plut.
and that the Duke of Bourgondy should understand how this man cosoned him with
his double dealing, he caused the Siegneur of Contay to be set behind a
portall, The Kin discouers the Constables double dealing to the Duke of
Bourgondy
he was an affectionate servant to the Duke, and then the Kings prisoner. And
with him stood Phillip de Commines to hear Creuilles charge which was nothing
else but to yield him an account of the voyage which he had made unto the Duke
to withdraw him from the amity of the English, and that he had so disposed him
thereunto as he was in a manner ready to charge them.

Creuille supposing by the Kings countenance and attention that he took
delight in this discourse, counterfeited the speech and gesture and reported
the Dukes oath, he stamped with his foot against the ground and swear by St.
George, calling Edward one-eyed white-liuer, and the Son of an Archer, who
cairied that name. If Contay had not seen and heard Creuille, he would not
have believed, that a man of any sense would have spoke so unworthily of his
master and the King faining to be thick of hearing, took delight in the
repetition of the chief words of this tale, and his heart seeming full of
joy, gave courage to Creuille to amplify this discourse, to the end that
Contay might understand it better, Constables opinion to buy a truce.
and know that the Constable mocked his master. Florence has seen the like
policy. Peter de Medicis to make it known that Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan in
counselling King Charles to pass the Alps did not wish him any good success.
He caused the Ambassador of France to stand behind a ha^ging, and saigning
himself ill he sent for the Ambassador of Milan, who entering into discourse of
the designs of Lewis Sforza his Master he told all ^e could to make it kn^w^
that the intentions of the French did not concur with his masters.
Guicciardin
To conclude the Constable as Creuille said, thought it fit they should
purchase a truce of the English and that they should give them some town, as
Eu and St. Valery.

The King being content with that which he had heard, told Creuille that the
Constable should hear from him. He set Contay at liberty to go and report unto
the Duke of Bourgondy what he had heard behind the Portall of the Constables
dissimulations, who sent his Confessor unto the King of England to advise him
not to trust unto the Kings words, nor to attend until he did willingly give
him Eu and St. Valery, The Constable persuades K. Edward not to trust K. Lewis.
but to seize thereon by force, to winter his troops, in hope to lodge them
better and more at large, and he offered fifty thousand Crowns to aid him to
make war. Tell your Master, answered the King of England, that he is a
deceiuer, that I repent me not of a peace, seeing he has repented him of that
which he had promised me. The King notwithstanding to let the Constable
understand that he did esteem his Counsels There are some things wherein it
is better to be deceived then to distrust. The King was well informed of the
Constables infidelities, and yet to entertain him in good humor, and not to
give him occasion to do worse he commends his Counsels.
gave Eu and Saint Valery to the King of England only to lodge in during the
treaty, of Peace. But he had given such order as the English in these towns
were rather in prison then in Garrison.

The Constable by Edwards answer saw himself almost in despair with more
subject to be amazed how he lived then to rejoice that he was living,
apprehending on the one side servitude, and on the other punishment, and seeing
no other port in this torment of mind but death.

The Dukes of Bourgundy and Brittanie were comprehended in this truce if they
would. The Duke of Bourgundy being advertised of this Treaty, came from
Luxembourg with sixteen horse to find King Edward, who discovered in his
Cousins face the It is an extreme misery to stand betwixt 2. great powers and
have no means to maintain himself. A little nag betwixt 2. great horses, is
always subject to some stripe.
spleen he carried in his heart, and seeming amazed at this sudden arrival
he demanded of him what brought him. I came, said the Duke, to speak with you:
will you, said Edward, that it be in private or public, whereupon the Duke,
who could not contain his choler, and who came to speak what he would, not
considering that he might he are what he would not, t demanded of the King of
England if he had made a Peace. No said Edward, but a Truce for nine years,
in the which you are comprehended with the Duke of Brittanie, I pray you
accommodate your self unto it. The Duke replied in English, which he
understood and spoke. That his Army should not have past the sea for that this
Treaty ruined the reputation of the Kings of England, and that he had need of
that Lions heart interred at Rouen. Richard the first King of England was
called Coeur de Lion he dyed at Osney^, and his heart was interred at Rouen, a
reasonable good Poet for these times made him this Epitaph.*
Then he adds, I had procured you a good occasion to do your business, which
you shall never recover, to get that which belongs unto you. It was not for
mine own interest, for I could well pass without it, and to let you know how
little I regard your Truce: Words betwixt the K. of England and the Duke of
Bourgondy
By St George I will not treat with the King before that you are returned into
England and have stayed there three months. Edward taking no delight in these
words, full of choler left him there: He went to horseback, and so returned as
he came being well content to have said that which he would say to him, who
had not done that which he would do, and carrying in his heart a wonderful
discontent that this Treaty took from him the means to purchase glory To
loose the occasion of any great matter by the mean of Arms is a very sensible
grief to a great courage. Epaminondas did show it in causing his sons head
to be cut off who had won a Battle, co^plaining that he had deprived him of
part of his glory.
at the Kings charge, and once again to give him a Battle.

* Viscera Carceolum, corpus fons ser^^t Ebrardi,
Et cor Rhotomagum magne Richard tuum.
In tria diuiditur vnus qui plus fuit vno,
Nec superest vna gloria tanta viro.
And this other: Hic Richard Iaces sed mors si cederet Armis,
Victa timore tui cederet ipsa tuis.
The King fearing that the Duke of Bourgundies choler and the Constables
practices would cause Edward repent, or make him distrust the expectation of
that which had been promised, would make his proceedings free from all
suspicion. Confidence is the true cyment of friendship. Good cheer made to the
English at Amiens.
The English entered continually in what troops they would into Amiens. There
were long Tables at the gates furnished with good meat and delicate wines, and
good companions attended to entertain all that came. All the Tauerns and Innes
were full. The Marshall of Gie having charge to observe how the English lived,
came one morning into a Tavern where they told him they had already made a
hundred and eleven reckonings, Gran favores comery no escotar.
and it was not yet nine of the clock. Among other commodities the soldier
found it sweet to dine well and not to pay any thing. It was in the Kings power
to cut the throats of nine or ten thousand, who could neither go on their
legs, nor find the gates to return unto their quarters, they were so full.
They were content to see them drunk with wine, who would have been drunk with
blood. But when they came and told him that it was dangerous to suffer so many
men to enter, he left his hours which he was saying, and the ceremony of
Innocents. The Romans did observe good days to assail but all were good to
defend. Macrob. l. Satur. cap. 16.
All days are good and fit to care for defense and safety.

We must believe that which he says that saw it and has written it. The King
being up and saying his hours, one came and told him that there were at the
least nine thousand English in the Town. I resolved to adventure to tell him,
and entering into his retiring place I said unto him. Sir, although it be S.
Innocents day yet is it necessary that I tell you that which has been
delivered unto me, and so acquainted him at large with the numbers that were
entered, and still came, all armed, and that no man durst refuse them the gates,
least they should be discontented. The King was not obstinate, but soon left
his devotion, and told me that they must not keep the ceremony of Innocents:
The Christian religion holds the observation of days superstitious. Eas
culpat, says St Aug. qui dicunt non proficiscat hodie quia praeposterus dies
est. It blames them that say I will not go forth this day because it is
ominious.
whereby we may gather that the day whereon the Feast of Innocents fell was
for all the rest of the year following superstitiously ceremonious to this
Prince, on which he would not have them speak unto him of any affairs, Phil.
de Commines having been in danger of a disgrace upon that occasion.

Yet he received this advice in such an humor as he believed that he might
refer his devotion to another time and dispense with it, to the end that he
might provide that this troop should retire quietly. The King dines at the
gate of Amiens.
He caused his dinner to be carried to the Porters house, not to show his
distrust, but to make much of the English which came in and out. He stayed some
to eat at his table, and made others drink, and withal provided for the
safety of the Town, having caused three hundred men to be armed in their
Captains houses, and appointed some upon the Portall to observe the entry of
the soldiers. The King of England being advertised of this disorder sent to
entreat the King not to suffer them to enter. That shall not be, answered the
King, but if it please him to send some Archers of his guard to the Port, they
shall let in whom they will. This was done, the King having by his dissembling
obtained that which some greater brute had made difficult.

But Lewis had no money in his Coffers to pay the sums that were agreed upon.
He found how difficult it is to draw money from a multitude in an urgent
necessity. Although they say that a Prince should have no other treasure then
in subjects purses, yet there may fall out such urgent occasions as if behave
it not in his own Coffers he is in dangerous estate.
His Treasurers refused him, Paris furnished this sum upon assurance to be
repayed within three months. There remained nothing but to choose a place for
the enteruiew of the two Kings. Piquigny noted by the Predictions of England.
This was at Piquigny a town which the Sibilles of England had long before
noted for so great and happy an action. They made a bar upon the bridge of
the river of Sum, in such sort as they might pass their Arms freely, yet
without any wicket for their bodies, the King remembering that he had heard say,
That which is past teaches the present. In the like occasion Duke John was
slain at Monter eaufaut Yonne, whether he was come unto the Dauphin, who since
was Charles the seventh, to treat an accord.
that the door which was left at the Bar at Montereau Faut-Yonne did serve
to advance the execution which caused so many calamities in France. For Duke
John being invited to pass with three more not two paces off received the
mortal blow from Taneguy of Chastell.

The 29. of August 1478. the King came first unto the Bar, for that he was in
his own house, Enteruiew of the two Kings at Piquigny.
and received a strange Prince. Many take this ceremony otherwise, and that it
is for the greater Prince not to come first unto the place, but to be stayed
for.
He was accompanied by the Duke of Bourbon, and the Cardinal of Bourbon his
Brother. In these actions of show he took delight to have some one attired
like himself. Phil. de Commines was so that day. He had eight hundred men.
Edward came thither after, being advertised by a Gentleman of the Kings
arrival.

The Duke of Clarence his Brother did accompany him thither. The Duke of
Gloucester would not be there, for this Truce discontented him, he had behind
him all his Army in Battle, either of them had twelve Noblemen Princes should
never meet at a Parle but with equal assurances of either side. Philip K. of
Macedon would not go to land, but did parle from the prow of his galley with
I. F. who was upon the shore, and being demanded by him of whom he stood in
fear, I fear not any man answered Philip, but the immortal Gods, but I trust
not them I see with you. Tit. Liu. lib. 32.
to accompany him. There were four English Lords on Lewis side, and as many
French of Edwards, to see if there were any practice to the prejudice of their
master.

Edward ware a Cap of black Velvet, Edward a goodly Prince.
with a great Jewel of stones made like a Flower-de-Luce, a goodly Prince and
of a gallant stature, but began to grow gross. Phil. de Co^. says, that
Edward was one of the goodliest Princes of that age, but at this enteruiew he
began to grow gross. Beauty is a quality which does adorn the rest which are
necessary in a Prince. But this is vain without the rest, it is more fitting
for a woman, and serves but to please. Maximin son to the Emperor Maximin was
so fair as the women desired to be beloved of him and that he would make them
mothers. Iul. Cap.
Coming within two or three paces of the Bar, he put off his Cap and made
two or three low reuerences before he came unto the King who attended him
leaning upon the bar, after very kind imbracings, to make the heart speak
by these demonstrations of love and affection, the Peace was sworn upon the
Masse-booke and the Cross.

The King, who knew Edwards humor, fitted his Discourse to entertain him with
a content which cost him nothing, entermixing still some merry speech among
their most serious affairs. And for that Edward had youth, beauty and love in
him, he entreated him not to return into England before he had seen the
Ladies of Paris, and that the Cardinal of Bourbon who was their present should
give him absolution. Edward showed by his eyes and his silence that this Sumons
was pleasing unto him. The King pressed him no farther, The King offers that
which he would not have accepted.
remembering that his Predecessors had been too familiar there. These two
Princes were so cunning as it was hard for the one to have any advantage of the
other: the policy of the one appeared outward and the other kept his close
within. Some show their Art at the first encounter, others hold it secret and
there the deceit is not discovered, before one is deceived. Hereunto is
applied the controversy which was betwixt the Fox and the Leopard for the
variety of their skins. The Leopard bragd that his was fairest without, being
marked with diverse spots, that is nothing (said the Fox) my variety is within.


They conferred long together to open their hearts one unto an other, or rather
for Lewis to discover Edwards thoughts, who for that he was not like unto him
in judgment and experience, was not so wary. The King found that he had an
extreme desire to assist and defend the Duke of Brittany, and that he held
himself bound unto it, saying that he had never found a better friend at
need. As for the Duke of Bourgundy he did not seem to be so careful of his
fortune, for when as the King said unto him, What shall we do if my Brother
of Bourgundy will not enter into the Truce. The King of England answered. Lewis
sou^ds K. Edwards thoughts.
I will summon him again, and if he will not hearken to it, I refer my self
to you two.

The Constables fortune remained. In the first conference of the Treaty, the
King of England being highly offended that he had failed of his word, had said
that he could let the King know his bad servants, and how to convict them of
treason toward his Majesty. The Deputies had not much regarded it, holding it
to be a policy to terrify the King with such practices and Intelligences,
and although there had been some thing, yet the estate of the Kings affairs
did not allow of too curious a search of the fidelity of his subjects, There
are seasons when as it is not good to discover all diseases to move humors not
to purge the body. It was told Pompey that there were among Stertorius papers
many Senators Letters, who exhorted him to come into Italy and to attempt
against Rome, but Pompey did an Act not of a young man, but of a grave and
settled in^gement, causing all his Letters to be burnt, and not suffering one to
be read. Plut.
but the King, who contemned not any thing, thought that it was an Arrow shot
against the Constable, and therefore he desired to be satisfied from Edward,
who dissembling not his great coffeehouse against the Constable, related
unto him the whole History of his preuatications, and for proof thereof
delivered two Letters into his hands.

After a long discourse, accompanied with infinite shows of love, honor, and
respect, the two Kings parted. Edward past by the Sea, leaving Hostages in the
delights and feasts of Paris, and the chief Noble men of his Court talked of
nothing but the Kings bounty. The Heralds and trumpets of England at their
parting cried out. A largess a largess Liberality is like the Sun among
the other lights of a royalty. It is the my^rhe which preserues the reputation
of Kings incorruptible.
for the most noble and mighty King of France. A largess a largess.

The King went to lie at Amiens, by the way he entertained himself with that
which he had observed in this Action, speaking these words to Phil. de Commines
confidently. A wise observation of the king.
I found the King of England so willing to come to Paris as it did not please
me. He is a goodly King, and loves women much, he might find some Mignion at
Paris, who would tell him so many goodly tales as he might have a desire to
return. His Predecessors have been too much in Paris and Normandy. His
company auailes me nothing on this side the Sea, but on the other side he is my
good brother and friend.

Being come to Amiens, and ready to set down to meat, Haward, one of the
Hostages, thinking to do him a great pleasure, came and told him in his ear
that if he pleased he would draw the King of England vno Amiens, and it might
be to Patis to make good cheer there with his Majesty. The King (who having
saved the Capitol It is good to see an enemies back. The Gauls demanded boats
to pass the River of Tyber, and the Senate commanded to give them some, being
put to rout they assured them the way to save them. Poli^nus Lib. 2.
had no care but to make a large way for the Gauls to pass) received this
speech with a good countenance, although it did not please him; and as if he
had thought of other matters, he began to wash and to speak of other things.
Haward remembered him after supper, having not observed the Kings intention by
the first evasion. The King being pressed by his importunity, said that he was
then ready to go to horse, to see what the Duke of Bourgundy would do, and to
make him run the hazard of Arms, seeing he had contemned the opportunity of
an accord.

They that past the Sea unwillingly would have been glad to have found some
occasion to have stayed longer in France, they had some reason for the good of
their estate, and that Paris might be to London, as Carthage had been to Rome.
Estates maintain themselves by the common fears and iealousies they have one
of an other. And therefore Scip^o Nasi^a did advise the^ to preserve Carthage,
notwithstanding that she had put the (...) of Rome to comprimise. Ne metu
ablato aemula vrbis, luxuriar^ felicitas vrbis inciper^t. Least being freed
from the fear of a City that was enemy, the City in her prosperity should
fall to ^yot. Flor. Lib 2. de Bello Punice.
They had such hot spirits among them, as if they had not some imploiment
without the Island, they were capable to begin the Earl of Warwicks game.

During the Kings abode at Amiens, he was visited by the English, especially by
those that would not return without some present. The King gives pre^^m^s to
the English.
The Duke of Gloucester who seemed much discontented with this Truce, found it
good after that the King had given him plate and horses. This Prince did sow
even in barren grounds, the fear of ingratitude did not stay his hands from
giving unto them who being gone never gave him thanks. They do not forbear
to sow after an ^^n fertile harvest, he must not leave to bind one after
ingratitude, although the ben^fit perish with the other, he must not suffer it
to perish with himself.
He was very well pleased with that day, but he was grieved that the King of
England had showed so much passion for the Duke of Britain, for his desire
was not to suffer him in peace. Edward declares the Duke of Brittan^ to be his
friend.
He caused him to be sounded again by the Lords of Bouchage and St. Pierre,
but they brought nothing back but rough words, sweating that he would repasse
the sea again, if they quarreled with the Britton. Besides the bond which K.
Edward had to the D. of Brittany, for that he had assisted him in his greatest
necessity, he feared to disco^tent him least he should set Henry whom he held
prisoner at liberty.


The King seeing that he could not divide them, thought to make him a good
friend whom he could not declare a just enemy, Peace betwixt the King and the
Du: of Brittany.
seeing that he was comprehended in the Truce. Wherefore there was a Treaty of
peace betwixt them, signed and concluded in the Abbey of Senlis the 16. of
October, 1475. published in the Parliament of Paris, and at the estates of
Britain.

The King of England was not more content to see his realm again, then the
King seemed joyful to have sent him out of his Princes sometimes let slip free
speeches in their Cabinets, which are observed and reported again. The King
being some days after King Edwards departure with his servants, rejoiced at
the happy success of his affairs, saying that there was nothing to be
compared to vanquish without fighting The victory which costs least blood is
m^st glorious said Alphonso K. of (...). Panorm in his life.
and that they which returned from the place whether they came to make war
without doing any thing were vanquished. Words escaped the K. upon the Treaty
of Peace.
He iested that with wine and money he had sent away the English. This flowing
of words with more truth then wisdom, came to the hearing of a Gascon
Merchant remaining in England, who was come into the Cabinet to crave leave to
transport a certain number of pipes of wine Impost free. Heard by a Gascon
Merchant.
The King would have been glad that this man having seen the Palace of his
Councels bare and uncovered, had been blind and deaf, but he made no show of
it acknowledging notwithstanding that discretion had not been arbitrator
betwixt his tongue and heart, that the Merchant had seen and heard too much,
There have been Princes which have put their servants to death having heard
words the report whereof was dangerous. Alexander dealt therein more
discrectly, for finding that Ephestion had seen in his letter an advice of
importance, he only touched his lips with his seal without any word speaking,
and Lewis de^lt more royally, who bought them at a deer rate which might have
carried words that had escaped him inconsiderately.
and that Edward might cause this first flower of Peace, (which was but in the
bud) to wither, Cause not foreseen of a good fortune.
if these words were reported unto him. He therefore resolved to buy this
Merchant upon some pretext of service. He employed Philip de Commines who won
him, offering him an office in the town where he was borne, the transport of
the wines which he demanded, and a hundred pounds starling to send for his
family, but upon condition that he should not go into England, the King
condemning himself willingly in the penalty, for that he had spoken too
freely.

The most courageous, but especially the French which were retired into England
blamed this peace. Many held it for a work of heaven, saying that it had
accomplished the Prophesies which the holy Ghost had made, Men draw great
Predictions from small matters. In the Concla^e held for the election of a
Pope, after the death of Paul the fourth a Dove flying rested upon the Cell of
Cardinal John Ange Mediguin who was named Pius the fourth, and it was taken for
an assurance of his election.
that a white Dove the day of the enteruiew of the two Kings had sat upon King
Edwards tent, and that all the noise of the Army could not drive her away.

A Gentleman Gascon called Bretailles, who served the King of England, was
discontented at the Peace, and mocked at his jest. He said that this Dove being
beaten with the rain had fallen upon this tent as the highest to dry her self
in the Sun. He talked with Phillip de Commines, who knew him and said, You
had reason to laugh at us. To whom Commines (but not touching that) said. How
many Battles has your King won? Wisdom of Phil. de Com. to avoid a
needless discourse.
Nine answered Bretailles, K. Edward the fourth was in nine Battles fighting on
feet to assure the Crown of England on his head and to ruin the house of
Lancaster.
And how many has he lost? one only, which is that which he might have won
in France, so great a loss as it has blemished the honor of nine which he
has won, for this tenth was the crowning of all the rest.

They came and told the King that this Gascon was a free spoken man, and that
in the liberty of his speech he might make his masters thoughts known, and
alter the minds of many. The King sent for him, caused him to dine at his
table, and by his purse stopped his mouth and made him say as the rest, that the
holy Ghost had made the Peace. In one hour Bretailles settled an assured
revenue for ever upon the timiditie of this Prince. We may say of King Lewis as
Plutark did of Nicias, he gave not less to the^ that might do ill, then to
those that deserved well, and who were worthy to taste of his bounty, so as his
fear was a revenue and rent unto the wicked, as well as his bounty was unto
good men.


The Duke of Bourgundy seeing that the King of England was far off, began to
bethink himself. He had seen the inconstancy of the English. Contay had
represented unto him that of the Constable, and the discourse which he had
heard behind the Portall. All this would not suffer him to grow obstinate
against reason, and moreover the King is armed against the frontier of
Hainault, who demands it, and offers to do it, and he has a lively impression
of the great perplexity which an irresolute soul does suffer that lives in
suspense betwixt hope and fear. Whilst our souls are in suspense betwixt hope
and fear, we do not enjoy the present, and the future torments us.


Hugonet the Dukes Chancellor sent the King word that if it pleased him to send
his Deputies unto the bridge, Treaty of Peace betwixt the King and the D. of
Bourgundie.
midway betwixt Auennes and Veruins, the Dukes should be there to resolve upon
that which was presented. The King would be present notwithstanding that his
Council dissuaded him, and he led with him Haward and Cheney, Hostages which
the King of England had left. One of them being sorry for the Peace, seeing
the Deputies for the Duke of Bourgundy accompanied with a great number of
soldiers well mounted and armed, said, that if the Duke of Bourgundy had showed
many such to the King of England, he had not so suddenly repast the Sea.
Philip de Commines, to whom these words were spoken, answered not any thing, he
had so great patience in hearing, and such stay in his speech, as it was no
pain for him to hold his peace in occasions where the tongue sometimes
escapes: He that is not patient to hold his peace, can not be discreet in
speaking.


The Vicont of Narbonne who had heard them, said, that without doubt the Duke
of Bourgundy had a good number, but the English had so great a desire to
return into England, as they were contented with six hundred pipes of wine,
and a pension which the King gave them. This English man who was much altered
with this Peace, found his grief doubled with this flout, and all fuming with
choler, he said, It is true that was told us, that you would jest at us, call
you the money which the King gives us a Pension?, Every man gives what names
he pleases to things. That which in effect was a pension, the English call
tribute. An insupportable word to a free Nation. Saluian lame^ting the
condition of the Empire of Rome which paid Tribute unto the French, who had
newly seized upon G^ul, says, Aur^m quod pe^dimus munera vocamus, dicimus
donum esse quod pretium, et quidam co^di^onis miserimae. The gold we bestow we
call reward, we term that a gift which is a price, and of a most wre^ched
condition.
It is a Tribute, and by St George you may speak so much as we shall return.
Philip de Commines (O the wise man) brake off this Discourse, and from serious
and biting as it was, and might have been worse (for the French would never
have endured that they should have termed France tributarie to England) turned
it to a Jest. But the Englishman was discontented, and complained to the King,
who was much offended with the Vicont of Narbonne, who had not considered that
to bad demands good answers cost little and profit much, and that a small
matter calls back an enemy who departs discontented. Words of contempt or
mockery inflame men's hearts to other resolutions the^ are expected. Cabades a
Captain of Persia besieging Amida, and finding (...) that the si^ge would be
long and difficult, resolu^a to leave it. The inahbitants grown proud thereat,
came running to the wa^s, calling him coward, and mocking at his retreat.
Wherewith Cabade^ was so incensed as ^e returned, pressed, forced, and spoiled
the Town.


The Deputies of either side met, but could not agree, every one seeking to
maintain his own. The King told his that he would not have so many words, and
causing the Dukes deputies to come, he shut himself in with them, and before
they parted concluded a Truce for nine years, beginning the 13. of September,
1475. and ending the same day in the year 1484. The Duke would have Baldwin
Bastard of Bourgundy, the Lord of Renty, John de Chata, and Philip de Commines
excluded and to loose the benefit of this Truce, the which notwithstanding was
not so soon published to save the Dukes oath, who had sworn not to hearken
unto it so soon.

As they were upon the Treaty the King of England, being discontented that the
Duke of Bourgundy treated apart, sent Thomas of Montgomerie unto the King, to
assure him that be would return in the Spring with a mighty Army, to finish
the Duke of Bourgundies ruin, but the King, who loved him well where he was,
answered, that the Truce which was then in question, was no other then what had
been made with him without any alteration, but that the Duke desired to have
his Letters Patents apart.

Thus a peace was made both with the English and Bourgundians. These mists
which were so thick as there was no hope to see the Sun all the day, were
disperced in a moment, leaving France in the same cleerenes that it was before.

The wisemen of those times saw and did acknowledge the particular care of Gods
providence over this Monarchy having by his singular grace escaped so terrible
a storm. It was not the first brunt, nor the greatest fit which tried the
firmenes of her forces. The foundations of this Estate are so well laid, All the estates in the world have tried her Inconstancy, what are become of the
Empires of Assiria, of Persia, of Media, of Egypt, of Judea, and of Macedon.
Quicquid in altum ^ortuna tulit ruitura leuat. Whatsoever fortune has raised
on high, is to fall again. And Plato says that every thing is in this world
as upon Euripus, sometimes above, sometimes beneath. (...).
her laws have so wisely prevented all kinds of accidents, that although
there be nothing constant in the world, and that nature turns every thing
sometimes above, sometimes beneath, yet it stands amidst the greatest shakings,
and supports it self like a Colosse with his own weight. The composition of
this body is so strong and vigorous, as it entertaines it self even with his
excess and disorders: other Estates with all their good order are not in
better case, and the least disorder they commit brings their life in danger.
Plutark said, that the reputation of Sparta was like unto a body which always
took a diet, and which was distempered with the least disorder.


The Kings wisdom was the Instrument of Gods providence to free this Realm
from the danger which did threaten it. It is true that if necessity, which
has no law, did not excuse the proceedings of this Prince, and if the honor
of the action did not remain to him that has the profit, there might be
exceptions taken to that which the King did to have this Peace. A wise Prince
and less fearful would have adventured a Battle, rather then be subject to
his enemies pride, but these high and generous forms of treating are buried in
the ruins of proud and triumphant Rome, and there is nothing remaining but
admiration which the History represents. The Romans never received condition
nor capitulation As the Romans did never receive offers nor conditions from an
enemy, so long as he was armed, so did they never go whether they called them.
If thou be mighty, thou may force me, if thou can not, I must go
whether my commodity leads me.
from an armed enemy they never made retreat in disorder. Never did General
of a Roman Army give place to any one, were he a King: Never did they in
strange Provinces quit the marks of their authority. Never did they allow a
stranger, how great so ever, to enter into their lodging on horseback. When as
Tigranes came to Pompey, to yield himself into his hands, the Sargeants told
him that he must light, for that no man was ever seen to enter on horseback
into the Romans lodgings. Pl^t.
And in a word, never had Prince his mind and resolutions raised to more
generositie.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF of the seventh BOOK.
1 THe Constables perplexity after the peace. 2 The King sends for the
Constable. 3 The Constable leaves. S. Quentin, and retires to Mons in Hainault.
4 The King seazeth on S. Quentin, and summons the Duke of Bourgundy to effect
the Article of the Assembly of Bouuines touching the Constable. 5 He is
delivered to the King, and conducted to the Bastille, his process made,
condemned to die and executed. 6 Profit and blame which the Duke of Bourgundy
received by the Constables death. 7 Army of the Duke of Bourgundy in Lorraine.
8 Attempt upon the Dukes life discovered by the King. 9 Army of the Dukes
against the Suisses. 10 The Kings voyage to Lion. 11 Siege of Granson. The
Suisses give, and win a Battle, and recover Granson with a great spoil. 12
The Duke seeks unto the King for a continuance of the Truce. 13 Rene of Aniou
King of Sicile comes to the King at Lion. 14 Duke of Bourgundies Army before
Morat, defeated by the Suisses. 15 The Suisses enter into the country of Vau,
and the Duke retires into the Franche Conty. 16 Yoland Duchess of Sauoy the
Kings Sister leaves the Bourgundian party. 17 Alfonso of Portugal comes to
demand succors of the King. 18 Henry the fourth King of Castille declared
unworthy of the Crown. 19 Accord betwixt the King of Castille, and the King of
Portugal. 20 Affliction, heaviness, and grief of the Duke of Bourgundy after
the Battle of Morat. 21 Rene Duke of Lorraine besieges and takes Nancy. 22
Army of the Duke of Bourgundy before Nancy, and treason of Cont Campobasso. 23
Defeat of the Duke of Bourgundy and his death, an observation of his courage,
and a memorable example of his Justice. 24 Death of Galeas Duke of Milan.
THE HISTORY of LEWIS the XI.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
AT the Treaty of Piquigny the Constable of Saint Paul resembled a Tree beaten
with three contrary winds, which notwithstanding conspyre all together to tear
it up by the root. The Constable in ill terms with all men.
Great wits do oftentimes commit great errors, and you shall seldom see a
great spirit without some medley of f^lly whereof the purest com^s from the
finest wisdom, and therefore Thucidides will not have the choose high aspiring
spiriits into the Counceller of Princes nor to the ma^naging of aff^ires, but
those that are mean who are less obstinate.
He thought to make a perpetual war betwixt the King of France, the King of
England, and the duke of Bourgundy, behold he is amazed to see them reconcyled
and against him. He has made himself unworthy of grace with the first, of
succors, and defense with the second, and of all hope with the third, and in
opinion with all three that he would play the companion As it is dangerous to
contend with ones equal, so is it mada^sto quarrel with his superior, and to
seek to go hand in hand with him.
with them, raise his reputation and merits upon the ruin of their affairs,
mingle his ashes with those of their Estates, and eternize his memory not in
burning one Temple alone, Ill with the King.
but the Estates of them all three.

The King had done him good, not in respect of his person, but of the services
which he might do him, and when as he saw his affections altered, his will
also grew could, making it known that great hatred proceeded from great
friendship. The favors and benefits of Princes are not for the respect of the
persons, but in consideration of services and merits which they find in their
servants: when these qualities change, it is not strange if in like manner
their favors and affections alter.
He could not forget the practices which he had made to keep France in
trouble and combustion; nor the arrogant and insolent show of arms upon the
Causey of Compiegne^, nor the letters written to the King, at the sight whereof
he swear his great oath, which he did never violate; that he should die: Nor
so many acts of a spirit which made it self miserable for that he could not
bear his felicity.

The Duke had never pardoned him the taking again of Amiens and Abbeuille. Ill
with the Duke.
the desire of his revenge was a river Revenge runs on still although it
appears not, Plutarque compares it to rivers which run under the earth, and
afterward hurst forth with more violence.
which had his course through the rocks of the difficulties of his affairs.
He could not forget his cunning practice, to marry his daughter to the Duke of
Guienne, nor his refusal to receive his men into Saint Quentin after that he
had caused them to come. Moreover he was incensed, Offenses often renewed end
with immortal pains.
for that he had first made war in his country by fire the rest being
contented to use the sword, for whilst he lay encamped before Amiens, the
Constable had made a road into the country of Haynault, and burnt the Castle
of Seurre, belonging unto Baldwin of Lannoy whom the Duke loved. Ill with the
King of England.
The King of England was offended with him, for that having councelled and
persuaded him to come into France to triumph there, he had returned without
triumph. All three would rather have made an other hell then have suffered such
trecheries unpunished.

All things seemed to bandie and conspire his ruin, he could not keep
himself up firm seeing so many persons about him overthrown. The Constables
perplexity after the peace.
It is no wonder not to be moved in tra^quillity but we may be amazed to see
a man rise when as all others shrink and to stand firm amongst them that
stu^ble Sen. Epist. 73.
The disgraces which fortune has done him in the public ruins are augmented
by many other private crosses: His wife, the only support of his greatness, is
dead, James of S. Paul his brother prisoner, la Scala his nephewe returning out
of England was taken by the Kings men and found seized of dangerous
Instructions; the Earl of Roucey his Son in the duke of Burbons hands. The
Earl of Dammartin his enemy with the Kings forces near unto S. Quentin: And
the Prince of Orange at liberty, carrying the title of Prince by the grace of
God. Jealousy and envy work strange di^^emperatures in their minds which
martch hand in hand. The Constable of S^. Paul. could not endure the prosperity
of some great men in court. He is grieved that the prince of Orange is set at
liberty for thirty thousand Crowns, and that the king has suffered him to
carry the title of Prince by the grace of God to coin money and to pardon all
offenses except heresy and treason.
All these things were so many thorns in his bed to keep him from sleep, he
does not dream, wake nor think but how to stand firm against all these
violent storms of fortunes, but he seeks to cure his harms A pernicious
remedy to cure one mischief with another, and to think to be cured by
disorders which caused diseases, the intemperance of the Patien^ causes the
cruelty of the Physician.
by other mischefes. He is like unto an earthen vessel which must needs
break if it fall upon a stone or a stone fall upon it.

The nedle of his Compass turns toward the Kings Clemency as to his north. He
sends Rapin, his secretary, unto him with silken words humble and mild,
beseeching him to believe that the King of England and the Duke of Bourgundy
desired nothing more then to draw him to the extremity of despair, The
Constable seeks the Kings favor.
and to seek his safty of them being that he could not find it with the
King. That a desire to be revenged of him who had not offended the^, but in
that he had not offended his majesty, had given way unto the slanders which
had bin published against him, and favored by the il will of his enemies which
were about his majesty, namely by the Lord of Dammartin and Lude who did not
love him, and that his heart could not bend unto that divine rule to love his
enemies. To love ones enemies is a divine Action, to love his friends humane,
but to hate his friends is brutish. But men are of that disposition,
especially great men, they cannot endure the prosperity of their enemies.


Good workemasters know one another work, one line makes them judge by whom
the picture was made. The King, his craftsmaster in dissembling, did judge that
whatsoever the Constable pretended to do was but cou^terfeit, Aristotle
speaks of a rock which burns having oil cast upon it.
that an ambitious spirit dissembles as he list, It is dangerous to give credit
to the words and actions of those that have any design, (...) a desire to
attain unto it makes them to faigne any thing.
that a wicked man is never worse then when he will counterfeit to be good,
wherefore all the oil of his goodly words do not always serve to open but to
cover the inte^tions. Archidamus son to Agesilaus said that sheep kn^w but
one note but Kings had many to use as they pleased.
words did but inflame the flint of his revenge the more, and from the
concurrence of these two contraries rose the last tempest which ruined the
Constable. Yet he made show to approve his Intentions, he said they were good,
and called a secretary unto him to write a letter, The King sends for the
Constable.
by the which he gave him advice of all that had past with the English, and
that for the troble of mind wherein he was to dispatch many great affairs he
had great need of his head. If he had promised to save him he would have
accepted the neck of his promises, he was so constrained to make an example of
the treachery of a bad subject. Rapin was not cunning enough to observe two
things which past at this instant. Paul Erizze governor of Negrepont having
yielded in the year 1470. upon condition that they should save his head,
Mahomet caused him to be sawne in two and when he reproched him with the breach
of his word, he said unto him that the flanks were not comprehended in the
promise to save his head: Justinian.
the one was that the king turning to the Lord Haward, deputy for the King of
England, and the Siegneour of Contay, expounding unto them the counterfence of
this letter said, I do not mean that we should have his body but his head
only. The other was that the Lord of Lude demanded of Rapine if he knew where
his masters ready money was, a word which should have condemned the mouth from
whence it came to perpetual silence By the law of the Gymnosophists they that
have once accused the use of the tongue are condemned to perpetual silence.
It was sooner delivered then considered, there are wits which betraie wisdom
and discretion, their suddenness stays upon the first objects, they are not
always ready. This speech should have served as a Trumpet to give the
Constable an Alarm, who understanding what Rapine had done and heard, chose
rather to commit his safty to a good place then to the Kings good words.

He had caused the Castle of Han to be built, and within it a Tower six and
thirty foot thick, Castle of Han built by the Constable.
upon the port whereof there was seen a cord wouen with two tassells
hanging on the one side and the other, and this motto of his humor. Mon Mieux.
He assured himself to find his best always in that place in the worst estate
of his fortune, and from thence he should see, as from a safe shore, the
waves and winds play upon France. But there is no rock nor Acrocorinthe that
can hold at the presence of a Prince which means to punnish the infidelity of
his subject. Against a just enemy they must make it known that a great
courage has not less Clemency being discovered, then valor in Arms.
Mithridatus king of Bosphorus being defeated and vanquish^d, he entreated the
Emperor to make him fire war, his answer was short and generous. That at
Rome there was as much clemency against the vanquished as courage against an
armed enemy.
But against disloyalltie and ingratitude all pity is cruelty. He had
propounded to retire himself thither, but considering that he should be
beseeged by the Kings forces and the Duke of Bourgundies, he resolves to go
into Germany to employ his money in the pourchase of some place upon the Rhine
or else to pass into Spain. Perplexities of the Constable.
There was not any Saint in paradise in whom he durst trust. By Saint
Quentin he had always shrouded himself from the thunderclaps of these two
Princes. By Saint Quentin he did hope to pass without touch amidst so many
arrows that were shot at him. He would have kept these Princes in fear and
doubt, and they now drive him into an amazement A dangerous course to keep his
master in fear and jealousy. Although that every man (says Phil. de Com)
seeks to free himself from suspicion and fear, and that every man hates him
that keeps him in it, yet there is not any one that in this point comes near
to Princes, for I never knew any but did mortally hate them that would keep
them in fear.
and to the sad thoughts of his ruin. This Castle of Saint-Quentin was but a
prison unto him, Great men in the government of public affairs must make
themselus famous and not enuyed by their pride and insolency.
he never hears it named but his soul is tormented.

He added to these meditations public hatred, raised against him by the
Insolency of his carriage, having used his great offices to purchase envy of
the great, and to oppress the meaner sort, besides the libells and scandalous
songs which had been heard publicly throughout Paris, the which had had more
credit and course being prohibited, then if the reading had been allowed, for
such drogues do presently loose their sent when they are vented, the trouble to
recover them augments the currosity. Being pressed and oppressed with these
difficulties, all resolution abandons him, as he had abandoned himself. There
was danger in going forth, and danger in staying. France threatened him with
death, England with captivity, and Flanders with scorn.

In these trances and amazements which are not so great without as those which
his Conscience gives him inwardly, to see that he is held of all men as It were
much better not to be in the number of men then to be held among those that are
borne for the ruin of the co^mon-weale.
borne to the ruin of the Commonweal; he cast his eyes to that part whereas
nature had first opened them, The Constable re^ires to to Mons in Hainault.
and desiring rather to give himself unto the Duke then to suffer himself to
be taken by the King, he goes to Mons in Henault, upon a pasport which they
gave him, with fifteen or twenty horse; not considering that the firmest
friendship does not pass the Altars nor the respects of duty which we owe unto
superiors, and that in Accidents of injustice the proof is It is dangerus to
try friends against Princes and laws. Alcibiades to make this trial one a
time called them whom he held to be his friends and led them one after another
into a dark place showing them the Image of a dead body and saying that it was
a man whom he had slain, entreating them to help to bury him, but he found
but one among them all that would yield unto it and that was Callias. Happy is
he that has many friends but unhappy that has need of them.
dangerous. He trusted in the Lord of Emery Balife of Henault his surest friend
who commanded there for the Duke

It is hard to take an old fox, Mucho sabe la Raposa pero mas el que la toma A
she Fox knows much but he more that takes her.
but in the end he is taken, and he that takes him is craftier then the fox.
The King knowing that he was out of his burrow and in the Duke of Bourgundies
Cuntrie, caused 800. horse to advance with speed toward S. Quentine, to the
end he might take that place from him and with that all hope to recover the
Duke of Bourgondies friendship, so as being advertised that the King was in it,
and that he could not have it from any other hand then from his, The King
seazeth on S. Quentin.
he did not remember the Constable, but to remember the revenge of the wrongs
he had done him.

The King who would not use that power unto the Constable which heaven has not
given to any but to Kings, had no care but to be ridd of the Constable, The
power to save men from death is so excellent a guist (says Seneca) as the Gods
have imparted it to none but Princes.
he caused the Duke to be summoned to mainetayne and effect that which had been
concluded betwixt them upon that subject, seeing that he was retired into the
Cuntries of his obedience. This promise bound the Duke to do Justice of the
Constable within eight days, or to deliver him unto the King, who desired to
have him rather alive then dead, to use him at his discretion, and to make him
loose his life as he pleased, or to leave it him for his glory. Every man that
owes his life, lives to his glory that has given it him.


The Duke, who desired to have St. Quentin, Han, and Bohain, and could not have
them but by the performance of this promise, commanded the figneour of Emery to
give the Constable a guard, and to command him to keep his lodging. This was
not enough; the King who would not loose the Constable, to have the Duke to win
him, It is not the means to be rid of a bad servant to chase him away and to
disgrace him giving him means to remain with his enemy, but he must be
assured of him. If Iugurth had done so, he had escaped the treason of Bom^lcar.
Salust
sent the Lord of Bouchages to press him either no dispatch him or to deliver
him unto him. He had an Army ready in Champagne ready to suecor the Duke of
Louraine if he discontented him by the breach of promise.

Although the Duke were wholly bent to ruin the Constable, yet did he not
think it reasonable to deliver him into the Kings hands who had put himself
under his protection, and therefore he delayed long the accomplishment of this
promise. And on the other side the Constable, who saw nothing before his eyes
but fearful apparitions, so as his imagination was continnually troubled with
the imagination of the Kings revenge and his Conscience finding no satisfaction
When the Conscience is not satisfied, all that seems good is bad. It is the
privilege of a good man to live in tranq^ility of Conscience.
in his fact, he besought the Duke to remember the faith which he had given
him, to the which he had cast himself as into a haven of safety against the
long storm of his fortune.

But the Duke, who measured his religion by the ell of his profit, desiring
infinitely to recover St. Quentin, The Constable delivered to the King.
after some delays, he commanded Hugones his Chancellor, and Imbercourt to
deliver him. These men on the other side being wronged by the Constable,
executed this commandment dilligently. It was a very sensible grief In
mis^ries the afliction is doubled when (...) he represents unto himself the
contentme^t which his (...) shall receive. Caesar b^ing surprised by Pirates in
Asia, and detained prisoner by them be cried out aloud. O what pleasure will thou have C^assus when thou shall hear of mine imprisonment Plut. in the li^e
of Crassu^.
to see his life and fortune at the discretion and scorn of his enemies, who
led him to Peronne and consigned him to the bastard of Bourbon Admiral of
France and to the Signeour of St. Pierre who conducted him to Paris. They did
not long enjoy the content of this revenge of their enemy, for the Gantois
shall soon after kill them in view of the Duchess of Bourgundy, who shall
have noe power to save them.

The unfortunate Constable, Prisoner in the Ba^^le.
clad in a black chamlet cloak lyned with velvet, mounted upon a little nag,
goes complaining of the breach of public faith; as he accused his own
indiscretion A man of courage should do anything to free himself from being
made an example and the Infamy of public Justice. For this respect Eumenes
coniured his soldiers to kill him, and spoke these brave words unto them. You
have no reason to fear that Antigonus will be discontented, for he demands
Eu^enes dead and not alive. Or if you will not use your hands to do this
office, unbind but one of (...) it shall suffice for that effect, and if
happily you fear to put a sword into my hand, cast me bound hand and foot unto
wild beasts.
and condemned himself already by the feeling of his Conscience, so his
servants accused him of want of courage for that he had not attempted some
other way rather then that of the Grieve. Thereuppon they made him pass by S.
Anthonies gate to enter into the Bastile, with his hat pulled down in his eyes
to hide his face, being full of palenesse and shame of so tragical a
condition. Three hours after that the Dukes men had delivered him they
received letters of countermand, forbidding them to deliver him, but this
defense came too late.

The eyes of man cannot behold the Sun firmly, yet they see it in a basin.
It is impossible to comprehend the judgments of the Sun of Justice, we must
consider them in the life and variety of the Constable, which past like an
arrow in the water, as soon as ever he was prisoner it was said that he would
never come forth, and he himself thought that in losing his liberty he could
not save his life, that he was a dead man, and that it was a folly to desire
life He that will not do any thing whereby it may be known dying that he has
lived, should not desire life. The Troglodytes said, that such a desire of life
for one that had done nothing worthy to live, was an extreme misery. Dio. lib.
3. c. 3.
seeing that in living he could not do any thing to revive his reputation.

When he was come into the Bastile he found the Chancellor there with the first
President, and some counselors of the court, prepared to revenge the public
injury, and to make known what the body feels when the head is hurt Areius
capito said, that it did much import the Common weal to punish them rigorously
who had in any sort attempted against the Prince, unless they will say that
the Body has no cause to grieve when the head is wounded. Suet.
The Admiral told them that by the Kings commandment he did deliver the
Constable over unto them, to make his process with all speed, upon the
letters written and sealed which the King of England and the Duke of Bourgundie
and Bourbon had sent the which he presented unto them. The want of rewarding
the good is not so prejudicial to an estate, as the impunity of the wicked.


The Empires of the world martcht upon two feet, upon the recompense of good
and the punnishment of ill, and they must go straight on the one, and not halt
on the other, and yet it is better to fail on the right foot which is the
reward of good, then on the left which is the punnishment of whomesoeuer. On
this foot they went against the Constable, but somewhat to swiftly. He saw
him self reduced unto those terms as they did not regard his services past,
but his present offenses. He bears this affliction as impatiently, They carry
prosperities insolently and adversities impatiently which think that neither
the one nor the other can ever change.
as he past his prosperities insolently.

They began his process by his answers. He must either speak or beee silent,
His process is made.
his words discover the treason, his silence the Traitor. There is nothing but
pity to speak for him, and there is not any to be found for crimes of this
sort: His own writings were against him. He co^fest that to maintain his
office of Constable and trouble the Kings estate he had always entertained war
betwixt the king, and the Duke of Bourgundy, His Con^^ssions.
and to this effect had given him his seal and promise that when as the
soldiers which martcht under his commandment should be ready to strik he
would cause them retire. That seeing a marriage He that desires to continue
war in an Estate, let him follow the Maxim of the Constable of St. Paul,
always to keep the King in bad terms with the nearest of his blood. As the
Princes of the blood being well united unto the Prince make him to be more
assured and redoubted, so when as they are drawn away the state must needs
suffer. Hereof we read two goodly examples, one of Hipparcus in Thucid: the
other of Sext Tarquinius in Tit Li^ius.
treated and concluded betwixt the Duke of Guyenne the kings brother and the
princess of Castill he wrote unto Msr. aduising him to have a care* how he
proceeded, and as soon as he should be gone into Spain to fetch his wife, the
King was resolved to send an Army into the Duchy of Guienne to dispossess
him, and to make him miserable, and that if he would give ear to marry with
the Duke of Bourgundies daughter, he assured himself to make him have her, so
as he would send his seal to the Duke of Bourgundie, and that he would pass
a procuration to obtain a dispensation of the oath for his promse of marriage
with the Princess of Castill.

That the Duke of Bourgundie having sent a man expressly to him to have his
seal, the which he would send to the Duke of Sauoy, he would that they should
paffe to the Duke of Bourbon, to draw him unto their league and intelligence
against the King, who answered them that he had rather be as poor as Job There
is no misery comparable to that which treason and infidel^ty causes: and
therefore the Duke of Bourben did rather choose the condition of Job, then to
revolt against his K.
then consent to their conspiracy, and that the end would be miserable.

That the king having commanded him to write to the king of England, to the
Queen, to the Earl of Somerset and to Msr. de Candalles touching the E. of
Warwick, that he had written quite contrary to the kings intentions. They
desired to hear him touching the bar and Causey of Compeigne. At that word
he found his own mistaking, and that the perfection of man's actions depends of
well knowing himself The first precept or rather the summary of the
Instructions of the conduct of man's life, is to know himself well. Thereon
depends the good or bad issues of actions. Heraclitus speaking of a great and
high cogitation of his spirit, said that he sought himself.
. He could not deny but that he had there played the companion with his
master. He confessed that when he spoke with the king near unto Compiegne, he
had caused a bar to be made betwixt the King and him to the end he might
talk in safety, and yet the king notwithstanding past the bar to embrace him
and to entreat him to hold his party, the which he promised and swear, and
notwithstanding two days after the Duke of Bourgundy sent one unto him to know
if he would perform that which he promised him, and to offer him a pension of
a thousand pounds sterling.

That he had written unto the Duke of Bourgundie that he could find means to
seize upon the king and then kill him or carry him to any place, and that he
would lodge the Queen and the Dauphin where as they should be allwaies found.

They showed him the letters which he had written to the king of England, He
acknowledges his letters written.
and he does acknowledge them, and if there had been no other crime, Phil. de
Commines says that the have of this proceeding was sound strange and that the
King did much press the Commissioners. The Historiens have not well observed
the time but we may coniectur^ it, in that the Earl of M^rle the Constables
son sent on the 4. of December a herald called Montioy, who did reside
commonly with the Constable to John Ladreche President of the accounts borne in
Brabant to entreat him to succor and to stay the Constable if this were the
beginning of his ^mprisonment as it is credible, his process was made in
fifteen or sixteen days.
it had been sufficient to convict him. The king did press the Commissioners
very earnestly, and they proceeded but slowly in a matter of that weight. The
treason being apparent, their opinions tended to death by the courses of
extremity and of the highest point of Justice, and the sentence was pronounced
in Parliament by the President of Popincourt.

It was necessary that the prisoner should hear it in Parliament, He is sent
for to the Court of Parliament.
and therefore the Siegneur of St. Pierre went early in the morning to the
Bastile to fetch him, coming into his Chamber he demanded of him what he did,
and if he slept? he answered that he had been long awake but he kept his bed,
having his head full of fancies. The Siegneur of St. Pierre told him that the
Court of Parliament had viewed his process for the expedition whereof it was
necessary he should be heard. He rose and prepared himself to go unto the
Palace, not thinking that from thence he should be led unto his death. And for
that the Court had ordained that the Seignieur of Estouteuille, Knight and
Provost of Paris, should accompany him, he grew into some jealousy that it was
to draw him out of the hands of Philip Hu^llier Captain of the Bastile, who
was his friend, and entreated him mildly, to deliver him unto the Provost of
Paris his enemy, who he thought by an inhumane voluptuousnes To laugh at
another man's misery is an inhumaine voluptuousness and to weep at another
man's harm is an eternal misery,
received great content at his misery. Hated and detested of the Parisie^s
He feared also that the people, who hated him as much in the end, as they had
admired him in the beginning, It is in our selves to be esteemed, or scorned,
Never man was more contemned in the beginning nor less in the ending then
Brutus.
and had conceived an implacable hatred against him, and defamed his reputation
both by writings In June 1471. the K. by a public proclamation promised 300.
Crowns to him that should discover the author of Libels that were made against
the Constables honor. Henry Mariette who had bin Liefiena^t criminal of Paris,
and Peter Mercier a Scholar were committed to prison for that fact, but they
were absolved.
and words publicly, would do him some outrage as he past through the
streets. The Siegneur of St. Pierre assured him, and freed him from either
fear, telling him that he went not out of one prison to go into another, and
that he would never suffer him to be wronged in his company. Thus he went to
the Palace on horseback betwixt St Pierre and Estouteuille. Being come to the
stairs foot of the Palace, the Lord of Gaucourt, Governor of Paris, and
Denis Hesselin came to meet him, to lead him to the Tournelle, where he found
the Chancellor, who having exhorted him to patience, demanded of him the order
of St. Michel. The Constable took it from his neck, kissed it, and gave it him.
He had received it from the Kings own hand, being the third of fourteen
which first received it.

The Chancellor did also demand the Constables sword of him, When men in high
degrees are condemned to lose their lives, the death of honor by degradation
goes before that of the body by punishment.
he answered that it had been taken from him when he was committed to prison.
This done the Chancellor retired himself and left the Constable in some hope
that justice would be satisfied with this degradation of honor, and leave him
the remainder of his life as a gift, the which notwithstanding he should
neither desire nor accept being offered, having lost that which was dearer then
it. There remains nothing to loose for him that has lost his reputation. He
dies too late that suruiues his honor.
But behold the President of Popincourt which pronounces his sentence and
speaks to him after this manner. His sentence pronounced.
The Court has and does declare you guilty of high treason, for the which it
does deprive you of the office of Constable of France and of all your offices,
honors, estates and dignities, and for punishment it does condemn you to
suffer death, and to loose your head at the grieve, in Paris, it declares all
your goods moveable and immovable forfeited to the King. And although,
considering the foulenes of the great and execrable crimes of treason which you
have committed, you should be quartered, By the greatness of punishments they
judge of the foulnes of offense. Treason and felony have always been severely
punished
your four quarters to be hanged on the high ways, and your body on a
Gibbet, yet for some considerations moving the Court, namely for your last
marriage, of which were issued Children, and other causes, it has ordained
that after public execution done of your person, your body shall be laid in
holy burial if you require it.

The Constable with an amazement ordinary in such strange and sudden
accidents, and excusable in the most constant men who suffer death resolutely,
Four Divines exhort the Constable to dye.
and yet abhor to see it, Nature abhors death. A valiant man goes freely unto
dangers, and yet is moved at them that miscarrie. There are some which receive
the stroke more Constantly the^ they apprehend it. Seen. Epist. 58.
answered. Ha God be praised, behold a hard sentence, I beseech him to give me
the grace to acknoledge him well this day. They gave him four Divines to
comfort him, but in these extremities consolation is a part of the misery. They
dispose him to unite all his thoughts to the last and most important act of his
life, to end it to his health, Justice in destroying the body, gives always
time to think of the health of the soul. At the point of death man sets up
his rest that being lost their is noe more to loose.
for it concerns the loss both of body and soul, Death being a game, which
if it be well played they hazard little to gain much.

He demanded of the Chancellor if he might not be allowed to receive the
Sacrament, but it was denied him, If the Sacrament be denied to them that are
condemned by Justice, the resolutions are drawn from the Coap. Super eo de
heret, in 6 and c. question 13. 9. 2.
They thought it fit that a Mass should be said before him, and that at the
end they should give him holy bread, and so (...) continued with the Divines,
about the examination of his conscience, till betwixt two and three of the
clock in the afeernoone, and then he was carried on horseback to the
Towne-house, where he disposed of that which the King suffered him to give by
his last will. He divided among the four companies of begging Friars
threescore half Crowns, which were all the jewels he had sowed in his
doublet, whereof the Hangman thought to make booty. John King of Ha^gary, whom
Sultan Soliman made K. of Buda, paying a tribut caused the head of Gritti,
son to a Duke of Venice, to be cut off. When the executioner had stripped him,
he found in his breeches a little purseful of precious stones which were valued
at 4000. crowns. Paul Iou. lib. 32.
Many Princes and noblemen held it then, and do yet hold it an act of wisdom
and foresight not to be without some pieces of gold, for that they may be
driven to that distress, and so ill asisted by their followers as for want of
an hundred Crowns, or much less, to stay the bad design of some desperate
fellow they may suddenly run into some dangerous fortune.

He had upon his finger a ring with a small diamond; he entreated the Bishop
of Paris his confessor to put it on the finger of the Image of our Lady of
Paris, and to offer it on his behalf. He charged another to give unto his
Grandchild a stone, which he ware about his neck, and which resisted poison,
but the Chancellor kept it to present it unto the King.

This disposition being made they led him to a great seaffold, from the which
they did ascend to an other which was less, but higher, where he should
receive an end of his life, Death is sweet when it is the end and not the
punishment of life. And they say it is a troublesome thing to die before one be
sick.
for a punishment. Upon the greater were the Chancellor, the Siegneur of
Gaucourt, and some other of the Kings Officers, all the place, and all windows
were full even to the tops of houses. He went up unto the Scaffold with his
hands unbound, He is executed at the Grieve.
the executioner bound them with a little cord. They presented him a Cushion of
other stuff then those be whereon the Constables The Chancellors and Constables
of France take their oath unto the King, kneeling upon a cushion of velvet, here
they offer the Constable one of wool, with the Arms of the City of Paris.
of France take their oath unto the King. He removed it with his foot and set
it right, and then he kneeled down with his face toward our Ladies Church.
There in the sight of heaven and of two hundred thousand people, the firebrand
of war was quenched the 29. day of December 1475 He dyed much amazed but full
of devotion and repentance: He dyed trembling.
To dye trembling after that manner, was not to dye like a man who had carried
the sword of France. The executioner should not have been more hardy to strike,
In what place soever death assailes a generous man he should die generously.
The generosity of courage does something abate the infamy of the punishment.
Rubrius Flauius being condemn thy Ne^o to loose his head, when as the
executioner said unto him that he should stretch forth his neck boldy, he
answered. Thou shall not strike more boldly then I will present my head.
then he to offer his neck to receive the blow. Thus he, who had no care, nor
thought but of division, had his head divided from his sholders, the which as
full of wind goes into the Air, and the body falls to the earth: the life
which remained caused some little motion, which makes the head to move apart,
and the body apart, but it is without soul, for that is not divided. The
Franciscane Friars carried the body to their Church, and they said then upon
the dispute which they had with the Curate of S. John, at the Grieve, that two
hundred Fria^s had had their heads cut off. We must conclude this discourse
with so certain a Maxim as whosoever shall affirm it cannot lie. Never any
one that dealt craftily with his Prince, but in the end he was deceived, and
there is nothing more certain by considerations of presidents, experience and
reason, that who so keeps his Master in fear forces him to free himself.

This place remained vnsupplyed above forty years, Importance of the office
of Constable.
for the command is so great over all the forces of the Realm, and the name of
such luster, as if it falls into the hands of an ambitious man, that is able to
make his authority march equal with the Kings, if of a Prince of the blood,
he is the Kings King, if of an other the Princes and great men of the Realm
will not obey him, and his commandment, as Bertrand of Gueschin said, Ber^rand
of Gueschin refused to accept the Office of Constable, for that he was but a
simple Knight and dur^t (...) presume to command the kings b^others, C^zins
(...) not your self by this means, for I have neither Brother, Cousin, nor
Nephews, Earl n^r Baron within my realm, but shall obey you willingly, if any
one should do otherwise, he should displease me. Froislard.
does concern the great rather then the less.

The Constables goods being forfeited were restored to Francis of Bourbon
Earl of Vendosme marrying Mary of Luxembourg. Her slender and small stature
brought into this house the smalnes of bodies of those great Princes, who
before were of that goodly and rich stature. The first beauty of men, admired,
and desired in Kings.

As the King had showed an example of his Justice in the Constables death, Duke
of Alencon set at liberty.
so did he one of his bounty to the Duke of Alenccon, The D. of Alencon was
co^ducted from the Louure, to the house of Michel Luillier on Thursday the 28.
of December 1475 at six of the clock at night by John Harlay Knight of the
watch with four torches, as the Author of the Chronicle does observe.
whom he suffered to go out of the Louure where he was a prisoner and to be
lodged in a Burgesses house of Paris. The fortune of this Prince was to be
pitied, and the consideration of his birth bound the Princes to commiseration.
He was of the blood of France, and the house of Alencon was a branch of that
of Valois. Charles of France Earl of Valois had two sons. Philip of Valois
King of France, and Charles of Valois Charles of Valois, Brother to Philip of
Valeis King of France had four sons by Mary of Spain his second ^ wife.
Charles who was a Iacobin, and then Archbishop of Lion, Peter Earl of Alencon,
Philip Archbishop of (...), and Robert Earl of Perch.
Earl of Chartres, and then of Alencon who dyed at the Battle of Crecy. He
was father to John first Duke Duke of Alencon, who married Marry of Brittanie,
and by her had this John the second of that name Duke of Alencon, his son
Rene Duke of Alencon married Margaret of Lorraine by whom he had Charles the
last Duke of Alencon married to Margaret of Orleans, the only Sister of King
Francis the first, and died without children.

By the Constables death the Duke of Bourgundy received from the King St.
Quentin, Profit and blame of the Duke for the Constables death.
Han, and Bohain, and the spoils of the dead which might amount to fourscore
thousand crowns. He was sorry that he had lost him who had made him have so
good a share in France. He was blamed to have given him a safe conduit and then
Behold the judgment, which the Lord of Argenton makes upon this delivery.
There was no need for the D. of Bourgundie who was so great a Prince and of so
famous and honorable a house to give an assurance to the Constable to take him
which was a great cruelty, the Battle where he was certain of death, and for
covetousness.
deliver him, 1476.
and to deliver him to him that pursued him after the assurances of Protection
and defense. This breach was noted for an infallible presage of the ruin of
his house.

The Annals of the Franche Contie of Bourgundy add an other cause, which was,
that the Duke had seized of a great sum of money at Aussone, which was levied
by the publication of the Croisadoe, and appointed for the war against
Infidels. From that time he approached still near unto this precipice, making
his grave in his own designs, as Silke-wormes die in their own works. He
began to distrust his own subjects and to take strangers. When a A Prince is
much weakened that it forced to distrust his subjects, and to employ strangers,
whose obedience, affection, and fidelity is not tied to any other respect but
their pay. They think they are freed from their says when as money fails.
Prince is brought to that misery, all goes to ruin. He reuiues in his soul
all the thoughts which he formerly had to be revenged of them that had offended
him. He will dispatch them first whom he holds the weaker, and remembering that
being before Nuz, Rene Duke of Lorraine had defied him, spoiled the Duchy of
Luxembourg, and razed Pierrefort, in revenge, for that after the death of John
Duke of Calabria and Lorraine, The Duke of Bourgundy declares war against the
Duke of Lorraine.
he had taken him prisoner, he resolved to make him repent it, whereupon he
armed for the conquest of Lorraine, by the which, besides the hereditarie
Titles of King of Jerusalem and Sicile, which are in this house, he promised to
make himself so mighty against the Germans, as he would make the Emperor
repent that he had denied him the title of King.

Ambition troubles his imaginations; it represents unto him all that in
possession which he has but in hope; he believes that all the ships that go
upon the sea are his; Ambitions great designs.
Ambition represents things as the ambitious man desires or propounds them. It
troubles the imagination. Trasillus thinks that a^ the ships which are in Pyrce
have se^sayle for him, he keeps a Register of them, and is sorry that his
brother Caton seeks to dissuade him, for he is never better content then with
these imaginations.
but as the moon is ecclipsed when she is full, so fortune, which had so much
favored him, grew dark when as he thought it had been complete. He thought to
have his triumphant chariot drawn not by Lions like to Marc Anthony, nor by
Elephants as Pompey, nor by stags like Aurelian, but by Princes like Sesostris.
The insolency of Sesostris King of Egypt in prosperity (...) so great and
disordred, as he caused four Kings to dra^ his Chariot in stead of horse, the
one of them fixing his eyes still upon the turning of the wheel burst out in
laughter, and being demanded bg S^sostris why he laughed: This wheel (said this
poor Prince) turning that up which was below, makes me remember my Condition,
and to think that yours may be the like.
He is as near as Sesostris to try the instability of this wheel, and that
the favors of fortune are no presents but baits.

The Earl of Campobach passing by Lion to go into Italy had made offer unto
the king to deliver unto him the Duke his master, Attemp^ against the Dukes
life discovered by the King
either a prisoner or dead, assuring that he could do it easily, the one by
poison, and the other when as the Duke should be riding upon a nag to view his
Army, as he was accustomed. He discovered this ungrateful and damnable
Intention to Simon of Pauia a Physician of Lion, and to St. Pry the Kings
Ambassador in Piedmont. The king did abhor and detest such a wickedness, to
the which the generosity of the blood of France would never have suffered him
to consent to gain the monarchy of the world. The answer was noble of
Alphonso the first King of Naples to Roger Earl of Pallanza, who offered to
kill* the King of Castile. If it were (said he) to be King of all the world I
would never consent ^o such a wickedness.
A prince that seeks to ryd himself of an enemy otherwise then by the course
of Arms is wicked. All treason is cursed and execrable. He advertised the
Duke It is an act of a free and generous spirit to reject those that offer to
betray their masters. Fabricius sent him to Pyr^us who had offered to poison
him.
by the Siegneur of Contay, but he contemned this advice, being unable to judge
of the intention of him that gave it, and thinking that it was to draw the
affection of a profitable and necessary servant into jealousy, he seemed to
make more esteem of this Traitor then he had done ever. The ^ame year 1476.
in October John Bon a Welch-man borne, and a household servant to the King, was
punished at Paris, for that he had conspired to poison the Dauphin. He was
condemned by the Provost of the Kings house to loose his head: being ready to
be executed the King sent unto him to know whether he had rather loose his eyes
then his head, he answered yea: then the executioner put out his eyes and
delivered him to his wife.

The Duke was then very busy at the siege of Nancy, Campobache, who was very
confident to Rene, dissuaded this enterprise. The Duke not able to taste the
reasons which he represented unto him, suffered himself to be so transported
with Choler, as he struck him, and yet against all reason and the rules of
wisdom, which do not allow any trust A man of courage which has received an
indignity or outrage desires to be revenged, and does long harbor this
desire in his heart, after which they must discharge him, and n^uer trust him
more. It is the precept of Thucidides, whosoever finds himself unjustly
wro^ged by him, that had no occasion, if he can once get from him, he will
seek to have a more sharp revenge then an open enemy.
to be given to servants that have been so entreated, he kept him still about
him.

He prevailed over Nancy, and Lorraine yielded to the yoke. This was not
sufficient; The Duke of Bourgundy seazeth upon Lorraine.
Ambition prescribed him new designs. He remembered that whilst he was encamped
before Nuz, the Suisses entering into Bourgundie had taken Blasmont, besieged
Hericourt, and defeated two thousand Bourgundians in Battle. He remembered the
complaints which James of Sauoy Earl of Romont, brother to the Duke of Sauoy,
had made unto him, he desires to revenge it in his revenging humor, Duke arms
against the Suisses.
and with it the Sovereign Majesty of Princes, which was wronged by the
rising of this people, who being in league to become masters of themselves,
said that the troop was better kept by many then by one alone, They that
prefer the government of many before that of one, say that a flock is better
kept by many dogs then by one alone. They are answered, that a ship which has
many Pilots or Masters is in m^re danger the^ that which has but one good one.
and in less then an hundred years had extinguished in their country the
memory of those which had commanded over them.

The King coniured him not to trouble himself with the conquest of a country
where he could not enter the stronger, He seeks to revenge the Earl of
Romon^s wrong.
but with hazard to die of hunger, nor weak but to be beaten, that the enemies
whom he tormented had pain enough to live in peace, and that he should seek
some better. Against an enemy that it poor and miserable, there is no great
hope of war nor profit. They did council Julian the Emperor to make war
against the Goths. I will said he, have better enemies, we must leave them to
the Merchants who sell them as they please. Sigonius Lib. 6. Imp. Occid.


The King parted from Tours in the beginning of February, The Kings voyage to
Lion.
in the year 1476. he past into Bourbonois and Auuergne, stayed at our Lady of
Puis, from thence to Lion, and so into Dauphine. It was to assure his frontier,
On that side where a neighbor is armed, they must always provide for the
frontier.
the Duke of Bourgundy and the Suisses being in Arms, and to be near at hand
to see what would be the issue of their quarrel. A desire to have often
advice made him to erect posts. Posts erected.
He did much apprehend the Duke of Bourgundies progress against the Suisses,
the which would have added much unto his power, for he had all the house of
Sauoy at his dispose, and the Duchess, although she were the Kings Sister, was
most passionate for the red Cross. The Duke of Bourgo^dy gap't after the Duchy
of Milan, Rene King of Sicile and Duke of Aniou held the conquest infallible,
and therefore he desired to adopt him for his son, and to give him the
County of Prouence. The D. upon this ^ope had sent Chasteau Guien into Pi^dmont
to leuy men, and to make them pass into Prouence.
The King of Sicile Earl of Prouence offered him Prouence. Galeas Duke of Milan
was his Ally. The Princes of Italy were of his intelligence, it was a
wonderful content unto him to see so many seek his friendship, The off^rs of
succors of alliance and friendship are pleasing when they may be forborne.
Magnificum. says Tacitus, Laetumque (...), it is sociorum auxiliis ambiri neque
indigere. It is stately to be offered so great succors from Allies and not to
need the^.
and to be able to pass without theirs. The Germans told the King that if he
did not declare himself against the Duke, they would make an accord with him
to make war against the King.

The King who saw far of and behind him, thought that his affaiers could not
long prosper, if the Dukes enterprise did succeed against the Swisses. The
Swisses being advertised of his resolution to assail them, they prepared to
let him know, that as a desire of command was natural in him, The Swisses crave
peace of the duke of Bourgundy.
so a resolution to defend themselves was also natural unto them. There are no
such people to be found. There were never any so simple as to submit themselves
volontarily to servitude without defense or resistance. As it is natural for
the Siciliens, says Hermo. crates, to seek to domineere over those that do
willingly submit themselves, so it is proper for a man to defend himself from
the injuries that any one would do him. Thucid.
But to lay all the blame upon him, they sent him their deputies to beseech him
to leave them in peace, they offer to forsake all Alliances which should be
offensive unto him, even that of France, that their countries deserved not the
pains he should take, for all the spoil and ransomes his soldiars could hope
for was not worth his horsemens spurs and bits. The deputies of the Cantons,
which were then but eight commonalties The liberty of the Swisses began in the
year, 1315. by the Alliance of Vry, Schuits and Vnderuald* Lucerne did
ascociate it self to these Cantons in the year, 1332. Zurich. 1350. Zug and
Glaris. 1352. Firbourg, and B^rne, 1401. S^leure. 1481. Basil and Schaffosue
in the year, 1501. App^^zel. 1514.
returned with nothing but words of choler from this Prince who was offended,
both for the succor they had given to the Duke of Lorraine, and for the injury
they had done to the Earl of Romont, having taken from him a cart laden with
sheep skins, so small an injury was the ruin of his house, whose most
illustrious mark was the Golden Fleece of a sheep.

This war being begun for less then figs or raysyns, or the head of a wild
boar Small matters have drawn great armies to field. A Swisse named Elico
brought figs and raynsis out of Italy to the Gauls, to make them know the
abondance and delights of the Contry: upon which motion the Gauls past the
Alps. The Lombards were invited by the like allurements. The war betwixt the
Etoliens and Arcadiens was long and bloody for the head of a wild b^are.
discharged his first furies upon Yuerdun, Light occasion of the war against
the Svvisses.
the which was taken and recovered again in few days, Granson, a town near
unto the Lake of Neuf Chastell, was beseeged and defended only by four
huundred Swisses of the Canton of Berne, who not finding themselves strong
enough, Army strong in men and artillery against the Svvisses.
nor the town to be held against so great forces (for the Duke had fifty
thousand men, and a great number of ordynance, of diverse sorts) I. de Serres
writes that the Duke of Bourgondy had five hundred pieces of ordinance of all
sorts. The History of the Swisses reports that they took in the spoils, 400.
peece^ ^ey. 400 allerlye buchse^ If we consider the equipage necessary for all
this, we will h^ld it a fable.
they abandone it and fire it, and then retire into the Castle, where they
compounded to have their lives saved. The Capitulation was not observed, for
the Duke being incensed that the beseeged had endured many days seege, Seege
of Granson.
caused four score to be hanged, two hundred to be drowned, and the rest to be
put to ransom: an Act which thrust the other towns into despair, and gave
them so much courage, as they resolved never to trust this Princes faith any
more, and rather to see themselves ruined then to yield.

Being victor over this first resistance, he promised unto himself the like
issue, The Duke shows all his riches at the seege of Granson.
and as he was in the Mountains, not to fight but to triumph, he discoursed
rather what he should do after the victory, then what was to be done. It is a
ridiculous presumption to assure himself of that which depends of the
inconsta^cy of fortune, Caesar mocked at Pompeys captains, who talked more how
they should use the victory, the^ ^ow they should fight. Nec quibus rationibus
superare possent, sed quemadmedum vti victoria debeberent, ^ogitabant* Caes.
lib. 3. de Bell. Civil.
His Camp was a general show of the riches and state of his house, the
content whereof depended more of other men's eyes then of his own. He never
shows himself but in rich and stately arms, the pure gould was not more
precious. He shows not himself to foreign Ambassadors but glistering with
stoanes, his tents and pauillions were of cloth of gold, and his mouables
inestimable, for there was more in that house then in three of the greatest of
Europe, his equipage was also as rare in proffitable pieces, as that of Darius
was in unprofitable mouths: more fitting for an army of women or of Eunukes.
Parmenio writing to Alexander of that which he had found in Darius b^g^age,
numbers, 300 Curtesa^^ for music, 46 me^ to make Crowns and garlands of
flowers, 270. makers of sau^es, 29. Potters, 40. Perfumers and about, 80.
Officers of the Goblet, Athen. lib. 13. ca 30.


The Swisses gather together to succor Granson, thinking that the beseeged
would give them time. The Canton of Berne sent eight thousand men, Swisses co^
to succor Granson after the loss.
and the rest made ten thousand, they came to Neuf Chastell the day of the
Composition, which was the last day of February, 1476. On Saturday the third of
March they went to field with an order seemlie in all things, but very
profitable and goodly for the war, There is nothing so commendable in war
as order be it in marching or fighting. Xenephon says that it is the
goodliest and most profitable thing in men. Among the precepts of Vegetius this
is singular, Vt omnes milites in acic vel in itinere incedendi ordinem seruent.
v^g^t. C. ^. That all the soldiars should keep order, either standing in
Battle, or marching.
being come to Basts, a village above Neuf Chastell, they would have seized
upon the Castle of Famerku which is shut up betwixt the Mountain and the
Lake, whereof the Duke had seized the Day before; the Army having recovered the
top of the hill, they descouered that of the duke of Bourgoundy standing in
three great Bartaylons, and their ordinance before them: The Swisses did not
think to have seen them so soon in that order, and found that it was in good
earnest, and that they must of necessity join.

Wherefore they caused their forward to march in the which were the troops of
the Cantons of Bierne, Encounter of both armies at Granson.
Schuitz and Biene, the Battle followed afterwhere were the Banners and
standards of the Cantons, which are never displaied but upon great occasions
when as the Commonweal is in danger.

They keep them always in the midst of the body of the army, as the most
sacred and in violable pieces of the army; they hold it infamous and
unfortunate to loose them. The reproaches which are at this day most sharp and
shameful among them, renew the memory of such losses. They reproach them of
Zurich, who for that they had lost their enseigne a^ a Battle given at
Vuinterberg, had sense added a band of purple, but the marks of this quality
were black. And this has been given to Zurich by the Emperor Raoule of
Ha^spourg, for an honor. Simlerus.
A town cannot give a greater testimony of want of valor then to have lost
her enseigne, as a soldiar cannot do an Act more unworthy of his profession
then to abandon his colors. The Roman soldiar took an oath to follow his
General in all places, not to attempt any thing against the people and not to
abandon his Enseigne.


They had some few horse led by Erman of Eptingen. Those of St^ausbourg being
about one thousand and two hundred horse, lost the opportunity to be there,
having charged their quarter the day before for the discommoditie of forrages,
not thinking that the Duke of Bourgundy would appear so soon. The footmen of
Basil were appointed for the reere-ward, least the enemy should come and
charge them behind.

In the mean time the Duke moves, The Dukes Army put into (...) Battles.
he draws his three Battailons together, and causes some lances to advance to
begin the charge, they give with great cries (signs of courage Cries in the
beginning of a Battle were held by the Romans for a desire to fight and an
abundance of courage. A Captain in the second book of Tit. Liu. speaks after
this manner to his soldiors, Si iam satis animi est, decernique placet a gite
dum, clamorem, quale^ in acie sublatu^^ estis, his tollite, Iudicem voluntatis,
virtutisque vestrae. If you have yet courage enough, and desire to be noted, go
on and raise up such a cry, as you are accustomed to do in Battle, which is a
sign of your w^ls and virtues.
) and fury upon the Suisses Battle, which withstood them valiantly. At the
same time the Suisses horsemen charged the Dukes army in flank, and the
footmen followed with such violence as the Bourgundians were forced to retire;
those that were in the last ranks took this recoyling for a flight, and put
themselves in disorder.

Those few horse which had done this effect, Victory of the Suisses and
recovery of Granson.
would have pursued them that fled, thinking that they might with reason doubt
of their courage against them that held good, if they showed not some proofs
against them that ran away. He that does not charge the that waver, will be
very stayed against the^ that stand firm. One said unto Agis, that he should
let his enemies pass. And how then shall we charge them that resist if we do
not fight with them that fly? Plut.
But the Colonel Eptingen stayed them, showing them how dangerous it was, for
so small a number to follow so great and mighty an Army, The Roman Army did
commonly consist of 24000. men, and for the most of fifty thousand. With this
number they did encounter the Gauls and Affricans. They made war with order
and Art, and these with numbers and fury.
which was yet whole, and had endured no other harm, but what had happened by
their amazement; That they might rallie themselves again together, turn head,
and take from them the advantage which they had, and that very easily, being
far from their foot, who could not follow the chase.

The Duke had but too many men. Multitudes have not always gotten the greatest
victories. Pyrrhus demanded but fifteen thousand men to assail the world.
There was a little Hill near unto it, on the which the Duke gathered together
what troops he could, and presented himself to fight, but the Suisses
encouraged and puffed up with the good fortune of this first encounter returned
furiously to the charge. The Dukes horsemen found their own weakness against
these great Battailons of Pikes; if they had left their horses the charge had
been greater Philip Viscomte D. of Milan being assailed by 1^000. S^^sses, sent
the Earl of Carmagnoles with 6000 horse, and some few foot to ^^ght with them,
he was repulst with loss, but finding the great advantage of the Suisses arms
against horsemen, he resol^ed to return, and being near ^e caused his men at
Arms to light, who br^ke the Suisses, slew 15000, and the rest laying down
their Arms yielded*
but the amazement was such as the Dukes Army resolved as soon to a General
abandon of Camp, baggage and Artillery, as to fight.

The Suisses recovering Granson, they took them of their Nation down whom the
Duke had caused to be hanged, and in their place hung up as many Bourgundians
with the same halters. The spoil was above three millions in gold, moueables
and jewels, whereof the victors made so little esteem, through the ignorance
of price of things, as they gave gold for copper, and silver for tynne; They
tare tents and pauillions of cloth of gold in pieces to apparel their wives
and children. They lived yet in the commendable ignorance of money which made
Sparta for fine hundred years the Queen of Greece. Soarta flourished by the
laws of Lycurgus, but when as under the reign of Agis it began to know gold
and silver, and to love and admire riches, then werethey violated and came to
nothing. Plut. in the life of Li^urgus.


The Dukes great Diamond which was held a master piece of the sun, was sold for
a Florin to a Priest, who was so religious as he sent it to the Magistrates of
his Canton, who gave him six shillings starling. They say that this piece past
through many hands for a small price, at last it came unto a Geneua Merchant
remaining at Lion, who sold it for eleven thousand Florins, and then Pope Iulio
the second had it for twenty thousand. They found also three Rubies alike,
which were called the three Brethren, with other inestimable Jewels, which were
little esteemed by the Suisses. Their General made many Knights after this
victory, three of Zurick, four of Berne, two of Basil, and some of
Strausbourg. Valor is no less respected in Commonweals then in Monarchies,
in the first they love valiant men, in the other they fear them, and although
that in the commonweals There proceed more excellent men (...) of
Commonweales then out of Realms for that men gr^w excellent and make proof of
their virtue as they are employed and rewarded by the Prince or commonweal, so
as where there are many Principalities and diverse Est^tes so they also find
greater ^obers of valiant men. Asia had sew for that it was all under the
Empire of one alone. Affricke in like manner, Carthage has raised many. Emrope
having been divided into many Empires, has had more then all the rest, and the
fear they have had one of another has made the profession of Arms to flourish
and that they which have excelled have been partakers of honors and public
recompenses.
they apprehend always least some one which excels the rest in merit, should
attempt to exceed them in authority: yet it is certain that Europe for that
it has had more commonweals then Affricke or Asia, being subject to the
power of one alone, has had more excellent Captains then those, and after
that Rome had made but one state of all the world, and that virtue had no other
Theater but Rome the Estates of Europe began to neglect the excellency of
Arms, virtue giving her favors and recompenses no where but at Rome.

This was a great Corosiue unto him, to see himself vanquished by them whom
he contemned and held unworthy of his courage, but much more to see that his
reputation which he had so highly preserved was blemished for that it was well
known that he had come from Granson to Ioigne without any stay, and that it
was a dishonorable thing that footmen had caused such mighty troops of horse
to fly fifteen leagues. Courage of the D. of Bourgondy after the Battle lost.


But he has courage enough remaining not to faint under the rigor of this
misfortune. He does not blame his own rashness but the blindness of fortune, and
the daily hazard of arms. He has lost nothing but what may be recovered for
money, the loss concerned himself alone and if it deserved grief no heart
should be touched therewith but his. He thought that the greatness of his house
Indiscretion does ^alwaies take fortune to warrant her from reproach for her bad
government. Fortune alone is commended ir, all men's Actions soly esteemed and
soly outraged, and soly blamed for bad events.
and of his fortune stood yet firm as long as he had an army on foot. He
coniured the chief noblemen which suffered in this loss to forget it, and to
change their grief into wrath against enemies unworthy of such a booty, and to
make them buy the little profit which they had gotten at a dear rate. The
words which proceed from the mouth of a Prince after any lo^se should be
generous. M. Crassus seeing that the Parthians carried the head of Pub: Crassus
his son upon a lance and that this sight did daunt the courage of his
soldiers, he went through the band crying out the grief of this loss does
concern me alone, but the greatness of the Fortune and glory of Rome remaynes
invincible so long as you stand firm: Yet if you have compassion on me who
have seen me loose so virtuous and so valiant a son, I beseech you to
convert it into wrath against your enemies, and make them bu^e the joy which
they have received dearly.


Thus he resolved to have his revenge, but nothing troubled him but the King.
He fears that he will make his profit of this loss, and that he will anoy
him, wherefore he sends the Siegneur of Contay unto him, The Duke seeks for a
continuance of the Truce with the King.
to advertise him of this accident, and the opinion he has to repair it to
his advantage beseeching him with words of humility, befitting the condition of
his affairs more then the greatness of his courage to entertain the Truce, and
to excuse him if he came not to Auxerre as they had concluded together.

Although the Duke were in bad estate, yet the King considering that he had
lost nothing but his reputation, and that he had his estates and forces entire,
would not break with him, but assured him all that he desired for the Truce.
He could not believe that this Prince was ruined, so long as he had a sword
remaining in his hand. The loss^ of reputation is great, i^ should never be
hazarded, but it may be recovered if the estate remain, it being lost they
labor in vain to return again; a vanqu^shed prince is m^s^rable that is
expelled his estates.
he knew that his subjects carried so great a^^ection and loialty that they
would not suffer him long in that necessity, that arms were changeable and
that all the nations in the world had many examples, and France some, how that
the vanquished had subdued the victors and that a Prince is not ruined so long
as he has a spirit, hope and a sword remaining. As long as a Prince keeps
himself up how ruinous soever his affairs he, we must not ^ould him for
lost. Masanissa being put to rout by Siphar, saved himself by swimming* hid
himse^fe in a Cave being bruted that he was dead. He went to field being cured
of a wound received, and recovered his Realm. Leonidas son to Syph^x
expell^d him another time, he fled with 70. horse and by Scipios means was
restored.


The King informed himself particularly of this defeat, Contay told him that
there were but seven men at arms slain, Number of them that were slain in
the battle.
but the loss of the baggage was inestimable. The King being among his most
confident servants made it appear that nothing displeased him so much as the
little number. He commanded them to make Contay good cheer, who made no show
to hear the people of Lions singing through the streets the shame and ruin
of this battle, the courage of the Suisses and the rashness of the Bourgondians,
for at that time there was not a Battle but there was presently a Song made of
it. The custom is very ancient to make hymms and Songs of Battles and
victories. There are examples in Aristophanes and in Plutark in the life of
Flaminius. Charle maigne caused a collection to be made of all the rimes of the
like subject.


This hard encounter bred a great alteration in men's minds and affections.
Those which feared the courage and admired the prosperity of this Prince, began
presently to contemn him after the news of this rout. There was not any
friend, no love. Galeas Duke of Milan renouncing the alliance the had made with
him, besought the King to renew those which he formerly had with France, and
offers him a hundred thousand Ducats. The King made this brave and proud answer
to his Ambassador. Tell your master that I will none of his money, and that
once in a year I levy three times more then he, as for peace and war I
will dispose as I please, but if he repent himself to have left my alliance to
embrace that of the Duke of Bourgondy, I am content to return as we was: upon
which words the Truces were published again.

This good news augmented the content which the King took at Lion, whether
Rene Duke of Aniou came to see him. This good Prince who had seen the death of
his three sons, Rene Duke of Aniou comes to the King.
and had but one daughter Rene Duke of Aniou had by Isabel daughter to Charles
Duke of Lorayne three sons who died in the flower of their years. John Duke
of Calabria. Nicholas Duke of Bar. Lewis marquis of Pont, and yoland.
put the Duke of Bourgondy in some hope that he would adopt him for his son:
and transfer the rightes of his house to the Crown of Sicile, with the
Earldom of Prouence and this Prince had already sent Chasteau Guion into
Piedmont with 20. thousand crowns to levy soldiers and to pass them into
Prouence, to take possession thereof. The King being advertised hereof sent to
Phillip Earl of Sauoy to seize upon Chasteau Guion with his money and men.
He had great difficulty to save his own person but lost his money, adding
this loss to others which his master had received.

The King entreated him to come to Lion, and not to deal with the Duke of
Bourgondy who sought to ruin him. The good old man being discontented with the
Duke of Lorraine, who had forced him to give his daughter After the death of
Charles the first of that name* Duke of Lorraine, Rene Duke of Aniou pretended
the Duchy, as husband to Isabell daughter to Charles. He lost a Battle
against the Earl of Vaudemont, and was taken prisoner and forced to give his
Daughter Yoland to Ferry of Lorraine son to Anthony Earl of Vaudemont.
Yoland of Aniou to Ferry his son, resolved to this voyage. Complaint of the
Du: of Aniou made by the Seneshall.
He led with him John Cosse Seneshall of prouence, who with a freedom worthy
of the age wherein he lived and little known to them of his nation, (for he was
a Sicilien) let the King understand that all which Rene of Sicile sold to Lewis
of Chalon the homage and sovereignty of the Principality of Oranges, his Son
submitted it to the Parliament of Dauphine, and afterward K. Lewis restored it
unto him.
Duke Rene had treated with the Duke of Bourgondy touching Prouence and Sicily,
and that which he had dismembered to the benefit of the Prince of Orange, was
only to make his majesty know the wrong which he had done him in detaining the
Castles of Bar and Angers, and crossing him in all his affairs, that this
dispight had forced him to these resolutions, the which notwithstanding he had
no desire to effect if he might otherwise have reason from his majesty.

The King taking the liberty of this Discourse in good part, as free from
flattery, and seasoned with discretion, To fit a discourse to flattery for to
please, is impudency, but it is a great indiscretion to be to free and hardy,
to avoid pleasing and flattery. They must observe a mean. Seemelinesse comes
from mediocritie. (...) Plut.
he found truth in it which he could not gainesay, the which did bind him by
all courtesy and good usage to deface the discontents which the good old man
his Uncle King of Sicile had against him. The Chronicle says, that he made
him great cheer at Lion, he made him see the fair of St John, and the fair
Dames of Lion, but he did well requite this good cheer, for before he parted
he contented the King with such assurances as he desired to add Prouence to
the Crown.

The Duke of Bourgundy had besieged Morat, Morat besieged by the Duke of
Bourgundy
a small Town two leagues from Berne with an army of fourscore thousand men.
The Suisses had twelve thousand Pikes, ten thousand Halbards, and ten thousand
shot. The Duke of Lorraine came also with such troops as the King had given
him, and although the number were not great, yet he was commended by the
Suisses. They were weary says Phil. de Com. in our Court of the D. of
Lorraine. When a great man has lost al his own, most commonly he tires them
that support him.
There might be in all some thirty two thousand foot, and three or four
thousand horse.

The Duke of Bourgundy held it impossible for the Suisses or the Duke of
Lorraine to succor Morat, Battle of Morat won by the Suisses.
and yet they did attempt it and execute it very happily. As they approached the
Duke saluted them with his Canon which did play so furiously upon their
troops as presently there were many horses seen without riders. The Suisses
notwithstanding march on, for the way was such as they must either advance
forward or retire back: they charged the Dukes troops, beat them back, and
force many to seek their safeties in the Lake, into which they waded up to the
chins: but they were noe more assured in the water then on the land, the fury
of the victorious soldier slew them like Duckes. It was presently made red
with the blood of this slaughter, many fled to the next Forest, and were
slain there. The Duke returned from Suisserland, as He that will see in what
equipage Xerxes returned out of Greece, w^ether he had led a hundred thousand
men, let him read the tenth Satire of Iuuenall.*
Xerxes did out of Greece.

* Sed qualis redijt? nempe vna naue cruentis,
Fluctibus ac tarda per densa cadauera prora,
Has toties optata exigit gloria paenas.
The Suisses having continued three days upon the place of Battle, they
dismissed half their troops, and with the rest recovered the places which the
Duke had taken, Petterlingen, Romon and Milden: they enter at Losanna without
resistance and find that all were fled. Suisses enter the contrie of Vaux.
They become masters of all the country of Vaux, and think to do as much unto
Sauoy, to make it known that they that would not be their friends, were their
enemies, Aristenus says in the 9. Book of Titus Liu. speaking of the E^oliens.
Romanos aut socios habere oportet, aut hosts, media via nulla est. The Romans
must either have fellows and friends, or enemies there is no middle way.
that there was no mean betwixt both. The Lady Yoland, Mother and Gouernesse
to the Duke had broken the Treaties of Alliance, having favored the Earl of
Romonts quarrel against them, and given passage to the Duke of Milans troops,
and to the Bourgonians to make war in Suisserland. Geneua compounds with the
Suisses.
The Town of Geneua paying four and twenty thousand Florins was presented
from the storm which their Bishop of of the house of Sauoy had drawn upon
them.

The Duke retired into the Franch Contie, Affliction of the Du: after the
Battle.
oppressed with so many griefs and discontents as no man durst come near him.
If this great Battle did not draw water from the air, as they say that after
great and bloody Battles there shall fall great showers, After great Battles
follow great showers, for that there is some God which does wash and pu^ifie the
earth polluted with humane blood, or for that the dead bodies and the blood
which is spilt cast up gross vapors which thicken in the air. Plut.
it did from the eyes of many widow women and Orphans, for the number of the
dead was eighteen thousand of both sides: the History of Germany speaks of
two and twenty thousand.

The Duke vexed at this unfortunate success, the which he had attempted more
to revenge the injuries of the house of Sauoy then for his own, and fearing
least the Duchess of Sauoy should reconcile her self unto the King her
Brother, The Duchess of Sauoy seized on by the Bourgundians.
and that the Sauoyards should follow the fortune of the victory, he commanded
Oliver of la March to seize upon the Duchess and her two sons. He stayed her
near unto the ports of Geneua, set her on horseback behind him, and gave
order to them of his troop to do the like unto her two sons and two
Daughters. The Duke of Sauoy was saved and carried to Geneua. Oliver de la
March he went on his way all night, past the mountain, came unto a place
called Myiou, and from thence to S. Claud, and from thence to Rochfort, and in
the end to Rouure near unto Dijon. The King drew her from thence by the Lord
of Chaumont, and caused her come to Tours, The Duchess of Sauoy being prisoner
at Rouure sent unto the King to beseech him to set her at liberty. If she had
not bin in these extremities, she would not have done it, the hatred had been
so great betwixt the King and her.
whether he went after his departure from Lion. Being arrived there, he saluted
her with these words. Madame of Bourgundy you are very welcome. To whom she
answered, that she was a good French woman and ready to obey his commandments.
He took her at her word and this first answer was the best. The first answers
of women are commonly the best. It is that which Ulysses considered in Homer
pressing the soul of a woman to answer speedily.
Their humors and their passions were very contrary to extract the essence of
true and perfect love. She leaves the D. of Burgundies party.
Many things had past in their lives which had as it were losened the Cyment of
this brotherly affection. Philip de Commines says, that he conducted her to
her chamber, and caused her to be well entreated. True it is that he had (...)
great desire to be rid of her, and she as great to be far from him.

The King would willingly that she had married the Princes her children to his
humor, but she excused her self, and wrought so as by his means and the
mediation of the Duke of Lorraine and the Archduke of Austria, she retired
from the Suisses some of those lands which they had seized on, paying fifty
thousand Florins for the charges of war, but it was not possible for the
Earl of Romont to recover his. Eight days after the King caused her to be
conducted into her Contrie with her children, but before they parted one from
an other, they would be assured of the promises of love which they had made,
and not trusting to bare words they added writings and others. They deprived
themselves of that content which their wills might have received in producing
freely the effects of a reciprocal affection and confidence. But they had
rather be bound to religion then to Nature.

From this Flower-de-Luce are issued two Princes which have governed in Sauoy.
A^e the 3. Duke of Sauoy husband to Yoland of France succeeded Lewis the second
his father in the year 1468. Philip the seventh D. married to Mary of Bourbon.
Philibert the eight to Margaret of Austria* the ninth, Charles to Beatrix of
Portugal: the tenth. Emanuel Philibert, to Margaret of Valo^s: the eleventh
Charles Emanuell to Catherine of Austria.
She was mother to Philibert and to Charles, Philibert reigned ten years under
her charge, every one desired to have this Prince in his power. King Lewis, as
his Uncle by the Mothers side. Charles Duke of Bourgundy, as his kinsman and
neighbor. The Earls of Bresse, Romont and Geneua, his Uncles by the fathers
side, who would exclude Galeas Duke of Milan, who had given him his Daughter,
took also the government. He dyed and left no^ children.

Charles his brother succeeded him and married Blanch of Montferrat: of them
was borne Charles the sixth, whose barren reign was but nine months shorter
then his life. He lived six years eleven months. Philip Earl of Bresse,
son to Lewis, and great Grandfather to Charles Emanuel, who had been prisoner
at Loches succeeded him, a great Prince, as all they have been whose fortunes
have been tossed and crossed. They whom a variable and unconstant fortune has
exercised and tried govern themselves better then others Tacitus speaks it of
Caractatus. Que^ multa ambigua, multa prospeta ext^lerant, vt c^teros
Britannorum Imperato respr^mineret. Whom many crosses and many good fortunes
had raised up, that he might exceed the rest of the British commanders. After
that Iustus Lipsius to confirm this truth has spoken of Charles the fi^t, and
Lewis the eleventh: he adds Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and concludes
that the Greek word, is true (...). I have learned of them that have hurt me,
Miseria brudentiae bona matter. Misery i^ a good mother of wisdom.


At the Kings return from Lion, Alfonso K. of Portugal comes to demand succors
in France.
Alfonso King of Portugal came to salute him, being at Tours, he came unto
him as to his last refuge, being no longer able to resist the power of King
Ferdinand and Isabelta. The cause of their contention is well worthy the
knowing, and to understand it we must remember that it was formerly said that
by the peace made betwixt John King of Castille and John of Navarre, Blanch
the eldest Daughter of Navarre was married to Henry of Castille Prince of the
Asturies, and that the marriage was not consummated by reason of the
disabilitie and coldness of the husband. Pope Eugenius the third, gave a
dispensation for the degree of proximitie that was betwixt the married couple,
and the marriage was celebrated at Madrid in the year 1440.


The bashfulnes and modesty of this Princess made her dissemble her
misfortune, Disabilitie of Henry K. of Castill^*
whereof no man might inconsiderately grow in doubt, for the Prince was of a
manlike and brave aspect, but his actions were faint and languishing. They were
but five and twenty years old when they were married. At one and thirty he
succeeded to his father, who died in the year 1454 of a quartaine Ague, after
that he had put Aluaro de Luna Dom Aluato de Luna abusing the greatness of his
charge and the great love the King bare him, was hated of the Princes and
Noblemen of Castille, they forced the King to banish him six years from the
Court. His faction won the Prince D. Henry, who armed against his father, and
wroght so as he was restored to favor, and made Master of the Order of S.
James, but seeking to be revenged of his enemies; and making many enterprises
against them, Queen Isabel favoring them, made the King resclue to put him in
prison: and to have him ex^cuted at Veil dos^t. The King did forfeit al his
goods, they did set a silver Basin whereas his head was to receiu that which
passers by would give for his entertainment. A remarkable example of the
inconstancy of Kings and fortunes favors, Al sin (...) vita, a la tarde loa el
dia. The life is commended by the end, and the day by the Evening.
his Constable to death, and had reigned nine and forty years and six
months. Henry succeeded him, and Alfonso his second son was great Master of
the Order of St. James, he would willingly have given him his Crown, for the
grief he had conceived for Henry's disobedience. His Daughter Isabella was but
three years old, to whom he gave the Town of Cuellar, and a great sum of
money for her marriage. All things succeeded otherwise then he had proiected.
The eternal providence, which has written in his tables of Diamond the
adventures of things, which are, have been and shall be, had disposed after
another manner.

But as the most constant patience is tired at length this Princess, The Pope
dissolues the marriage for sterilitie.
having for a long time endured her husbands disabilitie, began to murmr, and
he prevented her complaints, presenting a request unto the Pope to be
separated from her, and showed that she was barren and could not be a mother,
and that the affairs of Castille required an heir. The Pope dissolved the
first marriage and suffered him to marry again with Ione Infanta of Portugal,
Sister to King* Alfonso, and Daughter to King Edward, a Princess exceeding
fair, who more desirous to be a Queen then a wife, consented to this
marriage, notwithstanding that she was fully advertised of the disabilitie of
the husband which she took, who although he were a great Prince could not have
found a woman, where as every one may have for his money. But she made it
known that a politic woman never dies without an heir.

On the other side the King held the blemish of disabilitie to be so
dishonorable, as to make the contrary known* and to have children to succeed
unto his Crown, he consented that Bernard de la Cueua, one of his favorites
Some write that D. Ioane consented thereunto by force, but when she had once
made this leap, she had more need of a bridle then a spur. A wonderful
incontinency and impudency. Being at it were confined to the Castle of
Alacaes, under the custody of the Archbishop of Seuelle she had by D. Pedro the
Archbishops Nephew two children, D. Ferdinand and D. Apostol.
should lie with the Queen, who presently conceived with child, and to the end
it should not be thought to be done by supposition, he would have her
delivered in the presence of Henry Earl of Alba de Lista, the Archbishop of
Toledo, and the Marquis of Vellena. It was a Daughter, which had for her
Godfather the Earl of Armagna^, who was at that time Ambassador in Castille to
King Lewis the eleventh.

Wisdom and discretion might have made this deceit more fortunate then it
was, Henry the king of Castille degraded.
for all Spain made demonstration, of incredible Joy for the birth of this
Daughter, but there was folly and indiscretion of all sides. The King, who
would confirm this opinion that he was a gallant man, sought the love of other
women, who soon discovered the deceit. The Queen made show to be jealous,
entertained her love securely with D. Bernard, so as the great familiarity he
had with her made the world doubt of her chastity, and when as they saw that
the King honored him with the chief charges of the Realm, making him master
of the order of St James, and then Duke of Albuquergue, they did imagine that
he made him play his part in this Comedy, which ended with cruel and tragical
effects, for the Great men of the realm made a league to seize upon D. Alfonso
and D. Isabella, brother and Sister, to the end that this Bastard should not
deprive them of their rights. Alfonso being about twelve years old was
proclaimed K. of Castille by them, and then did D. Henry show the imbecillitie
and weakness of his Nature, for whereas he should have opposed himself against
those mutinies, he suffered them to get such credit and authority, as the
Archbishop of Toledo, being sent for to come unto him, to the end he might
pacify those troubles, he said unto him that brought him this charge. Tell
your King that I am weary of him and his affairs, and that he shall shortly
see who is the true King of Castille.

The Grandos of the Realm assembled in a great plain near unto Auila to
degrade the King from the royal dignity. That which they could not do unto
his person, Alfonso proclained K. of Castille.
they did unto his statue When as King Henry understood of this degradation,
which was in June 1^65. he said, I have bred up children and they have
contemned me. I came naked from my mothers womb, and the earth at^ends me
naked: No man can live so poorly as he is borne, and it God expels me now
for my fins he will comfort and preserve me afterward, for his infinite power
is that which kills and restores to life, which wounds and cures: that which
gives Siegneuries and takes them away, which raises up Kings, and pulls them
down when he pleases.
which they presented upon a scaffold: when as the Herad said that D. Henry was
degraded from the royal dignity, the Archbishop of Toledo took the Crown
from his image, the Earl of Plaisance the sword, and the Earl of Beneuent the
Scepter, this done Diego Lopes cast it out of the royal seat. Alfonsos
standard was advanced, and poor Henry shouted at and contemned. They would end
the quarrel by a battle before Olivedo. The Battle of Oluiedo was in the
year 1467. They do not agree who had the victory. D. Alfonso was seen armed
a^ all pieces encouraging his men. D. Henry appeared not in the fight, but
entered triumphing toward night into Medina del Campo
The two Armies fought by order, one squadron against another. The Archbishop
of Toledo led his army having a white stole upon his arms. The combat
continewed three hours, and ended with so great disorder of either side, as
both parties made bonfiers for the victory.

The Pope sent his Legate Anthony de Veneris Bishop of Lion, the Popes Legate,
being in Spain, commanded them to lay down Arms upon pain of
excommunication, the great men of Spain opposed themselves and said that they
appealed to a Council. The Licentiat John D. Alcacer and Doctor Alphonso of
Madrigall were committed for this appeal.
to pacefie these troubles, during the which King D. Alfonso having reigned
three years died of the plague at Cardegnosa: Death of Alfonso King of
Castille.
The League would have declared Isabella heir of the Realm, the which she
would not accept the King her brother living, whereupon a peace was made, by
which she was declared Princess of Castille the nineteenth of September, 1468.
upon condition that she should not marry without the consent of the King her
brother. They would have married her to Alfonso of Portugal, who was a
widower, and D. Ioane to John the eldest Son of Portugal, upon condition
that if there came no children of the marriage of the Pincesse Isabell, D.
Isabella was sought for in marriage by the brother of King Lewis, and by the
King of Englands brother. She made choice of D. Ferdinand Prince of Arragon. He
came to see her unknown, D. Guttiere of Cardona who co^ducted him showed him
her, saiing in Spanish, Esse es. It is he. To whom the Princess answerered
suddenly, and S. Shall Be thine arms, upon this cause the family of this knight
does at this day carry an S in t^eir arms and device.
those which issued from the marriage of D. Ioane should succeed to the realm
Castille. But D. Isabella had other thoughts, she loved Ferdinand son to John
King of Navarre and Arragon, whom she caused to come to Vaillidolet in a
disguized habit and married him the eighteenth of October. 1469. Isabella of
Castille marries Ferdinand of Arragon


King Henry was so incensed at this marriage, as he declared his Sister fallen
from all the rights which she might pretend to the crown of Castille, and
caused Ioane his daughter to be proclaimed his true heir, who was married to
Charles Duke of Guienne, as has been formerly said. This treaty of marriage
was broken by the death of the Dukd of Guienne. King Henry died also. The death
of Henry the 4. King of Castille was in the year 1474. the one and forty year
of his age and the on and twenteth of his reign He was interred in the great
Chapel of the Monastery of Guadalupe. He appointed 52. lamps of silver to
burn day and night upon his tomb.
And notwithstanding that the Crown were assured to Ferdinand and Isabel, yet
Ioane continued the title of Queen of Castille, Troops sent out of France
into Castille.
and in this quality she married with Alfonso King of Portugal, which was an
occasion of great wars. The French King being discontented with the house of
Arragon, and the war of Pergignan, sent troops to the King of Portugal under
the command of Aman of Albret. Ambassadors have oste engaged their Masters in
very ruin ous voiages. Philip de Co^mines who had treated with them of the K.
of Portugal, says that if they had been well advised, they would have
informed themselves better of matters here, before they had councelled their
Master to this voyage which was very prejudicial unto him.


But the King of Portugal having lost his enterprises and his Partisans, was
forced to retyer himself into Portugal carring away no other triumph of the
war of Castille, but the Princess D. Ioane his wife, whom notwithstanding
he would not mary before he were assured of the Realm of Castille, and
therefore he went into France to implore aid from King Lewis, with whom he
had treated an alliance by his Ambassadors, who under the good chere which was
made them, and the good words which were given them during the treaty, without
any other intent, persuaded their Master to come into France, assuring him
that he should do more by his presence for the succors which he demanded, then
by the mediation of his servants, and that there might be a marriage made
betwixt the Dauphin and D. Ioane his Niece.

He landed at Marseille, Alfons^ K of Portugal comes to Tours.
came to Lions, and so went down the river of Loire to Tours, where he
acquainted the King with the cause of his voyage. Necessity ^orceth Princes
even to things unworthy of their quality. They write that this Prince besought
the King to succor him with such vehemence and humanity as he fell on his
knees at his heete.
It had not been secret though he had been silent. Kings come never to the
gates of other Kings to offer or to give, but to demand and entreat. He carried
a Lamp in his hand which descouered his heart. The discommodities of great
Princes cannot be hi^den. Ariston says that poverty is a lamp, which does
lighten and make all the miseries of the world be seen.


The Kings affairs would not suffer him to be more liberal to this Prince of
good effects then of good words. Lewis refuses him succors.
If he had no other consideration but of the estate of Spain, he had taken an
other course, but he had always for a perpetual object the greatness of the
house of Bourgondy, whereof he durst nor judge so long as the Duke was armed,
and therefore he had rather fail his friends then himself.

To resolve of the succors which the King of Portugal required of him, he
consulted rather with reason then affection, Resolutions taken by the Counsel
of affection, are subject to change those which are grounded upon reason last
perpetually.
which laid before him his great expenses in Germany and Lorraine for the
entertainment of his army, which he might not dismiss unless he would run
the hazard of a surprise and scorn, not to have foreseen that which concerned
himself. Wise men see all accidents in their thoughts they cannot be
surprised (...) word. I did not think it coms never out of their mouths.
Seneca calls it the word of ignorant men. Audimus aliqua^do voces imperitoru^
dice^tium^ Ne^ciebam hoc mihi restare sapiens scit sibi omnia restare quicquid
fattum est dicit sciebam. We sometimes here the words of ignorant me^ saying,
I did not know that this would have happened A wise man knows that all things
may happen: He says whatsoever is done I knew it.


The King of Portugal thinking that if he might so reconcile these two
Princes affairs, The King of Portugal mediats a peace in vain.
as they might have no subject to doubt one another, he should d^aw succors
from them both, he undertook to go into Lorraine to persuade the Duke to
reconcile himself unto the King. His voyage was not long, for upon the first
propositions he found that his enterprise was impossible, and so returned to
the King, who continuing the honors which he had done him at his arrival,
entreated him to see Paris, and in the mean time procured a dispensation for
him from Pope Sixtus the fourth Notwithstanding that D. Ferdinand and D.
Isabella of Castille made great oppositio^s at Rome against the marriage of
King Alphonso of Portugal and D. Ioane his niece, his sisters daughter, yet
the Pope granted a dispensation at King Lewis his instance.
to marry with D. Ioane his Niece.

The Chronicle and Martinienne, make a curious relation of his entertainment,
which was the 23. of November 1476. The Lord of Gaucour Governor of Paris,
Reception of the King of Portugal into Paris.
and Robert of Estouteuille Provost of Paris went to meet him on the way to
Orleance toward the windmill. The Chancellor of Oriole with the Presidents and
Counselors of Sovereign Courts, and many Prelates went forth. The Magistrates
presented him a Canopy at Saint James gate. The Rector of the University, with
the Doctor and Regents, received him at St. Stephens, the Bishop and Clergy of
Paris at our Ladies Church. The short days and the long speeches added fire to
the greatness of the ceremony Fire carried before the Prince was one of the
ornaments of Majesty, it was not in a Link or Torch, but in a Lamp or
Lantern. Prenuncius ante, Signa dedit cursor posita de more Lucerna. Corippus
lib. 2. Herodian says that Pertinax came unto the Senate not suffering them to
carry fire or any other marks of the Empire before him. The President Bertier
says, that the same honor was given to the Patriarks in the Greek Church, and
the ti^le of Balsamon. In Respons de Patriarch. Pr^uileg.
They caused fifty torches to march before him to conduct him to a Merchants
house called Laurence Herbelot in the street of Prouuelles.

The showed him the singularities and beauties of Paris, he saw the Court of
Parliament of peers, the most sacred Senate of Europe, where he did number as
many Kings as Senators, Francis Hale Archdeacon of Paris, A cause pleaded in
Parliament by two (...)
the Kings advocate, and Peter of Brabant an advocate of the Court and Curate
of S. Eustache pleaded a cause the Chronicle says, that it was a goodly thing
to hear. Here the ignorance of those times moves me to pity, few men were
learned, and few learned men taught in France. Italy had gathered up some wits
of that great shipwreck of Greece, The tyrant of the East would not allow of
any exercise of learning. Greece has given these goodly wits unto Italy.
Emanuel Chrisoloras an Athenian. George of Trebizo^de. Theodore de Gaza a
Macedonian. Ier^nimo Spartiate, G^egory Typhernas, John Argyropile of
Constantinople, Lao^^^c Chalcondile Athenian. Marcus Musurus, of Candie, and
John Lascaris.
For they make him believe that learned men are soon possessed with great and
heigh resolutions, against the servitude which keeps them under Books and
Sciences teach men of judgment more then any other thing to know themselves,
and to feel the smart of servitude and the loss of liberty.
But this light could not pass into France through squadrons of men of war,
and good books which are not preserved but in the Temple of peace, lay yet in
the dust of Cloisters, they were not made common to the world, and they feared
much that the masters in speaking well and eloquently in a Chamber would not be
so in doing well in field in sight of the enemies, Cato persuaded the Senate to
send away Carneades who was come to Rome on the behalf of the Atheniens, for
that his cloquence drew the youth of Rome to follow him, and disposed the
rather to immitate to speak well the to do well in war, and in the managing
of affairs. Plut.
that all eloquence was grown rusty in Barbarism.

These great and goodly actions of those times, in the which they must spread
the maine fails of eloquence, were given to Doctors of the Sorbone. They
undertook to make Ouerture at the Estates, and to justify or condemn Princes
before the Kings Council. See here a Curate of the greatest parish in Paris,
who makes proof of the grace and greatness of the French eloquence, in the
first Parliament of France before a strange King; the Ignorance of those times
found none more capable, he deserved to have money given him to be silent,
rather then to speak. The ancient Orators got money both to speak and to be
s^^et. One demanded of Demosthenes what he had gotten for speaking, and he
answered. I have sold the silence of one day for five talents. Plut.


After that the King of Portugal had stayed sometime in Paris, they put into
his immagination (as jealousy does easily possess aflicted minds) that the
King who had at the same time confirmed the ancient alliances The All^ances
betwixt France and Castille, were confirmed by the D^puties of both Kings
betwixt Ba^onne. and Fontaraby.
of France with Castile: Alphonso retires into Portugal.
would cause him to be taken: he thought to retire himself with an intent to
shut himself into a Monastery, or to make a voyage to Jerusalem, hoping for no
succors but from God, having in vain attended them from men. The King being
loath to abandon him in this preplexity, caused certain ships to be armed in
Normandy to conduct him into Portugal, where his son dispairing of his
return, had already taken the title of King.

D. Beatrice widow to D. Ferdinand of Portugal, Aunt to the Q^eene of
Castile, Accord betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal.
undertook to reconcile them, entreating her Niece to come to Alcantara to
confer together. Their Conference did produce a peace for a hundred years It
was said by this accord that the peace should be kept betwixt the Kings of
^astile and Por^ugal for a hundred years and one to come.
to the content of both Realms, and to the glory of both Kings, who then
carried their arms and their designs to the conquest of new contries. In the
year 1475. the first voyage was made to Guinee by the mariners of Castile,
after they had conquered the canaries in the year 1417. Of this enterprise
John of Batencourt a french was General and carried the title of King. Of that
of Guinee Pedro de Colied s.
By this peace it was said that the King of Portugal should not marry D.
Ioane; that she should depart out of Portugal, or if she would remain
there, she should have her choice, either to marry with D. John Prince of
Castile, newly borne when he should come to age or enter into a monastery.

This Princess did rather choose a monastery then marriage, and took upon her
the habit of Sta. Clara in the royal Monastery of Coimbra, who for the
greatness of her courage and contempt of the world, deserved of posterity the
surname of excellent.

The flight of Granson, and the loss of Morat, two fatal accidents to a
spirit insupportable both in prosperity and adversity, There are spirits like
unto sick bodies which are distempered with heat and cold they cannot iud ure
prosperity nor adversity.
brought comfortles aflictions unto the Duke, Afliction of the Duke of
Bourgondy after the Battle of Morat.
and made him continue six weeks solitary at Riuiere, suffering his beard to
grow carelessly feeling his understanding to grow weak, and his natural heat
so cold, as they made him to drink wine alone, in stead of Ptysan, which
before was his ordinary drink. And to recover his spirits and to cheer his
heart, they applied thereunto diverse sorts of remedies; and if by fits he came
to his good sense, it was but to make him have a more lively apprehension of
his unfortunate Estate. A great courage is very se^sible of pu^l^^e disgraces.
Mahomet seeing himself forced to raise the siege from Belg^ade with loss and
sh^me, called for poison to R^l himself. He never remembered this ahh^o^t but
(...) his is head against the wall and ^are his mustastachos.


The solitarines which he used to pass away his grief, did but augment it,
and let him know that there is no worse estate then that of a discontented mind
in an unsound body. He woould not endure any one to talk unto him, and was
mad when they spoke. If he would have suffered himself to be seen it would
have given him ease, and by the cheerfulness of his countenance his soldiers
would have recovered their spirits which this accident had danted. Princes in
the change of their fortunes ent^r into fury against them (...) at seek to
ad^^se them. Perseus having been defeated by Paulus AEmilius, slew 2. of his
greatest f^iendes, w^o s^ept foreward to tell him some truth. Every thing
dis^leaseth an aflicted mind.
Great sorrows must be euaporated, for the more they are restrained the more
they swell and grow more violent, but being past they must show a countenance
free from all perplexity or baseness. He is contemned of his friends.
Time did but increase the wound in the Soul of this Prince, his friends and
allies contemned him. Gal^as Duke of Milan seeing that by this loss all his
Intelligences were crossed in Italy, turned his back to him. Frederie Prince of
Tarentum, abused with a hope to marry his daughter, allies himself to the
house of France; whilst that this triumphant Chariot went well, every one would
be on the top of it, but now it is overthrown they abandon it. Prosperity
fi^ds many friends and kinsmen: misfortune and misery has no^any,: (...) shi^
does most commonly fellow f^rtune, who has hauour and good success at her
sides.


The Duke of Lorraine seeking to make his profit of the Duke of Bourgundies
misfortune, recouers his places lost in Lorraine, with the horsemen he had of
France, Duke of Lorraine recouers his own Co^try and be^leegeth Nancy
and some footmen from the Suisses and the Towns of Germany. He besieged
Nancy, forced the Lord of Bures of the house of Croy to yield, after that he
had in vain solicited succors from his Master. R^ne Duk of Lorraine recovered
many places which the Bourg^ndians held. E^pinal wou^d not yield without seeing
him, for that they were made believe that he was dead. Nancy having endured ten
weeks seege it yielded the 7. of November. 1476.
The English which were within it having lost Cohin their leader began to
murmr more at the length of the succors then the languishing of the siege,
for they had no other torment then the impatiencie of that which they attended.
They told de Bures that if he did not compound they would make their own
appointment. De Bures in steed of opposing himself to so unjust and
dishonorable a demand yielded unto them. The Pilot believed the Galley slaves,
and the Physician yielded to the pleasure of his sick patient. Pompey resolved
to makewarre at the appetite of his soldiers, the which the Captain of a sh^p
should not do, much less the General of an army, and against his own mind,
for he was wont to commend those Physicians which did not please the disordred
Appeti^e of their Patien^s. Plut.
The composition was made, and three days after succors came.

The Duke of Bourgundy, Army of the Duke of Bourgon dies before Nancy.
not to give the Duke of Lorraine leisure to fortify Nancy, nor to furnish it
with men and victuals, blockt it in on every side, having Pont a Mousson for
his retreat. This was not done with the advice of his best Captains, Not^ing
does more advance the ruin of a Prince then not to believe Couns^ll, and to
presume to know more then any. They hold him, says Paulus AEmilius* that would
manage all things after his own brain for an arrog^nt rather then a wise
man. Tit. Liu Lib. 44.
who held that seazing upon the small places thereabouts, he should cut off
their victuals, and in the end famish them without troubling his Army, which
had more need to refresh it self in garrison then to Camp. But his Councels
were disordred, and choler and fury made his spirit run headlong. Of an
enterprise governed by choler and fury, there is no good issue to be expected.
Furor iraque mentem precipita^t. Fury and choler make the mind run headlong.
His will void of all reason and government seemed to conspire against
himself, the sooner to advance his misery. Phil de Co^. says, that God
propounds such resolutions to Princes, when it pleases him to change their
fortunes. lib. 5. c. 5.
He would give no credit to Pope Sixtus the fifth, who sent the Cardinal of
Friuly The Cardinal of Friuli the Popes Legate being at Basil exhorted the
Suisses to lay dow^e arms: But they said they could not do it until the D.
of Bourgundy were out of Lorraine,
his Legate unto him to treat a Peace betwixt him and the Suisses.

In the heart of winter, Suisses send succors to the duke of Lorraine.
and of a very rigorous sharp winter, he camped before Nancy. The Duke of
Lorraine was at Lucerne to have succors from the Suisses. They give him eight
thousand men, which pass at Basil, cross through Alsatia, and spoil the Jews
in the towns of Ensicheim, Colmar and Schletstat, making no conscience to take
in gross from the Jews that which by their Vsuries they had robbed by retaile
from the Christians. All the Duke of Lorraines forces being together, he made
two troops, the which were not equal to the Duke of Bourgundies, being great
in number, but very weak and languishing for their precedent losses, and the
discommoditie of the season, which was wonderful rigorous, and wherewith
notwithstanding both Dukes were pleased, as if they had bin in the delights of
their houses. D^licacy does not become a General in his Army. Tac represents
Corbulo as a General of an army should be in most discommodi us seasons. Ipse
cultu leui capite intecto in agmine, in laboribus frequens adesse: Laudem
strenuis, solatium conualidis, exemplum omnibus ostendere. He was accustomed to
go in a light weed, to be bareheaded among the ranks, and to be present at
labors, to commend the strong, to comfort the sickly, and to be an example to
all. Tac. lib. Ann. 17.


In the beginning of December the Duke of Lorraines Suisses and Germans go out
of Bergarten and charge the Bourgundians which were at S. Nicholas,
Bourgundians charged and slain.
slew above a hundred and took many horses. The brute of this charge coming
to the Camp before Nancy, awakes the Bourgundians, who presently beat to field
to succor their friends and recover the booty which the enemy had taken at St
Nicholas. At the same time the French and Lorraines, who knew nothing of all
this, enter the Bourgundians quarter of an other side, where they slew many and
set fire of it. Some thought that if this had been done by design, and with
intelligence, Nancy had been delivered.

Famine pressed it extremely, the inhabitants were forced to eat Horses, Dogs,
and Cats, their chief resistance was in the extreme fury of despair, The fury
of necessity makes strange resolutions, when as there is no other health but
danger.
which would have made them go forth like famished Wolves out of a wood.

It was impossible to put in any victuals, Famine extreme in Nancy.
but with the hazard of many men. The approches were so kept as no policy, no
stratagems, which are commonly practiced in such victuallings, could succeed.
In military factions, as the victualling of a place near pressed is one of the
most difficult, so is it one of the most worthy. Policy can do more then
force. That of Landrecy in the year 1543. is one of the most memorable, by
Francis the fifth in view of the Emperor Charles the first ^e made show to give
Battle, and the light horsemen being in skirmish be caused the victuals to
enter, and then he retired.
Rene resolved to put in certain sackes of meal under the conduct and hazard
of a company of men at arms. They past not all, many were taken and presented
to the Duke, who commanded they should be hanged by the rigor of the law of
Arms, which wills that every man attempting to enter into a place to fortify
it after that the Canon has played shall be punished with death. Among these
there was a Gentleman of Prouence, caled Ciffron, Stuard to the D. of Lorraine,
Ciffron not heard meaning to discover Campo^asses treason.
who before his death said that he destred to discouera matter which did import
the safety of the dukes person. Campobasse who knew him for that he had bin
employed in the practice of his treason and intelligence with the Duke of
Lorraine, makes the Duke of Bourgundy believe that his desire to speak was but
to desire to live and to win so much time. This Duke too tractable in a
matter of such consequence, and which should not have been neglected, commands
he should be dispatched. Ciffron said that it was not any desire to prolong his
life, but to free his Conscience, which made him desire to be heard, they
report this unto the Duke, who sends back to know what he would say. This was
to add cruelty to death, to refuse a little respight to a condemned man. To
give time to prepare ones self to die is an act of justice and humanity. The
judgments of Ne^o seemed the more cruel, for that he gave not an hour to
think of death.


Ciffron desired no delay for himself, for he was resolved to die, but he
required it to assure the Dukes life, to whom he sent word that he could not
trust that which lay hidden in his breast to any but himself. Campobasse, who
did wonderfully apprehend the last words of C^ffron, Kept near unto the Duke,
to the end he might take from him all means to discover his Treason,
wherefore coming out of the Dukes chamber he said that the Duke would not see
Ciffron and that he commanded them to dispatch him, so in strangling him they
smothered in his breast the advice which might have saved the Dukes life. A
miserable condition of them whose misfortune no man believes until it be past.
The Emperor Domitian said that the condition of Princes was miserable, for that
having discovered conspiracies made against them, they are not credited until
they be slain. They always say unto them, it will be nothing, it can not be.


The blow, which Campobasse had received from the Duke of Bourgundy, did
continually blow in his heart the fire of revenge, which lay hid, and to the
end he should not loose the remembrance, he did entertain that by the
ordinary object of a device which was wittily cruel. Campobasse leaves the
Duke.
It was of a Fig Tree which by his own force did riue the Marble of an
ancient Monument. Nicholas of Campobasse car^ied for his device the Fig Tree of
Meala, Marmora Mealae findit caprificus. Mart. lib. 10.
Not able any longer to cover the fire of his revenge, nor to hide his
unnatural treason, and fearing least the besieged, whom he fortified with
advice and Council, should discover him, he past to Re^es troops, and did
weaken the Dukes army by some horsemen which followed him. That reason which
makes traitors odious, and treason acceptable, caused him to be well
entertained in Renes Court. Vice does sooner find a wife then virtue a
husband. There is no such villainy but it pleases when it profits. Yet the
Suisses and Germans which were in the Duke of Lorraines Army detested this
treachery, They that abandon their duties and l^yalties are never est^emed,
Princes do c^untenance and honor the^ for a time, but Noblemen that are about
them (...) on them.
protesting that they would not fight with a Traitor. Rene sent him to Conde
upon Mozelle, to keep the passage, and to make his profit of the spoil of the
Duke of Bourgundies men. They did counsel the Duke to retire to Pontamousson
to refresh his Army, The D. of Bourgundy contemnes Council.
and not to expose it in that weakness to the hazard of a Battle, and to think
that the succors which Rene brought to the besieged, was not answerable to the
necessity wherein they were. That his army consisting of foreign troops,
could not long endure the toils of the war, nor the rigor of the winter,
being certain that the soldier which fights only for pay grows discontent
and disbands. That which he receives is less in his conceit then that which he
suffers and thinks to merit. They that serve themselves with strangers find an
undoubted inconu^nience. Thucidides says, that most commonly they make w^r
with bragging words and shows but when they are to fight, they retire. lib. 3.


He would not believe this Council, Contempt an assured presage of his ruin.
and resolved with a courageous obstinacy to the worst, God had taken from him
the tranquillity of the mind, and the foreknowledge of his own miseries.
Fortune, which meant to cast him down headlong, blinded his eyes that he could
not see this Precipice. God will not only deprive most men of a quiet se^led
and happy life, free from all troubles and care, but takes from them most
commonly the foreknowledge of calam^^es and afflictions which shall fall upon
them, and the means to prevent them, either for that he will not have his will
prove vain and be diuerted, or to ex^mpt them from the care and vexation
wherein they might be, a^tending the blow, if they should foresee these
inevitable accide^ts. Nicetas Choniates.
The wheel began to turn, to stay it was difficult, and the fall was
infallible. The descent unto ruin is easy, but the assent to good fortune is
painful. The Duke of Lorraine divided his army into two great Battaillons,
either of seven or eight thousand men, whereof the chief force were Suisses,
glorious and proud of two victories which they had won at Granson and Morat.
The Duke of Bourgundy had not the third part of his troops, and if he had made
choice of the best to fight, he should not have found twelve hundred, yet he
attends the enemy resolutely being well intrencht, having before him a Brook
betwixt two thick hedgerowes, near unto the Hospital of Magonne.

The Suisses upon their first approach seize upon St Nicholas, Defeates and
death of the Duke of Bourgundy.
and chase away the Bourgundians that were within it. The same night the Duke
of Bourgundy thought to surprise Nancy before that the succors should arrive.
The Duke of Lorraine was speedily advertised thereof: The Suisses let him
understand that the season was so rigorous, and the cold so extreme, as if the
troops did continue long without any imploiment they would ruin themselves
without profit. An army in time surmounts all accidents. In like manner which
in time ruin armies. Of this kind are hunger, cold, and other d^scommodities
of the air.
The next day which was twelfe day, they advanced toward Nancy, the Dukes
chief strength was in his ordinance, the which notwithstanding wrought no
great effect. The Duke being advertised of the Suisses march, planted his
Ordinance against the highways coming to Nancy, thinking they would come
that way, but they took the left hand which was a rough and troublesome way
along the River of Mozelle, passing a little Brook through the Y^e and Snow
which then fell and ceased as soon as the Battle began. They recovered a
little hill, by the which they might charge the Dukes Army of both sides. The
Bourgundians discovering it, they raised a great cry to have the Artillery
charged: But it was too late. The Suisses having taken breath, and made their
prayers fell violently upon the Duke of Bourgundies footmen, and after some
resistance won their trenches, make them recoile, and disorder them. The
horsemen seeing the footmen in route fled that way where as Campobasse stopped
their flight and their retreat. All the Bourgundians were at the discretion of
their enemies. The Duke being known by the traitor Campobasses men was slain
with one blow of a Halbard, and two thrusts of a Pike. When the D. of
Bourgundies body was know^e, they found that he had a blow with a Halbard
which did (...) his head from above the care unto the teeth, one thrust with a
Pike through hi^ ^high, and an another in his fundament.


After the Battle they were full of care what was become of him. They sought
him both among the living and the dead. There was no difference, the bodies
were all naked, the Lion was stripped by some poor Greyhound which durst not
look on him living. Cowardly dogs bite the skins of wild beasts (...) they
are in the house and (...) off their hair, but they dare not touch them when
they are in the ^ield. Plut.
They found him in a ditch, his face being plaistred over with mire and blood,
the sharpnes of the winter having frozen all that they could not know him.
Nature having given him no greater share of ground in this fall then to the
meanest soldier. The brute was that he had escaped, and for sorrow of such a
loss had attired himself in a Pilgrims weed to wander throughout the world.
There was seen in the town of Bruxelle in the Diocese of Spire, a naked man
covered only with a linen cloth, who^ they held to be the Duke of Bourgundy.
Rene Duke of Lorraine sent to Metz to learn if he had not bin seen pass, the
Secretary of the Town having made inquiry, assured him that he had not been
seen. The Dukes body found by a Page.


Campobasse killing all them that fled, had reserved one of the Dukes pages,
who did serve to find out his body, The Duke of Burgundies body was known by
a Por^ugall Physician, by the bas^ara of Bourgundy, by Oliver of La March, and
by the Gr^omes of his Chamber.
the which he knew by diverse marks, the wanting his teeth of the upper Iawe
which he had lost in his youth with a fall, by the scarre of a wound which he
received in the throat at the Battle of Montlehery, by the withering of the
skin upon his shoulder which a cole had made; by a Fistula which he had under
his navel, and by his nails which he ware longer then any one of his Court.

The Dukes Ensigns and colors were presently carried to Rene, who observing
the Fuzils or Irons to strike fire which they carried said. The Duke interred
at Nancy.
What a Pity, when this Prince would warm himself, he could not make use
of these Fuzils to strike fire! The duke carry (...) his colors an iron to
strike fire betwixt two trenchers of wood, meaning that it was in his power to
make a great fire of war when he pleased.


The body was drawn from among the dead and carried to Nancy, where after
they had washed it, and attired it in a poor weed of linen cloth, they laid
it upon a table, under a cloth of Estate of black Velvet, the chamber being
hanged with the same. The Duke mourning in his outward habit for this death,
and carrying joy in his heart for his victory, would needs see him, and was not
so scrupulous as Pompey, who turned away his eyes from the dead body of
Mithridates, King of Pontus, least he should provoke the revenging wrath of the
Gods against him.

At this sight the Duke was moved to pity and sorrow, as compassion is not
less natural in great courages, then cruelty even against the dead is proper
to base and cowardly minds. Great minds are moved at the spectacle of the
ruins of nature, and at the ^ragicall effects of fortune. Alexander felt his
^ies to swell with tears when he read these words in Persian upon Cyrus tomb.
I am Cyrus who conquered the Empire of the Persians, let no man envy this
little ground which couers my poor carcass.
Taking him by one hand, he said, God receive your soul, you have caused us
much trouble and sorrow. He caused him to be interred with all kinds of
Funeral Pomp, finding no expense so pleasing as that which is made to interre
an enemy.

It is strange to read what is written and credited, K. Lewis advertised of
this death the next day.
that the day after the Battle, King Lewis being at Mass, the Archbishop of
Vienna said unto him presenting him the Pixe. Rejoice Sr your enemy is dead.
The Posts which brought this news so speedily might truly be called winds,
like unto those of Elius Verus. The Emperor A^lius Verus gave wings and the
names of winds unto his Posts calling one the North, another the great wind, an
other the South, etc.
And as the people believe not that which they desire not, his subjects were
long doubtful of the truth of his death. They said that the grief of this
loss kept him hid, and that he had been seen in a Pilgrims weed. It is
troublesome to believe the death of Princes whom they love, who have won their
hearts by mildnes and affability.

This Prince said, and his tomb speaks it yet, that he never had any rest in
his life. He would be the Eagle of Princes in design and execution, and as
Eagles have always in their nests stones which sound, he had always some
design in his head which disturbed his rest. He that did inherit the
matteresse whereon he slept, might well keep it to cause sleep, seeing that a
man so distempered did sleep little.

We must not suffer honor to grow old, Humor of the D. of Bourgundy
nor to wear like a garment, it must be renewed by some goodly action. He
sought by new designs and new enterprises, to maintain the brute of this
reputation, which he thought did pass away presently, if some other courageous
action did not renew it, and he feared nothing more then that his idleness
should give the people occasion to demand what he did. Mean men are not to
give an account of all their actions, but will know what great men do or do
not. A Prince should never give the people occasion to inquire of his idleness.
Cato had reason to say, Non minus otii quam negotii clarorum virorum rationem
extare oportere. The reason of famous men's Idleness must be apparent, is well as
of their employments.
His great courage was given him to afflict his body, and to torment his
spirit. His force was not equal to his Ambition, less pride or more power.
His life was too short to go that great way. He would not have been satisfied
with half Europe. Excess the Dukes Ambition.
All or nothing. He had more valor then government. Of this King and this D.
might have bin made the composition of a great and absolute Prince; Who so
could have taken some of the King our Masters conditions and some of his, might
well have made a perfect prince, for without doubt the King exceeded him much
in judgment, and the end did show it by his works. Phil. de Com.
for the two essential parts necessary to make a great Captain, Wisdom,
and Valor, he had but one, and would make himself to be esteemed by actions
which were rather animated by courage, then guided by Counsel.

But he was laborious and diligent, two qualities He is a good Captain that is
both wise and valiant. Hanniball was valiant, and Fabius wise. This man by his
w^sdome undermined the heat and courage of the other. Guiechiardin says. That
it is no less the duty of a valiant Captain to do ^he works of a wise man
then of a courageous Paulus Aemilius did persuade Marcus Varro his Colleage to
temper the hot fumes of his courage, by the coolenes of his wisdom.
requisite to make a Captain. He would be every where, himself did view the
situation of his Camp, with the advantages and discommodities about it, he
observed who went and came, who entered and who went forth. Charles D. of
Bourgundy was called by many the toiling, for that he would see all and do
all, toiling himself extraordinarily in all occasions.
He was still walking among the soldiers, reprehending the Captains
privately, and the soldiors publicly, when he found them to neglect their
duties. The meanest fortune requires wisdom to guide it, and the greater it
is, the more it is environed with difficulties. This Prince grew so insolent,
and fell into so great a conceit of his own valor, after his first deeds of
Arms, that although his natural inclinations were not merely warlike, yet
he took delight in no other exercise then war; with such great presumption,
as he held no wisdom comparable to his Councels, nor force equal to his
valor, and yet in that there was impatiencie and deceit, and in this rashness
and violence. Presumption was so violent in his imagination, as he would not
have given place to Hannibal nor to Scipio. Antigonus being demanded who was
the best Captain, he answered. Pyrrhus if ^e had lived a man's age. But among
them that lived so, the first rank was due to Haniball, the second to Scipio,
and the third to Antigonus.
He had made a temple of his heart, which adored no other Deity, then his
Ambition.

After the Battle of Montlehery, The Duke grew presumptuous and insupportable.
he did nothing by Council, all after his own head, and according to his own
humor, being not able to restrain the fiercenes of his pride, nor moderate the
greatness of his designs, After that Paulus Emilius had vanquished Perseus,
King of Macedonie, he spoke these goodly words. Let us learn to humble our
selves, and let us restrain our fiercenes and pride.
Vanity did so ouershadow the tree of his fortune, as it made it die. His death
was the ruin and desolation of the great body of the house of Bourgundy,
which has continued some 100. years under four Dukes in continual
felicity and prosperity. And so all ended, yea the empire of Rome which
commanded all that was great, rich, and powerful upon the habitable earth, is
in the end fallen to pieces. The Empire of Rome in the time of the Emperor
Adrian, had 200. thousand foot, and 4000. horse entertained daily, with 300.
Elephants for war, and 2000. Chariots armed with 300. thousand Armours
complete: As for their sea forces, they had above 2000. gal^es, and 1200.
gal^casses, and 800. vessels for pomp, siluered and gilt for ostentation only,
and in ready money above fifty millions of gould. Appian Alex. in his preface.


He had virtues worthy of a Prince, but Pride, presumption and wilfulness
blemished all the glory. Above all he was a great iusticer, and they report an
admirable example of his Justice against a Governor of a Town in Zeland who
was in a manner mad for the love of a Lady which was equally fair and wise,
Example of the Dukes great justice
and who had committed the guard of her beauty, to the love of virtue. He
attempted against her honor, and this violent curiosity to be partaker of an
other man's pleasure, Plut. says, that Adultery is a curiosity of another man's
pleasure.
made him to sue unto her and serve her. Seeing that he could not win her by
prayers, services nor presents, he committed a notable villainy, causing her
husband to be imprisoned, and faining that he was advertised of some
intelligence, which he practiced with the enemy. Behold he is in an estate
where he must justify himself or die, for in such accusations there is no
other way. He that is accused of a crime must have no other thought but to die,
or to justify himself. It was the message which that courageous woman of
Sparta sent unto her Son, being told that he was accused of some crime.
Either rid thy self of thy life, or of thine accusation. Plut.
His wife cast her self at the Governors feet, whose entreaties she had so
often scorned, suing for the innocent, and innocently pleading plainly for the
prisoners liberty. Why how now says the Governor do you make suit unto him
whose will you hold subject to your laws? restore me my self, and I will
restore you your husband; he is my prisoner, and I am thine, it is in your
power to set us both at liberty.

She saw her self reduced betwixt bashfulnesse and fear, A mind afflicted with
fear and love.
blushing first, and then palenesse painted upon her face, did witness the one
and the other passion: for shame to loose her honor, by a crime more odious in
her Nation then in any other, When as Tacitus in his description of Germany
speaks of their customs, he says. Paucissima in tam numerosa gente
Adultera, quorum poena presens maritis permissa, accisis crinibus nudatam coram
propinquos expellit domo maritus, ac per omnem vicum verbere agit. There are
very few Adulteries in so populous a Nation, whose present punishment that is
allowed the husband, her hair being cut of, he drives her naked out of the
house before the neighbors, and beats her through the streets.
and fear not to recover her husband. The Governor gave her no time to
bethink her self, for supposing that she was in an Estate not to refuse him
any thing, he takes that by force which he could not have with her heart, and
for that he would have no companion in this tyranous possession, Cruelty base
and villainous.
to his looseness he adds cruelty, which is pleased with that company, and
does commonly lodge in base minds. Cruelty is an ulcer of the soul,
proceeding from weakness and cowardice. Ammi. Marcel. lib. 27.
He caused the Husbands head to be cut off, the Wife did summon him of his
promise to set him at liberty, and he willed her to go into the prison and
take him: she goes thither with a heart swelled with joy for the delivery of
her Husband, and with a great desire to revenge this injury, but she found him
dead laid in a Coffin. She cast her self upon him, and with fearful cries
detested the Governors inhumaine and cruel deceit: which done, she goes
forth more furious then a Tiger, Just. Lipsius who has written ^hi, History
says, Retinere and placare conatur frustra; non tigris magis soeuiat (...)
coepto; statim que Amicaru^ fidis aduocatis, rem denarrat, eius ordine^ and
eulpam suam no^ culpam* ac consilium viamque vltioni exquirit: Censent omnes ad
Principe^ eundu^: qui inter alias virtutes insignes, nisi superbia et
peruicacia corripui^let, eximius Iustitiae cultor erat. He labored in vain to
pacify her. No Tiger did rage more having lost her young, she presently called
her ^riends, to whom she declared the matter, the manner, and her offense, yet
no ^ffence: and required their advice and a course to revenge it. They all
thought is fit to go unto the Prince, who among other noble virtues, if pride
and frowardness had not corrupted him, was a great fauorer of Justice.
from whom they have stolen her young ones, and reports to all her friends this
cruel adventure.

They advised her to go unto the Duke, to whom she fled and cast her self at
his feere, where with tears of revenge and grief, she acquainted him with
this injury, demanding Justice. The Duke hearing of his barbarous accident,
sends for the Governor, who being confronted with this woman, feels his face
to blush for shame, as much as hers was pale for grief, who after he had with
trembling denied a crime which had no other witness but his own conscience,
and tried that villainies are more easily committed then excused: It is a
trouble to color and disguise a villainy. An ancient Lawyer being importuned by
a Tyrant to excuse a parricide, which he had committed in killing his own
Brother, answered, That it was much more difficult to excuse an offense then to
commit it.
he embraced the Dukes knees, demanded pardon of him, and promised to marry
this woman, to repair the wrong and injury which he had done her. She craves
revenge for the death of her Husband, and not the love or alliance of him that
had slain him. those that were present advised her to accept of the offer,
seeing the mischief was done, and Justice might well revenge, but not repair
the wrong. She being forced to fly to forgetfulness, the Goddess of the
unfortunate, resolved to give her self unto him, who had deprived her both of
honor and husband, and to bind him unto her for his life, which he could not
save but by her means. The promises were written, concluded, and sworn,
whereunto the Duke added this Article, that the husband and dying first without
Children, all his goods should remain to his Wife. This concluded; their
hearts did sacrifice to the concord of marriage, and they promised to live
lovingly together. It seemed there was nothing else to be done, nor that so
clear a heaven as was that day, should have any lightning or thunder. The Duke
turning toward the woman, demanded if she were content: I am my Lord answered
she, by your bounty and Justice. I am not, replied the Duke, who wayed how
much the Commonweal was wronged in this crime: that a Prince may well declare,
but he cannot make an offender innocent: that he is bound to do Justice, A
Prince doing Justice equally, wins more glory then if he had given limits to
the Sea, vanquished Monsters, ruined hell, and supported heaven.
and to give an account of innocent blood, there being no triumph equal to
that which a Prince raises to his glory in doing Justice. He commanded the
woman to retire, and caused the Governor to be carried to prison, giving charge
that he should loose his head in the same place where he put the woman's husband
to death, A woman deprived at one time of two husbands.
and that he should be also put into a Coffin. D. Ferdinand of Gonzaga,
Lieutenant General to the Emperor Charles the 5. in Italy, made the like
reparation to an Italian Lady. He caused his head to be cut off that had
committed the rape, having first made him to marry her, and to give her all
his goods.
Which done, he sent this woman to the prison, who being amazed at this
spectacle, and to see her self the widow of two husbands in so short a time,
was so violently oppressed with grief, as within a short space she followed the
way which these two men had made her.

But to end the life and discourse of Charles Duke of Bourgoundy, he died at
the age of three and forty. He came into the world at Dijon on Saint Martins
Eve; in the year 1433. The very day that he was christened he received the
choler of the golden fleece, and withal the name of Charles, which Charles
Duke of Bourbon gave him, the title of Earl of Charolois, and Lord of Bethunes.

The house of Bethunes entered into that of Flanders, long before the house of
Flanders entered into that of Bourgundie. Baldwyn Earl of Flanders, who
purchased the Empire of Constantinople by the force of his Arms, and the
happy assistance of Anthony and Coesne of Bethunes, had two Daughters. Ione
married first to Ferdinand Prince of Portugal, and afterward to Thomas Prince
of Sauoie, and dyed without Children. Margaret her Sister, married William of
Dampierre, and had three Sons and one Daughter; Guy, William, John and Marie.
Guy married the Daughter of Fegard of Bethune, Robert of Bethune succeeded him,
to Robert Lewis of Neuers, to Lewis of Neuers Lewis of Malain, Father to
Margaret his only Daughter, who was married to Phillip Duke of Bourgondy, great
Grandfather to Charles. This house of Bethunes has like unto others The house
of Bethunes has brought forth many, great Captains under this name of Robert.
Robert who defeated Manfroy in Sicily, and married the Daughter of Charles of
Aniou: Robert who beseeged and forced Roche vandais. Look in the Duke of
Sullys Panegyre.
felt the injuries of Time and Fortune. Of Time which changes and rechangeth
all things, which makes the grass to grow upon the tops of Towers, and gives
bounds to Empires and Monarchies. Of Fortune, which makes of houses and men as
an Auditor does of Counters, and a Melter of Medalles; the first does value
them as he pleases, and the last does cast the same Image in Lead and Gold.
It has remained in a manner overthrown, under the ruins of this house of
Bourgondie, there remained nothing but the remembrance of her greatness, and a
mournful conference of that which she was, with that which she had been, but
Virtue would never suffer Fortune to deface out of the courage of her
descendants the magnanimity which was hereditarie unto them. Valor and
magnanimity were as natural marks in their hearts, Many at their birthes have
carried marks of their extraction; the Children of Seleucus carried an Anchor
upon their thigh, they of Pithon of N^sibe had upon their bodies the impression
of an Axe, and the children of Semes founder of Thebes had a Lance.
as the Anchor, the Axe, and the Lance, to the Children of Seleucus, of Pithon,
and of Semes; But as that river which having run far under ground, rises
up more proudly and violently, so this house continues about a hundred years
unknown, and far from favors and great dignities, it shall be like unto an
example of virtue without fortune, of fidelity without credit, of merit without
recompense: it shall not be but to appear more glorious, more powerful, and
more happy then ever.

At the same time Galeas Duke of Milan was murdered, Death of Galeas duke of
Milan.
his in-iustice and cruelty had made him odious and insupportable. He caused a
Priest to be buried quick with a dead man's body, the which he would not
interre without money. An extreme cruelty, and an extreme avarice. Nothing
did so much hasten his ruin, as a disgrace which he had done unto his
Schoole-maister, having caused him to have as many blows with a stirrup
leather given him in his own presence, as he had received stripes with a rod
from him being his Scholar. Princes do willingly remember the severity which
has been used toward them in their In^ancies. Nero put Seneca to death.
Arsenius fled into the desert, for that Arcadius his Disciple had resolved to
kill him.
To revenge this affront, he disposed there of his Disciples whom he knew to
have been wronged in their honors by Galeas to kill him: Cruelties and
whoredoms of the Duke of Milan.
the one had been deprived of his benifice; the other two saw their Sisters
dishonored, by the voluptuousnes of this Prince. Galeas Duke of Milan
defloured the Sister of Charles Viscount, master of his ward robe, and then gave
her to one of his Mignons to abuse. Paul. Iou.
The conspiracy being resolved, and they furnished with courage and arms for
the execution, they go to him being at the door of St. Stephens Church in
Milan, approaching near him, He is slain at the Church door.
and making show to salute him, John Andrew Lampognano struck him in the
windpipe, They write that Lampognano to accustom and encourage himself to
this execution, did every day stabbe the Dukes picture with a dagger, and after
his cruel meditations executed his desseigne.
Ierosme Olgiato in the throat and stomach, and Charles Viscount wounded him
in the belly. It was impossible to escape, presently the Dukes Servants seized
of them. The first being content to die, seeing that Galeas was dead, cried out
as they cut him in pieces. After this manner I desire to die. Ierosme was taken
alive, and being condemned to be fleied and quartered upon a scaffold alive, he
said (making no other repentance for this crime) that of so cruel a death,
the reputation would be perpetual. Ierosme Olgiati being strecht out upon the
scaffold to be quartered said. Mors acerba, fama perpetua, stabit vetus memoria
facti. Burt. Lib. 5. Hist. Florent. A bitter death, but a perpetual fame, the
memory of the fact shall remain old.


The King was not so much grieved for the death of Galeas, as he had been for
that of Francis Sforce, Lewis xi. a friend to Francis Sforce.
the best of his good friends, from whom he received 500. men at arms, and
3000. foot, led by Galeas against the league of the Commonweal, and to whom he
was resolved to retire, if he might not have entered into Paris.

When as the King saw himself freed of one enemy, Lewis sends an Ambassador
into Scotland.
he studied what he should do to be revenged of another, and remembering that K.
Edward had past the seas for the D. of Bourgundies passions, he desired to cry
quittance with him, and therefore he sent Robert of Ireland a Scottishman, and a
Sorbonist, with two French Gentlemen, to persuade James 3. King of Scotland, to
make war against England, but the Estate of Scotland was so full of bad
humors, as they could not stir this body without danger of an incurable
disease. Whilist that a body is found, it feels not the putrified and
corrupted humors which are disperced into diverse mebe^s, but as soon as one
part is grieved, all gather together and run thither. It is even so of states
whilst they are in peace, but upon the first trouble, any thing that is wicked,
seditious and rebellious discouers it self.
.

The King was but seven years old when he succeeded to his Father, Contention
in Scotland for the Regency.
and the division was great to know who should have the Regencie and Government
of the Realm. Some were for Queen Marie his Mother; Others were for James
Kenneth, and George Douglas Earl of Anguse. The Queen caused her self to be
declared that which she would be, and they that were for her said; that if
they regarded Proximitie, there was not any nearer unto the Son then the
mother: If they did consider the good of the child, not any one could have
more care then she: If they could not contend with her in the degree of
Proximitie, it were indiscretion to call her affection and fidelity in doubt,
having therein nature for her Caution. If they respect the common good, the
condition of her birth was considerable, for that being a stranger, no way
possessed with love nor passion, they should not find that she would support the
one to the prejudice of the other, as they might do which had Alliances,
Kinsmen, and Intelligences within the Realm, who carried their dessignes
beyond the Kings life, and might build upon his toombe: As for her, the death
of her Son could bring her no other fruits but a perpetual sorrow, and
therefore she was bound to desire his health and preservation.

Kenneth seeing this, Scottishme^ hate the command of women.
stirs up the people to apprehend the injury which was done unto the Laws of
a Realm, which had always detested the rule of Women, as contrary to that of
nature, Gynecoratis or the government of women is directly against the laws of
nature, which has given unto men se^ce, wisdom, arms, and commaundment, and
has taken it from women: and the law of God has wisely decreed, that the
woman should be subject unto the man, not only in the government of realms
and Empires, but also in every man's private family. Bodin. Lib. 6 cap. 5.
and which had seen the reign of an hundred Kings, and not any one of their
Daughters that succeeded. Shall we not find said he, among so many
thousands of men, one man that is capaple to command men? must a Nation which
has no other experience but arms, beforced to subject their swords to the
laws of a distaffe, and suffer themselves to be governed at the discretion of
a woman, and of a strange woman? The first woman which opened the way for the
rule of women in Scotland was Mary Stuard: and Mary the Daughter of Henry the
8. in England.
To pacify this discord, they resolved to leave all matters as they were for a
month, during the which, the passions of both parties were but the more
enflamed. Many within the Realm, desired rather to obey the Queen then any
other that should be of an equal condition, or superior unto them.

But as in such occasions a man of credit and authority works wonders, drawing
the hearts and opinions of men as he pleases. James Kenneth Archbishop of St.
Andrew, giving the Parliament to understand, Cato desirous to let the Romans
understand, that the commandment of women was shameful, spoke these words
unto them. All men command women, we command men, and women command us. Plut.
that to give the authority to the Queen, was to contradict the ancient Laws
of the Realm, to expose Scotland to dangers, and Scottishmen to the scorn of a
shameful government; and who should justify the reproach which might be made
unto them to command men, and to be commanded by women.

That Scotland never knew what the government of women was, they found no names
in their language to express it, they had never seen woman preside in their
Councels nor Parliaments, nor to dispose of Justice nor of the Treasure, and
that which other Nations call Queen, Scotland calls the Kings Wife. The history
of Scotland reports the words of James Kenneth: Mairoes nostri adeo erant a
cura publica muliaeribus mandanda alieni, vt si omnia reru^ vocabula excutias,
ne mul^ebus quidem imperii nomen opud eas inuenias. Quorsum enim e^rei nomen
imposuissent, cuius ipsi nullum, penitus vsum habuissent, nec imposterum vilum
fore sperabant? Quas enim Reginas alii suo quisque sermon, nos Regum vxores
appellamus. Our Elders were so far from giving the government of public
affairs to women, as if you will examine all words, there is not any one to be
found with them of a woman's government: why should they give that a name
whereof they had no use, neither did they hope there should be. Those whom
other Nations in their language term Queens, we call Kings wives.
That for these reasons he could not council the Estate of the Realm, to
prefer the government of a woman before that of a man, not to the Queen to
attempt it, beseeching her to think, that they which councelled her did it
more for their own fortunes, then for her honor. That although her virtues
were not unknown to Scotland, and that they must hope well of the vigor of her
spirits, and the greatness of her courage, yet they had but two many examples
of the ruins which very sufficient women had brought to States, when as
striving to excel their sex; they would exceed the bounds ordained by nature.
Zenobia Pal^^yren^ having vanquished the Parthians, and valiantly defended the
Roman Empire, in the end she saw her self vanquished and a prisoner. In a
moment she lost the realm which her husband had enlarged and inricht. This
seems to show, that the enterprises of women beyond their reach are always
dangerous.
His advice was, that they should choose one, or more, capable to govern the
Realm, until the King had force of mind and body to discharge them.

This opinion was followed by the greatest part, and they that would willingly
have crossed it, Council appointed for the Regency of Scotland.
seeing themselves ouerswaied by the multitude, consented. But to the end, one
faction should have no advantage over the other, they took two of either,
giving them power to keep the Prince, and to govern the Realm. They left
unto the Queen the care to bring up his two Brethren, Alexander Duke of
Albany, and John Earl of Mar, and his two Sisters: but she died the year
following. The affairs being thus settled in Scotland, the King of England made
a truce with the Scottish men for fifteen years.

About the sixth year of his reign, Robert Bothwell favored by the King.
Robert Bothwell a bold spirit, being desirous to have a share in the affairs,
found means to approach near unto this young Prince, and told him, that he
had been long enough under the government of these old men, that it was time
to make himself known, and what God had ordained him to be. Persuasions to
reign and command are always sweet, especially to Princes, who think they
cannot begin their reigns too soon, nor end the^ too late. Upon this
discourse, the King suffered himself to be led to Edingbrough, to begin his
reign. The Regents of the Realm were incensed at this presumption, and make
Bothwells process. But the King declaring that he had done nothing but for
his service, and by his commandment, makes him Lieutenant General of the
Realm, and a Companion both in his authority and affairs. Tiberius called
Seianus Socium laborum, a Companion of his labou^s, he caused his statue to be
honored in Palaces and Theaters. Tacit. lib. 4.
He commits unto his charge his own person, his Brethren and Sisters, his
Forts and Towns, until he should come to the age of one and twenty years,
he binds all the Noblemen that were about him, to acknowledge him in this
quality, and he gives his eldest Sister in marriage to Thomas Bothwell the
son of Robert. The points reserved to Sovereign Majesty should never be
imparted to any Subject, no not by Commission, least they open a way to the
Subject to enter into the Princes place.


That which the King thought to do to assure this breeding greatness was that
which overthrew it, Nobility of Scotland conspire against Bothwell.
for the Nobles of the Realm did so envy it, and did pretend so many dangers
in this great Communication of the Royal Authority to a private person, as
they coniured the ruin of this house. The King had demanded Margaret, the
King of Denmarkes Daughter in marriage: whereunto they did the more willingly
accord, for that by the treaty the controversy was ended betwixt those two
Crowns, for the Islands of Orcades. The question was to send one to conduct the
Queen: This charge was given to Thomas Bothwell by the advice of his enemies,
to the end that this absence might cool the great hear of the Kings love (as
commonly Princes affections favor that only which they see) and weaken his
faction, giving more courage to his enemies to make their party against him.
They that had never spoken word during his great prosperity, cry now against
those Horseleeches of State, against those Ravens and Harpies. For a time they
suffer and dissemble the public injuries and oppressions of private men, but
when as any one begins to cry, all pursue them.
All the complaints which had been made against the Father for the bad
government of affairs, were revived with such vehemency, as the King saw
himself in a manner forced to hear them, and to provide for it. A Parliament
being called at Edinbourg, they make a great instance unto him; he cannot
bandie himself against such wholesome resolutions, and they let him
understand, that the force of his Estate consists in the Accord of his Will
with those of his Senate. A Prince cannot show to much favor, love and
protection to the general Council of his Estate, from whence go all the
resolutions, for the good of the Co^mon-weale. Otho speaking of the Senate of
Rome, said unto his Army. Quid vos pulcherima^ hanc vrbem, domibus, tectis,
and congestu lapidum stare creditis? Muta ista et inanima intercidere and
reparari promiscue possu^t, aeternitas rerum, and par gentium, and mea cum
vestra salus, in columitate Senatus firmatur. What do you think that this
goodly City consists in houses, buildings, and heaps of st^nes these dumb and
senseless things may fall and be repaired again, the eternity of things,
the peace of Nations, and my health with yours is settled by the safety of the
Senate.
Robert Bothwell is sent for to appear in person, and to give an account of
his actions. Bothwell condemned by the Parliament.
His flight into England did convict him. His Son being ficke, and not able
to fly away was stayed a prisoner, and condemned to loose his head in the
Spring following: Thomas Bothwel being come to Edingbourg with the Queen, much
amazed after so many dangers which he had run for his service, to see his
house thus ruined, and upon the advice which his Wife gave him, of the small
hope there was to return into favor, he returned into Denmark, past into
Germany, and so into France, to entreat K. Lewis the eleventh, to make his
peace with the K. of Scotland, but when he saw that the king would not do any
thing, he retired to the Duke of Bourgondie, and did him great services.

But he did not long enjoy the peace and quietness which he thought to find
there, for the King of Scotland, who desired to see this house utterly ruined,
commanded his Sister to leave her Husband. An extreme hatred from an extreme
love which forces the K. of Scotland to break a bond which could not be
dissolved but by death. An example that t^er is nothing assured in the great
favor of Princes, and an instruction to ground our felicity upon our selves
and not upon an other. Man begins to be subject unto Fortune when he settles
his felicity without himself.
She was fully resolved to run her Husbands fortune, but he himself
entreated her to go unto the King her Brother, thinking that he could not have
more favor, nor better solicit an end of his exile then by her. As soon as
ever she came to Court, the King married her to another, and makes her to send
for her children which were in Flanders: Thomas Bothwell died for grief at
Antwerp, and the Duke of Bourgoundie, his heir, made him a rich tomb, not so
much for any care of his memory, as to erect unto Fortune the trophee which
she had gotten by the ruin of a house, The house of the Bothwels was as soon
over thrown as raised. The History of Scotland says. Ita Bodiorum quae tum
erat in Scotia florentissima familia intra paucos annos and creu^t and corruit,
magno posteris documento quam sint lubricae Regum adolescentium Amicitia. So
the family of the Bothwels which then did flourish much in Scotland within few
years did both rise and fall; a great instruction to posterity how slipperie
the love of young Kings is.
against the which it seemed she had no power.

The King in the mean time who had been bred up in great liberty, King of
Scotlands good inclination corrupted.
suffered himself to go whether his humors led him, and puts his Estate into
such confusion, as there was nothing in a manner firm nor well settled. The
Truce with England was expired, and it was feared they should fall to war, for
that the same time the English had taken and spoiled a great ship of Scotland,
but K. Edward, who after that he had ended his business with France, had no care
but to take his pleasure, made no difficulty to restore that which had been
taken, to the end the Truce might be continued, and the marriage of one of his
daughters treated with the Kings eldest son, the better to Cyment this accord.

The King of Scotland sent two Ambassadors to the Duke of Bourgundy to have
justice of some complaints, made by the Merchants which did traffic upon his
coast. Being arrived in Flanders, there came a Physician called Andrew to visit
them. He was a great Sorcerer, and one of those who to steal divination,
think to imitate Divinity, Andrew a Scottish Physician a great Sorcerer.
and to abuse the world with illusions, wherewith their Demons abuse them. The
devils inspire illusions into Sorcerers minds, to the end they should not see
that which is, and see that which is not. Quicquid miraculi ludunt per Dae
mones faciunt. What miracle soever they play, they do it by their Devils. Min.
Felix. They are Apes of Divinity thieves of Divination. Emulantur Diuinitatem,
dum furantur Diuinationem. They imitate Divinity, whilst steal Divination.
Tert. Apolo. c. 22.
He met them with amazement, for he told them that they needed not to make such
have, for that within two days they should have news of the Duke which would
make them to change their resolution. The two days were not expired before
the news of the Dukes death was brought to Gand.

An accident which overthrew their embassage, and sent them home into Scotland,
where they did not forget to tell the King (as Courtiers do willingly
discourse of that unto their Master which pleases him) that Andrew a Physician
had foretold them of the duke of Bourgundies death. King of Scotland given to
Sorcerie.
Curiosity and idleness had already framed this Princes spirit to receive these
vanities for infallible sciences, believing that he could not be a King if he
were not a Magician. Apuleius says that to be a King in Persia he must be a
Magi^ian. Vili inter Persas concessum est Magum esse, hand magis qnam regnate.
The bravery of the Court was all in these Impostures, if there were any spirit
corrupted with these errors, he was presently led into the Kings Cabinet, whose
spirit was like an infected Liver which draws out of a great glass of water a
drop of wine to corrupt it more, When a spirit begins to be depraved it seeks
the ill although it be shut up and environed with good, and conuerts the good
into bad nourishment.
some of his learned women had foretold him that the Lion should be smothered by
the young Lions. To have more knowledge of this prediction, he sent for this
Physician, he gave him Benefices and great entertainments to make him stay in
Scotland, and consulting with him as the Oracle of his fortune, he had this
answer from him. That the dangers which threatened his life should come from
the conspiracy of his own.

These words made so strange a Metamorphosis in this Prince: as being gentle,
mild and courteous, he became inaccessible, jealous and distrustful. Cruelty
gives unto a Prince the ^itles of Cyclops, Busyris, Phalaris, and others,
wherewith Maximin was defamed for his cruelty, and to make it a Maxim, Nisi
crudelitate Imperium no^ retineri. An Empire is not held without cruelty. Iul.
Cap
He thought that cruelty would purchase fear, and fear would assure him, and
disappoint the designs which should be made against him. He held his nearest
kinsmen for enemies, and the greatest of the Realm to be traitors. He made
new creatures and gave himself to be governed by base men, who managed the
state at their pleasures, and never did well but when as they thought to do
ill.

The Nobility of the Realm being offended at this bad government, The
Noblemen conspire.
and to see that the King was a slave to men, who could not remember their
fathers condition without blushing, and who held him coopt up like a savage
beast that he might not grow tame, they resolved to free him: but to prevent
it, these petty tyrants of the Kings will seize upon his Brethren, John Earl
of Mar the Kings brother was slain in prison, he was accused to have sought
to bewitch the king, they caused twelve Sorcerers to be burnt
they make the younger dye by bleeding, the other was put in prison, but the
escaped and got into France, Parricides and cruelties.
with his wife, Daughter to the Earl of Bullen, being forced to make that his
contrie where he found his fortune, thinking to see the same sun every where
which he saw in Scotland. He besought K. Lewis the eleventh to assist him with
sufficient forces to make war in Scotland. Every soil is the Country of a
great courage. Quo modo lucem noctem que omnibus hominibus, ita omnes terras
fortibus viris natura aperuit. As nature has opened the day and night for all
men, so has she al contries for men of courage. Tac. lib. 4.
The bad usage he had received from his brother carried him to these motions to
overthrow all that he could not remove. The K. thought it not fit to ground a
war against his allies upon an other man's passions: so as the Duke of Albany
seeing that he could not obtain that he expected from the king, he past over
into England, and persuaded K. Edward to make war against the K. of Scotland.
It is always dangerous to make war upon the Councels of men that are
banished from their countries, and reduced to those extremities to ruin it for
revenge. Passion does easily transport them, they promise that which they
cannot hold, and their wills are subject to change.


The Noblemen of the Realm apprehending this storm assembled together by
night in a Church, where they resolved to cast all that into the Sea which was
the cause of this tempest, and which made the King to play at tenis with his
subjects heads, Nothing is of so little respect to a cruel Prince as the blood
of his subjects. Stratocles seeing them buy the heads and n^ckes of beasts for
his supper said it was that wherewith they that governed the commonweal played
at tosse-ball. Plut. in Demet.
being necessary to rid himself of domesticke enemies before he did encounter
strangers. The King who had spies in all places was advertised of this
assembly, and sent Cocheran one of his favorites to discover it, he was met by
Archembald Douglas Earl of Anguse, Conspiracy of the Nobility executed.
who took him by the neck and made him fast with the same chain of gold which
he himself ware, and then he gave him in guard to certain soldiors until it
was day, at the break of which he was carried unto a gibbet, lamenting his
hard fortune, which had raised him up to ruin him. Some cried out to have him
dispacht, others were moved to pity. In these changes of fortune some sing,
others we^p w^^n Radamystus caused* Mithridates to be taken and unchained, the
people remembering the rigor of his co^mandemen^s added blows to his
misfortune: others lam^nted the change of his fortune. Vulgus duto Imperio
habitum probra ac verbera intentabat. Et erant contra qui tantu^ fortunae
commutationem miseretentur The common people. required his hard command with
reproaches and blows. And there were others which Pitied the change of his
fortune. Tac. lib. 4. To be wise we must fly the conversation of fools. Magna
pars sanitatis est hortatores Insaniae reliquisse. Sen. Epist. 94. It is a
great part of health to have left the persuades to madness.
All reioiced to see the Court purged from this contagious plague. He goes
directly to the Kings Chamber, and seazeth upon all these Empericks of state,
under whose government impiety had so reigned, and injustice been in such
credit in Scotland, and causes them all to be hanged.

The King of England made his profit of these broiles, King of England sends an
army into Scotland.
for having sent Richard Duke of Gloucester his brother into Scotland with a
mighty Army, he forced the King to restore him Barwick, which the Scottishmen
had kept one and twenty years, by means whereof a Peace was treated and sworn.

The Nobility of Scotland thought that the King would grow wise, having no
more these instruments of folly about him, z but he made them to change their
opinions, for having settled his affairs abroad, he began to call them to an
account at home, and to be revenged of them which had prescribed him a law.
This caused anew revolt, to pacify the which the King fled to the Pope, who
sent a Legate, to draw the Rebels to their duties, and he entreated the King
of France and England by his Ambassadors, to assist him to quench a mischief,
the contagion whereof might creep in among their subjects. Not holding himself
safe in Edinbourg, he would have retired to Sterling, but the Governor would
not give him entry. He was then forced to keep the field having no retreat; his
enemies encounter him, and he accepts the Battle which they presented, King of
Scotland ^^airne.
and fought valiantly, but finding his horse wounded, he retires unto a Mill,
whether he was pursued, and slain, in the year 1488. the 31. of his age, and
the eight and twentieth of his reign.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF of the eighth BOOK.
1 THe King is advised to make his profit of the divisions of Italy, but he
will not hear of it. 2 Troubles at Florence, and conspiracies against the
house of Medicis. 3 The Pope excommunicates the Florentines, and for their
sakes the Venetians, arming the King of Naples against them. 4 The King
declares himself for the Florentines, and forbids to send money to Rome. The
Venetians join in league with the Florentines. 5 He sends his Ambassadors to
Rome, and is arbitrator of the controversy: Ouerture for a Peace: The lets of
the Venetians side. 6 The Popes complaint against them. 7 Intelligences of the
Duke of Brittany discovered, and Letters surprised by the King. 8 Punishment of
Peter Landais. 9 Towns of the River of Sum recovered by the King. 10
Negotiation of Oliver le Dain at Gand. Taking of the Town of Tournay. 11
Princess of Bourgundy sends Ambassadors unto the King to have his Peace and
protection. 12 The King wins the Ambassadors. Restoring of the Towns of
Hesdin, Therouenne and Monstreuil. Siege of Bullen, two and twenty Deputies of
Arras hanged. 13 Arras yields upon a composition, which is not observed. 14 The
Gantois rise against their Princess, and will have part in the government of
affairs. Their Ambassadors, sent unto the King, bring back a letter which the
Princess had written, contrary to their Embassage. 15 The Princess
Chancellor, and the Lord of Himbercourt Governor of Liege, put to death. 16
Ingratitude and impiety of Adolpe of Gueldres against his father. 17 The King
entertaines friendship with the King of England, and keeps him from inclining
to the Princess of Bourgundy. 18 Marriage of Maximilian Archduke of Austria,
with the Princess of Bourgundy. 19 The Kings army in the Franch County. 20
The first alliance of France with the Suisses. 21 Estate of the affairs of
Castille under the new reign of Ferdinand and Isabella. 22 Death of John the
second King of Navarre and Arragon. 23 Peace and alliances renewed with the
Spaniards. 24 Blanch Countess of Foix Queen of Navarre, the mother of many
children. 25 Battle of Guinegast. 26 Siege of Rhodes by Mahomet the second,
and the valiant resistance of the great Master.
THE HISTORY Of LEWIS the eleventh.
THE EIGHTH BOOK.
TWO great occasions presented themselves unto the King to augment his Empire,
1477.
after the death of the Duke of Bourgondy. In the first, it seemed that Italy
was not divided, but to unite it again under the government of one alone; and
that not any one but the French King, might undertake it, or hope for it.

They councelled him to make his profit of these divisions, K. Lewis councel'd
to make his profit of the division of Italy.
and to renew the right which the Crown of France had to the Realm of Naples;
since Charles, Earl of Aniou Pope Urban the third, called Charles of Aniou
against Ma^froy, and promised him the Inuestiture of both Siciles. Charles came
to Rome in the year 1264. in May, and received it from Clement 4. and from the
same hand the Crown at S. John de Latran. the 28. of June.
and Prouence, brother to the great King, who renowned by the power of Arms,
and much more by the holiness of his life, deserved to be declared a Saint.

Robert of Saint Seuerin came unto the King, Robert of S. Seuerin came to the
King, to make him resolve to come into Italy. Paulus Aemilius says, that the
King answered him, that he had learned from his Predecessors, that the French
could never keep any thing in Italy.
and made him diverse ouertures to move him thereunto* but he, who was a Prince
which made more account of the essence then of the appearance of things, would
not hearken to it. The Geneuois entreated him to take them under his command,
having lived happily under King Charles the 7. He was contented that John
Galeas, Duke of Millan, John Galeas Duke of Millan did homage for his mother,
for the Duchy of Genoa to the Lord of Argenton, returning from his Embassage
to Florence in the year 1476.
should do him homage; and when they said, that they gave themselves unto him,
he gave them unto the Devil, refusing a command so ill grounded, as upon the
quicke-sand of the will of a multitude. He was also resolved not to meddle with
the affairs of Italy, having learned from his forefathers, that to send
Armies beyond the Alps, was nothing but to purchase repentance with much
charge, and great difficulties. The Geneuois have often sought a Master.
Guichardin says, that desiring with great instance to give themselves to Lewis
the eleventh, he did not accept the donation, and had often refused,
Dimescolarsi in Italia come cosa piena dispese and difficulta and all vltimo
perniciosa al regno di Francia, to meddle with the affairs of of Italy, as a
thing full of charge and difficulties, and in the end dangerous for the realm
of France. Guic. l. 1.


He sent the Signior of Argenton to Florence, Troubles at Florence.
being full of troubles for a conspiracy made against the house of Medicis:
Laurence de Medicis lived in that Commonweal as a Citizen, and commanded as
a Prince: for always in states which depend of the authority of many heads,
there are some which excel the rest. In popular Estates there has always
been some private man more eminent then the rest. Pericles at Athens,
Epaminondas and Pelopidas at Thebes.
His Grandfather the great Cosmo, Cosmo de Medicis surnamed the Great.
had laid the foundation of a great authority, which did threaten the
Commonweal with a new form of government under the power of one alone: He
was in such reputation, through favor of his wisdom, as he began to terrify
the liberty of the City; and as Machiuel says, the other Citizens held it
dangerous to offend him, and most dangerous to suffer him. The contrary faction
attempted to stop the growing of this design, the which they thought they
could not effect, but in killing Laurence and Julian de Medicis brethren, who
were not odious unto great men, but for that they had too great credit, and
their virtue too much reputation and applause. In a free Cittye the great
virtue and reputation of one alone is always suspected. Cato said against
Scipio, that a City could not termed free, in the which the Magistrate did
respect and fear a private man.


Heaven, which reserues unto it self the disposition of States, and which
aduanceth or stays the Destinies as it pleases, had resolved to raise the
house of Medicis by the same means that their enemies sought to ruin it.
Conspiracies do many times succeed happily for them against whom they are made.
Brutus in his History of Florence, the 6. Book, says: Consilia quae a
coniuratis ad Medicum potentiam euertendam inita fuerant, ad eoru^ principatum
stabiliendum mirifice contulerunt. The councels which the Co^spirators had
taken to overthrow the house of Medicis, did wonderfully serve to settle their
power and authority.
It was already grown to that splendour, and raised so high, as the fight of
the vulgar sort was dulled, and could not discern it. The Lords which carried
this Name, being hardy and courageous, knew their own merit, and knowing
themselves capable to reign worthily, past all difficulties to reign
assuredly.

The Conspiracy was executed upon Julian being at Mass in Saint Reparees
Church, but Laurence saved himself in the Vestry. The Conspirators were hanged
at the Palace-windowes, and the Conspiracy held so execrable throughout all
the world, as Mahomet All Princes are interessed in the punishment of traitors;
When as Mahomet understood that one of the Conspirators was in Constantinople,
he caused him to be apprehended, and sent bound to Florence.
would not suffer one of the Conspirators to live safely in Constantinople.
Pope excommunicates the Florentines.
The Archbishop of Pisa was among them that were hanged: Nicholas, Cardinal of
Saint Georges was put in prison: Pope Sixtus the fourth was offended, and
favored all those that had been dealers in this Conspiracy; he did
excommunicate the Florentines, Army against the Florentines.
and caused Ferdinand of Arragon, King of Naples to Arm against them: the Duke
of Vrbin was General of the Popes Army, and of the King of Naples, and with
him the Kings two sons, they did overrun the Territories of Florence, yet
they spared that which did belong to Laurence de Medicis, to bring him into
suspicion, and to make the people believe that he had intelligence with them.
So Hanibal spoiling and burning the houses which were about Rome, forbad the
Soldiers to touch any thing that did being to Fabius Maximus.


This Commonweal was in deadly conuulsions of her liberty, Changes of
government at Florence.
scarce knowing what should become of her: Her Physicians had rather see her
rot with languishing, then to cure her, or bury her. P^susanlas said, that he
was a good Physician which did not suffer the sick to languish nor rot but did
bury the^ speedily. Plut.
She had passed through all the forms of gouernements which the laws have
established over people. From Oligarthia she fell to an Aristocratia, and then
the people banded against the Nobility, and were reduced to those terms as
they entreated the Pope to give them a Prince. This was Charles of Aniou The
City of Florence was made desolate by the cruel factions of the people, which
made the blood to flow in, the streets, and put all into combution. The
Lucquois came and parted them, and it was resolved, they should take a master
from the Pope, so as he were royally descended. This was Charles of Aniou,
brother, to the King S. Lewis.
brother to the King S. Lewis going to Naples.

He had scarce let them know what difference there is betwixt the just command
of a Monarchy, and popular confusions, but they that were bred up, not to
endure a master, bring the popular estate again into credit; Duke of Athens
died at the battle of Poitiers.
then they return to a Sovereignty, and submit themselves to the Duke of
Athens, against whom they made their conspiracies, and forced him to leave
them: It is hard for a multitude to continue long in one form of government,
especially when it is a stirring, active, and subtle Nation. These changes
have bin noted in the Athenians, Samians, Megarians, Syracusans, Florentines
and Genouoys. The Athenians changed 6 times in less then a hundred years. The
petty Cantons of the Suiffes have maintained themselves in their first popular
estate.
then they returned to their first confusions, they change and rechange their
policy and government, thinking that they had got much by the change, when
they had new Officers, and that they which governed had new names, the peoples
understanding being dulled with a desire of Innovation: so as we find, that
in less then a hundred years, Florence in an 100. years changed estate seven
times.
they have changed their estate seven times, every man seeking to have his
share in the affairs, and thinking himself more capable then his neighbor.

That wherein they were now, was to be held most lamentable, and would have
been more, if the King had not showed his affection for their defense. He sent
them not any force against their enemies, King Lewis declares himself for the
Florentines.
but he made an Edict, forbidding his subjects to send any money to the Court
of Rome, either by bills of exchange, or otherwise, to obtain provisions of
benifices, to the end that France should not furnish the Pope with money to
ruin his friends.

In the Edict which the King made to forbid them to send money to Rome, bearing
date the 16. of August, 1478. after a great and patheticall complaint of the
enterprises, and practices against Florence made by Count Ieronimo, whom he
calls an Vpstart, a man almost unknown, of base and mean condition, we read
these words: We did hope that our holy Father, like a good Father and Pastor of
Christian people, would have employed himself for a peace, and not have showed
himself partial of either side; and hoping that for our sake, who have
always carried a great reverence and devotion unto the holy Apostolic Sea,
he would do some thing, we have let him understand of the ancient friendship,
league and alliance which we have with the Sgniory and Commonalty of Florence;
Oath of the Government of Florence
The Flore^tins have been always Allies and Confederate to the Crown of
France, they holding that their City being ruined by Totila, King of the
Goths, was built again by Charlemaigne, and cherished by the succeeding
kings, whose party they have always followed, and declared themselves Guelphes
for their sakes. Moreover the King was bound to favor this house of Medicis,
which has been always affected to his service; and be remembered the great
Cosmo had exhorted his Citizens not to break with France, to favor the
designs of the Pope, of the King of Naples, nor the Duke of Millan. And in
consideration of these great proofs of affection and good will, he had suffered
Peter his son, in the year 1465. to carry three Flowers de Luce in his
Scutchion.
which has been always so well affected to us, to the King and house of
France, as they have held them for their singular Protectors; and in sign
thereof, whenever they renew the Governors of their Signory, they swear to
be true and loyal to the house of France, and to defend their honor, and to
entertain themselves in their friendship, good will, and service.

But notwithstanding all these aboue-named things, and without respect of the
present necessity of Christian people, our sacred holy Father, has showed
himself partial in this matter, against the said Signiory, and Commonwealth
of Florence, and in like manner against the Duke and Signory of Venice;
wherefore they cannot by any better means, fortefie the Turk and Infidels
against Christians, then to molest and oppress them, that maintain the War
against the Turk: which things are so strange to think of, as the Universal
Church, and every virtuous and Catholic Prince should be grieved at it. And
moreover, we have been advertised, that our said holy Father has said; that
in this war against the Florentines, Venetians, and others of their part, he
would employ his Person, Goods, and all that he could furnish. The which is a
very strange thing, that the goods and revenues of the Church, which are
appointed for the service of God, defense of the Catholic Faith, and for the
sustenance of the poor, should be employed in such wars, and for such
Factions against Christians, and to mainetaine such conspiracies to usurp the
Signiories of Italy, and such murders and execrable crimes. In like manner it
is very strange that they suffer the indue exactions which are made at Rome, by
expectatiue Bulls and other means, and by the Vacants which they leuy, contrary
to the holy Cannons and Decrets of the Church, made, and constituted, by the
holy Fathers, and against the determination of the Universal Church, and of
holy councels, to employ the money which has been so gotten, to any Earledomes
and Signories, to give them unto men of base condition, and to advance them,
without precedent merit, or without any aid or succor which they have given
unto the Church. Among all the Kings and Realms of Christendom, we, our
sacred Realm of France, and Country of Dauphine, and generally all our
Subjects, have a very great interest and loss, by the great abundance of money
which is drawn and paid by a great excessive tax, contrary to the said holy
Decrees, and the liberties of the French Church.

The Venetians made a league with the Florentines: League betwixt the Venetians
and Florentines.
The Pope excommunicates them, being no less offended at this League, then at
the troubles which happened in Florence: The Duke of Milan entered also into
their League. The war was managed with that spleen wherewith their spirits
were then transported. The Venetians contemn these flashes of lightening, and
are amazed that Rome when it was Pagan had forbidden their Priest to look upon
dead men, The Priests at Rome diuerted their ^eyes from all funeral sights,
when as Tiberius made his sons funeral Oration, there was (said Seneca) a
veil betwixt him and the body: Quod Pontificis oculos a funere arecret: That
it might keep the high Priests eyes from that mournful sight. Sen. in Cons.
ad Mart.
and being Christian, that he suffers men to kill one another: That Pallas
Priests durst not curse Alcibiades, Pallas Priests at Athens would not curse
Alcibiades, although the people commanded it, for I have (answered she) the
office of a Priest to pray for men, and not to curse them.
and that the Pope being head of the Church, should curse a whole
Commonwealth.

Italy became the force and storehouse of the wars of Christendom, there
being no hope to quench the fire which his wilfulness had kindled, but by the
blood of the vanquished. 5 Lewis entreats the Pope for the peace of Italy:
The King knowing that the common enemy should reap all the profit of this
war, sent his Ambassadors to the Pope, to beseech him not to show himself
implacable to these two Christian Commonwealths. The Pope received them with
much contentment, as the Angels and Messengers of peace: They came to Rome in
February, All this d^scourse is drawn out of the Oration which is in the Acts
of the Vatican of Sixtus the 4. the which is cloqu^et and judicious for that
time, and for the estate of the business, it begins after this manner. Proximo
Februario venientes ad nos dilectos filios Oratores Christianissimi Franceorum
regis, pro nostra in eum principem solita charitate laeti suscepimus. Auxit
laetitiam missionis tam longinquae causa. Ad pace^ enim in Italia procuranda
diceba^tur venire. Our dear sons, the Ambassadors of the most Christian
French King, coming unto us, we received the^ joyfully, for our wonted charity
unto but Prince. The cause of this long Embassage did increase the joy, they
were said to come to procure a peace in Italy.
and had audience as soon as they demanded it: They let the Pope understand
that the Kings affection to the holy Sea, and his zeal and piety to the
service of the Church, had bound him to seek the means to quench this great
division, and to unite the childrens will unto the fathers, for that he was
well advertised that Christendom should have need to join all her forces to
resist the Turk, who had a desire that year to invade Christendom, and it
may be would begin with Italy, and therefore the League did promise to give
care unto a Pacification, Offer made by the King for the League.
to the end they might contribute their forces and means for the common
defense of Christendom.

The Pope Egimus pro meritis gratias, and pium magni regis desideriumlaudibus
quibus potuimus extulimus. No^ vinci nons tanti boni affectu monstrauimus. We
gave them than thanks for their well deserning, we did commend as much as we
could, the godly desire of that great King: And, we did show that we could not
be vanquished in affection to so great a good.
did thank the Kings Ambassadors with great affection, he did much commend
that commendable desire in Lewis, whom he termed the Great King: (he that says
Great, says enough, it was the glorious Title of the Kings of the East, For
the title of Kings, that of Great is excellent, and common to the kings of
Persia, (...).
and which comprehends all other greatness) and desired that when there should
be any occasion presented, to seek and advance the good of Christendom, his
affection should never give place to any other, and that he had made it well
known all the time of his Popedom, by so many Legations which he had sent
into all places, The Pope desires Peace.
to maintain the Public Peace, and make war to cease, and by that means
supply the necessities, and serve for the defense of the Faith: That never
Bishop The History of Affricke says, that the Bishop of Nola, after that he
had sold all his goods to redeem Christian slaves, he sold himself unto the
Vandales for his brethren.
sold himself more willingly for his brethren, then he would do, for so many
poor Christians, which do groan under the yoke of Infidels.

The Kings Ambassadors; as Arbitrators and Judges of the Controversy,
Ambassadors of France make an ouerture for a Peace.
propounded some Articles to end it, and among others: That there should be a
suspension of Arms and Censures; That the Cardinal of S. George should be set
at liberty; That they should ordain certain Suffrages and Prayers, for them
that had been slain in the Tumult of Florence; That the Florentines, and
Laurence de Medicis should humble themselves unto the Pope, as they offered to
do, for the reverence of the Apostolic Sea; And that all together should
demand absolution, after the form ordained by the Church: That they should
give caution and assurance, for their obedience and fidelity, and to maintain
the Liberties of the Church: That all the forces of either side should be
united together, and paid for two or three years, to make war against the
Turk.

The Pope having imparted the Articles and Instructions of the French
Ambassadors to the College of Cardinals: Articles of peace imparted to the
Consistory.
Every man commended the Kings Integrity, Religion, and Wisdom, but they
found them not full enough in matters which concerned the Holy Sea, Non multos
post dies jide^ oratores sicut internos atque aduersantes nobis mediatores
accessera^t, ita media quedam ad conueniendum scripta dederunt integritatem,
religionem, and sapientia^ deuoti regis monstra^tia Iudicio tamen nostro and
venerabilium fratru^ nostrorum ad honore^ sedis, quem imprimis seruatum
voleba^t satis non plena. After some few days, as there came adverse mediators
unto us, so they propounded certain means for an accord, showing the
integrity, Religion, and wisdom of the Great King, yet in our judgment, and
of our reverent brethren, they were not ample enough for the honor of the Sea,
which they would have chiefly kept.
which the Pope did chiefly regard, and yet they were allowed, upon hope that
they would produce a Peace, and an union of Christian Forces, against the enemy
of the Church; and also for that the King pretended to make the Venetians and
Florentines consent to any thing that should be thought reasonable for
satisfaction of the holy Sea.

Upon this assurance, The Pope receives the Ambassadors of Venice and Florence.
the Ambassadors of Venice and Florence were welcome; for the Pope did believe
that they came to perform all that which the King had promised on their
behalf: without this belief he had not received them, for the Church doors
are always shut against them that are Excommunicate, They that be
excommunicated are not heard, but to demand pardon and absolution. Pope
Nicholas in the ninth Epistle to Lewis and Charles Kings of France, says unto
them: That he could not hear King Lothaire in his reasons, for that he had
been disobedient to his commandments: Quod si contra propositum nostrum forte
presumpserit venire Roman minime cum qua cupit honestate vel hic suscipitur,
vel hinc profecto regreditur: That if he shall presumne to come to Rome
contrary to our purpose, he shall neither be received with the honesty that
he desires, neither shall he depart.
when as they present themselves to contradict his judgments, and to excuse
their faults: But as they were about this Treaty, the Pope supposing there
would be no other difficulty, but for the Ceremonies and Circumstances of the
Reparation, which was due for the offense done unto the holy Sea; a Post comes
unto the Venetians, bringing them news of an accord which they had made with
Mahomet, by the which they did give unto him, Scudry, Tenare, the Promontory of
Lyconia, with the Island of Lemnos, and they did promise to pay him yearly
eight thousand Crowns for the liberty of the Traffic. This Peace brought joy
unto the Venetians, but it did terrefie all the Princes of Italy: For this
Tyrant was so near, as he saw them from the Port which he had newly gotten
Mahomet did besiege Scudry, the fifth of June, with four score and five
thousand men, the siege continued nine months.


The Pope was wonderfully discontented, seeing that the foundations of the
Peace of Christendom were overthrown, and that the King was disauowed by
them, in whose name he had made such instance for a League against the Turk,
Indoluimus pro fidei causa vehementius, and quia potissimum conficiendae pacis
fundamentum submoneri ex hoc videbamus, nec minus ipsius Regis Christianissimi
gratia, in cuius dedecus maximopere redundat quo dum se huius pacis ad Ligae
requisitionem autorem profitetur ab ijs tamen pro quibus orati, tam iniuriose
contra fidei caussam affectus fuerit. We were much grieved for the Faiths
cause, and for that he did see the foundations of making of a Peace shaken, and
no less for the most Christian kings sake, to whose dishonor it does much
redound, who whilst be does profess himself author of the Peace, at the
instance of the League, yet he is injuriously dealt withal, by them for whom he
had entreated.
yet he did acquaint the Venice Ambassadors with the Articles; and they
demanded respite to answer, and to have advice from their Superiors. This
answer was attended two and twenty days: Venetians demand suspension of Arms
and Censures.
The Pope thinking that the longer they were to consult, the more just and
reasonable the resolution would be. Fatemur errorem (dilecti filij) dies tam
multos, ad saniora consilia pertinere credidimus, quanto inter eos consulebant
diutius tanto and iustius and reuerentius ad salutem animarum vtilius
responsuros putauimus. Dear sons we confess our error, that there were so
many days of respite given, we did think they had been employed in sounder
counsels, the longer they did consult among themselves, the more just and
reverent we thought their answer would have been, and more for their souls
health.
But for their answer, they demanded before all things, a Suspension of Arms
and Censures, adding great complaints, the which Sixtus maintained to be
contrary to the truth, entreating them to resolve within eight days.

The Pope reports all this unto the Consistory, and they find it hard to
suspend the Excommunication, Unpleasing to the Co^sistory.
Dura res videbaturminusque aestimationi Apostolicae dignitatis conueniens, ad
little condemnatorumque nutum, nulla^ poenitentiae significatione^ edentium
irrogatas poenas suspendi, diesque tantum octo, ad eam suspensionem edici.
Peruersa and co^fusa iustitiae norma haud dubie apparebat ex reo iudicem, and
ex iudice reu^ constitui. Porro aute^ cum Censurae ipsae nostrae ludibtio
habitae esset, magistratumque imperio interdictum nullibi obseruatu^, omnibus
in locis, omnia profanata, ridiculum iudicabatur, id suspendi quod seruatum non
esset, id concecedi quod sibi peccatores ante sumpsissent. Et enim si censuras
timeba^t, quaerebatur cur eas spreuissent, si non timebant, expediens non
videbatur rem iudicio peccatorum non necessariam vel concedi, vel peti.
before that they which were excommunicated had made any satisfaction to the
Church, nor made demonstration of repentance: It was held a distastefull thing
that the Accused should prescribe a Law unto his Judge, that the Judge should
do the duty of the Accused, and the Accused perform the office of the Judge:
It was a ridiculous thing to demand suspension of that which had not been
observed, and that they should grant that which they had already taken of their
own authorities, and they said; if they fear Censures, why do they contemn
them? if they fear them not, why desire they to have things granted, which in
their judgment, they hold not necessary?

Moreover they considered, Suspensio^ of Arms not always necessary to make a
peace.
that it was not always expedient to have a cessation of Arms to make a
Peace: That many Treaties had been made, both within and without Italy, in the
heat of Arms; That in this suspension there might not only be loss but also
danger, for that the course of the correction being broken, men's minds grew
incorrigible and more obstinate: And yet the Ambassadors of France did show,
that private considerations could not have such great effect as the general
for the common good of Christendom; That the peace which the Venetians had
made was no let, but the other Sovereign powers of Italy might join together
to resist the Turk, every one binding himself to entertain a certain number
of Soldiers, for so long time as should be thought fit.

Upon this consideration, Censures suspended and a Truce made.
the Censures and Arms are suspended, In ijs disceptandis augustijs publica
charitas priuatum nostrorum periculum vicit, and defiderio intenti ad ea quae
Gallici Oratores finem procurandae pacis, and oratione sua and mandatis and
medijs regio nomine ediderunt, de iure nostro decessimus, acquiescendumque
putauimus. In disscussing of those doubts, the public charity prevailed over
our private interest, and inclining with a desire to that which the French
Ambassadors had delivered in the Kings name, and by his mediation and
commandment, for the procuring of a a peace, we have relinquished our own
right, and thought good to surcease.
The Ambassadors of Venice and Florence fall to an examination of the
Articles: They find not any pleasing unto them, they make new demands, and will
have all restored which had been taken during the war, they pass over the Popes
interests and respects highly, and say plainly that the affairs are changed,
being no more in the estate they were in before they had made a peace with the
Turk, the which they declared they would maintain constantly and fully:
Conditions of Peace refused.
As for demanding absolution, after the form of the Church, there was no such
meaning. Pia insuper sanctaque impie and nefandissime occisorum Christianorum
Domini suffragia, and Cardinalis legati detensione^ ambagibus quibusdam
praetereunt. Qui vero monumentu^ declinandum existiment, si nostram eam
infamiam putant aequo animo per Deum superflui officij curam deponant: Nam
conscientia pluris est nobis quam omniu^ sermo and benefactis, quorum testis
est Deus, maloru^ calumnias veras nobis lauds adscribimus. Discrimen iniustae
criminationis malumus subire, quam tot defunctorum animas refrigerio iusto
carere: Qui si ad seipsos eam infamiam referunt imieque factoru^ delere de
ciuita^e memoria^ cupiunt: sunt haud dubie in seipsos and mortuos duri. Ad
iterandam enim contritionem, proximisque praebendum exemplum, subleu andumque
imprimis extinctorum animas stare ante oculos peccatum volunt: durae nimirum
recusationis suae culpa haec est, non misericordis postulati nostri.
They think it would be no honor for them to entertain an odious remembrance
of things past, causing Anniuersaries to be said for the souls of the dead,
and to give new assurance of their affection toward the Church, there was no
mention.

When as the Pope saw this, Popes complaint against the League.
he assembled the Consistory, with the Ambassadors Vertimur ad vos Itali, and
Co^federati Oratores, quoru^ causa haec agimus: lamentamur primo (...) Deo, and
fratribus nostris, ceterisque Legatis in hoc loco presentibus, vocem patris,
and plena salutis co^silia ad hunc diem, non audita esse. Clementia nostra
vest^os Principes, pie non vsos plus apud eos armorum and belli fiduciam, quam
Matris vestrae Apostolici Sedis charitate^, obseruantiam valuisse. Angimur
quoque tam longinquam missionem amicissi Regis, curamque eius and vigilias pro
viribus susceptas, sanctumque pro fide propositu^, successum per vos non
habuisse.
of the Emperor Frederick, of Lewis the French King, of Edward King of
England, of Ferdinand King of Arragon, of Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and
of the Confederates: He complained of the contempt of his authority, and told
the Ambassadors of the league, that he lamented the obstinacy of their Princes,
who would not hearken to the voice, and wholesome counsel of their father,
whose bounty they did abuse, and had more confidence in their own Arms, then
affection to the Church their mother: That he was exceeding sorry that the
Kings Embassage, and the good Offices which he had done to the holy Sea, should
remain without effect, that for his part, his conscience should never accuse
him to have contemned any thing for the good of the Church, that his arms were
always open to receive them that would repent. And for that the Ambassadors of
Venice, Florence, and Millan, demanded leave to depart, he declared that they
were free, that he would not force the necessity of their return; but if they
would stay, they might with all safety, that it might be, time and their
presence, might make those things easy, which seemed difficult; Intellige^ces
of the Duke of Britain discovered.
and that sometimes Treaties were broken off to be united again more firmly.

But it is more time to repasse the mountains, and see how the King makes his
profit of these last accidents. Estates are like unto ships, all things are
not so well, but there is still some disorder: It seemed that the Duke of
Bourgundies death had brought France to that estate, as she could not desire
any thing else to make her felicity perfect; But there is yet another Duke
which hinders this perfection: It is he of Brittany, who since the Treaty made
at Victoire near unto Senlis, has not discontinued his practices in England,
forgetting that the English had always reserved this Province for the exercise
of their Arms, when they should be weary of peace; Edward the third, King of
England, would not have the Duke of Britain comprehended in the Treaty of
Bretigny, to the end he might have means to vent in this province the boiling
humors of his Realm, and have where to discharge himself of his Soldiers.
and that they have taken delight to see him in bad terms with the King. The
Duke was more earnest and careful hereof, when he saw that he had lost the
Duke of Bourgundy, assuring himself that the King would fall upon him, and
that it would be verified of him what the Fable says of the Lark in the
Hawks tallants: The weak receives from one that is more strong, what Law he
pleases. The Lark (says Hesiodus) demanded of the Spar-hawke, why he offered
him violence. Miserable (answered the Spar-hawke) why do thou complain, a
stronger has thee in his power?
Wherefore he sent often to visit the King, to entertain him in a good opinion
of his pains, and the fidelity of his promises, and yet he continued his
practices with the King of England.

The secret of this practice depended of Peter Landays, Disposition of Peter
Landais
Superintendant of the Dukes affairs and Treasure, an able and sufficient man
to manage such Monopolies: He had Flattery for great men, arrogance and bravery
for Inferiors, and he was difficult and severe to them that were his equals:
These three qualities attributed to Landays, have been given to Cutius R^fus, a
man whom Tiberius, to ^^de the b^s^nesse of his extraction, said to be borne of
himself. Curtius Rufus videtur mihi ex se n^tus Curtius Ru^us seems to me to
be borne of himself. Tacitus adds that he was, Adu^rsus superiores tristi
adulati ne, arro^a^^s minoribus, inter pares difficilis. To his superiors a
sour flatterer, arrogant to his inferiors, and difficult to his equals. Tacit.
Animal. Lib. 11.
He employed and called Maurice Bromell, who carried and recarried the Packets.
The King, who had spies every where, discouers the messenger, and wins Bromell,
who by means of a Norman that could counterfeit the King of Englands hand, the
Duke of Britains, and their Secretaries, sent the original letters unto the
King, and carried the counterfeit Copies into England.

The Duke of Britain, who thought he had no other witness in this action,
then the Sun, and that the king could have no knowledge thereof, In Actions
which we think to keep most secret, there is always one witness
irreproueable, our own Conscience.
sent his servants often unto him, to assure him, that he was wholly at his
devotion, and would not depend of any but of him. When as the King had means
to verify the contrary by the proofs which the Norman put into his hand, he
caused Chauuin, Chancellor of Brittanie to be stayed, with all them that did
assist him in his Embassage, to the number of six or seven of the Dukes
Council, and committed them to close Prison for ten or twelve days, the
reason whereof they did not understand. When as an inferior Prince deals not
plainly and sincerely, with one that is mighty, he must not think it strange,
if he makes known the knowledge he has of his subtilties, even upon them
that know not any thing: and who, by the Law of Nations, should not be drawn
in question. For this reason Lewis the eleventh commits to prison Chauvin the
Chancellor, the Seneshall of Vennes, and six of the Duke of Brittanies
Councellers.


Chauvin seeking to justify his Masters Actions, and imputing this
imprisonment to the power which some standerous suggestion had over the King,
they did show him all the Letters which did witness the strict intelligence
which was betwixt the King of England, and the Duke of Britain. Your Master
(said the King) is much too blame, who assuring me of his affection, shows the
contrary in seeking the ancient enemies of this Crown. I have told him often,
Letters of the Duke of Brittany showed to his Chancellor.
that so long as he should hold the English for his friends, he must needs
be an enemy to France; and to the end he shall not excuse himself, nor
contradict this truth, behold two and twenty Letters upon this subject. Chauvin
viewes them, and considers of them: All his Rethoricke is not able to excuse
the Duke, he had rather calm the Kings just choler by confessing and yielding,
then to incense him more by contradicting.

The Duke of Brittanny seeing, that by the treachery of his Servants, his faith
could not be untainted with the King, he sent for Peter Landays, Peter
Landays suspected of treason.
who alone had the charge of this Negotiation; Being much confounded, he had no
other answer, but a protestation of his Innocence, submitting himself to the
rigors of Justice, if he were found tainted with any such disloyalty: then
remembering that he had not employed any therein, but Maurice Bromell, who had
carried the Letters, and the answers, he caused him to be apprehended. This
miserable wretch confessed all; and upon his confession, he was put into a Sack,
and cast into the River, to the end the King should discover no more.

Peter Landays was upon the declining of the precipice of his life, and of this
great favor which he had with the Duke of Britain, if Bromel had not been
found; but he was not contented to have escaped this danger, Hatred of Landays
against the Chancellor Chauvin.
his devilish malice engaged the Chancellor Chauvin, whose Justice and
Integrity he could not endure, being mad to see him so honest a man. An honest
man is a great torment to malicious and wicked minds: for although they blame
and fly Virtue, yet they consider the glory and light, and that whatsoever is
goodly in the world, as tributary to it. All the gold that is above, or under
the earth, is not comparable to Virtue. Plat. and Plut.
The meanest Virtue may procure Greatness that is vicious to envy. He thought
that the Wheel of his Fortune could not well be stayed; but being observed by
so quick and piercing an eye, to discover and censure that which he did, and
that which he did not. But he had more pain to accuse him, then to slander
him. Chauvins actions were like unto well polished Tables, the flies of
detraction could not stick upon them, they rest upon rough and uneven places.

He makes the Duke believe, that without Chauvin the King had never discovered
the Negotiation of England, that he had Intelligence with him, depended of his
Commandments, and was his Pentioner. The Duke was so hooded by Landays, as he
did not see but by his eyes, gives ear to this slander, charge the Innocence
of this good servant, Death of the Chancellor in prison in great poverty.
puts him in prison, and makes him dye there with grief, languishing, and
hunger. Chauvin, Chaunceller of Britain, after two years and a half
imprisonment, dyed of languishing and want in prison: four poor Beggars
carried him to be buried in the Franciscans Church at Vennes.
He was so old, as he could not live many years, but his memory shall live
ever, as a memorable example of the injuries which Fortune has done to Virtue.

Soon after Landays appeared upon the Theater of Gods Justice, to make known
the shame which attended him at the last step of his greatness. The Duke could
not prevent it, but he must justly feel the same fortune which he had caused
Chauvin to run: Landays process made.
for he was taken prisoner even in the Dukes Chamber, his process was made,
and he did insolently and arrogantly confess all the excess of his life,
upon assurance which the Duke had given him to save him, and to draw him out of
the Hang-mans hands. In the end, for his Concussions, Violences, Thefts,
Outrages, and other Crimes, And hanged at Nantes the 19. of July. 1485.
he was condemned to be hanged, and the Judgment executed before the Duke had
any advertisement; the Castle gates were guarded until the execution was done,
to the end, that not any one should enter. It was thought fit that the Earl of
Co^minges should go and entertain the Duke, during the execution; when as the
Duke saw him, he demanded in what estate Landays process was: he answered,
That the Judges would come and speak with him. They shall do well, said the
Duke, for whatsoever he has committed, I pardon him, and will that he shall
not dye. When as he understood of the execution, he said, that his ereherous
Gossip, the Earl of Comminges had deceived him. He was therewith so troubled
in mind, as few men saw him.
This Landays came of base parentage: he was the Dukes Tailors Boy, he had
charge of his Wardrobe, and by little and little grew to have the absolute
command of the afffaires of Britain. When as men of base condition are
advanced to great places, they forget themselves, they abuse their favor, and
respect not their fortune with that humility and moderation which they ought.

Britain had no need to have so great a King for enemy, Misery of the Duke of
Britain
The Duke of Britain sh^^s the pitiful estate of his imprisonment in a
Sentence given against the Earl of Ponthieur, in these words, The Windows of
our Chamber were shut close and we made a little hole with a Pin, through
the cloth that was waxt, by which hole we did look into the Castleyard. He
says also, that Margaret of Clisson, Mother to the Earl of Ponthieure, came
and scoft at him, using these words Deposuit potentes de sede. He has put the
Mighty from their seat. Hist. of Brit. Lib. 11.
it had felt the ruins and desolations which the Justice of God brings upon
Principalities for the sins of the Princes and People. The division betwixt
the Houses of Montfort and Blois, had brought it to the last extremity, and it
had seen an Act of wonderful presumption of a vassaile against his Lord; Duke
John having been prisoner to Oliver of Blois, with such unworthy usage, as he
was in a manner deprived of the air, which all the powers of the world cannot
take from Man, there being nothing but death that can deprive him of breath.

This poor Prince had no Air at all, but was in darkness, When as God,
(says Epictetes) takes from thee necessary things, as food, raiment, and thy
senses, he sounds a retreat, he opens the door, and commands thee to come.
and in a little Chamber, where he could not see, (but by a hoale made with a
Pin) the Sun; for the which many have believed they were in the world:
Anaxagoras said, that he was in the world to admire the Sun
A more tedious kind of life then death it self, and he that is reduced unto
it, has a strong resolution if he does not murmr that God suffers him to
live so long. One of the wise Stoickes thought that he gave man leave to
depart this life, when as he gave him no means to live.

But let us return unto the King: Towns upon the river of Sum recovered by
the king.
Before the news of Duke Charles his death was assured, he brake the Truce
which should have continued seven years longer, and seized upon Abbeuille,
Dourlans, Monstreuil, Montdidier, Peronne, Han, Bohain, Saint Quintin, and the
Towns upon the River of Sum, which by the death of Charles, the last Male of
the House of Bourgondy, returned unto the King.

He wished he might have done as much to all the Low Countries, and by some
iuster means, then by Arms, in marrying his son to the heir of Bourgondy.
Lewis desires to marry his son to the heir of Britain
But beside the great inequality of their ages, he had promised him to the
Princess of England, and he desired to give him the heir of Britain, for
she was more suitable to his sons age; and this Princess was a Rampart
against the fury of the English, who being seconded by the Dukes of Britain,
have entered that way, and come into the heart of the Realm.

He persuaded himself to prevail by other means: he had good servants at
Gand, who had made show that this kind of government was against their
minds; and that they affected new Masters. The day after that the Ganto is
received news of the Dukes death, they put to death 25 men of their Law. The
pretex was, for that they had executed a man before they were confirmed in
their charge.
He thought that in taking some of the chief Towns of the Country, the rest
in this confusion of Councels, and weakness of forces, would yield of
themselves; and as if there had been no other difficulty, he disposed already
of places and governments of Provinces.

His humor was to employ mean men in great affairs, and to handle great works
with small engines. He sent Robinet of Odenfort to S. Omer, and Oliver le Dain,
his Barber, to Gand, who was of such power and authority, even with the King,
as the French going out of the Realm, they demanded of them in mockery, among
other news of Court, Presumption of Oliver le Daine.
if Lewis were in good terms with Oliver. Strangers mock at princes which
depend upon (...) companions, and give themseles, as it were, in a prey to
their conduct.
This man, for that he was borne in a village near unto Gand, was so
presumptuous, as he thought he could make this Town subject to the Kings
will, and took this charge upon him to go thither, under color to carry some
message to the Princess, who had called an Assembly of the Estates at Gand,
Estates in the Law Countries held at Gand. The Oath of fidelity was renewed to
the Princess: for it had in already taken by Guy of Ro^^fort, Lord of Pluva^t,
her Chamberlain, and by Guy Perrot, her Secretary of state.
and under hand practiced men to what he had intended: he styled himself Earl
of Melun. This purple-hue did nothing at all beautify the Ape, but made him
more ridiculous to them that knew the baseness of his breeding. Baseness of
birth is a reproach which is given to them that gloriously forget themselves.
Iphicrates, Tully and Marius endured it.


Yet the King persuaded himself that he would do wonders in this City,
telling the chief Noblemen of his Court, that they whom he had sent to Gand,
and Saint Omer, were able to get the keys of the Town, and to draw in his
Troops. He made account of the one, as Augustus did of Mecenas, Augustus
Caesar loved 2. men above all others, Agr^ppa for his patience, and Mecenas for
his secrecy, and discretion. Being in Council with them after the war of
Actium, how he should govern himself, Agrippa advised him to live a private
life: but Mecenas wished him to think of a monarchy. Dion Plut. and Suet.
and of the other, as Agrippa.

Oliver having demanded audience of the Princess, Affront done to Oliver at
his audience with the Princess.
and refusing to speak unto her, but in private, he caused himself to be
scorned; and this disgrace concerned him that had sent him, who had not
considered, that such Commissions did properly belong to men of birth, or of
great merit; and that it seems they contemn the Prince to whom they send
Ambassadors of base condition. They that carry the Title of Ambassadors,
should be men of credit and reputation. Caesar said, that the Suisses sent
Ambassadors unto him, the chief whereof was Deuico, he who in the Cassian war
had bin their General.


The Gantois having discovered, Negotiation of Oliver le Dain at Gand, and
taking of Tournay.
that he had some secret practices in their Town, he was in danger to have
been cast into the River; whereupon he retired to Tournay, and practiced
thirty or forty men, by whose means he brought in Money with his Company,
which he had at Saint Quintin, and seized of the Town, sending seven or eight
of the Governors to Paris.

The Princess Council seeing that her subjects fidelity was shaken, and the
Towns of Picardy delivered unto the King, that she had to deal with a Cyrus,
Embassage sent from the Princess of Bourgundy to the King.
and that she was no Tomyris Cyrus having attempted against the Massagets, a
people of Scythia, Tomyris their Queen being Imperious, high minded and proud,
sent him the choice, either to go and assail her in her own country, where
she would attend him, or that he would stay in his own, and she would go unto
him.
to say unto him, If thou come not, I will go: that every one followed the
strangers fortune, they sent a great Embassage unto the king, consisting of
many Noblemen, and of all the orders of the Country; among which were William
Hugonet her Chancellor, and the Lord of Himbercourt, the dukes chief servants,
they found the king at Peronne, where he had made his entry, and present the
Princesses letters unto him, who besought him to protect her, rather then
oppress her, as having the honor to come out of the House of France, and
rather consider the pitiful estate of her present Condition and Sex, the
which besides was subject to the Councels and Authority of passionate Men, then
the respects of his own private Interest: That all subjects of Hatred and
Offense should be buried in the Tomb of Duke Charles her Father: When (...)
the Supreme Authority lights upon a woman, she must of necessity be supported
with great and eminet virtues, with a generous courage, and a wise conduct to
govern her self: upon the first refusal disconte^tments grow, and then
factions. Simon Rosgon Bishop of Agria, demanded of Q. Elizabeth, daughter to
Sygismond, and wise to Albert King of Hungary, the Archbishopric of
Strigonia, to whom she answered: Whilst I reign you shall not have it; and he
replied; as long as I live you shall not reign, and they both kept their words.
That it was piety, for a great Prince, her Kinsman and Sovereign, to defend
her in her Countries and Estates, whereunto she succeeded according to the
Laws and Ordinances of Kings his Predecessors, and in the end that she was
resolved to refer her affairs, to the good government of four persons, of
the Dowager her Mother, Sister to King Edward of England, of Rauasteen brother
to the Duke of Cleues, her near kinsman, of Hugonet her Chancellor, and of
the Lord of Himbercourt.

The King gave them good words, The King winnes the Princesses Ambassadors.
and having entertained every Deputy a part, following the first precept, not
to force all at once, but to pull of the horses tail hair by hair: To show
that perseverance and continuance does by little and little prevail over all
things: Sertorious caused two horses to be brought, the one lean, feeble, and
old, the other fat and strong; behind the leaner he set a strong and mighty
man, and behind the other a slender weak one: a sign being given the strong
man took the lean horse by the tail and sought with all his force to pull it
of, but he labored and sweat in vain: The weak man who was behind the great
horse began to pull it hair by hair, and soon stripped it without any pain.
Plu.
He drew the chief of them to be at his devotion, upon the assurance of the
marrying of his son with their Mistress: Hugonet having all his lands in
Picardy toward Amiens, and Himbercourt in Bourgundy, give themselves unto him,
and for the first proof of their affection, they dispose Phillip of Creuecoeur
Lord of Cords to open the gates of Arras unto him, holding him freed from his
oath to the Princess: They thought that if this marriage took effect, there
were nothing to be divided betwixt the house of France and Bourgundy.

Upon the same opinion, Towns yielded to the King.
Hedin, Therouenne, and Monstreuill yield: That which the Ancients called
Gessoriacum, is at this day named by the French Bologne, by the English Bollen,
and by the Flemings Beunen: Beatus Rhenatus says, that he had seen an old
Inscription, where were these words: Gessoriacum, quod nune Bononia.
Bulloine did not believe so lightly, it endured a Battry; the King entered, and
finding this Town fit for the fortification of the frontiers (as it has been
always famous on either side the Sea) he compounded with Bertrand de la Tour,
who was Lord in propriety, and as the new Lord, he did homage without Girdle or
Spurs, bare-head, and on his knees, to the Virgin Mary, offering as a right
and duty unto her image, a Heart of Massiue Gold, weighing two thousand Crowns,
Boloigne under the Virgin Mary's homage.
upon condition that from thence-forth, he and his successors Kings, should
hold the Earldom of Bulloine of the Virgin, should do her homage, and at
every change of a Vassal, should pay a Heart of pure Gold of that weight.

Thus the Princess of Flanders, Arras besieged.
saw herself forced to quite that, which she could not keep; It is better to
quite that which we cannot keep, then to loose it in keeping it. Phillip of
Macedon did willlingly abandon many places unto the Romans, and a great
continent of his Country which he saw he could not defend, rather then to be
seen to have lost it unwillingly: So after the Battle of Cannes, the Romans
refused to succor many of their Allies, desiring rather to loose them, then to
be blamed for that they were not able to defend them. T. Liu. Dec. 4.
yet the King held nothing of Arras but the City, which de Cords had
delivered unto him, and wherein he remained Governor. The Lord of Lude
defeated the Horsemen which they of Doway had sent, and in this Encounter Vergy
was taken, and remained a whole year prisoner in chains, for that he would
not be sworn unto the King, protesting obstinately that he could not cease to
be servant to the house of Bourgundy, nor begin to affect that of France: It is
dishonorable rashly to fall from the duty which we owe unto the Prince, L.
Maenius an Officer to Augustus, being carried prisoner to M. Anthony, he
demanded of him, What will thou shall be done with thee: that they strangle
me, answered Maeniu^, forneither for grace, nor punishment, will I ever cease
to be Caesar's soldier, neither will I begin to be yours.
They of the Town seeing themselves pressed demanded a Pasport of the Bastard of
Bourbon, Admiral of France, for two or three and twenty Deputies under color
of going to Bollen to treat with the King.

They go forth with this pasport, but being followed and surprised upon the way
to Flanders, they were led to Hedin, and by a sentence given by the Provost
condemned to loose their heads: the King arriving upon the execution staid it:
Princes always cause punishments to cease when they are in presence: They told
him that among them that were executed, there was a Parisian called Oudard of
Bussy, to whom he had given the office of a Master of Accounts in the chamber
at Arras: He caused his head to be set upon a stake in the Marketplace,
wearing a scarlet hood, furred with Meneuer. Arras yielded by composition.
A breach being made, an assault valiantly given, and basely defended, Arras
yielded by composition, the victory was but of bare walls, for their hearts
remained firm to the house of Bourgundy: There were a good number of Citizens
found in Arras, who suffered themselves rather to be hanged, then they would
say, God save the King.
The king also thinking it impossible to make this people obedient, and to
imprint the Flower de luce in their hearts, caused most of the Inhabitants to
depart, To people a Town with ancient subjects, and to expel the natural
Inhabitants, is a means to assure it, but very inhumane: It was a pitiful
spectacle to see poor men lade^ with their infants upon their shoulders, pass
out of the Coast Towns where they were borne, by the commadement of Phillip
king of Macedo, and to go into Emathia, quitting their houses and inheritances
to the Thracians. Tit. Liu. lib. 10. Decad. 4.
and planted natural Frenchmen, commanding the Town should be Francis-towne,
and that with her first name, she should loose the ancient hatred she bare unto
France. This people had no sooner yielded, but they made it known how much they
were grieved to see themselves reduced under the command of a new Master, for
the King having sent the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Chancellor of Oriole, Des
Cords Governor of the Town, and Guyot Pot Bayliffe of Vermandois, to receive
the oath of fidelity; they saw themselves assailed, in the Monastery of S.
Vast, where they dined, with a furious mutiny of the people, crying kill, kill,
The kings servants were only made afraid, but these madmen repented it, for
many of them were stripped and slain, and the City fined at threescore thousand
Crowns.

The Princess remained at Gand, Gantois ready to revolt against their
Princess.
with much trouble to keep the Gantois in obedience: She knew well their
sedition, but she dissembled the number of the seditious; It is not good to
hold all them to be wicked, in open show, which are so in effect: In old time
they did not think it necessary to mark all their slaves, to the end they
should not know their own strength: In seeking out all the seditious, they
know one another, and learn how many they are.
seeming to make account of their fidelities whose revolt and treachery she
held to be certain: They would have again the privileges, which her father
and grandfather had taken from them, they undertake the conduct, and absolute
direction of affairs, not being able to endure them, who for their wisdom
and experience had deserved the first places in the Princess Council, and she
had not any person capable to make head against this Mutiny, the which does
never fortefie it self, but through the weakness and cowardice of them that
may suppress it. A people which is fearful, is always humble and tractable:
when as Mutines see the powerful sword of Justice before their eyes, they
distrust one another: Being all together they are Lions, and divided Goats.


They made an Assembly in form of Estates, and resolved that from thence-forth
she should be governed by the advice of the Estates, who should send unto the
King, to acquaint him with this resolution, and to beseech him to allow
thereof, and in this consideration to cease all Acts of Hostility against her
Countries: These Ambassadors come unto the King, thinking to bring him a
subject of great content: assuring him that their Princess desired nothing but
the honor of his friend-ship and protection; being resolved not to do any
thing but by the advice of the three Estates of her Countries. The King, who
knew well the humor of the Gantois, the confusion of this Princesses affairs,
and had a desire to make his profit in this trouble, Ambassadors contradicted
and confounded.
In many things, but especially in this, Lewis did imitate the most politic of
Roman Emperors, who held it for one of the best maxims of State, to have
peace at home, and war far off. Princes which have followed this course, have
atained to a perfect prosperity of their affairs, others have gone astray.
said unto them: My Masters, I know not what to think of the cause that
draws you hither, knowing well, that it is not conformable to that which you
say unto me, and that your mistress will not aduow that she has given you
charge to tell me, that that she would be governed by the advice of the Estates
of the Country, for she has given me to understand the contrary: And as these
men protested of the truth of their instructions, and seemed resolute, the King
hears them coldly, and shows them a letter written by the Princess, and
brought by Hugonet her Chancellor, and Himbercourt.

At the sight of this letter, The King delivers the Princesses letters to the
Ambassadors.
which made mention that the Princess was resolved to refer her affairs to
the discretion of four persons, and not of the Estates, they end their
Embassage, and attend no other answer, being satisfied to see themselves
deceived, and the King suffers them to go full of choler and revenge. They
present themselves unto the Princess, to give an account of their Embassage,
complaining, bitterly and indiscreetly, that she had made them to carry a
message unto the king, contrary to that which she had resolved; that she had
reserved truth in the heart, and put falsehood in their mouths to ruin them:
When as the Princess sought to iustefie the truth of her intentions, When as
the Deputies of Ga^d presented themselves unto the Princess Council, saying;
That the King had let them see the contrary of their Embassage, the Princess
sought to maintain that she had done nothing contrary to their instructions,
Then (said Philip de Comines) the Pentioner of Gand, drew out of his bosom the
said letter, before all the world, and gave it her. He showed that he was a bad
man and of small respect, to do that affront to a young Gentlewoma^, to who^ so
villainous a scorn should not be done: for if she had committed any error,
she should not have been reprehended publicly: It is not to be demanded, if
she were ashamed, for she had told every one the contrary: Phil de Com.
assuring them, that what she gave them by instruction, was what she thought;
they present unto her the letter which the King had given them: She held this
for a great affront, and contempt, and the blood which appeared in her face,
discovered the trouble of her mind: The Gantois having no means to discharge
their choler upon her, upon her mother in Law, nor upon Rauesteen; they vomit
it out upon Hugonet, and Imbercourt, the chief of the Princesses Council.
They were instantly ceased on, imprisoned, and accused to have caused the City
of Arras to be yielded, Oliver of la March says, that the Chancellor
Hugonet, confessed that he had concealed the Duke of Bourgundies letters, written
at Nancy, the which did much import the safety of his person and Army.
and to have taken money of a private man of Gand, to give him a favorable end
of his suite, and to have infringed the privileges of Gand, Hogonet and
Imbercourt condemned to die.
the which may not be changed nor broken without pain of death: Upon these
accusations, or rather slanders, the Mayor and Alderme^ of Gand, condemn the^
to loose their heads. In 6 days their process was made, the number of their
friends, nor the appearance of their innocence, which in those extremities is
the last refuge, could not save them. Innocence is the last refuge of the
miserable, and helps him much, that has nothing else remaining: It has
sometimes set the condemned in the Judges place: Neri, son to Vgucione of
Fagiuola, Lord of Luga, condemned Castrucio to death, and the people freed him
going to execution, and set him in Neris place.
Three hours after the sentence was pronounced they were executed, without any
respect to the appeal which they had made to the Court Parliament at Paris,
(...) Brother in law, The Pope and Emperor offended at this impiety.
at whose instance, the Pope, and the Emperor Frederick, send unto Adolph to
set the Country at liberty, and to yield obedience to his father; and upon the
contempt of this commandment they write unto the Duke of Bourgundy, not to
suffer this impiety any longer.

The Duke was then about Dourlans, he commanded Adolph to come, and to bring
his father: Adolph durst not displease so mighty a Neighbor: The Duke hears
them in their complaints, and confronts them together; The son accuses the
father of villainous and wicked actions, Duke of Bourgundy Judge of the quarrel.
whereof he presently purges himself, and by the testimony of Noblemen that
were there present; at this confrontation the sons slander was discovered and
detested, then the father, transported with extreme grief presented the single
co^bat unto his son. The Duke would not allow it, for the uncertain event
could not be (where soever the victory fell) without a certain crime: Having
conferred of this business with his Council, he ordained that the father
should retain the title of Duke with the Town of Grave, and 3000. Crowns for
his entertainment, and the son should have all the rest. Notwithstanding that
this judgment was so favorable for the son, as all men thought that the
Judge was more affected to him then to the father; Adolph had married Catherine
of Bourbon, daughter to John Duke of Bourbon, and Anne of Bourgundy, sister to
Phillip: The Sigr. of Argenton says, that the Duke favored Adolph in respect
of this marriage.
yet this unnatural son, straying from all obedience and duty, Decius was
commended for that he refused the Empire, saying; that being Emperor, he
should forget to be a son. Imperet pater meus, meum imperium sit parere
humiliter imperanti: Let my father rule, my Empire shall be, humbly to obey him
that rules: Val. Max. lib. 4.
would not be satisfied, saying; That his father had reigned long enough, and
that he should content himself with the pension of 3000. Crowns, and that he
should never set his foot in the Country of Guelders: To be short, that he
had rather cast his father into a Well, and himself headlong after him, then
consent to the conditions of this sentence. It is an impious thing, says
Plato, for any one to force his father, and his Country, he says more-ouer
that the child should have a care not to offend him, for there is not any
prayer which the Gods hear sooner, then that which the fathers make against
their children.


The Duke being pressed to go unto his Army before Amiens, leaves them in this
dispute, and would not alter his judgment. The son fearing that his
obstinacy might bring him to the place where he had put his father, and knowing
that few men affected him, stale away in a disguised French habit, and took
the way to Grave: Adolph steals away and is taken prisoner.
But passing the River at Namur, with one man in his company, he was known by
a Priest, and stayed by others, and conducted to the Duke of Bourgundy, who
sent him prisoner to Villeuor, and afterward to Courtray, where he remained
miserable, and no man pitied him in his misery, It is a cruelty and inhumanity
to pity a parricide: The punishment which he endures, how great soever, does
not give so much amazement, as the crime causes horror and execration.
until that the Gantois set him at liberty, to be their General in the war
of Tournay. The father dying had given the Duchy of Guelders to the Duke of
Bourgundy.

The war being undertaken, by them of Gand against Tournay, and the Mutiny
growing insolently violent against the Duchess of Bourgundy, they had need of
a Head, for without it their hands were not much to be feared: He is set at
liberty by the Gantols.
They cast their eyes upon Adolph, draw him out of prison, and like madmen (as
they are) think that this cruel wretch, who could not love his father, will
have a care of their affairs. What piety can be expected of him that has
been impious, and inhuman to his own father? Qui fallere audebit Parents
qualis erit in ceteris? He that dares deceive his Parents, what will he be to
other men? Casiod.
They give him absolute command, being resolved to advance him higher then his
Predecessors, and to make him husband to the Duchess. People in such
distractions have played madder prankes, and made more indiscreete elections.

He lead them to Tournay, where having burnt the Suburbs, he was slain: His
death was not more honorable unto him then his life. The Princess was not
sorry for this action; For if he had returned tryumphing from this exploite,
the Gantois had forced her to mary him; and rather then to have had a husband
of their choice, she would have taken one by chance, as the heir of Bohemia
had done, Primislaus a Labo^er becomes King of Bohemia.
who married Primislaus, and drew him from labor, to the honor of her
Marriage, and Crown* Lybussa daughter to Gracus second King of Bohemia,
declared in an Assembly of the Estates, held in an open field, that she would
take him for husband, before whom a horse should stay, which she should let go,
without guide or force: He stayed before Primislaus, who was tilling his Land.
They took him, and led him to the Princess, who made him her husband, and
gave him to the people for their King: His wodden shoes were long kept in the
Cathedral Church of Prage, and showed to the Kings of Bohemia, to make them
remember their beginning.


The Princess of Bourgundies affairs impaired. Many Physicians undid the
Patient. The King had a mighty Army, which kept all the Low Countries in awe,
in his absence it was commanded by the Bastard of Bourbon Admiral of France:
There was nothing attempted by the enemy, but was defeated. In many exploits of
war, which were made upon this Frontier, I find that Guerin le Groin Baliffe
of Saint Peter le Moustier, and Robinet of Quesnoy, Either of them Captain of
a hundred Lances, took a great Conuoy of Money, which came to Doway, and with
a small Troop defeated a great number of Horse, which did guard it.

If the King of England had declared himself for the Princess of Bourgundy,
there had been a great alteration, and she had less apprehended the power and
hatred of the French King, who had wisely prevented it: Lewis entertaines
friendship with the English.
He knowing that King Edward loved his ease, and that he would not show
himself too passionate in his Neighbors quarrels, caused his Ambassadors to
observe him, and entertained him often with Visits, and Presents, To send wise
and polliticke Ambassadors to Princes who^ they fear, upon diverse pretexes,
is the true means to prevent their designs.
but especially with the hope of a Marriage betwixt his son, and his
daughter; Whom in England they called the Dauphine: He caused the fifty
thousand Crowns, due by the Treaty of Piquigny, to be paid at the day in the
City of London, which the English called the Tribute of France: He gave great
Pensions to the Chancellor, Chamberlain, Admiral, and Master of the Horse in
England; This made some to speak, and others to hold their peace touching the
affairs of France: To cast Gold into a Princes Council, is a great charm for
greedy minds: Gold is a medecin which at one instant works two contrary
effects: To speak, and to be silent.
There never came any Ambassadors but commended his bounty at their return,
and held themselves, in a manner, bound to favor his intentions: by which
proceedings, he held himself, in a manner, assured on that side.

This made the Princess of Burgundy resolve to marry, and to follow the
counsel of the Lady of Haluin, Princess of Bourgundy will have a man to her
husband.
her first Lady of Honor, which was to take a man, and not a child, for she
was capable to bear them: There was a great disparitie of age betwixt the
Dauphin, and thus Princess, who was mother of three children, before the
Prince was a eleven years old.
She refused the king of Englands brother: It was thought that if they had
propounded, the Earl of Angolesme, father to King Francis the 1. she would
have hearkened unto it, The Annals of Aquitane speak thus upon this occasion:
King Lewis wanted indgment in this action, for if he had not, he would have
married her to Charles Duke of Angol^sme, father to King Francis that now is.
her affections inclining to have a Prince of France, although she were much
discontented, for that the King had been the cause of the death of her two
good servants, Hugonet and Imbercourt.

The Emperor Frederick sent his Ambassadors unto her, to put her in mind of
the letter which she had written, by the commandment of Duke Charles her
father, carrying a promise of marriage to the Archduke Maxamilian his son. The
Duke of Cleues, who had another design, instructed her to refer her self to
her Council, In a Council held upon the reception of the Ambassadors, the
Duke of Cleues said, that after they had delivered their message, the Princess
of Burgundy should say unto them, that they were very welcome, and that she
would refer it to her Council, and no more. Phil. de Com.
and not to say any thing to the Ambassadors: but at the sight of this Letter,
and a Diamond which did accompany it, she declared that she had written the
Letter, and given the Diamond, Princess of Bourgundy marries Maxmilian.
by her fathers commandment. The marriage was treated, and Maximilian came
into Flanders to consomate it, and before the year was expired, Philip father
to Charles the 5. was the first fruits of this marriage, Maximilian was then
but twenty years old, When as Maximilian came into Flanders, he was but twenty
years old: He was borne in the year 1458. Elenor daughter to Edward king of
Portugal was his mother.
and desiring to show that the love of the Princess of Burgundy was not blind,
in choosing him among so many Corriuals, he sought to recover that which she
had lost.

The King sent Craon into Bourgundy, Kings Army in the French County.
Peter or George of Tremouile, Lord of Craon, Liuetenant of the Kings Army in
Bourgundy.
who having a power, and being assisted, by John of Chalons Prince of Orange,
reduced the Town of Dijon under the Kings obedience: The Prince of Orange
seeing himself deluded by him, and that he did not deliver up the places unto
him, which he had taken, according to the Kings commandment, grew
discontented, revolted, and recovered in a manner all that Craon had won in
the County, and then cast himself into Gy.

From thence Craon besieged Dole, Dole besieged.
contemning them that were within it, as men whom he held to be without courage
or defense. This contempt, accompanied with carelessenesse, made him to loose
his honor, the Kings favor, and the Town which he might have taken; for the
besieged made a sally in a night that was windy, dark, and rainy, with such
advantage, as they surprised him, and forced him to ritire, with the loss of
some of his Ordinance, and of three thousand men. The fault of a General of an
Army is sufficiently punished by the loss of his honor, and his Princes love
and favor. The Romans had no punishment for such errors, to the end their
Commanders should not have their minds troubled with the dangers, and ordinary
Inconveniences in such charges, and with the examples of such, whose faults had
been punished with death: For it is impossible to resolve iudiciously betwixt
fear and suspicion.


Charles of Amboise, Lord of Chaumont, was substituted in his place, who
advised the King to renew his aliance with the Suisses, and thereby to weaken
the house of Bourgondy. The persuasion of this counsel was not difficult: the
King thought nothing more fit for the safety of his estate, then to make his
enemies weak of Intelligence and Friends: He sent some to practice this
league, and pursued it with great vehemence. He had received so great content
in the ruin of the most obstinate of his enemies, as after the Battles of
Granson and Morat, he did nothing but speak of the Suisses valor, Lewis the
^1 greatly adua^ced the reputation of the Suisses. After victories which they
had won against Charles, Duke of Bourgondy, he caused them to be much
esteemed. He sent Ambassadors with rich presents: he gave them after the
battle of Granson, until his death, above a million of Florins of the Rhin.
and esteem their Friendship. He put them in greater reputation then ever they
had been, although they had much honored the establishment of their liberty
with a triumph of nine or ten Battles; and that we may say of them, as Titus
Liuius did of the Romans, Nulla vnquam Respublica nec mayor nec sanctior, nec
bonis exemplis ditior fuit, nec in quam tam serae auaritia luxuriaque
immigrauerint, nec vbi tantus, ac tamdiu paupertati ac parfimoniae honos
fuerit. There was never Commonweal greater, nor more holy, nor richer in good
examples, nor into which avarice and luxury crept later, nor whereas poverty
and parsimony were so long honored.
That never Commonweal was better maintained in her ancient discipline; nor
whereas Avarice had less credit, and Simplicity more honor, then in that of
the Suisses.

For these reasons the king made a defensive leave with them, Alliance of
France with the Suisses.
and by the Treaty, gave himself the Name of the first Ally of their
Commonweal, and termed himself their Bourgesse. The Duke of Sauoy said,
that the Title of the first Ally of the Suisses, belonged to him before all
others.
They promised to furnish him with eight thousand men at all times for four
German Florins and a half of monthly pay. 2000 pound sterling.
Moreover, he gave them a pension of twenty thousand Franckes, to be
distributed among them.

By the means of this Alliance, his forces increased greatly in Bourgondy,
Dole was taken by assault, spoiled, ruined, and made miserable. But this
pillage did impouerish the King, being certain, that what is taken from
Towns vanquished, is lost for the Victor. Craesus, King of Lydia, seeing Cyrus
Soldiers running up and down the Town of Sardes, he demanded whither they
did run. They go to the spoil of the Town answered Cyrus. They take nothing
from me (replied Craesus) all they carry away is thine, and not mine.
Aussonne held out but five days; Besancon, an Imperial Town, continued in
her liberties, and was not forced to more duty then she had been accustomed
to yield unto the Earls of Bourgondy. Verdun would not yield but by force, and
suffered for her wilfulness. Beaune avoided it, submitting herself to a fine
of forty thousand Crowns.

The King laboring to ruin the house of Bourgondy, Estate of the affairs of
Castille
apprehended the rising of that of Castille, seeing that by the marriage of
Ferdinand and Isabel, the Realms of Castille and Arragon, which had been
divided 405 years, were united. Castille and Arragon in the beginning were but
Earldomes, they were made Realms after the death of D. Sancho, the great king
of Navarre, who was the last Earl of Arragon and Castille.
He would have been nothing sorry, if the contention which was betwixt them,
who should have the government of Castille, had continued longer. Queen Isabel
said, that as daughter to King John of Castille, she was sole heir of the
Realm, and that her marriage should not deprive her of her quality. King
Ferdinand objected, that he was son to John the second, King of Navarre and
Arragon, descended in the direct line from John the first, King of Castille;
and that it was not fit a woman should carry the Scepter of so great a Realm.
Lipsius speaking of this Prince and Princess gives this censure, Maritus
caetera vir egregius restrictor aut timidior erat retinere sua melior quam
augere. Haec dilatabat. The husband a worthy man, a holder fast, or more
fearful: he was better to hold his own, then to augment it. She enlarged it.
It was concluded by the advice of the Grands, that all Letters and Expeditions
should be made in the name of both, and under the Seal of both Realms, of
Castille and Arragon, and the money coined with the Arms quartered.

This judgment (wherewith Ferdinand was not well pleased) was grounded upon the
great and eminent virtue of Isabel, Virtues of Isabel of Castille.
another Zenobia of Spain; and who did never breath any thing, but what was
great and generous: A great Iusticer, if ever any were, and inexorable to
rebellions, The City of Se^ile being revolted, through the factions betwixt
the house: of Gusman and Ponti, the queen Isabella went thither, and forced them
all to their duties: she caused all that were in the Castle to be hanged,
having refused her the entry.
she made the Court of Spain a true Academy of honor and virtue, out of which
came Gonsalue the great Captain: her counsels were followed as Oracles, and
often times her husband and the Grands of the realm, having found that no
great matter was effected, if it were not approved by her advice, never
disputed against that which she had resolved.

It is she that began and ended the war of Portugal, expelled the Moors out
of Grenado, added the realm of Navarre to that of Castill, and gave means to
Christopher Columbus In the year 1492. the third of August, the Queen D.
Isabella sent Christopher Colu^bus from Palos de Moguet in Andalusia to
discover the western Indies: having sailed 2. months and 8. days, he first
landed in the Island of Guanahamo, betwixt Florida and Cuba.
to discover new countries: they also commend her for her great and constant
piety, and for her admirable sobriety, having never drunk wine: she loved
learned men, and took delight in the knowledge of the Latin tongue: she was
full of courage and resolution in adversity; for being upon the treaty of her
daughters marriage with Emanuel, King of Portugal, news being brought her of
the death of her only son, The Prince D John of Castille, being married to
Margaret of Austria, died at Salama^ca. The History of Spain says, that the
King D. Ferdinand to acquaint his wife D. Isabella, with this death, caused a
brute to be raised that he was dead, and then presently showed himself unto
her, so one sudden consolation betwixt two great afflictions, did moderate both
the one and the other.
she did not cease to proceed, suppressing her grief until that Emanuel was
advertised thereof by others. She was very constant in all distemperatures and
dolours of the body, for she was delivered of her children without any groan
or cry. In partus acutissimis doloribus and gemitum and vocem supprimebat, rem
incredibilem, nisi a fidissimis matronis quae a cubiculi cura erant: id certo
se cognouisse Marinaeus Siculus adfirmaret. In the bitterest pangs of
childbearing, she did neither groan nor cry, an incredible thing, if Marinaeus
the Sicilian did not affirm that he had received it from the faithfullest,
matrons of her chamber.


King Lewis being very jealous of the county of Rousillon, Death of D. John,
King of Navarre.
which was a thorn in the foot of Castille, held the kings in jealousy and
expenses, and desired to have the realm of Navarre continue in the possession
of the successors of King John, who died in the end of the year 1479. D. John,
king of Arragon died at Barcelona, being 81 years old, having reigned in
Navarre 53. years, and 4. months: and 21 years six months in Arragon. He
was buried in the Monastery of Poblete.
He was a great Prince, and like unto others, had past the pikes of fortune. It
has been said before, that his son Charles, and after his death his subjects
of Barcelona, and after all that the king of Castille, and then the kings of
France made war against him: he saw his realm in horrible combustions by the
factions of Beaumont and Grandmont, which he had seen spring up, and neglected
to quench them in their breeding. About the end of his days, when as he had
more need of a Tomb then a wife; and that the law Papia Augustus in his latter
days caused the Senate to make the Law Papia, it had many heads, and amongst
others, a man of 60 years old, and a woman of 50, might not mary. This word
Buckle was used by Seneca; and after him, by Lactantius. Quid ergo est quare
apud Poetas salacissimus Jupiter desierit liberos tollere* sexagenarius factus
est and illi ^ex papia fibulam imposuit?
had buckled him up, being above fourscore years old, he fell in love with a
young maid, named Francina Rosa, which was no help for him to recover his
sight, which extreme age (for the interest of so long an abode in the world)
had taken from him. The year before his death, he went to see his son D.
Ferdinand at Victoria, to confer with him upon the affairs of the realm,
which he should leave unto him: In this encounter the father had not any with
him, but ancient men, above threescore years old, and the son was attended on
by the flower of all the Nobility of Castille. It was noted that the father in
all things gave place to the king, D. Ferdinand his son, as the head of the
house of Castille, from whence he was desended. Alphonso the fifth King of
Arragon, brother to John the second, king of Navarre would have his Ambassadors
give place to them of Henry the fourth, K. of Castill^, in signing the Articles
of a Treaty made at Naples.
The dispute of this precedence had bin begun in the Council of Constance, and
decided in that of Basil, in favor of Castille; Alphonso, the fifth king of
Arragon, would not yield it to his father John the second King of Castille. It
is a difficult thing sometimes for the prerogative of nature to give place to
that of fortune, and dignity; witness the Senator of Venice, who would not
give place to his son, although he were Duke, who to bind his Father, did
always carry a great Crucifix, to the which the father said he did his duty.
The law of Majesty was of more force then that of respect and natural
obedience, whereof the son, how great soever, many not dispense himself toward
his father. The Crown of Castille had always pretended that Arragon depended
of it in sovereignty; and that if it were free, it was by grace. The King D.
John the second, at his return from this voyage, dyed at Barcelona.

It was by his advice that a peace was at that time treated, Peace and
Alliances renewed with Spain
of betwixt king Lewis the eleventh, and the kings of Castille, to confirm the
ancient Alliances that were betwixt the two Crowns. Philip de Comines says,
that the Alliances of France and Castille, are betwixt King and King, Realm
and Realm, Man and Man of their subjects.
The Ambassadors of France were the Lord of Lescut, and the Bishop of Lombais,
Abbot of S. Denis: they of Castille were John de Gamboa, Governor of
Fontarabie, and John de Medina, one of the kings Council. This peace being
concluded, the Ambassadors of Castille came into France, they were received at
Paris with great honor, on Saturday, the third of July, 1479. they did the
like to the Ambassadors of France, who went to Guadalupa, whereas D. Ferdinand,
and D. Isabella were busied in punishing the disobedience of the Marquis of
Villena, who had hindered D. George Manriquez from chastizing them of
Cinchilla, who had revolted. At that time when as the Court was at Guadalupa,
the Marquis of Vill^na, head of the faction, being incensed that his enemies
had caused six of his Soldiers to be hanged, would do the like to as many of
theirs, being his prisoners: the chance fell upon a Soldier of Villeneufue of
Laxara, near to Allarcon, in whose place the younger brother presented
himself, and entreated that he might dye for him, for that his brother had
wife and children, who was set at liberty, and his offer accepted. Hist. of
Spa. Lib. 22.


The Articles are sworn by the king; and moreover it was agreed, that the
Town of Parpignan should be put into the possession of the Cardinal of
Spain, and that the two kings should name an Arbitrator, to decide within five
years what K. Lewis did pretend to be due unto him. After the death of D. John
the 2d, king of Navarre and Arragon D. Ferdinand succeeded in his fathers
Estate of Arragon and Sicile, and D. Leonora to the Mothers, as daughter to
Blanch, Queen of Navarre; but this succession which she would have advanced,
contrary to the Laws of Nature and Humanity, being blamed by the Histories of
Spain to have caused her elder Sister to be poisoned, D. Blanch being put away
by D. Henry the unable, was carried as it were a prisoner to Lescut in Bearne,
by Gaston Earl of Foix her Brother-in-law, to the end she should not marry
again. The Spaniards write that her sister Elenor caused her to be poisoned.
did not pass the fifteenth day after her Coronation.

She had by Gaston, Earl of Foix, many worthy Children, Gaston, Blanch,
Countess of Foix, mother of many children.
Earl of Foix; John, Vicount of Narbona; Peter, Cardinal of Foix; James, who
served King Lewis the twelfth in the wars of Lombardy, and five daughters;
Out of this house of Foix, were issued four Queens, cousin germans, at one
time: Catherin Q. of Navarre, German, Q. of Castille, and Arragon; Anne Queen
of France, and Duchess of Britain, Anne Queen of Bohemia and Hungary.
Mary, wife to William, Marquis of Montferrat, Ioane married to the Earl of
Armagnac, Margaret to Francis Duke of Brittanie, Catherine to the Earl of
Candal^, and Elenor promised to the Duke of Medina Celi.

The peace of Castille did not hinder the war which the King had against
Maximilian of Austria; 1479.
who to divert the Kings forces, and frustrate his designs, besieged
Therouenne: Maximilian camped before Therouenne with 20000. Flemings, some
Troops of Germans, and 300. English. It was re^ieued by de Cords with 8000.
Frank Archers, and eleven hundred men at Arms.
the Lord of Cords came to succor it: Maximilian went to meet him, and both
Armies encountered at Guinegaste. The The Gauls Horsemen were always esteemed
and feared. Plutarch, Polibius and Appian commend the^. Caesar says, that in
the war of Affricke, 30 horsemen Gauls, put to rout 2000. horsemen Numidians.
Caualarie of France showing their ancient valor, Battle of Guinegaste.
brake that of Maximilian, and chased them as far as Air, which made their
Footmen to waver: yet they were stayed by the constancy and good order of the
Captains which did fight on foot. Maximilian put himself among the footmen:
the Earl of Rhomont, and Engelbert Earl of Nassau, behaved themselves so
valiantly that day, as they carried away the honor, and Maximilian had the
field and profit. The French being Victors, busied themselves at the spoil,
Greediness of spoil has many times made them loose the victory who had it
most assured. They that escaped from this battle, and were at that of Nouora,
committed not this error in pursuing the victory, as to fall to spoil: they
were heard to cry out in the sield; Companions, remember Guinegaste.
and lost the victory which they had certain.

When news was brought unto Lewis, he would not believe that the loss was
such as they said. If it be true said he, that the victory be lost for me,
farewell all my Conquests. This loss made a Truce, and the Truce a peace,
Christendom had great need to unite her forces against Mahomet, who besieged
Rhodes. The King obtained a Iubile from Pope Sixtus, and caused it to be
published throughout his Realm to gather men's Alms and Devotion for the
relief and defense of that mighty Bulwark of Christendom. But the History
does not say that he gave any thing of his own to the Relligion, as King
Charles the seventh had done, to prepare himself against the Agression of so
mighty and fearful an enemy, who under a vain and deceitful proposition of
peace, Nothing does so much favor the designs of war, as an opinion of
peace: Mahomet caused his son Zizimi to make some ouerture of a truce unto
Demetrio Sofrano, Ambassador of the Order, and under his negotiation he
prepared for the war.
labored to discharge upon them all the furies of war.

But it was vain against Rhodes, Siege of Rhodes by Mahomet valiantly defended.
by the valor and vigilance of the great Master of Aubusson, who upon the
first advice that was given him of Mahomets design, provided carefully for the
defense and safety of the Town, he caused some Churches to be beaten down,
which might have annoyed them, if the enemy should get them; but he would not
attempt this demolition tumultuously, nor of his absolute authority, but would
first have the Priests, Monks, and all others that were interessed. These men,
by the permission of the Metropolitan of the Grecians, and of the Archbishop
There is always a great correspondency betwixt the Order of the Church, the
inferiors ordain nothing without the advice of their superiors. The Synod of
Laodicea forbad the Bishops (divided among the Villages of the Province) to do
any thing without the Bishop which was in the Town.
Colossensis, or of Rhodes (for there is a great Relation of authority and
obedience, of power and respect among them) consented. In all his designs he
ever respected the Kings advice and counsel, and informed him of all that
past; yea, of the fortifications which he made in the Island, and of the
ouertures of an accord which Mahomet made to deceive him; beseeching him, that
the French Commanders and Knights, which were within his Realm, should not
loose so goodly an ocasion to serve Christendom.

The siege of Rhodes began after that of Scutari, At the siege of S^utari, the
Assailants shot so many Arrows into the Town, as the besieged, for a long
time after the siege, burnt no other wood but Arrows: Mahomet was forced to
raise the siege. The Venetians, Lords of Scutari, left it him to have a peace.
in the end of May, 1480. 1480.
After that Mahomet had known, Tribute refused to Mahomet.
that it was impossible for him to have that tribute from the Rhodians which he
demanded, in regard whereof he would suffer them to live in peace; the Army
camped on Saint Stephens Mountain, and upon little Hills thereabouts, it
consisted of an hundred thousand men, and a great quantity of Artillery: A
great troop of horse and foot came furiously from the Mountain, to discover
the Town of Rhodes; the which were twice beaten and repulst. Their Batteries
being planted, the Canon played against S. Nicholas Tower: The great Master
was informed of every thing in the Turks Army by a German Inginer, who cast
himself into the Town, and left the Infidels, making show that the only
zeal of religion had moved him; he related the whole estate of the Camp, and
discovered that which they could not learn, but by him. But his zeal was
mere treachery and treason; Treason of a German Inginer.
for the which he was soon after hanged, by the commandment of the great
Master, who feared Traitors more then Enemies. At the siege of Towns, the
practices within are no less to be feared, then the attempts without. Scipio
Affricanus said, that he was not so careful to defend himself from the enemy,
as from traitors.


He refresht the Garrison in S. Nicholas Tower, and placed of the most valiant
Knights, and best Soldiers to guard it; he viewes the ruins which the battery
had made, and causes them to be repaired speedily. The Turks assail it with
an incredible fury; but they were so received, Assault given by the Turks.
as in less then an hour they lost 700 Soldiers, besides them that were
wounded; and they that retired suddenly to their Galleys, were drowned. The
great Master went triumphing to Rhodes, to give God thanks for this victory.

The Turks, to weaken the forces of the besieged, and to vanquish them the
more easily being divided, batter the Town in many places The Artillery
battering the walls of Rhodes caused the Island tremble; and it was heard
plainly at the Island of Castle Rosso, toward the East, an incredible way off.
with pieces, and Engines of war of an unknown greatness. There was never
Fort more furiously battered, neither was there ever Camp more annoyed by the
battery of the besieged. The assailants made some shot, whose noise was like
unto Thunder, and their ruins like that of Thunderbolts. The Rhodians had a
Canon which they called the Tribute, which carried away great heaps of the
enemies. The Scorpions, Rams, Slings, and Crosse-bowes of the old wars,
which carried and forced Mil-stones, and Rocks, with such great violence, and
so far off, wrought not such terrible effects. The Turks shot out of
Engines, the stones whereof ruined houses where they fell. And after this manner
Philip Augustus, and Richard, King of England, had in former times ruined
Ptolemaid: There was danger to remain within, and danger to come out of the
houses. Pau^us Aemilius says, that at the siege of Ptolemaid, Saxorum ictu
quae Tollenonibus mittebantur tecta domorum superne perfringebantur. The tops
of hous^s were broken down with the stones they cast out of engines.


The great Master, whose prudence was without fear, and valor without
rashness, would not neglect it: he was as covetous of his peoples blood, as he
was prodigal of his own; he could not see them die miserably, but provided a
good remedy, To fear to loose his men, and to spare their lives, is the duty
of one that commands. Fortes paratissimi effundere sanguinem suum, alienum
videre non possunt. Valiant men are ready to power forth their own blood, but
they cannot see another. Sen.
commanding the Women, Children, and unable persons, to leave the houses,
causing them to be lodged in a void place, betwixt the houses and the
Towne-wall, under Tents, supported with great pieces of timber. The stones they
shot out of their Bombards always past over them: for the Turks shot only at
the houses, and at the places most frequented; and if any stone fell there, it
found resistance, and did no harm. At night the people retired into Churches,
that were vaulted.

He commanded public prayers to be made, every man casting his eyes to
heaven, having no other hope of help: it was impossible to defend the wall,
and therefore he made intrenchments, where the Women labored with a
wonderful affection; they would have given their hair Women have often given
their hair to make Instruments for the war, or strings for bows, the
examples are reported by Vegetius, lib. 4. The Senate of Rome in remembrance
thereof, did dedicate a Temple unto them, called Venus without hair. In
honorem Matronarum Templum Veneri caluae senatus, dicauit I^l. cap.
to have made ropes against the Turks, more willingly then ever the Dames of
Rome, Aquilea, or Bizantium did to make bow-strings against their enemies. When
as the Bashaw saw, that the sole presence of the great Master was the chief
force and defense of Rhodes, The Bashaw seeks to poison the great Master.
he set two men to poison him: the first being surprised, and trembling at the
first demand they made him, entering into Rhodes, discovered the second.

Saint Nicholas Tower did so command the Port, as the enemy thinking that all
the defense of Rhodes depended thereon, gave an assault by night, when as they
thought that the besieged, tired with the continual toils of the day, had
neglected the defense, they made their troops to land secretly, and marched
directly to the Mole, (it is the Port whereas sometimes the Colosse, one of the
wonders of the world stood The Colosse of the Sun at Rhodes, was 70 cubits
high of brass set upon the port, all ships past betwixt the legs: It was
overthrown by an Earthquake, and lay long upon the shore: Mabia, a Captain
of the Sarazens, having defeated Constant, the son of Constantine, and nephew
to Heraclius, in a battle at sea, seized upon Rhodes, and sold the metal of
this Colosse to a Jew, who laded 900. horse, and sent it to Alexandria, in the
year 614. that is to say, 1460 years after that Charles the Indian, an
excellent Grauer, had made it.
) but found them that attended them, who repulst them in such sort, as they
lost a great number of their companions.

The Bashaw by these first attempts, did judge of the Issue of the siege,
thinking that he did beat in vain against this rock, and that he might win
the great Master by some other means; he demanded to speak with him upon
the ditches bank, where he told him, that he wondered at his presumption and
rashness, in seeking to resist so mighty a Prince, and obstinately to refuse
him tribute, It is a troublesome and importune demand, to require a tribute of
freemen; yea it is insupportable to them that are born to servitude. The King
of Castille demanded from Muly Alboacen, King of Granado, the Tribute and
Arrerages, to whom the Ambassadors answered, that the Kings of Granado,
tributaries to them of Castille, were dead, and therefore their bond was void;
and that in Granado they carried no more gold nor silver, but heads of Lances,
Arrows, and such like Arms, to turn them against their enemies, and to free
themselves from servitude and charge.
seeing that he could not receive more honor, then to be Tributary to a Prince,
to whom the greatest of Asia, Affricke, and Europe paid tribute.

Although the great Master did not think it fit to spend time in words, and
answers, for that in such occasions, a General should not have his hands on
his tongue, but his tongue in his hands, yet would he not suffer the Bashaw to
return without an answer, as without any profit of his discourse; and
therefore he said unto him: Know that thou have not to do with base and
effeminate Asians, Generous answer of the great Master.
but with Christian Knights, who are ready to bury themselves in the ruins of
this Town, rather then once think of yielding.

The walls of Rhodes had in few days endured 3500 Cannon shot, the Towers,
the Bastions, with the goodliest buildings, were beaten down and ruined: there
was a breach on all parts, but in the knights hearts, who were resolved to
loose themselves, rather then to leave it. Constancy and courage is never beter
tried, then in Towns besieged, whereof there have been admirable examples
seen. Some more through obstinacy then reason, have first slain their wives
and children, and then killed one another, to win the honor to be constant.
The Bashaw, the more to encourage the Soldiers to an assault, gave them the
spoil of the town, and caused it to be proclaimed by Trumpet, declaring that
nothing should be saved, but the Infants to be conducted to the great Turks
Serrail, that all the rest should be put to the Sword, having caused 8000
stakes to be made, to impale them that should be taken alive.

All things being ready, forty thousand Turks came unto the assault toward
the Jews wall, and the quarter of Jerusalem, with such fury, as if their
Prophet had been behind them, like unto the Egyptian Gods: King Amasis making
war against the Arabians, caused the statues of the Egyptians gods, which
they did worship to be carried after them; to the end they might go more
cheerfully to dangers, remembering that they had behind the^ their Gods for
spectators; and that they were bound to save them, and not to leave them in
their enemies power. Polioenus, lib. 7.
The attempt was so great, as the Christistians could not hinder them from
planting of their ladders, the wall was won, and their Ensigns set up in
sign of victory; but they continued not long: the great Master, and Anthony
of Aubusson, Vicount of Montelier his brother, came to succor them: they find
many Turks within the Town, Scalodoe repulst.
whom they cut in pieces, repulst the rest, and follow them even to the
Bashawes Pauillion, where they take the Turks standard Royal, and carry it to
Rhodes.

They say, that in this assault, the Turks saw This vision is related at large
by I. Bosio, in the first part of his History, accordingly as it is set down
in the Text, the which to avoid repetition, I omit.
in the air upon the walls, Vision miraculous.
a shining Cross of gold, a virgin attired in white, with a Target on her
Arm, and a Lance in her hand, and a man muffled with a Camels skin,
followed with a great troop of armed men, all glittering, which seemed to come
to succor the town: that the assailants were so amazed and terrified with
this vision, as they that were nearest unto the walls, durst not go on, and
they that were far off, fled. This miracle has been mentioned by all the
Historians that have written of this siege: and William Coarsin,
Vice Chancellor of the Order, speaks amply in his Commentaries. The Bashaw mad
at their great constancy and resolution, Retreat of the Turks
retired, and caused his Artillery to be carefully drawn away, whereof a
General should have an especial care; for the loss is dishonorable: He
caused it to be embarked, with his hurt men. The rage which he could not pour
forth upon the Inhabitants of Rhodes, showed it self round about the Town,
leaving no tree vn-cut, Vine vn-puld up, nor house vn-burnt. The Bashaw going
out of the Port, discovered two great ships, which Ferdinand, K. of Naples sent
to their succor: he held it an affront if he should suffer them to pass
without fighting. But in despite of him, and 20. Galleys which assailed these
two ships, they entered the Port after three hours fight.

Thus Rhodes, the clear Sun For that there is no day, how clo^d^ soever, but
the Sun is seen at Rhodes: the a^cients said it was consecrated to the Sun.
It lies in the Carpatia^sea, in the (...) of I^cia, separated from the coast,
by an Arm of the sea, which they call, the (...) of Rhodes, 20 miles broad: It
is long and (...) about 120 miles compass. Toward the North lies ^^eya,
Ae^^pt to the south, (...) to the Ea^t, and Candy to the west.
of the sea, so famous in the Histories of Antiquity, was preserved for the
Christians. All the City in sign of joy, made bon-fires, shot off Ordinance,
and rung their bells. The Trumpets, Hautboyes, and drums were upon the walls,
upon the news which the great Master received from Pope Sixtus the fourth, of
a mighty Army which came to his succor. The Bashaw desirous to know the cause
of this joy, sent certain Grecians to demand it of the Sentinels, who told
them, it was for that the Christian Army was near; which being reported unto
him, he commanded to weigh anchor, and to set sail, the 18 of August, having
continued at this siege 89 days, and lost the best part of his Army. This
valiant resistance, for the preservation of the Island of Rhodes, did purchase
much glory to Christendom, and bound Christians to praise the God of
Victories, to make him favorable when he should be called Xenophon exhort^
men to honor the Gods in prosperity, to the end they man be ^auou^able unto
them in adversity.
in the like necessity, for that the defense of towns and the defeat of Armies
come only from him. The Cross triumphed over the Cressants. Mahomet, after
this affront, did but languish, having propounded, for a revenge, to make a
great enterprise upon Italy, to make Rome another Constantinople, a Serrail of
the Vatican, and a Mosquee of Latran. Upon the apprehensions of such ruins and
desolation, Sixtus the fourth was ready to abandon Rome, and go into France.
Italy being too weak to resist so mighty an enemy, who having made himself
Master of 12 realms in the lesser Asia, of the Archipelagus, of Albania, and
of Sclauo^ia, of all the Empire of Constantinople, and of Trebizond, threatened
to enter into Europe by Apulia, and Calabria, M^homet the 2d. made war three
years in Apulia, and Calabria, he took the Towns o^ Ydrunte, Tatum, and
Leuce, by force.
where he had caused wonderful desolations, and spoiled Italy of the flower of
her horsemen; and it may be, he should not have found Princes which would have
sent back his Ambassadors so courageously, nor contemned his threats, as
Mathias Coruinus, K. of Hnngary, and Poland did: for when this Barbarian had
sent to him, to have him yield him his realm of Polonia, he made this brave
and hardy answer to his Ambassadors; This generous answer made by Mathias
Coruinus, is related by Ioachin Cu^eus, in the Annals of Silesi^, Mahomet did
ever after fe^re him.
Go and tell your master, that he reigns in Greece by my means, and that he
shall remain there no longer then I please.

The end of the eighth Book.
THE CONTENTS OF the Ninth Book.
1 MAXIMILIAM makes no good use of his advantage, after the battle of
Guinegaste. 2 Attempt against the Kings Person, miraculously prevented. 3 The
like enterprise discovered and punished. 4 Taking and recovering of Beaune and
Verdun. 5 Sigismond Archduke of Austria, gives his Estates to the Archduke
Maximilian his Nephew. 6 Lewis of Bourbon Bishop of Liege slain by William de
la March. 7 A new discipline for Soldiers made. 8 Goodly obser^uations of the
advantages which Footmen have over Horse. 9 Death of Mahomet the second,
Emperor of the Turks, an abridgement of the chief actions of his life, and
his cruelties. 10 The Kings design upon Lorraine: Estate of that House from
Duke John to Yoland of Aniou, wife to Ferry Earl of Vaudemont. 11 Variable
success of the huse of Aniou in the Realm of Naples, from Lewis the second,
son to King John, to Rene Duke of Aniou. 12 Death of Rene Duke Aniou, his
death and exercises, he instituted the Order of the Croissant. 13 Charles Earl
of Main and Prouence, gives the County of Prouence unto the King. 14 The King
seazeth upon the Duchy of Bar. 15 Rene, Duke of Lorraine General of the
Venetians Army. 16 War of Ferara against the Venetians: The Pope, and the
King of Naples, deal in it. The Venetians are excommunicated. 17 Peace treated
against the Popes liking, magnanimity of his courage. 18 Necessity of the
Church to hold a Council. 19 Hardy enterprise of a Prelate against the Pope.
THE HISTORY Of LEWIS the eleventh.
THE NINTH BOOK.
WHAT avails it for Stagges to have goodly and strong heads, if they have not
courage to use them? Maximilia^ makes no great use of his advantage at
Guinegaste.
The Archduke Maximilian had more subject to repent himself, then to rejoice
for the success of Guinegate, for that he did not make use of his advantage:
If he had presented himself before Therouenne or Arras, he had found
amazement for resistance. But he durst not attempt it, Phillip de Co^min^s
says, that after the battle of Guingaste, if Maximilian had been counseled
to return before Therouenne, he had not ^ound any creature within it, nor yet
in Arras.
So as the battle which should have purchased him glory among the Flemmings,
He lost more then he got.
made him contemptible, for they knew well, that the place of battle was not
left him, but to present unto him the inequallity of the loss, having lost a
greater number of men then the King, who was still Master of Artois, without
the which, the Earls of Flanders are but petty Princes.

Those Estates are unhappy which are forced to seek strange Masters, they are
like unto counterfeite legs and arms, set on to natural bodies: It fares
not much better with Princes which are always hated, who being not loved
cannot be well obeyed. It is a glorious Title for a Prince, when he can say,
that he is well beloved of his subjects. It cannot be purchased but by royal
virtues, which are more to be esteemed then Kingdoms. I^ regnare depend
spesso della fortuna, ma il Re che si proponga per vnico fine la salute and la
felicita de populi suoi depend solamente da se medesimo and della
propriavirtu. To reign, depends often upon fortune; but that King which
propounds unto himself for his only end, the health and felicity of his
people, depends ^oly of himself and his own virtue. Guic. lib. 1.


Maximilian had not been bred up in affairs, His age without experience.
his youth could not be ripe before his time: The Emperor Frederick his
father, one of the most covetous Princes in the world, had neither given him
men, nor money, sufficient to perform those wonders which were expected from
him, before they saw him: In a word, he had not done sacrifice to reputation,
By the first judgments which are made of a new Prince, his reputation is weak
or strong, and therefore the wise advise. Instandum famae nam prout prima
cedunt censentur vniuersa. We must stand upon fame, for as the first succeed,
all the rest are censured.
entering into the Country. Moreover as men are more grieved for the failing of
things promised, then for those which are but in expectation; they saw the
Emperor Frederick did not care to assist him, nor to relieve him with forces
equal to the subject which did press him; For he had written unto the chief
Towns, that as soon as he had settled the affairs of the Empire, he would
follow his son: and yet he left him in a confusion of miseries, By the
Emperor Fredericks letters written to the Town of Dole, bearing date the 12.
of February, 1477. we see that he promised to follow him presently. Nos vero
co^positis paulisper negotijs nostris eundem fillium nostru^ ducem Maximilianum
illico subsequemur, and ad vos in propria persona accedere volumus parati and
inclinati vt ad omnem gratiam and fauorem quos vos intuitu dictorum ducis
Maximiliani, and contoralis Ducissae Mariae impartiri possumus. Ann. of Bourg.
having not where with at all to defray the charges of his own house, so as
the Princess was forced to sell and pawn part of her reueneues.

So the battle of Guinegaste was not followed by any other loss. Only the
Prince of Orange would make use of it, having found, that what he had designed
against the Kings person brought him nothing but shame and repentance. Revenge
inuents villainous practices to please it self: Being offended with the King
for that he had not given him so great authority as he thought he had deserved,
he was not content to have left his service to follow the Archduke, and to
have caused the Towns of Bourgundy to revolt, Attempt against the Kings person
discovered.
but he attempted against his life, thinking that to free himself from fear
he should utterly ruin himself, To attempt against an enemies life is a
testimony of fear and cowardice, upon an apprehension that he will be
revenged: It is a counsel of safety, not of courage.
Monsr. d'Espilly the Kings Atturny General in the Parliament of Dauphine (who
is one of those that in merit and sufficiency find more men to imitate him
then to go before him) sent me an extract out of the Register of the Chamber
of Accounts of Dauphine which related a strange example thereof, and serves as
in a clear Lantern, that the eternal Providence has never failed in the
preservation of this Monarchy, diuerting those storms which hell had raised to
overthrow it. And behold the History.

John Renond, John Renond a Lionois.
Borne at Saint Chaumond in Lionois, and making profession of a Mercer, and an
Apothecary, By the Process verbal, it is said, that this Renond was married,
at Clermont, that he had two brethen at Lion, one Beneficed in the great
Church, and Peter Renond a Hosier, Tenant to Master Michael Lambert.
in the Town of Clermont in Auuergne, undertook to go to Florence to see one
called Francisquin, whom he had sometimes served, and who was a servant in the
house of Medicis, carrying him a horse of some twenty Crowns price, being in
hope that he would do him some good, for men of that sort, give not, but to
receive. He began his journey before Easter, past the holy week at Lion, and
past the Monday after toward Mantua, where he was incountred by five men who
led him to Saint Claude, to the Signeor of Erbens, who committed him to prison,
Prisoner to the Prince of Orange.
for that he said he was a Frenchman, and sent him to the Prince of Orange,
who was then at Arbois.

The Prince of Orange informed himself curiously of all that he knew, and
finding by his discourse, that a desire to draw something from the Master
which he had served at Florence had made him undertake so great a voyage, that
necessity made him capable of any thing, and that it made him of a sick man's
humor, to whom a small matter fitly administered gives ease: Benefits which
prevent the demands of them that have need, and whom necessity does p^esse,
work great effects, and are like unto those easy remedies which being fitly
given, do much case the Patient: In aegris oportunitas cibi salu^aris est, and
aqua tempestiue data remedij locum obtinet. In sick persons, the opportunity
of meat^s healthful, and water fitly given is in stead of a remedy. Sen.
he began to cast forth some words of the tediousness and difficulty of the
way, assuring him of greater good with less pain; he demanded of him if he
would not be as well pleased to have it done him there, as to seek it so far
off. He offers to do any thing.
Renond answered that he was well content, and that he was ready to serve him
against all men, yea were it to go against the King: The Prince of Orange
replied: Thou say well, thou art the man I seek for, commanding they should
make him good cheer; and after that time they suffered him to go up and down
the Town where he listed, yet they caused a Legeois to accompany him, least he
should escape. The Bastard of Orange did sound him, to see if he continued in
this humor, and if he did embrace it willingly, or with grief, We must not
hope for any good success of that which is done unwillingly. Per multum
interest vt^u^ spon^e nostra quid faciamusan inu^ti. There is a great
difference whether we do any thing willingly or by constraint. Arist.
and assuring him that if he did persist, he should find a happy fortune: that
if he would swear to serve the Archduke of Austria faithfully, the Prince of
Orange had power to do him good, and his authority was such, that if he gave
him half the Country, He is engaged with the hope of great rewards.
the donation should not be revoked. These words wrought the effect, which may
be expected from a soul of that disposition, and in such affliction as to
recover his liberty, he would have promised any thing.

The Prince of Orange, thinking that there was not any else to do but to bind
him, causes him to come into his chamber, in the presence of the Bastard of
Orange, to swear vpon-the Masse-booke, and the Figure of the Crucifixe, He
swears to do what he would have him.
to do all that he should command him, and adding this clause unto his Oath, An
oath should have three (...), Truth, Judgment, and Justice, if it wants any
one, it is execration: we must always forbear to swear to deceive him that
trusts unto the oath that is made unto him. In dolo iutat qui aliter facturus
est quam promittit, cu^ periurium fit' nequi (...) decipere credentem. He
swears deceitfully that does otherwise then he promises, being perjury,
wickedly to deceive him that believes. August. 21. q, 2. Can. in dolo.
that if he did it not, he renounced God, his Christianisme and Baptism.
Renond swear, and spoke those words freely, and takes a chamber in Hell (those
were his words) if he failed to effect that which should be commanded him; but
his heart did not consent to this Oath, desiring rather to deceive his heart,
then to betray his Master.

They left him yet three days, to see if he did persist in this resolution,
and to observe if there were any coldness in his words, or amazement in his
Countenance, for that words the most certain in show are changed by the
inconstancy of will, the Nature of man being such, as it oftentimes takes away
Will from all his intentions, There is nothing constant in humane resolutions,
man (...) subject to reject that suddenly which he has promised and sworn.
Quia non ex* toto vult, non ex toto imperat. For he that does not wholly will,
does not wholly command.
and in these dangerous bargains, we must not buy men by the sound, as they do
vessels of Tin, the eye must judge both of the inward and outward man.

The Prince of Orange gave him a horse, and carried him to Bleterans, where he
caused him to come into his Chamber, and commanded the Bastard of Orange to
bring him five boxes of Lead, They show him five boxes of poison.
presenting which unto Renond, he coniured him by the oath which he had taken,
to use them as he should direct him: He let him see that those Boxes were full
of diverse Liquors, and that every one was of a different color; then he said
unto him. Thou know that when the King has heard Mass, or done his
devotions, he is accustomed to kiss the ground, and, many times, the corners
of the Altars. Revenge is blind, it respects neither the holiness of places,
nor the reverence of things. Princes should learn 'by this example, that death
watches them, and may surprise them every where*
Thou shall find means to power these Liquors at the corners where he shall
kneel, and shall rub the corners of the Altar: and to the end, the color may
answer the Ornaments that are upon it, and that the diversity make them not
observe the spots, thou shall take green liquour for green Ornaments, black
for black, white, for white, and in like manner, red and blew for the like
colors: The white may be laid upon the ground, or upon any gray color. They
are of this Composition, that as soon as they are powered forth, there will
nothing appear, and no man can perceive it, but beware thou do not touch it
with thy hand.

This defense not to touch them, made Renond demand after what manner he might
lay them on the Ornaments of the Altar, and not rub them with his finger. The
Prince said unto him: Thou shall take a wax candle, and fret the end of it,
then faigning to make thy Offering, thou shall according unto custom, kiss the
corners of the Altar, and then thou shall touch them with the end of thy Wax
Candle, rubbing the place, where thou shall think the King will kiss the
Altar.

Renond who did abhor all this in his soul, He promises to do it.
made show by his words that nothing seemed more just, nor more easy to be
done. The Prince of Orange did long to have him gone, and it seemed to him,
that his Revenge, although she were drawn by Cruelty, Boldness, Impatiency,
and Impudency, as by four Tigers, The Chariot of Revenge has four wheels,
Cruelty, Impatiency, Boldness, and Impudency. Valde enim velox currus iste ad
effundendum sanguinem, qui nec innocentia sistitur, nec patientiaretardatur,
nec timore frenatur, nec pudore inhibetur. The Chariot to shed blood is very
swift, it is neither stayed by Innocence, restrained by Patience, Fear does
not brible it, nor shame hold it back.
went not swift enough, saying always, that seeing the King would not have him
for his servant, he would never hold him for his Master. Renond promised to do
all this, and made no difficulty but how he might get out of the Country and
not be stayed, for that as soon as he should enter into the Realm, he was in
safety, and feared not any thing.

The Prince of Orange gave him money, and caused him to be conducted out of the
Franch-County: He gave him a Pasport to pass unto Bresse, and promised him two
hundred Crowns: But, for that Renond said, the recompense was not equal to
the service he undertook, he swear by the Prayer Book, which he held in his
hand, that if he did that which he commanded him, he would give him an Office,
which had two hundred and forty pound yearly fee: That if he dyed, he would
cause to be given to his wife and children, thirty pound Sterling of yearly
rent, and a house, in the Town of Salins, for their retreat: and in a word,
that they would do him more good then they had promised him.

There remained no more to do, but to make the Kings Epitaph, but as they were
upon this discourse, the Signior of Erbeins arriues, who brake them off, and
the Prince caused Renond to retire, who went down into a chamber, whereas the
tonnell of the chimney did answer to that of the Prince, by the which he might
easily understand what they said: After that Erbeins had discoursed with the
Prince of the affairs of war, and that Dijon, Chalons, and Beaune were ready
to yield unto the Archduke: The Towns of Dijon, Beaune, and Verdun revolted
against the King. The Lord of Chaumont, who was Governor, recovered them.
Phil. de Com. says that it was for want of judgment in the enemy, and that
God gives wisdom and g^uernment to that part which he will support.
He heard the Prince say unto him: You have brought us a man which is very fit
for us, for the boxes which you know: Whereupon Erbeins said unto the Prince,
you have done ill to discover this business, to one that is a Frenchman. If
you (said he) have promised to make him a Knight, the King will make him an
Earl: He has Knighted a Scullion, and given him great means, Danger wherein
Renond was.
for that he discovered the like enterprise: And what remedy then (said the
Prince.) You must cast him into the River (answered Erbeins) to the end he
discover not any thing: That were ill done (said the Bastard of Orange) seeing
that he was taken in Sauoy, in the habit of a Merchant, and not of a Soldier;
that he was a poor man, who had never spoken unto Soldier but with his hat
in his hand.

This first instrument being made unprofitable, the Prince did not for all that
desist from his bad intent, his revenge was so enflamed with rage and despite
against the King, who had contemned him as a person that could neither do him
good nor harm. The King, says Phil. de Com. did not think that the Prince of
Orange had had courage, or means, to rebel the Country of Bourgundy, as he
did a great part of it.
The Prince demanded whom they should then employ for the Boxes: I will
answered Erbeins, give you one of my servants called Catherin, a very faithful
man, who can both go and speak, and knows many in Court, and has been the
Winter past at Arras, Paris, and at Tours. They sent for this Catherin, who
promised to do any thing they would. Then the Prince of Orange commanded the
Bastard of Orange to carry Renond to Salins, and to have a care least he
escaped. You shall do well (said Catherin) for if he go into France, I will not
go, for that he will discover all (...) designs, and knowing me he will accuse
me: He had reason to think thereon, for if he had been discovered, they would
not have given him any time to repent. There are crimes, whose example is so
necessary, as they that are apprehended must be presently dispatched. In other
excessesit is good that repentance go before the punishment, and a good Prince:
Non poena semper, sed saepius poenitentia contentus esse debet: Not always
with punishment, but oftentimes must be content with repentance: Tacit in vit.
Agtic.
The Bastard of Orange said, that he would put such irons on his feet that he
should not be well able to fly: The next day, Renond was led to Salins, and
lodged in a base chamber at Chastelbellin, where he had fetters put on him,
waighing above an hundred weight.

The Bastard of Orange went to Beaune The Process verbal shows that the
Country made great joy for the reduction of Beaune, (...) these words. And in
making the said feasts and dancings, he heard them that were in the chamber,
under the Tower where this deponent was, cry out with a loud voice, Long live
Burgundy and of the rest one: Thus they cried three or four times, and so did
the rest that were in Castelbellin.
to reduce it to the Archdukes obedience, Renond a prisonerin Irons, put to
ransom.
which done he returned to Chastelbellin, and told Renond that he was his
prisoner taken in the wars, and that he must put himself to ransom, Renond
could do no other thing but weep, saying, that the Prince of Orange had
promised him otherwise. The Bastard of Orange told him, that it was no place
for tears, and that water was dear, that he should resolve either of a
ransom, or to be cast down headlong from the top of the rock; Seeing no
remedy, he promised to pay two hundred Crowns by Midsommer day, and if he did
not acquit himself within the time he should pay the double.

He found himself in this perplexity the first day of May, which was the
feast of Saint James, and Saint Phillip, he made his Vow unto our Lady of Puy
in Velay, and to Saint James in Galicia, promising to go thither to pay his
Vows, if he escaped out of that prison, and not to see wife nor children
until he revealed the Prince of Oranges practice unto the King. His prayer
being ended, God (who has always had a particular care of the King and Realm
of France) gave him means to break his Irons, Renond delivered miraculously
and to get out of prison, to advertise the King of these matters, so much
importing the safety of his person, and of his estate: The Process Verbal
says; that after that Renond had made his Vow, his Ironsopened, and he found
means to escape* by two lances which he had tied one unto another; and by
cords which he found there*
The fear he had to be followed made him to take the way to Lausanne, from
whence he went with all speed to Bourges, where hearing of the Lord of
Bouchages being, and that he was one of the Kings principal Servants, he
addressed himself unto him, to tell him all that he had learned of the Prince of
Orange. The Lord of Bouchages sent for Raoul Pichon, Counselor to the King,
to hear this Declaration, and caused a verbal Process to be made, the which
was inrold in the chamber of Accounts of Dauphine, bearing date the eight and
twentieth of May, one thousand four hundred seventy and eight, Signed Imbert
of Baterne, R. Pichon.

From this Discourse we see another spring. The Signior of Erbeins, The like
attempt discovered and punished.
to let the Prince of Orange understand, that he had inconsiderately made
choice of a Frenchman, to be the bearer of his boxes, and the executioner of
his designs; for that, beside the bonds of God, and nature, which bound him to
his Prince; and not to hold any thing which he should promise against him:
Unjust promises must not be kept, it is justice to fly from the^; and
injustice to observe them* If they were extorted by force they bind not, for
his will that promised was not free.
The estate wherein he was, when he promised, dispensed him of his promise:
he said unto him, that if Renond did it for the hope of recompense, he should
have more from the King, then from any other, and that he had made a Scullion
of his Kitchen, or one that did make sauce, a Knight, for that he had revealed
the like enterprise. The Chronicle makes no mention of this kind of
recompense: but it reports the service, which a Sauce-maker, called Colynet,
did unto the King.

Princes have Instruments for the good and evil which they do, they find men
for all affairs, whose spirits are apt to undertake any thing, and to dispatch
the^ of me^ by ways unknown to generous minds, and unworthy of Princes. To
practice against the life of an enemy by any other means the^ by Arms, is
unworthy of a Prince: Adgandestre Prince of the Chattes promised the Senate to
put Arminius to death if they would send him poison, the Senate answered: Non
fraud neque occultis, sed palam and armatum populum Romanum hosts suos
vlcisci, qua gloria aequabat se Tiberius priscis imperatoribus, qui venenum in
Pyrrhum regem vetuerant, prodiderantque That the Romans were not revenged of
their enemies by fraud and secret practices, but by Arms, in which glory
Tiberius was equal to the ancient Emperors, who did forbid poison to be given
to King Pyrrhus, and did bewray it.
The Duke of Bourgundy had some, who practiced a Merchant called Ithier, to
have the king poisoned upon promise of 50000. Crowns, to distribute among the^
that should execute this damnable design, but they found that the gate, by the
which they would have it pass was shut, and had never been opened to any such
thoughts, whereas they found nothing but misery, for we may say, to the glory
of fidelity, that such detestable conspiracies did never enter into the Kitchen.

Ithier corrupted one called Hardy, and he dealt with a maker of Sauce in the
Kings Kitchen, to whom he promised twenty thousand Crowns. This Sauce-maker
resolved suddenly to cry quittance with this wretch, that came to tempt him,
preferring the duty of his fidelity before all other considerations of profit,
making show to hearken to this bargain, he told him, that he could not do any
thing without Colinet, who was also an Officer, and that it was necessary to
put the poison into his hands: Hardy delivered it unto them and instructed them
how to use it. The King advertised of this poisoning.
They presently advertised the King, who caused this poisoner to be apprehended
and examined in his presence, to know the motives and the effects of his
design; He confessed the whole matter: The King went from Amboise (where he was
at that time) to go to Paris, and caused Hardy to be conducted by John Blosset,
Captain of an hundred Archers of the Dauphins Guard, who carried him in chains
in a little Cart, to deliver him to the Provost of Merchants of Paris, to do
justice of him: The came and received him in the Suburbs, and caused him to
sit in a chair, made fast in the Cart, to the end the people of Paris might
see him, not so much to the shame of this miserable wretch, as to the confusion
of the Duke of Bourgundy, for that it was publicly spoken, that he had
commanded this foul attempt.

They made his Process, Hardy condemned to be quartered.
Execution of John Hardy, on Thursday the 30 of March 1474. The Chronicle
says, that his head which had been set up at the Grieve, was presently
stolen away.
and he was condemned to be quartered, his four quarters to be carried to
four frontier Towns, with an Inscription, containing the cause of his
punishment, his houses to be razed, and the place where he was borne to be
ruined and never more to be built.

A holy, and just judgment: If the places for that they have been innocently
guilty of any heinous villainy, have been termed wicked; they that have
subborned and suffered these Murderers, and poisoners, of Kings, should be
held most cursed and execrable. The place whereas Iulia caused her Carroch to
pass upon the body of Seruius Tullius her father, slain by Tarquine. The gate
by the which the 300. Fabians went forth to battle where they died. The place
of Battle whereas Claudius father to Drusus was sick. The place where the
V^stales were interred alive: were termed Execrable.


The fear of the like punishment did not divert an Englishman, called John Bon
from the like thoughts, who undertook to poison the Dauphine. John Bon an
Englishman conde^ne^.
He was condemned to loose his head, by a sentence given by the Provost of
Paris. Being at the place of excution, he desired to have his wife and children
recommended unto the King: The Kings pleasure was, that the loss of his life
should be moderated with the loss of his eyes: He accepted of this commutation
of punishment, which did not bind him, but to go accompanied, There is not any
affliction but does still find some thing to comfort it. Asclepiades being
grown blind, said that blindness brought him this content to go always
accompanied, causing (...) fe to be guided by a young boy.
and kept him from a passage where man finds no Companion, and is without hope
ever to return. My opinion is, that the King did it in remembrance of some
services, which this miserable man had done him in the discovery of some of the
Earl of Armagnackes practices, as has been formerly said.

God dispersed these wicked practices which the Prince of Orange had against
the Kings life, Taking and recovery of Beaune and Verdun
but his designs upon the Towns of Bourgondy succeeded: He made Beaune
revolt; and as we have said, the bastard of his house entered into it. Verdun
did also declare it self against the King: the Towns of Mons-aujon,
Chastillon upon Seine, Semur, and Bar upon Seine, followed this rout. Chaumont,
Liuetenant general of the Country, recovered them as speedily as they had
been taken, Rebels punished.
and caused them to be severely punished which had been chief actors in this
revolt. The punishment of a rebellion should be^ done speedily and sharply, as
Q. Fuluius did upon the Capuans, of whom he put 80 to death without acquainting
his Colleague therewith, or expecting any commandment from the Senate. Ita ad
Capuam res compositae co^silio ab moni part laudabili severe and celeriter in
maxim noxios animaduersum. Thus at Capua matters being settled by a
commendable resolution, the chief offenders were speedily and severely
punished Tit. Liu. lib. 16.
Their enemies wanted judgment, and Phil. de Commines referres that to the
difference of men, which should be imputed to the secret judgments of the
eternal Providence, for the favor or disgrace of Princes and states. The
Memorials of the Franch-county, written by Golu, accuse the covetousness of
the Emperor Frederick, and the weakness of his Garrisons that were in
Bourgondy. Giury compounded for Beaune at forty thousand Crowns. The Bailiffe
of Auxois yielded Semur. William of Vaudre was taken prisoner at Seurre, and
Simon of Quingey, and Cottebrune at Verdun.

The Prince of Oranges attempts (who was retired to Basil) had not lasted so
long in that province, Sigismond Archduke of Austria inconsta^t, gives his
estates to his Nephew.
if the Archduke Sigismond had not been an Actor, and quit the Kings
Alliance. He was suddenly incensed, and as soon pacified. Lightness, Cho^er,
and Facility do not well become a prince: either he is feared more then he
ought, or esteemed less the^ be desires. Such was Vitellius, Quem subitis
offensis, aut in tempestiuis blanditii^ mutabilem contemnebant, (...) as
inconstart, they did contemn and fear, for his sudden choler and unseasonable
flattery.
These humors do never encounter in a Prince; but they make him co^temptible,
or fearful: He suffered himself to be governed by his servants, who abused
him as well in making him fear, as in putting him in hope. By the counsel of
some, he had followed the King against the Duke of Bourgondy* by advice of
others, and in the worst estate, he leaves the King for his Nephew the
Archduke Maximilian, and sends German Troops into Bourgondy, under the
command of Simon of Quingey, dispossesseth himself of all his estates, and
reserues only a pension. Sigis^^nd, Archduke of Austria having no children by
his first nor second marriage, gave his goods to the Archduke maximilian his
Nephew. Phi. de Commin (...) says, that he suffered himself to be governed by
his servants, and there was never any great Judgment nor honor in him.


What was lost in the battle of Guinegaste, was recompensed with the winning
of the Town of Air, Lewis of Bourbon, Bishop of Liege, slain.
and the troubles which happened at Liege Lewis of Bourbon, Bishop of Liege,
brother to John and Peter of Bourbon, was grown old in the hatred which the
Liegeo is bare him the which took deep root in their memories, when as they
remembered, that to revenge his private injuries, the Duke of Bourgondy had
reduced them to that misery and desolation which they yet felt.

William de la March, called the Boar of Ardenne, who had been bred up by
the hand of this Prince, and who was a pentioner to the house of Bourgondy,
undertook to kill him, and to make his son Bishop.

To execute this design, he gathered together a Troop of the most desperate
wretches that were in Paris, (a Forest at that time where such sauadge beasts
did lurk,) (...) with the honor of their villainies, and the fear of Justice.
Therascally mullitude in Towns are always dissolute, and they principally,
quibus ob egestaten^ and flagitia, maxima peccandi necessitas, who for then
poverty or vil^anies, are forced to sin.
he gave them red Cassockes; and for a Badge, a Boares head upon the sleeue,
with whom he went into the Country of Liege. He acquainted some of Liege with
his Conspiracy, Treason of the Liegeois.
who promised to serve him. They presently took an Alarm to see these Boares
in their Vines; they let the Bishop understand, that he must not suffer them
there, and that if he would go forth to chase them away, every man would follow
him.

This good prelate, whose courage could not defer such an occasion to another
season, and did think that Palms were not planted for cowards, resolved as
sudenly as he was entreated, to go out against these thieves.

Being ready to charge, the Liegeois abandoned him, so as he was compassed in
by these Boares, and barbarously slain by their Leader, who caused him to be
stripped stark naked, and to be carried to the place before the Cathedral
Church. Soon after Maximilian caused the head of la March to be cut off.

Although the King held a Peace difficult betwixt Provinces so near, so
interressed, and so accustomed to pick quarrels, as it is a hard matter for
two Neighbors, Lewis seeks a peace of Maximlia^.
which have many desputes, to be long at peace; Neighbor Estates have always
some disputes: The Romans and Carthaginians, continued five hundred years in
peace; but when they began to extend their frontiers, and to draw near one
unto another, suspicion. jealousy, and envy of eithers greatness thrust them
into war.
yet the loss of the battle at Guinegaste, made him resolve to seek it. A
resolution which could not grow, but from great wisdom and policy, having
duly considered, that it was necessary, honorable, and profitable for him so
to do.

A Prince that is already well stricken in Age, who sees great discontentments
amongst great men, and hears great complaints amongst the meaner, and has his
Children very young, should no more think of War, if he could not draw unto
him the advantage which he desired; and considering that the Footmen had all
the honor of the battle, he made the body of an Army of ten thousand Foot,
two thousand Pioners, six thousand Suisses, and a thousand five hundred horse
to employ upon all occasions.

This establishment must be reckoned among the examples of his good
Government, or rather among the Instruments which he could handle to reign
powerfully. If he had made this Order sooner, New discipline for Soldiers.
or if King Charles the eighth, and Lewis the twelfsth had continued it, France
had not felt those wants and weakness which have been a let that her
designs have not been equal to her courage.

Estates depend not so much upon a good form of Government, Estates may well
be governed either by one alone, or by few heads, or by many, but their
strength or weakness depends upon private order; and especially of Martial
discipline, whose effect is so great, as it preserues even Tyrants in the
estate which they hold, whereof the house of the Ottomans is a president.
as of Force: Military Discipline is the foundation of an Estate. The grounds
of Warlike Discipline are Foote-men; and all Foote-men which are not drawn
from the Princes own Estates, cause more discommodity then profit. Rome which
in her greatness (that is to say, Dangerous to employ foreign soldiers
from Numa to the Emperor Augustus) Footmen have given unto the Romans the
Empire of^ all the world. From Numa to Augustus, they had but one year a
suspension of Arms, and have always carried the war into the Enemies
country, how far off soever.
had fought five hundred and fifty Battles, and had won four hundred thirty
seven with her own Troops, held that footmen were the sinews of her forces,
and has not found a more certain cause of her ruin, then to have mingled
strangers in their legions.

Strangers draw away the chief treasure of the realm, their affection and
fidelity is not so natural, as they care more then the subjects to preserve
the estate: They dis-band for want of pay, and sometimes they bandy against
them of the Country with more fury then against their enemies: they will
prescribe a law when they are ready to decide a good action; and like unto
Ravens, rather follow the prey, then accompany the Wolves which pursue and take
it. The Fable says, that the Ravens having accompanied the Wolves at the
pursuit of some beast to devour it, would have their share when it was taken,
saying, that they had assisted the^, and always followed them: you were not
for us (answered the Wolves) it was the prey that drew you thither, and if it
had succeeded ill, and that we had been taken, you would not have spared our
own flesh.
Experience teaches many examples to confirm this Maxim. Those estates which
have no other suport but by foreign forces, suffer great discommodities in
time of peace, and recei^e small profit and succors in time of war: they are
always declining to their ruin, the which is not deferred, but by the
slacknesse of the occasion, or the small courage of the assailant.

Men of war are not ordained but to preserve or conquer, Observations of the
adua^tages of Footmen over horsemen.
to defend or take towns, and to decide by a battle the rights and
differences of Princes and Estates. In all these occasions footmen are more
proper then horsemen. A town which is kept by hors-men, receives such
discommodity for provision, as oftentime it is more pressed by necessity within,
then by the enemies without: and always horse do more trouble a Philip. father
to Alexander, seeking to camp in a place of advantage for the soldiers, but
unfit for the horse, cried out, that it was a great pity of our life, which
must be subject to the commodity of horse.
General to feed, then to discipline his soldiers. At assaults of places
hors-men are of small service, if they leave not their horse, and serve on
foot. At battles, footmen which have means to entrench and cover themselves,
and have good store of pikes, are always more then equal to horsemen. It is
true that the Cauallary has great advantages, for a horseman has better
legs then his own, he charge more furiously, and has more force, heat
and breath then a footman. Footmen are levied more speedily, are led and
lodged with more facility, are paid and entertained more commodiously, fight
more safely and courageously, and rally themselves again more We are not now
in the time of the old wars, when as Gentlemen only gave themselves to the
exercise of Arms. At this day every man has liberty to seek it without the
Realm, and many are grown Soldiers, and never went out of their Village
easily: For the facility of the leuy, it is so great in France, since that the
civil wars have armed the people, as there is not any parish where you find
not Soldiers which have carried Arms, and others which are resolved to run
that fortune.

The Provinces are so peopled, France cannot be disarmed of footmen.
as if the King should loose as many battles as the mightiest conqueror could
give him, yet could he not disarme him of Footmen. Add hereunto, that horse
fit for the war, are always dear, and rare, and that we ever find more men
then horses. The Romans, to repulse the Gauls, who had seized upon some Towns
of Lombardy, made a description of their forces, and of the number of men fit
for the war: they found six hundred thousand foot, and threescore thousand
horse.


Touching the pay, we know that the difference is great betwixt the pay of a
man at Arms, and that of a footman; and that it is easier to raise a thousand
foot, then a hundred horse. For the facility of lodging, footmen cover and
entrench themselves in field, and fortify themselves within a Town: if they
be lodged in a village, they lie close to defend themselves, and not scattering
like unto horsemen. For the advantage of fight, it is true that horsemen have
sooner done;l but also we have seen battles lost by the disorder and violence
of the horse, who can hardly keep their ranks, nor recover them being lost;
and oftentimes they fall upon the foot, and break them with more disorder then
the Elephants of the Ancients, One of the greatest forces of the Armies of the
East, consisted of Elepha^ts: They must of necessity (says M. de Montagne)
give great credit to their beasts and to their discourse, abandoning unto them
the head of the Battle: wher^s the least stay they could make for the
greatness and heaviness of their bodies, and the least amazeme^t that had
made the^ turn head upon their own men, was sufficient to overthrow all.
to whose discretion they did commit the head of the Army. A Foote-man fights
more surely, and more resolutely then a horseman. In what perplexity does a
valiant man fight vpa faint-hearted Jade? and what is a Coward, or a madman
upon a courageous horse? How many have we seen carried away by their horses,
into dangers not foreseen, who can no more stay them in the flight, then in
the heat of their fight? They that speak of war with knowledge and
experience, hold, that commonly when as the Cauallary aduanceth to give the
first charge, it is the cause of the loss of the victory, returning often upon
their foot, and striking a great amazement into them, for that having conceived
a great opinion, and assured themselves often to win the Battle, they find
themselves suddenly deceived; and therefore the Rout of the Cauallary is
always full of amazement.


For the commodity of the leading, be it to march, lodge, or fight, the
footmen pass in all places, whereas the Cauallary comes often into such
difficult passages, as the men at Arms should rather desire flying, then
ordinary horses. Speaking hereof with a brave French knight, very well known
in these last wars, and who has yet command amongst the Kings men at Arms,
he said unto me, That the discommodity of forage had been so great, as the
horsemen were sometimes fifteen, or twenty leagues from the camp to supply
their wants: That some went to war with five or six Horse, who fought but
upon one, and yet the people were forced to feed these unprofitable beasts,
with their keepers: That ten horsemen had more Carts then a company on foot.
And if his advice might purchase credit, they should therein imitate the
Spaniards, who give honors, recompenses, and marks of virtue to the foot, and
the contrary to horsemen. It is more honorable in Spain to be among the
foot companies then among the Horse. The contrary is observed at Rome. Valerius
the Consul said unto his Troop: Agite Iuvenes prestate virtute peditem, vt
honor and ordini prestatis. Go to young men, excel the footmen in virtue, as
you do in honor and order. Live.


The Horsemen were the loss of the battle at Courtray, and the footmen
defeated the Earl of Flanders before Gand. The horsemen seeking to have all
the honor of the battle at Poitiers, came to charge before that the foot
companies had means to join, this was the cause that the English, whose force
consisted wholly in Foot, won the Battle. At the Battle of Guinegaste, the
Archduke Maximilians Horsemen abandoned the Foot, who stood firm, and kept
the place of Battle. We have formerly seen, that the men at Arms at the
Battle of Mont-lehery, who seemed as if they would have supported heaven with
their Lances, fell upon their own Archers, and trod them under their feet,
doing them more harm then their enemies.

It is true, that whatsoever was fortunate and glorious in this Encounter, came
from the Arrierban, or Gentlemen of Horseback of Dauphine, who made the
Fore-ward under the command of the Baron of Sausonnage, who was slain there:
for of four hundred Gentlemen which dyed in this Battle, there were four and
fifty of Dauphine. Before the troubles, their names and Arms were to be seen
in a Chapel in the Convent of Iacobins at Grenoble. Yet for all this
discourse we may not banish horsemen out of Armies; if Rome To them that say,
the Romans made their Conquest by Footmen, we may answer, that in like
manner, the Parthians increased their Empire by horsemen: And that M. Antony
having vanquished them in eighteen battles, found his victories unprofitable,
by reason of the inequality of Hors-men. Plut.
could have equaled them of France in Courage and Resolution, she had sooner
carried the proud Title of Queen and Mistress of Nations. But she was forced
to make a virtue of necessity: for meaning in the beginning to have all the
people fit to serve in War, and all having not means to be Horsemen, her
chief force was settled in Footmen. Romulus Romulus made but three Centries
for hu^dreds of Horsemen. Tullus Hostilius added ten troops, either of two
and thirty Horse. Tarquinius ordained, that the number should be of three
hundred: Seruius disposed the people into five bands, which made 93 Centuries,
whereof 18 were for horsemen.
having divided the people into thirty Tribes, made but three hundred horsemen.
And to prove this poverty, we find that when as Lucius Tarquinius, of a
Patrician race was made Constable by Lucius Quintius Cincinatus, he had always
fought on foot, for that he had no means to mount himself on Horseback.

Horsemen are very necessary in diverse occasions, Necessity of Horsemen.
which cannot be otherwise performed: If it be needful to make a long journey,
to surprise the Enemy, seize upon, approach, cut off, or hold passages, recover
the Cannon, inuest Towns, keep the Enemy in Alarm, to command the fieild, to
make a spoil, to cut off victuals from the besieged: all this Horsemen do,
and more readily, and more effectually then Footmen. Oftentimes they have
recovered that which the Foot have lost; they alone have saved the Estate:
Sext. Tempa^^^us seeing the Volsques come to the charge against him, spoke
these words: Nisi haec armata cohors sistat impetum hostium actum est d^
Imperio. If this armed troop did not ^^ay the Enemies fury, the Emperor were
undone.
and we know well, that the Parthians have done as great Exploits with their
Horse, as the Romans with their Foot; but it is certain, that the men at
Arms have always been beaten when as they encountered Foote-men, and
therefore we often see, that the Roman Horsemen left their Horses to fight and
defeat Footmen, and took them again to pursue them when they were in
flight. Titus Largius at the Lake of Regilla, and the Consul Valerius fighting
against the Sabins, caused their Horsemen to light: And when as Largius had
defeated the Latins, he caused them to mount again to pursue them. Equitibus
admoti equi, vt prosequi hostem possunt.
The like has been observed in the English and Bourgondian Armies.

But to return to the Camp which we have left; It was not sufficient to have
made this Leuy of Men of War, to keep the Field, and to serve upon any
occasion, if they had not added two necessary things to make it profitable,
Entertainment and Safety: for if it had always lain open to the injuries of
the Air, and the enterprises of the first Assailant; or if it had been forced
to dis-band, to seek for Victuals, it had been like unto the Pyramides of
Egypt, of great show and ostentation, and of no profit. The King provided for
the first, imposing a Tax upon his Subjects, which Philip de Commines calls
Excessive and Cruel, The entertainment of the soldiers of the camp, cost the
king a hundred and fifty thousand pound sterling yearly.
necessity justifies all kinds of impositions: for all that is necessary to
the State, is Justice; and all that is profitable, is necessary. Necessity
goes beyond the Law; Necessity teaches Princes to command the laws, and
dispenses them from observing the Laws, it does excuse that which they do,
Necessitas, magnum humanae imbecillitatis patrocinium, omnem legem frangit.
Necessity a great support of humane weakness, breaks all laws. Sen.
and when the Prince is pressed, he does more consider that which he does, then
that which he should do: his Justice goes of another train, then that of
Princes; and those things which seem to be against the laws, are not done,
but to make the laws live and continue.

Wherefore, Armies are not to be entertained without tribute.
who-so will draw service from any thing, must make it last: for that which is
not for ever, cannot always profit, and he that will have it last, must make
the means whch entertaines it lasting: The Tributes by the which the means to
make war, are maintained, may not be touched. Augustus ordained a perpetual
and certain revenue for the entertainment of Soldiers, out of the twentieth
penny of Legacies and Successions. After his death, the Senate entreated
Tiberius to extinguish it. Dion says that he would not do it, and Tacitus
gives this reason. Quod militare aerarium eo subsidio niteretur, that the
treasure of the war did (...) consist of that aid.
The quiet of Provinces cannot be without Arms, and Armies; Arms are not to
be found, nor Armies entertained without Money; and the Money which is to be
employed in public necessities, is not drawn, but from private commodities.
The Senate would have Tiberius suppress the twentieth penny imposed (by
Augustus) upon Legacies, and Successions: But this wise Prince would not yield
unto it, for that it was only affected for the entertainment of his Soldiers.

For the second, he caused a great company of Tents, and Pauillions to be
made, to lodge his Soldiers dry, and Carts to close them in, and entrench
them. All this would have been found weak against a mighty Enemy, and against
a mighty attempt, Lewis the eleventh, strong in Artillery.
if he had not placed Artillery. I do not hold it a small matter the
commendation which Philip de Commines gives him to have been always well
furnished of Ordinance in his Armies, and better then ever King of France: for
the great designs of Princes are not executed by handie strokes. His
Chronicle says, that about the end of the year 1478. He caused twelve great
Bombardes to be made, with a great number of Iron bullets in the Forges of
Creil, and many of stone, in the quarries of Peronne.

Since that men grew so ingenious not to imitate Nature; (...).
as Xeuxis in his Vine, Appelles in his Venus, Memnon in his Statue, Miron in
his Cow, Architas in his Dove, Sapor in his Heaven of Glass, Mont-royall in
the Eagle of Wood, and in his Fly of Iron, Albert the great in his brazen
head, but to offend and destroy: Art^llery invented.
that Men's wits have given wings and fire to Iron, to hasten death more
speedily; that a German Monk The invention of Gunpowder and Ordinance was
found out by Bartholmew le Noi^, a German Monk. The year is diversely reported:
some date it 1330. others 1334, and others 1380.
went down into Hell, to find fire there for the ruin of Man, as Prometheus
had mounted up unto Heaven to fetch that there, wherewith he thought to give
them life; and that Europe has known that which was not in use, Nothing
strong without Cannons.
but to unknown Nations. The Portugals found Pieces of ordinance in the realm
of Pegu, which the Chinois had brought thither 2500. years before: and the
Chinois attribute this invention to an evil spirit, who taught it to their
first King, called Vitey, to defend himself against the Tartars, above a
thousand years before the birth of Christ.
Artillery has been a mark of the power and greatness of Estates, which
cannot be held strong, nor assured, if they be unfurnished, seeing that
nothing can be gotten, nor preserved without it.

Artillery shows those Forts to be weak, which the Ancients held
impregnable; there is not any but fears this thunder: and if they ouer-throw
the Attemps, and consume the means and patience of the assailant, Forms of
war changed.
it is only by the Cannon: It works such terrible effects, and so far from
the use of the Engines in old time, as it has changed Artillery is the cause
that war is at this day more iuditiously managed then in former times, when
as quarrels were ended by battles. Every man seeks to win time, and to force
his enemy to necessity. They trust nothing to fortune, that may be committed to
wisdom: they govern their designs with longer time, and more safety.
all the old forms of Sieges and Battles. Gunpowder and wilde-fire are
multiplied in so many sorts, and are grown to such perfection, as the war
which in former times was made only with Iron, is now done with Artillery and
Powder.

They cause the Cannon to martch in the head of the Army, All yields unto the
Cannon.
and that holds the rank of Elephants: Elephants have been employed in the
head of Armies. Siquidem Tirio seruire sedebam An^ ibali: When I did sit to
serve Anniball of Tire.
and Chariots armed with Sythes, which did cut in sunder all they encounter.
They give them the honor to begin those great battles, whereupon depend the
healthes of Estates; they open passages, and make new: all that come by one
way, scatter themselves into a dozen, because they would not encounter them:
nothing preserves it self, but to receive death, or fight. They are absolute
Judges of the doubs of victory; and if a battalion of foot presents it self
so strong, so well armed with Pikes, and so covered with Muskets, as they mock
at all the attempts of a victorious Prince, and merit that glorious name of an
Armed wall, Dion calls the fourth Legion, (...). See what has been spoken
thereon in the first Book.
they must at the sight of the Cannon yield their Arms, or suffer the pain of
their rashness, and see themselves sooner overthrown, then Grass or Corn is
mowne down and reaped. The terrible effects of Artillery is wittily
represented by the Signior of Bartas in his Poem of the Law.

Even as when many Cannons shot at once,
Affront an Army; the earth with thunder groans:
Here flies a broken arm, and breaks another,
There stands the one half of a halu'd body; the other
Falls down a furlong thence: here flies a shield,
And deepe-wide windows make they in the field.



It is Ordinance then, which makes a Prince equal to thundering Jupiter, who
makes the Rocks to leap, and overthrows the Giants under the mountains
which they had raised against him: The Brazen-mouthes which vomit forth Iron,
winged with fire, show the greatness, and augment the reputation of them that
make them speak. All the Trumpets of their glory sound not so loud, and are
not heard so far as these Flutes. They be the most certain Titles of the
right of Arms, and are not subject to contradiction; so the charge is Royal,
and there is not any Prince, how great and powerful soever, but in process of
time will find it insupportable. They write, that King Henry the second, in
his voyage to Germany, never made Cannon-shot, but cost him three hundred
Crowns. Blaise of Vigenere ^ says, That in the voyage of K. Henry, in the
year 1552. at Danwilliers, and Iuoy, places of small importance, which
notwithstanding endured thousands of Cannon-shot, there was not any one shot
but cost the King, (accounting all the equipage and furniture belonging to the
Artillery) two or three hundred Crowns; so as a dozen of those balls came to
a thousand six hundred crowns.


All the Instruments and Engines of War, known unto the Antiens, have been
contemned to bring Artillery in use, which has all the effects and force of
Bows, Arrows, Rams, Slings, Crosse-bowes, Scorpions, and those terrible
Engines which did raise up men into the Air, carried away whole Galleys,
heaped up and carried with great violence, Rocks, Millstones, and Men, The
Cross-bow was an Engine which carried far off, and with great violence.
Sometimes they did put in men alive, or dead. Pelagius, a young man of Spain,
seeing himself forced to yield to the infamous and execrable lust of Almansor,
struck him on the face, wherewith being incensed, he caused him to be cast by
one of his Slings, beyond the River of Betis, or Guadalquibir, in the year
895. Iussit ^um funda machinali trans Betim mitti scopulosis rupibus illidendum.
whom they made to leap beyond the Walls, the Rivers, and the Mountains of
those places which they would make subject to ruin.

But as Inventions are not perfect in the beginning, the first Pieces of
Ordinance were all of Iron, Inuentio^s at the first rude and imperfect.
with bands and hoopes of the same, so heavy and ill made, so difficult to
govern, so ill mounted, and of so bad a bore, as they had more show then
execution, and did only serve to amaze them that would be amazed with the
noise. All Mechanicke Inventions are rude and gross in their Infancy, as
appears in Artillery and Printing. The Batteries of those times were
ridiculous, they did only serve for an unprofitable expense of powder. They
shot^ a far off, and at randon, and five or six vollies in a whole day.
The Chronicle reports an example which shows the little industry and address
that was even in the Masters of this Art: for all the Officers of the
Ordinance being gathered together on Monday before Twelfth day, Bombard made at
Tours.
in the year 1448. in the field before Saint Anthonies Bastille, to try a
great Bombard which the King had caused to be made at Tours; At the first shot
it carried an Iron Bullet of five hundred pounds weight unto the Gibbet at Pont
Charenton: They thought it was not well boared, and therefore they would have
it cleansed and charged again. The Caster playing the Gunner, scoured it so
carelessly, as he left fire in it, so as having charged it anew, and put in his
Bullet; the Bombard having no fire set to the touchhole, discharged of it
self, blowing up the Caster ino the Air into many pieces, which slew (near
and far off) two and twenty men, and burnt and maimed many others. The
Chronicle adds, that the pieces of the Casters body were gathered together,
and buried in the Church of S. Merry, and that they cried in the streets; Pray
unto God for I. Maugue, caster of the Bombard, who is newly dead between heaven
and earth, in the service of the king our Lord.


Our age more industrious, Ordinance of Brass.
and subtle, having caused Brazen Ordinance to be cast, that is to say, a
mixture of Tin and Copper, softer and more flexible then Iron: Artilery
began to be good in the wars of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and of
Francis the first, and better under the reign of Henry the second: King Henry
the fourth has brought it to perfection. France could not carry the title of
Invincible, before her Arsenals were filled with that, whose want makes the
mightiest Empires weak: She may now brag to have the keys of all the forts
of Europe, and that there is not any one, but will stoop and humble it self
at the sight of this Thunderbolt, when as at the first word of Jupiter, it
shall be cast forth by the Eagle which carries it, and which only demands
where is it?

If Christian Princes would have vented out in any other place then in Europe,
Death of Mahomet 2.
that warlike heat, which turmoyled them to their own ruins, God had given
them a goodly occasion to employ, both the Camping Troops of Lewis the 11.,
and all the forces of other Christian Princes, to the overthrowing of that of
the Turks, which was wonderfully shaken by the death of Mahomet Mahomet the
second, Emperor of the Turks, dyed the the 3d. of May, 1481. in the 52. year
of his age.
: He dyed at that time in Nicomedia: Pope Sixtus was so glad, as he appointed
three festival days, Sixtus the 4. rejoices at the death of Mahomet.
in Rome, to thank God for that the Church was delivered from such a scourge:
dying he cursed Rhodes thrice: he was a wiser and more polliticke Prince then
any of the house of the Ottomans, as he who in all his conquests added policy
to force. He was thick, synowy, and strong of body, he had an Aquiline nose,
and so crooked, as the end hung over his lip: Being young, he began to take
delight in the acts of Alexander the Great, promising himself to surpass or
equal him. Mahomet propounded no other pattern unto himself then that of
Alexander, not to imitate him in his virtues, but in his ambition.
The first day he sat in the Throne of Amurath Amurath dyed before the Castle
of Croy, in the year 1450.
his father (who reigned 32. years, Mahomet surnames himself the Great.
a Prince much beloved of his own, and just unto his enemies) he would be
surnamed the Great.

In show he held Mahomets Religion, but having been bred up as a Christian by
his Mother, who was daughter to Lazarus Prince of Seruia, and instructed by her
in the Prayers, and Confession of the Christian Faith, when he came to the
Empire he found himself in so great a doubt and distraction what he should
believe, as he resolved not to believe any thing, caring no more for the
Gospel, then for the Alcoran, making a scoff at Mahomet, whom he termed to be
a Slave and a Thief, holding his Prophecies for Fables, and his Laws for
Impostures. The father dying had recommended unto him his young son Turcin,
being but eighteen Months old, and he had promised not to make him feel the
rigor of the house of the Ottomans: But as he had no faith toward God, so he
kept none with men, We must not expect any observation of faith, from a Prince
that has no Religion.
he forgot this promise, for death had no sooner closed up his fathers eyes,
but he drew this poor Infant out of the Nurses arms, to beat out his brains
against the wall, saying; that he would not have his father interred alone.
Moses, one of his chief servants, entreated him not to defile his hands in his
own blood. This reason did not move him, but only to change the executioner,
for he commanded him to kill him. Moses caused water to be brought, and powered
such abundance into the mouth of this infant, as he did both smother him and
drown him. The mother seeing this Inhumanity, filled the house with fearful
cries, and made terrible imprecations against Mahomet, who to comfort her said;
That she sought in vain to revive her son with tears, that she should
conform her self unto the Law, This custeme is inhumane and unnatural. But
we must not expect just Laws in a (...) it is better to murder some few, then
to expose a million to death by the war which should gr^w in the house of the
Ottomans, if the great Senior should suffer the Princes of his blood to live:
But where is the Law of the God which they adore that approues a Parricide? It
is a tyrannous custom, but yet ancient. The s^ccessors of Alexander, says
Plutarch, did commonly kill the mothers, wives, and children, with their
brethren, it was an ordinary custom.
which would not that a Prince coming to the Empire should suffer his brethren
to live, for that there could be but one Head in the Empire, nor but one Sun
in Heaven: but if she desired any other thing, whatsoever it were, she should
be sure to obtain it. This woman changing her grief into revenge, demanded
the heart of Moses; Revenge of a woman.
Mahomet instantly commanded that he should be bound hand and foot, and with
the same knife which she thrust into his body, she opened his side, pulled out
his heart, cast it to the dogs, and was therewith pacified. The Author of the
History of Scandeberge, relating this History in the 7th. book, adds these
words: A profitable instruction, for those corrupted spi^its, which prostitute
their consciences to the furious passions of great men.


Amurath had another son of six months old, called Calepin, and foreseeing
it would be impossible he should escape death, if he were known for his son,
Treachery of Haly Bassa.
he recommended him to Haly Bassa entreating him to save him. This Treacherous
wretch to purchase the favor of the new Prince, discovered this innocent
creature unto him. Calepin was veiwed and known by thirty Matrons, and
presently strangled. Haly Bassa, did not live long in the impunity of this
treachery, for after the taking of Constantinople, Mahomet caused him to be
strangled, accusing him of Infidelity, and of Intelligence with the Christians,
and that he had diuerted his father Amurath from the siege of that City. He
carried his designs higher then his Predecessors, he breathed nothing but the
Monarchy of the whole world, and the desire of glory made him to love those
which keep the glory of Princes from decay, and to favor men of knowledge
Mahomet much delighted in Histories and Historiographers favoring John Maria of
Vicenza, for that he wrote the Persia^ wars against Vssan Cassan, in the
Turkish and Italian tongues.
against the intention of his Lawgiuer, who the better to keep under the minds
of men, and to make them subject to the yoke of servitude, did forbid them the
knowledge of learning: He caused to be written in the Arabian tongue, the
lives of great Captains, and especially that of Alexander, whom he took for
his Pattern; but he had not his generosity in battles, nor his moderation in
victories: He used it more cruelly, Cruelties of Mahomet at the taking of
Constantinople, and other places.
when as at the taking of Constantinople, he caused the head of the Emperor
Constantine to be carried in mockery through out his whole Army, and troops of
men to be slain like sheep. The most apparent which were retired into Saint
Sophias Temple The Temple of S. Sophia, which had been built by the Emperor
Justinian, was spoiled of the treasure, and precious relickes, which
Constantine the Emperor had preserved so dearly: It was made a Brothel-house,
and a Stable for horses.
being brought before him as he was at meat, he gave himself that cruel
content, to see their heads fly off under the hang-mans sword. When as he
took Trebizond he gave his word to the Emperor David Comnene, and to his two
sons, he led them in triumph to Constantinople, with the chief Noblemen, their
wives and children, but this was but to add unto the infamy of their death the
quality of their misery, and to make the spectacle more solemn, causing them
to be publicly executed. At the taking of Chalcide, Mahomet besieged Chalcide
in Negrepont, in the year 1470. He took it in 30. days and lost 40000. men.
it was a capital crime to pardon any man being above twenty years old: He
caused some Noblemen of Albania to be fleed by peece-meale, and caused this
barbarous inhumanity to continue fifteen days, to the end he might have time
to taste the sweetness which he took in this cruelty.

He besieged the Castle of Iaisse in Bossina, the King yielded by composition,
that he should carry away all that was within it, but there was no faith kept
with him, for he caused him to be bound unto a Tree, and to be shot to death,
reproaching his avarice unto him, that he had rather save himself with his
Treasure, then with his Honor. There is nothing more shameful and
disho^ourable to a Prince, then to yield without defense, or danger. They that
bend without blows are more worthy of blame and reproach, then they that do
their endeauours to resist courageously, Thucidides in his admonition to the
Athenians.


He had employed Mahomet Bassa in his greatest affairs, and loved him as one
that had been bred up with him from his youth. This miserable man had been a
Christian, and in his greatest honors did still sigh for Christian liberty;
for the greatest have no other title but of slave to the great Signior, and
although he were advanced above the highest in the State, yet his nature being
proud and ambitious, he held himself under all, so long as he should be a
slave, and that he should see one or two above him. An ambitious spirit cannot
endure any thing higher then it self. Marcus Crassus is the picture of men of
this humor. This foolish ambition had so blinded him as he could not be
satisfied to precede so many millions of men, but he held himself in a manner,
the last of all, and that all things failed him for that they esteemed him
only inferior to two. Plut. in the life of Marcus Crassus.
Trusting therefore in his Masters love and favor, he made him a sumptuous
feast, and at the end thereof offered him fifty thousand Crowns, beseeching
him to declare him free, and take from him that odious name of slave, leaving
him that of most faithful, and most obliged servant. Pride trodden under foot.
Mahomet was so incensed at this demand, as having instantly commanded this
Bassa to couch with his belly against the ground, he set his foot diverse
times upon his neck, until that this miserable wretch began to cry: I thank
you my Lord, I thank you, it is too great a happiness for me to live under
your feet. To live after this, was to declare himself unworthy to have
received life, Generosity of a young boy of Sparta.
and to have less courage then that Boy of Sparta, A young boy of Sparta being
forced to serve, said he would not do it. He spoke the word and performed it,
for when as they commanded him to bring a Chamberpot he ran his head against
the walls: whereupon Seneca says. Tam prope libertas est, seruit aliquis?
Does any man serve, when as liberty is so near?
who seeing himself forced unto a service which his condition should not
refuse, cried out ^ I will not serve: and in speaking this, he ran his head
against the Wall.

The siege of Belgrade was the Theater of his power, and misery, for he never
made greater attempt, nor had a mightier Army. He had caused his Cannon to be
carried in pieces by his Soldiers, and when he was in Mysia he made diverse
Pieces to be cast of an unmeasurable greatness, for he took delight in
those fearful Engines, having at the Siege of Constantinople employed a
Bombard, to move the which, he used the force of two thousand men, and of
seventy yoke of oxen. Hitherto fortune had ever smiled on him, now she makes
him to receive so sencible an affront, as he is forced to hold them happy,
which had been always miserable, for being ignorant of the estate of
prosperity, they did with more patience endure their misfortunes: Adversity is
insupportable to the which have always tasted of prosperity: Denis of Corinth,
held them happy which from (...) i^fancy had be^ unfortunate. L^^io^es
relinquet quos nu^quam fortuna respexit quam quos deseruit: Sen. Fortune (...)
the more (...) whom she has never fiuored, then w^o^ she has forsaken.
He was shot with an arrow at this siege, by reason whereof he was carried
secretly to Varna, to the end it should not daunt the courage of the Turks,
and fortefie the Christians: Being dressed, he demanded what they did in the
Camp: Loss at the siege of Belgrade.
to whom it was answered: That all was in disorder, the Bassa of Asia slain,
the chief Captains put to rout, forty thousand men dead upon the field, the
Ordinance lost, and that they lost time to think to take the Town, which the
only presence of John Coruin made impregnable. These words put Mahomet into
such a rage, and rage into such despair, as cursing both heaven and earth,
Mahomet seeks to poison himself.
and blaspheming God, he called for poison to kill himself, which being
refused him, he set fire of his Camp, and retired.

As the unfortunate event of the Seige of Belgrade, made him to desire death,
so that of Rhodes, and an extreme sorrow to see himself vanquished, Mahomet
dies for grief.
having done nothing but vanquish, made him to dye: Mahomet continued six and
forty days before Belgrade, the siege bganne the 13. of June, and was raised
the sixth of August. 1456.
Dispairing then to subdue the Rhodians, and having continued all his fury and
violence of war, against that strong rampart of Christendom, four score
days, he retired to Damiet in Nicomedia, It is hard for a Prince to be
vanquished, having always bin victor. Boleslas the third, King of Polonia,
having won 47. battles, and being forced at last against the Russians to fly,
dyed for grief: Cr^m. lib. 6.
where he was surprised with so violent a Cholick, as he died. Phil. de Comines
says: That every year in the beginning of Summer, one of his legs did swell
as big as his body, and did fall again after some time, yet no man could give
a reason of this grief: He imputes it to his Gourmandize, and to the
punishment of God. It may be it was that leg into the which Bladius, brother
to the Prince of Valachia, stabd his knife, to save his honor from that Goat,
who would have forced him to the infamous and unnatural lust of a barren
Venus: Amurath his father would have done the like to twelve young Gentlemen of
Polonia, who^ he reserved for that abomination, they resolved to kill him, but
being d^scouered, they slew one another to avoid a more miserable life, or a
more ignominious and cruel punishment.
His cruelties and inhumanities made some Soldiers of his Guard resolve to
kill him in his bed: Excess of Mahomet.
The Conspiracy being discovered by a Christian, he caused the Conspirators to
be strangled; and from that time he suffered not any one above twelve years
old, to enter into his chamber. For these reasons Mahomet is the second of
those great Princes, whom Phil. de Commines preferres before all others, to
have reigned at one time: King Lewis the eleventh, is the first, and Mathias
Huniades the third.

The King did not extend his thoughts so far, Designs of the King upon
Lorraine and Prouence.
for seeing himself approach near unto the West of his days, he carried them
not into the East; His thoughts were converted upon his nearest neighbors, as
upon Loraine and Prouence, he held the Councels to plant the bounds of his
Empire unworthy the courage of a great Prince: He would have France like unto a
great Tree, which with the spredding of his branches, and shadow, hinders the
growth of all that is about it. Augustus was author of this Counsel to
Tibe^^us, Coerce^di intra terminos impe^ij. To ^^straine the Empire within
certain bounds: A hard lesson for a Prince that has courage: Vna and ea vetus
causa bellandi est profunda cupido Impe^ij and diuitia^um. A great desire of
Empire and riches has been the old and only cause of war. Sal.
The Estates of Navarre, Flanders, Britain and Prouence, were not more in the
power of their Princes then in his, and trembled under his authority, as the
Pigion, or Partrige do under the flight of the Hawk: The designs which he
had upon Lorraine and Prouence, were executed in adding wisdom to occasion,
and force to reason.

To understand this proceeding we must know that John Duke of Lorraine, Estate
of Loraine.
did first marry Sophia, daughter to Eberhard Earl of Wirtemberg, and had two
sons, Charles and Frederick: The children of Charles Duke of Lorraine were,
Ralph, Lewis, Charles, Robert, Frederick Ma^y, married to Enguerand, Earl of
Coucy, Margaret to the Earl of Baden, and Isabell to Rene of Aniou.
Charles succeeding him in the Duchy of Lorraine, married Margaret daughter to
Robert of Bauaria Count Pallatine, by whom he had many children which dyed
before him, leaving no heir but Isabell. Frederick Earl of Guise, married
Margaret, daughter to Henry Earl of Vaudemont, and had Anthony Earl of
Vaudemont. Charles married his daughter Isabel to Rene Duke of Aniou, Calabria,
and Bar, Earl of Prouence, King of Sicily, Naples, and Jerusalem: Of their
marriage came John, Lewis, Rene, Charles, Elizabeth, Margaret, Yoland, and
Anne: After the death of Duke Charles, Rene would have entered the Duchy, as
his wives Inheritance: Anthony Earl of Vaudemont opposed himself by this
reason, that the Males exclude the Females. At the Council of Constance
Anthony Earl of Vaudemont demanded of the Emperor Sigismond, the inuestiture
of the Duchy of Lorraine against Rene of Aniou, for that it was a see of the
Empire, whereof women were not capable.
The controversy was first ended by Arms, Rene lost the battle of Blanuille
and was taken prisoner by Anthony Earl of Vaudemont, who gave him to Phillip
Duke of Bourgundy, for that he had succored him; afterward by the marriage
of Yoland daughter to Rene and Isabel, with Ferry son to Anthony of
Vaudemont, the Duchy of Lorraine remained in effect to Rene the Husband of
Isabell, Rene of Aniou D. of Lorraine.
and in hope to Ferry husband to Yoland. John succeeded in the Duchy of
Lorraine; He had married Mary John and Mary had four children, Isabel who was
married to James King of Scotland Rene, John, and Nicholas.
daughter to Charles Duke of Bourgundy, who dyed in her delivery of Nicholas,
Marquis of Pont, her third son, who succeeded in the Duchy of Lorraine,
after the death of his father and brethren: He left the affection which his
Predecessors had borne to France, and fell to the Duke of Bourgundies party,
upon hope that he would give him his daughter in Marriage. Death surprised him
in the year one thousand five hundred seventy three in the thoughts of his
Marriage, and to renew a second enterprise upon the Town of Mets, Nicholas
Duke of Lorraine would have seized upon Mets by this Strat^geme. He caused
certain pipes to be put into Wagons, as if they had been full of wine,
wherein there were armed, Soldiers. They entered, but seeking to seize upon the
gate, the Portcullis was let down, and they all taken and slain in the Town
which they would have surprised.
the first having been unlucky and unfortunate.

Thus there remained not any Male of the Branch of the Dukes of Lorraine, there
was not any but that of the younger brethren of Vaudemont and Guise. Branch of
Vaudemont.
The Law preserved the right of the succession for the daughters of Rene Duke
of Aniou, and of Isabel of Lorraine: Margaret Queen of England being a
prisoner pretended not any thing: Yoland widow to Ferry Earl of Vaudemont
succeeded: She was mother to many children, and the right of Priority gave the
title of Lorraine to Rene, but Yoland reserved the authority and command unto
her self, the which held ten years.

Rene assured himself to be Earl of Prouence, as he was Duke of Lorraine,
that his Grandfather, by his mother side, disposing of his estate would
remember him; but the King had persuaded him to make Charles of Maine, his
Nephew, his Heir, Rene Duke of Aniou King of Sicile and Earl of Prouence,
made his Will at Marsellis the 22. of July. 1474.
as he did in all his Estates, except in the Duchy of Bar, the which he gave
to Rene, Duke of Lorraine, with the lands of Lambesque and Orgon. He gave to
John his base son, the Towns of S. Reny, S. Canat, and the Marquesat of
Pont. They would both have had Prouence, but the good old man, to let them know
that neither of them should have it, being one day at Table, he cast a
shoulder of mutton to two Spannels which fought for it, and at the same instant
he let slip a great Dog, which scattered them and took it away. It shall
be even so, said Rene, of your affairs, you contend for that, which one that
is more mighty shall carry away. This Emblem, is yet to be seen imbost and
engraven on a cha^re, in his Oratory in Saint Saviors Church at Aix.

This Discourse, grounded upon the very Originals, do contradict the opinion of
them that have written, Rene did not give Prouence to the King.
An error of some Writers which have believed that which the chronicle has
spoken of this donation, making express mention that Rene being at Lion,
concluded with the King that after his death, the County of Prouence should
return directly unto the King, and be united unto the Crown.
that Rene gave the Earldom of Prouence to Lewis the eleventh: That the loss
of the battle at Gransson, having altered the minds of many Princes toward
the Duke of Bourgundy, King Rene changed that which he had done to institute
him his Heir, and that being come to Lion, he flatly renounced his friendship,
and did consent that Prouence should be united to the Crown, upon condition
that the King should set at liberty his daughter, being Widow to Henry the
sixth, King of England, and prisoner to Edward, and that for her ransom he
should pay fifty thousand Crowns, that in regard of this sum she should
renounce the pretensions which she might have unto Prouence: That to content
those which the children of his daughter Yoland, Duchess of Lorraine might
also have, he left them the Lands of Lambesque and Orgon. That to make the
King know that the declaration of his Will, came from his heart, with an
extraordinary content he wrote this Donation in letters of Gold, with his own
hand, and did enrich it with exceeding fair Lymning We must observe that
among the titles which Rene took in Testament, he adds that of Earl of
Prouence, Barcelona Forcalqueci, and P^dmont.
.

The Testament of this Prince speaks not any one word of King Lewis, neither
is it found that he made any other, notwithstanding that he came unto him the
year following being at Lion. He named for Executors of his Will: Queen
Ioane of Lauall his wife, Executors of Renes Testament.
Charles Earl of Main his first and chiefest Heir, Rene Duke of Lorraine his
second Heir; William of Harcourt, Earl of Tancaruille, Gui of Laual Knight,
Signior of Love, and Seneschall of Anjou, John of Vignolle, Deane of Angers,
and President of the Assizes and Accounts of Anjou, John Pinot Doctor of
Diuinty, his Confessor; Peter Le Roy, called Bemanon, Vice Chancellor of
Angiers; John Buell, Doctor of the Laws, and Master of the Accounts: Beside
the contentment which the observation of these names may give unto those
families which have any interest therein, it serves to the curiosity of diverse
qualities united in the same persons, the which at this time seem incompatible.
He would also that if he dyed in Prouence, the Archbishop of Aix, and the
great Seneschall of Prouence, should be among the Executors of this Testament.

The King being advertised that Rene Duke of Lorraine made practices in
Prouence, and fearing that by his means King Rene should change his mind,
commanded that they should seize on him, Kings have long hands, and many s^ares
to entrap their enemies: It is hard to avoid all their ambushes.
and laid so many ambushes for him as it had been impossible for him to
escape, if he had not speedily recovered Marsellis, where he imbarkt; He
remained three months at Sea, past into Sicile, came to Venice, and crossing
through the Grisons Country, he arrived in Lorraine, never complaining of the
dangers which had run, nor the time which he had lost to make have and fly
from an incensed Prince, whose clemency is nothing but a wearied severity and
rigor.

Rene had that misfortune which is insupportable to great courages, (...).
to survive the greatness of his house: He saw the Crowns, which had
honored the heads of Kings his Predecessors broken. Battle of Rocgueseiche.
Lewis Duke of Anjou his Grandfather, second son to King John, had gotten
the second Title of Right unto the Crown of Naples, but his bad Government,
after the battle which he had won against Ladislas, in the year one
thousand three hundred four score and three, At the battle of Rocqueseich,
the troops ^f Ladislas were defeated by them of Lewis, but the victory was not
pursued, when as Ladislas spoke of this encounter he said, that the first day
after the battle, his enemies had been Masters both of his person and the
whole Realm, if they done their endeavors to vanquish, the second day they
might have been Lords of the Realm and not of his person, if they had
followed the victory: but the third day, they could neither have had his person
nor the Realm.
whereof he had reaped not the profit which he should have done, forced him
to quitte Italy, where he had entered with an Army of fifty thousand men, and
to retire into France, grieuing very much at the unfortunate, and ill success
of his enterprises.

His son Lewis the third, Duke of Aniou, was also declared King of Naples by
the Pope, and instituted Heir by John the second, who had succeeded Ladislas
her brother. This Princess, so famous in the history for her unchasteness, was
first married to the duke of Guelders, and afterward to James of Bourbon Earl
of March, whom she expelled both from her bed and Realm, and this poor Prince
made choice of the Convent of Franciscane Friars, Ioane Queen of Naples died
at Cossence.
at Besancon for his last retreat, where he caused him self to be carried
upon a Sieve, in despite of the greatness and vanities of the world. She dyed
at Cossence without Issue, in the year one thousand four hundred thirty and
four, and remaining sole of the house of Duras, she left her heir by
Testament Rene Duke of Bar, brother to Lewis.

Alphonso King of Arragon who had been adopted by Ioane, and afterward
dishinherited by her, Alphonso of Arragon adopted son to Ioane of Naples.
besieged Gaetta: Rene being freed from prison, Rene after the Battle of
Bl^niuille in the year 1431. against the Earl of Vaudemont, and the Marshal
of Bourgundy, was de^^yned prisoner.
whereas the Duke of Bourgundy had held him, armed to go to Naples, whither he
had sent Isabell and his children: He was received at Naples like a victorious
Prince. The Pope sent him the Inuestiture of the Realm, upon condition that
he should pay him a Tribute. This was an occasion of great and extraordinary
joy at Naples, being followed with so great honors, as there was reason to
hold them for signs of the peoples inconstancy. The peoples great joy, and the
honors which they do unto their new Princes, are a^vaies followed with some
act of their inconstancy. Thus excess of honor is a bad sign of their love.
(...). Plut. in Demet.
He went through the Streets on Horseback in a Royal Habit, a Crown upon
his head, and a Scepter in his hand, he made seven and twenty Knights, choosing
them from among the chiefest, and most valiant, of the Noblemen, and of his
most faithful serseruants.

He reigned four years with some happiness; Seige of Naples.
but he had Alphonso of Arragon always opposite unto him, who besieged Naples
with four thousand horse, and a great number of foot. He entered by an old
Conduite of water, which a Mason had discouerd unto him, being the same by the
which Bellisarius that great Captain had entered it nine hundred and fifty
years before, and had expelled the Goths. This City in one night became
wholly of the Arragon faction. Rene left it, and returned into France with much
grief for his loss, but with more resolution to live in peace, detesting
war and ambition which entertained it.

Alphonso dyed, Ferdinando base son to Alphonso.
being much troubled in mind to have broke his word with Lewis of Aniou.
Alphonso had promised by express capitulations, not to trouble Lewis his
cozen, in the Realm of Naples: But a Crown is too sweet a morsel not to
break with a friend, and to seem too full of conscience: He persuaded Queen
Ioane to adopt him, and she for assurance of this Adoption, delivered into his
hands the two Castles of Naples.
Ferdinando his son was crowned by Pope Pius the second. John Duke of
Calabria son to Rene, sought to recover the Realm which his father had lost.
The Geneuo^s did furnish him with three Ships of burden and ten Galleys,
and lent him three score thousand Crowns: He went out of the Port of Marsellis
with twelve Galleys, and a promise from King Charles the seventh of greater
succor at need. With this Fleet he arrived at Gaette, for the greatest of
the Realm came posting to kiss his hand, Battle of Sarmy, won by John Duke
of Calabria.
and to declare themselves for him. He won the Battle of Sarmy and Saint
Fabian, and was wonderfully well served by Count James Picenin, so named for
his small stature, who in a little body had an invincible courage, and the
forces of a Giant, We must not so much regard the great^esse and stature of
the body, as the force and vigor of the mind: Homer says that Tideus, father
to Dyomedes, was little, but warlike and valiant.
He was General of his Army, and held for one the of most valiant Captains of
his time. The power of the Arragonois had been quite ruined, if the (...) the
second decleres himself for Ferdinand, King of Naples, and gave him the Crown
upon condition that he should restore unto the Church the lands of Ben^vent and
Te^acina, held by A^phonso of Arragon his father. At the council which he
called at Mantoua in the year 1459. he exhorted Christian Princes to succor
Ferdinand against John, Duke of Calabria.
Pope (who fearing least the prosperity of the French affairs would prejudice
the liberty of Italy) had not made a league with the other Princes, to succor
the Arragonois, being besieged in Barry, a Town ill fortified, and worse
furnished against the necessities of a Siege. But all their league had
prevailed little, if it had not been fortified by Scanderbeg, that other Mars
of Albania, whom Ferdinand called to his succors, and whom Pope Pius the 2d
coniured to assist him: He came, in regard of the strict amity he had had
with Alphonso, and was exhorted to this voyage by Paul Ange, Archbishop of
Duras. Scanderbeg joined at Duras with twelve Italian Galleys; and from thence
came to Ragusa, Ragusa in old time was called Epidaurum upon the Adriaticke
sea. It has a Castle, which in those times was held impregnable, the
government is Aristocraticall.
attending his Troops, and preparing victuals to send into Apulia.

He forced John, Battle of Vrsare won by Scanderbeg
Duke of Calabria, to raise the siege of Barry, and won the battle of
Vrsare. The Duke escaped the danger by the sweetness of his horse; he recovered
Troy, where he was received, and drawn over the wall with a cord: from thence
he caused himself to be conducted to Genoua, where he found a Gally, which
carried him into France, despairing ever to do any more good at Naples, nor in
Sicile; from whence he carried nothing but the bare name of Duke of Calabria.
He was followed by some Captains, who (for that they had run the same fortune)
durst not remain under the command of the Arragonois; Count Picenin having
escaped this danger, remained for a time hidden in Italy, Francis Sforce Duke
of Millan, having drawn him unto him by a false promise to make him his son
in law, delivered him to K. Ferdinand, who put him to death
so as Rene grew old in the complaints of this usurpation, favored by the
Popes: All his hopes were dead for the recovery of his forefathers
Inheritance; The inuestiture of the Realm of Naples, having been once granted
by the Popes to the house of Aniou, could not be given away against their
liking to that of Arragon. We hear often in their pleadings, Id quod nostrum
est sin^ causa nostra a nobis aufe^ri non potest.
and to fill up the measure of his sorrow, he saw the first Branch of this
Powerful and Royal house of Aniou wither in his son and grandchild.

Rene surviuing, his son and grandchild dyed in the year 1480. A Prince
who had great and eminent qualities, worthy of a better fortune: he was a
great Iusticer, and an enemy to long dispatches. He said sometimes, when as
they presented him any thing to sign, being a hunting, or at the war, that
the Pen was a kind of Arms, which a Prince should use at all seasons. K.
Rene, although he were in Arms, did not forbear to do justice to them that
demanded it, saying, That the pen of Princes should never be idle, that long
expeditions made them to loose the love of their subjects. They write that he
drank not any wine, and when as the Noblemen of Naples demanded the reason, he
answered, that it had made Tit. Liuius to ly, who had said, that the good wines
caused the French to pass the Alps.


The reign of so good a Prince was much lamented: for he entreated his
subjects like a Pastor and Father. Commendation of Rene of Aniou.
They say, that when as his Treasurers brought unto him the Royal tax, which
was sixteen Florins for every fire; whereof Prouence might have about three
thousand five hundred, he informed himself of the abundance, or bareness of
the season; and when as they told him, that a The Northeast wind.
Mestrall wind had reigned long, he remitted the moity, and sometimes the
whole tax. He contented himself with his revenues, and did not charge his
people with new tributes. He Michael de Montagne in the 2d book of his
Essaies C. 17. of presumption, says, that being at Bar-le-Duc, he saw
presented unto K. Francis the 2d. a portrait, which Rene, K. of Sicile had made
of himself.
spent his time in painting, the which were so excellent, as they are yet to be
seen in the City of Aix: he was drawing of a partridge when as they brought
him news of the loss of the Realm of Naples, yet he would not draw his hand
from the work, such pleasure he took therein.

He lived long. A President of Prouence making an Oration before King Charles
the ninth, in the year 1573. said, that he had been seen by some that were
then living. He instituted an Order, which he called of the Cressant. The
Knights carried a Cressant, or half Moon upon their right arm, with this
Motto, l'Os en Croissant; encouraging them thereby to seek and desire the
increase of their valor and reputation. He dyed at Aix, his wife caused his
body to be transported into France, and by a witty policy deceived the
Prouencals, who would have had it. His death made no other change in Prouencae,
but of the person: Charles, Nephew to Rene, succeeds him.
Charles his Nephew, son to the Earl of Main, was acknowledged Earl of
Prouence: but his time was very short: for he dyed before he could finish the
second year of his reign.

Some few days before his death, on the tenth of December, 1481. he made the
King his heir, and after his decease, Charles his son, and the other Kings
his Successors, The institution of the heir is set down in th^se terms in
his Testament, Et quia haeredis institutio est caput and fundament^^ cuiuslibet
testamenti dictus Serenissim^s Domi^u^ noster rex in omnibus^ regn^s
commitatibus Vicecomitatibus, etc. fecit, instituit and ordinauit, ac ore suo
proprio nominauit sibi haeredem suu^ vniuersalem and insolidu^ Christianissimum
excellentissimum principem ac dominum Ludouicum Dei gratia Francorum Regem,
eiusdem consobrinum and Dominum chariffimum atque reuerendissimum and post eius
obitum illustrissimun and clarissimum D. Delphinum etc.
beseeching him with all his heart, to suffer his subjects of Prouence to enjoy
the graces, liberties and privileges which they held of King Rene, Prouence
given to K. Lewis.
recommending unto him his Cosen Francis, Lord of Luxembourg, to keep him in
his Court, and to maintain him in the lands of Martigues, which he gave him,
he did not recommend him unto any one of his servants in particular, but one
Archer of his guard, called the great Pickard.

There was little difference betwixt his Testament and his death, K. Lewis
takes possession of Prouence.
and less betwixt his death, and the taking of possession: for on the
nineteenth of the same month of December, one thousand four hundred eighty
one, the King sent a Commission to Palamedes Forbin, a Knight, Lord of Sollier,
Chamberlain to the Earl of Prouence, to take possession, and to command in
the Country in quality Lieuetenant general, with absolute power to dispose of
Offices, to place and displace Officers, to remit and abolish crimes, yea high
Treason, to confirm or revoke ancient Privileges, and to grant new, to
assemble the Estates, to impose Tributes, and to leuy Soldiers for to force
obedience: This commission was dated at Thouars, the 29. of December, 1481. in
the presence of the Earl of Mar^e, Marshall of of France, and of Estellan,
Bailiffe of Rouen.
The quality of this Commission, was a great Testimony of the service which he
had done the King, having solely disposed his Master to make this goodly
present unto France. But as all changes cause amazement, there was some trouble
to execute this Donation, some holding the party of Lorraine, and others of
France.

Rene, Rene, duke of Lorraine discontented
Duke of Lorraine, finding his friends feeble, and his power weak against the
King, was not willing to grow obstinate in Prouence: He that encounters one
that is more mighty, does but undo himself. More mighty is to be understood
in dominions, subjects, force and treasure. A wise Italian says to this
purpurpose: Si tu truoui vna machina cresciuta per la felicita and disciplina
d'ottocento anni, discostati da essa, che e cosa impossible, quando pur ella
cadesse, che tu non rouini sotto. If thou find a work grown by the felicity
and d^scipline of 800 years, avoid it, being impossible if it falls, but thou
shall be ruined under it.
He passed the Alps with an hundred men at Arms, and a regiment of a thousand
foot. The King sent a garrison of Scottish men unto Bar, under the command of
the Lord of Aubigny, he caused the Walls to be repaired, and the Arms of
France to be set upon the gate, such as are yet to be seen.

He remained in Italy till after the Kings death, which day he held to be the
rising of his hopes, the which were only supported by the assurance which the
Duke of Bourbon This hope was not vain: for in the first year of the reign
of K. Charles, he was restored to the Duchy of Bar, and had a company of an
hundred Lances given him.
gave him, that this rigorous season would be followed with a greater calm.
War against Ferrara.
The Venetians entreated him to accept the charge of General of their land
Army against the Duke of Ferrara. It was a war which shaking the peace of
Italy, brought the peace of Christendom into question, and gave a great
advantage unto the Turk, who beheld these Tragical furies near at hand. And
this was the cocasion.

After the death of Borsio of Este, Hercules of Este his brother would succeed
in the principality: Lionel of Este, their brother, had left Nicholas his
son, who had the same pretension. Italy was in a manner divided, the one for
the Uncle, the other for the Nephew. The Venetians did succor Hercules so
powerfully, and so fitly, as the Scepter of his fathers remained to him. He
married Elenor, daughter to Ferdinand of Arragon, and being fortified with this
new alliance, he suffered the heat of friendship, which his fathers
entertained with the Venetians, to grow cold; as commonly Princes do not long
follow their predecessors steps, and if they commend their Orders, yet they
subject not themselves unto them. Borsio had very carefully entertained
friendship with the Signiory of Venice. When there fell out any controversy
betwixt them for their limits, or that their Officers did attempt upon one
another Jurisdiction. Borsio came to Venice with a small troop, like a
private person, to give reasons unto the the Senate.
He restored the Salt Pits of Commachio, contrary to the ancient Conuentions:
he took from the Venetian Merchants the exemptions and freedoms of Imposts
which they had enjoyed: he caused a Fort to be built near unto Cap d' Argent,
to bound his Estates, and dissembled the wrong which the Magistrate of Venice,
residing in his City by accord had received, having suffered him to be
excommunicated by the Archbishop of Ferrara.

The Venetians, The venetians proclaim war against the Duke of Ferrara,
although tired with war by reason of the great ruins which they had
received by the Ottomans, yet they declared it against Hercules of Este, they
grounded it upon the necessity of their defense, which justifies all kinds of
proceedings, and makes all that to be found good, that is profitable. All times
are in season. When there is question of a defense, there is no regard to be
had to Justice or Religion. A certain and inevitable danger iustifies Armies.
The Romans held some days unfortunate for enterprises, but when as necessity
forced them, they feared not any thing. Dies certos and euitabiles obseruabant
cum inferenda in hosts arma non propulsanda forent. They did observe certain
auoidable days when to assail an enemy, but not to repel him.
They raise two Armies, one by land, and another by sea, the one to run along
the Costs of Apulia and Calabria, and to hinder the succors of Ferdinand, the
other to remain in the river of Pau. The Pope was in the beginning for them,
and hindered Alphonso of Naples from passing with four thousand men to succor
his brother-in-law.

The Senate sent Robert of Arimini to succor the Pope, Pope Sixtus ioynes with
the Ve^etians
who won a battle against Alphonso of Arragon; but this victory cost him his
life, which he ended soon after. They write, that in one day died two of the
greatest Captains of Italy. ^redericke of Vrbin at Ferrara, and Robert of
Ar^minial Ro^e. Pope Six^us caused th^se words to be set upon (...), veni,
vidi, vici, and pontifici retuli, (...) secundis rebus invidet. I came, I saw,
and overcame, and told the Pope, that death enuies prosperity.


Ferrara was besieged, and so pressed with the valor and good fortune of the
Assailants, as it could no longer hold out. The Pope (who had incited the
Venetians to this war) exhorted them to peace; He declares him self against
them.
and seeing that they would not harken unto it, declared himself for the
Ferrarois: he drew the spiritual sword against them, and struck them,
interdicting their Common weal. Baptista Zeno, and John Michele, 2 Venetian
Cardinals, did coragiously resist this resolution; yet the Pope notwithstanding
their contradiction, proceeded on: It is true, that as in the heat of Arms,
they do not always think of religion, his censures were contemned by the
Venetia^s, who did not respect them as good physic, but as an Emperikes
plaster, the which Popes were wont to use for all kinds of sores. They found
it strange, that he would force them unto a peace, the which notwithstanding
had not been observed when they were busied in war against the Turk. The
Princes of Italy made a league against them, and an Assembly of the
Confederats, which was held at Cassal-maior, in the territory of Cremona:
Frederick Gonzague, Prince of Mantua, was chosen General of the Army, the
honor of the enterprise, and of the chief authority being reserved to the
Arragonois: There was not any Prince, City, nor Commonweal in Italy, except
Genoua, but was engaged in this enterprise, to ruin the greatness of Venice.
The greatness of Venice was then suspected to all the Potentates of Italy, and
if it had been augmented with the estate of Ferrara, the way had been open to
greater designs.
Rene of Lorraine (whom the death and ruin of Charles of Bourgondy had
advanced to the reputation of one of the greatest Captains of this age) served
most gloriously in this Expedition.

Both parties were soon weary of this war: they spoke of treating of a peace
at Cesara, but this Proposition took no effect. It was continued at Tourbolles
betwixt Robert Sanseuerin, and Lewis Sforce, Peace concluded.
who finished it, and it was concluded, That the Venetians should return into
all the places which they had lost, during this war in Lombardie, and should
retire all the garrisons which they had on either side of the river of Pau:
They should ruin all the Forts which they had made on the banks thereof, and
should restore to Hercules of Este all that they had taken from him, except the
P^llesin of Rouig^, which they should retain unto themselves, and should enjoy
the same rights, both old and new, which they were went to have in Ferrara, and
there abouts. Such was the end of the sociall war, which cost the Venetians
in less then 2 years, three millions, and 600000 ducats. This peace was
received with much content after these turbulent and ruinous seasons. They made
bon-fires and combats with great pomp at Venice. When ^s Guichardi^ speaks
of this peace, he says, that it was honorable for the Commonweal of Venic^,
and shameful for all the rest of Italy, the which with a general applause,
and at such time as it did flourish in riches, arms, and force, had ^anded to
ruin the Venetians; but God would not that the effects of his s^uerity and
mercy, of his wrath and peace, Fussero in potesta d'^n huomo ambiciosissimo and
superbissimo sotto posto al vino and a molte altre in honest volunta che la
^ssercitasse ad arbi^ ^o delle sue cupidita, non secondo la consideratione
della iustitia o del bono publico ^ella Christianita, should be in the power of
an ambitious and proud man, subject to wine, and many other d^sh^nest lusts,
and should use it after his own will and not according to justice, and the
good of Christendom.
Pope Sixtus hearing of this Accord, Grief of P. Sixtus for the Peace.
died for grief: He had incensed all the Potentates of Italy at the Assembly
of Cremona, against the Venetians: his courage and resolution went beyond all
the designs, threats, and attempts of his Enemies: And when as to terrify
him, they declared, that they would cause him to be cited to appear before a
Council, he made it known, that he endured these threats, Resolution of
Pope Sixtus.
as the Physician does the injuries of a mad man, answering; Sixtus inge^ti
animo summaque constantia respondisse fertur. Se concilium quidem libenter
admissurum vbi spera^^^ se omnium horum Principum criminibus par^factis res
plurimas Ecclesia ablatas ab ijs repetiturum. Vnde qui illum metu expugnare
sperabant ab eodem preterriti alia perfugia quaesiere.
That he would always take the holding of a Council for a great happiness,
when as there should be hope, by the discovery of their wickedness, to force
them to yield unto the Church the goods which they had taken from it. Platina
adds, that this answer was a proof of the vigor of this Popes spirit, and of
the greatness of his courage, which amazed them that thought to amaze him.

The Church notwithstanding had great need of this Phlebotomy, or letting
blood, as the most wholesome remedy for the disorders which time does breed in
the most holy and best ordered things. Lewis 11. neglects the calling of a
council.
It has served happily in the first years of her birth, under the conduct and
direction of the Apostles, In the Apostles time, and in the first Infancy of
the Church, when as allwa^s pure, according to her institution, there were 4
Councels, or Apostolical Assemblies. The first the 34th year after the
coming of our Savior, whereas Matthias was named to the Apostleship, and the
Assembly might be of 120 faithful. The second in the same year for the
election of Deacons, of which number St. Stephen was. The 3d in the 48th year,
according to Onuphrius, and 51th according to Baronius, for circumcision, and
the heresy of Cerinthus. The 4th for the the tolleration of circumcision for a
time, that they might bury the Synagogue with honor in the 58th year. Of these
four Councels the Acts of the Apostles speaks. cap. 1. 15. and 21.
and has been ever since used. The King was not very careful to procure this
remedy; being incensed for that which Pope Sixtus had done against the
Florentines, he forbad the transport of gold and silver to Rome, and commanded
the Bishops and Prelates of his realm, to assemble at Orleans, whither he sent
the Earl of Beaujeu to preside. But he showed not the like zeal and courage
which his father had done in the Assembly of the French Church at Bourges.
Where there is question of Gods service, they must proceed after another manner,
then when it concerns but the Interest of men. Public buildings must be made
after another manner, and of another matter then private. Moses sustained the
peoples cause before God with tears, he defended that of God against the
people with Arms. The King came to Orleans to pass to Clery, remaining there
but half a day to break off the Assembly; he was satisfied to have drawn
from the Pope that which he desired in favor of the Florenti^es, and promised
to continue it at Lions.

This did but make the sights of good men more vehement, who burn with the
zeal of Gods house, Estate of the Church lamentable.
and who saw that the wound was ^neurable, and that the canker had seized upon
the vital parts, that the Church was at peace with Heretics and Infidels,
and in perpetual trouble with her own Children. I have nourished (said she by
the report of S. Bernard) Children, I have exalted them, and they have
contemned me. Vox plangentis in tempore isto. Filios enutriui and exaltaui,
ipsi autem spreuerunt me, spreuerunt and maculauerunt me a turpi vita, a turpi
quaestu, a turpi commercio: a negotio denique perambulante tenebris.
They have dishonored me by the filthiness of their lives, and the foulness
of their commerse, and by works which are done in darkness.

The Chronicle of Basil reports a strange History of the passion, (or rather
fury) wherewith a Iacobin Friar was transported, whom it names Andrew,
Archbishop of Krane, a man of learning and courage; who thrust on by
presumption, Presumption carries men's minds out of the common way, it follows
unknown courses, and embraces novelties. A spirit presuming little of it
self, remains in the bounds of innocence and simplicity.
(a vice diuerting men's minds from their duties, Andrew, Archbishop of Krane,
preaches against the Pope.
to wander out of the common way) past the mountains, came to Basil, and
preached in the Cathedral Church against Rome, as against a new Babylon,
coniuring the Emperor, and K. Lewis the eleventh, to procure the Assembly of a
Council against her scandals. Pope Sixtus the fourth was no sooner advertised
hereof, but he commanded the Magistrate of Basil to deliver him into the hands
of his Justice. The Senate answered, that they had already given advertisement
thereof to the Emperor Frederick, and attended his pleasure; beseeching the
Popes Nuntio to have patience, and to assure himself that there should not be
any thing done in prejudice of the holy Sea.

The Archbishop on the 13 of July, the same year 1482. caused a declaration to
be published; by the which, lamenting the ruins of the Church, he coniured and
entreated all Ministers and Pastors to succor it; xcomE nicated by the Pope.
and by virtue of the Decree of Constance, to assemble at Basil The Council
of Constance in the 39 Session decreed that every ten years they should
assemble a general Council.
to advise of the remedies: and for that the Pope had declared him
excommunicate, he appealed against his sentence; and having no better reason to
object against this excommunication, then the want of power, he maintained that
Sixtus the fourth had not entered into S. Peter's Chair by the door, but like a
thief; that he made traffic of holy things, and that he took delight, not
to feed, but to fley Christ's Flock.

The Princes and Commonweals of Italy were not in good terms with him, all
threatened him with a Council: And although that Pius the second, his
Predecessor, Pope Pius the second did excommunicate those that did appeal from
the Pope to a Counceil. Iulio the 2d renewed the same excommunication. Silvest.
verbo excommunicat. T. Number. 39.
had called such form of proceeding against the Pope, Execrable; yet it seemed
they could find no better means to restrain the excess: Every man cried
after the reformation of abuses; but that which might be commendable in
public complaints, did not justify the boldness of a private man, who
presumed to censure the Pope: and the number of fools does not excuse the
folly. A common error give some excuse, but the number of them that fail,
makes not the fault less. It is always ill done to play the fool with them
that are not wise.
Sixtus declared him an Heretic, and a troubler of the Churches quiet, from
whose body he was cut, like a rotten member, unworthy to exercise the
ministry, to hold any dignity, or to be partaker of the holy Sacraments,
condemning him to remain prisoner in a Monastery, with bread and water, until
he had made full expiation of his crimes. In like manner, the Emperor found
the proceeding of this Bishop very bold, and gave him to understand, that
seeing he was but a private person, he desired to know by what authority he
pretended to call a Council. He answered, That the public necessity of the
Church approved his zeal, and coniured the Emperor to maintain it, after the
example of the Emperor Sigismond The Emperor Sigismond labored Christian-like
to smother the new opion of the Hussites of Bohemia, he procured the
convocation of the Council of Costance, and was there in person.
and his predecessors, who had not spared any thing for her quiet and peace,
and to root out abuses: wherefore he besought him not to show himself difficult
to grant out Patents and necessary pasports for the convocation of a Council:
otherwise he should answer before God for the ill which his negligence would
make incurable.

The 4th day of December Peter of Kettenheim, Pryor of Velpach; the Pryor of
Erford, and the Pryor of Mortau; present themselves anew unto the Senate of
Basil, and declared that they had charge to proceed against them by all the
rigors of the Churches justice, if if they did not deliver this revolted person
into their hands, to be exemplarily punished. He was honored by some, like a
St. Paul, that great Citizen of heaven, the pillar of Churches, an earthly
Angel, and a heavenly Man: he was contemned of others as a seditious man, an
Abironite, and a Rebel. Some thought it hard, that, because he had said (not
secretly, like unto spies, and slaunderers, but publicly, and in the
Cathedral Church of such a Town) that fire was at the door, that the mine
was ready to play, to overthrow the whole building, and that Satan had planted
his ladders whilst that the Sentinels slept, they would entreat a Bishop so
rigorously; and that, howsoever, they should consider the thing that was good
and wholesome, They say, we must consider the Council apart, and him that
gives it apart. The Ephores caused the advice which had been given by a bad
man, to be pronounced by one which was good In his quae a malis been fiunt,
hic tenendus est modus, vt appareat authorem displicuisse non factum. Plin.
Paneg. Traiani.
and not the person that might be passionate. They also remembered, that many
great personages about that time had said, Words of Gerson.
that in these disorders they might follow extraordinary motions, either of
powerful authority, or of charitable admonition. In the time of K. Charles the
seventh, every man spoke of reformation. Gerson presumed to say, that the
pursuit might be made, Per quos cunque fideles praesertim maiores
authoritatiua potestate, sieve charitatiua admonitione. Gers. in Propos. vtil.
ad extirp. schis.
Others said, that the desire was good, but being guided by pride and
presumption, it made him odious that propounded it, that he which was sttooken
with death, for that of his own motion he had put forth his hand unto the
arc, fearing lest it should fall, did serve as a terrible example, showing how
dangerous it is to deal irreverently in holy things.

The Senate answered, Basil excommunicated by the Pope.
that they could not satisfy the Popes desire, before they understood the
Emperous pleasure. Upon this answer the Town was interdicted. The Emperor
sent a Franciscan Friar to Basil, who had audience in a great assembly, where
there assisted the Ambassadors of the Princes of the league of Italy, In this
assembly assisted Josias of Seligni, Bishop of Syon and Grenoble, Anthony of la
Roche, Pryor of Mortau, Claude of Tholsugeo^, and William of Rochefort.
where he delivered his charge, and spoke of this Archbishop, as of a Goliath,
who had raised himself against the Lords host. He said also, that being at
Rome for the affairs of the Archduke Maximilian, when as the Pope had been
advertised of these troubles and motions for the calling of a Council, the Pope
had commanded him to go to the Archduke Sigismond, and then unto the Emperor,
to know of them whether they did approve and favor this revolt: Pope
co^plaines of the town of Basil.
and in like manner, to complain that the Town of Basil, which had been
always very obedient to the Holy Sea, had suffered it self to be carried
away very inconsiderately with such Impostures and Impressions: The desires,
and the effects of Desires which tend to reunite the members of one Family
under one head, are just and commendable, and God does assist them. There is
none but Satan which has favored and advanced schism and division. We are
all of one stuff, we make but one part of the garment, we have need but of one
seame Sarrura tantum opus est. But it is not fit to hear all them that speak.
That the Emperor having found, that whatsoever he did for the calling of a
Council, proceeded from extreme hatred; and that his reason was wholly
converted into passion against the Pope, and impudent arrogance, presuming in
the quality of a private person, to attempt the reformation of the Church, and
to call a Council, the which belonged only to the Pope. The Emperors intent
was, It was not for that the Emperor did not earnest^y desire the ho^ding of a
Council, having written to king Charles (...) 7th to come or send to Mentz, to
the end they might remedy the necessities of the Church in the year 1423. but
he did not allow of this particular Instance.
that they should seize upon the person of this Archbishop, and that they
should put him into safe keeping, and in such a place, whereas he might be
represented unto the Pope.

At the same instant he produced the Emperors letters patents, The Emrour
commands the Archbishop to be app^ehended.
by the which, commandment was given to all Provinces, Potentates, Towns, and
Commonalties to apprehend this Archbishop. Then directing his speech unto him,
he exhorted him to acknowledge his error, and to humble himself to the holy
Sea, that he might recover the Popes favor, who seeing his repentance, might
have pity on him, offering to that end all the good offices that he could
desire from him.

The Archbishop answered in this sort: I have never failed in obeence and
respect to the Emperor, The Archbishop resists in his proposition.
and nothing has moved me to speak against the Pope, but the zeal of Gods
honor. I can make a distinction betwixt the person and the dignity; the Chair,
and him that sits in it. I have, with much grief, seen the scandals and
abominations which abound in Rome; and that the Pope is more pleased to
flee^e, then feed the sheep, whom Jesus Christ with the price of his blood,
has drawn out of the Wolves throat. A Pastor should feed Christ's Flock, but,
Illud quod hic dicitur pasce, alij mutant in tonde, quia multum stude^t circa
subditos exactionem temporalium exercere, and de pastu non cu^a^t. That which
is here said feed, some do vnsitly change to fleece, for that they study to
exact the temporalities from their subjects, and care not for feeding, Chrysostom.
I have thought that there was no means to remedy it, but by the holding of a
general Council; and seeing that contrary to the intention of the Decree of
the Council of Constance, they had let pass above thirty years without
holding of a Council; and that the Decrees of that of Basil were not observed,
nor executed, having often conferred with the Cardinals at Rome, and found that
the mischief was neglected, I addressed my self to the Senate of Basil, as the
most convenient place to make my good intentions known: and if I have therein
erred, I submit my self to the judgment of the Emperor, the French King and
the Council, and take the University of Paris for my advocate, protesting that
I had never any intent to offend the Pope, neither can be called a Slanderer,
having truth for a warrant of that which I speak; beseeching that I may have
three days respite given me to answer more pertinenly to that which is
objected against me.

Hereunto the Friar replied, that if there were any disorder in the Church,
there were doctors to teach and correct, whose doctrine they should rather
follow, then their manners and actions, The doctrine may be good, and the life
bad: If the Pastor lives well, it is his profit; if he teach well, it is thine,
take that which is th^e and meddle not with another man's. A bad and barren
ground, may bear gold.
and that it did not belong to him to undertake the correction.

And for that in this Discourse he showed his wilfulness, he did summon the
Senate of Basil to forbear to protect him, and to apprehend him prisoner. The
Nuncios and Commissioners, deputed by the Pope, made the like instance, saying;
that they could not refuse him unto the Pope, who was his lawful Judge.

The Senate of Basil referred the dicition of this business to the next
Council. The Popes Nuncio and other Deputies were there, and the Archbishop
appeared, where the contention was long, and urged with great vehemence and
affection, of either part, In the Assembly of the Senate of Basile, on
Saturday, the 21 of December 1483. the Archbishop of Krane was arested
prisoner, when as they consulted whether they should do it.
The Ambassadors of the Princes of Italy which were in league against the
Pope, would willingly have had a Council to humble the great heart of Sixtus,
Dispute of authority of the Pope and Council.
saying; that they should hold themselves to the Council of Constance, which
had plainly decreed that the Pope should obey the Council, had prescribed him
the time for the calling of a Council, and had bound him not to dispossess
Angelo Corrario, who had carried the name of Gregory the twelfth, from the
dignity of Cardinal or Legate: That the same doctrine of the Council of
Constance had been followed and practiced in that of Basile: The Council of
Constance in the fourth Sessio^ made a Decree, declaring that it represented
the Universal Church, and had power immediately from God, the which every man
was bound to obey, yea the Pope himself.
that if they took away that constancy which was necessary for the observation
of their decrees, they thrust the Church into distemperatures and languishings,
like unto those bodies which have their sinews strained, and their members and
bones displaced.

The Popes Ministers said, on the other side, that the Church was a perfect
Monarchy; that she had not her beginning from David, Alexander, Augustus, nor
Frederick, neither did she acknowledge any other establishment: that the
Church did not depend of any other Judge but of God; That even the Council
assembled at Sinuesse^ would not forcibly condemn that poor Idolatrous Pope,
who since was held for a great Saint. and who by a wonderful weakness, and
base fear of death, had obeyed the impiety of Dioclesia^, and sacrificed to
his Gods, for prostrating himself upon the ground, confessing his fault, one
of the Fathers of the Council In this History of Marcelline we find often
that the Bishops said: Iudica causam tuamnostro iudicio non condemnaberis: and
that after his confession one of them says: Just ore suo condemnatus est and
ore suo Anathema suscepit Maranatha, Quoniam ore suo condemnarus est, nemo enim
vnquam iudicauit Pontificem, nec prae^ul Sacerdotem suum, quoniam prima seeds
non iudicabitur a quoquam.
took the word, saying* he had justly condemned himself by his own mouth,
he has submitted himself to excommunication. Never any one did judge the
Pope, for the first Seat is not to be judged by any; That the Council of
Constance binding Popes to the execution of his decrees, had respect only to
Anti-popes, and not to them whose election was holy and lawful: When as some
said that the first Seat was not to be judged by any one, the others replied,
that it was understood of private Assemblies, and not of a general Assembly of
the whole Church.

The day was spent in these long Disputes, and night approaching, Cinthius of
Vrsin, Commander of Saint John of Jerusalem, entered the Senate, laid hold upon
the Archbishop and led him away prisoner to the Tower of Spalen. The Senate
was much offended, and commanded the Popes Nuntio to depart the Town, seeing
that his charge was ended. He retired himself, and caused new Declarations and
Excommunications against them of Basil to be published at Rahnfield,
Constant, and other places, forbidding all sorts of persons to converse with
them:

The prisoner in the mean time languishing in expectation of what should
become of him, took the shortest course for his liberty, and judging that if
he lived in pain, his baseness was the cause of it, and that death might give
him a free passage, he changed his patience into despair: so as on the
Thursday after Saint Martins day, in year one thousand four hundred four
score and four, he was found strangled with the cord of his bed: This
execrable kind of death was kept secret until that they understood the Popes
mind; after which the executioner of Justice entered into the prison, put the
body into a pipe, and cast it into the River of Rhine. To kill himself has
been held an act of courage^: Plato forbids it in his Laws: The Thebians
detested it, and the Athenians did cut off his hand, that had slain himself,
and did cast it on the common dunghill.
The Popes Deputies returned to Basil, and the Excommunication having been
observed three days, was taken away, and the Town delivered from the Popes
censures.

Yet for all this they did not cease to wish that the Pope would earnestly
embrace the reformation of the disorders of the Church.

Desires of this kind are just, but we may not press them with heat of
passion and indiscretion of zeal.

An example showing that it is not reasonable, in such sufferings and
perplexities of the Church, that the pride of any private person should presume
to reform it: We must leave those thoughts to Princes and Magistrates. The
simple multitude must attend with patience at the foot of the Mountain, until
that Moses descend to let them understand the will of God: The Ship wherein
that holy Family is included, which has neither sight nor day, but toward
heaven, shall in the end appear most glorious over the waves of the deluge,
and shall come unto the Mountain of a happy tranquillity. (*) ()

The end of the ninth Book.
THE CONTENTS OF the tenth Book.
1 VVEakning and alteration of the Kings health in the beginning of the year
1480. 2 An Apoplexy seazeth on him: His actions to maintain his authority, and
to keep himself from contempt. 3 Liberty of Cardinal Balue, and his policy
to obtain it. 4 Generosity of the Cardinal of Estouteville to maintain his
dignity, and that of the Clergy: His death. 5 Oppressions of the people. 6
Desire of the King to reform Justice, and tedious Suits. 7 Relapse of his
sickness at Tours, he goes to Saint Claude, in his return passes by Salins,
and there sets a Parliament for the Franche County. 8 Death of Mary,
Duchess of Bourgundy wife to Maximilian the Emperor. 9 Admonition made by
the King to the Dauphin at Amboise. 10 Estate of the Low Countries at the
discretion of the Gantoies. 11 Treaty of peace, and marriage, betwixt the
Dauphin and Margaret Princess of Austria. 12 Death of the King of England, and
troubles for his succession. 13 Earl of Richmond, prisoner to the Duke of
Britain, comes to the Crown of England by the Kings assistance. 14 Death of
Francis Phoebus King of Navarre; suite for the succession. 15 Death of Alphonso
King of Portugal. 16 Lewis falls into new apprehensions of death, and shuts
himself into his Palace at Plessis. 17 Zizimi son to Mahomet, reuolts against
Bajazeth, flies to Rhodes, and is conducted into France. 18 Commendation of
Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary. 19 Impairing of the Kings health. 20 He
sends for Francis Paulo a Calabrois: strange distemperatures of his sickness.
21 His aistrust of John Duke of Bourbon. 22 Publication of the peace betwixt
the King and Maximilian of Austria, Marriage of Charles the Dauphin, with the
Princess Margaret: Magnificence at their entrance into Paris. 23 The third and
last relapse of the Kings Infirmity: his last actions: His perfect sense even
unto the last gasp: His death.
THE HISTORY Of LEWIS the eleventh. THE TENTH BOOK.
IN the beginning of the year 1480. 1480.
Lewis began to dye, and to fear death, the which comes never so fitly, but
it brings with it terror and amazement. Life must be considered by the end:
If it be good and glorious all the rest is proportionable. Quomodo fabula, sic
and vita, non quandiu, sed quam been acta sit, refert. Nil ad rem pertinet, quo
lo^o desinas, quocunque voles, desine tantum bonam clausulam imponas. Life is
like unto a fable: It imports not how long, but how well it be acted: It skils
not where thou leauest, leave where thou will, so thy conclusion be good. Sen.
His forces grew weak, but his courage was fortefied and strong, upon an
apprehensio^ which he had that they would make designs upon his grave, and
that they would not stay until he came to the end of his Carriere. He
desired to end it with the Authority, Majesty, and Reputation that he had
begone, and would not that they should know him dying, nor that they should
hold him mortal: He works so, as in the West of his life, the shadow of his
reputation and respect is as great as at the Noonday of his reign: Yet he
finds that his judgment has not the force and vigor which it formerly had;
that the remainder of his life is become sower, Age is always accompanied.
that age comes not alone, When as wine and life grow low, they become sour.
Antiphanes.
having brought him diverse discommodities, an incorrigible melancholy,
agitations of the mind, a slow Fever, and the pains of the Emerauds: He has
more provision then he has way to go, he gathers and lays up when he should
abandon and let go. Age becomes covetous when it has not any need of goods, it
fears the earth should fail it: One demanded of Symonides why he was so
sparing in the extremity of his age; for that said he: I had rather leave my
goods after my death to my enemies, then in my life time to have need of my
friends.
His designs are great and spacious, and his desires grow young, he cannot
free himself from new hopes, his soul is as it were hung betwixt the fear of
death and the hope of life, his understanding is a Millstone which the
continual course of affairs does turn day and night: And although his life
passes away in languishing and grief; yet had he rather endure the pain,
then not to be, desiring rather to be freed from it, then from life, the which
how painful soever it be, has some hour of ease: There i^ no life so
languishing and full of pain, but it is supported by some hope freed from the
fears of death: When a^ Antisthenes the Philosopher was in extreme pain, he
cried out, Who shall deliver me from these miseries? Diogenes presenting a
knife unto him said; This, if thou will, and that soon. I do not say of my
life (replied the Philosopher,) but of my pain.
For if pains be violent they are short, and if they be short, they give no
leisure to complain: Going to hear Mass at a little Parish near to the
Forges of Saint Chinon, The King suddenly and dangerously sick.
he found himself very ill, and fell into a great weakness, and faintings,
loosing his speech and all knowledge. He was speedily succored by the Signior
of Bouchages, who was his Physician, and afterward Archbishop of Vienna,
having taken a glister he recovered his spirits, went to horse, returned to the
Forges and there dyned.

But he had so great a difficulty in his speech, as he could not be
understood but by signs. Phillip de Commines, who served him as Grome of his
Chamber in this sickness, was also his Truchman He understood little of what
was said unto him, but he felt no pain: He made me a sign to lie in his
chamber, he did not pronounce many words; I did serve him fifteen days at his
meat and about his person, as Groom of his Chamber; the which I held for a
great honor, and was well respected. Phil. de Com.
when as he confessed himself to the Official of Tours: And for that being
surprised with this sickness they carried him from the Table unto the fire,
An Apoplexy imperfect,
and would not suffer him to come near unto the windows; he remembered all
this, and being come unto himself, he demanded who they were that had staid
him by force, and kept him from taking of the air, being named unto him, he
chased them away and would no more see them, for he did never like that King
Charles his father should be forced to eat, for that the Subject should not in
any thing force his Prince. We do not willingly see the^ that have been the
secret witnesses of our faults, or imperfections. The Ape beholding it self
and seeing his foulness, his wrinkles and deformed shape, breaks the glass.


He thought that as soon as a Prince suffered himself to be governed by his
servants, he was, as it were, in tutelage and servitude, Lewis maintains his
authority to the last gasp.
and he would not that this great authority, the which he had so absolutely
maintained all his life, should be in any thing restrained, so as immagination
being weakened and troubled by age; Melancholy and distrust could not endure
that he should be contradicted or dissuaded from any thing, having these words
often in his mouth: Do you think that I know not what I do? Nothing did so
much afflict him, He fears contempt the forerunner of sedition.
as the fear that his infirmity should be known: There is nothing that a
Prince, which begins to grow old should so much prevent, as to make it known
that he grows heavy, and that the vigor of his spirits is weakened: For
ambition of rule is so itching a thing, as every man will give order to these
defects.
For he thought that as soon as his weakness and infirmity should be
discovered they would hold him as dead, and unprofitable to the world, that he
should be contemned of his Subjects, who would pass sudenly from contempt to
sedition.

He feared that in the end they would make him believe that his senses were
distracted, and that they would control him in the expedition of affairs:
wherefore, as soon as he felt his faintings past, and that his spirits began
to return, he would dye in action and standing: Vespasian being tormented
with a bloudyflixe, whereof he dyed, did not forbear to rise and stir, his
Physicians told him that it did increase his grief, persuading him to lie
quiet, but he answered them; The Emperor must dye standing.
he caused all the dispatches, made by his Secretaries, He calls for dispatches
and expeditions.
to be brought unto him, seeming to understand more then he had vigor, or light
of understanding: He made show to read the letters, and although he sometimes
turned them vpside down, and had little knowledge, yet no man durst advise him.

The misfortune of this accident was happy for Cardina^l Balue, Cardinal Balue
was imprisoned in August, in the year 1469.
Cardinal Balue set at liberty.
whom he remembered among the scruples of his consciences: He had taken as
much pleasure to ruin him, as he had received content to raise and advance
him: He was first imprisoned at Montbasson, he did confiscate his goods, and
gave his moueables to the Commissioners which made his Process: His plate was
sold, and the money delivered to the Treasurer of the wars, Tanneguy of
Chastell, Governor of Rousillon had his Tapestry-hangings: Peter of Orioles,
General of the Finances his Library, the Lord of Crussoll a piece of Tapestry
of twenty else, with the ground of Gold, certain skins of Sables, and a
piece of skarlet of Florence: If we should only consider the malice of this
man's nature, who was a deceiuer, treacherous, and ambitious, and so known by
the Italians, amongst whom he had lived, and there dyed, Jerome
Garimbert^speakes of this Cardinal after this manner: Egli fu di natione
Francesce da Verdune pouero, pl^beio, triste, cupido sempre di nouae rapacitae
and ribald^rie. He was a Frenchman borne, of Verdune, a poor Plebeian,
wicked, and always covetous of gain and filthiness.
the cause of his imprisonment cannot be but just; His spirit which had lodged
him there twelve year, for that he had employed all his policies and
inventions to nourish civil discord, and which like unto the serpent drew in
the whole body where he might pass the head, furnished him with a notable
stratageme to set him at liberty.

He pist and drank his Urine so secretly as they thought this retention would
kill him. His policy to get out of prison.
The King caused him to be visited, his Physicians told him that his life was
desperate, whereupon the King (who was weakened with his infirmity) entered into
some scruple, that he had done wrongfully to have kept a Cardinal twelve
whole years in a Cage of Iron, that the Church was scandalized, and his
liberty wronged. The Cardinal of Saint Peter ad vincula (who afterward was
called Iulio the second, and was come into France to mediate a peace) took the
King in this good thought, The question is great upon the exemption of
Churchmen out of the power of Princes: Some hold it is ordained by the Law of
God, and others by grace and concession.
made him to apprehend the offense of the Church, in the long captivity of such
a Minister, and entreated for his liberty, the which was presently granted:
Balue went to Rome, and was all the remainder of his life an enemy to France,
and for this cause was much favored by Ferdinand King of Naples: he dyed
Bishop of Preneste, and was interred at Saint Praxede.

This Prelate had all his life time warlike thoughts and inclinations, and a
chollericke and stirring spirit: The Cronicle says that in the war of the
Commonweal, he went day and night on horseback to visit the Guards: He
got a Commission from the King to go and muster the Soldiers at Paris. The
Earl of Dammartin seeing the confusion and disorder which this Prelates
ambition caused in public charges, besought the King to suffer him to go and
hold a chapter in the Cathedral Church at Eureux.

If contrary aspects and shadows raise and grace things opposite: Generosity
of Cardinal Estouteuille.
the great and excellent virtues of William of Estouteuille Cardinal of Rouan,
will show themselves here gloriously: He was the ornament of the Cardinals of
his age, and neither fear of danger nor apprehension of ill did To do good
where there is no danger is a vulgar thing, but to do good where there is
peril is the proper office of a good man: to do evil is too easy and too base.
hinder him from doing good. Rome cast her eyes upon him, as Athens did
sometimes on Aristides; He was wonderful jealous of the dignity of his Robe,
and considering that the world was but a Theater, on the which every man was
bound to play the part, which his virtue, or fortune, had given him, he would
always perform his with constancy and honor: King Charles the seventh,
commanded him to go to Rome, with the Ambassadors which he sent to Pope
Calixtus the third, to yield him obedience, but he excused himself, not for
fear to expose his sufficiency, Ignorance and weakness fear any encounter,
for that they think being compared one with another, their imperfections will
presently appear.
to the encounter of a greater, but not to offend the honor of his Cardinals
place, which did not allow him to accept of any Legation, but from the Popes
authority.

With the same courage that he maintained the honor of his Hat, he defended
that of the Church, and of France. The Barrisell, or Provost of Rome finding a
man in committing a flagrant delict or heinous crime, and having no hangman to
execute him, presently forced a poor Priest, whom he found begging in the
street, to do this office: He labored in vain to tell him that he was a
Priest, and a Frenchman, and that he had never done an act unworthy the one or
the other: Cruelty of the Provost of Rome.
The Provost, who had abandoned the Helm of reason to the storm of choler, A
judgment transported with choler, is like unto a Ship without Pilate and
without helm, or a lodging, out of the which the master is expelled by the
fire and smoke which is in it: The end of all that is done in choler is the
beginning of rerepentance.
the which had filled his spirit with fumes, felt himself so transported with
passion to punish the crime, as he would not hearken unto the innocent, but
threatened to make him play the part of the offender, if he would not do that of
the Hangman.

The fear of death, which had forced greater men to do worse, made him
resolve to this infamous excution, after which he retired himself, holding
down his head for shame, into the house of Cardinal Estouteville, where he
complained of this wrong, and demanded justice. The Cardinal considering that
by the injury of this poor man, the dignity of the Church, and the honor of
the Nation was interressed, sent for the Provost, and having let him know his
fault, commanded his Muletier to hang him at the bar in his Hall, with one of
his Mules halters: At the sight of this Provost, hanging at the window, the
Popes Officers made great complaints, and the Cardinal Estouteuille was ready
to retire into France, but Pope Nicholas being advertised thereof blamed the
cruelty and injustice of the said Provost, who had so affected the punishment
of another, It is the ordinary course of injustice to plunge it self into the
mischief wherhinto she would draw others: Dat poenas dum exigit: They be
ruins which break upon that whereon they fall.
as he had not considered into what danger he engaged himself: He commended
the Cardinals justice, and entreated him not to leave Rome.

He remained 28. years there, and dyed the same year when as King Lewis the
eleventh left this life: He was made Chamberlain to Sixtus the fourth, Bishop
of Ostia, and Deane of the College: He caused Saint Augustines Church to be
built, and did much enrich that of Saint Mary the Great: The Chanons of this
Church, and the Monks of the other, did not yield that respect unto his memory
which they ought: For being ready to interre him they fell to quarrel for his
Roabes, with so great a disorder, as the rings were taken from his fingers, and
he had like to have been stripped naked by the indiscretion of those whom he
had clothed.

This first sickness of the Kings continued some 15. days, During this
sickness all ^ffaires were dispatched by the Bishop of Alby, by his brother
the governor ^f Bourgundy, by the Marshall of G^e, and the Lord of Lude, who
were lodged in two little chambers under his.
at the end whereof he went to see the Camp of his new disciplined soldiers,
which he had erected, and caused them to be put in battle, in a Valley near
to Pontdelarche in Normandy, having caused a great number of Tents and
Pauillions to be made to lodge them in field, and Carts to enclose them and to
serve as a Trench: For the entertainment whereof he must make new leuies for
money, and excessive taxes, for it did amount yearly to a hundred and fifty
thousand pounds Sterling: They that were about him when this sickness took
him, Oppression of the people.
considering how much the people were oppressed, and thinking that he would
never recover it, made diverse decrees for the suppression of this Tax.

Many thought that this sickness had touched his heart, and made him more
sencible of the miseries and calamities of his subjects, for the remonstrances
so often made upon this subject had not prevailed any thing, and they expected
no ease but what should come from his own motion: He had much oppressed his
people (says Phil. de Comines) and more then ever any King did, Authority and
persuasions could not move him to ease them; It must come from himself, as
the^ he would have done, if God had preserved him from sickness, and therefore
it is good to do well whilst we have leisure, and that God gives health and
understanding to men.
He propounded to reform all the disorders of his Realm: If he might not
have the honor to have reigned well, he desires to make his reign better at
his death then in his life, thinking nothing makes a Prince to be more
lamented, then when he dies in some great action for the good of his Realm.

He meant to begin this Reformation by Justice, The Kings desire to reform
Justice.
and Phillip de Commines says, that he loved not the Court of Parliament of
Paris, for that he disliked many things: He had so much contemned to give great
Offices to the recommendation of merit and sufficiency, and therein to
consider the honor and condition of persons as ignorance had the reputation
which did to belong knowledge, and they might say that France was betrayed by
Asses, as Troy had been by a horse, That age was in the thick darkness of
ignorance, the which does weaken all resolutions of well-doing. Diogenes said
that Troy had been betrayed by horses, and the commonweal of Athens was lost
by Asses.
petty-fogging did triumph in the Palace, and did plunge them that came for
justice into gulfes of confusion: It became insupportable by long and tedious
delays, and therefore he undertook to cut off the proceedings of the
instructions of suites, and those long formalities which made justice like unto
a Vine, which, not being cut, brings forth much wood, and little fruit. Laws
are made for public infirmities, and yet when there were most laws, the
Commonweal was most corrupted, and weakest. To shorten tedious suits, and to
cut off that which is unprofitable, and superflous in laws, has been the
enterprises of great Princes, of Theodosius, Justinian, Ch^rlemaigne and
Frederick, Emperors.


But such good thoughts came to late: they say that the Moule opens her eyes
when she is ready to dye. The functions of his soul were languishing and
dejected. It was no more that great Spirit, which gave life and motion to all
the spirits of his Realm, that first mouer which made all the spheres of
Christendom to work; and who, remaining in his Cabinet, Wisdom works great
effects without moving from one place* Edward of England seeing that Charles
the fifth did so much annoy him, and yet never went out of one place, said I
never knew king that did Arm less: He does cross me m^re with his letters,
then ever his Father and Grandfather did with their great forces and Armies.
kept all his neighbors in awe. The remainder of his life was at the
discretion of all kinds of languishings. This cold Melancholy could find no
heat, it was chill in the hottest days of the year, His waywardness and
melancholy.
and did plunge him into a perpetual waywardness, insupportable to his
followers, and much more unto himself. Melancholy and sickness drew him by
one and the same way unto death. They sought all means to cheer him, and
caused Musicians to play before him, they brought many sheepheards of the
Country of Poictou, to sing, to make him merry, and to keep him from slumber,
which drew him to a perpetual sleep. But as the flame is smothered by smoke,
so this great desire of life, and this base fear of death blemished the beauty
of the goodliest actions of his age. We must drink this cup joyfully when God
presents it. He that has a firm hope of enternall life, should not fear a
temporal death. This careful desire of life retains nothing of the generosity
of the mind. Maroboduus non excessit Italia per duodeviginti annos
consenuitque multum imminuta claritate ob nimiam viuendi cupidinem. Maroboduus
went not out of Italy for the space of two and twenty years, and he grew old,
having much blemished his glorry, by his too great desire to live. Tacit.
Annal. lib. 2.


A year after he fell into a relapse of his sickness at Tours, where as he
was taken with a more violent convulsion then at the first, Relapse of the
Kings sickness at Tours.
so as he was held for dead, and remained some two hours laid upon a
mattresse. The Signior of Bouchage, and Philip de Commines made a vow for him
to S. Claude, and he writes, that presently after he recouers his speech. A
change which the mind of man should consider as all other meruailes of the
hand of God, by the humility of his zeal, and not by the subtilty of his
judgment. The reason of that which is done miraculously depends only of his
power that has done it. S. Gregory says that miracles, debent considerari per
studium and non discuti per intellectum.
He went to Argenton to change the air, and remained there a month very
sick; then he returned to Tours, and from thence past to S. Claude to
perform his vow, where he left an everlasting memory of his piety and
devotion. The Chronicle says, that in this voyage, for the safety of his
person, he led eight hundred Lances, and six thousand foott.


At his return he past by Salins, A Parliament erected at Salins.
where he erected the Parliament of Bourgondy, which the ruins and extreme
fury of the war had chased from Dole. He made ordonances for the government
of Justice, the which are yet observed in the Franch-County. Being at Beaujeu
in Beaujolois, he was advertised of the death of Mary, Duchess of Bourgondy,
who had fallen from her horse going a hunting, and had left two children,
Margaret and Philip, for the which he was not sorry, foreseeing that this
death would breed some alteration in Maximilians affairs: for the Gantois
could not suffer the command of Maximilian, nor Maximilian endure the humors of
the Gantois. When as Manlius was chosen Consul, he said unto the people, Seek
another to whom you may give this honor: for I cannot endure your manners, nor
you my commandments. Live.


At this return from this voyage he would see his son the Dauphin in the
Castle of Ambois, The King go^s to see his son at Ambois
where he had remained since his birth, and had not seen him, neither did he
suffer him to be seen by all sorts of men: for remembering, that at the same
age the great men of the Realm had seized on him, against his father Charles
the seventh, he feared the like attempt. Clau^ Seissel says, That the King
would not have his son seen by the Nobility, and men of Estate, so as many
doubted whether he were living or dead. And I think it is one of the reasons
which made him write, that Charles the 8. was supposed.


One of the greatest griefs and discontents which he might have at the end of
his life, was the apprehension of blame which France would give him, to have
neglected the breeding and Instruction of this Prince, and to have so late
sought to repair those defects: he would that the admonitions which he gave
him in the presence of his most confident servants, should be published in
form of an Edict, and enrolled in sovereign Courts, to the end his subjects
might know, that if his sons reign were not answerable to his hopes, the
cause should not be imputed to his fathers Instructions.

Lewis, Admonition made by the king to the Dauphin.
by the grace of God, King of France, Dauphin of Viennois, Earl of
Valentinois, and Dioys, to all those to whom these Presents shall come
greeting, We let you understand, that considering the beginning of all things,
and the end thereof, even of humane Nature, whose days are short: And that God
our Creator has given us such great graces, as it has pleased him to make us
the head Governor and Prince of the Noblest Region and Nation upon Earth,
which is the Realm of FRANCE; whereof many Princes and Kings our Predecessors,
have been so Great, Virtuous and Valiant, as they have purchased the name of
The Most Christian King, The Kings of France carry the Title of Most Christian
since Clovis. Charles the Bald is called Most Christian in his Coronation. Pope
Innocent, and Honorius the 3d. in their Bulls to King Philip Augustus, and to
Lewis the eighth, called them, Most Christian. The Apostolic Legate, and three
Bishops named in their Letters, write that the Realm of France is Most
Christian. Du. Tillet.
as well for reducing many great Countries, and diverse Nations, inhabited by
infidels, to the good Catholic Faith, rooting Heresies and Vices out of our
said Realm, and maintaining the Holy Apostolic sea, and the holy Church of
GOD in their Rights, Liberties and Freedoms, as for doing many other goodly
deeds worthy of eternal memory, so as some are held for Saints, living in the
glorious company of GOD in his Paradise, which our Realm, and other our
Countries and Signiories, we have (thanks be to GOD) so well entertained,
defended, and governed, as we have augmented and enlarged it of all sides, by
our great care and diligence, and by the aid also of our good, faithful, and
Loyal Officers, Servants and Subjects, notwithstanding that soon after our
coming to the Crown, the Princes and Noblemen of our Blood and Lineage, and
other great Noblemen The Princes and Noblemen of the League, were Charles of
France, the Kings Brother, John of Anjou, Duke of Lorraine and Calabria; John,
Duke of Alencon; Charles of Bourgondy, Earl of Charolois; John, Duke of
Bourbon; Francis, Duke of Brittanie; James of Armaignac, Earl of March, and
of Castres, Duke of Nemours; John, Earl of Armaignac his uncle; John, Earl of
Dunois, and of Longueville, Bastard of Orleans; Lewis of Luxembourg, Earl of
S. Pol. Charles, Lord of Albert, father to great Alain, and Anthony of
Chabannes, Earl of Dammartin.
of our said Realm, or the greatest part of them, had conspired, plotted, and
attempted against us, and the Commonweal of our said Realm, many great
practices, treasons and conspiracies, so as by means thereof, there has
followed so great wars and divisions, as it has caused a wonderful effusion
of humane blood, ruin of Countries, and the desolation of multitudes of
people, the which has continued since our said coming, unto this present day,
and is not yet fully quenched, but may, after the end of our days, reviue, and
continue long, if some good order and course be not taken.

Wherefore, having regard hereunto, and to the age wherein we are, and to the
certain infirmity wherein we are fallen, for the which we have been in
great devotion to visit the glorious body of Saint Claude; so as with the
help of our Creator, we are much amended, and have recovered health. We
therefore resolved, concluded and determined, after the return of our said
voyage, to see our most dear and well-beloued son Charles, Dauphin of
Vienna, and to instruct him in many notable things Happy are those Princes
which learn the forms of Governing well, by the examples and instructions of
their fathers. Leon received them from the Emperor Basillius, and Philip
Augustus from Saint Lewis. For if the highest knowledge of a Prince be to know
his Estate, the knowledge cannot be more faithful, nor certain, then from
those* which have the experience. The Book of the Emperor Constantine
Porphyrogenete, for the Instruction of his son associated to the Empire (the
which is now remaining in the Kings Library) is only upon this subject; and as
Monsteur Casaubon, who has it in keeping, writes in an eloquent Epistle upon
Polybius: Sciebat vetus regnandi Princeps ad negotia gerenda in quibus Repub.
salus continetur illud adprime defiderari vtingenia hominum probe nota sint
quibus cum agitur sieve illi sint subditi; sieve amici, sieve socij, sieve hosts.
The Prince who was old in Government, knew well, that in matters which
concerned the safety of the Commonweal, it was chiefly to be desired, that
the Dispositions of men, with whom they are to deal, be well known, be they
Subjects, Friends, Allies, or Enemies.
for the direction of his life in good manners, government, entertainment and
conduct of the Crown of France, if it please God he come unto it after us.
For the accomplishing whereof, after our return from our said voyage, into our
Town of Ambois, we went into the Castle of the said place, where our said
son the Dauphin was, whom we have always caused to be kept, and bred up
there; where, in the presence of a certain number of Nobleblemen, and Ladies
of our Blood and Lineage, and other great Personages, men of our Council,
Captains and Officers, both to us, and said son, we have called our said
son before us, and have caused those words and Remonstrances which followed
to be delivered unto him.

First, after a recital made by us of the aforesaid things, or of the greatest
part of them to our said son, we have let him understand, how much we
desire, that after us he might (with the aid of God) come unto the Cromne of
France, his true Inheritance; and that he might so govern and maintain it, as
it might be to his honor and praise, and to the profit and vtility of the
Subjects of his Realm, Dauphine and other Countries and Signiories, and of the
Commonweal. This Instruction regards only the settling of the Princes
affairs, and does not extend unto the duties of Conscience, nor to those
virtues which edify Kings, Piety and Justice. But to what end so many
Instructions? To make a Princes conduct happy, we must wipe these words out
of his mind, If it please, it is lawful: If it may be, it shall be. A good
Prince should not will any thing, but what he ought. Caesar^ cum omnia licent,
propter hoc minus licet: vt foelicitatis est posse quantum velis, sic
magnitudinis velle quantum possis; vel potius quantum debeas. For that all
things are lawful to Caesar, therefore they are the less lawful: As it is a
happiness to do what thou will, so it is a greatness not to will any thing
but what thou may, or rather what thou ought. Plin. Paneg. Traja.


Item, That if it pleased God to work his will on us, and that our son should
come unto the Crown of France, we have commanded and enjoined him, as a
father may do his son, that he shall govern himself and the said Realm,
Dauphine, and Countries, by the Council and advice of our kinsmen, Lords of
our Blood and Lineage, and other Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Captains and wise
men of our Council; and especially of those whom he shall know and find to
have been good and faithful to the deceased, our most honored Lord and Father
(whom God absolve) to us, and to the Crown of France, that have been unto us
good and loyal Officers, Servants and Subjects. Bod^n writes in the fourth
book of his Commonweal, Chap. 4. that K. Lewis the (...) made another Edict,
declaring all offices perpetual, if resignation, death, or Fortune, did not
cause some change, and he ordained, that a Destitution by forfeite should not
take place, if the forfeiture were not adjudged.


Item, We have also expressly commanded and enjoined him, that when it shall
please God he come unto the said Crown of France, that he shall maintain all
the Noblemen of our Blood and Lineage, and all other Noblemen, Barons,
Governors, Knights, Esquires, Captains and Commanders at war, in their
Offices and charges, and all other, having the command of men, and guard of
Towns, places, and Forts, and all other Officers, either of Justice, or other,
of what condition soever, not changing or disappointing any of them, unless
they be duly found faulty and disloyal, An Officer which fears to be
disappointed, holds all his actions pure, and keeps himself from failing: Yet
a Prince should never displace without cause, and one of the greatest
commendations which they give to king Robert, is, that he never disapp^^^ed any
Officer if he had not offended.
and that there may be a due declaration made by Justice, as is requisite in
that case.

Item, Unto the end our son may, and will, consider of, entertain and
accomplish our said Ordinance, Iniunction and commandment, we have laid
before him the great miseries, inconveniences, and ir-repairable losses which
befell us soon after our coming unto the Crown, for that we had not
maintained them in their estates, charges, and Offices, King Lewis the eleventh
coming to the Crown, did suddenly disappoint all his fathers ancient servants,
who handled him in such sort, as he was ready (as he confessed after-ward) to
quit his Crown and his estate.
the which has continued long, to the great oppression and ruin of many of
our Countries and Subjects, and does yet continue, although that (God be
thanked) we have not lost any thing of the Crown, but have augmented it with
great Lands and possessions; hoping shortly, with the pleasure and good will of
our Creator, to settle peace and tranquillity: And that if our said son should
do the like, and should not continue the said Noblemen and Officers, the
like, or worse, might happen unto him; and that as he loves the good honor
and increase of himself, the said Realm, and others our Countries and
Signiories he should have a special care not to do any thing to the
Contrary, for what cause soever.

Which Remonstrances made by us to our son, the Dauphin, for the good of the
Crown of France, and to the end the said Ordonances, Commandments and
Injunctions made unto him, should take effect, and be in perpetual memory,
we have demanded of our said son, A mark of great mildness in a severe
Prince, and of great bounty in a difficult Father, he does not use his
authority over his son for so just a command. He first sounds his will, then
he suffers him to consult with his obedience, the bond whereof is sealed with
the Seal of Nature, the which has not given to men any Commission to command
others, and to make them subject, except the Father, whom Procles calls, The
Image of the Sovereign GOD.
what he thought, and whether he were content, willing, and resolved to
entertain the same things, and other delivered by us, and especially touching
the said Charges and Offices. Whereunto he has humbly made answer, and said,
That he would willingly obey, acomplish, and perform with all his power, the
Commandments, Instructions, Ordonances and Injunctions which we gave him, for
the which he did most humbly thank us.

Moreover, we commanded him to retire himself with some of his Officers which
were there present, and confer with him upon those matters which he had
propounded unto him, and resolve whether he would entertain all that we had
enjoined him: The which he has done, and then he spoke these, or such like
words unto us: Sir, with the help of God, and when it shall be his pleasure
that these things happen, I will obey your commandment and pleasure, and will
perform and accomplish all that you have enjoined me. Whereupon we said unto
him, That seeing he would do it for the love of us, he should hold up his
hand, and promise so to do and hold: The which he has done.

Item, After many other things declared by us, concerning the same matter, and
also of many Noblemen our adversaries within our realm, A Prince cannot leave
a more profitable and fruitful precept unto his son, then to make him know
the friends of his Estate, to cherish them; and the enemies to beware of them:
the one and the other are known by the effects; but men regard but the face,
and God sees the heart.
who have always been contrary to us, and our said Crown, from whom part of
the miseries and inconveniences above mentioned, have sprung, to the end he
might have a watchful eye over them, we have recommended unto him some of our
good and loyal Servants and Officers which were there present, and some
absent, letting him understand how well and faithfully they had served us, as
well against our enemies, and about our person, as also in many and diverse
sorts. Of which things, and of every their circumstances and dependances, we
have ordained and commanded our loving and faithful Notary and Secretary, Mr.
Peter Parrent, to make all Letters, Provisions, Patents and declaratory clauses
of our said will and commandment, that shall be needful; as well during our
said Reign, as that of our Son; and in the beginning of his said Reign, by
manner of confirmation to the said Officers, and confirming the^ in their said
Charges and Offices, and we have so commanded and enjoined our said son, to
cause it to be done by the said Parrent, as our Secretary and his. We also
command by these Presents, our loving and faithful Councillors of our Courts
of Parliament Presently after the death of Lewis, the Parliament of Paris
decreed, that the Officers should continue in their charges, as they had done
before, attending the answer of the new King, the which shows, that charges
are suspended, until that his pleasure he known, according to an ancient
Decree made in October, 1382.
of the said Realm and Dauphine, Exchequer of Normandy, Masters of our
Accounts, Generals and Counselors of our Treasury, of Justice, and of our
Aids, Masters of requests of our household, Prou^st of Paris, and all
Bailiffes, Seneshals, Provosts, and other our Justices and officers, or their
Lieuetenants, and every of them to whom it shall belong, which are at this
present, or shall be hereafter, in our time, or our sons, that they observe,
entertain and accomplish, and cause to be observed, entertained and
accomplished, from point to point inviolably our present Ordonances and
Declarations, and all and every thing contained in these Presents, with their
circumstances and dependances, not doing, or suffering any thing to be done to
the contrary, either now or hereafter upon any cause or occasion what soever,
forcing all them that shall oppose themselves to the contrary, by the taking
away of their letters granted to the contrary, (...) thereof, seizure and
detention of their goods in our hands, imprisonment of their persons, even as
is accustomed to be done for our own affairs, notwithstanding any opposition,
appeal, or complaint, or any Ordonance made, or to be made by Us or our said
son, restraint, or commandment, defenses or letters to the contrary, for the
which we will not have the contents, effect and execution of these presents in
any sort deferred, stayed, or hindered.

And for that many men have need of these Presents in diverse places, We will
that full credit shall be given unto the Copy thereof, made under the seal
Royal, or signed by the said Parrent, or any other of our Notaries, or
ordinary Secretaries, as to this present Original. In witness whereof we have
caused our Seal to be set to these Presents. Given at our Castle of Ambois the
22 of September, in the year of grace 1482. and of our reign 22. By the King,
my Lord the Dauphin, the Earl of Beaujeu, the Earl of Marle, Marshall of
France, the Archbishop of Narbona, the Signiors of Bouchage, Percigny, Plessis
of Solhes, John Doyac, Governor of Auuergne, Oliver Guerin, Steward of his
household, and many others being present. Miscounting in the History.
Signed Parrent.

The date of this Edict discouers the mis-counting of Philip de Commines,
Philip de Comines was sent into Sauoy, to set at liberty the Signior of Illins
a Dauphinois, whom the King had given for Governor to Duke Philebert his
Nephew. When as the Earl of Bresse saw the Kings Army at Maston, he did
what they desired.
who says, that in the year 1483. the King would see the Dauphin his son,
whom he had not seen in many years before, and that soon after he had spoken
unto him, he fell into the extremity of his sickness, whereof he died: for
this Remonstrance was made in the Castle of Ambois, in September 1482. and the
King died not before August the year following. But to resolve the doubt of
times, it may be that the King some few days before his death, had a will to
see the Dauphin, when as they conducted him to Paris, to make his entry, and to
celebrate his marriage, and that Philip de Commines not being at Ambois when
this first Remonstrance was made, being stayed in Dauphin or Sauoy, whether
the King had sent him with Troops, against the Earl of Bresse, he had no
knowledge thereof, and therefore has written, That the King had not seen the
Dauphin in many years before.

If a History be the Image of Truth, A History is the proof of time, the
light of truth, the life of memory, the mystery of life, and the Trumpet of
Antiquity. It is the Image of truth, and as the image is perfect, that does
rightly represent the Original, so a History should represent all things in
their simple truth.
and if Truth can have but one universal face in all things, how can it accord
the Chronicle with this Edict? It writes, that the King going to Saint Claude,
and before his departure out of Tourraine, saw the Dauphin at Ambois, and gave
him his blessing: That in the month of October, the same year, being fallen
into a Relapse of his sickness, he caused himself to be carried to Ambois
to exhort him to that which he should do, which makes me to wonder, if in
matters that be secret and important, Writers do not always give full,
perpetual, and immutable Assurances, seeing that in these they dispense so
freely with the Certainety.

The Instructions which the King gave unto the Dauphin, were found Good and
Holy, but they could yield no good fruits, but with a peace. All the rest
without it had been of small use, there being nothing whereof a Father, who
leaves a young heir, should be more careful, then to leave him his
inheritance quiet and assured.

Being therefore resolved to give a peace to France, who attended it as a gift
from heaven, There can be nothing given more pleasing, no^ more healthful to
the people, then a peace, Vt circumspiciamus omnia quae populo grata ^^nt,
atque iocunda, nihil tam populare quam pacem, quam concordiam, qua^ otium
reperimus. Let us look unto all things that are pleasing and acceptable unto
the people, we shall not find any thing more popular then peace, concord, and
ease. Cicer^ pro Le Agr.
he thought to give his son a wife, but not the Princess of England, who was
promised him by the Treaty of Piquigny.

After the death of the Duchess of Bourgondy, the Gantois had seized upon
Prince Philip, Estate of the Lowcountries at the discretion of the Gantois.
and the Princess Margaret her Children, telling the Archduke Maximilian,
that the Guard and Tutele belonged unto them. The King, who desired to have the
Princess Margaret married unto the Dauphin, and knew well, that by the
Gantois means, the Propositions of the Treaty would be to his advantage,
commanded Des Cords to make some Ouerture thereof, with two or three petty
Companions of the Town of Gand, who had purchased some credit in the
Seditions and Mutinies of the people. These Men sitting their duty to the time
and fortune, A proposition of a peace and marriage.
transported with private passion (a deadly poison All passion and private
affection is a poison in the conduct and managing of affairs. Peffimum very
affectus and Iuditij venenum sua euique vtilitas. Every man's private interest
is a deadly poison to true judgment. Tacit.
in Affairs of importance) and distasted with the soft and effeminate command
of Maximilian, consent speedily to the Propositions of Des Cords, and promise
to make them succeed to the Kings good liking.

There was little pain in the effecting of this business: for the Gantois, to
prevent all difficulties which the Father might propound in the marriage of his
Daughter told him plainly, that they would have no more wars with France.
They insulted over him, doing and undoing many thing contrary to his
Intentions. On the other side, Pope Sixtus, both by the reason of his Office,
P. Sixtus mediates a peace.
as a common Father, and by the Law of Religion, which does nothing more
Christian, There is nothing more proper for a Christian, then to make peace.
(...) BASIL.
then to make peace, solicited the King and the Archduke thereunto, to join
their forces against the common enemy of Christendom, and had sent the
Cardinal of Saint Peter ad Vincula to exhort them.

The Deputies of either side met at Arras: A Treaty of peace and marriage.
they laid open all the Pretenses of the Crown of France to the House of
Bourgondy. The Kings intention was, that the Rivers should return unto the
Sea, from whence they came; and his reason was grounded upon the Law of the
Realm, which gives no part of Revenues of the Crown in propriety to the
Females; and portions given to the Princes of France, pass not to their
daughters, when as they leave no sons. In old time the Infants of the House
of France had their Portions in Sovereignty. This was abbrogated in the third
race, and so ordered, as the younger sons could not pretend any thing to the
Succession of the King their Father, but a provision for their entertainment,
the which, (having no Heirs Males) returned to the Crown. Hereupon there was
a Sentence given to the benefit of King PHILIP the third for the Earldom of
Poitiers, and Lands of Auuergne against CHARLES the first, King of Sicile,
brother to Saint LEWIS, in the Parliament of Tousaints, 1283.
Finally, upon that Maxim, That the revenues of the Crown are Inalienable,
and not subject to prescription: For men cannot prescribe any thing against
God, nor private men against the Estate. To apply the square unto the stone,
and the Hypothesis unto the Thesis, the Kings Deputies did show that the Duchy
of Bourgondy, the Franch-County, with the Earledomes of Flanders, Artois, and
Henaut, were pieces of the Crown. If their discourse was not in these terms,
it was so in substance.

The beginnings of the diminution of Flanders, as they of all the great Empires
of the world, have been weak, uncertain, and fabulous. Estates, as all other
things in the world, have three times, the beginning, the decrease, and the
declining.
The Country was peopled by a Colony of Saxons, whom Charlemaigne brought
thither, governed under the authority of the Crown of France, by their Lords
Forresters. The Governors and Guardi^ns of Flanders (says Mr. du (...)) before
Baldwin, surnamed Iron-Arme, were Officers mutable at the will of the Kings of
France, although that some sons have succeeded in their fathers Offices, for
that that they were heirs of their virtues, and were called Forresters, not
that their charge was only upon the land, being fall of Forest for coals, but
the guard of the sea was also commutted to them.
The Estate began by Baldwin, suruamed Iron-arme, and continued in his
posterity; but as it ended by Maud, daughter to Baldwin the fifth, Flanders
past under the commands of the Dukes of Normandy, then of Thierry, Earl of
Alsatia, who married Sibilla, daughter to Foulques of Anjou, King of Jerusalem,
and had but one daughter, who was heir to the Earldom of Flanders, and
married to Baldwin the fourth of that name, Earl of Henaut; of this marriage
came Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, the eighth of that name, who was Emperor of
Constantinople, who died at Andrinopile, who left but two daughters; Ioane, who
died without children, and Margaret, Countess of Flanders, Margaret, Countess
of Flanders, who reigned thirty years, had two husbands, the first was
Bourcher, an Englishman, by who she had one son, which dyed young: and William
of Dampierre, second son to Archambauld, Lord of Bourbon, Father to Guy,
Earl of Flanders, Father to Robert of Bethunes.
who married William of Bourbon, Guy, Earl of Fla^ders
son to Archamb^uld, Lord of Bourboun: He was father to three sons;
William, who died without children; Guy Earl of Flanders, and John, Lord of
Dampierre.

Guy, Earl of Flanders, married Maud, daughter and heir to Robert (others
named him Fegard) of Bethunes, Robert of Bethunes.
by whom he had five sons, and three daughters: Robert of Bethunes his
son, who has deserved the surname of Great, as well for the greatness of
his virtue as his fortune, succeeded him.

Charles of Anjou, King of Sicile, brother to Saint Lewis, gave means to
acknowledge his valor more gloriously, having set two Crowns upon his head,
by the Victory of the battle of Benevent, Battle of Benevent, the 10 of
February, 1565. where as Manfroy, bastard to Conrade, whom he had poisoned, was
slain.
whereas the Parricide Manfroy ended his tyranny, honor and life. He had
enjoyed them longer, and more happily, if he had followed the council of this
Prince, Robert of Bethunes, Earl of Flanders, did not allow of the death of
Conradyne: The History, which detests it, reserues him this honor: Vtrique
nou^ ac regio nomine indigno crudelitatis in or be Christiano exemple fecuri
vitam eripit frustra Flandriae Comite monente, generosum victorem decere
moderationem, and clementiam. Sed vicit vox cruenta vita Conradini, mors
Caroli; mors Conradini, vita Caroli. He took away both their I was by an
example of cruelty, which was new in the Christian world, and unworthy the name
of a King, the Earl of Flanders ^^lling him in vain, that moderation and
clemency did become a generous victor; but that cruel voice preua^^d: The life
of Conradine is the death of Charles, and the death of Conradine is the life of
Charles.
who found the death of Conradine and Frederick of Austria, Prisoners taken in
the war, barbarous and inhumane.

Of this Marriage Charles was borne who dyed young, Charles of Bethunes son to
Robert Earl of Bethunes dyed at a eleven years of age. They write that he
brought from his mothers womb the figure of a Cross betwixt his shoulders.
and Lewis who was father to Lewis the second, Lewis the second of Bethunes.
Earl of Flandes* He married Margaret of France, daughter to Phillip the
Long, who treating of the conditions of this Marriage would that Robert of
Bethunes his Grandfather, should declare the children that were to be borne of
this marriage, Earls of Flanders* This Lewis of Bethunes, surnamed of Cresse,
for that he dyed at the battle of Cresse, Lewis the third of Bethunes.
left one some called also Lewis, and surnamed of Mallaine: These so diverse
names have but one Spring* Mallaine is Bethunes, and Bethunes is Flanders: The
greatest Families of Europe have forgotten their first names to continue them
of their portions and successions: So we see Bourbon for France, Austria for
Habspourg, and in this Genealogy of the Earls of Flanders, Dampierre for
Bourbon, Bethunes for Flanders, and without any other distance, but from father
to son, Neuers and Mallaine for B^thunes.

Lewis of Bethunes, or of Mallaine, married Margaret daughter to the Duke of
Brabant, and had his only daughter Margaret, who was first married to Phillip
Duke of Bourgundy, and afterward to Phillip the Hardy, son to King John.
From this truth we must conclude, that the Crown of France, had the right of
homage, and of Soueraignety over the Earldom of Flanders, before this
marriage. The like is said of the Towns of Lisle, Douay, Orchies, and Bethunes.

Consequently, Artois cannot be separated from France, no more then the
Earldom of France from whence it is come, County of Artois.
for the parties follow the nature of their whole. King Lewis the ninth,
performing the will of Lewis the eighth, his father, gave it for a portion to
his brother Robert, upon condition that he should not transfer it to the
daughters which should be borne of his marriage with Maude daughter to the Duke
of Brabant: For these reasons, the treaty of Arras betwixt King Charles the
seventh, and Phillip the second Duke of Bourgundy, did expressly reserve the
Fealty, Homage, and Sovereignty, of those lands which did hold of the Crown.
King Lewis the eighth, disposed after this manner of the Country of Artois,
Volumus and ordonamus quod filliusnoster secund^^ natu habeat totamterram
Attrebatensemin feudis and domanijs and totam aliam terram quam ex part matris
nostrae Elizabeth, possidemus saluo dotalitio matris suae. Quod si idem qui
Attrebatensium tenebit sine haeredem decedat volumus quod terra tota
Attrebatensis and alia terra quam tenet ad filium nostrum Regni nostri
successorem and liberos integre redeat.


The Franch-County has made a part of the ^state under Cloves, The
Franch-county.
and Clo^ilde. The Duchy of Bourgundy has always been one of the goodliest
Flowers. Henry the first, King of France, gave it to Robert of France his
brother for his portion; His posterity has held it unto Phillip the son of
E^des. Phillip the fourth, married Ioane, the eldest daughter of King Phillip
the Long: Phillip the Long had four daughters by the Lady Ioane of Bourgundy;
Ioane married to the Duke of Bourgundy, Margaret married to Lewis of Crecy,
Isable married to Guy Dauphine of Viennois, who was slain with an arrow before
the Castle of Lapierre, and Blanch a Nun, in the Monastery of Louchan, near
Paris.
By this alliance, the two Bourgundies were united, and of this marriage came
Phillip Prince of Bourgundy, who was married to Ioane daughter to Robert Earl
of Bolleigne, who died at the battle of Crecy, Phillip his son, surnamed de
Roue: succeeded in the Duchy of Bourgundy after his Grandfathers death, in
the year, one thousand three hundred fifty and four; He was married young to
Margaret of Flanders, the only daughter to Lewis the third, Earl of Flanders,
and dyed at the age of twenty four years, in in the year, one thousand four
hundred three score and two: By his death the Duchy of Bourgundy came unto the
Crown, by the right of return, and by proximity of blood, King John being
found nearest to the succession. This proximity is easy to verefie, being
certain that Robert, Duke of Bourgundy had four sons, and two daughters, by
Agnes of France, daughter to King Saint Lewis, Hugh, or Hughues, Eudes, Lewis,
Robert, Ioane, and Margaret; Hughues was Duke and dyed without children; Eudes
succeeded him, Ioane was married to Phillip of Vallois, father to King John, who
only remained of the discendants of Robert: Phillip the Hardy, Duke of
Bourgundy.
He caused it to be united and incorporated to the Crown, and gave it to
Phillip the Hardy, his son, by reason of his service and recommendation. In
the inuestiture which bears date the 6. of September, 1363. we read these
words. Ad memoriam reducentes grata and laud digna seruitia, quae charissimus
Phillippus filius noster quarto genitus, qui sponte expositus mortis periculo
nobiscu^ ^mperterritus and impauidus stent in acie prope Fictauos vulneratus
captus, and detentus in hostium potestate: ibi and post liberationem nostram
h^cten^s exhibuit ind^fessevero amore filiali ductus ex quibus suam merito
cupientes honorare personam, perpetuoque praemio fulcire, sibi paterno
correspondentes ^more spem and fiduciam gerentes in domino, quod ipsius
crescente prouidentia dicti nostri subditi Ducatus eiusdem, a suis
oppressionibus releuabuntur.


The Deputies of Flanders were well instructed what they should answer, and if
they had not been a denial had served for a sufficient reason, for in
disputes of consequence, to consent were base, and to deny wisdom. They said,
that reasons drawn from Laws, and Customs observed, did not prove that
successions, Fees, and the place of Peers, were incompatible with the quality
of women: Judith daughter to Charles the Bald, brought unto her successors
Earls of Flanders, the Low Countries, with their largest limits: The ancient
bounds of the County of Flanders, were betwixt the Ocean Sea, and the Rivers of
Escault and Sum.
The same Provinces have been governed in diverse seasons by women, Margaret of
Alsas, Ioane of Constantinople, and Margaret of Mallaine.

The place of Peers of France has been held by wo^men. In France, women are
capable to hold the places of Peers, and to give their opinion in the
judgment of Peers. Maude Countess of Artois did assist at the Process of
Robert Earl of Flanders, in the year 1315. And in this quality, the Duchess
of Orliance, and the Countess of Artois, were adiourned to judge the Process
of John Monfort Duke of Brittany.
The examples are in Normandy, Guienne, Tholousa, and Britain. Raou^ married
the daughter of Lewis King of France, who had Normandy for her Dowry: Eli^or,
daughter to William Earl of Guienne had that goodly Province in marriage:
Alphonso brother to King S. Lewis, was Earl of Tholousa by his wife: Maude of
Artois, Maude of Artois, caused Robert, Grandchild to Robert the second Earl
of Flanders, to be excluded from the succession by two decrees, the one made,
by Phillip the Fair, at Asmeres, the 9 of October 1309. and the other by
Phillip the Long, 1318.
by the judgment of Phillip the Fair, succeeded in the County of Artois, by
this only reason that the daughters were capable of this succession, and that
representation had no place in the direct line.

To all this the Deputies of France answered suddenly; Answers to the
objections.
That Provinces once united to the Crown can be no more dismembered: That
great Empires should endure great changes and alterations, if the Females were
made equal to the Males in the right of succession, for their Crowns should
not be dismembered into many pieces, for that we find in Commonweals in
general, and in Families in particular, more daughters then sons; That if
examples had more force then reason, and that they must decide the controversy
by the number, they might not contradict the authority of King Phillip the
Fair, who would that the County of Poictou, which he had given to Phillip his
son, should return unto the Crown for want of Heirs Male, by reason
whereof, when as Eudes the fourth, Duke of Bourgundy, and Ioane of France his
wife, daughter to Phillip the Long, had pretended the succession of the County
of Poictou, against King Charles the Fair, Phillip the Fair, would that the
County of Poictou which he gave to Phillip his son, who was afterward King of
France, Surnamed the Long, should return to the Crown for want of Heirs Male,
upon condition that the King should be bound to marry the Daughters.
they were rejected by a Decree of Parliament given the 22. of February: The
same has been observed in other Portions of the Princes of France, for the
Provinces of Berry, Orleans, Anjou, Maine, the County of Clermont, Artois,
Alanccon, Perch, and Eureux.

The Deputies did not agree upon these points, and the proofs could not be so
clear, but there would be still found some exception or diversity: Moreover,
they treated for two Princes, who stood not upon words but held all things
doubtful, wherefore they thought it fit for the good of a peace to give more
power to trust then to iealousy, In Treaties it is neccessary to use all the
cautions which wisdom and foresight can invent, but in the end we must trust
them with who^ we treat, else it is impossible to resolve any thing.
which is a shelfe, against which affairs suffer ship-wracke: They did wink
at many things, and did turn from that which the necessity of affairs did
forbid them to encounter: For in Treaties of this sort, He that can give, must
give, and he that cannot, must seem liber all of that which he can neither
sell nor keep; He that will have all, loses all. Matters past as they
desired, not by the rigor of restitution, but in favor of the marriage of the
Dauphin Charles, with Margaret Princess of Flanders; Margaret of Austria was
married to the Dauphin, but she was not his wife, for in the year, one
thousand four hundred four score and twelve, He sent her back, and married
the Duchess of Brittany: She was married to the Prince of Castile, who dyed
in the first year of his marriage.
For the Archduke and the Estates representing Prince Phillip as Heirs to the
Princess Mary, appointed for her Dowry, and promised, the Counties of Artois,
Bourgundy, Mafconois, Auxerrois, Salins, Bar-sur-seine, and Noyers for her, and
her Heirs, Males and Females: For want whereof all the aforementioned land should
return to Prince Phillip, and to his Heirs. Phillip the first, was married to
D. Ioane of Castile, and had many children, Charles the fifth, Emperor:
Ferdinand King of the Romans, then Emperor, and King of Hungary. D. Elenor
Queen of Portugal and France, D. Maria wife to Lewis king of Hungary. D.
Isabella Queen of Denmark, D. Katherine, wife to D. John King of Portugal.


That if the lands returned to any other but Prince Phillip and his Heirs,
then the King might retain them until the controversy were decided, for the
Towns of Lisle, Douay and Orchies, the which should be done within three
years after the case should happen: The said Signiory should be governed under
the Dauphin, who should make satisfaction for the money borrowed in the Counties
of Artois and Bourgundy, and suffer that the pensions granted by former Princes
should take effect.

And if the marriage were not consummated, all those places should return to
Prince Phillip, reserving only a Dowry of fifty thousand Florins by the year,
assigned upon Bois de Vincennes, Montargis, Crecy, and other places of
Champagne, Bry, and Touraine: That during the minority of Prince Phillip, and
before his marriage, the King, nor Dauphin, should not demand the government
of his Low Countries: There was a general pardon granted to all banished men
of either side, and every man should re-enter into his possessions, without
restitution of fruits: It was also agr^ed that be Prince of Orange, the Earl
of Ioigny, Leonard of Chalousi^u^, Master William of Baume, Signior of Ilain,
and Claud of Theolongeon, Signior of Bastie, comprehended in the peace, should
return into the possession of their lands, in Bourgundy, Dauphine and the
Realm.
The King also promised to favor the Signior of Romont for the recovery of his
lands.

All privileges given by the Princes should remain to them that had obtained
them. The houses of Flanders at Paris, and Conflant, should be restored to
Prince Phillip, and that of Artois to the Lady Margaret.

This marriage was the gate by the which many Families of the Franch-County,
past into France: The Signiors of the house of Chalon, John Dandelot Master of
the Kings horse, and Balife of Amont, James of Colligny father to Gaspard of
Colligny, High Admiral of France, Guy of Rochefort Signior of Pluuant,
Chancellor of France, John of Ache, Signior of Verreu, Captain of Dijon,
Balife of Auxois and Chamberlain to King Lewis, James of Vaudre, and some
others of the house of Mouy, and of Saint Fall. These Conditions of such
advantage were yielded unto without any difficulty, for the King had won them
of Gand, who had the children in their If they of Gand could have given unto
the King the Counties of Namur and Henalt, with all the subjects of that house
which speak French, they would willingly have done it, says Phillip de
Commines, to weaken Maximilian.
possession, and whose only care was to weaken Maximilian, and to take from
him all means to arm against them; not considering that flying one mischief
they did run into another, giving the King means to have them at his
discretion, and that they were like unto the horse, which suffered it self to
be bitted and backed by man, to encounter the Stagge.

During this Treaty, the King was grown so^leane, pale, and disfigured, as a
man could hardly know him, and in an other Religion they would have commended
him more to have encountered death then to attend it. He was nothing but a
shadow and a voice, in the hottest days of Summer his body was content with
his own coldness, without seeking any other refreshing. He made difficulty
to sign any Articles, not for that he did not allow of them, but to hide the
deformity of his grief, When as age, or sickness, causes any deformityin a
Prince, he should suffer himself to be seldom seen: Tiberius did therefore
live out of Rome: Facies parum decora aetas grauior, valetudo imbecillis saepe
risui and fastidio sunt: A deformed face, old age, and (...) are often subject
to be laughed at, and loathed. L. Lips. ex Tacito.
and there was not any one that durst speak unto him, nor demand any thing of
him.

When as the King of England received advertisement of the resolution of this
marriage, Death of the King of England.
he was so much grieved as he dyed: he saw his hopes frustrate in France, and
his actions contemned in ^ngland, repenting that he had not given credit to
his Council, who thought it necessary to break betimes with the King, and not
to suffer him to fortefie himself with the ruins of the house of Bourgundy,
seazing upon the Towns so near unto England; for the taking of Bollegne did
threaten him with the loss of Callice and Guines. Toward the end of his
days, he recompensed the toiles of his life, and plunged himself in delights,
taking care how to make himself fat: That which was superfluous became
necessary to him: The increase of a Neighbors power, holds a Prince in
perplexity, and sometimes in sachirresolution, as not daring to make war, he^
does things prejudicial to peace.
Phillip de Commines says, His Exercises and pleasures.
that he had no thought but of Ladies (and more then was fit) of Hunting, and
to entreat his own person well: When he went a Hunting, he caused many
Pauillions to be carried for Ladies, and in this sort made great feasts, for
he had a body as fit for it, as any that ever I saw, being young, and as
beautiful as any man that lived in his time. Edward was held in his youth to
excel all the Princes of his age, in beauty and stature, but when as he came
into France, in the year, one thousand four hundred three score and fifteen,
He was grown gross. F^w men become so but by their own means.


Entering into the Realm he saw himself surprised with a storm, and expelled
by him who had assisted him to conquer it; He retired into Holland with two
Hulkes, a little Ship, and many men, without money, seeing himself to give a
gown furred with ^ables to satisfy the Mariner who had transported him: At
the end of six months he re-entred into London, when as his enemies had held
him to be lost. In eleven days the Earl of Warwick had won the whole
Realm for Henry the sixth, Edward recouers it in twenty days, with the hazard
of two great battles. The strongest carried it, They are sometimes bound to
fortune, and sometimes to policy, for the happy events of great enterprises,
but most commonly the stronger is the Master. (...). Occurrat forti qui mage
fortis erat.
and remained peaceable King, yet with some remorse to have been bound for the
quiet possession of his Realm, to the cruelties, and inhumanities, which he
committed against his own blood: For he put to death King Henry the sixth, and
Edward Prince of Wales his son, with the Duke of Clarence his brother.

The cause of this brothers death is not very certain: The most common opinion
is, that he would have armed to succor the Princess of Bourgundy, contrary
to his brothers liking. Polydore Virgil says, that enforming himself, he
learned of them that lived in those times, that King Edward being advertised by
a Coniurer, All the answers of Sorcerers are doubtful, and deceive them that
trust in them: They spoke truly, meaning the Duke of Gloucester, and the King
deceived himself understanding it of his brother of Clarence.
that his name that should succeed him began with a G. had a conceit that
George, Duke of Clarence, his brother, should take the Crown from his
children, Death of the Duke of Clarence the Kings brother.
and upon this apprehension he put him to death in a But of Malmesey. Others
have written, that he sought the Alliance of the Princess of Bourgundy, and
that the Duchess Margaret, sister to Edward, favored his Designs, which the
King (not wishing so great a fortune to his brother) hindered. That at the same
time one of the Dukes servants, having been condemned to dye for poison, the
Duke of Clarence was offended, and spoke in such sort as the King, taking his
words for threats of some great trouble, caused him to die in prison. George
Duke of Clarence, brother to the King of England, made choice to dye in a But
of Malme^cy, to die with some content, which an (...) disolution of the soul
is wont to cause, as Seneca says: or to make himself drunk, and to free
himself from the horror end feeling of death: Drusus meaning to dye of hunger
would not cate any thing in nine days but the flocks of his bed. Tacit. l. 6.
Annal.
An act notwithstanding which did afflict him with such grief and repentance,
as remembering the great precipitation of his judgment, procured by his
brothers enemies, when as any came to sue for a pardon, for any one that was
condemned to dye, Repentance does, undoubtedly, follow cruel and rash actions:
Caracalla having put his brother Get^ to death, he did never think of him, or
look upon his stature but he wept. He caused Loetus who had persuaded him to
this paracide, to be imprisoned, and did all kinds of honor unto his
Funeral. Funus Gerae accuratius fuisse dicitur, quam eius qui a fratre
videretur occisus. Getas Funeral was performed with more then his that seemed
to be murdered by his brother. AELIVS SPARTIANVS.
he always said: My poor brother had not any to sue for him, He left two
children, Margaret who was married to Richard Poole, and Edward whom the King
made Earl of Warwick.

All the crosses which Edward had suffered did not so much afflict him, as he
received contentment at his return from the wars of France, for the peace
which he had brought back, and the Treaty of marriage which he had made of
his daughter with the Dauphin of France, and the pension of fifty thousand
Crowns: So when he saw the Dauphin married unto the Lady Margaret of Austria,
he was so grieved as he resolved to return into France to revenge this
injury: Choler and grief were so violent in his soul, as he dyed, the tenth
of April, at Westminster, whereas the Parliament was assembled to resolve upon
the war of France. His body was carried to the Castle of Windsor, and
interred in S. Georges Chapel: He had ten children by Elizabeth his wife,
and left Edward Prince of Wales, and Richard Duke of York living.

All his life he had been liberal, and dyed coue^ous: He recommended his
wife, His brother murders his children.
children, and Realm to Richard Duke of Gloucester, who to have the Crown, put
Edward, who had reigned but two months, and Richard, his Nephews, to death.
Edward had a base son called Arthur, his daughters were married to diverse
Princes, Brigit the last was a religious woman.
The daughters were declared Bastards, by the Parliament, for that a Bishop
affirmed that he had married Edward unto a Lady of England before that he was
married to the Lady Elizabeth Rivers: He caused himself to be Crowned King
in July following.

The parricide of his two Nephews, caused so great scandal and horror in all
the orders of the Realm, and the mother, who had fled into the Sanctuary at
Westminster, This trust, and recommendation of such precious Jewels, bound the
Duke of Gloucester to have a care of them. IS DIGERDES King of Persia, seeing
that ARCADIVS the Emperor his enemy, had recommended his some THEODOSIUS unto
him, found himself bound to preserve his Estates, and laying aside all
passions of precedent hatred, he proclaimed war against any one that should
molest his pupil.
having foreseen the rage of this Tiger, filled the City of London with very
pitiful and strange complaints, as every man found this greedy and unsatiate
desire to reign, inhumane and tyrannous, having forced him brutishly to tear
in peecees the Laws of Nature, and to pollute his hands with his own blood.
Churches are Sanctuaries, but they give no safety but to Innocents, and to them
that are wrongfully (...). The Temples of the Ancient were a Sanctuary to three
sorts of men, to Offenders, to Slaves, and to Debtors.


God did raise up the Earl of Richmond, Earl of Richmond prisoner to the Duke
of Brittany.
who was prisoner to the Duke of Britain, all good men desired it, to revenge
the innocent blood, and this Tyrant, foreseeing that there was nothing to be
feared but from that part, sent Thomas Hutton to the Duke of Brittany to deal
with him that he might not be set at liberty, Ambition of reign is not
restrained neither by the respect of piety, nor the motions of Nature. Cupido
regni fratre and fillia potior. The desire of reign is deerer then brother or
daughter. Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
seeking the friendship of King Lewis, who would not make any answers unto his
Letters, nor hear his Ambassadors, calling him most inhumane, cruel, and
wicked, for the most horrible and execrable murder of his Nephews.

The King assisted the Earl of Richmond, who being set at liberty by the Duke
of Brittany, past into England with three thousand Normanes, the scumme (as
Phillip de Commines says) of the whole Province, and was presently fortified,
by all them that were offended for the death of their lawful Prince, Earl of
Richmond King of England.
giving him battle within few days after his arrival, in the which this
Tyrant was slain, and the Earl of Richmond acknowledged for King.

In all these great reuolutions we must confess a Divine Justice, which does
early or late revenge iniquities, pursuing them even in the generations of
children, who are punished for their forefathers offenses: Henry the fourth,
caused Richard the second to dye in prison, Henry the sixth, his Grandchild,
dyed a prisoner to King Edward the fourth, Richard Duke of Gloucester murders
Edwards children, and Richard is slain by Henry Earl of Richmond the seventh
of that name. Who can deny* but there is an Eternal Justice in all this, When
(...) ^ wicked man commits any villainy, he is presently a prisoner to GODS
Justice, and like a fish he is taken with the bait of pleasure and delight
which he has taken in doing it.
which does punish the wicked by themselves, and makes use of them to scourge
others, and it deferres public punishment for a time, the secret does never
abandon the crime, and is a perpetual thorn in the offenders soul.

Francis Phoebus, son to Gaston Earl of Foix, dyed also, having succeeded to
Elenor of Arragon his grandmother, Death of Francis Phoebus King of Navarre.
he being but twelve years old, and reigned under the government of his
mother. The Lady Magdaline of France during her sons minority carried this
Title: Magdaline, Daughter and Sister to the Kings of France, Princess of
Viana, Gouernesse to our most dear, and wel-beloued son, Francis Phoebus, by
the Grace of GOD King of Navarre.
The Realm of Navarre was so divided, as it had need of a Prince of more
great respect and far better experience, and yet for that he was near
allied to the Kings of France and Castile, the most factious were quiet, and
took the oath of Allegiance, when as he entered with incredible applause into
the Town of Pampelone, the tenth of December, in the year, one thousand four
hundred four score and two.

Presently after his Coronation, Ferdinand King of Castile offered him Ioane
his second daughter in marriage: The Queen his mother did still protest that
her will did wholly depend upon King Lewis the eleventh her brother: The
History of Spain says that he had a desire to marry her to D. Ioane, a Nun at
Coimbra, to the end he might renew the pretensions which she had to the
Realm of Castile, as daughter to Henry the fourth; and by this means, he did
always assure himself of the County of Rousillon. But when as his mother had
brought him back into Bearne, he was poisoned at Pau, playing on a Flute. He
dyed with this grief that his life nor death did not profit any man, As no
man should desire to live to himself alone, so that death is honorable which
is employed for the public: Turpe est sibi soli vivere and mori. Plut.
there being nothing that does more trouble a great spirit then when he lives
and dies not for himself. Dying he spoke these holy words, which the mouth of
the Son of God pronounced a little before his death: My Kingdom is not of
this world: If he had lived, he was borne to be a great Prince, but the world
(to speak truly) is so small a matter, as the Philosopher had reason to mock
at Alexander, who had carried the Title of Great. Alexander would be instructed
in Geometry, to learn the greatness of the earth, He found that the Title of
Great, which he carried, was false, considering: Qua^ pusilla terra esset, ex
qua minimum occupauerat: Quis enim esse magnus in pusillo potest* How little
the earth was whereof he held the least part, who can be great in a small
thing. Sen.


The Lady Catherine his sister succeeded him, Katherine of Foix, Queen of
Navarre.
and was married to John of Albret; John of Foix, Vicount of Narbona her Uncle,
did quarrel with her for the Earledomes of Foix and Bearn, saying that these
lands, lying within the Realm of France, whereas women did not succeed,
Queen Katherine could not pretend any thing, and did by force seize upon
Maseres and Monthaut, and besieged Pamiers, but could not take it. Queen
Katherine advertised King Lewis the eleventh with this invasion, France does
furnish many examples against the Vicount of Foix, to show that the daughters,
being nearest of blood, did exclude the Males that were farther off.
who sent Commissioners into the Country to forbid the Vicount of Narbona to
proceed by way of fact, upon pain of loosing his right.

This controversy was of such importance as he himself would be judge thereof,
Controversy for the lands of Foix, Bern, and Bigorre.
and after him Charles the eighth was Arbitrator: In the end they must pass by
the censure of the Court Parliament of Paris: John of Foix Vicount of Narbona,
and after his decease, the Kings Attorney General, as Tutor and Gardien to
Gaston of Foix his son, said against Katherine of Foix, that daughters being
incapable of dignites, by reason of their sex, might not succeed in the
Realm, King Charles the eighth, sought to make an agreement betwixt the
parties, and therefore committed it to the Cardinal of Foix, and Monsieur
D'Alby, but seeing they could not agree, he sent them to the Court Parliament,
All which proceedings in writing were imparted unto me by Master Galland, one
of the most famous Advocates of the Parliament.
Dutchies, or Counties, but only the Males, and that they might not dispose
thereof by Testament. When as they say that women are incapable of dignities,
it is to be understood of charges, which consist in Functions and Offices. A
Woman cannot be a Consul, a President, or a Chancellor; but when the dignity
is patrimoniall, and annexed to the Fee, such a dignity may belong unto a
woman, as well as the jurisdiction.


The King caused a Consultation to be made of all the learned Lawyers of his
Realm, to know what his Neeces right was. They found that it depended upon
this Maxim; That the Nephew, or Grandchild represents his Father and
Grandfather in the right of Primogeniture, or first borne. That this right is
transferred to the children of the elder, although he die before the Father,
and holds the place of lawful heir.

They did also consider the custom, and common observation of this Realm,
where the eldest son dying, and leaving a son, he succeedes the
Grandfather, as his Father should have done: The Grandfathers second-sonne
being excluded from all pretention: for the Nephew excludes the Uncle, and
representation has place in this Realm, in Fees which are not diuisible.

In the time of King Charles the fifth, his Majesty sitting with the Peers of
France in his Court of Parliament, Ioane of Brittany, married to Charles of
Blois, Charles of Blois, and the Lady Ioane of Britain his wife, did enjoy
this Duchy five and twenty years, or thereabouts, until that John of Montford
being succored by the Forces of England, slew Charles of Blois in battle, and
expelled his wife out of the Duchy.
was declared heir to the Duchy of Brittany, as representing her Father,
against John, Earl of Montfort, her Uncle. She was daughter to the Duke of
Brittanies second brother, and the Earl of Montfort was the third brother.
Allain, Lord of Albret, as son unto the eldest, Vicount of Tartas, who was
deceased, succeeded his Grandfather in the Lands of Albret, and excluded from
the succession the Lord of Sancte Bazille his uncle, and the Lord of Oruall,
his Grandfathers younger brother. In the house of Albret there are many
Earledomes: The Earldom of Gaure, the Earldom of Dreux, the Earldome of
Peyragore, and many Vicounties and Baronies. They held that house in the time
of King Lewis the eleventh, to have six thousand pound sterling of yearly
rent.


King Philip, in the year 1314. did judge the suite betwixt Maud, daughter to
the Earl of Artois, and Robert of Artois her Uncle; and by his judgment it
was decreed, that the daughter should succeed, as the nearest unto her father.
Lewis, Earl of Flanders, had but one daughter, the richest heir of
Chrstendome, the which succeeded her father in the Earldom of Flanders,
excluding the Duke of Brabant her Uncle, and was married to Philip of France,
son to King John, and first Duke of Bourgondy, The Treaty of Marriage betwixt
the Duke of Bourgondy, and Margaret, Princess of Flanders, was made the
twelfth of April, one thousand three hundred sixty nine.
the Duchy of Guienne, which comprehends all Gasconie, as well that which is
of the jurisdiction of Tolouse, as of Bourdeaux, and more, was carried to the
Crown of England, by the marriage of the daughter of William Duke of Guienne,
with Henry King of England. Elenor, the only daughter to William, Duke of
Guienne, and Earl of Poitiers, was married to Lewis, King of France; and
being put away by him, she married again to HENRY, son to the King of
England, and Duke of Normandy.


Henry, King of Nauare, and Earl of Champagne, left one daughter, who was
married to K. Philip the Fair, and succeeded her Father in the Earldom of
Champagne. The last Earl of Poictou The County of Poictou, and the Town of
Poitiers were united to the Crown by King Charles the seventh, in the year
1436.
had one daughter named Margaret, who was married to the eldest son of
France, and succeeded her Father, notwithstanding that the Earl of Saint
Valier, her Uncle, was then living.

Raymond, the fifteenth and last Earl of Tolousa, dying without Issue Male,
Ioane his only daughter succeeded him, and was married to Alphonso of France,
brother to the King Saint Lewis. The marriage of Alphonso of France, and Ioane,
Coumtesse of To^ouse, was treated in the year 1228.
Matthew, Earl of Foix, dying without children in the year 1398. his sister,
surnamed Isabel, succeeded him, and was married to Archambaut of Grailly. Lewis
of Luxemburge, Earl of St. Paul, had many children, but his eldest sons
daughter, who was married to to the Earl of Vandosme, was sole heir of all
his lands, as representing her Father, who was the eldest. They hold that the
Countess of Vendosme did not succeed in the Earldom of Saint Paul by right
of succession, but by a Treaty of peace, and that her Uncles were all incapable
of this sucession, for that the Lands of Lewis of Luxemburg her father, had
been confiscate.


The Earl of Lauragais left but one daughter, who succeeded in the Earldom,
whereof she made donation to the French King.

The Earl of Castres had one daughter, who was married to a younger son of
the house of Bourbon, Earl of March, who after her fathers decease, succeeded
in the Earledomes of Castres, and Vandosme, and excluded them of Montfort, who
were her Uncles, from the succession. Of this marriage were borne two sons,
James of Bourbon the elder, who was Earl of March, and of Castres: and the
younger who was Earl of Vandosme. James of Bourbon married Beatrix of Navarre:
James of Bourbon, Earl of March, married with Beatrix, daughter to Charles
the second, King of N^uarre, the fifteenth of August, one thousand four
hundred and five.
Elenor their only daughter, was married to Bernard, Earl of Armaignac and
Perdiac, who after her fathers death succeeded as well in the Earldom of
March, as of Castres, and excluded the Earl of Vandosme from the succession.
True it is, that these Earledomes have remained in the house of Bourbon by
transaction. The King made Donation of the Earldom of March, to Monsieur de
Bourbon, and his wife: The Duke of Nemours children being restored to their
Lands, there was a suit to overthrow this Donation, and then an Accord was
made, by the which the Earldom of March remained to the house of Vendosme
and Bourbon, the Duke of Nemours children being otherwise recompensed.


William, Vicount and Lord of Mountpellier, although he had many kinsmen of
his name, had no other heir but his daughter Mary, wife to Peter, King of
Arragon. Peronelle, Du Tillet says, that this Peronella of Bigorre, had five
husbands: 1. Gaston of Bearne. 2. Ninion Sance, Earl of Sardaine. 3. Guy of
Montford. 4. Rao^l Tescu. 5. Boson of Mathas.
daughter to the Earl of Bigorre, succeeded her father in the Earldom of
Bigorre, in the year, one thousand two hundred sixty four, and was married to
Boson of Mathas, Vicount of Marsan and Gabardan. Of this marriage issued D.
Mathea, married to Gaston, Prince of Bearne, who succeeding her father and
mother, brought unto the principality of Bearne, those goodly pieces of
Bigorre, Marsan, and Gabardan.

In like manner by the daughter of Gaston, Prince of Bearne, named Margaret,
married to Roger Bernard, Earl of Foix, all that is come unto the house of
Foix. Examples which serve to confirm this general custom observed within
the Realm: That in all Dutchies, Counties, Vicounties, Baronies, Lands and
Signiories, the daughters being nearest in degree have succeeded, and been
preferred before the Males. So as if King Lewis the eleventh had lived, he
would have decided this controversy, in giving sentence for the Niece against
the Uncle: His judgment had been grounded, first upon the right of the first
borne, and representation: secondly, upon the conuentions of marriage betwixt
Gaston of Foix, and the Lady Magdalen of France, making express mention, that
the children which should be borne, should succeed in all the lands of Foix
and Bigorre, then held by Gaston of Foix, her father. Thirdly, upon the ancient
customs and obseruances of the Realm. Fourthly, upon the testament and last
will of the Earl of Foix.

Alphonso of Portugal died also at the same time: Death of Alphonso, K. of
Portugal.
he had his share in the miseries of Kings, he entered a child into the
Realm, Such as God gives the prince, such must the people receive him; but the
wisest of all Kings says, Unhappy is that Realm which is commanded by a
child. Metius Falconius Nicomachus approving the Election which the Senate had
made of Tacitus, being old and broken, used these words: Dij auertant
principes pueros and pattes patriae dici impuberes and quibus ad subscribendum
magistri literatij manus teneant quos ad Consulatus dandos dulcia and circuli
and quaecunque puerilis voluptas invitet. Quae malum ratio est habere
Imperatorem qui samam curare non nouerit, qui quid sit Respub. nesciat,
nutritorem time at, respiciat ad nutricem manum, magistralium ictibus,
terrorique subiaceat, faciat eos Consules, Duces, Iudices, quorum vitas,
merita, aetates, familias et gesta non nouerit. God forbid the Princes and
Fathers of the Country should be termed children* whose hands their masters
must hold when they subscribe, and who are drawn to give Offices with childish
delights: What a misery is it to have an Emperor which knows not how to
maintain his fame* nor what a Commonweal is, who fears his Tutor and is
subject to stripes and terror, and shall make them Consuls, Dukes, and Judges,
whose lives, merits, ages, families and actions he does not know.
which was ill for himself, and worse for his subjects. His mother Elenor,
sister to John the second, King of Arragon, was deprived by the Estates, of the
Regency which her Father had left her: Peter, Duke of Coimbra, caused her to
be poisoned. Alphonso took Arms to revenge his mothers death: Peter was
slain before Lisbone with a poisoned Arrow. They would have married Alphonso
to Ioane, the supposed daughter of Henry the fourth, King of Castille: this
Tragedy has been formerly played. He died at Sinta, being nine and forty
years old, in the year one thousand four hundred, eighty two, and the three
and fortith of his reign, and was interred in the Royal Monastery of the
Battle of the order of preaching Friars.

After the wars betwixt him and the King of Castille, and the unfortunate
voyage which he made into France, he did nothing but languish. He saw himself
forced to pass into France for succors. Fortune could not set him in a more
wretched estate for there is nothing so miserable, as to see a Prince expeld
his Country, and begging. Pity is presently changed into contempt, and the
consideration of that which is honest, does not ouer-sway that which is
profitable. They may well say, that kings are brethren, that one royal blood
calls another, that their interrests are common, that Rome is his mother, the
Senators his fathers, their children his brethren; yet if the aid which he
demands, does not benefit him that gives it, he shall return more discontented
then he came. In great deliberations, profit goes before honesty. Demetrius,
son to Seleucus, having been given in hostage, and bred up from his infancy
at Rome, entreated the Romans to restore him to his Realm, which was held by
the children of Antiochus; and to move them thereunto, he called Rome his
Country and Nurse, the Senators his fathers, and their children his brethren.
But for all this the Senate inclined to that which was most safe and
profitable, they assisted the children of Antiochus, being weak and young,
suspecting much the great courage of Demetrius, who was in the flower of his
age. Polib.


Thus behold three Kings embarked almost at one instant in the ship of Death,
Death of the Duchess of Bourbon.
only God knows the port whereunto they are arrived: he did call at the same
time, the Lady Jane of France, Duchess of Bourbon, to the end that Lewis
should not be grieved to leave the world. The Chronicle calls this Princess,
Most noble, Powerful, Holy, and the example of good livers. She died in the
Castle of Moulins, in May, 1482.

She had labored all her life to entertain love and friendship betwixt the
King her brother, and the Duke of Bourbon her Husband, knowing that the concord
of France, and the greatness of her household, depended thereon, and we may
ascribe unto her, the glory of the peace which was made at Ryon, by the which
the principal firebrarnds of the great fire of the league, were quenched;
Whereupon all they that loved quiet, cast their eyes upon those of this
Princess, and held them the Pleiades of France, whose sweet Influences made
the Oliue-tree of peace to flourish. Princesses, by whose means peace does
flourish, are the Pleiades of Estates, wherein they are allied. Pliny says,
that the Oliue-tree springs under the Influence of the Pleiades. Con^ipiunt
oleae virgiliaru^ exortu haec sydus illaru^ est. Polybius says, that among the
Grecians the Caduce, and among the Barbarians the Olive is a sign of peace and
friendship.


At the same time dyed John of Bourbon, the second of that name, Earl of
Vendosme. Here amazement stays me suddenly, why in all the History of King
Lewis the eleventh, Philip de Commines has never made any mention of that
Nursery of Caesar's and of Alexanders, and of that Royal branch which has
brought forth the greatest King that ever ware Crown or Scepter. He speaks of
four sons of John the second, Duke of Bourbon, of Charles Cardinal of
Bourbon, of Peter, Lord of Beaujeu, of the Bishop of Liege, and makes no
mention of John the second, Earl of Vandosme, who lived under the reign of
Charles 7, and continued unto the end of Lewis 11. we must not wonder if the
Chronicle has forgotten it, it does often follow toys, and leaves most famous
actions. As there are injuries which are repaired by the quality only of them
that do them, The baseness of him that does a wrong, defaceth the fearing of
the injury. Crates having received a blow on the face by Nicodromus, a Man of
base condition, was contented for revenge to set these words upon his wound:
Nicodromus faciebat.
so we see writings of so poor a fashion, as it is indiffrent whether they be
inserted or not.

But how comes it to pass that so diligent, so exact, and so iuditious a
Writer had never cast his eyes upon this house, which had held all them of
France in admiration, and had not spoken of the actions of John the second,
Earl of Vendosme, which were no works of ambition, but of virtue, and had not
glory for their simple object, but the contentment of his own conscience,
desiring rather they should be graven in the memory of good men, then upon the
front of public works.

An Historian that does surpass honor, wrongs the public, and as a
sacrilege does ravish the recompense of virtue, The sweetest fruit of a great
and heroicke action, is to have done it: they are deceived which think to give
any other glory unto virtue, then it self. She cannot find out of her self
any recompense worthy of her self.
and does envy the fruit that may grow thereby. For although that men may be
borne generous, and full of heat for the love of virtue, yet it is needful
that the precepts and Images be often represented unto them, and that the
statues which (...) set up in the Temple of memory, graven with the sciffers of
eternity, should be showed them; yet it is not sufficient to show them adorned
with the Palms and Crowns of their Triumphs; they would have them
represented in such sort as they may seem to breath, speak, and say unto
them: Men's minds are excited to the love of virtue, by the examples of glory
and honor, which adornes the memory of men whom she has made famous: werefore
Polybius says, that they did represent to the youth of Rome, their Images, as
living and breathing, to encourage them to that desire of honor which does
accompany good men. Poly. lib. 6.
You shall be as we are, if you will live as we did.

This labor may have great defects: they are found in the most perfect, A
History should be free from love or hatred.
but they shall rather seem to come from want of Judgment, then of will, the
which I find free, in this kind of writing, from hatred and love, furious
passions which disguise both truth and false-hood. They shall rather reproach me
with ignorance, then with lying, and my writings shall always have more salt
then spleen; with what face shall they appear in this age, so much bound unto
the Kings glorious actions, if they were dishonored as the rest, with so
injurious a forgetfulness of his Predecessors.

John, Earl of Vendosme, great great Grandfather to Henry the fourth, King of
France and Navarre, was son to Lewis, Lord Steward of France, and Governor
of Picardy, son to Lewis, Earl of vendosme, son to John, Earl of March,
son to James, Constable of France, the younger son of Lewis of Clermont,
Duke of Bourbon, eldest son to Robert of France, second son to S. Lewis.
His Grandmother was Katherine, heir to the house of Vendosme, his mother
Ioane of Lauall, daughter to Guy of Lavall, surnamed de Gaure. The Signiory of
Laual was erected to an Earldome by K. Charles the seventh; at the instance of
Lewis of Burbon, Earl of Vandosme, and was the first act of Soueraignety which
he did after his Coronation.


His father dyed in the year of our Lord 1447. and this death happened in a
time so full of troubles, as he was forced to gird his sword unto him, more
for the necessity of common defense, then by reason of his quality, or for
seemelinesse. He past his first Apprentiship in Arms, under the brave
Achilles of France, John of Orleans, Earl of Dunois, and was at the siege of
Rouen, Bourdeaux and Fronsac with John, Earl of Clermont, son of Charles
Duke of Bourbon, and Carles of Bourgondy, Duke of Neuers. He served King
Charles the seventh in all occasions that were offered to restore France; and
to free it from the oppressions of her enemies, and did merit the Title of Most
faithful servant of his Kings will, and an invincible companion of his dangers.

These two qualities which should have purchased him love with his successor,
Loialty of the Earl of Vandosme.
were the cause of his disgrace, wherein he did comfort himself by the
knowledge he had of this Princes humor, who did not love any of his blood, nor
them whom his Father had loved. This was not able to withdraw him from his
duty: for he still preserved the reputation of the ancient fidelity of them of
his house unto the Crown. This branch of Vandosme has that of glorious, that
it has never left their kings, in a manner all the Princes of France were of
the league of the Commonweal; yet John, Earl of Vandosme, would not hearken
to it. When as the Duke of Orleans took Arms against the Lady Anne of France,
he drew unto his party Charles, Earl of Angoulesme, the chief Noblemen of
France; only the house of Vendosme remained with the Kings Gouernesse.


And although that John the second Duke of Bourbon had declared himself of the
league of the Commonweal, for that the King had dispossessed him of the
government of Guienne, from whence he had expelled the English, and had reduced
it under the obedience of the Crown, yet would he not imbark himself in the
same ship; and for that he would not look upon this storm from a safe shore,
he was present at the battle at Montlehery, with Francis and Lewis his
children; one of which was prisoner to the Earl of Charolois. As the example
of the head of his house did not make him revolt, so the feeling of his own
interest did not make him discontented. His father had carried the Staff of
Lord Steward, and his great grandfather the sword of Constable of France. King
Lewis the eleventh disposed of the one and the other in favor of men, as far
inferior in comparison of his merits, as in qualities of his birth; yet he
did not murmr, nor seem disco^tented, considering that it is no more lawful
for the greatest Prince of the blood, then for the least Officer of the Crown
to prescribe a law to the Sovereigns will, to make it yield unto his passions;
and that the elections of Kings, in the distributions of honors, are not
subject to the rules of distributive Justice, which observes a proportion
betwixt recompense and merit. The King of France holding his Crown of God
only, and the ancient Law of the Realm, distributes honors as he pleases. It
is a great violence to force a a mind full of courage, to hate that which he
loves, and to ruin that which he has raised.
In the end this charge of Lord Steward is returned into the house from whence
it went: It did honor others, Charles of Bourbon, Earl of Soissons does honor
it at this day by the great and goodly qualities which heaven adds to the
greatness of his birth: he restored order in the kings house, and revived the
glory of his Majesty's service.

With the same courage that John the second followed the King against his
rebellious subjects, he served him against foreign enemies, He was present at
the great Assembly at Ambois, with all the Princes of the blood, and the chief
Officers of the Crown, to resolve a war against the house of York in
England, and against the duke of Brittanie, where there was a league made for
the defense of the house of La^caster, and Edward, son to King Henry the
sixth, was married to the Earl of Warwicks daughter.
and was employed with the Duke of Bourbon to disperse the storm wherewith
King Edward the fourth threatened France, being come thither not so much to
fight as to receive the triumph which the vanity of his ambition promised him.

The proofs of his service are not verified by those of recompense; and we
may say, that this Prince, being not present at the distributions of the great
honors of the Realm, had no great share in the Kings favors and bounty: We
see him hold his rank at the Coronation, and in the Assembly of the Estates,
but being none of those that were honored with the first colors of the Order
of Saint Michael, he has remained in the rank of those great Spirits, whose
contentment dependes only of themselves. All the Princes of the blood cannot
have all the honors of the Realm. All Planets make not a shadow: the refusal
of a dignity augments the glory of him that has well deserved it, and the
concession does not make him famous that is unworthy. They ordained statues for
them that had made war in Affricke against Tacfarinates, though they did not
va^quish him. Dolabella went thither, defeated him, and slew him; he demanded
the same honors which had been given to others, which Tiberius refused, and
Taci^us thereupon said, Sed neque; Blesus illustrior and huic negatus honor
gloria^ intendis.


He had six daughters, Ioane of Bourbon, married to John the second, Duke of
Bourbon: Catherine, married to Gilbert of Chabannes: Ioane, wife to Lewis of
Ioyeuse: Charlotte, married to Engelbert of Cleues; Earl of Neuers: Rene,
Abbess of Paintes, and then of Fonteuerard, and Isabell, Abbess of Caen, and
two sons, Lewis Earl of Vendosme, Lewis of Burbon ha^ 2 sons, John Earl of
Vendosme, and Lewis of Rochesur you head of the house of Montpensier.
who married Mary of Luxemburg, and Charles his eldest son, the first Duke of
Vendosme, married Frances of Alencon, and had by her seven sons, and six
daughters: the second of his sons was Anthony, who married Ioane of Albret,
Queen of Navarre, and heir of the house of Foix, Albret, Bearn, and Armagnac.
Of their marriage was borne Henry the fourth, king of France and Navarre: their
third son was Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, father to Henry, Prince of
Conde, to Henry Prince of Conty, to the Cardinal of Vendosme, and to Charles,
Earl of Soissons, and Grand-fahter to Henry, Prince of Conde, first Prince of
the blood. The younger son of John the 2d Earl of Vendosme, was Lewis, head
of the branch of Montpensier, and of Roche-sur-yon, whom death has cut off
from this great tree. There remains one daughter, promised to the Duke of
Orleans, the Kings second son.

Death freed the Earl of Vendosme from the cares which a longer life had
augmented by the iealousies and distrusts which the King conceived of all the
Princes of his blood, and which kept him continually in the diverse agitations
of hatred and fear. It is impossible but that he who by his extreme rigors
and seuerities has offended many, should fear always: he cannot trust his
subjects as his Children, seeing he has not entreated them as a Father, Love
is a strong guard of a Princes person. Agesilaus said, that he would live safe
without gardes, if he commanded his Subjects as a good father does his
children. He must be beloved of his subjects, and feared of strangers. Amorem
apud populares, me^^ apud hosts quaerat. Tacit.
he has his share of the fear which he has made common. Wheresoever he
casts his eyes, he sees marks of his severity; so he finds not any one
but puts him in fear: he has fear of his Children, fear before him, and
fear behind: and as in his life he had always desired more to be feared then
loved, so in the end he found himself composed of the same humor, fearing more
then he loved.

Hitherto it seems he did not trust any man but Peter of Bourbon, Lord of
Beaujeu, his son-in-law, in whom he had so great a confidence, as he referred
unto him all the care of his affairs, when as the pleasure of hunting
entertained him in the Forests, not for some few days, but whole months. The
Author of the Annals of the house of Bourbon, who has seen the originals of
many great treaties, speaks after this manner: This Peter of Bourbon, Lord of
Beaujeu was in such favor with the king, as his Majesty desiring to retire
himself from affairs, kept commonly at Chamois and places thereabout, a
Country, at that time, full of wood, and wild beasts, causing the said Lord
Peter of Bourbon, his son-in-law, to remain at Montereau-faut-yonne, to be
chief of the Council, to whom all men repaired for their dispatches which had
any business in Court. A Prince must be feared and loved, but for that it is
difficult to have these two things concur together, it were better and more
safe to be feared, for that Princes which have grounded themselves upon the
love of the people, have found, that there is nothing more inconstant, and men
do sooner offend him that makes himself to be loved, then he that is feared,
yet must they not in seeking to be feared, make themselves odious.
The King loved the woods and hunting to free himself from cares, reposing all
upon the said Lord of Beaujeu. His Majesty also said, That he did hate deadly
them of Bourgondy, Aniou, Alencon, and the Dukes of Brittanie for their pride.

And contrariwise, that he loved Charles of Artois, Earl of Eu, for that he
retained nothing of the arrogance of his predecessors, and them of Bourbon
more for their mildness and humility. It is not the first testimony which the
kings of France have given of the mildness, wisdom and moderation of the
Princes of the house of Bourbon. When as King Charles the ^s^h, passed from
Au^gaon, (where he had seen Pope Clement the sixth) i^to La^gueclock to
settle an order for the coplaints of the Country against the oppressions which
they had suffered under the government of the Duke of Berrie his uncle he
commanded the Dukes of Berrie and Burgondy to retire, and would not have any
other prince ne^re unto his presence, but Lewis, duke of Bourbon, his uncle by
the mothers side, and John of Burbon Earl of March and of V endosme whom he
loved infinit^y, giving a reason hereof openly, That he loved those Princes,
for that they had never served any other master, and had never had any
ambition nor design against the state, neither had they ever given him any
occasion to complain of them.
This virtue was never found in a great spirit, but it did purchase power and
affection with others. Pride is barren, humility fructifieth: a vine spreading
upon the earth bears excellent fruit, the high and straightest Cypres-trees
are unfruitful.

He was not so bountiful of his favors to the Lord of Beaujeu, but he was
as sparing to the Duke of Bourbon his brother: he had an implacable hatred
against John, Duke of Bourbon, son to Charles, the Achilles of France. This
hatred was nourished with a fresh apprehension, for that this Prince lamenting
the disorders of the State, the miseries and oppressions of the people, and the
bad usage which Charles, Duke of Berrie suffered, had laid the first
foundations of the league, had left it by the Treaty of Ryon, and re-entred
again into it upon despite, for that during this Treaty, the Duke of Millan,
by the Kings commandment, had ouer-run and ruined his Country of Beaujolois
and Forest.

But for that he was a Prince of great power, great courage, and great credit
in the heart of all France: he would not euaporate this fire of revenge and
indignation which he had against them, and considered rather what he might
do, then what he should do. And the Duke, who was acquainted with the
disposition of this King, knew well, that all Princes write offenses done them
in brass, and the service which they receive, upon sand; wherefore he remained
long in his Duchy of Bourbonois, and would not come to Court.

The King, whose chief care was to weaken his enemies, and to divide them,
gave him the government of Languedoc, dissembling the remembrance of things
past. Upon this assurance the Duke of Bourbon showed that he did not breathe
any thing, but the Kings service; neither had he any greater content, then to
yield him proofs equal to his affection: and therefore he followed him to
Peronne, and we must believe that without him in this voyage he had given his
Enemies more courage to execute those dangerous councels, having resolved to
stay him: For besides the respects of Alliance, the Duke of Bourgondy,
respected this Prince, who had the two principal parts necessary in great
Captains, Valor and good Fortune. The two qualities necessary in the General
of an Army are, Valor and good fortune. Duo sunt quae Claros Duces faciunt,
summa virtus, summa foelicitas. Lat. Pac. Paneg.


We have formerly seen, that the Constable of Saint Pol did what he could to
draw him to the Duke of Bourgondies party, Fidelity of the Duke of Burbon
and to make him join with the King of Englands forces; and that this brave
Prince made it known, that nothing was able to shake his loialty, no not if he
should be reduced to the misery of Job, An extreme oppression is no lawful
cause to arm against the Prince, rebels seek pretexes and coulors to shadow
their discontents, but good subjects suffer with patience.
although that the sincery of his actions could never wipe away the blemish
which distrust had put in this Princes eyes, yet would he not trouble the
content which he had received by the testimony which his conscience gave to
fidelity and virtue. The King also foreseeing that if his enemies were
fortefied, with his favor and forces, he should be much troubled, he
coniured him to come unto him. The Duke excused himself upon a resolution
which he had taken to live quietly in his house, the which no man could envy
him, having purchased it with incomparable toils and crosses. He besought the
King to suffer him to rest in the port of this tranquillity after so many
storms, and to content himself with the service which the other Princes of
his house, and his Bastard the Admiral did him.

The King entreated and coniured him to come, and to reap the same fruits in
Picardy which he had sometimes received in Guienne, The honor of the glorious
victory of Fromigny is given to John the second Duke of Bourbon, who then took
the title of Earl of Clermont, for he charged the English with such fury, as
with the loss of ten men only, he defeated five thousand English, and
took 1400. prisoners.
to the shame and confusion of the English, sending the Bishop of Mande unto
him to deliver his requests, and recommendations more confidently, and to
assure him that the occasion was not less glorious then at Fromigny.

The Duke being loath to fail France in so great an occasion, and remembering
that his predecessors had not desired a more glorious grave then to die upon a
field of battle covered with the blood of their enemies, The Princes of the
house of Bourbon who have dyed for the service of the Crown, are Peter of
Bourbon, slain the 19. of September 1356. at the battle of Poicters, James
and Peter his son at the Battle of Brignay near unto Lion: Lewis at the
Battle of Agincourt 1415. Francis at the battle of Saint Bridget on holy
Cross day in September 1525. John at the battle of Saint Laurence, 1557. and
Anthony at the siege of Roan, 1562.
and to free the King from all conceit, that he had a will to give ear unto
the Constable, who did solicit him with all vehemence, he delivered the
Constables letters into the Bishops hands, protesting that he would never
carry Arms against the Kings service. The effects did not differ from his
words; for seeing the Duke of Bourgundies troops approach to enter the
Country, he went to horse and put them to rout: The Earl of Conches was slain
there, the Earl of Rousillon Marshall of Bourgundy was taken prisoner there,
with the Earl of Dammartins son, and the Signiors of Longy de Lisle, Digoin,
Ruygny, Chaligny, and the two sons of the Signior of Viteaux, one of which
was Earl of Ioygny: Being then assured of the descent of the English, and that
they had passed the Sea, he came unto the King with six hundred horse, and
commanded part of his Army which was near unto Beauuais. Matters being reduced
to those terms that the King desired, and the King of England having repassed
the Sea, he retired himself to Moulins to perform the last duties to his
mother, The Lady Agnes of Bourgundy dyed in December 1476. She was wife to
Charles Duke of Bourbon, and mother to John the second of that name, Duke of
Bourbon, to Charles, Cardinal and Archbishop of Lion, Peter Lord of Beaujeu,
Lewis Bishop of Liege, and James who dyed at Bruges, and to the Lady Ioane of
Bourbon, married to the Lord of Arlay, Prince of Orange, and Margaret of
Bourbon, wife to Phillip Earl of Bresse.
and from that time resigned his aboade at Court unto his brethren.

After the Duke of Bourgundies death, he would not be an actor in the war
which the King began against his daughter, and with a discourse free from all
flattery, a vice unworthy of a great courage) A great courage speaks fr^ely,
but without btterner or slander: Fattery is the mark of servitude; and
slander death falsely vs^rpe that of liberty. Adulationi^oedum crimen
seruitutis, malignitati falsa specie^ libertatis in est. Tacit. Hist. Lib. 1.
he did not dissemble his opinion, saying; that the King should have given it
a better and a more reasonable Title, then a simple desire to join the Low
Countries to his Crown, this so free and true a judgment did much offend the
King, who from that time resolved to let the Duke of Bourbon know that this
last offense had renewed the feeling of the first: He caused secret
informations to be made against him, yet doubting his courage and reputation,
he would not have the rigor of his justice aim directly at him; He began
with his Officers, and gave commission to John Auin, Counselor in the Court
of Parliament, and to John Doyac, to inform against him, thinking that to free
themselves from trouble they should be forced to engage their Lord, Claude of
Seyssiell says, that King Lewis the eleventh sent unto ^he Duke of Bourbon
some of his ministers, men of base condition, to do him some intolerable
wrongs, under color of Justice, thinking for the great spirit which he knew
to be in him, to provoke him to offer some violence, or to make resistance, but
the Duke knowing to what end all was done, endured it with patience, and
escaped by sufferance and dissembling.
they decreed a personal adiournement against his Chancellor, his Atturny,
the Captain of his Guard and many others, who appeared with more confidence to
defend themselves, then slander had assurance to accuse them; upon their
answer the Commissioners knew not what to say, and the Court of Parliamen,
which knew well that it was a practice to trouble the Duke of Bourbon, whose
probity and integrity (two rare qualities in that age) had purchased him the
surname of Good, and the affections of all the people, enlarged them: The
Chronicle says, that this proceeding was against God and Reason.

It was a very sencible grief unto him to see his loyalty called in question,
and his services contemned. But he considered all these occurrents with an
open eye, and a resolute brow, with the a ^uantages which a good conscience
gave him, and did judge thereof with a settled spirit, lamenting the bad
counsel which entertained the King in his great rigours in an age which was
not fit for it. Seuertty is not good in a Prince whose age is declining, It is
needful to purchase love, Galba knew it well.
Some other would not have forborne tears for so peircing a grief, he would
have lost his sleep, and his body should have found no other rest but that
which disquietnesse brings by the agition of the mind; but afflictions which
assail good men do them no other harm but burn the bonds which hinder them
to lift their hands, with their hearts, up to heaven. They bless the name of
God in the midst of flames, Imprisonment does not deprive him, which suffers
for justice, of the sweetness of a profound sleep: His rest is so sound as
the Angel of the Lord which comes to deliver him, must awake him.

It is now time that Lewis go the way which these great Kings have traced unto
him. There wants nothing but this piece to the triumphant Chariot of death,
and he could not desire better company then of these three Kings his near
kinsmen, who were there already, Having passed through all the charges of life,
we must not refuse that of death: Seneca said to him that was loath to leave
the charges and offices which he had exercised in his life time. Quid tu nescis
v^um esse ex vitae officijs and mori? Do thou not know that to die is also
one of the duties of life. Sen. Epist. 77.
he had passed by all the offices of life, there remained nothing but the last:
but it is the most difficult, and would be less if he had thought on it in
time; if going by the way of life, he had thought of the lodging of death,
those fears which hold him in worse estate then death it self, should be
dispersed. Accidents foreseen a far off, considered without amazement, and
attended with resolution, do not trouble the mind like unto those which
surprise it: His thoughts were engaged in so many mortal and perishable
things, as he had small care of Immortal, and yet these went before him and
attended on him, and the others followed after him and abandoned him: He has
busyed himself to gather up Attlantas Apples, and has so much the more
hindered the fruit and prise of his course; In the way of health he that
stays, retires; and he that retires loses himself and goes astray. There
are three sorts of men whom God loves not, they that stay, they that turn
back, and they that wander: We must give courage to the first, call on the
second, and direct the others.

Lewis found himself to be in so difficult a passage as he had need to be
encouraged, Lewis falls into new apprehensions of death.
supported and directed, It is a sweet consolation to a Princes mind among
the trances and fears which are found in the passage of life and death, when
he has not to do with any but himself, that all his enterprises are ended,
and that he may say, I die content.
he could not but murmurre against the Law of Nature which did not suffer him
to glut himself with the pleasures of life: But to have content of the rest at
the point of death, he must make provision thereof throughout the whole course
of his life: That word, I dye content, is not always found in the mouth, nor
proceeds not from the heart of Princes, who have had so much pain to content
themselves, and in whose lives, as in those of other men, we find, Vanity,
weakness, inconstancy, and misery: The great oppositions which Lewis makes
against the decree of death, show that he is not yet content with the fruits of
life: He complains that he has discovered the Port, and desires to thrust
himself again into the violent waves of the world; He thought that a little
more life would have made him reap the fruits of so many designs which he
had sown in diverse places, and did grieve that death would not suffer him to
see that ended which he had begun.

Yet it is a very remarkable thing that before his death he saw all things new
or renewed in all other Kingdoms of Europe, as if the eternal providence of
God, had not left him in the world, but to consider these great changes which
did amaze England, Arragon, Navarre and Scotland. And although they were things
far from his sight, yet could he not but be passionate, and inform himself
as interressed in all things: His curiosity notwithstanding was staid by the
respects of his Religion, Offers of Bajazeth to the King.
in contemning the offers of friendship which Bajazeth made unto him, who sent
him a list of all the Relics which his father had found at the taking of
Constantinople, and of the Holy Land, promising to deliver them unto him; so as
he would assure him of Zizimi his brother, who had yielded himself to the
Knights of Rhodes. This piece is worthy to be related: Zizimi reuolts against
Bajazeth.
Mahomet left two sons, Bajazeth Bajazeth was the elder, and Zizimi the
younger, who said that he was the Emperors son, for that he was borne during
the reign of Mahomet, and Bajazeth before.
the elder, surnamed by the Turks Ildrimy, that is to say, Lightning, he
commanded in Paphlagonia toward the black or Euxin Sea, John called Zizimi,
that is to say, Love, was at Conio a city in Licaonia, the Ianisaries were
divided which of the two should succeed, the first was held effeminate and
dissolute, the other led a more manlike and martial life: The controversy was
followed by a great sedition, and the great Turks Treasury was spoiled; many
desiring that the Scepter should be given to him that had the best sword. The
Law of Nations has always preferred the ^lder before the younger, what
advantage of force or valor soever he has, and ^lthough that Pirrhus had
ordained that which of his children had the sharpest sword should succeed him.
Yet notwithstanding the eldest was less valiant and carried it.
The faction of Bajazeth, by the wisdom of Acmet Basha, remained victorious,
and Zizimi was forced to retire himself into Asia the less, from whence he
passed to Jerusalem and then to the great Caire, toward the Souldan of Egypt.

The great Caraman hearing of the division which was betwixt these two
brethren, held it a fit occasion to be embraced, to recover the Realm of
Cilicia which Mahomet had taken from him, whereupon he inuites and solicites
Zizimi by letters and Ambassadors to join with him. They make an Army, and
present themselves near unto Mount Taurus to give Battle unto Bajazeth:
Zizimi considering the inequality of their forces (for the Army of Bajazeth
consisted of two hundred thousand men) and that if he fell into his brothers
hands, he would put him cruelly to death, he thought there was no other
retreat for him but to the Christians. In any sencible grief, or when any
execrable thing was spoken, the Jews and Mahometans, rent there garments. Among
the acts of choler and fury of Maximin, observed by Capitolinus are these:
Incurrere in parietes, vestem cindere gladium arripere quasi omnes posset
occidere. To run against the walls, to cut his garments, and to draw his sword
as if he would kill all men.
This was not without doing great violence to his conscience, breaking his
habits in sign of breach of his heart, in such resolution, for he was a great
obseruer of his religion, and so jealous, as he fell into fury when he saw a
Turk drunk: He drank water with sugar, and sometimes wine, so as it were
mingled with spices and other liquors, saying, that this mixture did alter it,
in such sort, as it was no more wine. There is not any Law whereas humane
policy does not find some exceptions.

By the advice therefore of Caraman, he left his wife and children with the
Sultan of Egypt, and resolved to seek his fortune and succors among the
Christians, and to retire himself to Rhodes, having written this letter to
Bajazeth.

Zizimi King, to Bajazeth his most cruel brother.
DEmanding of thee that which was just and honest, Bajazeth receiving this
letter and having read it, remained two days retired, and would not be seen,
showing a wonderful grief, that his brother had retired to the Christians,
especially to the Knights of Rhodes, the greatest enemies he had in
Christendom.
thou a breaker of all Divine, Letter of Zizimi to Bajazeth.
and Humane Laws, and a contemner of Mahomet, does force thy brother to fly
unto the Christian name, and to them in particular, which wear a Cross, for
the great hatred they bear unto our powerful House: I am forced to retire my
self unto them to save my life, and thou art the only cause of this
mischief: If thou had granted me that which I desire so justly I had
remained peaceably upon the frontier, and thy brother, a Mahometane as thou
art, and of the same blood, should not be forced to join with Christians, with
whom it would be impossible for him to serve God according to the ceremony of
our Law, Zizimi was always sad and melancholicke, being deprived of the
exercise of his Religion* At the first feast which the great Master made him,
there was Music of all sorts of Instruments; yet he was nothing the merrier.
They brought before him a scullion of the Kitchen, a Turk who was a slave, who
sung, or howled out a song after the Turkish manner whereat he took a
wonderful delight.
I attend from God the revenge of so great a wickedness, and do pray unto our
great Prophet to give thee a punishment equal unto thy crime: If our father
had foreseen thy impiety, I assure my self that with his own sword, or by
poison, he would have taken away thy life. He has exalted the house of the
Ottomans, and it seems, thou take delight to ruin it: But it is impossble
that an Empire which thou have usurped with so great tyranny and cruellty,
should continue long, the building cannot be firm upon so bad a foundation.
The day will come, when to revenge thine impiety, some one will do the like to
thee and thy children, that thou attemptest against me and mine. Adue and look
to the ruin which threatens thee.


Zizimi was well received at Rhodes the 24. of July 1482. the great Master
sent Aluaro of Estuniga Prior of Castile with the Galleys of the Order to
conduct him, Zizimi comes to Rhodes.
he went himself to meet him with all his Knights: Zizimi was amazed to see
himself received with so great honors in a Town which his father would have
ruined. He made it presently known that he had a desire to go into France,
and to cast himself into the Kings Arms, although he were invited by many
other Princes to come unto them. He is conducted into France.
The great Master having thereupon received commandment conducted him thither.

They took Say before him, The Say which is taken to Princes is ancient,
Xenophon in the first of his Cyropadia shows how the Persians did use it.
Tacitus speaks of Halotus, who carved the meat, and took Say to Claudius:
infer epulas and explorare gustu solitus. Athaneus says, that the Romans
called him that had this charge, (...),. and the Grecia^s (...)
as they use to other Princes (an ancient custom and known to the Romans who
had it from the Persians) whereat being amazed, and desiring to let them know
that he was not come thither to distrust, he did eat of every dish that was
set before him, before any Say were taken: Noble and generous minds (said
Zizimi) are not distrustful, I fear not to be poisoned among such brave and
noble Knights, and if I had feared it I would not have trusted my safety in
their hands, I will live among them as a private man, and not as a Prince:
Bajazeth was so fearful least he should be set at liberty, and trouble his
Estates, as he paid yearly 45000 Ducats to the Treasury of the Religion,
35000. for the entertainment of Zizimi, and 10000. to repair the spoils
which Mahomet his father had done them at the siege of Rhodes, There was an
accord made betwixt the great Master and Bajazeth, the 8. of December 1482.
the which is worthy of memory; for that it may be said that the great Turk to
live in peace, and fearing that Zizimi should return into Turkey, was forced
to yield himself tributary to the Knights of Rhodes.
and would that the Ambassadors which carried the first payment should pass
into Auuergne to see in what estate he was.

The great Master wrote to all the Princes of Christendom, that if they did
not contemn this goodly occasion to divide the Empire of the Ottomans, by the
means of Zizimi, they might spoil him of all the Estates he had taken from
the Christians, and by so precious a Gage, bridle all his designs, in such
sort, as Christendom might remain long in peace and tranquillity, for he
should not dare to attempt any thing, whilst his brother were in the Christians
power. Bajazeth feared both at home and abroad, Zizimi had friends, he put all
them to death whom he suspected to favor, and among others Acmath Basha, who
had taken Otranto, Isaac Basha was dismissed from his Offices.
But at this season Italy was full of divisions. The Pope, Venetians, and
Siennois, were in league against Ferdinand King of Naples, the Florentines, and
the Duke of Milan: The Emperor made an excuse that he could not intend it.
Christendom did not reap the profit it might have done, and neglected this
occasion, as the precedent offered by one of the sons of Amurath, who had
made himself a Christian, and maintained that Mahomet was unlawful, and
supposed. (...) Mahomet the son of Amurath, and gave him to Pope Nicholas the
5. who caused him to be instructed in the Christian Religion and in good
learning: after his death he retired himself to the Emperor, and then unto
Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary, and knowing the controu^^^y that was betwixt
Bejazeth and Zzimi, he let the great Master of Rhodes understand that both
their pretensions were vain.


Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary sent his Ambassadors to the Pope to entreat
him to be a means to deliver Zizimi unto him, promising by this means that
Christendom should be revenged for the dishonor and loss that it had
received at the cruel and bloody battle of Varna: Let us stay our eyes upon
the excellent virtues of this brave Prince, which is the third of the three
greatest Princes, which Phillip de Commines says, had reigned at one time (a
season which did produce but mean things) and let us turn them a little away
from the first, who is now dying, and is no more but a sad and lamentable image
of the ruins of life.

Mathias Huniades or Coruin, was second son to John Huniades, a great
Nobleman of Valachia, Commendation of Mathias Corui^us King of Hungary.
who after the death of Vladislas King of Poland and Hungary, slain at the
battle of Varna, was chosen at the age of twenty years, by the common consent
of the Hungarians to be Lieutenant general of the Realm. Of all the battles
betwixt the Christians and Turks, that of Varna was the most memorable in
loss^: It continued three days and three nights, the victory which seemed to
favor the Christians in the beginning, t^rned from then, and Ladislaus King of
Hungary was slain there, tbe 20. of Neue^ber. 1444.


He had forces in field, courage and opportunity to climb higher and to make
himself King, but he would keep himself in this estate and preserve the
Crown for Ladislaus son to Albert of Austria, and to Elizabeth daughter to
Sigismond King of Hungary. The Emperor Frederick drew him unto him, after the
death of his father, to bring him up. The Hungarians demanded him, and upon the
Emperors refusal to deliver him, Coruin did overrun the Country of
Austria, Stiria, and Carinthia, filled them with fire and blood, expelled the
Bohemians out of the Towns which they held in Hungary, and restored Ladislaus
in his capital City to his fathers Throne, at the age of 12. years. This
great service deserved an equal guerdon, but as suspicions, iealousies, and
slanders, are plants which grow of themselves in the Courts of Princes:
Huniades made trial how hard it is for great virtues to be free from them, and
to be long happy by the only conduct of wisdom. Suspicions and de^ractions
in the Courts of Princes not only hurt the against whom they are made, but
them that invent the^ an^ that give care unto them. A Prince should give no
(...) ear unto them, especially when it concerns those whom he may not
punish, but he must forget the great services which he has (...).


Virtue was in this brave courage, as the Iuy which ruins the wall that holds
it up: Glory which is the fruit of virtue made the Tree to wither, and this
reputation, grounded upon his merits, stirred up envy against him, and envy
framed slander, a monster of hell, Slander worse then hell.
more curell then hell it self, which torments only the wicked, but she does
cruelly afflict Innocents: There was nothing in him that could offend it but
the greatness of his merits, and services, which made him to be esteemed the
The History gives this commendation to John Coruin. Huius and felicitas
tyrannorum impetus repressi^, velut obiecta moles, exundans flumen. Nec
quisquam regum, aut ducu^ res maiores and Europae vtili^res aduersus Tu^ca^
gessit. This man's felicity did suppress the fury of Tyrants, like a bank cast
up against an ouer-flowing River: Neither has any King or Captain done greater
matters, nor more profitable for Europe, against the Turk.
Hercules of Hungary, and the rampire of Europe, for he alone had presented his
head, like a strong rampire, against those furious torrents Amurath and
Mahomet, Vlric Earl of Cilia being incensed for that he had broken the
designs of his ambition in Dalmatia, suggested matter against him to Ladislaus
a young Prince, who believed easily that such a courage would not contain it
self like to his other subjects, and that an authority which is excessive is
not safe: Death freed him from this slander, but the Calumniator continued it
against his children, The continuance of a great power which is above his
condition that holds it, is not sure. Nunquam satis fida potentia vbi nimia.
That power is never safe that is ouer-great. Tacit.
Ladislaus and Mathias who smarted for it; The first not able to endure the
insolency and pride of the Earl of Cilia, fell to strange terms with him, and
from words to the sword, and slew him. The King was much amazed at so hardy an
act against the chief of his servants, and from that time he resolved to be
revenged, but hatching his revenge under a feigned forgetfulness, he swear to
Temisvuar upon the Sacrament never to remember it, and for a greater proof of
his love he presented him with a robe of Scarlet embroidered with Gold: he
caused Ladislaus and Mathias to come to Buda, under color to give unto
Ladislaus a charge for the execution of a great design, and the conduct of a
mighty Army against the Turk, and to Mathias the place of Liuetenant general
of the Realm. They went rashly, not considering how their father had sometimes
advised them not to trust an incensed Prince. Two brethren which think they
have offended a Prince, should not suffer themselves to be taken together.
The King not thinking himself bound to hold his word unto a subject who had
so much offended him, When the Prince holds his word with them that have
offended him, he adds much glory to his reputation.
caused Ladislaus head to be cut off. Cruelty of Ladislaus King of Hungary.


God did show upon the point of this cruel execution the innocence of him that
was executed, and that as this Prince had confounded his accusers outwardly, so
he had lived in such sort as he felt no accusation in his soul. To present
ones self to death without amazement, is the triumph of his innocence, who
feelleth no accusation within him, and is not confounded with that which is
done outwardly: Sic vixi vt accusatorem exterius non timeam vtina^ sic vixissem
vt intra me ipsam accusatorem conscientiam non haberem. I have lived so as I
fear no outward accuser, I would I had lived so as I had not my conscience
within me to accuse me. Greg.
They bring him to the place of execution with his hands bound, and attired in
that robe which the King had given him: he kneeles down, recommends his soul
to God, and stretches forth his neck to receive death: The hangman gave him
three blows and made him to fall flat to the ground, yet he rose again
although he were bound, and with all the force of his voice and soul, Death of
Ladislous Coruin.
called upon God, the witness of his innocence: at the fourth and fifth blow
the Executioner made an end of him: Ladislaus seeing that this death had
wounded the hearts of the greatest of his Realm, and that he was not safe
amongst them, retired into Bohemia, and led Mathias with him.

The friends of Count Vlric seeing him conducted to prison mocked at him,
Mathias Coruin a Prisoner at Prague.
saying; That it was not the way to make himself to be crowned King, as he had
proiected. The fire of this great courage A generous and courageous spirit
cannot endure an offense or wrong, for any accident that does oppress him.
which burnt incessantly (though covered under the ashes of this misfortune)
answered; That if he were a King, he would cause their wickedness to be
punished after another manner. These two brethren did serve for an example to
reason, which assures how dangerous a thing it is to trust a Prince that is
young, powerful, offended, and ill advised. He did not long enjoy this revenge,
for soon after being at Prague he was poisoned by a Lady, incensed for that he
had left her to marry Magdaline daughter to King Charles the seventh.

As soon as Michaell Zilasius brother to Mathias mother, was advertised of
this change, and that George Poguebrac entreated Mathias courteously, he
assembled all his friends, and came to the Estates held at Pesta, accompanied
with 20000. men where he demanded audience: He represented the great services
of Count John Huniades, Propositions at the Estates of Hungary.
who by his valor and courage had purchased the name of the Lightning and
Thunder of the Turks, John Huniades defended Hungary against Amurath and
Mahomet: He repulsed Mahomet from the siege of Belgrade: The History says
that he was called Fulmineus terrur Turcorum: The lightning terror of the
Turks.
he complains of the ingratitude wherewith he had been rewarded, and the
unworthy usage of his children; forcing some to pity, and others to
acknowledge those great merits: when as he saw their minds wavering, he thought
it not fit to do things by halues; The people must be taken at their word, and
opinions are like unto pieces of coin, which although they be scarce current,
yet are accounted so if they have course. Resolutions which are taken in such
assemblies are not always grounded upon the knowledge of that which is, but of
that which is maintained to be: He caused them which had the authority, to say
that Hungary could not be without a King, and that they could not choose a
better then Mathias: That if the Election might not be done willingly, he was
there to have him crowned by force, and saying those words he drew out his
Cimeterre, which he swear not to sheath again until a resolution were taken
conformable to his. Mathias Coruinus chosen King of Hungary.
The Estates of Hungary said, that they should not loose any time to seek
another Prince, It is easy for the son to mount to honors when as he finds
that his father has prepared the way.
and that they would not desire one better known, more generous, nor of a
better Race: Finally, they declared him King of Hungary.

The advice of this Election was carried speedily to George Poguebrac, King of
Bohemia, who was at supper, Mathias sitting at the lower end of the table,
hauig read the letter, he caused him to come and sit above him; To go from a
prison to a royalty, from great misery to a supreme honor, are the effects of
GODS Providence and bounty, who rayseth the humble and throws down the proud.
Mathias was much amazed, his condition made him to dobut that which he
understood not, and his thoughts were obscured with the variety of false
immaginations. After supper Poeguebrac told him what had hapened, saluteth him
and embraces him as king of Hungary, and entreats him to love him as his
brother; Mathias promises it, and their promises were confirmed by his
marriage with Katherine, daughter to Poguebrac, with whom he caused him to be
conducted into Hungary.

He began to triumph as soon as to reign, for to fight and vanquish was all
one unto him. At one time being followed by his own forces, which were greater
in courage and discipline then in number, These three qualities were eminent in
John Huniades, Valiant, Wise, and Generous, Ducum omnium (says the History)
qui cum Turcis arma contulerunt illotempore cla^issimus, solers* ac sagax in
prospiciendis, patiens in expectandis, acer in persequendis rerum occasionibus,
atque in ipsis rebus vrgendis pertinax, in conficiendis felix, ac fortunatus.
Of all Commanders which had made war against the Turk, he was at that time
the most famous; watchful to foresee, patient in expecting, swift in
embracing, resolute in pursuing all occasions, and happy in effecting them.
He did gloriously end three great enterprises, the one against the Emperor
Frederick, whom he forced to yield him that which he held of the Crown of
Hungary; the second against the Bohemians, whose factions and conspiracies he
overthrew, and the third against Mahomet the 2. to whom he gave many occasions
to think that the valor, conduct, and generosity of John Huniades his father
were revived in him.

He recovered Iaisse, Exploits of Mathias Coruin^s.
and seven and twenty Castles thereabouts, he past the river of Save, entered
into the higher Misia, and in two assaults seized upon Zerbenic, where are
those goodly Mines of silver: he expelled Suela, that famous thief out of
Bohemia, pacified the seditions of Transiluania, punished them that were the
Authors, Punishment which is applied fitly, and severely done upon the head of
a conspiracy, offends few, and spares many.
who had made John, Earl of S. Georges, King; and besieged, burnt, and ruined
Romansarre. The flames of the fire of his Justice, did amaze all Moldauia: all
the furies came out of Hell to follow his Army, and to revenge the injuries of
Christendom upon those Infidel Provinces. A war which was all cruelty, and
a cruelty which was all justice; victory which is always insolent, and
especially in civil wars, Pity nor Mederation do not always purchase
favor in a Conquerours heart, they are forced sometimes to give place unto
liberty, and therefore Tully says, that victoria ciuilib* bellis se^per est
insolens, Victory is always insolent in civil wars.
had no pity, but of those which had no more need: he had rather ruin Towns
to save souls, then to save Towns, and ruin souls: he left in all places,
such marks of the furies and terrors of the war, that even at this day the
Country laments the effects, and numbers the examples. That which the sword
did spare, was consumed by fire and famine.

And therefore the name of Mathias was at that time a terror to the Women and
Children of Hungary, His valor and conduct
who in all occasions performing the duty of a General, and yet sometimes
running the hazard of a Soldier, as if his body had bin borrowed; he was
wounded in the thigh with an arrow. He did so diminish the number of his
enemies, as the province was assured, and his Army rich with spoils. Mathias
is taxed with ingratitude, for that he had made war aagainst George King of
Bohemia, who had given him liberty, and his daughter in marriage. This war
was unfortunate to either, and prejudicial to Christendom.


Being returned to Agria, he came to Buda, where he received letters of
entreaty from Pope Pius the second, and from the Emperor Frederick to make
war against the Hussits, the which he undertook. He makes war against the
Hussites.
It was not his only obedience to the head of the Church which drew him to this
war, nor any desire to triumph over the truth, ambition had a great share in
it, the desire of a new Crown made him forget the good usage which he had
received in his imprisonment from Poguebrac, and dispensed him of those bonds
which cannot be dissolved by death, nor discharged but by life. Great
enterprises are not scrupulous, and if the laws of piety are to be violated,
it is to content those of ambition. They write that these two Kings made war
ten years, MATHIAS King of Hungary, and GEORGE, King of Bohemia, made war
ten years for Religion; And in tbe end they agreed, that his Religion should
be the better, whose Fool did vanquish the other at fist.
and that the combat of their Iesters, fighting at fists, reconciled them. In
the end Mathias dispossessed George Poguebrac of the provinces of Morauia,
Silesia, and Lusatia, and death of his Crown.

Mathias caused himself to be proclaimed and crowned King of Bohemia, Mathias
crowned King of Bohemia.
and Marquis of Morauia. Some Bohemians refused to obey him, and framed a
faction under the name of Ladislaus, son to Casimir, King of Polonia, whom they
did acknowledge for their King. Mathias came thither, and pressed them so
eagerly, and entreated them with such rigor and severity, as all the Towns
submitted themselves to his will, to have his peace and pardon: These long and
and troublesome wars had so wasted his treasure, as he was forced to make
use of the Clergy goods. The Prelates of Hungary opposed themselves, and the
chief Noblemen of the Realm joined with them, This conspiracy was so strong
and violent, that of 75 Tribes of the realm, there were but 9 that continued
in their first obedience.
conspiring together to expel him the Realm. Nobility of Hungary discontented.
Hitherto he had made known what love and force might do; now he shows
himself so wife and temperate, as returning into the way of the duty of a
good Prince, he does easily reduce his people to that of good subjects: That
Prince is wise which does not disdain to give some satisfaction to his
subjects whom he has offended, especially when he fears a greater mischief.
And by this means many who had cast themselves into his enemies Army,
returned unto him. Ladislaus being coopt up in Nitria, was forced to make an
Accord with Mathias, and to return into Poland.

Casimir his father apprehending this shamfull retreat, and taking his part of
the Affront, reserved the whole revenge to himself; he levied an Army of
threescore thousand fighting men, Polonians, Bohemians, Russians and
Tartarians, and entered into Morauia and Silesia, to recover that which
Poguebrac had lost. The first beginnings were so favorable, as not regarding
the inconstancy of fortune, he suffered his thoughts to wander in the common
error of Princes, who neglect the storm, during the calm of their affairs.
In great designs Princes think on^y what they should do when they have
executed them, and cast not their eyes upon that which may hinder the
execution, and which as Polybius says, has need of great providence Polyb.
lib. 11.


Mathias held it not fit for his reputation nor courage to attend them, he
goes to meet them with eight thousand horse, and having furnished the Town of
Vratislauia with victuals and munition, he lodged himself in the sub-vrbs, and
there attends them with a resolution not to hazard any thing. A Prince should
not stay until his enemy come unto him, and force him to feed him at his charge.
Every day they made Sallies and Skirmishes to the Polonians loss, who never
returned but with grief for some prisoners taken, but many more slain. And to
show that he did little esteem their Attempts, and that he could loose
little, and get much, he caused scaffolds of Wood to be built upon the Walls
for the chief Ladies and Gentlewomen of the Town, It is a great advantage for
a General of an Army, when he is assured that victory brings him great profit
and great effects, and that the loss cannot equal the gain.
and for those chiefly who were not made but to be beloved. They beheld the
Knights who made Sallies upon their Enemies, and cast themselves courageously
into dangers for their sakes. At their return they commended their valors,
and encouraged them to continue. If they were hurt, they were the first that
dressed them, if they returned victors, they presented them the prisoners Arms
and colors which they had taken.

The Princes of Germany desiring to divert this storm, and fearing that this
fire, kindled upon the Frontier, would fly further, labored to quench it:
Ernestus, Duke and Elector of Saxony, and John, Marquis of Brandebourg, The
courages of these 3 Princes were vanquished by the eloquence of the Marquis of
Bra^deburg, who in the Assembly of three Kings, of Casimir, King of Polonia;
Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, and Mathias King of Hungry, discoursed with such
gravity and vehemence, vt prae admiratione adstantes obstupuerint. Ita tune,
virtute Ernesti Saxonis and eloquenti^ Ioannis Marchionis haec or a Germaniae
magno discrimine liberata, redijt ad tranquilitatem, That the assistants were
amazed with admiration. So then by the virtue of Ernest of Saxony, and the
eloquence of the Marquis John, that coast of Germany was freed from great
danger, and recovered peace*
made an Army of six thousand horse, and presented themselves before
Vratislauia, protesting that they came thither to no other end, but to set upon
him that would not live in peace. So by their means a peace was concluded the
12. of February, in the year 1475. and Silesia was divided betwixt Ladislaus
and Mathias. Mathias makes war against the Emperor


This war being ended, he began an other against the Emperor, he besieged
Bohemia, and forced the Emperor to demand a peace. Pope Sixtus, and the Senate
of Venice (for that they would not incense the Emperor) took from him the
pensions which they had given him, to the end that the Emperor should not
think that they favored his designs; Death of Mathias Huniades.
yet for all this Mathias did not forbear to press the Emperor to effect
that which he had promised him; and seeing that he thought to entertain him
with the vanity of his words, he began the war again, and besieged and
took Hambourg upon the confines of Austria and Hungary.

Mahomet thinking to make his profit of this division, ouer-ran the Countries
of Dalmatia, Carinthia and Friuly, and carried away a great number of slaves;
but they were set at liberty, and they that led them cut in pieces, being
incountred by Mathias Captains. The portrait of of (...) Prince makes him of a
higher sature then the ordinary of men, open and quick eyes, his eyebrows
elevated, a big head, a fair face, and of a good complexion a large forehead
and flaxen hair.
The Emperor Frederick sought a peace of him; the which taking no effect,
there was a truce concluded. Soon after Mathias He that has written the
History of the kings of Hungary, ends the discourse of Mathias life in these
terms: In somma non si puo diro altro di vantagio: se non ch'e vanita il
persuadersi, che altre personnagio si trouasse alhora in tutte lc parti
pareggiante l'inuitto and glorioso Matthia Coruino: se l'ambitione d'vna
principessa Aragonesse non lo hauesse tyrannegiato. To conclude, there can be
no more said, but that it is a vanity to think that there can be any one sound
comparable to the invincible and glorious Mathias Coruinus: if the ambition of
a Princess of Arragon had not tyrannized over him.
died at Vienna in Austria of an Apoplexy, in the year 1490. being 47. years
old. He had taken to his second wife, Beatrix daughter to Ferdinand, King of
Naples, by whom he had not any children, suffering himself to be transported
with her ambitious humors, enemies to all rest.

The commendation which is given him of a great Prince, and a great Captain,
does not blemish that to have made the Sciences and learning to flourish
again, and to have favored them that made profession thereof, and among
others, John of Monroyall, the Ornament of the Mathematickes: He replenished
his library with the rarest books he could find, out of the which are come
some fragments of Polybius, and Diodorus Siculus. A Prince which affects glory,
esteems them that are the Trumpets. The most valiant have done things worthy
to be written, and have written things worthy to be read, Corn. Sulla, Caesar,
Augustus, Claudius, Traian. Adrian.
If after the death of Mahomet they had put Zizimi into his hands, as he
desired and besought the Pope, he had ouer-throwne the tyranny of the Ottomans:
for Bajazeth upon these apprehensions, sought to be at peace with him; but the
Pope would have him make war against the Hussites of Bohemia.

Let us return and see what Lewis does in his sad and melancholic thoughts of
that day which must be the Judge of all the rest: he has given an end to all
his designs, and the law of Nature will have him end: he^ does not live but by
entreaty, and the days which remain serve only but to the end he should
husband them that they might profit those which he has past and lost. His
Servants comfort him, and his Physicians have no means to cure him: they
entertain him with vain hopes, and divert his thoughts from any thing that
might augment his waywardness: And for that they told him, that a Northerly
wind, which did then reign, made men's bodies sickly, and did hurt the fruits,
he commanded the Parisians to go in Procession to S. Denis, to cause it to
cease. The Chronicle saithn, that to appea this, Northerly wind, all the
Estates of Paris went diverse days in procession to S. Denis in the month of
February, and that the same prayers were made in May following for the kings
health.


But he was more troubled with distrust: Distrust of Lewis 11.
It is a torment unto him, in comparison whereof all his other afflictions
seem light: He fears his son should deal with him, as he had done with
Charles the seventh his father, and that he would be the head of a faction.
When as Peter, Duke of Bourbon his son-in-law, entered into his chamber, he
would see if they of his train were not armed. He lived in as great fear
amongst his own followers, as a passenger can do in a thick Forest which is
haunted with Thieves and Murderers. The Prince is happy which distrusteth not
his subjects, but can sleep safely with them, yea among the woods, as Eberhard,
Duke of Wittemberg said.


He fears lest they should advance his days, that the old factions would
revive: In former times he dissembled all, now he distrusts all; he does not
remember what was past, but to be revenged of offenses: he doubts his
son-in-law, distrusts his daughter, and fears his son. And to the end the
weakness of his mind should not be judged by the indisposition of his body;
and to make it known that they be not the legs, Authority and Severity
should support the contempt of old age: the Empeperour Seuerus being full of
the gout, the great men of his Count contemned him, and gave the Title of
Emperor unto his son: Seuerus caused himself to be carried unto the
Palace, and commanded those proo^d heads which contemned him, to be cut off,
who being prostrate at his feet to demand pardon, he said unto them, Learn
that it is the head, which commausndes, and not the legs.
but the mind which commaundes and reigns, he makes diverse Ordonances, which
make the people think that they cannot come but from a sound judgment, and a
firm and vigorous disposition: for although that these desires seemed to have
ridiculous causes, yet they proceed from a great and constant resolution to
end his life in action.

But he was no more but a walking Anatomy, and every man wondered how he could
live* Philip de Commines says, that in the voyages which he made to diverse
places after his first sickness at the Forges of Chinon, His great Heart
carried him. Now he has not any about him but two or three men of base
condition, and bad fame, who after his death were presently chased from Court:
he did often change the Groom of his Chamber, and all other sorts of
servants; and to excuse this change, he said, that it was one of the pleasures
of nature. He did not suffer them to speak unto him of any Affairs, but such
as could not be dispatched but by his Commandment. A Prince in his perfect
health should not be troubled nor importuned with every thing. Whilst that a
Prince busieth his head about matters of small consequence, the most important
pass away and are forgotten. It is not fit to trouble a prince with all sorts
of Affairs, nor to bind him to play the part of a Chauncellor or President.
Maius aliquid and excellentius a principe postulatur, Some greater matter, and
more excellent is expected from a Prince. Tacit.


Humane remedies failing to cure him, they had recourse to extraordinary, and
did things which the original calls strange. Philip de Commines says, That
Pope Sixtus the fourth being informed, that through devotion he desired to have
the Corporal whereon S. Peter sang Mass, he sent it presently unto him, with
many other Relics, the which were returned back again. Of this, and for
that the Turk s^^t to offer him the Rediques which were ^ound at
Constantinople, Phil de Commines concluddes, that this Prince was esteemed and
honored throughout the world.


It seems that Philip de Commines does great wrong unto the memory and
courage of such a Prince, when he says, that never man feared death so much,
or did so many things to think to avoid it; and who in the apprehensions he
had that they would advance it, he neither trusted son, daughter, nor
son-in-law: what a madness, to offend Nature to avoid that which she has
ordained? What a blindness, to think to resist time, which carries away all?
Turn thy head of all sides, thou shall see the ruins of Towns, and why not
of Men? Behold Megara before thee, Aegina at thy back, Pyrea on the right
hand, and Corinth on thy left. What is all this but ruin, contempt,
solitariness and horror? Sulpitius comforts Tully by the ruins of these four
Towns which were sometimes most flourishing, saying, Hemnos honumculi
indignamur si quis nostrum interijt cum vni loco tot appidorum cadauera
proiecta sint. Are we poor men angry if any of us dye, when a^ the carcasses
of so many Towns are cast into one place?


They told him, that in Calabria there lived one called Francis of Paulo, an
Hermit of an admirable holiness and austerity of life; who did great
miracles: he never ceased until he had obtained leave from the Pope to draw
him into France, thinking that by his presence and prayers he might prolong
Life, and recoile Death. This holy man had not purchased the reputation of
sanctity by false Titles: he had made profession from his Infancy Francis of
Paulo borne of mean parentage, professed himself an Hermit from his youth. He
went out of his Hermitage to build a little Church near unto Paulo, where he
laid the first foundations of his Order upon humility, calling them Minimes
that should make profession, and upon austerity, binding them by a fourth vow to
a ^perpetuall lent. He died at Tours being 93 years old.
by an incredible humility and austerity of life. God had given him the gift of
Prophecy, and had used his hands to make his power known. He had past the
straight of Sicile upon his Cloak spread upon the Waves, the Master of the
Bark refusing to receive him, and rejecting him as an unprofitable burden.
The King sent men expressly to Naples to have him come: he past by Rome, where
he was honored of all men for the holiness of his life. Entering into the
Kings Chamber, he cast himself at his feet, entreating him to prolong his
days: he would willingly have had the Sun descend ten degrees, and the
shadows of his Dial to have gone back* Philip de Commines does not report
the Answer of this Hermit, and has deprived us of so just a curiosity, he
says only, That he answered as a wise Man should do. He went not with that
ostentation which we find in them that are learned: for he was such a one as
Saint Francis desired his Religious men, should be more skillful to pray then
to read, Francis of Assise said, that he had rather have his religious men
skillful in praying then in reading.
he had a sweet, pleasing, and easy speech, and his language was Italian,
not common, or much known unto the French, which made him to be admired. We
must believe, that this light of the Spirit of God, shining clearly in a mind
purged from worldly affairs, As the son is seen more plainly in a cleerre
water then in mire, so the divine light shines more in spirits that are
cleansed from worldly affairs then in those that are always troubled with the
cares thereof.
made him speak words, if not altogether Divine, yet at the least, Flatterers
pleasing to Princes.
free from pleasing and flattery, which in these extremities, do always abuse
Princes; making them believe that they are far from death, although it hang
upon their lips. There are many which assure them that they should hope for
more good then they ever had; but there are few which let them know, that they
should fear greater torments then they have ever endured. It is lawful for
the Physician of the body to Plato in the third Book^ of his Commonweal,
gives physicians leave to lie, and to promise health unto the sick, even in
their extre^^t, to (...) the comfort.
lie unto his Patient, but he that has the cure of Souls, neither may nor
ought.

God did much favor this Prince, to send him a man of this condition to help
him to dye; who among many great qualities, necessary to this Office, even
toward such a King, might speak freely unto him, without dissembling, or
flattery: For Princes in these extreamities have need of men which should not
be like unto the sons of Zebedee, who spoke of Scepters and Honors, when as
Christ discoursed of the Cross: They must let them know, that the world, and
all that is great and admirable in the world, is unworthy of the soul, which
is not made for the world, but the world is made for it. The health of the body
depends of the soul. The soul (says Chrysostom) was not made for the body,
but the body for the soul, who so neglects the first, and is too careful of
the second, loses both.
That being of a substance exempt from corruption, and by consequence, from
death, cannot have an object disproportionable to her power, nor can delight in
mortal and corruptible things; and being the Image As a Tryangle is not fill^a
with a Tryangle, s nothing is able to fill the heart but God. Caeteris omnibus
occupart potest, repl^ti autem non potest, capacem enim Dei, quicquid Deo minus
est non implebit. It may well be busied with other things, but it cannot (...)
filled: whatsoever is capable of God, nothing can fill it that is (...) then
God.
of God, there is not any thing has reference to her eternal essence, but her
Immortality. God had no beginning, and it has has no ending: God is for ever,
and man desires nothing more then to continue his being. The form of his
understanding is Truth, and there is no other Truth, but God. The great world
has but one sun, the lesser but one soul, and both have but one God.

This good man undertook to make this Prince capable of two things, the
hearing whereof is difficult to men, and Kings are very hardly taught: to love
God, and to contemn the world. The world entertaines their mind with so many
things which men think worthy of love, as they cannot lodge any other affection
in their hearts, and do not think of the love wherewith the Angels live and
burn, being the fire of the Intellectual world, as the Sun is of the
celestial, and the Elementary of ours. Princes in stead of loving God, love
themselves, they find that all is made for them, they dispose so absolutely of
all the beauties and pleasures of the world, as they desire no other: they have
under their powers so many great and goodly spirits, as they have no will to
change their abode, to see them of the other world; One demanded of Cercidas
the Megapolitaine if he dyed willingly. Why not, said he* For after my death
I shall see those great men, Pythagoras among the Philosophers, Hecateus among
the Historians, Homer among the Poets, and Olympus among the Musicians. Ael.
lib. 13. de Var. Hist.
all is made for them, nothing is spoken against them: for them the fish cut
the waves, the birds beat the air, beasts march upon the earth, and men
run, toil, sweat and kill themselves; wherefore when in the end conscience
commands them to raise their thoughts toward the place whither their face is
turned, to mount toward their beginning, to breathe nothing but eternity, to
contemn the fumes of the world, and to admire the light of Heaven, they have
their heads so heavy, and their eyes so dazzled, as they cannot understand, that
He that loves the world, the love of God is not in him. They eye cannot, at
one instant, bohold both heaven and earth.

The exhortations of Francis de Paulo did cast some seeds of the love of God
into this Princes heart; but the cares of the world were the birds which
carried it away, and did smother it in the thorns of affairs. The fruits of a
slow piety, which does flourish but in the Winter of man's life, do never ripe
well. It must be manured in due time: That piety comes late when it has not
recourse to God, but at need. Byon had vanquished Athens, and had poisoned many
spirits with the impiety of Theodorus, his master being reduced in the end to
languish of a great infirmity, he began to acknowledge, that there were Gods,
but it was to cure him. A mad man (said be that writ his life) not to believe
that there were Gods, but when he had need of their help. Diog. Laert. lib. 4.
the same God which would have fire burning always upon his Altar, will that
fire burn continually in a Princes Heart. It was sometime kindled well in that
of Lewis, but the first wind of worldly affairs blew it away.

His heart had good inclinations when as necessity and afflictions pressed it;
but he suffered them to wither at the first Sunshine of prosperity. A
mischief which is natural to the fragilitie of men, who do no good, but for
the fear of evil, and make themselves voluntary slaves to things whereunto
they should command, and which are made for them* There is not any man but
would blush at the reproach which his own conscience may give him, that if he
had given him the tenth part of the time which he has employed for his flesh,
it should be much better. This reproach is like unto that of Marcus Varro, in
his Satyrs. Si quantum operae sumpsisti vt tuus pistor bonum faceret panem,
eius duodecimam Philosophiae dedisse tempore bonus iampridem esses factus. If
thou had spent but the twelfth part of that time in philosophy which thou
did to have thy Baker make good bread thou had in time been made a good man.


Lewis then following the first train of his life, seemed to have more
Devotion then Conscience, more trembling with superstition then constant in
Piety, Alexander was struck with this infirmity, who having lived impiously,
dyed superstitiously. A. his death there was none seen about him but Divines
and South-sayers, who made prodigies of the lightest things.
more desirous of the health of his body, then of his soul: for having made a
prayer unto Saint Eutropeus to recommende unto him the one and the other,
Claudius of Seissell said, that he caused the word Soul to be put out,
saying; That it was sufficient if the Saint made him to have corporal health
without importuning him with so many things.

He was grown so confident that his holy man would cure him, as he still
sent to Plessis to tell him, that it consisted only in him to prolong his
life: The more he trusted this good man, the more he distrusted all his
servants. Such extraordinary guards and distrusts were not without cause: for
as Phil. de Commines says, some had an intent to enter into Plessis, and to
dispatch matters as they thought good, for that there was nothing dispatched;
but they durst not attempt it, wherein they did wisely, for there was good
order taken.
The Castle was well guarded, the Walls were fortified with great bars of
Iron. The guard stood Centinell in the Ditches, having command to shoot at any
one that should aproch before the gates were opened He would willingly have
drawn the ladder after him going to bed: he daily changed his servants, and
depended upon the austere humors of John Cottiere his Physician, to whom he
gave monthly ten thousand Crowns, not daring to refuse him any thing, and
promising whatsoever he desired, so as he would chase away that fearful
apparition Alexander Tyrant of Pher^a lived in such distrust, as the Chamber
wherein he was accumtowed to lie, was kept by two terrible dogs, having a
^^dder to ascend unto it.
of Death, at the name whereof he shrunk down betwixt the sheets. This
Physician did sometimes brave him, saying; I know well, that one of these
mornings you will chase me away as you have done others; but I swear by God,
you shall not live eight days after. This poor Prince in stead of using him
as Maximin did his, Maximin the Emperor commanded his physicians to be slain
for that they could not cure his wounds.
gave him whatsoever he would, Bishopprickes, Benefices, and Offices. The holy
man of Calabria on the other side watched, fasted, and prayed continually for
the King, neither was it ever possible to divert him from the thoughts of his
poverty. The King could not give enough to the one, and could not force the
other to receive any thing. Antipather King of Macedon said, that be had two
friends at Athens, Phocian and Demades, The one he could never content with
giving, and the other he could never move to receive any thing that be offered
him. Plut.


He sometimes attired himself richly, Curiosity of Lewis the 11th.
contrary to his custom, but it was in a Gallery like to a flash of
lightening, and as one would say, I am yet here; or by his rareness to procure
admiration to Majesty and Gravity, like to to the Kings of Egypt; The ancient
Kings of Aegipt showed themselves seldom unto the people, and always after
some new^ manner, carrying sometimes fi^e upon their heads, and sometimes a
bird, or a branch, to move admiration.
he had not any in his Court, but his Physician and master Oliver. Every man
began to be weary of this solitariness. The French desire to see, and to
press near their King: They do not Court it in vain, and do not serve an
invisible master: He ordained diverse businesses, both within and without the
Realm, sending to fetch diverse things out of far Countries for ostentation
and rareness; The more rare and unknown things that Princes have, the more
apparent is their greatness, and therefore they cause many beasts to be kept
for show, as Tygres, Lions, and Ounces.
as little Lions in Affricke, Rayne-Deere and Buffes in Sweathland and
Denmark, Allans in Spain, Mules from Sicile, and little Grey-houndes out of
Brittanie: He changed his Officers, cashiered his Captains, took away their
pensions, and all to be spoken of, fearing they should hold him to be dead,
although it be very hard to conceal the death of a great King. There is
nothing can be less concealed then the death of a prince.
They might say of his designs, as Stratonicus did of the Rhodians buildings:
That he undertook things as if he had been Immortal: for he feared, that
in doing nothing, the people would be curious to know what he did, not
apprehending so much the hatred of his subjects as their contempt. Stratonicus
said, that the Rhodians did ^ate as if they should dye soon, and did build as
if they had been immortal. Plut.


In these last and extreme languishings he caused the peace to be proclaimed
at Paris, Publication of the peace.
as the Archduke had done at Brussels: for it had bin said, that it should be
published in the Courts of Parliament of France, and in the chief Towns under
the Archdukes obedience, and sworn by the Abbots, Prelates and Noblemen of the
countries of Artois and Burgondy, to the end it might be known that it was not
only made with the Princes to continue during their lives, but with the
Princes and people. The Princess Margaret This marriage was so displeasing
unto the Archduke, as Phillip de Co^mines says, he would willingly have taken
her from them if he could, before she went out of the Country, but they of Gand
had given her a good Guard.
was brought to Hedin by the Lady of Rauestien, base daughter to Duke Phillip.
The Earl of Beaujeu, and the Lady Anne of France his wife received her, and
conducted her to Amboise whereas as the Dauphin was: She made her entry into
Paris in the beginning of June, and was married in July.

The Chronicle reports the pomp of this entry in these terms. On Monday the
second of June, Entry of the Lady Dauphin into Paris.
about fine of the clock in the evening, the Lady Dauphin made her entry into
Paris, being accompanied by the Lady of Beaujeu and the Admirals wife, with
other Ladies and Gentlewomen, and they entered by Saint Dennis gate, whereas
were prepared for her coming three goodly Scaffolds; in the one, and the
highest, was a personage representing the King, as Sovereign; On the second
were two goodly children, a son and a daughter, attired in white Dammaske,
representing the said Dauphin, and the Lady of Flanders; and in the other
underneath, were the personages of the Lord of Beaujeu, and of the Lady his
wife; and of either side of the said Personages were the Arms of the said
Lords and Ladies: There were also four personages, one of the Husbandmen,
another of the Clergy, the third of Merchandise, and the last of the Nobility,
every of which made a short speech at her entry.

The marriage being celebrated at Paris, whereunto all the chief Towns of the
Realm were invited, The King would have his son return to Amboise, not
holding if fit that this new Son should rise before the West of his life.
This great rejoicing of all France did but augment his heaviness, to see
himself forced to quit the place unto his son: All the helps which the Art
of man could invent were employed: He caused the holy Oil to be brought, This
Vyall of holy Oil was seen by Philip de Commines upon the Cupbord in the
Kings Chamber, at Plessis, at the hour of his death. Others baue written that
the gave up the Ghost as it arrived.
the Clergy of Paris, the Court of Parliament, the University, and other
Companies, went in Procession, the last day of July 1483. to meet it at Saint
Anthonies in the field, it was lodged that night in the holy Chapel, and the
next day passed on, and was followed with the same company unto our Lady in the
fields. Phillip de Commines says, that he had an intent to take the like
unction that he did at his Coronation: Others have written that it was to know
the declining of his life, for when the King is dead, it is empty, and fills
again miraculously for the Coronation of a new.

On Monday, the 25. of August, he fell into that extremity of sickness which
ended his days, Last actions of Lewis the eleventh.
and forced him to acknowledge himself, not only mortal and dying, but as
death: At that time he sent unto his son, all such as came to see him, saying
unto them: Go unto my son, your King, serve him well: giving to every one
some charge to deliver unto him, but most confidently to Stephen de Verse,
Baliffe of Meaux, who had been his Governor: He sent unto him also his chief
Officers, the Chancellor with his Seals, and all his train, the Captains
and Archers of his Guard, his Hunts-men and Faulkeners. But his intent was not
to suffer them long there, if he recovered his health as assuredly as he felt
his courage firm, and his judgment strong, the brain not being troubled with
the malign fumes of his infirmity, for he had a continual looseness: So we
see that the soul in this separation of the lodging wherein it has been
shut, and whereof it has great cause to complain, (...) of the (...) some
guest, and the soul complain^s of the body, (...) of a troublesome lodging* Vt
qui in alieno habitant multis aguntur in commodis, semperque de aliqua
domicilij part queruntur: Ita animus nunc de capite, nunc de pedibus, nunc de
stomacho, nonc aliud de alioqueritur significans se esse non in suo domic^o,
sed vnde breui sit emigrandum: As they that dwell in another man's house have
many discommodities and do still complain of some part of it: So the soul
does complain sometimes of the head, of the legs, of the stomach and other
parts, showing that she is not in her own mansioan, but from whence she must
soon depart. Se^.
recouereth new strength, by the joy which it conceiues to re-enter into this
sphere of her rest. She disposes (says a great man of this age) more wisely,
and more holily of all things, fore-seeth more certainly that which is to
come, fore-telleth it and does prophecy, for that she begins to approach to
her first beginning, to be joined again to that immortal being, and to
participate with the life eternal.

Soon after he fell into great faintings, which made him to loose his speech,
but he recovered it, to will the Duke of Bourbon to go unto the King his son,
and that he should have a care of him, Commandments extraordinary of the King.
charging him with many extraordinary things, the which had caused terrible
accidents if they had encountered a froward and difficult spirit: Philip de
Commines in this place speaks what he thinks good, and confirms his
opinion by the events, He gave him all the charge and government of the King,
and commanded him that some men should not come near him, telling him many
good and not able causes, and if the Lord of Beaujeu had observed his
commandments in every point (or at least in part, for there were some
extraordinary commandments which were not to be kept) and that in the
generality be had observed the^ better, I think it had been profitable both for
the Realm and himself, considering those things which have since happened.
Phi. de Com. does not^ here the diu^sio^which was betwixt the Lady Anne of
France, and the D. of Orleance, whereof he has not written any thing in the
c^urse of the history: A division which caused the Assembly of the Estates at
Tours, and then of a league, whose first attempts appeared before Orleance, the
second ended in Brittany, by the battle of Saint Aubin the 28. of July 1488.
and by the taking of the Duke of Orleans.


This commandment of the King incountering a spirit, which was mild,
tractable, and temperate, had not the effects it should have had. Bounty, and
mildness are sometimes negligent in matters which require heat, and
quickenesse. This Prince was one of the best of his age, being nothing but
mildness and courtesy. The more rare these qualities are in Princes,
Humility and courtesy are goodly qualities in great men: Humanitas tam clara
in imperatore quam rara est. Nam quum indiscreta felicium predissequa sit
superbia, vix cuiquam contingit and abundare fortuna and indigere arrogantia.
Cuius quidem ita maiores nostros semper praetesum est, vt grauiorem semper
putaue^nt s^ruitutae contemptum. Humanity is as glorious as rare in an
Emperor: For as arrogance is an indiscreeet (...) to fortune, it seldom
happens that any one abounds with good fortune and wants arrogance: The which
was always so hateful to our forefathers, as they held contempt more
grievous then servitude. Lat. Pac. Pan.
the more excellent they are: arrogance never fails in them who have no
wants, and pride does always follow felicity: It is a miracle to see a great
Prince, courteous, mild, and affable. Rome found not any Surname more odious,
for the last of her Kings, then that of Proud, and comprehended in that word
all the vices, for the which she changed the form of her government, and
suppressed the Royalty in despite of the King; Yet the mildness and facillity
of this Prince gave a great foundation to the troubles which happened for the
Regency of the Realm.

The King had often said in his life time, Lewis the 11. would not have the^
speak of death unto him.
that in what extremity soever they saw him they should never pronounce that
word of death unto him, These fears which happen at the diss^lution of such
sweet company as the body and the soul, comes not through faihtnes of heart,
or want of courage; this word Death; has drawn words of grief from the soul
of the Son of God, it has made the heart of the most constant to tremble, and
the Stoickes have painted palenes and blushing on the foreheads of many great
and valiant Captains: The greatest courage of the world, would not willingly go
to danger, if he were assured to dye there.
finding it too distasting for a Kings ear: Yet must he be content that she
present her self, and that she take his Crown from his head, as she has done
the Arms, Club, Scepter, and Sword out of the hands of Achilles, Hercules,
Alexander, and Caesar: They that had charge of his conscience, expected when he
himself finding his strength to fail would acknowledge it. The resolution to
signify this judgment unto him, was taken betwixt a Divine, his Physician,
and Master Oliver: They went roughly unto him, and with small respect, like
unto men which had added impudency to the baseness of their condition, there
speech was after this manner: Indiscretion of the^ that speaks to Lewis the 11.
of death.
Sir, we must discharge our consciences, hope no more in this holy man nor in
any other thing, for undoubtedly you are a dead man, think of your conscience,
for there is no remedy: Every man spoke something briefly, to let him know that
they were all of one accord concerning his death: He answered, I hope that God
will help me; and the flesh desiring to deceive the Spirit by a vain
confidence of her forces, and to declare herself openly against the constancy
and resolution, which this last point of life required of him, to make them
judge of his courage, she made him say, I am not, it may be, so sick as you
think: Being half dead he counterfeits himself whole; The spirit, body, and
forces fail him, only dissembling holds good: He desired rather to wear
in languishing, then courageously to break in sunder the chain which
(although he were a great Prince) held him in the servitude of life. Lewis has
had great resemblances in his reign, and in his life, to the ^umour of
Tiberius, his end did also savor of his. Tiberium iam corpus iam vires nondum
dissimulatio deserebat, ide^ animi vigor sermon ac vultu intentus quae-sitae
interdum comitate qua^uis manifesta defectione tegebat. Force and strength
failed Tiberius, but not dissembling, the same vigor of the mind with a settled
speech and countenance, and a counterfeit courtesy did cover it, although he
decayed visibly. Tacit. lib. 6. Annal.


He was environed with Relics, and made Barricades of them, thinking that
death should not dare to pass over them, and lay hold of him, he was so often
dead, as five days before his death Tiberius did all he could to conceal his
death, it being bruited abroad Caligula thought to enter into the Empire, but
behold the dead man demanded meat, and his successor began to quake for
fear: Macro who had been one of his fauourits, seeing him to continue too
long, caused him to be smothered with couerings. Macro intrepidus opprimi senem
iniectu maltae vestis iubet discedique ab limine. Macro being without fear,
commanded that the old man should be smotherd with couerings, and that they
should presently go from the door.
news came to Paris before the accident, by reason of a fainting: They that
were about him held him for dead, and every man thought of his own private
affairs: But behold suddenly the dead man called for meat, they saw him
revive in an instant having a plain speech, a firm understanding, and a
judgment such as in the vigor of his age, disposing of many things for the
good of his Estate, as if this fainting of his bodily force had been nothing
but to suffer his spirit to meditate: saying; Tell Des Cords that he give
over the enterprise which we have upon Callice, least he incense the English,
that he remain six months with the King my son, and that they think no
more to make war against the Duke of Brittany, nor any neighbors to this
Realm for five years at the least. He would have peace begin his new
reign, to the end the Kingmight grow in age, and France in wealth: I will be
interred, said he, at our Lady of Clery, and accompanied at my funeral by such
and such. They told him that the Kings of France were interred at Saint Dennis,
Saint Dennis (...) is the Sep^lch^e of the kings of France Dagobert was the
first s^under, and there was interred: The kings predecess^u^s had there
Se^ul^^res in d^uers places, Clouis is interred at Sa^nt (...), Childeber^,
Chilperi^, and C^o^a^e at S. (...) main d^spres, Clouis or Lewis, at Ch^l^es,
Pe^in at Saint Denis, Chorlemanse, at Air La^^ apelle, and their successors
have their Tombs in diverse places, but the greatest number is at Saint Dennis.
and that his father and Grandfathers were there, It is all one, said he, I
will lie there: He had so great a devotion to the Virgin Mary, had made so
many vows unto her, and had received such visible effects of her intercession,
as he would have her Temple the depositary of his bones.

He fell extremely sick on Monday, and although that no man thought that he
should have continued until the next day, yet he said, That the good Lady
would make him live until Saturdy: It was true, his prayer returned into his
own bosom; he ended the week, Death of Lewis the eleventh.
the last day of his life was on Saturday, the thirtieth of August, at eight of
the clock at night, having lived three score and three years, and reigned
three and twenty: He continued in the world longer then any Prince of his
race, that is to say of the third branch of the Kings of France, but he lived
little, I think, says Phillip de Commines, that from his infancy, he never
had but troubles and afflictions until his death, and if all the good days
which he had in his life, wherein he had more joy and pleasure, then trouble
and care, were well numbered, I believe there would be few sound, and that for
one of pleasure and ease, their would be twenty of pain and affliction.
he that has been long at Sea in storms and tempests, and has never
arrived at a safe Port, cannot say that he has sailed much, but that he has
been long tossed with a tempest: In like manner he that has lived long in the
crosses of this life, cannot say that his life has been long, but that he
has continued long in the waves of this world.

He dyed not with this grief, not to have done any thing in the world, he
that in dying carries no other mark of his being, but old age, departs
shamefully out of this life: Lewis the 11. left it not with that remorse to
have been idle, and to have let the torrent of age slip away, without
retaining something Of running water there is nothing kept but what is drawn
forth to use; In like manner of the course of life, there remains nothing but
what virtue reserueth for glory to have lived: Tantum habes a currente flumine
quant^m hauris ita ex a^nis semper euntibus nihil accipis nisi quod in res
duraturas collocaris. Thou have so much of a running stream as thou drawest
forth, so of years which still slide away, thou retainest nothing but what
thou do employ in durable things.
for his successors, give him the honor to have freed them from subjection,
and France is bound unto him to have beautefied it with the Crowns of Dukes
and Earls. The death of Charles the last, Duke of Bourgundy, restored unto him
the Duchy, and County of Bourgundy, but his good title must be so assisted by
force, as his Provinces were rather conquered then restored.

He united also unto the Crown, the Dutchies of Anjou and Main, which had
been separated for the portion of Charles the first King of Sicile, The
returns of the Counties of Anjou and Maine, which had been very remote from
the Crown, was drawn (...) ^arriage of Charles of Valois, who married the
daughter of Charles the second, King of Sicile, upon cond^tion that he should
renounce the rights and hopes of the Crown of Valencia and Arragon.
and given for a Dowry to the Lady Margaret of Sicile, who married with Charles
of France Earl of Vallois. This marriage restored that hope unto France, which
she had in a manner lost to reunite those Provinces, for that contrary to the
Law of the Realm, they had been given in marriage to a daughter.

France is also bound unto him for the acquisition of the County of Prouence,
by the means which have been formerly mentioned: The piece was not entire,
for the Principallity of Orange was separated, yet in the year one thousand
four hundred three score and fifteen, he had purchased the homage and
jurisdiction of William of Chalon Prince of Orange, and made it subject to that
of Dauphine. Lewis of Chalon Prince of Orange, bought of Rene King of Sicile,
the ^omage and Soneraignty of the Principall^ty of Orange, which was held of
the County of Prouence, and William of Chalo^ sold it to King Lewis the 11.


He past the three score and third year of his age, the which he had always
apprehended for that the Kings of this branch had never attained unto it: Age
of Lewis the eleventh.
And as it is the nature of man to desire to live, and to repent to have lived,
when he had attained unto it, he would willingly have kept back that term,
in the which nature by the great infirmities wherewith he was brought low,
chased him out of this life, not as from a Ship-wracke, but as out of an Inn
where he had made good cheer. Themistius compares the death of old me^, to
the going out of an Inn, and that of young men to a Shipwreck.
In like manner Princes, and they that have lived in pleasure, fear not death
for want of courage, as many think, but for the long continuance of their
delights and contents. He arrived not at this port without storms and great
perils, in the which he was preserved by the same hand which had diuerted many
damnable attempts against his person. The most doubtful of these accidents was
at Peronne, the greatest at the battle of Montlehery, the most unexpected under
the port of the Castle of Alencon, Dangers which he did escape
This accident happened on Sunday the 8th. of August 1473. Edward the 2. King
of England, playing at Chesse, ended his game so fitly, as a great stone f^ll
upon the place as soon as he was up, and had slain him if he had stayed.
Thomas Walsingham.
when as a great stone falling from the Vault did but touch his sleeue: An
accident which shows, that no man knows where death shall surprise him, and
that a wise man should always attend it resolutely in all places.

This Reign was rough, difficult, and tossed with strange reuolutions. Such as
lived in those times said that the world had never been more wicked. Opinion,
which like unto Orpheus Harp, does always move the lesser and weaker spirits,
has made this belief common among them, that the world does daily impair,
that the Golden Age is changed into Silver, then into Copper, and in the end
into Iron and Brass: That our It is true that the older the world grows, the
more remote it shall be from the innocence, and simplicity of the first Age.

Aetas parentum peior auis tulit.
Nos nequiores mox daturos* Prolem vitiosiorem.
But in all ages men have been corrupted and disordered: Seneca says, that
his complained, and that such as should come after would make the like
complaint.


Grandfathers times were better then that of our fathers, that ours has
increased in wickedness, and that they which shall succeed shall be more
wicked. Paradox that the world growth not worse.
But I find in this Princes time as famous villainies as have been since: His
Chronicle does produce many, besides those great distractions which the History
has observed in public actions, as rebellions, Infidelities, Attempts,
Treasons and Conspiracies, not discovering many other excesses which have
remained smothered in the consciences of two or three. I have collected the
examples which it sets down, as a lump of many poisons to make a Treacle
against vice. The first in showing a great liberty discovers a great bounty.

The year that the King made his entry into Paris, a young woman left her
husband to follow her own disordered lusts, and after her husband being well
advised (these are his very words) took her again. Wise men hold the sower
and sweet of marriage secret: That age as well as those which have gone
before, and have followed after, does furnish examples of men, who in favor of
Mecanas Galba having in^^ted Mec^^nas to supper, seeing his wife and him to
court is by looks and signs, he (...) down upon his C^sh^^a f^yning to be
v^^y sleepy, to give way unto their leaves: The which he maintained with a good
grace, for his man being ready to take away the dishes which stood upon his
Table, he cried out unto him, how now Knave? do thou not see that I sleep
not but for Mecaenas.
have shut their eyes whilst they courted their wives.

In the war of the Commonweal, Examples of diverse disorders.
there were seen pass through Paris two hundred Archers on horseback, after
them eight Strumpets, with a black Monk their Confessor: In the year one
thousand four hundred three score and five, the sixth of June, a Capper in
Saint Dennis Street, strangled his wife in his own house, and a Laboring man
of Clignancourt cut his Throat. Another Gentlewoman of Paris was accused of
Adultery, and poisoning, by her own husband. A father had long abused his own
daughter, and had many children by her, and as the wicked are never content
with one wickedness, he fell from Incest to Parricide, When as the mind of
man has once subjected it self to the tyrany of vice, he is not wicked with
one kind of crime only. Quisnam hominum est quem tu co^tentum videris vno
Flagitio. What is he among men, whom thou shall s^e content with en^ villainy.
Iuv^n.
killing his children so soon as they were borne: He was hanged at Paris, and
his daughter was burned at Magny near unto Pontoise. Three Serieants, forced a
Priests chamber in Paris and did beat him outragiously, they were condemned to
be whipped through the Streets of Paris. A Religious man of the Temple had his
Throat cut by one of his brethren, The great Prior of France being assisted by
the Commanders and Knights, condemned him to be kept prisoner in a Dungeon,
and there to be fed with the bread of sorrow and water of heaviness. A fair
Burgess of Paris, who was much esteemed among the women of best fame, gave
ear to the Earl of Foix, who attempted against her honor, suffered her self
to be won, and left father, mother, husband and children, to follow him. A
Hosier being accused of many Thefts cut out his own tongue, for that he would
not confess any thing. There were many scandalous Libels cast abroad in Paris,
against the Kings chief Officers, namely against the Constable of Saint Paul.
An Archer was condemned to be hanged at Paris, for ^he School o^ Physicians at
Pa^^s, dear an. (...) to be cut, that they might see how the stone is framed,
and how it lies in man's body, for that there were many troubled therewith in
those days, he was cured and his life saved.
sacrilege, having robbed the Church of Meudon. A Franciscan Friar Preaching
indiscretly, was banished the Realm, in the year one thousand four hundred
three score and eighteen, in the month of October, a Monk Hermaphrodite using
both Sexes became great with child.

Behold how that in those times, as well as in ours, excess and disorders were
common. The world is nothing but a sincke of all filthiness. O what a vile and
abject thing (said an Ancient) is man, if he do not raise himself above man!
We see few become good men for the only respect of integrity and honesty: If
they enter into the Temple of Virtue, it is always by some false door.

Lewis the eleventh had three sons and three daughters: Ioachim died young,
Children of Lewis the 11.
and this death drew, with sorrow, from the fathers heart a Vow never to know
any other woman but the Queen. Francis Duke of Berry died in the year one
thousand four hundred three score and fourteen: This loss caused him to
shut himself up for some few days, in the Castle of Amboise, refusing to see
or to be seen of any, not considering that Kings children were men borne in
the cries and groans of their mothers, and bewayling their own miseries like
to other men. Stratonicus an Artificer of Athens, hearing that the mother of
Timotheus cried out at her delivery, said; How would she have cried, if she had
made an Artificer? He mocked at that common slattery, which spoke of Kings
children, as of the children of the Gods. Atheneus.
This grief was humane, and should have been lamented humanely, and comforted
by this reason: That the thing which is restored to him to whom it belongs
cannot be said to be lost: But it is hard to see a goodly flower die at the
break of day: A vain reason, he that makes it to grow, may gather it when,
and how he pleases.

Louyse his eldest daughter dyed also in her Infancy* Anne was betrothed to
Nicholas Marquess of Pont, Grandchild to Rene Duke of Anjou, but he did not
marry her, for the Duke of Bourgundy being jealous of this Alliance propounded
unto him the marriage of Mary, his only daughter, to draw him by this vain
hope, from the service of this Crown: She was married to Peter of Bourbon,
Ioane his third to daughter was married to Lewis the twelfth, and put away in
the first year of his reign: So as finding her self hateful unto her
husband, and unpleasing to many, she left the world: Being unmarried she
wedded herself to solitariness, the which she had desired all her life: In
her Infancy, the King demanded of her of what Order she would have her
Confessor, and she made choice of the Gardien of the Franciscan Friars at
Amboise.
Her father loved her not, for that Nature had given him cause to complain of
her deformity, having not engraven any makes of her favors, neither upon her
face nor on her person, for she was black, little, and crooked: Beauty, is a
piece of so great recommendation, as they that are not favored therewith, are
less pleasing eue^ to them that by Nature should love them.
The Signior of Lesguiere her Governor did hide her often under his Gown,
when as the King met her, to the end he should not be troubled with the sight
of her. The hatred of King Lewis the eleventh, her father, the death of Charles
the eighth, her brother, and the divorce of King Lewis the twelfth, her
husband, changed all the sweetness of her life into the bitterness of the
Cross, and imbarkt her as in a tempestuous Sea, whereas she found no other
Port but that of death. The children of great men to become the children of
God, are bound to drink of the cup of affliction Happy are those pains and
afflictions which are to amend and save, not to ruin and destroy the
afflicted: The Cross is the mark of the Citizens of heaven, they whom the
hand of God disdlaines to strike, are such as he disdaines to amend.
as well as the meanest. The way to heaven is full of Thorns: The flaming
sword appeared at the entering of Paradise: The Land promised to the faithful
abounds with plenty of Milk and Honny: Milk is first blood before Milk;
Honny is drawn from bitter flowers, Roses grow among Thorns.

Her husband loved her not, Cause of the dissolution of the marriage of Lewis
the twelfth.
and yet during the time of his imprisonment in the great tower of Bourges, he
received no other succor, nor assistance but from this Princess. The cause of
their Divorce was Sterrility, and want of consent in marriage. CLAUDIUS of
Seyssell says that he gave her unto him, to the end that sterrility, and
barrenesse, might deprive him of all means to have children, so much he hated
and abhorred the Blood Royal. The cause of this divorce was fterility, and
want of consent in marriage: Lewis declaring that King Lewis the 11. had forced
him to marry her.


Her consolation was in this solitariness, for that she recovered the liberty
which she had long desired: The King gave her the Duchy of Berry for her
portion, the Town of Bourges was her retreat, with a yearly pension of one
thousand two hundred pounds Sterling. She made the Order of the Religious of
the Annunciado, otherwise called the Order of the Virgin Mary, the which was
allowed and confirmed by Pope Alexander the sixth, in the year one thousand
five hundred and one, and she caused the Monastery of Saint Laurence of
Bourges to be built: The habit of her Religious women is a blew, or sky
colored Gown, a white Kercher, and a red Scapulaire, with a Cord of ten
Knots, signifying the ten Virtues, or Consolations, which the Virgin Mary had
in her life The ten Knots of this Cord had relation first to the pureness:
secondly, to the wisdom; thirdly, to the humility; fourthly, to the faith;
fifthly, to the virtue, sixthly, to the praise; seventhly, to the obedience;
eighthly, to the poverty; ninthly, to the patience; and tenthly, to the pity
of the Virgin Mary.
: She dyed at Bourges, the fourth of February, one thousand four hundred and
four: Her body was burnt, and the ashes cast into the wind in the first
troubles, when as the Earl of Montgomery took the Town of Bourges.

Charles his son succeeded him at the age of thirteen years: The Histories
of those times, speak much of the greatness of his courage, and the
weakness of his brain: They all agree that he neither had any great
understanding, nor much wit: Two great defects in two little words, the which
are much dilated in the actions of his life, whereas we see that he attempts
lightly, and gives ear to many things which are always prejudicial to them
that hearken to them A Prince should stop his ears to reports, and should fly
them: Clandestinas existimationes nullisque magis quam audientibus insidiantes
susurros. Melius omnibus quam singulis creditur. Singuli enim decipere and
decepi possunt, nemo omnes neminem omnes fefellerunt. Secret suggestions and
whisperings which circumuent none more then them that give ear unto them. It
is more safe to trust all in general then any one in particular: A man in
particular may deceive, and be deceived, no man has deceived all men, neither
have all men deceived any one man. C. PLIN. PAHEG.
: If the felicity of an estate depends of obedience, if to obey well depends
of commanding well, if to command well depends of a Princes wisdom, what good
commandment can be expected from a Prince, who neither has a sound judgment,
nor has gotten any thing to make it better? What hope is there that he shall
ever be able to command others and himself well?

After that Philip de Commines has showed that he was touched with the like
fever of the brain to Charles the seventh his Grandfather, and to Lewis the
eleventh his Father, who both feared their Children; and that for this cause
he soon past over his grief for the death of the Dauphin his son: He
adds, that this Prince was always little, Disposition of Charles the eighth
both of body and understanding; but he was so good, as there was never a
better creature seen. Claudius of Seissill says, That he was a good Prince,
Noble, and of a greater courage then of body, covetous of honor and glory,
desiring all good and honest things as much as his age could bear, and that
he failed in the flower of his youth, when as he began to understand his own
affairs. Peter Desrey a Champenois, who has written his Chronicle, says;
That having past the weakness of his first Age, youth gave great hopes of more
force and vigor of his Spirit, and that he did exercise himself in the
knowledge of many things, which make Princes learned in the difficult knowledge
of all. The knowledge how to reign and command, is the highest and most
difficult of all others. Books may help much, for that they furnish examples
whereof the shortness of life cannot see the hopes. But a good understanding
does all. The knowledge which comes from books, may serve for an orname^t, but
not for a foundation. The Philosophy of Princes is constancy, faith and
sincerity, other scyences are but as Paintings, as Plato says.
After the death of his father (says this Chronicler) and that he had taken
upon him the Royal dignity, he began very willingly to read books written in
the French tongue, and had a desire to understand the Latin; and to do like a
good Prince, he employed his youth willingly to serve God devoutly, and to
hear the council of wise men, desiring to learn how to govern well.

Notwithstanding that the carelessness of Lewis the eleventh to have him
Royally instructed, and bred up, has ministered occasion to the most famous
Historian of those times, and which has been since, to write that which
cannot be spoken but of a Prince, ill bred, and worse brought up: yet let it
not displease him: for this Charles, whom he gives us for an Ignorant Man, is
the same whom he compares unto Julius Caesar, for that his coming and his
victory in Italy was but one thing. Carlo condotto ad allogiare al Castle
Capoano gia habitatione antica de re Francesi hauendo con marauiglioso corso
d'inaudita felicita sopra l'essempio di Iulio Caesare prima vinto ^he veduto
and con tanta facilita che non fusse necessaria in questa espeditione ne
spregare maivn padiglione ne rompere may pur vna lancia. Charles being
conducted to lodge in the Castle of Capua, an ancient habitation of the Kings
of France, having with an admirable course of unheard of felicity, beyond the
example of Julius Caesar vanquished before he had seen, and that with so
great facility; as in the expedition he had no need either to pitch a Tent, or
to break a Lance.
For it is true, that he struck more amazement into Italy at the brute of his
coming, then the Gauls had done by their descent in former times.

He put all the Potentates in alarm, Pisa at liberty, Florence in fear, and
Sienna in jealousy; and having the effects of his desire greater then those of
his hopes; he entered armed into Rome, with his Lance upon his Thigh, he
planted his Cannon on the Marketplace, and made himself to be acknowledged
and admired of all men for the Deputy of the living God, for the reformation of
the disorders of Italy: and without striking stroke, or pitching any Tent, he
entered a Conqueror into Naples; and in his return, he marched (as it were)
upon the belly of Italy, being all banded against him, to hinder his retreat.
And although that France has not reaped the glory and fruit which she
promised unto her self by this voyage, it suffices that the cause was just
and glorious: for we must judge of things not by the events and executions,
but by the causes and motions of their wills that have done them. He that
considers of things by the events, does judge of the whole Image by the
heel. In all occasions we must settle our judgments not upon the issue and
execution but upon the causes and intentions of them which do them, and the
differences of things. Polyb. lib. 2.


This course might have carried me unawares to unfold the whole part of the
Table. Behold (by the grace of God) we are come to the bank; It is sufficient
to have written the Fathers History, leaving the Sons to some other. But
before we end, we must repasse unto the Judgments of the actions of this
Prince. That done, we will enter into the great Carriere of the toils and
glory, the Combats and victories, the Virtue and Fortune of the greatest
Prince that ever was before or after Lewis the 11th.

The end of the tenth Book.
THE CONTENTS OF the eleventh Book.
1 LIberty of Judgments upon the life of Lewis the eleventh. 2 A particular
examination of his actions, his piety, his devotions, and pilgrimages, his good
deeds to Churches, his behavior toward the Pope. 3 What he was toward King
Charles the seventh his father, toward his son, his wife, and the Princes of
his blood. 4 Majesty: The care he had to preserve the respect: he did not
affect pomp: who were the chief officers of his Crown: he is very wary to
confer titles of honor and dignity, he contemnes the mark of majesty. 5.
Magnificence: The order and expenses of his house: he receives the Ambassadors
of foreign Princes with great state. His buldings. 6 Clemency: He leaves no
offense unpunished: his Prisons and Cages of Iron, a rigorous usage of the
Dukes of Alencon and Nemours: He reuengeth old offenses which he had received
before he was King, and forgets not them of the league: Severity in the end
makes him fearful and distrustful. 7 Justice: He institutes the Parliaments
of Bourdeaux and Dijon: he loves not the Parliament of Paris: a free and
courageous admonition made by the President La Vacquerie: how chief Ministers
should carry themselves to Princes: Of the Kings Audiences. 8 Wisdom: He was
always accompanied with fear, he let slip the occasion to do his business in
England and Flanders, he can choose men and draw foreign Princes to his
devotion, as the Archduke of Austria, Cosmo di Medicis, and others; he drew
unto his service the Lord of Lescun, and Creuecoeur, and Philip de Commines.
His tongue offends his wisdom. 9 Liberality: He is neither covetous nor
liberal: he has forms to give which bind much: he entertaines many
Pentioners: his liberality passes to excess, empties his Coffers, drives him
to necessity, and to lay rigorous Impositions upon the people. 10 Valor:
Proof of the greatness of his courage in diverse encounters, what care he had
of war. His policy and military discipline. 11 Knowledge: He had more
knowledge of learning and the s^yences, then other kings his predecessors. The
pitiful estate of the profession of learning under his reign, his Apothegmes
and Answers. 12 Temperance: He had two base daughters: his private kind of
life: his domesticke pleasures: his exercises and his confident servants.
Diverse other observations upon his life and History.
THE HISTORY Of LEWIS the eleventh.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
MEN judge freely of the lives of Princes after their deaths: Judgments are
free after death.
the glistering of their Purple-Robes does no more dazzle their eyes, Themist^us
(...) that the court of the Emperor Iovinian was full of flatterers, said,
that then adored the p^rple more then the person, and that the Court was an
Euripus whose waves did f^ow and e^be in an instant. Nicep. Call. l. 10. c. 42.
and the Judgments which are made, are purged from flattery, which does
always augment the good, and diminish the ill which they do. That King does
greatly bind him which speaks of his life, when he gives him no occasion to
lie in commending him: For Princes are never so perfect, but Truth may find
great exceptions in the goodliest qualities of their praises; and before that
the Statue be made perfect, there must much Marble be taken away, and the
form exactly sought in the substance. Philip de Commines saying that he had
seen the greatest Princes of his time, and in them all there was both good and
evil, for that they were men; he adds for truth, freed from all flattery,
That God had created Lewis the eleventh more wise, more liberal, and more
virtuous then all they, and that in him there were more things belonging to the
office of a King and Prince, then in any of the other. I have in a manner
(says he) seen them all, and known what they could do; wherefore I divine
not.

This great authority which he preserved unto the last gasp, Liberty of
judgment upon the life of Lewis 11.
and carried into death, was supported by three mighty pillars, which his own
wisdom had raised, Severity, Constancy, and Reputation. Majesty is the
invincible f^^t of a Prince, it is better preserved by s^uerity, then by too
great (...).


But for that these good souls are like unto the Mill-dew of the stars,
which loses much of her pureness passing by the Regions of the air; and by
the entrails of Bees which form it; and that the gold of Princes virtues
cannot be drawn absolutely pure from their lives, being always mixed with
diverse strange matters, we must consider if the piety which was in him, has
retained nothing of superstition or hypocrisy, his elemency of fear, Justice
of cruelty, wisdom of subtilty, liberality of prodigality, and his other
goodly qualities of Art and dissimulation. Every man may now speak his opinion
without fear of displeasing, or blame of flattery: Praises which are not
necessary are best: Neminem magis laudare Imperato^em decet, quam que^ minus
necesse est.
praise may pass on freely, and boldly, without any other necessity or bond,
then the respect which every man should have to preserve the memory of Princes,
against the outrages of slander.

Posterity, which understands not things, but by the voice of such whom
benefits or offenses have bound to remember them, does always receive
flatteries and lies for truth. Flattery or hatred do most commonly turn an
History out of the right way of truth, and therefore Tacitus protests, that
they of whom he speaks, are not known unto him neither by offenses done, nor
by benefits received Mihi Galba, Otho, Vitellius, nec beneficio, nec iniuria
cogniti.
It is fitting in painting to represent Hanniball and Antigonus halfe-faced, to
hide the eye which they wanted; but a History must show the whole face, to the
end that Princes may find their own vices in the portrait of others. This has
noted them, to show that there is nothing perfect in this world; and if the
Tapestry of this Princes life be fair and pleasing, viewing it on the right
side, you shall find the back very much disfigured with knots and seames.

We must not seek his Elogies in the Histories of strangers, Buchanan says,
that Lewis 11. Tyrannidem exercebat, practiced tyranny; and that there was
nothing more common, Quam ex vsu and suis co^modis sine discrimine ^idem fall
re quibuscunque sed precipue agnatis Principibus, then of custom, and for his
own profit, to deceive any without distinction, especially the Princes of the
blood.
who speak as if God had suffered him to live for the misery of the
Commonweal, and the ruin and desolation of the people, whose fatness and
good estate he held dangerous for the health of the whole body; holding for a
Maxim, that they should not do ill unto the people, nor attend any good of
them.

In the end the Chronicle speaks after this manner: This King in his life
time, by reason of some men that were about his person, as Oliver the Devil,
called Dain his Barber, John Doyac, and many others, to whom he gave more
credit then to any men of his Realm, did during his Reign, many Iniustices,
wrongs and violences, and had brought his people so low, as at the time of his
death they were almost in despair.

All this is nothing but a rough draught of his humors: Plety and Religion of
Lewis the 11th.
To view the whole Table we must consider what his Religion and Piety was
toward God, and his obedience toward the Pope: then we will pass to his
affection toward his Wife, his Son, Father, and his nearest Kinsmen the
Princes of his Blood, and his Servants. Of all these things the Judgment shall
be reserved to truth and discretion, which will have the memory of Princes to
be always reverenced; and that they speak of their defects, not as of vices,
but as of imperfect virtues. The virtues of Princes should be spoken without
flattery, and their vices by discretion, they must not set down their defectes
plainly, but pass them over as virtues which are not perfect. It is the advice
which Plutarke give, writing the life of Simon.
For the first, the good is always good, and the evil is always evil;
Opinion cannot change the essence of things, they are very hardy which will
have actions to be other then they appear: Slander having no strong sight to
behold the brightness of virtue, uses false spectacles, and calls that
Fear which is Wisdom, Hypocrisy that which is Devotion, ^arde judgment of
Claudius Seissel.
and Inhumanity that which is Justice. I find that Claudius Seissell has
judged very boldly of the Devotion and Piety of this Prince, thinking that he
has pierced into the very inward parts, by the observation which he has made
of the outward man. He has represented him very melancholicke and
superstitious, always trembling and terrified with the horror of eternal
pain. His devotion True p^ety supports it self, she will have the soul
cheerful and obedient, and that a good man be so, although that nothing
should be ever known.
(said he) seemed to be more Superstitions then Religious: For to what Image,
or Church of GOD, and Saints, and namely of our Lady, that he understood the
people had any devotion, or where there were any miracles done, he went thither
to make his Offering, or sent some expressly thither. He had moreover his Hat
full of Images, the most part of Lead and Tin, the which whenever any good
or bad news came unto him, or that the humor took him, he kissed, falling
sometimes suddenly down upon his knees, in what place soever he were; so as
he seemed rather a man distracted then wise.

Such censures belong to him who does keep and judge the hearts of Kings; God
the Judge of Hearts.
but it is true, this Princes Religion was wholly outward, retaining nothing in
his heart. It was popular and ceremonious, as if he had had for the object of
his worship a visible dignity, and that it were sufficient to appear holy, and
not to be so. Religion will have an exterior and public exercise with her
Ceremonies. The Prince is bound unto it, and it is Impiety for any other to
contradict it, and to trouble the order, But the service which is done by the
Spirit, is answerable to the essence of God, who is all Spirit, and that which
is done outwardly, is more for us them for him.


His Chronicle says, that on a Sunday, the eighth of September, going from the
Tournelles to our Ladies Church, he past by the Church of Mary Magdalen, to
subscribe himself a brother and companion of the great brotherhood of the
Bourgeses of Paris. The God of the people is the God of Kings, but the exterior
service of Religion allows many things to the simplicity of the people, which
are not fitting for the majesty of Kings.

If we shall judge of causes by the events, we may say, that the Pilgrimages
on Foot and Horseback, Pilgrimages of Lewis 11
and the most zealous devotions of this Prince, have often covered designs
which were repugnant to Piety and Justice: He did therein always circumvent
some one, and upon this opinion, that the show of religion works wonders in
the belief of men, The people opinion of their Princes holiness works great
effects. Sertorius with his Hind had gra^en such a superstition in his
Soldiers minds, as they did not think that they were governed by a man who
had more judgment the^ they, but they did firmly believe that it was some God
which guided them.
keeping them from judging rashly of his life and actions, whom they saw so
familiar with God. They say, that he did fit his religion to his designs, and
not his designs to his religion. They did not in those times speak of that
most impious Maxim; Maxim of Machiuel.
That it is sufficient for a Prince to seem outwardly religious and devout,
although he be not so. A Maxim of Atheism, which mockes at God, to deceive
men: at God, who in the end confounds hypocrites, and will be served with an
unfeigned heart, whereof he sees and sounds the deepest bottom. They make
Machiuel Author of this Maxim, that a new Princce cannot observe all things
for the which men are esteemed good; being often constrained for the
maintaining of his estate, to do things contrary to faith and religion, to
leave the good when he may, and to do the evil when he is forced.
We may well say, that the world looks but to the exterior, and that which is
in show. It is not possible in matters of religion, whose actions must be so
often reiterated, that hypocrisy should still join them so well together, but
some one will dis-band and discover the deceit. The Signior of Haillan,
Historiographer of France, who has promised to publish the whole History of
this King, and has given us an abridgement in his book, which is excellent
and iuditious touching the affairs of France, speaks of his Religion after
this manner: Never Man was more superstitious then he, he did things which
were good in show, but to a bad intent, thinking by his superstition to deceive
both GOD and the world. The superstitious fear not to do evil for the
opinion they have to obtain absolution by the acts of their superstition.
Hypocrisy cannot continue long, lying cannot deceived long. The night lasts
not, but when the Sun is far from the Horizon. Judgments are settled upon that
which they see, wherefore Machiuel says, It concerns every man to see, and
few to feel, but in the end the mask falls.
He took from the poor to give unto Churches, and did more oppress his
people with Tributes and Taxes, then any other King of his Predecessors, and
therefore he made his subjects to be ill affected unto him.

He confessed himself often, for that once a week he touched them that were
troubled with the Kings evil. Curing of the Kings evil.
It is the only miracle which has remained perpetual in the Christians
religion, and in the house of France. That this grief, whose beginning is an
incorrigible ill digestion, a hidious ulcer to look on, dangerous to touch,
and for the most part incurable, should be healed by these words: The King
touches thee, and God cures thee, is a wonder beyond the reach of discourse
and judgment. That Clouis did first cure the Kings Evil, is drawn out of the
Epistle of Hormisda a Pope. S. Lewis adds to the Ceremony of touching, the
sign of the Cross. His arm is at Poblette, whither they that are sick of
that discase* go in pilgrimage to be cured.
I say aperpetuall miracle: The Kings of England have the same virtue.
for since Clouis the first Christian King, it has continued to them which
succeeded to his Religion and Crown. Other Realms have had the like graces
given them, but they have not continued: The Kings of England cured the falling
sickness, they of Hungary the Iaundise, and they of Castille those that were
possessed.

I could not find what men he employed for the service of God, and the conduct
of his conscience. We find that he, who was the head and directer of Gods
service in the Kings house, was called Apocris^ire under the first race,
Arch-chaplain in the second, and great Chaplain, or great Almoner under the
third.
I read, that besides the great Chaplin, or Arch-chaplin, he had two Chaplins
and one Clarke of the Chapel; and that a Franciscan Friar called John Vouste,
did for a long time exercise one of these charges.

The Chronicle says, that a little before his death he made a Doctor of
Tours, called Master Martin Magistri, his Counselor and Almoner, who dyed at
Clerry after the voyage of Saint Claude. In the accounts and expenses of his
House, we find, that he bound the City of Tours to give every day in the
Week (Friday and Saturday excepted) a piece of Royal Beef a foot square to
the Lepers and Hospital of Tours; and for the performance thereof gave a
hundred pounds sterling to be employed in the purchase of lands for the
foundation of this piece. Leprosy, which grows from an Adust and Melancholy
blood, demands meats that are less earthly; The air, water and nourishment
may not only alter the temperature of bodies, but also of the mind. Sunt qui
non corpora tantu^ verum etiam animos valea^t mutare liquores.
being certain, that nourishment ingenders diseases, and being engendered,
entertaines them.

He granted unto the holy Chapel at the Palace of Paris, the moities of the
Regalities to be employed in the entertainment of the Church and Ornaments.
He founded the Religious Nuns of the Aue Marie, which was the ancient Convent
of the Beguines, a kind of Religion, which was (as it were) Neuter, betwixt
the Mary's, and other religious Women: his picture, and that of Queen
Charlotte is to be seen in the quire in glass. He did enrich the Church of
our Lady of Clery, and of Victory, with great revenues. Being at Lion in the
year 1476. he gave unto the Chapter of the Church of Foruiere, This Church is
on^^ of the most remarkable Antiquities of the C^tty of Lions. The word of ^
oruiere comes from Forum veneris or Forum vetus. It is much bo^nd to the memory
of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.
the rents and guards of S. Simphorien le Chastel, and the Farm of the
Chastelenie of Charlien, to bind them to say certain Masses daily in a
Chapel called, Our Lady of good Council. The letters of dispatch show the
great devotion of this Prince to the service of the virgin Mary, and begin in
these terms: Having had consideration of the great and singular graces which
God our Creator has heretofore done us, at the Intercession of his blessed
Mother, the glorious virgin Mary; in whom, after God her son, we have always
had our chief refuge and hope: and who, in the conduct of our greatest
affairs, has always imparted unto us her grace and Intercession to God her
son; so as by her means, and aid, our Realms and Signiories are, by the
grace of God, preserved, entertained, and remain in peace, under us and our
true obedience, notwithstanding any enterprises, practices and conspiracies
which have been made since our coming to the Crown, against us and our said
Realm, Signiory and Subjects, as well by our enemies and adversaries, as other
our rebels and disobedient subjects, their adherents and accomplices. He did
institute many godly things, the observation whereof has continued unto our
times: The institution of the prayer which is made at noone by the sound of a
bed, was the first day of May, 1472.
his devotion to the virgin Mary made him ordain, that at noonday every man
should pray at the sound of a bell, and say the salutation of the Angel for
the peace of the Realm.

The Emperor Charlemaine had great and eminent virtues: The commendatio^ of
Charlemaigne.
he declared himself enemy to Didier, King of the Lombardes, who had revolted
against the Pope: he pacified Italy, subdued the Saxons, and expelled the
Sarazens out of Spain. But this enterprise was greater and more hardy then
profitable and needful: for Gannes, otherwise called Gannelon betrayed him,
and was the cause of that memorable defeat of Roncivaux, In the valley of
Ronceuaux dyed these valiant Captains, Rowland, Reynold of Montauban, and
Ogier the Dane* Charlemaigne made these four verses upon the death of Rowland
his sisters sons Tu patriam repetis tristi, nos orb relinquis,
Te tenet aula nitens, nos lachrymosa dies,
Sed qui lustra geris octo and binos super annos,
Ereptus terris, iustus ad astra redis.

where those brave and generous knights were lost, whose incredible valor is
no more believed, then the truth of the Romance. He joined the Roman Empire to
the Monarchy of France. But the Imperial Diadem did not cure the great
afflictions of the mind which he had all the time of his Empire, by the revolt
of the Sarazens in Spain, the Sclauonians, or Danes, and the Normans. Three
years before his death, at the age of 68 years, he gave himself to holy
contemplation, and to the care of Religion, and the Church; Founder of the
University of Paris.
he erected the University of Paris, by the advice of Alcuin his
Schoole-maister, and did people it with the most learned men of his time.

He had sour wives and many Concubines, the greatness of his virtue, and the
wonders of his reputation, made him to be adored of his subjects, and redoubted
of strangers: The Sophie of Persia, and Prester John of Ethiopia sought for his
alliance: He built two goodly houses, His Buildings.
the one at Iughelheim the place of his birth, the other at Nieumegue; he
built the Bridge at Mentz, a work of ten years, the which, the year before
his death was ruined by a sudden fire, in less then two hours: He built the
Church of Aix la Chapelle where he is interred: During his life he caused six
Councels to be called, at Mentz, at Rheims, at Tours, at Chalons, at Arles, and
at Francfort, and made Orders for the Reformation of the Church: Charlemain
made a book for the reformation of the Church, which carries this title,
Capitula Carol^ Magni, and contains Proofs of his great piety* When he went
to Collegiall, Churches, or Monasteries, he did sing with the Priests, and say
the lessons of the morning, and caused the^ to be said by his children and
other Princes of his Court.
He died the eighteenth of January, and in the eighth day of his sickness, in
the year eight hundred and fourteen, His Death
the three score and eleventh year of his age, and the seven and fortieth of
his reign, including fifteen years of his Empire.

For his great and heroicke virtues, which serve as an example, and pattern to
Princes, and for his great bounty to Churches, for the which Phillip de
Commines says, that a Chartreux Monk called John Galleas, His Can^nization.
Duke of Milan Saint: Phillip de Commines visiting the Church of Pauia, and
beholding the statue of John Galeas Duke of Milan on horseback to be higher
then the Altar, whom a Chartrous Monk, borne at Bourges, called Saint; he
demanded of him why he called him Saint, seeing the Towns which were painted
about him were so many marks of his tyranny, he answered softly, in this
Country we call all the^ Saints that do us good, he built this Monastery.
King Lewis the 11. would that the day of his death should be solemnized like
Sunday. The Church does not solemnize the birth of Saints, it makes the day of
their death a Feast, which is another kind of birth then the first, there being
no more proportion betwixt the world out of which they go, and heaven whereinto
they enter, then there is betwixt the womb out of which they go, and the world
whereinto they enter. He caused his Statue to be taken out of the rank of the
Kings, to make an image upon the Altar of the Chapel at the Palace with that
of Saint Lewis; he would also have his own in his rank, after another
fashion, kneeling before the Image of our Lady.

But how great soever his zeal was unto the Church, yet would he have the
Popes know, wherein, and wherefore, they were bound unto the Crown of France:
The Kings of France have deserved, the glorious Surname of Eldest son of the
Church, Popes bound to the Crown of France.
having defended it from great enemies, and freed it from terrible
persecutions. It is also found that at the last wherewith she is threatened she
shall have no other deliverer but a King of France; This opinion is grounded
upon a Treatise of Antichrist, which some attribute to Saint Augustine, others
to other ancient fathers, and many to Rabanus: Read upon this subject the
eighth Discourse of Doctor Suares, a Portugois, upon the Apocalipse.
the which has made many to say, and write, that the Majesty of the Church
shall never be overthrown so long as the Crown of France shall endure.

The devotion of Lewis did not make him incensible of the wrongs which the
Temporal power might receive from the Spiritual. Pope Pius the second, Paul
the second, and Sixtus the fourth, knew well that this spirit could not submit
himself in all things without knowing the reason: He did not dissemble the
wrong which Sixtus the fourth, Pope Sixtus being ^ff^rded at the violence done
to Cardinal Riario his Nephew, and to the Archbishop of Pisa, did
excommunicate the Florentines, declaring that ^ee would employ against them and
the Venetians his person, goods, and whatsoever else he could: The KIng upon
this advertisement thought it not reasonable that the goods appointed for the
service of God, should be employed in war, making a defense to to carry money to
Rome.
did unto the dignity of his father, and common pastor of Christian people,
banding himself against the Commonweals of Florence and Venice, and
suppoting the undue exactions which were made in the Chancery of Rome: He
forbad all men to send any money thither to have provision of Benefices, by Bulls
and expectatiue graces, upon pain of confiscation of body and goods, giving
the moueables, jewels, and horses of all the offenders to them that should
discover them. He appointed Commissioners in the chief Towns of the Realm,
to see and peruse the Bulls and provisions which should be brought from Rome,
that he might know whether they were contrary to the privileges and liberties
of the French Church; The Signior of Gaucourt^ Chamberlain to the King was
appointed in the Town of Amiens, the commission is reported by Du. Tillet.
He commanded the Bishops and Prelates which remained in the Court of Rome, to
watch over their Troops, and to be resident in their Bishoprics, upon pain
of privation of the Temporal of their Revenues, and to prepare themselves for
the holding of a Council at Lion when it should be called, upon the instance
which he would make unto the Pope: He was advertised that Religious Friars
going to general Chapters of their Orders out of the Realm, were employed to
carry packets, Religious men employed in messages.
and intelligences, he made a defense for the going to any Chapters which
should be held in foreign Provinces; The defenses by this Edict given at
Selongnes the third of September 1476. were general against the Religious of
the Order of Cisteaux, of the Charthusians of Clugny, and the four begging
Friars; But the Chartusians are not subject to the punishment, by the same
Edict it is spoken of the Friars Minors of the three Orders.
the punishment was diverse: He appointed banishment for them of Cisteaux and of
Clugny, and declared them incapable to hold any Benefices in France, and in
regard of the Begging Friars, besides banishment, he said that he would root
out, and expel the Realm all them of that Order which should infringe his
Edict.

Howsoever he did reverence Churchmen, yet would he not have them stray from
public instructions, Sermons of sedition.
to censure affairs of Estate; for such kinds of discourses do more trouble
the minds of men then comfort them: They be but clouds which break forth into
brutes of sedition, incense Princes, Discourses of affairs of State in a
troublesome and difficult time enter into seditious Spirits, as burning nails
do into green wood. They be Conduit Pipes, says the President Du Vair, by the
which dest^ll the affections wherewith the people are seasoned, and afterward
thrust on to good or bad actions.
and are like unto the arrows of Thrace which were shot against heaven to
appease it: He was advertised that Friar Anthony Fradin, a Franciscan born at
Ville-Franche in Beaujollois, spoke too boldly of the bad government of
affairs: He sent Oliver le'Dain to Paris in the beginning of the year 1479.
to forbid him to Preach. The multitude (which runs as it is led) mutined
against this pursuit, and followed this Preacher in troops to defend him, The
people go like troops and consider not; Quo eundum, sed quo itur: Whether they
must go, but whether they go.
yea the women carried stones and knives, to use against such as should come to
offend him.

From one liberty they saw diverse spring, as faults follow one another, and
this sedition was ready to cause great tumult: Light faults should be repaired
by pardon, and great by severity; and a Prince, as Julius Agricola says, must
not always be pacified with the punishment, he must rest oftentimes contented
with the repentance of such as have ^rred. Nec poena semper, saepius
poenitentia contentus esse debet, Tac.
The Court of Parliament prevented it in such sort, as they gave the King
subject rather to content himself with the repentance then the punishment of
this silly multitude. They commanded the Friar to go out of Paris, and not to
Preach seditiously in any other Province; They did consider that France had
seen and suffered terrible agitations by the violence of these spirits, and
that England had been violently afflicted under the reign of King Richard, by
the seditious Sermons of one only man, who seeking to confound all Orders by a
pernicious equality, Preaching always in his Sermons that when as Adam did
eat the Apple there were no Gentlemen, that Nature, the Minister of God, had
created all men of the same form, and had cast them in the same mould, as
brethren and companions lodged on the same earth, The Bishops of England having
forbidden the Pulpit to John Ball an English Priest, he went to Preach
seditiously in the fields, causing himself to be followed by the people, where
in the hearing of 200000. he began with these terms.
and if God would have made this distinction amongst men, he would have
ordained this difference from the beginning.

A great man of that time spoke these words upon that subject, which are so
worthy and true, Discourse is a powerful charm.
as the History shall not stray to step a little out of the Highway to
consider them. In truth (says he) the force of speech is a powerful thing,
especially having life given it by passion; for you would say that it does, in
a manner, mould and fashion men's souls, and that it is a fire kindled, which
incountring another body inflames and sets it on fire, When Adam delu'd, and
Eve span: Who was then the Gentleman?
how far off soever it be, like unto Naphte, which kindles at the very sight
of the fire. What cannot Eloquence do in the mouth of an honest man and of
credit, seeing that coming from a seditious spirit, it works such great
effects. One word of a man of credit, says Polibius, may divert men from bad
enterprises, and draw them to good: The eloquence of a wicked man is like
poison in a cup of Gold.
I have often observed when, not with any eloquent discourse, but with words
which were scarce intellegible, and without any discourse of reason, they have
put the people that heard them into choler, for that they were so: so easily do
passions communicate by words, and pass from him that speaks, to him that
hears. The same iealousy which a husband has for the honor of his wife, the
feeling which the son has for the love of his father, the same motions which a
faithful Minister has for the love of his Prince, a Preacher should have for
the Glory of God, he should dry away for the zeal of his house, and for the
increase of his service; any other passion that transports him is but fury.

Next to the service of God, piety respects the obedience and honor which we
owe unto our parents. How Lewis was toward his father.
It is true that Lewis offended against this Law, not only in his first age
(whose weakness and facillity to the impressions of other men might excuse his
error) but in his full vitility, which made him inexcusable, when as he could
not be ignorant that his duty toward his father was so natural, so religious,
and so strictly commanded, by Divine and Humane Laws, as all other duties
yield unto it. All the offices of Piety yield to that of the child to the
father, the son which sees his father and his son in danger of their lives,
if he cannot rel^^ue both, he must abandon his son to save his father, for
the duty which he owes him is more ancient then the love which he heare^ unto
his children: Cymon being unable for his poverty to bury his father, before he
had paid his debt, sold his own liberty.
The joy which King Charles the 7. had of his birth did not continue so long as
the sorrow he had for his disobedience; when he was borne he had cried Noe like
others, and this word which in the beginning did signify rest and consolation,
was a presage of the crosses and toiles which he endured. It is true that this
sour severity wherewith he controuled his actions, was cause of his disorders
and excess; The rough, severe, and imperious proceeding of fathers toward
their children makes them to grow insolent and disordered. It is a Divine
counsel which Saint Paul gives unto fathers: Parents he prou^cetis ad
iracundiam filios ne despondeant anim^m: Parents provoke not your sons to
anger, least they turn away their minds.
For being unwilling to dis-ioyne the authority of a father from that of King,
he chose rather to keep him in fear and obedience by the severity of the one
then by the mildness of the other: He thought that he had no better means to
enjoy this spirit then by keeping him short, and restraining the violent
motions of his courage, and that being in necessity he should be always in
obedience.

He was eighteen years old before he had any portion allowed him, no not that
which did belong unto him from the day of his birth; for the father considered
that if at the age of twelve or thirteen years, when as he had no part in the
Estate, he should have been had of some great faction, the increase of means
and years would have drawn him to great enterprises. The first example of his
disobedience was the trouble of the Praguery, which has been formerly related,
when as he suffered himself to be surprised and stole away from the Earl of
March, his Governor, whom Chroniclers have called a Prince of the Blood, and
erroniously have taken the husband for the wife. For it is true, that James of
Bourbon, The Lady Elenor of Bourbon daughter to Ieames of Bourbon Earl of
March, was married to the Earl of Perdriac, son to the Earl of Armagnac.
Earl of March, King of Naples, and son to John of Bourbon first Earl of
Vendosme, having but one daughter of his first marriage, gave her to Bernard of
Armagnac Earl of Perdriac, who by this marriage carried the name of Earl of
March, and Governor to Lewis the 11. They write that Lewis chased away the
Earl of March, for that he had advertised King Charles that the Duke of
Alencon was come to Ni^rt to subborne him.


For this reason it was late before he gave him the government of the Country
of Dauphine, neither would he that the displacing of Officers should depend
upon his capricious humors, this wise father having found that his actions
were so wandering, inconstant, and contrary to themselves, as it was a difficult
thing sometimes to believe that they proceeded from one spirit, for there is
nothing equal Men's minds change not according to the motions of reason but
according to occasions: Nemo non quotidie consilium mutat: There is not any man
but changes his mind daily.
if it comes not from the same resolution, wherefore in the Letters Pattents,
which were granted at Charleiu the 28. of July, 1440. the King reserved not any
other thing, but that he should not displace those Officers which were settled
in their charges, and that the Chancellor of France should keep the seal of
Dauphine.

For the taking of possession of this Province, he sent John Signior of
Gamaches, a Knight, and Gabriel of Bernet Signior of Targey, a Squite, Steward
of the Kings house to Grenoble, whom he termed his Ambassadors; they presented
the Kings letters, and the Dauphins, to the Council of Dauphine, in the
presence of Iuuenal of Vrsins a Knight, Lord of Treynell, Leiutenant of that
Province, in the absence of the Lord of Gaucourt, who was Governor, and of the
chief Noblemen of the Province.

Stephen Guillon President in that Council made an Oration upon this subject,
but after such manner, as it discovered the rudeness and simplicity of the
matter, for who so should discourse now after that manner, they would wonder
why the feet should do the ears so much wrong as to suffer attention. A
Babbler demanding of Aristotle if his discourse were not strange; no, answered
he, but yet a man having feet should not give himself so long patience to
bear thee.
They found men in those times who knew how to speak, but few were able to
discourse eloquently, It is easy to judge of the beauty of the building by the
frontespice: Behold the first periode of this Oration, Seeing it is the
pleasure of my Lords the Ambassadors to our most redoubted Lord and Prince my
Lord the Dauphin Lewis, that I should say something unto you concerning the
matter of their Embassage, to obey them as I ought, I will speak it as well as
I can, with the help of our Lord and of his Mother, and also with the good
supportation and correction of them and you my Masters, and the better to
relate it I take for my Theme: Fillius ditus est nobis dominator Dominus and
in manu eius potestas and Imperium: I say the third and the ninth chapter: In
those times public actions were performed like Sermons, and always they
took some passage of Scripture for the ground of their discourse.
The whole Discourse is of the like strain, and extends it self upon the
Dauphins praises, being drowned, as it were, in the allegations of diverse
passages of Divinity and Law.

I think in those days they had more regard to deeds then words, Simplicity
of the eloquence in the old time.
and that they had more care to do then to speak, that their discourses were
without pomp or vanity, and did not favor of that bold babbling which will
make men believe, that he which is beaten should make reparation, and that the
vanquished is victor. Thucydides and Pericles, had charge of the government of
the Commonweal of Athens, yet could never agree, Archidamus King of
Lacedemonia, termed their contention a wrestling, and asking Thucydides who was
the stronger, he answered: When I have thrown Pericles down be makes them
that see it believe that he is not vanquished, but that he stands still.
But in this action there is neither choice of terms, nor choice of reason;
and for that he would not have it wholly without invention, he stands upon the
letters of Lewis his name, and says that that in this word Ludouicus there are
nine letters, the first represents the Liberallity of this Prince, the second
that he was Vertable, the third that he should Domineere, and be feared; the
fourth that he was Orthodoxall, the fifth Vigilant, the sixth a Iusti^er, the
seventh Charitable, the eight Virtuous, and the ninth that he was filled with
Wisdom: Having ended the Dauphins Panegericke, he fell upon that of ^his
Ambassadors, and said that the Signior of Gamasche, who was called John, was a
forerunner to JESUS CHRIST, and the other the Angel which did foretell his
Incarnation to the Virgin MARY, for that his name was GABRIEL.

Such kind of writings are like unto Medals, which men esteem more for their
stamps, and for the testimony they give of the doubts of Antiquity, then for
their proper beauty: neither do we see any but give some light in the
obscurest difficulties, and serve in the managing of great affairs. We see in
the beginning of his discourse, The Dauphin is not acknowledged Prince of
Dauphine until the King has given him the power.
how this President labors to satisfy them who held, that Dauphine should
acknowledge the Dauphin from the day of his birth: for he maintained, That the
eldest son of France, could not be acknowledged for Prince, and Lord of
Dauphine, until it should please the King to give him the provisions and
command.

The History sets down how he retired into Dauphine, and from thence into
Flanders: A wonderful hearts grief unto the King, Grief of K. Charles the 7.
which did accompany him unto his grave; In either of his vioages, he was
always accompanied by necessity: His servants purses being emptied in the
voyage of Dauphine, they borrowed a hundred Crowns of them of Romans. The Bill
which he made is carefully kept among the public writings of that Town. It
is true, that Lewis the eleventh, was such toward Charles the seventh his
father, as he desired not that Charles the eighth his son, should be like
unto him, and doubting that the disposition of his nature might be helped by his
nourishment, he did not care to breed him up in those virtues which are worthy
of a Prince. These defects proceeded not so much from the fathers fault as from
the time, In th^se days they held that learning did wrong to courage, and the
most val^ant of those times were very gross and ign^rant: They say also that
Italy being given more to learning then Arms, had given a great advantage to
them that had conquered it.
where the old error was sworn by the greatest Families, that the study of
learning did daunt their courages: He would not have him learn any more
Lattine then these few words: Qui nescit dissmulare nescit regnare: King Lewis
the 11. would not have his son learn any other Art, but how to dissemble, in
the which he had pasi Master; he also said that in reading books he should
find so many accidents and perils, as he would becomelesse courageous.
A Prince leaves his son learned enough, when he has made him capable to
force obedience: Obedience is the Science of Princes. There is not any Science
necessary for a Prince but to command well, and to be well obeyed.


Of his two daughters he loved none but her whom he gave to the Duke of
Bourbon, the eldest was a sad encounter to his eyes. He failed also in the
affection which he ought unto the mother, for he gave her not so good a share
of his heart as she ought to have had. CLAUDIUS of Seyssell says: That whilst
he was in the vigor of his age, he was not loyal of his person, He always
kept her meanly attended, in some Castle for the most part, whether he went
some times to see her, Lewis the 11. a bad Husband.
more for a desire to have Issue, then for any delight he took in her; and
for the fear she had of him, and his sour usage of her, it is credible, that
she had no great delight nor pleasure in his company: But that which is worse,
toward the end of his days he sent her into Dauphine, and did expressly
command that she should not be near his son when he should be King. Of
all the contentments of life that of marriage is most to be desired: It is a
roughs passage, the ways are flanked with Bushes and Thomes, it is impossible
to go unto the end of it, but some Brier or Bramble will catch hold of you:
Marriage is good of it self, but it is subject to bad accidents: To explain
this truth, Gregory brings a comparison of a way which is clean and straight,
and yet has on either side brambles which may catch hold: In via quidem munda
non offendimur, sed a latere nascitur quo pungamur. We are not hurt in a clean
way, but it grows from the sides wherewith we are pricked. Greg. 12. Moral.
And the great Prince, which did draw all sorts of Sciences abundantly out of
the Treasures of the Eternal Wisdom, does number the concord of Marriage
among his chiefest felicities, holding him happy that has a wise wife, and
aduowing that there is not any thing more pleasing unto God then Nuptial
Concord.

That of brethren is no less pleasing unto him, Lewis bad to his brother.
there was not any betwixt the King, and the Duke of Guienne his brother, and
we cannot say that of them which is written of the two Twins, Two brethren
were held Twins, for that being touched with the same Infirmity, the
beginning, progress, and declining was equal in either of them. August. lib:
5. de Ciuit.
that the one had a feeling of another infirmity: There was no resemblance of
Complexions and Will betwixt them. The Duke of Guienne having seen that his
presumptions in the League of the Commonweal, and those of the Dukes of
Brittany, Bourgundy, Bourbon had been recompensed, and to draw favors from
the King, it was good to make himself to be feared, he still continued his
practices with them that might terrify him, and held his spirit in the
apprehensions of war.

This great rigor, which the King used toward him, might well be excused and
maintained with this great reason, not to make the Princes of the blood great
in a time of trouble and liberty. If his brother had had a greater share in the
State, and if his portion had lain nearer to his enemies, the League of the
Commonweal had continued longer. In the beginning he thought to content him,
in giving the Duchy of Berry The Duchy of Berry was given him for his portion
in November 1461. and in the year, 1465. he entered into the Duchy of
Normandy, and the Lands which the Duke of Orleance held there, as the Counties
of Mortaigne and Longueuille.
to him, and to his Heirs Male, then the Duchy of Normandy, with power to
impose all sorts of Subsidies: But he did all this only for the necessity of
his affairs, and to dispierce, and cut assunder the storm of the League:
Soon after, he drove him out of Normandy, and compelled him to retire, and
withdraw, himself into Brittany, as poor as ever.

This severe course was approved and allowed by the three Estates, who held it
not fit, nor convenient, to pull so goodly a Flower from the Crown, saying;
that he should rest himself contented and satisfied with the offer which the
King made him of twelve hundred pounds Sterling yearly rent, with the Title of
a Duchy, and four thousand eight hundred pounds Pension: This offer was made,
according to the Ordonance of King Charles the fifth, in October 1374. by the
which he would that Lewis of France his second son should have twelve hundred
pound sterling yearly rent, for his portion, and 4000. pounds given him to
furnish him.
In the end, he gave him the government of Guienne, but he commanded John of
Popincourt, President of the Accounts at Paris, not to inuest him with his
Letters, before he had delivered, and resigned up the others, and made his
renounciation: This was but a scantling of the whole piece, for of this great,
spacious, and goodly Province of Guienne, he had nothing but the Country of
Bourdelois, Bazadois, and Landesse: He neither enjoyed it long, nor yet
possessed it quietly; for being there, he presently found great troubles for
the limits, and bounds, which the Kings Officers strove and contended for, and
for the which the Duke of Bourgundy would have taken Arms, but it was
compounded and verefied by the Court of Parliament two years after. Death gave
him a more contented, quiet, and certain Portion in the other world.

If death had not done the like grace to the Duke of Orleance, and drawn him
out of the cares and afflictions of this life, he had declared the cause of
the same resolution the which he made known to King CHARLES the seventh: The
violent death of LEWIS Duke of Orleance his father, having invited the English
to mount upon the Stage, and there to act the part of Kings of France for many
years, made him to take Arms, and to join the revenge of this death to the
defense of the Crown: He was taken prisoner at the battle of Agincourt, and
carried into England, where he remained five and twenty years. His liberty
and rest came from thence, from whence proceeded the causes of the miseries of
his house, and of his captivity. Phillip Duke of Bourgundy, paid two hundred
thousand Crowns for his ransom, married him to Mary of Cleues his Niece, and
gave him the Order of the Golden Fleece, The Duke of Orleance received the
Order of the Duke of Bourgundy, after his return out of England, in the year
1440.
He was not received by King Charles the seventh, according to his hopes and
the greatness of his quality. Assembly at Neuers in the year 1442.
This discontent made him to join with the intentions of the Dukes of
Bourgundy, Brittany, Alencon, and other Noble men, who assembled at Neuers, to
make King Charles the 7. regard them better then he did, and to reform the
disorders of the Realm. The discontented Princes assembled at Neuers, in the
year 1442. The Archbishop of Rheims Chancellor of France, was sent to
moderate their choler, and to assure them of all they desired.


This was presently repaired, for the English made their profit, and the Duke
of Orleance recovered the rank, and authority which the dignity of his birth
gave him near the King: Who employed him in the conference which was made at
Tours, for a Truce betwixt France and England, under the favor whereof he
undertook the conquest of Milan, after the death of PHILLIP MARIA. The
success of this enterprise did show that he had believed them too lightly who
had represented it so easy; as the first day he should arm, Lombardy would
give him the Castle of Milan. He past into Italy to take possession of the
Duchy, It is a great error in a Prince to believe that lightly which is
represented unto him of the facillity of a great design, notwithstanding that
the most temperate are subject to suffer themselves to be carried away with
these goodly persuasions. Credulitas error magisest quam culpa and quidem in
optimis cuiusque mentem facillime irripit. Credulity is an error rather then a
fault, and it does easily creep into the best men's minds. Cicero.
But as it has been always reproached unto the French, never to think of
their return when they pass the Mountains, being there he was presently
unfurnished of all necessary means to work any great effect, and was forced
to end his enterprises as soon as they began. The conquest of the County of
Ast was the fruit of his voyage, the rest remained to FRANCIS SFORCE. This
County of Ast served him for a retreat for some time after, the greatness of
his courage not suffering him to remain near the King, Cause of the Duke of
Orleans death.
for the small esteem he made of him. A contempt which did wound his heart
with so sencible a grief, as CLAUDIUS of Seyssell finds no other cause of his
death.

Lewis Duke of Orleance was successor to this bad usage, and to the end that
this contempt might be a counterpoise to the greatness of his courage, he
would have his breeding less exquisite then his generous disposition could
bear, and forced him to marry his daughter, who was weak and crooked, The
Author of the remembrances of the Royal House of Bourbon says, that Lewis the
eleventh, caused Lewis Duke of Orleance to be bred up as grossly as he could,
to abate that generous heart of the house of Orleance, Claudius of Seyssell
says, that he used him very roughly, and sought to kill him.
giving him a boane of grief and repentance to gnawe for above twenty years.

According to the Maxim, to humble the Princes of his blood, he entreated the
Earl of Angoulesme no better, and would not suffer him to think of marrying
the Princess of Bourgondy, desiring rather that that great and mighty Estate
should be in the power of a foreign Prince. He doubted the courage of them
that were nearest allied unto him, and held them (as it were) overwhelmed under
the rock of contempt and necessity, and kept them from great charges. The
springs of his bounty were drawn dry for them, for he used France like unto an
Orchard, where as they cut, pull up, and transplant trees at their pleasure.

That great and wonderful house of Bourbon, which alone can reckon as many
triumphs as France has had enemies, and which before all others carried a
Ducal Crown, avoided these storms. This royal family of Bourbon has bin so
much esteemed by our ancient Monarks as it was the first among the Princes of
blood that was honored with the Title of a Duke: for although the Duchy of
Bourgondy were long before the erection of the Duchy of Bourbon, yet it was
never comprehended in the house of France, but since Charl^s the fifth and the
Duchy of Bourbon was erected by Philip of Valois, Grandfather to Charles the
5.
He would have used it with the like rigor, but he found it more firm,
Greatness of the house of Bourbon.
forcing him to convert his spleen and hatred into other effects of love and
affection. For he he gave the first Collar of the Order to John Duke of
Bourbon, his brother, who had married the Lady Ioane of France, daughter to
Charles the seventh, and the Lady Agnes his daughter, to Peter of Bourbon, to
whom he committed all his important affairs; he gave him the inheritance of
the Earl of Armagnac, yet he would not have him carry the Title of Earl.

Majesty. Next to the duties which bind a Prince to serve God, and to love his
Allies, there is not any thing which should keep his spirit more in action
then the care of Majesty: for it is so delicate a spring, as if it slip or
break, the whole frame of authority is in disorder, and he becomes a king of a
Tragedy. When I speak of Majesty, I mean not that, to maintain that a Prince
should live like unto the Kings of Persia, in a Castle with three Ditches,
Ridiculous gravity of Princes.
and as many Walls, The Kings of Persia were rather worshipped then reverenced
by their subjects. They remained in a Castle with three Ditches and three
walls, speaking to few, and yet had news daily from all parts of their Empire,
from the straight of Hellespont to the East Indies, by Sentinels which were set
upon the mountains.
that they should not speak unto him, but through a trauers, like unto the
Kings of Borney: that he should not see his subjects, but bare-headed, and
covered with ashes; or that he should not show himself but once a year, like
to the first Kings of France: But my meaning is to speak of that inviolable
and glorious respect which binds a Prince not to say, do, or yield to any
thing contrary to the dignity of his Crown, which cannot endure to be forced,
and does never show himself in public actions, but with what is fit and
necessary for his greatness and power. The words and actions of Princes are so
considered, and the people judge of them as they understand them; and therefore
should always appear Maiesticall, and (if it may be) Divine. And ancient
Grecian said, That a Prince should not speak before the people, but as if he
were upon a stage in a Tragedy.
This Majesty is like unto Moses Rod, Majesty compared to Moses rod.
the which being held in the hand, was the Instrument of admirable things; but
creeping on the earth, there was nothing but horror and contempt.

Lewis the eleventh was always very careful to maintain this Majesty, being
wonderful desirous of reverence, respect, and reputation, and yet his private
and familiar actions were very contrary. This care was the last garment he put
off; he showed it upon the tigpe of his lips when as he thrust forth the
last words of his life. He gave it two supporters, Fear and Admiratition,
(...) that gre^ God, who the Prince does represent. It is the support and
protec^sion of an estae and conf^^^ be contemned, nor wronged, but the whole
body will be distempered. maiestas Imperij solutis tutela. Maiestly is the
guardian of the Empires health.
another would have maintained it with Love and Authority; but he mist this
first way at his coming to the Crown, and could never after recover it: he
found such sauadge humors, and so accustomed to liberty, that as the
intemperance of the Patient iustifies the severity of the Physician, he was
forced to use fury to make mad men wise.

Thus his Majesty was feared of the greatest Princes of Europe, it was not
contemned of any man without punishment, and it was reverenced of all his
subjects. This Majesty was like unto those Pictures which seemed fairest far
off. It was admired in foreign Provinces, but it was something blemished by
his carelessness and facility, wherewith he did often wrong his greatest
actions.

The Castillians at the voyage of Bayone, scoffed at him, to see him with so
little pomp and majesty. Custom of Lewis 11 at ceremonies.
Upon days of great show he caused some one to be attired like himself. At
the enterview of King Lewis the eleventh, and Edward the fourth at Piquigny,
Philip de Comines was att^^ed like the King.
And yet a Prince should never do any thing that should cause him to be
sought for among his subjects and servants; the brightness of his Majesty must
shine like unto a Planet over the lesser stars.

Great men which inuiron a Prince, give a luster to the greatness of Majesty.
Offices of the crown
The Offices of the Crown are ordained to that end, and the great dignities
which France does impart to great merits, adds reverence, and does incite
their minds to merit them.

It is like unto the Garden of Phaeaces, which abounds with all sorts of
fruits. It is not unfitting to set down here who tasted of them during this
Reign. When as king Lewis the eleventh came unto the Crown, there was no
Constable: Arthur, Duke of Brittanie, Earl of Richmond, was under the Reign
of Charles the seventh.
Constable. Lewis of Luxembourg, Earl of Saint Paul, no other carried the
Sword during this Reign. Chancellor, Peter of Moruilliers, Iuvenall of
Vrsins, Lord of Treynell, and Peter of Oriole.

Lord Steward. The Lord of Nantoillet, JOHN of Croi, CHARLES of Melun, ANTHONY
of Croi, son to JOHN of Croi, and ANTHONY of Chabannes, Earl of Damartin.
Chief Chamberer. JOHN the second Duke of Bourbon. The Office of chief
Chamberer, or Gentleman of the Chamber, continued long in the house of Bourbon.
The King Saint Lewis gave it to Robert of France his son, Lewis the first,
Duke of Bourbon, Charles the first, John the second, Peter the second, Dukes of
Bourbon.
Lord Chamberlain. JOHN of Orleans, Earl of Dunois, ANTHONY of Chasteauneuf,
Lord of Lau. Marshals of France, ANDREW of Lauall, Lord of Loheac, JOHN
Bastard of Armagnac, Earl of Comminges, Ioachim Rouant Lord of Gamasche, of
Boismenard, and Peter of Rohan, Lord of Gye. There were but two until King
Francis the first. Admiral, John Lord of Montauban, Lewis Bastard of Bourbon,
Earl of Rousillon; Lewis, Lord of Grauille. Master of the Crosse-bowes, The
master of the Ordinance of France, or the Co^oncll of the Infantery, have
succeeded in this charge.
John of Estouteuille, Lord of Torcy. Great Butler, the Lord of Lau.

We find not that he had any Master of his Horse, or Master of the Pantry.
Ioachim of Rouant was Master of the Horse at his Coronation. Yuon of Fau his
chief Hunts-man, Lewis of Lauall, Lord of Chastillon, was master of the
Waters and Forests.

The ancient order of France was, that Knights Banneret, the Master of the
Pantrie, the chief Caruer, and the chief Cuppebearer should serve the King at
the four Annall Feasts, and to either of them was given four pounds
sterling: but when as Lewis the eleventh neglected this Gratuity, they forgot
the Duty.

It is one of the precepts of Majesty, that the marks of Sovereignty be not
imparted to any, A prince should not be more sparing of any thing then of
honors which depend of his majesty.
yet he suffered the Prince of Orange to style himself Prince by the grace of
God, Here P. Matthew is deceived.
and to Rene King of Sicile, to seal in yellow Wax in the year one thousand
four hundred sixty nine, the which does only belong to the Kings of France,
other Princes of Christendom seal in wax of diverse colors; and to Charles
Earl of Angoulesme to release prisoners, when he made his first entry into
any Town where he commanded. In this privilege, but for once to Charles Earl
of Angoules me, prisoners for high Treason were excepted. It was granted in the
year 1477.


He was very stayed in giving Titles of Honor and Dignity to great Families:
a Prince cannot be too wary therein: for it falls out often, that the
considerations which favor the private merit of any one, end with him when
he dies; but when the dignity is tied unto the person, as the feodall titles
of Dukes, Marquises, Earls and Barons be, the Family for the which the
gratification was made, is dispossessed thereof, when as the Lands go away.
Many disallowed that the feodall Titles of Dukes, Marquises, etc. should be
given in France to the Land, and not unto the Blood, for it happens that some
one loosing the land, does also loose the means to maintain the Title which
remains.
Hence it comes that in England such dignities are not annexed to the Lands
and Fees, Policy in England for the titles of Houses.
but to the Blood, and the Descendants of the Family. The German does not
impart it to the whole posterity, but only to them which descend from the
Males.

There are two houses which be so great and famous of themselves, as they
honor the titles which are given them. King Charles the seventh his Father,
having made the Earldom of Foix a Pairie for Gaston of Foix, he confirmed
this erection; but he made not any new. This house of Foix was in those times
one of the most famous in Christendom, and compare with Sovereign Princes We
find that in great ceremonies the Earls of Foix are named before the Princes,
and had precedence of the Earls of Vendosme. There is no other reason but that
the eldest of Princes houses precede the younger of other houses, and therefore
at the Estates held at Tours, the Earls of Neuers, Eu and Foix, had precedence
of the Earl of Vendosme.


Gaston of Foix, who lived in the time of King Charles the fifth, went equal
with Kings: when as King Charles the sixth was at Tholousa, he sent the Earl
of Sancerre Marshall of France; and the Signior of Riuiere, one of the chief
of his Council to the Earl of Foix, who was then at Mazere, to entreat him
to come unto him, or else he would go to see him. He did not excuse himself
upon the Indispositions of his great Age, and being sorry that he had not
prevented this summons, he parted from Mazere with six hundred horse, and came
to the King to Tholousa. Train of the Earl of Foix.
The History says, that presenting himself unto the king, he was followed by
two hundred Gentlemen, all clothed in silks; among them there was noted the
Vicount of Bruniquet and his brethren, Roger of Spain, Lord of Montespan,
issued from the blood of Arragon, and head of the house of Montespan, Espagno
let of Spain, son to Roger of Spain, son to Leon of Spain.
and the Lord of Corras, who first raised the honor of the Earls of Caramain,
a great and rich family, Beginning of the houses of Mo^tespan and Caramain
allied to that of Foix, and who (seeing that Houses and Families have their
periods like to all other worldly things) could not desire a more glorious
fall, then into the house of Monluc, where it begins to revive. King Charles
the sixth requited this visit at New-yeares tide in the year 1390. At this
voyage the Earl did institute King Charles the sixth his heir, the which he
would not accept, for that he would not defraud the Vicount of Chastellan his
lawful Heir.


He favored the house of Lauall with the like declarations of honor, House of
Lauall.
the which was long before held for one of the worthiest of France, having
never wanted children, nor the first dignities and alliances of France, having
for their stem the House of Montmorency, They draw the beginning of the
first house of Montmorency, to the time of Saint Denis, by whom the first that
was converted among the French Knights, was a Lord of Montmorency, and
therefore the ancient Device of this house is, God help the first Christians.
the first Christian of France; and there is no difference in their Arms, but
five Cockle-shels Argent to the Cross. Wherefore he would that Francis of
Lauall, Lord of Gaure, son of a daughter of king Charles the seuenths sister,
should go in rank with the Earls of Vendosme, as well in Council as in
Parliament, and in all other public actions; and caused his letters to be
dispatched at Man's the nine and twentieth day of November 1467. to serve for a
special and perpetual privilege to his posterity.

He had much contemned the glorious and honorable marks of Majesty. Princes
had always men appointed to serve in time of peace and war for the ornament
of their majesty, and royal greatness. Heralds were instituted in France for
that respect, in time of peace they carried mayles upon their breasts, and in
times of war their Coat of Arms powdered with Flowers de Luce. I have
observed in the Church and Cloister of Saint Catherine du Val of the Scholars,
twenty of their Tombs which show the form of their Maces and Scutchions.
Bodin writes, that having chased away almost all the Gentlemen of his house,
he employed his Tailor for a Herald at Arms, and his Barber for an
Ambassador, and his Physician for a Chancellor, as an ancient king of Syria did
Apolophanes his Physician, whom he made the president of his Council. Philip
de Commines observes it, when he shows how much he was troubled to furnish
out a Herald which he sent to the King of England. Heralds were necessary for
the Majesty of a Prince, in actions of war, and in the most solemn days of
peace.

They had diverse names, and diverse charges, and they either carried the Titles
of the Sovereigns, Provinces, or of some other famous occasion, as in France
the Heralds are diversely named, and we find often in the History of France,
these names given to Heralds: Bosios error in the History of Malta.
Monjoy e Saint Denis, Mont Saint Michel, This word of Monjoy Saint Denis was
sometimes the warlicke cry of the French. They say it grew upon that which
Clouis said in the battle near to Colleyn, when as fearing to loose it, he
promised to believe in Jesus Christ, worshipped by Clotilde his wife, and to
hold him for his Jove. Since that time they cried in their battles, Monjoye
Saint Denis, as if they would say, Christ whom Saint Denis has preached in
Gaul, is my Jove, that is to say, my Jupiter. The word of Jove being turned
into that of Joy. The Antiquities of Gaul wri^ten by the President Fauchet.
wherein a great man of Italy has erred, and moves them that observe it, to
laugh; for having found in our Histories that King Lewis the eleventh had sent
two Heralds to Bajazeth to complain that he had broken the peace with the
Venetians: he sets down their names after this manner: Monsieur Gaudio de
Saint Denis, Monsieur de Saint Michel, whereas he should have said, The
Herald Monjoy Saint Denis, and Mont Saint Michel.

They were created at great and solemn Feasts, and when they presented Wine
unto the Prince, having drunk, he gave the cup to him whom he made Herald,
wherewith he should make his Scutchion. Oliver of la March says, that Philip
Duke of Bourgondy did sometimes give them the name of that Country whereas the
Wine which he then drank, did grow: which done, the other Heralds gave him
the Coat of Arms, charged with the Princes Arms.

There were more Ceremonies at the Creation of a King at Arms: for his
sufficiency was to be testified by all the Kings at Arms, Creation of Heralds
and Heralds that might be found, and they were distinguished from others by a
Crown croslet, which they carried on their heads. Their chief charge was to
make a distinction of the Arms of Families, to preserve the ancient, and
prevent the usurpation of new. They might forbid them that were no Gentlemen to
carry Arms which were not fit for their profession, or for Gentlemen to carry
any other Crests then their Fathers had done, or to open the Helmet, or to
crown them without permission.

It was also their duty to keep the Blason of Arms of Houses, There were
great considerations in the form of Scutchions, and in the Crests of Arms. A
Knights Scutchion might be cut square, or voided at his pleasure, whereunto a
Crest was added, taken out of part of the Arms, and the Helmet shut, and
stand^ng straight. A Squires Scutchion was round, like unto a Rondache, and had
had no Crest, but his Helmet only shut, turned on the one side.
to have recourse unto them upon any dispute that might grow upon differences
and conformities. Office of Heralds at Arms.
They kept a Register of the Devices and Colors of Sovereign Houses, as White
for France, Black for England, Red for Bourgondy, Blewe for Savoy, Yellow for
Lorraine, and Green for Anjou. The King at Arms in the house of Bourgondy had
a care that such as were made noble, should not carry a field gueles, for that
it was the color reserved for the Prince.

This house did greatly observe the Respects and Ceremonies of a Sovereign
pomp. Magnificence of the house of Bourgondy.
When the Duke did eat at any solemn Feast, besides all the ordinary state of
Kings, he had behind him the Kings at Arms, and Heralds with their Coats and
Crowns, and before him were set, at a low Table, two Vshers, and two Sergeants
with their Maces, who had always their eyes upon his, to execute his
commandments upon the least sign he should make; yea, to take the greatest
prisoners which could not be taken elsewhere.

These Charges have been contemned by the contempt of persons which have not
desired them, but to cover the indignity of their birth. In former times they
were not held but by Gentlemen, whose honor carried them unto dangers with the
same courage that they which are less generous fly from them. They had the
guard of the Kings Chamber, and had that charge which since the Archers of the
Guard have. The S^rgean^s at Arms, by day, carried a Mace before the King, and
guarded his Chamber by night, and therefore du Tillet thinks, that they held
the place of the Archers of the guard.
They showed good proof of their valor at the battle of Bouuines, under
Philip Augustus, by reason whereof Saint Lewis did build the Church of Saint
Katherine du Val des Escoliers, and King Charles the fifth appointed the
brotherhood there, whereas at this day many Tombs are to be seen, which have
preserved the ancient form of their habit and Arms.

That which Philip de Commines observes of a Gascon which came into the place
where as the King was at the stool with three or four, confirms this opinion
of the small care he had of the forms befitting Majesty; for although there
were no Vshers at the doors, Duty of Chamberlaines.
yet this facility to enter even into the Cabinet, was dangerous. His
Predecessors had provided for it, and the Chamberlaines were bound The first
care of the kings person belongs to the Lord Chamberlain, he was bound to lie
at the Kings feet, when the Queen was not present, and so Peter, Lord
Chamberlain to the king S. Lewis, was buried at Saint Denis, at his masters
feet, as he served him living. And at this day in the Assembly of the Estates,
and when as the King sits in Justice, the Lord Chamberlain sits at his feet.
by the duty of this charge, not to suffer it: but he contemned it all the
time of his reign, until the end, when he was more careful of it then was
needful, passing from a great facility and confidence, to a rigorous severity
and distrust to keep his gates shut: we find these words very remarkable in
the Ordonance of King Philip the long: After the care of the soul, they must
not be so negligent of the body, as through negligence, or bad guard any
perils arrive, especially when for one person many troubles may happen. We
therefore ordain, and do therewith especially charge our Chamberlain, that
no unknown person nor boy of poor estate enter into our Wardrope, nor lay
their hand, nor be at our bed making, and that they suffer not any strange
sheets to be laid on. And we command the Steward of our house, that our
Pantrie or Kitchen, and all other Offices of our house be so well and
carefully kept, as no danger may arrive, and these things we will have
observed in the houses of our Company, and of our Children.

The other precept of Majesty, Great Offices should not be hereditary.
is not to continue great Offices in one Family, The perpetuity of great
charges is dangerous. They that have commanded long, are loath to obey.
Antiquitas voluit Prouinciarum dignitatem amica successione repara^i ne diutina
potestate vnus insolesceret. Antiquity would that the Governments of Provinces
should be supplied yearly, least that any one by a continual command, should
grow insolent.
and to make them hereditary. The Order and justice of the state, will that a
distribution be made of those who by the quality of their birth, or the
greatness of their merit, are capable.

The perpetual Dictatorship did overthrow the state of Rome, the great
authority given to the Mayors of the Palace, did ruin the first Family of our
Kings. To those that are ambitious of the same Offices their Predecessors
enjoyed, we should wish the like moderation and integretie that Quintus Fabius
Maximus had, who having been five times Consul, and undergone many great
charges, entreated the Senate not to confer that Honor unto his son; not
that he thought him unworthy, but that he knew well, that the Commonweal
should receive prejudice by the perpetuity of great Offices in one Family. In
an other occasion Quintus Fabius Maximus did show, that in the election of
great Charges there should be no respect had but of the public good, he
would not consent that T. Octacilius, who had married his wives daughter,
should be Consul, for that he held him not capable of that charge; nor of
courage to make head against Hanniball. T. Liu. lib. 24.
This was to love the State more then himself. Lewis the eleventh took more
delight then he received content or profit to change his Officers often. When
as a place is executed worthily and profitably by any one, his dismission is
unjust, and the Princes service is wronged: Offices are to be maintained if
they be good.
for if the place be not supplied by a man of the like experience and
sufficiency, the Commonweal is damnified: As the ruin of Families comes
commonly from new servants, so the fall of Estates proceeds from new
magistrates which enter into Offices without experience.
those that are new come, being greedy of gain, prefer their own private
Interest before all public consideration. The soundest Estates have always
some ulcers: to change the remedy, and to change the Physician is one thing.
Wounds have no time to close up, when they do often change plasters.

He dismissed the Duke of Bourbon from the government of Guienne, Changes in
diverse Charges.
and gave it to the Bastard of Armagnac: JOHN of Andie, Lord of Lescun, bastard
of Armagnac, Earl of Comminges, head of the house of Riberac.
He took from the Lord of Bueil the Office of Admiral of France, and gave it
to the same Bastard, and afterward to the Bastard of Bourbon his
Sonne-in-lawe, who did him great services; yet having no consideration thereof,
he took from him the Government of Picardie, to give it to PHILIP of
Creuecoeur, Lord of Cords. He would have the Lieutenants in the Government
of Bourgondy to hold their places as the Wolf by the ear: He took it from
Des Cords, and gave it to Chaumont, who died in the year, one thousand four
hundred eighty one. King. Lewis the eleventh being discontented that the Lord
of Tremouille had not taken Dole, he took from him the Government, and gave
it to Charles of Ambois, who was governor of Champagne.


He took the Seals from PETER of Moruillier, and gave them to IUVENEL of
Vrsins, from whom he had taken them when he came to the Crown, them he gave
them to Peter of Oriole: He took the Office of Marshall of France from the
Lord of Loheac, and to restore it to him again he took it from the Earl of
Comminges, bastard of Armagnac. Charles of Melun was his Lieutenant in the
City of Paris, he dispossessed him of that charge to give it the Earl of Eu,
and made him Lord Steward of his house.

Entering into Paris he made James of Villiers Lord of Lisle-Adam Provost of
Paris. After the War of the Commonweal he dismissed him from that Charge, and
gave it to ROBERT of Estoteuille. His whole Chronicle is full of these changes
in all sorts of dignities and Offices.

Magnificence. Magnificence of Lewis 11.
The Majesty of a Prince is followed by his Magnificence, which is one of the
Flowers of his Crown; It is a Foil which gives luster to this Dyamond,
Iamblicus calls Magnificence, the crown of the Empire of princes, and says,
that it is chiefly admired among the principal actions of a Prince.
it shows it self in many places, and upon many occasions; but her Theter is
in his House, and at his Court, she presides in his expenses, and appears in
the private Ornament of his person.

Lewis the eleventh did respect it so little, Habit of Lewis 11.
as to see his Apparel you would have said, that he desired to live poor,
and to dye rich. He attired himself plainly in course Cloth, and took no
delight to see sumptuous Apparel. His Chronicle says, That he ware Doublets
of Fustian. Whether he did it to make his Fashion more popular; or (by his
example) to cut off vain and vn-necessary expenses, thinking that a King, who
should carry nothing that does savor of a Woman, is more adorned by the
Ornaments of the mind, then by those of the body. A Princes habit should not
be too stately, and full of pomp. Romulus attiring himself in scarlet, or
purple lost the love of his people, nor lasciuicous and dissolute, like to
Nero, Calligula, Commodus and Heliogabalus, nor of a strange fashion, for the
which Hieron of Syracusa was odious unto his subjects.
It never represents him well apparrelled but once. This was when to conclude
the Treaty of Conflans, he went to the Mercers Grange with a small Train, and
little brute, Attired in a long Roabe, loose, furred with Ermines, the which
was much more seemly then the other garments which he was accustomed to wear.

There is to be seen at this day in the house of a Councellor of State, Bed
of Lewis 11.
the bed wherein he lay, the which we cannot behold without admiring the
excess of this Age, and the simplicity of that. It is of Yellow and Carnation
Damask, without any Lace, and the Fringe without fashion. Bodin says, That in
scorn he ware a greasy Hat, and the coursest Cloth. In the Chamber of
Accounts there was an Article found of his Expenses, making mention of two
shillings for a new pair of Sleeves to an old Doublet; and another Article of
three halfe-pence for a Box of grease for his Boots, 300000 L sterling.
and yet he raised yearly three millions more then his predecessors had done,
and did alienate a great part of the Crown lands.

The expense of his house was much less then that of many Noble men of that
time. All things were very exact there, frugality was recommended in such sort,
and superfluity so odious, as they needed not to pass out of Sclauonia
Dissolution has been great in private persons by the examples which Athens
does produce, and among others, of Aesope, a player of Tragedies, who being
come into Sclauonia to eat Creuices, which were much esteemed in that
Province, when as they told that those of Affricke were better, he sailed into
Affricke.
into Afric to eat creuises. By the accounts we find that they increased
according to the years voyages and affairs. It did not exceed three thousand
six hundred pounds starling until the year 1480, when it amounted to four
thousand, three hundred threescore and one pounds, eight shillings Sterling: In
the year 1481. it came to six thousand six hundred sixty and eight pounds
Sterling: The expense of the Kings house for that which concerned the mouth
only, was in the year 1471. two thousand 800. and three pounds two shillings
Sterling: In the year 1472: 2900. pounds: The year 1473, 3280. pounds: In the
year 1474. 2520. pounds Sterling. The year 1475. 3020. pounds. In the year
1476. 3040. pounds. in the year one thousand, 4. hundred seventy and seven,
three thousand 600. and four score pounds: In the year 1478. 3480. pounds,
and in the year 1479, 3700. pounds sterling.
And yet he went not from Plessis, from the eight of November until the
seventh of September, the year following, that he was carried to be buried at
our Lady of Clory.

The number of Servants for the ordinary service of this expense was not great,
their wages small in comparison of these times. They served the whole year,
and it began in October. There are none but these set down in the roll of
his voluntary pensions. Two Chaplins, and to either of them twenty shillings a
month, and to a Clarke of the Chapel ten shillings: A Gro^me of the Kings
Chamber nine pound a year; Four Squires of the Kitchen to either twelve
pounds a year: One Hastler, one maker of Brothes, a Sauce-maker, a Head-cooke,
a Butler, and two Grooms of the Carriages, to either of them twenty shillings
a month: Two Vnder-Cookes of the Kitchen at sixeteene shillings a month; a
Porter, a Pastry man, a Baker, two Carters, to either of them six pounds a
year: To a Groom of the Stable, and two to assist him, eight and forty
shillings a month: A Farrier twelve pounds: The Master of the Chamber of the
Kings Treasor had six score pounds, and the Comptrouler fifty: King Lewis the
11. gave thirty pounds of increase to Martin Barthelot, Master of the Chamber
of his Treasure, but the chamber of Accounts would not allow of it without a
special command, the which was dispatched at Paray le Moinat the sixth of
April 1481.
They gave but five shillings for the Grooms Livery, and four and twenty
shillings for Cloakes for the Clerks, Notaries, and Secretaries of the house
and Crown of France.

His expense was not all in one place, many did profit by it, and did draw
their commodities out of the lively Springs of the Princes Magnificence: Lewis
remained little at Paris but most at Plessis.
I have observed in the Accomps of the Chamber of the Treasure, By the Accounts
of the Kings house which were made monthly, we find that in twelve years they
were made. but twice at Paris, the one in the Kings house, and the other in
that of Master John of Popin court.
that there past not any year but he made many voiages, and that Paris saw
him but seldom: In the mean time he kept not his Chamber to live at his ease,
neither did he imitate the first Kings, who did not show themselves unto their
subjects but like the Images of the Gods, which they drew once a year out of
their gilded boxes: He did visit his Provinces, he spent not the twelve
months in one sole lodging of the Zodiake: Neither did he send his affairs
to the Mayor of the Palace. Clouis the 2. the 12. King of France began to
give to his successors, until Charlemaigne, the name of idle, They were seen
but once a year.


Magnificence does not always consist in the private expenses of a Princes
house, Magnificence how far it extends.
in numbers of Horses and Dogs, nor in the show of Lions, Tigers, Leopards, or
Elephants; it should appear in Receiving, Lodging, Feasting, and defraying
foreign Princes and their Ambassadors: This Prince in such occasions made it
known that Magnificence does not dwell but in Kings houses, and that Frances
was the Theater: He received in this manner the King of Portugal, the Queen
of England, and the Prince of Wales her son, Rene of Aniou King of Sicile,
the Duke of Sauoy, and the Princesses of Sauoy, Anne, Louyse, and Mary. The
expense of these three Princesses came to forty two pounds eleven shillings and
a penny, from the 28 of October to the 24 of November.


By the same respects of Magnificence, which will that a Prince labor to
content the eyes, and minds of others, as himself, A Prince does many things
wherewith he might dispense if he had none to content but his own s^ lf:
Magnum est personam in Repubtueri principis qui non animis solum, sed occulis
ciuiu^ seruire debet. It is a great matter to maintain the person of Prince in
a state, who is not only bound to serve the Citizens minds but also their
eyes. Cic.
he made many other expenses, which were esteemed and commended both by his
Subjects and Strangers: He did often, and for many days, feast and defray the
Ambassadors of England, Hungary, Arragon, and Naples. In the year 1477. in
March, the king of England sent the Lord Howard to visit him, being followed
by three score and ten persons, whom he defrayed all the time of his abode in
France. The good cheer he made unto the English at Amiens, after the Treaty
of Pyquigny, and the twelve pipes of wine, of the growth of Fay Monjan which
he caused to be conveyed to Deipe to give to Edward King of England, bound the
English to those cries of joy which were heard in their Army, and at their
departure: A largess for the Noble King of France.

But as there is one kind of Magnificence which is all in show, and does
purchase great applause among the people, so there is another which is not so
glorious and has much fruit: It is that which gives pensions to strangers,
and does bind them to serve the Prince, He does gratefie his memory in binding
learned men unto him who have credit with posterity. Senec.
which does nourish, advance, and recompense good wits, entertaines excellent
Artists, favors good inventions, and all those that have any credit with
posterity.

There is also an other which is Religious, Religious Magnificence.
and which has not been known but by the most Christian Kings, who without
wronging the greatness of their Majesty made their houses a refuge for the
miserable: Robert son to Hugh Capet had commonly a thousand poor men in his
train, he gave them horses to follow him, and to pray for him: Lewis the 9.
was founder of 28. Colleges in France, who dying commanded his son to be
devout to God, and charitable to the poor.
Lewis the eleventh had ordinarily six score, and in Lent two hundred and
forty, whom he fed with meat from his Table.

And yet this is not the whole extent of Magnificence, it goes farther, and
will be seen in Plays, Shows, and Iousts, and in things which are rare, and
not common; In public calamities, the Greeks and the Romans did vow
Hecatombs, they did sacrifice a hundred beasts upon so many piles of wood: Si
vero Imperatorum votum esset, centu^ Leones, centumque Aquilae vna mactabantur.
If it were the Emperors vow then were there a hundred Lions, and a hundred
Eagles, slain together.
when as the people did vow Hecatombes of hundred Oxen, and a hundred Sheep,
the Emperors did offer a hundred Eagles, and a hundred Lions: But the expense
which is wholly employed for sight, entertaines the people but till they think
of the belly* A remembrance which dispenceth with all other things, and has no
share in public cares, but that which does provide means to content it, The
multitude cares not for the conduct and good success of affairs, so they find
corn at Market: Vulgo vna ex republica Annonae curae. The common people have
no care of the Commonweal, but for Corn.
when it endures any want, all Sights, all Plays, all Sports are tedious, and
makes them say that the Feast is made at their charge.

The Princes Magnificence must therefore show her effects in things whereas the
pleasure incounters with profit, and which pass not with the contentment
which the spirit takes in admiring them, like unto the daughter of Marvel
which inamels her half circle unprofitably in the Air. The Prince must not
imitate the pride of the Pharaohs of Egypt, who employed the sweat of their
Subjects, and the treasure of their Cofers in works of Ostentation, They say
that the Piramides were unprofitable works, but the structure was profitable
for the Prince, who by this means made his subjects to labor, whom idleness
had corrupted and drawn to revolt and sedition.
and studied more for vanity then profit: Wherefore Princes have caused their
Magnificence to be renowned in public works, Works of vanity and ostentation.
and in the b^autifying of Towns, which seemed not to have been ruined but to
be re-edified more stately, and which have purchased the honor to have left
them to their Successors much fairer then they had received them from their
Predecessors. The City of Romewas bound to the Emperor Augustus for her
decoration, and most glorious ornaments, therefore he said: Roman lateritiam
accepi, marmorea^ relinquo: I received Rome built of Brick, I leave it of
Marble.


We do not see that he did any great works in Buildings, for it is a hard
matter for a Prince to hold a Sword in one hand, and a Trowell in another. He
caused the Church of our Lady of Clery to be built, and repaired that of
Victory near to Senlis, he did enrich and beautify by his bounty the High
Altar, with 16. Lamps of Silver: His Statue stands on the right hand, we see
it also on the Portall with that of Queen Charlot, and their Arms round
about, with those of the Dauphin. Phillip Augustus had caused this Church to be
built in remembrance of the happy victory which he had against the Flemmings:
The battle of Bovines in July, 1214. won by Phillip Augustus against Otho of
Saxony, and John King of England: Ferdinand Earl of Flanders was taken
prisoner there and carried to the uure, and the Earl of Salisbury an
Englishman to Saint Quentin.
There remains nothing of the ancient building but the Body and the Cloister,
the Enclosure of the Church, all the Quire and the Portall are new, and carry a
remarkable difference of the Architecture of these two reigns: The first is
plain and low, the other is stately and more raised then those times did bear.

He has not left in France any other mark of this public care, and although
that Phillip de Commines gives him the honor to have done more then his
Predecessors, in the fortification of his Realm, yet it was so little as
neither the memory nor the fruit has remained to his successors. The Roman
Emperors have preserved their memory by the reparatio^ of public ruins.
Augustus restored the Theater of P. Emilius: Tiberius that of Pompey: Caligula
the walls of Syracusa Vespasian the Capitol. Titus the Theaters: Antonyn that
of Adrian, and Alexander Seuerus Traians Bridges.
This glory which has beautified the Bays of victorious Princes, and which
has given a dumb eloquence to Marbles to eternise their names, did belong to
Henry the fourth, the restorer of ruins, whereof France imputed the cause as
well to the liberty of the French, and carlessenes of her Kings, as to the
injury of times and the designs of her enemies. As we may give him the glory
to have restored life, order, and liberty to France, so we may say that he has
given her a new face, new force, and new beauty: The Fortresses of France,
which did tremble and humble themselves at the first approach of any enemy, are
become inexpugnable. The Kings houses which seemed desert, and had felt, with
the rest, the fury and liberty of troubles, do now carry upon their Frontespice,
the glorious marks of the felicity of his Reign: Barren and inhabitable
places are become fertile and frequented, Towns are added to Towns, and
Rivers joined unto Rivers for the facillity of the Commerce.

All Bridges, Ports, Passages and Highways are honored with the eternal
Monuments of this Princes care for the greatness of his estate, and the
necessities of his people, who besides his part of these public works,
retires with one hand for the reward of his toils, that which he paies with
the other for the tribute of his duty; for the Treasury of France which has a
continual ebbing of that which it receives, does not resemble that of some
Emperors, which never restores any thing of that which it takes, and therefore
it has been compared to Charibdis, The treasure of a covetous Prince is
compared by Latinus Pacatius, to the Gulf of Charybdus. Noster ille pirata
quicquid vndecunque co^uenerat, id nobis sibique periturum in illa^ specus sui
Caribdim congerebat. Boni nostra ad aerariun^, vna and perpetua via iba^t,
nullas eorum reliquias, nulla fragmenta, vel sero victa fastidio, illa co^munis
vorago reuomebat. That our Pirate whatsoever came from any place, that did he
thrust into his Carybdis to perish both for us and himself: Our goods went one
way continually to his treasure, and that common Gulphe: and being glutted did
not vomit forth again any relickes or fragments.
but with this difference that this Gulf casts to shore whatsoever it has
devoured, but nothing comes out of that bottomless pit. Thus the profit made
the toil pleasing, and they which labor so profitably complain during the
Solstice of Summer that the day passes away too fast: Thus the poor cannot
excuse their misery whilst they have arms left them: A Prince should entertain
public works least that idleness bred sedition, and that the poor may have
no excuse that they want means to get their livings, for where there is
idleness they always find Mutines and Thieves.
Thus idleness, the plague of States, is banished, and finds no retreat but
among idle hands which steals the fruits from them which labor.

The structure of these great and incomparable works, whereas we see the
marueiles of the industry of Mirons, of Phidies, Appelles, and Lysippus, and
which are worthy to be accounted the eighth wonder of the world (if it be true
that there were seven) could not be effected but by that great Augustus and
most victorious Prince, the best of the Kings of France and Navarre: The most
glorious Title of a Prince is that which the Senate ordained for Traiane. Nee
videri potest optimis in sua cuiusque laud praestantior. Minus est enim
Imperatorem and Caesarem and Augustum quam omnibus Imperatoribus, and
Caesaribus and Augustis esse meliorem. He cannot seem the best that does not
excel them all in their own virtues: It is less to be an Emperor, a Caesar,
and an Augustus then to be better then all Emperors Caesar's and Augustus:
Plin. Panegeric.
None but the Duke of Suilly, great Surueiour of France, could execute his
Commandments with more order, courage, and care. France is bound unto him for
her decoration, the enriching of her Crown, the restoring of her rights, and
the recovery of her first beauty and felicity. For her he has first put in
practice that great Maxim of polliticke knowledge: To mainetaine fertile
places by commerce, and barren by handy Trades: This Eloge is not mine own, I
received it from the Kings own mouth.

Clemency: Clemency
This goodly Pearl is not seen in his Crown; The virtue which rayseth Kings
to heaven is Clemency: Consulere patriae, p^rcere afflictis, fera,
Caede abstinere, tempus arque ira, dare
Orbi quietem, saeculo pacem suo,
Haec summa virtus, petitur hac coelum via.
Sen. in Octau.
this great and royal virtue which pardons the afflicted, rayseth up them that
are dejected, Lewis the 11. knew not how to pardon.
and breaks the current of choler, was unknown unto him: Yet never Prince
found more occasion to win himself honor, but that deceitful Maxim, that
a Princes justice may always and in all cases dissemble, A Prince may mingle
prudence with Justice, he may be a Dove and a Serpent, with these three
conditions, that it be for the necessary, apparent, and important good of the
State, that it be with measure and discretion, and that it be for an offense,
and not to offend.
and sow the Foxes skin unto the Lions, filled his reign with tragical
examples of severity, and gave him in dying that contentment not to have left
any offense unpunished.

Phillip de Commines being to live under the sons reign, has not written
all he knew, and could have spoken, upon the fathers, and yet he says but too
much to show his rigor. He was (these are his words) suspicious, as all
Princes be which have many enemies, and which have offended many, as he had
done: He was not beloved of great men, nor of many of the meaner sort, and had
charged his Subjects more then ever King had done.

If Commines would have painted out a cruel Prince, he could not have
employed other colors then those wherewith he sets forth his rigorous
prisons, his Cages of Iron, and his fetters: Cardinal Balue inuentor of these
Cages of Iron, was lodged there with the first, and continued 14. years. Lacum
fodit and aperuit eum and incidit in fouea^ quam fecit. He dug a pit and
opened it, and fell into the Ditch which he had made.
He says, That they were of wood covered with plates of Iron, that he had
caused Germans to make most heavy and terrible fetters for men's feet,
Rigorous prisons of Lewis the eleventh.
and there was a ring to put upon the leg, very hard to open like unto a
choler, the chain was great and weighty, with a great bullet of Iron at the
end, much more weighty then was fit, and they were called the Kings Snares.

Although that punishments be the effects of Justice, and very necessary, for
that he hurts the good which pardons the wicked, yet it caries some show of
cruelty, when as the Prince himself seems more careful thereof then he
ought, and that he does employ them as well against innocents as those that
are guilty: The more rare executions be, the more profitable is the example.
Remedies which curemildly, are to be preferred before the^ which bur^ne and
mutulate: To affect new punishment, and against accustomed manners of the
Country are marks of cruelty.
I have seen (says Phillip de Commines) good men prisoners with fetters on
their feet, who afterward came forth with great honor, and received great
favors from him, amongst others, a son to the Lord of Gruture of Flanders,
taken in battle, whom the King married and made his Chamberlain, and
Seneschall of Anjou, and gave him a hundred Lances: Also the Lord of Pie^^es, a
prisoner in the war, and the Lord of Vergy: For he found in the end that
vigor does but distract men's minds, the violent gust of the Northen wind
cannot make a passenger to abandon his Cloak, whereas the Sun casting his
beams by little and little, does heat him in such sort as he will be ready
to strip himself into his shirit: Generous horses obey the shadow of a small
Wand, whereas Asses tell their paces by the number of their blows.

The reign of this Prince was wonderful stormy, they could not say of him as
of Antonyn, that he had shed no blood. The reign of the Emperor Antonyn
was so good as Herodian called it (...). that is to say without blood.
Tristan his great Provost, who for his barbarous and severe behavior, did as
justly as Maximin deserve the name of Sour, was so ready in the execution of
his rigorous commandments, as he has sometimes caused the innocent to be
ruined for the offender: He always disposed this Prince rather to use a sword
to punish faults, then a Bridle to keep them from falling.

A more temperate Spirit would have staid him, and Princes in these storms do
but what pleases them which guide the effects of their Wills. A Prince is no
less dishonored by the multitude of executions, A multitude of executions,
says Seneca, breeds as bad a reputation to the Prince, as a multitude of
Burials to a Physician, too great rigours makes the pains contemptible,
augments the number of offenders, and makes them to become wicked through
despite.
then a Physician receives blame by the death of his Patient: Claud of Seyssell
could not say any thing more bitter to the memory of this Prince then that
which he writes: That there were seen about the places of his abode many men
hanged upon Trees, and the prisons, and other houses near, full of prisoners,
who were often heard day and night, crying out for the torments which they
endured, besides others which were cast into the River.

Many great Princes have felt the severity of his humors: John Duke of Alencon
had in the end as much cause to murmurre against his justice, as he had to
commend his Clemency in the beginning of his Reign. He had been cond^mned to
loose his head under Charles the seventh: The King restored him to his liberty
and honor, to make him some years after undergo the like censure: The Duke
of Alencon being prisoner in the Casile of Loches was led to Paris the sixth of
June, 1473. by the Lord of Gaucort, and Chaletiere Steward of the Kings house,
with 24. Gentlemen and 50. Archers.
He caused him to be apprehended and carried to the Tower at the Louure; His
Process was made in the year one thousand four hundred three score and
fourteen, and a Sentence pronounced the eightenth of July in these terms:
Sentence against the Duke of Alencon.
The Court having seen the Charges, Informations and Confrontations of
witnesses against John of Alen^con, his voluntary confessions, the Process and
other things which were to be seen touching the great and heinous crimes
committed by him, by the conspiracies, practices, and treaties which he has
many and sundry times had, and made, with the English, the ancient enemies and
adversaries of this Realm, and other Rebels disobedient to the King, and to
the great prejudice of the King, and subversion of the public good of the
Realm, forgetting, through ingratitude, the great grace that the King had done
him, The King going into Touraine about the end of the first year of his
reign, found John Duke of Alencon prisoner at Loches, and set him at liberty.
infringing the conditions for the which the King had pardoned him, and
likewise the quality of other crimes which he had committed: Having also seen
and considered all that was to be seen in this party, with mature
deliberation, It has been said that the Court declares the said John of
Alencon guilty of High Treason, Crimes wherewith the Duke of Alenicon was
accused.
and Murder, and to have caused counterfeit Money to be qu^ined with the
Kings stamp and Arms, Coining of money is one of the rights of Soueraignety:
It is treason to make any be it good or bad; Many Nobleme^ in France had the
privilege to coin, but they were revoked by an Edict made by King Francis the
first.
and as such a one, the said Court has condemned him to receive death, and to
be executed by Justice, and with all has declared all and every his goods
forfeited to the King, the execution notwithstanding of the said John of
Alencon, reserved unto the Kings good pleasure. The King freed him from the
pain, but he left him one more tedious then that of death, Ignominy and
Imprisonment.

He did not also suffer Rene King of Sicile his Uncle by the mothers side to
live in peace: He commanded his Court of Parliament to make his Process, But
it made him answer that he could not be judged of Treason but in the Kings
presence. Bodin in the fourth book of his Commonweal, the sixth Chapter,
says; that the Court of Parliament made this answer the twenty sixth of April
one thousand four hundred three score and fifteen: It had done the like in
the Duke of Alencons Process in the time of King Charles the seventh, In the
year 1458.
He had the courage to withstand this brunt, and as we have seen, attended
until that time had cured the ulcer of the Kings hatred against him.

The Duke of Nemours could not escape the severity of his Justice, the which
he had contemned by great relapses into the same faults. If the Duke of
Bourgundy had returned a Conqueror from the Suisses and Lorraines, the King
would have been no less troubled to put him to death, then to set him at
liberty: Captivity is a means to free the soul from the tyranny of the body:
It is an act of cenerosity to contemn death more then to hate life. Fortium
virorum est magis mortem contemnere quam odisse vitam. Q. Cur. lib. 5.
The tediousness of his prison had disposed his soul to leave that of the
body without grief, to contemn death and to hate life.

Princes find the offenses of them they have bound unto them more sencible and
less pardonable: The King had erected the County of Nemours into a Duchy,
Relapses of the Duke of Nemours.
he had pardoned him his felony of the League of the Commonweal, and yet
forgetting the effects of such a bond, and his oath of fealty, presently after
the Duke of Guienne was retired into Brittany he sent a man unto him,
disguised like a Friar, to offer him both his body and goods, protesting to
serve (as he did) against the King his Sovereign Lord. The Duke of Guiennes
death forced the Duke of Nemours to fly the second time to the Kings mercy,
for a second pardon, which the King granted him upon an oath which he took
never to conspire against his Prince: The extract of the Process sent to the
Prouines and Parliaments, shows that this oath was taken in the presence of
six Apostolic Notaries, and six Royal Notaries, and upon the Cross end
Crown of our Savior.
soon after he assisted the Earl of Armagnac, and renewed the practices and
intelligences which he had with the Duke of Bourgundy: All these inconstant
actions weere degenerated into so many crimes, which might not remain
unpunished, and which did assure him that death could not surprise him. His
soul was bound to resolve the same day that he entered into resolutions, which
could not be otherwise expiated.

Innocence may be surprised, crimes cannot, for the offense and the punishment
are Twins: it is also a kind of content to foresee which way we must pass.
Julian dying did thank the Gods for that they had not killed him by surprise.
The King caused him to be taken at Carlat, and sent him prisoner to the
Castle of Pierrescise, which was then without the walls of Lion. A while after
he caused him to be conducted to Paris, where his Process was made by the
Court of Parliament. By an accord made betwixt King Lewis the eleventh, and
James of Armagnac Duke of Nemours, the 17. of January, in the year 1469. the
said Duke did renounce his place of Peer, being content to be tried as a
private person, if he did fail in his obedience to the said King, who did not
show that rigor, but did furnish his Court with Peers for his judgment, made
at Noion the fourth of August 1477. Du Tiller.
The Lord of Beaujeu Earl of Clermont was President by the Kings Commission:
He confessed all that has been formerly spoken, and moreover that he had had
intelligence with the Constable of Saint Paul to seize upon the King and
Dauphin: Confessions of the Duke of Nemours.
That the Duke of Bourgundy had sent him word if he could take them he should
have the City of Paris and the I Will of France for his part: That the Dauphin
should be delivered into the hands of Monsir de Bresse, and the King
transported out of the Realm of France: The Duke of Nemours confessed more
that he had consulted and given credit to a Friar a Doctor of Divinity, whose
books had been burnt in the Bishops Hall at Paris.
Upon these occasions he was condemned to loose his head at the Hales in Paris,
the fourth of August, one thousand four hundred three score and seventeen:
He was a Peer of France, but this quallity was omitted in his Sentence, for
that by an accord made the seventeenth of January, in the year one thousand
four hundred three score and nine, he had renounced his place of Peer, and
was content to be tried as a priuate-person, in case of relapse.

The sentence of death was pronounced unto him by Peter of Oriole Chancellor
of France: A Prince should always keep his word inuiolably, and hold faith the
foundation of Justice. It is a great glory for a Prince when his tongue and
heart agrees. Mira est in principe nostrome^tis linguaeque concordia, no^ modo
humilis and p^^ui animi sed servile vitium scit esse mendacium: The union of
mindle and tongue is admirable in our Prince: he knows that lying is not
only the sign of a base and abject mind, but that it is a servile vice.
He had no refuge to his innocence, for it appeared not, nor to the Kings
Clemency, which was tired with releeuing him, he appealed to Faith, which is
the first virtue of a Prince, saying: That he had not yielded but upon
assurance of a pardon, which was promised him. The King protested that he had
not promised him any thing, and that he would rather have forced him in the
Castle of Carlat, then receive him to save his life, having so often deserved
death. He therefore would have the chief points, whereof he was convicted,
drawn out of his process, and sent to other Parliaments throughout the
Provinces, to the end they might know what had incensed the severity of his
Justice.

He never pardoned any that had been engaged in the league of the
Commonwealth, nor those which had banded themselves against him to follow his
brothers dessignes. His hatred against the Bishop of Paris appeared most after
the death of this Prelate, for being advertised that he was lamented by all
the Orders of Paris, he commanded the Provost and Aldermen of Paris to make
him an Epitaph, which showed the bad services he had done his Majesty, by his
intelligences with the Princes of the League. As they that were nearest unto
his blood have felt the effects of his wrath, so they which thought themselves
to be nearest unto his heart have not been freed, Princes favors are not
immortal. Fato potentiae (says Tacitus speaking of Maecenas) raro
sempiternae, an satias cupit, aut illos cum omnia tribuerunt, aut his cum ia^
nihil reliquum est quod cupiant.
and have not grown old before they have tried the truth of this old Maxim:
Favors of Princes last not.
That Princes favors soon grow old: For a Prince is weary of giving; or he
that is favored being full of favors does not care to husband the
continuance: They make mention of the fear he put the Lord of Lude, and the
Earl of Sancerre in. Antony of Chasteauneuf Lord of Lau, may well be produced
for an example, both of his favors and of the miseries which do accompany
favorites: The Chronicle says that he was chief Butler of France, Seneschall
of Guienne, Lord Chamberlain to the King, and more beloved of him then ever
any one had been, having had in less then five years, three or four hundred
thousand Crowns in reward from the King: But we must attend the end, and not
judge of the building before it be finished; Aluaro de Luna who^ John King of
Castile advanced and loved above all men of his Realm, said to them that
admired his fortune: Judge not of the building before it be fun^sh^. He dyed by
the hands of Justice.
behold the backeside of the Medal. At his return from the voyage of Peronne
he caused him to be put in prison in the Castle of Suilly upon Loire: He
commanded Tristan to draw him from thence and to lead him to Vsson in
Auuergne, but he escaped.

Many were punished for this evasion, Charles of Melun, a man at Arms of the
Admirals company, and Captain of Vsson lost his head at Loches, his wives
son called Remonet, and the Kings Attorney at Vsson.

This Charles of Melun must not be taken for Charles of Melun who commanded in
the Bastille, when as Paris was besieged by the Army of the league, and who
could not avoid it, but his fidelity was otherwise censured by his King then
it appeared in the proofs of his service. He felt the storms of fortune in
the disgrace which he received when as the king took from him the Office of
Lord Steward of France, to give it to the Lord of Craon.

The ordinary examples of new punishments for old faults made repentance vain:
his searches being feared of Innocents, did forbid them that were guilty to
trust unto the assurances of his clemency. All were in fear, and stood upon
their guard, not so much for him as against him. They knew well, that he had
his eyes blindfold, to strike of every side, according to his choler, and the
suddenness of Tristan, Severity of Tristan the Hermit.
who had reduced the marks of Majesty to the Sword and Halter. If he had
sworn by as many Gods as the Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians and Grecians did
worship, The Egiptians did worship as many Gods as the Earth brought them forth
fruits, the Assyriars as many as they had Town: the Persians as many as they
saw stars, or fires the Gretians as many as they had fountains.
no man would have trusted him; wherefore they that followed his brother
considering that he knew not how to forget injuries, and that he made a jest
of that royal precept: A Prince that will sa^e much, must pardon much, they
went to serve them whom they held to be least reconcilable with him.

Claude de la Chastre, who had left him, upon some coffeehouse, to serve the
Duke of Guienne, who honored him with many charges, and among others, with the
guard of his person, had retired himself unto his house at Nancy after the
death of this Prince: If a Prince has any subject of choler, it should be
open, and soon gone, it is not generous to convert it into hatred.
and the King, who had both his choler sudden, and his hatred long against
offenses of this kind, and who never held the smallest that were committed
against him, to be light, sent to take him prisoner by his Gossip Tristan, and
held him about a month in suspense what he should do with him: for he had
committed no fault, but in serving the Duke of Guienne loyally, preserving his
faith unstained amidst great temptations, and seeing himself a prisoner, he
did more glory to be an Innocent in prison, then guilty at liberty: Admirable
is ^ at faith which amidst great accidents and vehement pursutes remains
untainted.
he caused him to come before him, and demanded of him, if he had a will to
serve him as faithfully as he had done his brother. He answered, that he could
never do so great service unto his Majesty; but his affection would be greater;
and that the service which he had done unto the Duke of Guienne, was a proof
of the fidelity which he would always show to him that should be his Master.
The King told him, that he would use his service, and having an intent to make
his guard, as well of his own subjects, as of strangers, The Infidelity of
subjects forces Princes to employ strangers for their guards. Alex. Seuerus
was the first which took soldiers of a rough aspect terrible and fearful,
and therefore Dyon says that his entry into Rome was odious. The Emperors did
ordinarily employ Gauls, Italia^ Spaniards, Germans, or Macedonians. The
Emperor of Constantinople was guarded by Englishmen, Tiberius by Germans, Nero
had Hollanders, or Frisons, and Herod of Judea Germans.
he sent him with a Commission to raise a Company of an hundred Gentlemen for
the guard of his person: then remembering that his wife had been much altered
and distempered with his imprisonment; Lewis fears the revenge of women.
and that the weakest are strong enough to do mischief, he said unto him;
Hearken Captain Claude, women are bad when they will do a mischief; behold a
pair of perfumed gloves which thou shall carry to thy wife from me, with five
hundred Crowns which are in them: I know that she was much afraid when as my
Gossip Tristan went to take thee, bid her that she should not wish me ill,
and come again to me three Months hence with thy Company. I give thee one
of my best Mules to carry thee more easily.

This was the first French Company, there having been none before but that of
Scottishmen, The first guard of the body was Scottishmen, and therefore the
Captain of the Scottish guard carries the Title of the first Captain of the
Guardes of the Kings person: he begins the year, and serves the first quarter.
and it is called at this day, The ancient French Guard. Claude of la Chastre,
who was the first Captain, dyed at the age of 81 years, under the reign of
Lewis the twelfth. After his death, five of his successors and heirs of the
same Arms commanded successively in this charge. It is at this day commanded
by Monsieur de Pralins.

Offenses grew not old in his memory, and the secret wounds which his
Conscience A Conscience touched with remorse for his cruelties and inhumanities,
suffers terrible torments without dying. Such was that of Herod, and of
Catullus, who were terrified every night with the fights of such as they had
put to death, and had daily their complaints and sighs in their ears.
gave him in reproach of so many men which had been beaten and ruined by the
lightning of his Justice, He pursues old offenses.
made him not more tractable to pardon. He did never forget the displeasure
which he received during the wrath and indignation of King Charles his Father.
Three great personages of the Parliament of Grenoble; John Bail, the Kings
Attorney, th^^ a Councellor, and afterward a President. Guy Pape, a Councellor
in the same Parliament, and held by the sovereign Courts and Universities of
all Europe, the Oracle of the Law, and Rene of Tomassin, a Councellor also,
felt in their Age, the rough blows of this Princes remembrance. They had all
three declared themselves for the Father against the son, and not willing, in
this division, to waver betwixt Justice and Discretion, resisted his designs,
and diuerted all those which strayed from their duty to follow this Prince.

As soon as Lewis came to the Crown, he remembered all this, A Prince which
pardons offenses, gives a great peace unto his conscience. The Panegerick of
Constantine has this goodly passage: Sibi imputet quisquis vti noluit
beneficio tuo, nec se dignum vita iudicauit quum per te liceret vt viueret: tu
quod sufficit conscientiae tuae etiam non merentibus pepercis^i. Sed ignosce
dicto non omnia potes, dij te vindicant and inuitant. Let him impute it to
himself that would not make use of thy bounty, neither did he think himself
worthy of life, when he might have lived by it: thou to satisfy thine own
conscience, have spared even them that deserved it not. But pardon me, thou
can not do all, the Gods revenge thee, and inuit thee.
not to make use of it to the glory of Clemency, and to the content of a good
Conscience, which takes delight to pardon even them which deserve it not, and
remits the revenge to God, but to give new punishments to old offenses; and as
his nature was more prompt to revenge an offense, then to reward a good
service, and more easy to hate then to love, They are very natural passions
to be sensible of injuries. It is a dullness and baseness to have no feeling
of an injury, and it is folly to hold that for an injury which is not. Irasci
in quibus non oporter, insipiens est: non irasci in quibus oporter, insipientis
est. Arist. in 3. Eth.
he caused a Commission to be dispatched the two and twentieth day of April,
in the year 1462. and sent it to the President of the Chamber of Accounts, and
to one of the Stewards of his house, to make the Process for these three good
servants to king Charles the seventh.

The chief points of the Accusation were, That they had assisted and seconded
King Charles in the detention of Dauphine (for so they spoke) from the Dauphin
Lewis, the true and only Lord of that Province: That they had crossed the
designs of their Sovereign Lord, and that the general Estate of the
Province, assembled at Grenoble, did not grant him a sum of money to supply
his wants when as he was in Flanders. That Bail had imprisoned all his
servants which came about his affairs, and depended wholly of king Charles;
from whom he had obtained, for one of his sons, the Archbishoppricke of
Ambrun; and for another, the place of Attorney General.

The accused were heard, and the Innocence which they felt in their Souls, did
put such generous words into their mouths, as the Judges hearing them, did not
distinguish good men but by the hatred of their Prince, and their hard
Fortunes, holding them more worthy of the Recompense of Prytaneus, The Judges
consulted after what manner they should put Socrates to death: Cicero says,
that upon the diversity of their opinions, he spoke after this manner: Ego ob
ea quae feci dignu^ me censeo qui publicitus alar in Prytaneo.
then of the Severity of Areopage: Yet they were forced upon these Accusations,
to pronounce a sentence the second of June following, by the which they were
declared, convicted of Felony, Ingratitude and Treason committed against the
Dauphin, A sentence very rigorous.
deprived of their Offices, Charges and Dignities, and condemned to restore the
Fees received by them since the Dauphins departure into Flanders, their Fees,
Lands, Signiories, Jurisdictions, and other goods depending of the Dauphin
confiscate, and themselves banished for ever out of Dauphine, with defense
never to return again upon pain of death.

They ended the remainder of their days under the rigor of this Judgment, and
and left nothing to their Children, but the hope of a milder Reign, having not
tasted any under this Prince. Those which had been Donotaries of these goods,
would not leave them, and opposed to the Letters of CHARLES the eighth, that of
LEWIS the eleventh, by a Sentence solemnly given by the Commissioners in the
presence of the Kings Lieutenant, dated the eight and twentieth day of June, in
the year 1484. It was said, Priorem sententiam minus debite fuisse latam nec
talemeos pati debuisse, sed po^ius absoluendos. The first sentence was not duly
had, neither should they have suffered it, but were rather to be absolved. M.
de Franc, Treasurer of France at Grenoble instructed me herewith.
After his death, King Charles the eighth, by his letters dated the three and
twentieth day of March, in the year 1483. restored them to their Honors, Fame
and Reputation, and would that all their goods should be restored unto them,
notwithstanding any opposition which was made by them that held them as
confiscate.

The examples of this severity shows the reason of the fear and distrust
which troubled his mind, and kept him shut up like the vestall fire, and set
Care and Silence in guard about him, being reasonable that he should fear
those which he had hurt: for neither great nor small can love them that have
wronged them. Herewith accords that which Claudius of Seyssell has written.
The fear which grows from rigor and severity does never purchase the peoples
love. Oderunt quem me*tuunt. And it is hard long to resist the public hatred.
Plebi multae manus, principi vna ceruix. A multitude has many hands, and a
Prince but one neck.
He openly discouers the fear which he had of his subjects when as he heard
say, Galeas D. of Millan brother in law to the King.
that Duke Galeas Sforce had been slain by certain Millanois in the City of
Millan upon a festival day, and in the Church: for he augmented his guards
about his person, and forbad them to suffer any man to approach near him; and
if any one did strive, he commanded them to kill him. And moreover he caused
a page to carry a Pertuisan after him, to defend himself if any should offer
to outrage him; the which (being come into his Chamber) was set at his beds
head: And truly it appeared plainly at his death, whether he were beloved or
hated: for then all sorts of people rejoiced, few were sorry for it; no not his
very servants, and they to whom he had done most good. But if nothing but the
dislike of the people had blemished the memory of this great Prince, it had not
been less glorious; the Judgments of the multitude are Judgments of folly,
and the affections of the people are always indiscreet, they reject that which
is good, and approve that which is bad; what they say is false, what they
commend is infamous, what they undertake is fury, and they make things greater
then they are. They that have well known the people, have compared their
judgments to a tempest. In Imperita multitudine est varietas and inconstantia
and crebra tanquam procella, sic sententiarum commutatio. In the unskillful
multitude there is variety and inconstancy, and often like unto a tempest, so
often they change their minds. Cic. pro domo sua.


His Justice. Justice.
They cannot deprive him of the honor of the erection of two parliaments, to
do justice to them of Guienne, and of Bourgondy. He instituted that of
Bourdeaux in the beginning of his Reign, and that of Dijon presently after the
death of Charles the Terrible. We have showed before how much he was grieved
for that he had not reformed many things that were deformed under his reign,
and especially the administration of Justice. He had been bred up in an Age so
full of liberty, that as he had been forced to see and suffer many iniustices,
A Prince should never dispense with the laws of reason. Those words are
flatteringly tyrannical, Licet si libet, in summa fortuna id equius quod
validius, nihil iniusta quod fructuo sunt; sanctiras, pietas, fides priuata
hona sunt, qua iuvat Reges eant. That is lawful that they list; in a great
fortune that is iustest that is of most force, there is nothing unjust that
brings profile; sanctity, Piety and Faith are private virtues: Kings may go
which way they please. The Law is the Prince which we must obey, the head
which we must follow, and the rule whereunto we must apply all our actions.
Arist. 3. Polit. It is the invention and the gift of the Gods. Demost. in
Aristog.
so he did not care but to do justice himself, according to the laws of his
will, thinking that his duty was contained within the limits of his pleasure,
and reason within those of his will.

But admit his life were so pure and sincere, Hatred of Lewis 11. against the
parliament.
as the most severe Cato could find no cause of reprehension, yet would it be
hard to excuse that which Philip de Commines says, That he hated the
Parliament of Paris, and that he had resolved to bridle it. This is not like a
little fly upon the face of his reputation to beautify it, but a malicious
ulcer to disfigure it. It is the duty of a good Prince to give authority to the
administration of his sovereign Justice, to maintain those venerable heads
which conceive the Oracles, and preserve the rules of state, who are always
laden with mortar to repair the ruins, and are the Ministers and Interpreters
of the law,k which is the rarest invention, and the most excellent gift that
Heaven has given to men.

The roots of this hatred were very deep, and the first effects did appear
in the year 1442. when as K. Charles the 7. his father left him at Paris, to
command there in his absence. The Earl of Maine sought to make use of this
occasion, and of his favor to have certain privileges verified. The Court of
Parliament being pressed, and in a manner forced, put this clause in the
verification; By the express commandment, to show that if their suffrages had
been free, it had not been done; We find often in the Registers of Sovereign
Courts these words, De expresso mandato: and De expresissimo ma^dato, and
sometimes, Multis vicibus reiterato.
he sent for the Presidents of the Court, and commanded them to put out that
clause, else he would leave all, and would not go out of Paris until it was
done. The wisdom of the Court contented him, the clause was put out of the
Decree, and retained upon the Register.

The change which he made in the Parliament presently after his Coronation, was
a branch of this root; John of la Vacquety was Recorder of the Town of Arr as,
when as after the death of Duke Charles the King did send to summon it to
yield. La Vacquerie said that it might not be, for it was of the ancient
patrimony of the Earls of Flanders, and descended to the ^ daughters for want
of heirs male.
and I think that it serves for a reason, for that upon the execution of the
Treaty of Conflans, the letters were directed to the Chancellor and
Priuy-Councell before the Parliament. It is also true, that he would often
have had the wills of the Court liable to his; and that having threatened it
upon the refusal it made to verify some Edicts which it had found unjust,
Whether a Magistrate be allowed to quit his Office rather then to verify an
Edict, is a question treated by Bodin in the second book and fourth chapter of
his Commonweal, but very superfluous, for there is not any one but knows
therein what he should do.
the President la Vacquery (whom he had drawn from the service of the
Princess of Flanders) came unto him with a good number of other Presidents and
Counselors in their scarlet roabes. The King being amazed to see this red
procession, demanded wherefore they came. Sir, (answered la Vacquerie) we come
to resign up our places into your hands, and to endure whatsoever it shall
please you, rather then to wrong our consciences in verifying the Edicts which
you have sent us. He was very sensible of these words of Conscience, and did
not willingly like of any thing that was spoken to charge it: he presently
called them back, and promised never to do any thing but what should be just
and reasonable: yet this course was not commended by them who compare a
Magistrate leaving his charge (for that he cannot allow of the Princes will) to
a Mariner which abandons the Helm during a Tempest, A Magistrat^ should not
quit his charge for any respect.
or to a Physician, who judging the Disease incurable, does not vovchsafe to
apply Remedies to assuage the pain when as he sees those that may cure it are
in vain.

In these occasions the examples of good men, whom we must imitate, and the
advice of wise men whom we must honor, should carry a light before judgment.
He who first (in France) had the keeping of the sacred Seals of two Crowns,
seeing himself sometimes forced to have the constancy of his duty strive with
the absolute commandments of the King, shows how others, over whom the
dignity of his Office, his virtues, experience and merits give pre-eminence,
should compose and govern their Actions.

When as the King, to free himself from the Importunity of some Spirits which
are hard to content, and who abusing discretion in demanding, grow discontented
when they use liberty in refusing, commandes him to pass the Seal for things
which exceed the ordinary forms of Justice, and are both without President
and Reason. Example is a clear light in doubtful things: for those which are
not grounded upon example, cannot be maintained by reason. Quod exemplo fit,
id etiam iure fieri putant. That which is done ly example, that they think
lawfully done. Cic. ad Sulpitium.
He has been heard to say, that he should hold himself inexcusable,
unworthy of his charge, and to carry the Title, of the first Minister of the
Kings Sovereign Justice, if he did represent unto him the wrongs which it
received in commanding him things forbidden by the laws, and which should be
odious to his own judgment, if importunity had not rather wrested then
obtained them from his bounty; Justice is the felicity of Empires.
they have seen how discreetly to his Admonitions he added most humble
prayers not to wrong the most sacred thing which the wisdom of God has left
to Princes for the felicity of their estates.

And when these Admonitions have not prevailed, that his Majesty has had
other motions, and that the effects which seemed contrary to Justice, have made
him see causes which Time, the Men, and the Affairs have made lawful and
necessary, he has always converted his Reason into Obedience, contenting
himself to have showed the integrity of his mind, without opposition against
the will of his Prince, which is above the Laws, and does declare all that
just which does accomodate his Affairs: for there is no Law which commaundes
a Magistrate to ruin himself in maintaining Justice against the power of his
Prince; and Wisdom, which carries a light before all other virtues, will that
a man fail in any thing rather then himself. Among the Precepts which
Polybius sent to Demetrius, to draw him out of the danger into which youth and
indiscretion had engaged him, this is remarkable. Quit all rather then thy
self.


When as the Princes will strayes from reason, it must be reclaimed mildly by
discretion; we must think that he can do nothing without the advice of his
Parliaments: Kings have always had a Council a part, to consult and resolve
upon the great affairs of their estate. The peers of France did not enter
into the Kings Council, and their quality did not privilege them, if they did
not please the King. It is also observed in the Ordonances for the government
of the realm, and for the Regency in the absence and minority of Kings, they
do not in any sort speak of the Peers of France.
The King should be no King if there were (in his Realm) an Authority above
his. Great resolutions, which concern the safety of the State, are not treated
of in great Assemblies, where as the secret, which is as the soul, cannot be
long kept in, but does euaporate. Matters are never kept secret in great
Assemblies: whatsoever was done in the Senate of Rome, was blown abroad, the
Senators Children told news to their Mothers; and Titus Liuius wonders that
the Ambassadors of Greece and Asia had discovered nothing of the speech which
King Eumenes had used in open Senate against King Perseus.


Monarkes have always had a Council separated from the Senate, which is
otherwise busied enough with the flowing and ebbing of Suits, and they have not
only reserved great affairs to their Council, but they would have chosen
persons confifidently to impart unto them their most important affairs. This
is not without President: for the greatest and most happy Founders of the Roman
Empire, had (besides the Senate) a Privy Council of few persons. Julius
Caesar had for his privy Counselors, Q. Paedius, and Corn. Balbus: Augustus
had Maecenas and Agrippa, with whom he treated his greatest, and most
important Affairs.


The Parliaments have the care of the execution of the Kings Edicts, they
publish them, and cause them to be observed: they keep the Registers, that at
need they may have recourse to them. It is true that Princes have sometimes
showed themselves so absolute in their wills, as the wise men of their
Council, not being able to restrain or moderate them, have often allowed the
oppositions which the Parliaments have made to their Edicts, and favored them
for that they were conformable to reason, and agreeing with the public good.
For although the Sovereign be above the Laws, and that he may derogate from
Right and Law, wherein Sovereignty does properly consist, yet it is necessary
that the absolute power be restrained by the Civil, and that he consider,
that in destroying the Law, and offending Justice, he is like unto the Iuy,
which pulls down the wall that bears it up.

I leave it unto the wise to consider, if they did well to put into the mouth
of King Charles the ninth, Words of K. Charles to the parliament.
(the thirteenth year of his Age, and the second of his Reign) these words:
These words are reported by Bodin in the 3d book of his Common weal, the
first chapter, and he adds, that the Parliament made other admonitions, for
that there was a division upon the publication of his Letters, which gave
occasion of the Decree of the Privy Council the 24 of September following, by
the which the division was declared void, and the Parliament forbidden to put
into deliberation the Ordonances proceeding from the King concerning affairs
of State; the which was also done by letter patents in the year 1528.
I will not that you deal with any other thing but to do good and speedy
Justice: for the Kings my Predecessors have not set you in the place where you
are, but to that effect, and not to make you my Tutors, nor protectors of the
Realm, nor preseruers of my City of Paris: And when I shall command you any
thing, if you find any difficulty, I shall be content you acquaint me with
it; which done, without any further reply I will be obeyed.

But when the State is governed by a wise Prince, whose reputation is grounded
upon great and eminent virtues, they have no other part in the Estate, The
Authority of the king is an Ocean.
but the Honor and the Obedience. The duty of a sovereign Magistrate is to
obey the Prince, to bend under his obedience, to command his subjects, to
defend the warlicke, to resist the mighty, and to do Justice to all.
A Regal power is an Ocean, into the which all others, like unto Rivers, loose
their name: They be as Stars, which borrow their light from the Sun, and
have none in his presence.

It is sometimes necessary that they resist those commandments which have
been rather extorted by importunity, then obtained by reason from the Princes
motion; and the admonitions which they make in such occasions, should be
always considered. But if the Prince have other Reasons, and other respects,
and that his thoughts go not the common way, it is not for them to show
themselves difficult, neither must they attend a third command; and it were
better to dissemble and support some things extraordinary to the Princes will,
then to incense him. It is well known, that the obstinacy and resistance of
PAPINIAN to the will of CARACALLA, made him more cruel and violent. Caracalla
having put his brother Geta to death, he commended Papinian to make his excuse
unto the Senate. Papinian answered suddenly, That he would not do it, and that
it was not so easy to excuse, as to commit a particide. Caracalla incensed
with this answer, put him to death, and continued his cruelties, which a more
discreet proceeding had restrained. Spartiat.
Wise men think one thing, but they do not utter it: They always ways go
one way, but they go not still the same pace. If a storm hinders them from
coming into the haven, it is wisdom to obey the Wind, and not to bandy
against the Tempest. The Office of a Wise man is comprehended by Cicero in
these words: Vt in nauigando tempestati obsequi arti^ est, sic omnibus nobis in
administranda Repub. proposit^m esse debet. Non idem semper dicere sed idem
semper spectare. As in sailing it is Art to obey the Tempest, so should all we
do in the government of the Commonweal. Not always to speak the same
thing, but to look to the same end.


Lewis the eleventh strained his absolute power unto the height: His Provost
went and took prisoners out of the Consergerie of the Palace, and caused them
to be drowned right against the Mercers Grange. Toward the end of his days,
he found his Conscience much oppressed with the contempt of Justice: he would
have repaired it, but he was come to the Sabbath of the week, when it was no
longer lawful to labor.

In April 1482. he sent unto the Court of Parliament an Act of the Oath which
he took at his Coronation, The King in his Oath at his Coronation, does
promise to defend his subjects from all violence and wrong, and that in all
judgments he will command equity and mercy, to the end that God, who is
merciful, may grant it to him and his subjects.
to exhort them to do good Justice, and to free him from that bond. It is that
wherein the condition of Princes is to be lamented: They are laden with the
very weight of their Consciences, and with the excess which has been
committed throught all the Orders of the Realm, for that they have neglected
the remedies. What peace can a soul have which labors to fight against his
own faults and other men's? It is a troublesome enterprise to correct his own
vices, and to strive against other men's. Neque enim multum prodest vitia sua
projecisse si cum alienis rix ^ndum est. Neither has he profited much that
has cast away his own faults, if he must contend with other men's. SENEC.


He that shall consider how easily he did communicate with all sorts of
persons, and how willingly he did hear them, he will think that if he had
not a care of Justice in general, he had done it to all men in particular:
But he erred as well in this, as in any other thing. But it is equally bad to
give ear to all the World, and not to any man, and he made it known, that in
matters which are held perfect among men, there is always some thing to be
taken away, or added, and that is only perfect, where there is nothing
wanting, nor any thing that exceeds it. There is nothing perfect in the virtues
of men: Nothing can come from man that is in every degree perfect. Nunquam e
mortali semine nascetur qui sit omnibus bonitatis numeris absolutus. He shall
never be borne of mortal seed that shall be absolute in all goodness,
DIONYS. HALIC. lib. 8.


PHILIP DE COMMINES has observed in two places of his History, that his ear
was open to every man. In the first he says; Never any man did lend so much
ear to men, nor did enquire of so many things as he did, nor that desired to
know so many men. In the second: He meddled with many mean things of his
Realm, which he might well have forborne, but his humor was such, and so he
lived. And his memory was so great, as he remembered all things, and knew all
the world, both in all Countries, and about him.

It is the office of a King to hear the complaints of his subjects with
mildness and gentleness, which does not blemish Majesty. God who has
constituted them Judges over their Subjects, will require reason of the Justice
which has been demanded and not done, Kings should give an account of the
administration of Justice over their people: Wisd. 6. Audite Reges terrae and
intelligite, discite iudices finium terrae, praebete aures vos, qui continetis
multitudines, and placetis vobis in turbis nationu^, quoniam data est a Domino
potestas vobis and virtus ab Altissimo, qui interrogabit opera vestra, and
cogitationes: quoniam cum effetis Ministri regni illius no^ recte iudicastis
nec custodistis legem Iustitiae^, neque secum du^ voluntate^ Dei ambulastis:
Hear ^ ye Judges of the earth, understand, etc.
To demand Justice of a King is to do him a kind of homage which does not
belong to any other, and to confess that he holds the rank over men that God
does over Kings: But for that they cannot participate with every thing, see
all, hear all, not be every where, Princes rely upon their Ministers.
they rely upon the diligence and fidelity of their servants, whereof some
assist them with their wits, counsel, and tongues, and others with their
hands, swords, and fortune. France has always been seconded by men of this
quality, it brings more forth daily, and is not weary of so many
Childe-birthes. Princes are like worke-men, their Officers are the Iustruments
with the which they may cut and fashion as they please: And although all
charges be distinguished and have their bounds, that the Trowell may not do
the office of the Hammer, yet they tend all to one end, the service of the
Prince, whereon depends the public safety, which is the perfection of the
work.

The Princes ear is like unto the Temple of the Goddess Horta, which was
always open, but the prayers must be short and guided by reverence and
humility, for Jupiter of Crete has ears at his feet: Those which are unjust,
are dead toward the King, and mortal toward God for him that makes them: We
must speak unto the King as if God understood it, and none must speak unto
God as if we were understood by men. There are some which demand things of
Kings which they would not give to them that ask them, and others that would
blush if the prayers which they make unto God were known: Wherefore a Prince
sends such petitions to whom he pleases to see if they be just and civil;
It were impossible for him to hear them and determine them, without doing
wrong to those affairs which require no delay to resolve on. The greatness of
his Majesty is wronged when as they make him descend into the care of base
things. It is importunity to a Prince to give him an account of base things,
When as Pliny wrote to Traian, De seruis damnatis quise Ministerijs publicis
immiscuerunt. Of slaves condemned who had wrought in the public works: He
adds this Preface to his Letter: Salua magnitudine tua, Domine, descendas
oportet ad meas curas cum ius mihi dederis referendi ad te de quibus dubito. My
Lord, saving your Greatness, you must descend unto my cares, having given me
leave to impart my doubts unto you.
Wisdom, which is the light of his actions, and the Serpent which shadows
his forehead, Bochoris King of Egypt being by nature rough, sour, and
violent, the Goddess Isis sent him a Serpent, which wrething about his head
did make a shadow, to the end his judgment should be seasoned with Prudence
and Justice.
forbids them to trouble their heads for all sorts of affairs, the which are
often represented by men, which neither see far off nor much behind them, who
confounds their discourses in the beginning, and speaking without reason would
be heard with patience.

We must beautify this discourse with the same authority which gave luster
unto the precedent. The discourses which are held at the Table of the
Chancellours of France are always upon some goodly Subject, pleasing to
learn, and profitable and necessary to understand, and we may say, that
delicacy of wits finds that there which excess did furnish to the appetite of
(...) men for four months, to deliver into his hands the four chief Towns
of Brabant, Brussels, Antwerpe, Macklin, and Louan, and to leave him the
Country of Flanders in Soueraignety without homage if he could conquer it.
These offers proceeding rather from the necessity of affairs, then from the
Kings intention, who desired nothing but to advance his affairs in Bourgundy
and Artois, and to divide and weaken his enemies forces, were well and wisely
weyed by the King of England, The less which is profitable and certain is to
be preferred before the more which is unprofitable and uncertain. The King of
England desires rather the Countries of Bullen in effect, then Brabant and
Fla^ders in hope: neither could the English consent unto a war which did
interrupt their Traffic with the Low Countries.
who answered that if the King were so well minded to make him a sharer of his
conquest, he had rather have some of those which were already conquered in
Picardy, and that in delivering him Bulloine he would declare himself for him
against the Princess of Bourgundy.

The King then having contemned the way of mildness and reason to follow that
of force and fortune, neglected also the occasion which this first amazement of
the Princess and her people put into his hands, and leaving her the liberty to
marry her self, and to carry those goodly Provinces to a strange house, all
things became impossible: Maximilian, having married the Princess, raised with
great solemnity the order of the Golden Fleece, Oliver dela-March, reports the
ceremony which was made at the raising of this Order, and says that they
wondered the King had not prevented the Archduke.
to show that he would also restore the affairs of that house.

Yet for all this they do not leave to give him the honor of the wisest of his
age: Parts of wisdom.
He made his wisdom appear in that he could consult and deliberate well, he
could judge and resolve well, and he could lead and execute well; This wisdom
was wholly his, and depended not of the motion or discourse of any other:
Wherefore when as he demanded of Brezay, Seneschall of Normandy, the reason why
he said that his horse was great and strong, being but little and of a weak
stature: For that (answered Brezay) he carries you and all your Counsel. It
is a very singular grace of heaven when as the actions of Princes, unfurnished
of Council, succeed happily: For as a Prince has need of a soul to live by,
so is it necessary for him to have counsel to reign: Every Prince has two
Councels, one interior and the other exterior: The interior is that which
grows in his head from his own knowledge and understanding: The exterior is
of those that assist him in the managing of affairs.
It is weak council which consists only of young heads: Young men may well
have some good points, but they are like unto those of the ears of corn: The
force of council consists in wisdom which is not gotten but by experience,
and experience comes not but with time: A man may be borne capable of wisdom,
but only time makes the wise; Young Vines carry Grapes abundantly, but the old
make the good wine: In all that he undertook he showed the force of his
spirit; speaking of Arms he seemed never to have done any other thing but
fight with men and besiege places, and discoursing of affairs of Estate he
seemed to have past his whole life in Council. Great Spirits are always
entire in any thing they deal in. When as Cato had Arms in hand be seemed
never to have practiced any other thing: When as he spoke of Sciences a man
would have said he had never gone out of the University.


He informed himself curiously and exactly of all things, and of all persons
whom he knew not to be capable to show any art or disguising: A Prince adds
much esteem and respect unto his reputation when as he believes that he knows
all. Phillip de Commines observes an effect of his wisdom to sow discord and
division among those that would agree against his service: King Lewis our
Master understood that Art better; to divide men, then any other Prince that I
ever knew; and he spared neither his Silver, Goods, nor Pains, not only
toward the Masters, but also to the servants. The must hear all things to
draw profi^e from them: Valetius Publicola is praised by Plutarch for the
liberty he gave every man to enforme^ him of that which concerned him. And
Isocrates does therefore commend Euagoras King of Cypres: But there must be
great discretion in that which is spoken with and against private men.


Another act of his wisdom to have kindled, and entertained the fire which
did consume the forces and burnt to ashes the ambition of his enemy; In
causing the instruments of the war of Germany, Swisserland, and Lorraine to
move, he remained at peace: He had means to discharge his Realm of the
unprofitable burden of men which cannot live but in trouble: As the flowing
and ebbing is necessary for the Sea, to discharge it of the great scumme and
filth which a calm gathers together, so a great Empire must purge it self and
cast forth the bad humors which a dead and idle life draws together.

Although his promptness in speaking has oftentimes hurt him, Silence a soul
of great actions.
yet would he have it known that his very Hat had no part of his secrets.
Silence is the Pole and Axletree of enterprises, the which must not only be in
words, but also in gesture and countenance, for the eyes and the face are the
dumb interpreters of the mind: He that does manage a great design must know
how to govern his tongue, but much more his mind, for Polybius says that many
have discovered by their faces the designs which they have kept in their
hearts.
They cannot be executed but at certain times, upon certain places, with
certain men, and by certain means; if the one or the other be neglected or
discouerd, all must go to smoke. The concurrence of many things is necessary
for the execution of a design, the failing of one is able to ruin it, but
there is never enough when they talk too much.

Wisdom has also cause to complain of his tongue: He has often paid for
the liberty of his speech: But who can impose silence to Princes? The liberty
of Speech is a mark of their authority, it is the point and seasoning of
discourse, but the diversity of occasion makes it perilous: It sometimes
offends the most mild and patient spirits, and as every wound has his grief,
so there is not any wound that seems light to him that feels it, and
oftentimes they fall into incurable ulcers: Nothing can happen more troublesome
to free men then to be debarred of the liberty of free speech. The liberty of
free Discourse (says Democrates) is a sign of courage and generosity.
There are hours when we may not speak anything, A rule how to speak.
others when we may speak some thing, but none when we may speak all.

Besides the exact intelligence of his affairs, he had a great judgment in
the choice of men, and an admirable wisdom to entertain them and keep them.
He esteemed them, bound them unto him, and did not suffer them to languish in
any discontent, nor to attend the fruits of their service: He knew how to lay
the stone-worke, to enrich the Jewel, and to beautefie it with Amaile, gold,
and ornament: He not only knew them of his Realm that were most capable to
be employed in diverse functions for his service, but also who were the most
worthy Ministers with Neighbor Princes: He knew in what heads did reside the
sufficiency of England, Spain, and Portugal, and did not cease (...)

This great and profitable skill to divide their minds, that might hurt him,
did not only stetch to the servants and ministers of the same Prince, but he
knew how to divide Princes of one blood and family. He did govern the
affections of Sigismond at his pleasure, The Archduke Sigismond of Austria was
won by the King, whose party he followed both against the Duke of Bourgondy,
and the Archduke Maximilian. He revoked the adoption which he had made in his
favor, believing them that said, that to shorten his hopes, he would shorten
his life.
and turned him sometimes against the Archduke Maximilian, his persuasion being
of such force with this Prince, (who was good and tractable) as he made him
believe that Maximilian had designs against his life, the sooner to get
possession of his Estates, which were assured him after his death. Sigismond in
the end discovered this fraud, and found that the ruin of the Archduke his
Nephew, touched him so near, as the Franch-County could not be lost, but the
County of Feret would be also exposed to great danger, and had great subject to
apprehend the increase of greatness of so mighty a neighbor; and therefore
he yielded to a levy of some troops in his Estates of Elsasse and Ferret,
which were employed to relieve and defend Dole, the chief Town of the Franch
County, which was besieged by the Lord of Chaumont, of Ambois.

The King found means in loosing Sigismond, to win the Captains that led
the Troops, so as they suffered a great number of Frank Archers of the Kings
Camp to slip into the Town with their Troops, who seizing upon the Gates,
gave entry to the rest of the Army. The Town was exposed to sack and
pillage, Sack and desolation of Do^e.
both of the enemies and of strangers, and fire made an end to ruin that which
the Soldiers could not spoil or carry away, neither was there any house
exempt, but whereas the General was lodged. A lamentable example of the misery
of those Towns which are relieved by foreign forces, whose fidelity being
gotten and maintained by money, depends always of him that offers most. From
that time Dole was called the Dolorous.


By the same skill of winning men, and knowing how to unknit knots without
cutting the Cord, he had at his devotion the most confident Ministers of
England. Philip de Commines says, that he was employed to win the Lord
Hastings, as the Duke of Bourgondy had formerly done to have him his friend at
a thousand Crowns pension. He was very difficult to resolve; but as Silver is
like unto Cephalus Arrow, which is never shot in vain, that a long pursuit
shakes the most constant resolutions, he suffered himself to be won for two
thousand Crowns pension.

The King sent Peter Cleret, one of the Stewards of his House, unto him, to
carry him this Money, and to bring back a quittance to be put with the rest,
and to justify hereafter, that not only Hastings Lord Chamberlain, but also
the Lord Howard high Admiral, the Lord Chainey, Master of the Horse, and
Thomas of Montgomery had been Pensioners to the French King. This was said to
make a gain in giving, and to make a Trade of liberality. To hope for profit
of that which is given, is to traffic, and to put money to usury, it is to
think to ^old in letting go, and to receive in giving.
Philip de Commines does plainly set down what past betwixt them. Cleret
demanded a quittance, and Hastings was not so ill advised as to give him any:
Cleret let him understand that he had to do with a Master who was very
distrustful, and if he did not make it appear how he had delivered this sum
unto him, he might say he had stolen it; and therefore he desired only a
letter of three lines unto the King.

Hastings seeing that there was some color in his reasons, but much more in
those which did not allow him to write, gave him to understand, Wisdom of the
Lord Hastings.
that they should trust his Faith and Word, There is nothing that does bind
more then the assurance which we take of the fidelity and conscience of any
one. It is easier to break civil bonds then them of honor.
which he esteemed more then an hundred bonds in writing. He therefore
answered after this manner; Sir, that which you say is reasonable, but this
gift comes voluntarily from the King your Master, and not at my suite; if you
will have me take it, you shall put it into my sleeue, and you shall have no
other letter nor testimony: ^ will not that it shall be said by me, that the
Chamberlain of England has been a Pensioner to the French King, nor that my
quittances be found in his chamber of accounts. It is injustice to cause
benefit to be hurtful and infamous to him that receives it.
The said Cleret rested satisfied, left him the money, and came and made this
report unto the king, who was much offended that he had not brought him a
quittance; but he commended the said Chamberlain more then all the other
servants of the King of England, and he was ever after paid without giving
quittance.

He was so great an Architect, as he employed all sorts of spirits, fortunes
and conditions in the building of his designs. He did not only seek to have
at his devotion the chief Ministers of kings, but he also drew them unto him,
that had credit and authority in free Towns and Commonweals, therefore he
loved great Cosmo de Medicis, and was grieved for his death, which happened in
the first years of his reign. The laws of wisdom did bind him to enter
friendship with a house, Commendation of the house of Medicis.
whose great felicity drew the greatest of Europe to admiration. Virtue does
force even Envy it self to suffer this Palm to grow, which sprung up the
higher, the more they sought to depresse it, When as Envy has stormed and
striuen against the growing glory of a house, in the end she is forced to
yield, her eyes can no more endure such a glistering light.

Est aliquod meriti spatium quod nulla furentis

Inuidiae mensura capit. Claud. in laud. Stiliconis.


and made it known that it is no less indiscretion to malign the glory and
prosperity of merit, as to be angry when the sun shines, which Jupiter
commandes, and Apollo pronounces his Oracles. In those days to envy the glory
of the greatness of the house of Medicis, was to deprive the Colossus of
virtue of his shadow, which is glory.

Lewis 11. had great reasons to esteem him, knowing that great Cosmo de
Medicis had made Francis Sforce Duke of Millan, that the wealth of his servants
had raised the hopes of many great Princes, Riches of the house of Medicis.
which were in a manner dejected, A servant unto Peter de Medicis lent unto
Edward the fourth, an hundredth and twenty thousand Crowns, and another 50000
to the Duke of Bourgondy at one time, and 80000. at another.
that without him Edward 4. had not returned into his Realm, and the Duke of
Bourgondy had lost his credit in Italy. In those times they did not speak but
of the Piety and Magnificence of great Cosmo de Medicis, who had opened the
bar to his posterity to attain unto the sovereign command of Tuscanie. He
lived as a Citizen, commanded as a Prince, and his Country gave him the Title
of Father: His virtue was a Rampart to good Men, A good man is a great Rampart
to good man against a powerful Citizen that persecutes them. Such was Nicias
at Athens against the insolency and rashness of Cleon. Plut. in Nicias:
his House a refuge to good Wits out-raged by F^^tune, and a Port to the
Muses chased out of Greece. His b^unty appeared in four Millions of Gold, (...)

The Kings of Perou have their news carried after this manner, They have, upon
the high ways, posts, or Cabanes, appointed at every mile, the first Carrier
cries unto the second what is commanded him, the second carries it unto the
third with the like speed, and so until it comes unto the place appointed.
(...), as Suetonius reports, I^uenes P^^ro modicis inter^alles per militatis
vias dehinc vehicula disposuit. He first set young men by small distances upon
the high ways, and then he appointed Coches. He speaks also of Caesar's
diligence by Coches. Longissimas vias incredibili celeritate confecit,
expeditus meritoria rheda, centena passuum millia in dies singulos. He went
long iourneyes with incredible speed, a hundred miles every day, being set in a
hired Coch.
The Emperor Augustus ordained Coaches in certain places, to conduct them
that carried his commandments through the Provinces, or that brought him any
news, before time they did hire them, and Caesar did use them when as he went
in so short a time from Rome to the banks of Rosne.

Paris, the Rome of France, the miracle of the Cities of Europe, whereof it
should be the Dyamond if it were a Ring, owes unto this Prince the most
favorable concession and confirmation of the privilege which it enjoys, and
wherewith Kings have always gratified it, holding it reasonable that it should
bear the marks of their favor; Privileges of the Parisians.
and the profit which it feels by the ordinary presence of their Majesty's, he
gave leave to every Burgess to take yearly a certain measure of salt for
their provision, paying the Merchants right only, and to be freed of the
foreign imposition, paying six deniers upon the Liver in Paris, and twelve
upon the furthest parts of the Realm, not being bound to give caution for the
sale of it: That they should not be forced by any harbinger to lodge the kings
Officers, nor any Soldiers, but at their own pleasures. These privileges
were ampl^fied and confirmed during the war of the Commonweal, and for that
the people did apprehend that they might be revoked when it did cease, the
Chronicle says, that he declared in a great Assembly, that he desired rather
to augment them, then to cut off any thing.
Not to be bound to plead any where but in Paris, for what cause soever. To be
freed from all duties and services for the fees they held, yet upon condition
to have sufficient and defencible Arms, according to the value of their fees,
for the guard and defense of the City.

In like manner the City of Lion (that mighty Bulwark of the State) is bound
unto him for the establishment of the Faires. Commerce is a great means to
draw foreign commodities into a State, but it may cause a dangerous
transport of gold and silver, if it be not entertained by the exchange of
Wares. And as it should not be lawful to transport those that be necessary,
and whereof the Subjects may have need, One of the iustest, and most ancient
means to augment a kings tributes, is upon the entry, going forth, and passage
of Merchandise. It is the foreign Imposition, an ancient right to
Sovereigns, and it is called, Portorium quod mercium quae importantur
exportan^urve nomine penditur.
neither those which are vn-wrought, so the permission should be easy and free
for those which are needful for strangers; that the subjects may thereby gain
the profit of their hands. This Prince being given to understand, that the
Faires at Geneua did draw a great quantity of Money out of France, he erected
four Faires at Lion, The Estates of Tours after the death of King Lewis the
eleventh, required to have these Faires ^ept but twice a year, at Easter, and
at the Feast of All Saints, and in some other Town then Lion, for that it was
too (...) ^^^thest bounds of the Realm.
and gave them his letters patents at Saint Michael upon Loire, the 20th of
October 1462.

Traffic cannot receive a more sencible injury then by the calling down, or
raising of Money, which wrongs the Law of Nations. If there be any thing in an
estate which should be immutable, it is the certainty of their valor.
Wisdom is not commended but for the constancy of that which she resolves: A
Prince who is the warrant of public Justice, and subject to the law of
Nations, should not suffer the course of Money to be variable and uncertain,
to the prejudice of his subjects and strangers, which treat and traffic with
them. Wherefore the Kings of Arragon coming to the Crown, took an Oath, not
to alter the Coins which were allowed.
she learnes fit accidents which are mutable and immutable to reason, which is
constant and one, and not reason to accidents. When as the course of Money is
disordered and uncertain, all is in confusion. Lewis the eleventh changed the
course of coins in the year 1473. he ordained that the great Blankes should
go current for eleven Deniers Turnois, which before were worth but ten; he
reduced another coin called Targes, Orders for Coins.
to eleven Deniers, which past for twelve. The Crown at thirty Souls, three
Deniers Turnois, and after this proportion all other pieces. Then considering
that one of the causes of the weakening of Coins grew for that the Officers
took their Fees and entertainements from the rights of the Mint, which should
be unknown in great Estates, The Ancients knew not what the right of Minting
meant, and the Coins were not imparted for the fees of officers, which were
taken from other kinds of money, to the end that the coining of money should be
free from all suspicion of deceit, it was done in public places, as at Rome
in Juno's Temple; and Charlemain did forbid any to be coined but in his Palace.
and are not seemly but in petty ones, where they draw profit from every
thing, and augment their Revenues by the coining of money. In the year 1475.
he displaced the Generals and Masters of the Mint, and set four Commissioners
in their places, German de Merle, Nicholas Potier, Denis the Britton, and
Simon Ausorran, and ordained that the Kings crowns of Gold which before had
course for four and twenty Souls Parisis, and three Turnois, should go for
five and thirty pieces of eleven, being worth five and twenty Souls, eight
Deniers Parisis, and they should make other Crowns, which should have a
Halfe-moone in stead of a Crown, which was on the rest, and should be worth
thirty six pieces of eleven of the value of twenty six Souls, six Deniers, and
new Dozains, at 12 Turnois a piece.

Liberality. We should lie in calling this Prince covetous, as well as in
saying he was liberal: Liberality
he never knew what it was to spare, no not in his age, when as covetousness
does most trouble the mind when it has least need of it. Covetousness, which
comes in the end of man's life, is inexcusable. What auails it to provide so
many things for so small a iourny? Auaritia senilis maxim est vituperanda.
Potest enim quicqua^ esse absurdius, quam quo minus viae restat eo plus viatici
quaerere? Covetousness in age is much to be blamed. Can there be any thing
more obsurd then when there is least way to go, to make most provision? Cat.
M^i. One thinking that there was nothing so honest, as to demand and receive,
demanded of King Archelaus, being at supper, a cup of gold, wherein he drank.
The King commanded his Page to go and give it to Euripides, who was at the
table, and turning toward him that had begged it, ^e said; As for thee, thou
art worthy to demand, and to be refused, for that thou do beg; but
Euripides is worthy to be rewarded although he demands not.
he knew not what it was to give with reason and discretion, to whom, how much,
and when. He gave not with a refusing countenance, but cheerfully and freely.
No man holds himself bound for that which is given by importunity, and which
is rather wrested away then received. Slow graces are as troublesome as the
swift are sweet: Bounty should prevent demands, sometimes hopes, and never
merit. She does not consider who receives, how far the greatness of his
courage and fortune goes that gives, and does fore-warne him, that there are
some that deserve to be refused when they demand, and others which demand not,
deserve to have given them.m

He gave good Words, but his Promises were so sure, as he seemed to be bound
to the day he promised. A Man might hold that received which he offered.
There is nothing so great, (...) have past, has given thee nothing but
increase, the conspiracies of the greatest powers of Europe have only tried
thy forces. Rich and goodly France, whom the ingratitude of thine own children
could not shake: If thou have been sometimes ignorant of thine own power,
thou can not (at this day) dissemble what the felicity of an Estate is which
lives in assured peace.

In former times there was nothing found in the Treasury but debts. The
difficulties which Kings have had to decide Controversies with their own
Subjects, have forced them to sell their demaines, the chief part of the
entertainment of their Majesty. The sinews of this body were heretofore
shrunk, their functions were neither lively nor free: now that this great
Esculapius has set together the members, and restored it to life, heat and
motion, France may say that she was not happy until the day that she was
vanquished by his victorious Arms. Lat. Pac. making Rome to speak in the
panegericke^ of Theodosius, says thus: Quando me Nerua tranquillus, amor
generis humani Titus, pietate memorabilis Antoninus teneret, quum moenibus
Augustus ornaret, legibus Hadrianus imbueret, sinibus Trajanus augeret, parum
mihi videbar beat^, quia non eram tua. When as mild Nerua, the love of
mankind, religious Titus, and memorable Antonine enjoyed me, when as Augustus
did beautify me with walls, Adrian gave me Laws, and Traian augmented my
bounds, yet did I hold my self scarce happy, because I was not thine.


It is the Hercules which has cut off these Hydras heads, which has
delivered France, tied Want to mount Caucasus; and who (after incredible
toils) has dedicated Peace, that white Hind Menelea, which has the Head and
Feet of Gold.

The beams of this Glory reflect upon so many great understandings, so many
noble resolutions which have followed the Justice of his Hopes, and the crosses
of his Fortunes. A good Prince has an Interest in the Commendation of his
Servants, he has a feeling of that which honors them, he is moved with that
which wrongs them; and a good Servant cannot desire a more glorious
acknowledgement of his services, then in the heart and judgment of his Master.

Every man knows, and many understand the esteem which the king made of the
Duke of Suillyes services, which are such, that as all the Nations of the Earth
give the palm of Valor to this great King, in the restoration of this great
Empire of FRANCE, so they cannot deny him the glory of great Wisdom, and
clear Judgment, and Providence, in the election which he has made to commit
unto him the principal pieces of his Estate.

The purest eloquence has already showed her riches upon this subject by
Discourses which cannot be followed but by the eyes of Admiration, and a
desire to imitate them. A great, rare, and happy Wit, Counceller to the King in
his Councels, and President in a Sovereign Company, has made the Marbles to
speak upon this verity.

His Panegericke filling men's minds with Admiration, and their eyes with
Wonder, has made known that one line suffices to judge of the excellency of
the Hand that drew it. I have taken this period as a glistering stone to
beautify this Discourse. Commendation of the Duke of Suilly.


This great HENRY has lodged his Treasure in the Temple of your Integrities, a
Temple shut for the profane, a Temple whereas only virtue finds a place to
receive the reward* of her Travels. You have made all Europe know, that there
is not any place so fortified, either by Nature or Art, or by both together,
which can long hold out against the thundering Artillery which the IVPITER of
France has committed into your hands, as to his faithful Eagle, to carry it
wheresoever he shall command.

It is now that our great King may sit in his Throne of Justice, and punish
Rebels according to their deserts: For although that Men's offenses be
without number, he can cast forth as many thunderbolts as they can commit
faults. The glistering of so many perfections and Arms wherewith your
Stone-houses are filled, dazles the eyes of Subjects, and people bordering upon
France; the one fear them, the other are assured; but both the one and the
other do equally admire so fearful a Power in the King, and in you so great
Industry, who knew how to provide the means to make our peace so firm, as
we can give it, and take it from whom we please, whereby the Kings Majesty is
(at this day) the Arbitrator of Christendom.

Valor comes in order in the observation of the Virtues and Vices of this
Prince. Valor natural to the Kings of France.
It is superfluous curiosity to search it among his Virtues: for although some
men say, That Nature makes few men valiant, and that valor comes from good
institution, yet it is true that the Kings of France are all borne valiant.
Valor does constantly resist all the accidents which may shake the weakness
of man. Timendorum contemptrix, quae terribilia and subiugare libertatem
nostram nitentia despicit, prouocat, frangit. A contemner of fearful things,
those things which be terrible, and seek to subiugate our liberty, he
despises, prouokes, and breaks.


This virtue, which (through excellency) is simply called Virtue, and which
contains many other virtues, all Heroicke and Royal, Magnanimity, Wisdom,
Assurance, Constancy, and Perseverance to vanquish, break and endure all
kinds of accidents and difficulties, which returns from Combats in the like
sort it goes, fears death no more in Arms then in his House, and has his
seat in the Heart and Will.

This Prince had not learned the Art of War by discourse, he went to Horse
at the age of fourteen years, and continued until his Father had expelled
the English out of his Realm. He that is no Soldier but by seeing battles
painted, is like unto him that understands music, but can not sing.
He made proof of his Courage at the battle of Montlehery, at the Alarm and
Assault of Liege, and in the War of Artois. His Wisdom corrected the heat
of his Valor: for that which was esteemed valor before he was King, would
have carried the name of Rashness after he came to the Crown.

PHILIP DE COMMINES says, that (of his own nature) he was somewhat
fearful, and would not hazard any thing. But every where, and in any great
occasion he gives him the glory to have carried his resolutions beyond all
kinds of accidents and dangers. We must judge of Courage by all the
dimensions, and not only by the height and greatness, but also by the length
and extention, not being sufficient to be valiant, if it continue not.

Adversity is the Touchstone of men's resolutions, He that has neither enemy
nor misfortune cannot make account of the force of his courage. Mis^rum te esse
iudico, qui nunquam tue^is miser, traxisti sine aduersario vita^. Nemo scit,
quid potueris, neque tu quidem ipse. Opus est enim ad sui notitiam experimento.
Quid quisque possit, non nisi tentando didicit. I hold thee miserable that were
never wretched, and have drawn forth thy life without an enemy. No Man knows
what thou can do, no nor thou thy self. It is needful to have experience to
know ones self. No man has learned what he can do but by trial.
no man can judge of his good fortune, nor her forces, if he has not tried
those of misfortune, and the vigor of his enemies: She is a learned mistress
in all professions, and makes that ruins, ship-wracks and routs produce the
precepts which frame sufficiency, and assure the judgments of Architects,
Pilots and Captains.

He gave Military charges to them that were capable to discharge them, he
loved men that were resolute to dangers, and did them good. By the Capitulation
of the Castle of Hedin, Flamen of Launoy, who was governor, remained in the
Kings service, There is no other thing to be considered in the provision of
great Offices which cannot be executed but in presence and person, but
experience and sufficiency. Tiberius regarded the quality of the birth, so as
it were seconded by proofs of virtue. Mandabat honores, nobilitatem maiorum,
claritudinem militiae, illustras domi arts spectando, vt satis constaret non
alios potiores fuisse. He gave honors, respecting the Nobility of the
Ancestors, their valor in war, and their good deserts at home, so as it
might appear there were not any more worthy. Tacit.
all his lands being then in the Conquerours power and dominions, the King gave
a pension to Raoul of Launoy his son. After the siege of Hedin, the King did
batter Quesnoy le Comte, made a breach and gave an assault, Raoul of Launoy, to
begin his service by some notable proof of his courage and valor, did clime
up the ruins of the Wall, through the blows, fire, and flame, so
courageously, as the King seeing and admiring his courage, said aloud, He is
too furious, he must be bound. The place being taken by assault, the king sent
for him, and said unto him: Passion of God my friend, thou art but too furious
in a fight, we must bind you to moderate your heat: for I will not loose you,
desiring to make use of your service more then once. And in saying so, he put a
Chain about his neck of five hundred Crowns, and gave him a company of
footmen. The presents and rewards of Princes are Chains and Manacles which
bind and captiuate men's affections.
He was made Bailiffe of Amiens, and Lieutenant for the King at Genoa. They of
his house have for a long time carried a Chain about the Scutchion of their
Arms, in remembrance of this gratification.

Arms then were the delight of this Prince in his youth, wisdom gave him
Maxims, contrary to those of his courage, when he was king, and yet in all
places wither he sent his Armies, commanded by his Liutenants, and in those
where he was himself upon the Frontier of Flanders, he always made it
known, that his wisdom to resolve, and his presence to execute, made the
principal part of the happiness of his affairs. He had all the time of his
reign Armies on foot, Contempt of discipline in Soldiers.
and they give him the honor to have entertained greater and more mighty
Armies then his Predecessors, One demanded of Agesilaus what parts were
requisite to make a great Captain, he answered, Courage against his enemies,
and wisdom and judgment to make use of occasions.
and to have had more care of Men of War, Fortresses and Artillery. All this
is seen in the Precedent book, speaking of his new erection of Troops to
have always the body of a great Army ready to guard his Estate and person,
and to suppress any sudden revolt, holding it indiscretion to attend necessity
for the leuying of Soldiers. They of his time lived very licentiously. The
complaints that were made presently after his death, An Estate should have
ordinary and extraordinary forces: the ordinary is understood of Companies
which are entertained in Forts, and near unto the Prince: the extraordinary is
in Arms which are levied, entertained and employed in occasions of war.
to the Estates at Tours upon this subject, were vehement; and it was
particularly said, That the men at Arms, the Gentlemen of the Ban, the Frank
Archers, and the Suissers, had done infinite harm unto the people; that the
Soldiers not contenting themselves with the goods they found in the laborers
houses, forced them with cudgels to go and fetch Wine, Fish, Spices, and other
excessive things from the Town.

King Lewis the eleventh sought to remedy these disorders, and to settle
discipline, to make the Soldiers more modest and moderate, Military discipline
consists in three points, Continency, Modesty, and Abstinency. By the first
they avoid voluptuousness, which makes courage fainte. By the second they
frame themselves to valor, and it has these three points: Velle, vereri, and
obedire, to Will, to fear, and to obey. By the third they are content to do
that which is allowed.
and to hold their hands free from all violence. But he did it not
effectually: for his Edicts had neither constancy nor execution. Edict to
reform Soldiers.
The Chronicle says, that in the year 1474. being at Creil, he made an Edict
touching the Men at Arms of his Realm, by the which he declared, That a
Lance should keep but six horses: that is to say, the Lance three horses
for himself, his Page and Cutler, and the two Archers two horses, and one
horse for the Groom, and that they should no more have Paniers to carry their
Arms; and withal, they should not lodge above one day in a village. And
moreouerit was proclaimed, That no Merchant should sell unto the said Men at
Arms, or lend any Silks and Chamblets, upon pain of loosing the money which
the said Soldiers might owe them by reason thereof: and also that they should
not sell unto them any woolen-cloath of above three shillings three pence an
Ell.

The disorder of Silks was as great in those times as it had been little
known in precedent Ages. PHILIP the fair made an Ordonance for the
reformation of apparel, according to the condition and difference of persons.
There was no mention made of Silks, for that the use was not common, nor known
in France. It allows a Duke, Earl or Baron of six hundred pounds sterling a
year rent, or more, to make four suits of apparel every year, and no more,
and as many for their wives, and forbids Lawyers and Clerks which are not in
dignity, to make Gowns for their bodies of cloth of above sixteen Soulz the
Ell of Paris.
This dissolution was one of the causes of the rareness of Gold and Silver,
which was no more to be found but in Chains of gold, and in their purses who
had had means to transport it out of the Realm to have Silks. The Estates of
France complained at Tours, and it was said, That every man was clad in Velvet
and Silks, and that there was not a Fiddler, Groom of the Chamber, Barber nor
Soldier but ware it, that they had Collers, or Rings of Gold on their fingers,
like the Princes, and that there was not treason nor villainy but they committed
to continue this disordered sumptuousness of apparel.

Science. Science.
If he were learned by Art or by Practice, we must look unto the effects of
his good Conduct, with the which (like unto Perseus with Mineruas Courtelax) he
had cut off the head of the Medusa of reuolts and sedition in his Realm. If it
be true, that in his time simple honesty, Innocence does commonly lodge with
Ignorance and Simplicity. The troubles which have molested the world, are not
come from the simple. The learned, or they which presumed to know all things,
have framed them. Simplex illa and aperta virtus in obscuram and solertem
scientiam versa est. That simple and open virtue is turned into obscure and
cunning knowledge.
and ignorant virtue were degenerated into a Science, or knowledge of
dissembling, or subtilty, we must hold him for the most learned Prince that
ever bare Scepter in his hand, or Crown upon his head. He had (says Philip
de Commines) his speech at commandment, and his wit perfectly good, without
the which books serve to small purpose. They make men learned, but not wise;
and the difference is great to have a full head, or a head well made, to be
sufficient or learned, instructed in contemplation or in action. They teach men
diverse Sciences for their use, and to excel in them. Princes should learn,
Regere Imperio populos, To govern the people.
A Princes Science is to know how to command. Philip de Commines says, that
he was learned enough.

The Author of the Annals of Aquitane writes, That he had gotten more
knowledge, as well Legal as Historical, then the Kings of France were
accustomed to have. And although he were not of those times, when as they met
with Emperors going to the Schools with Books under their Arms, Lucius met
with M. Antony, who went to see Cyrus the Philosopher, son to one of Plutarkes
sisters, this Prince said unto him, That it was a goodly thing to learn, even
for a man that grew old. To whom Lucius all amazed, answered, O Jupiter
Romanoru^ Imperator iam apetente senio gestans librum qui pueris mos est
preceptore^ adit. O Jupiter the Roman Emperor growing old, goes unto his
master, carrying a book, as school-boyes use to do.
nor was not of the humor of that other Emperor, who forgot his Dinner to
hear Lessons, Charles 4. Emperor loved learning in such sort, as being in in
the schools at Pragne, some coming to put him in mind of dinner, he said
unto them, that he had dined, preferring^ the contentment of the mind before
that of the body. Aen. Silv.
yet that great leisure which he had in Dauphine, and afterward in Flanders,
accompanied with a desire to learn (which is the first step to mount unto
knowledge) could not leave him in the ignorance of things necessary to reign
well. On a time he used his Latin to good purpose: Pope Sixtus had sent
Cardinal Bessarion, Cardinal Bessarion borne at Trebisond, and Monk of S.
Basil was made Cardinal at the Council of Florence by Eugenius the fourth,
and sent Legate into Germany to reconcile the Emperor and the Archduke
Sigismond brethren.
a Grecian borne, to mediate a peace betwixt him and the Duke of Bourgondy. He
had been employed in great Embassies in the time of Pope Eugenius, who had
made him Cardinal, and of Pius the second, the which he ended happily. This
was the cause of his death: for having begun with the Duke of Bourgondy, as
holding him the most difficult to draw to reason, the King took it ill, and
imputing it to contempt, or to some private passion, as he presented himself
at his Audience, he laid his hand upon his great beard, and said unto him:
Barbara Greca genus retinent quod habere solebant. The Grecians called all
other nations barbarous. Plat. in Menoxeno.
An Arrow shot not against Greece, which gave the name of Barbarous to all
other Nations, but against the Birth and Inciuilite, or Indiscretion of this
Cardinal, whom he left there, and commanded to be so speedily dispatched, as
he knew his stay there was no more pleasing unto him, then his Indiscretion.
The feeling hereof did so afflict him, as soon after returning to Rome, he
fell sick at Thurin, died at Reuenna, and confirmed that Truth, That
Embassages ambitiously affected, do never succeed happily. A grave and true
sentence spoken by John Caruagial Cardinal of S. Agnolo, Nessuna legatione
ambita puo hauer desiderato fine. No Embassage affected can have a desired end.
Ier. Garimbert.


Who so had the Apothegmes, the goodly speeches, and good words of this Prince,
should enrich this discourse with so many pearls and precious stones. There
comes nothing from the mouth of a great King, full of wisdom and experience,
but should be as curiously gathered up as the crumbs which fall from the table
of the Gods. Damis did curiously collect the words of Appollonius. Some
misliking that ^e busied himself with such trifles, said that he had done like
unto dogs, which gather up all the crumbs and fragments which fall from their
masters tables. Damis answered, You say well, but this is a banquet of the
Gods, and all that assist at it are Gods also, the Officers suffer nothing to
be lost.


Philip de Commines has observed this: A King has more force and virtue in
his Realm where he was anointed and crowned, then he had without it.

To have served well, does sometimes loose men, and great services are
recompenst with great ingratitude; Judgment upon the recompense of services
but this may happen as well through the error of them that have done the
services, who too arrogantly abuse their good fortune, as well to their
Masters, as their Companions, as through the mistaking and forgetfulness of
the Prince. Princes seeing the merits and services to be so great, as they
cannot recompense them but by great aduancemets, they do not willingly look
upon them, who as often as they present themselves unto their eyes, seem to
demand recompense. Beneficia eo vsque laeta sunt, dum videntur exolui posse.
Vbi multum antevenere pro gratia odium redditur. Benefits are so long pleasing
as they think they can be paid; but when they have exceeded, hatred is
repayed for thanks. Tacitus, lib. 4.


To have good in Court, it is greater happiness for a Man when as the Prince
whom he serves does him a great favor for a small merit; wherefore he
remains bound unto him which should not be if he had done so great services
as the Prince had been much bound unto him. Wherefore he does by nature love
them more that are bound unto him, then those to whom he is beholding.

When as pride goes before, shame and confusion follows at the heels. Pride
is always followed by Ruin and Shame. Dominare tumidus spiritus altos gere,
Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo Deus.
SEN.


When he changed his servants, he excused this change, saying; That Nature was
pleased with variety.

He said, That if he had entered his Reign otherwise then with Fear and
Severity, he had served for an example in the last Chapter of BOCACE his Book
of unfortunate Noblemen.

And considering that secrecy was the soul and spirit of all designs, he
said sometimes, I would burn my Hat if it knew what were in my head. Metellus
said the like, that if he knew his shirt understood his secerets, he would
burn it,


He remembered to have heard King Charles his father say, that Truth was sick,
and he added, I believe that since she is dead, and has not found any
Confessor.

Mocking at one that had many books, and little learning, he said, that he
was like unto a crooke-backt man, who carries a great bunch at his back, and
never sees it.

Seeing a Gentleman which carried a goodly Chain of Gold, he said unto him
that did accompany him; You must not touch it, for it is holy, showing that it
came from the spoil of Churches. It is long since that this sacrilegious
liberty has been in custom, and that Princes, that would please GOD and Men,
have detested it; but custom to evil has more power over the wills of men
to entertain them in it, then it gives horror and shame to fly from it.
Caesar did bite Pompey to the quick, for that he had taken away the ornaments
of Hercules Temple. Pecuniam omnem ex fano Herculis in opidum Gades intulit,
and giving himself the honor to have caused it to be restored, Referri in
Templum iubet.


He took delight in quick answers, which were made without study: for if there
be premeditation they loose their grace. On a time seeing the Bishop of Chartres
mounted on a Mule with a golden bridle, he said unto him, that in times past
Bishops were contented with an Ass and a plain Halter. The Bishop of Charters
answered him, That it was at such times when as Kings were Sheepheards, and
kept Sheep. The Annals of Aquitane, which report this, add that that the King
began to laugh: for he loved a speech which proceeded from a sudden wit.

He loved Astrologians, and this love proceeded (as it were) from a natural
and hereditary curiosity, having much troubled the minds of his forefathers.
Charles the fifth was governed by them, Credit of Astrologians.
and gave them means to teach Astrology publickely in the University of
Paris. He had for his Physician one called Monsieur Garuis Cretin a great
Astrologian. CHARLES the fifth caused many Books of Astrology to be
Translated into French, he built a College for Astrology and Physic, and
gave them the Tithes of the Village of Caugie, and caused the foundation to be
confirmed by Pope URBAN the fifth. He caused the Nativity of King Charles the
sixtth, to b^e cast by Monsieur Andrew of Suilly.
The like curiosity made Charles the 5th to love and cherish familiarly Michael
Tourne-Roue a Carthusian, who was very skillful in the practice of Elections:
He made that of the day when as the King went a hunting, where as he found
the great Stagge which had a Collar of Copper about the neck, wherein these
words were written; Hoc Caesar me donauit, Caesar gave me this. The figure of
it was set up in the palace of Paris.

He was also much bound to the advice which James of Angiers gave him of the
bad Intention which two Augustine Monks had to open his skull, who were
beheaded at Paris. In the book of SIMON of Phares, which is in the Kings
Library, we read this: JAMES of Angiers was in that time, who discovered the
false intent which the two Augustines had, which did open King CHARLES his
head, saying; They would cure him, being ignorant both in Physic and
Chyrurgery: They were suborned by PHILIP Duke of Bourgondy, (as was said) to
work this effect. The matter being discovered, the said Augustines were
degraded, and lost their heads, as was reason.
He also made great account of Charles of Orgemont, who foretold him that the
Duke of Aniou his brother should bring nothing back from his voyage at Naples,
but shame, want, and misery, the which happened: for all the Knights which had
followed him, returned with white sticks in their hands, Upon this Prediction
SIMON of Phares speaks thus: The French were forced to fly, and the Duke of
Millan forgetting his Faith and Oath, did kill them that were taken, and
suffered the Dogs to eat them, and therefore let this be an aduertisment to
the Kings of France, and to the French, never to trust in a Lombards tongue.
or dyed in Hospitals. He was also advertised of the issue of the voyage which
Boucicant made to Genoa, and of the treason of the Marquis of Montferrat, and
of Count Francisque.

CHARLES the seventh had Astrologians all his life: He entertained in his
Court JOHN of Bregy, a Knight, who cast the Nativity of AME Duke of Sauoy, and
of the Lady YOLAND of France his wife; and German of Tibonuille, who
foretold the death of King Henry the fifth, and of Charles the sixth. He
received into Pension, and into his house JOHN of Buillion, whom the English
had kept prisoner at Chartres, for that he had foretold that which hahpened
unto them at the siege of Orleans.

He gave entertainment also to SIMON of Phares, borne borne at Orleance,
whose book of excellent Astrologians is to be seen in the Kings Library: This
Simon of Phareswrites of himself that he did foretell, The great famine at
Paris, and the great plague which followed under the reign of Charles the ^.
that the Lands were untilled, and the woods, so ^full of wolves as they
devoured women and children, and that it was proclaimed that for every Woolfe
they could take they should have two shillings, besides that which the Commons
might give.
Master Lewis of Langre a Spaniard, a Physician and Astrologian at Lion, told
King Charles of the victory he should get at Fromigny, in the year 1450. and
of the great plague which was at Lion a year after, for the which he gave him
forty pounds a year, pension.

In all the chief actions of the life of Lewis the eleventh, we find that
John Merende of Bourg in Bresse, did cast his Nativity, and speaking of his
Adventures unto the thirtieth year, Predictions upon the life of Lewis the
eleventh.
he advertised King Charles the seventh of his rebellion, and how his
government would be wonderful to men, This man was much esteemed by Duke
Amedeus the Pope, he foretold the Schism of the Church, and the war betwixt
France and England.
Manasses a lew of Valencia continued these predictions unto the battle of
Montlehery: Peter of Saint Valerien, a Chanon of Paris, and a great
Astrologian, was sent in the year 1435. into Scotland for the marriage of the
Lady Margaret; during his abode in Flanders, he consulted always with
Astrologians of future things, and these impostors, more hurtful to a
Commonwealth then Players, Sights entertain the people and breed them up ^n
idleness: And therefore Phillip Augugustus by an Edict banished Plaiers out of
France: Nihil tam moribus alienum quam in spectaculo desidere. Sen.
whom his predecessors had chased away, were always in his ears. He caused
many judgments to be made by John Coleman his Astrologian, who taught him to
understand the great Almanacke, and upon the great Conjunction of Saturn and
Mars, which was the eighth of April, about ten of the clock eighteen
minutes, in the year 1464: He spoke plainly of the troubles of the League,
and so did in like manner Peter of Grauille, whom Lewis the 11. caused to come
out of Normandy: Conrade Hermgarter a German left the Duke of Bourgundies
service for the Kings, who gave him great entertainements. But above all, he
made great esteem of Angelo Catho a Neapolitan, who came into France with the
Prince of Tarentum, John Spirink did also foretell the Duke of Bourgundy that if
he went against the Suisses it would succeed ill, the Duke answered, that the
fury of his Sword should vanquish the course of heaven.
and had foretold the Duke of Bourgundy and the Duke of Guelders their
misfortunes. The King gave him the Arch-bishopricke of Vienna, wherein he
could not reside for the great crosses he received from them of Dauphine, but
was forced to retire himself to Rome: His Chronicle does also speak of the
death of Master Arnold his Astrologian during the plague, in the year 1466.
the which he had foreseen, and which unpeopled Paris of above 40000. persons.

France had other kinds of men which did better deserve the favor and bounty
of the King then these Deuiners. God is offended at the rashness of this
science which undertakes the knowledge of future things, which is only
reserved to his eternal Providence, and which in regard of man is all composed
in with clouds and impenetrable darkness. Vanity of Judiciary Astrology.
The curious are deceived, for they tell them things that are either true or
false, Fauorinus with this Dilemma mockes at Judiciary Astrology: Aut aduersa
dicunt and prospera. Si dicunt prospera and fallunt, miser fies, frustra
expectando. Si aduersa dicunt and mentiuntur, miser fies frustra timendo?
Either they tell adverse things or prosperous: If they foretell prosperous
things and err, thou art a wretch in vain expectance? if they tell adverse
things and lie, thou will be a wretch in fearing without cause?
They make themselves miserable in the expectation of prosperity which never
happens: They are miserable also in the apprehension of adversities which they
fear incessantly, and happen not but when they least dream of them, thinking
they have escaped them, and howsoever lying deceiues hope and augments fear:
Judiciary Astrologyis forbidden by the reasons which Epiphanius produces
against the Manicheans, Bas^le in his Exameron: Chrysostom upon Genesis* Hom.
5. Augustine. lib. 4. cap. 3. of (...), Cofession^, and by the Counciles of
Tol^do.
The Church which has the eternal truth for the vertical Star of her
establishment, which does always look unto the Sun of Justice and
Constancy, not governing her self like unto the Synagogue, by the inconstancy
of the Moon, has religiously and iudiciously detested the practice of
Judiciary Astrology, which filles the ears with vanity and curiosity, and the
conscience with amazement.

If the curiosity had had any reflection to the advancement and beautifying of
learning, Barbarism had not tyranized so long over so many good wits: Princes
cannot add goodlier Crowns to the Palms and Bays of their virtues, then
those which good wits do dedicate unto them as an acknowledgement of their
favors to learning. The glory which a Prince does get by Arms is great, That
which comes from the favor and protection of learning is immortal. Int^r omnia
quae vertute principum ac felicitate recreantur, sint licet for tasse alia
magnitudine atque vtilitate potiora, nihill est tame^ admirabilius haec
liberate quam fouendis honorandisue literarum studijs i^partiu^t. Among all
the things which are delighted with the virtue and felicity of Prinalthough it
may be there are some to be preferred in greatness and profit, yet there is
nothing more admirable then that liberality which is bestowed to nourish and
honor the study of learning. Eumenes Rhoet^r in orat. pro instau. scho.
King Charles the seventh, father to Lewis, and King Charles the eighth his
son, had some care of the University of Paris: The first set down an order
for the decision of causes referred to the Court of Parliament: The last
declared what men should enjoy the privileges of the University, and how they
should be inrowled in the book of Privileges: But we do not find that Lewis
has done any thing either with it, or against it. The President Thou, whose
History Europe does no less admire for his eloquence and boldness, then Italy
did Titus Liuius, and Greece Thucidides, speaks of Johannes Vulceus of
Groningue, and says that he reformed the University, during the reign of this
King, and this reformation shows that there was some disorder. The negligence
of men was not so much the cause as the violence of times, full of troubles and
confusion, which did not permit them either to teach or to learn. These clouds
of Ignorance were as dark in other Nations: Barbarism in in the time of Lewis.
The misery of that age was so great as who so should represent the potrraite
of that Barbarism, would move the minds of men both to pity of so great
ignorance, and to fear that our negligence would bring us soon into the like.
The sweetness of the Muses was but bitterness, their flowers all withered,
and their light all confusion; the men of those times did not only contemn
learning, but they did abhor her beauty, and said that it did not agree with
the gravity and severity of other Sciences. Barbarism being banished the
schools whereas the taught good learning, it remained long among the Lawiers.
King Francis the first having seen these words in a Decree, debotauit and
debottat: commanded that al^ the Acts of justice and contracts should be made
in Lattine.
For this cause the purity of the Lattine Tongue was banished out of the
Schools, and they were filled with unknown Sophistries, which were strange
and barbarous: The Schools were no more the Fountain of the Muses, but Moates
full of Frogs, There were good wits, as all ages does produce, as all Seas
may breed Pearls: But as there is a necessity to howl with Wolves: they were
forced to fit themselves to the common use, being impossible to wipe away the
contumely which was done to the reading of good books: It was a good Verse if
it fell not twice or thrice upon the Cadence of the same Syllable: All Lyricke
Poets meddled with time, as careless of elegancy as of reason.

The Latin tongue was harbored in some Cloisters, and thence the Proverb
came, Not to speak Latin before Friars: as if they should not handle any
tools before good worke-men, nor dance before good dancers: But they that have
written of those times show that all the eloquence was nothing but a confused
babbling which brought forth new words, as monsters bred of pride and ignorance:
So the greatest and most famous actions were all made upon the model of
Sermons, and they always took some Text of Scripture which they called the
Theme of the Discourse: In those day: they busied men's w^ts with unprofitable
and impertinent Etimologies: They said in Schools that the Scipio's and the
Censorins were names of dignity: That the Ethnickes came from Mount Ethna, and
that the Law* Falcidia was so called a fal^e, for that like a Sith it did cut
off Legacies.
They did often add ridiculous and foolish Etymologies, and their inventions
were about Letters and Syllables. The proof hereof may grow of that which
has been observed in diverse places of this History, as of the discourse which
the first President of Grenoble made to Lewis the 11. Of the pleading which was
in the Court of Parliament before the King of Portugal: Of the Oration made at
the opening of the Estates of Tours: That which was made unto the Millannois
under the reign of Lewis the 12. is an other mark of this great simplicity:
The Millannois for a rebellion made against King Lewis the 12. came in
Procession to dema^d pardon of the Cardinal of Amboise, his Majesty's
Lientenant, Mr. Michael Ris a Doctor of the Laws, Counselor in the great
Council and Parliament of Dijon, and in the Senate of Milan, made a great
discourse upon this occasion, the which he began in these terms. Misertus est
Dominus super Niniuem ciuitate^ quod poenitentiam egit in cinere and cilicio.
In like manner the Oration made by the Rector of the University of Paris, to
Queen Mary, second wife to Lewis the 12.

When they have searched into the causes of this great desolation, they have
found that avarice has contributed most; for when as they found that great
wealth was not gotten by the profession of learning; that they which had
consumed most in good books, had wasted their estates unprofitably, and
contemned their fortunes: that only pleading got the grain and left but the
straw for other professions: Men studied no more to be learned but contented
themselves to be Doctors: The Law it self, which makes a great part of
polliticke knowledge, was, in a manner, abandoned, and her excellencies
dishonored with an infinite number of ridiculous glosses and vain questions:
Wherefore Pope Innocent the 3. who labored, more seriously then happily, to
restore that Profession to honor, did often complain that avarice had made
the Liberal Sciences Mechanicke, and that many past impudently from the first
precepts of Grammar, to the study of the Laws, not staying neither at
Philosophy, nor any other good Art: Wherefore throughout all the East good
books were not known but to some rare and eloquent spirit, and in the West
the Latin tongue was grown barbarous, the Syriac unknown, and the Greek so
odious, as it was no ignorance in the most learned to skip a Greek word and not
to read it. Ignorance is so shameless as she glories of that she
understands not. In those times when they met with a Greek word, they were
dispensed with, if they made no stay at it, and the Reader said: Graecum est
non legitur.


The taking of Constantinople did wholly ruin learning in the East, and was
the cause to make it revive in the West, by the care of Pope Nicholas the
fifth, and of great Cosmo de Medicis, who gathered together the sad Relickes of
this Shipwreck: They caused the good books of all the Greek Authors to be
sought out and preserved, and did lodge and entertain them that were capable
to make them speak Lattine. This misfortune made them to arrive in Italy as
into a Port of safety, against the tempest of Greece, or rather as some
precious moveable rescued out of a great fire, they found a sweet retreat,
and an honorable resting place in the house of Medicis.

Some time before Emanuel Chrisolara had been sent by John Paleologue, to
demand succors of Christian Princes against Bajazeth the first, who threatened
Greece with the servitude which it has endured under the Empire of his
descendants: Having done his charge he staid at Venice, then at Florence and at
Rome, he read some lessons at Padua, past into Germany, and dyed during the
Council of Constance. George Trapezonde, by extraction from Trapizonde, but
borne in Candy, and Theodore Gaza of Thessalonica continued these first
beginnings. Cosmo de Medicis made choice of John Argyropile, John Capnio was
one of his A^ditours, the first time he entered, Argyropyle asked him of whence
he was and what he would; he answered that he was a Germain, and would
remain at Rome to learn something of him in the Greek tongue, whereof he had
already some knowledge: Argyropile commanded him to read and to interpret a
passage of Thucidides, Capnio did it after so elegant a manner, and with so
clean a pronounciation, as Argy^opile sighing said, Graecia nostro exilio
transuolauit Alps. Greece by our exile has flown over the Alps.
their companion to be schoolemaister to Peter de Medicis his soon, then he
went to Rome, where he did publickely interpret the Greek Histories, and did
so inspire the love of learning into the hearts of good spirits, as the
Cardinals and Noblemen of Rome did not dsidaine to go and hear his Lessons.

Out of the School of Emanuel Chrisolara came Gregory Typhernas, who came to
Paris, and presenting himself to the Rector, he said unto him, That he was
come to teach the Greek, and demanded to have the recompense allowed by the
Holy Decrees: The Rector was somewhat amazed at the boldness of this stranger,
and yet commended his desire, and with the advice of the University staid him
and gave him the entertainment he desired: Jerome of Sparta succeeded him.

The Shipwreck of Greece brought many other great personages to the road of
Italy, Demetrius Chalcondyle, Demetrius Chalcondyle an Anthenian, taught
publicly at Florence after Argyropile: He went away through the practice and
iealousy of Angelus Politianus, and retired to Milan.
Marcus Musurus a Candiot, John Lascaris of the Imperial race, whom the
Magnificent Laurence de Medicis employed to get leave from Bajazeth to visit
the Libraries of Greece, from whence are come many good books, which where so
many Lamps ^ dispierce the clouds of Ignorance and Barbarism.

The University of Paris as fruitful a mo^^er of good wits as a careless
Nurse to cherish them, is much fallen from her first glory: Her Schools, which
were sometimes more famous then those of Athens in Greece, are unpeopled; the
water of her Fountains which did water all the youth of Europe is troubled;
there is no Spring in the year for these goodly flowers, which are cherished
of some for the rareness, of others for the smell, and of all for the
assurance of fruits. The Northern blasts of the last troubles, have (in a
manner) withered them, and hardly will they recover their beauty, if the same
Sun which has raised the Flower de Luce does not revive them. Hercules after
so many glorious labors, did not disdain the name of Musagete: Fuluius caused
a Temple to be built in Circo Flaminio at Rome to Hercules Musagete, that is to
say the conductor of the Muses, and Eumonius the Rector gives this reason: Quia
mut^is operibus and premijs iuuari orna^ique deberent, Musarum quies defensione
Herculis, and virtus Herculis voc^ Musarum. For that they should be relieved
and adorned by their mutual works and rewards: The quiet of the Muses by the
defense of Hercules, and the virtue of Hercules by the voice of the Muses.
France dare not hope that any other will finish that which Henry the fourth
shall leave imperfect, he will not suffer that she which carries the glorious
name of his eldest daughter, and has purchased it by her immortal watches,
and by the production of many great personages, which have worthily served the
Church and State, shall languish any longer in hope to recover her first
dignity: There wants nothing else for the triumph of his glory, James David
Cardinal du Perron High Almoner of France.
nothing but that can make his Bays immortal: The Muses have need of
Hercules valor, and the labors of Hercules have need of the recommendation of
the Muses. The generous thoughts which our Augustus has of this restoration,
are wonderfully revived by the lively and powerful persuasions of the learned
Cardinal, the miracle of our days: But where shall we find so many B^deus,
Turnebus, Cuias, Murets, and Scales as is necessary to have the effect
answereable to the design and reputation.

Temperance: Temperance wherein it consists.
If it were not taken but for the moderation which seasons all things, that
great temper which he had in prosperities, and his constancy in adversities,
had purchased him the palm of this virtue, but if they take it for the rule
and restrainte of voluptuousness, and of other motions of the mind, it is not
so apparent in his heart as in that of Alexanders, Cyrus, and Scipioes: The two
base daughters which he had shows that he was not contented with the lawful
intemperance of marriage: After the Battle of Montlehery the King gave his
base daug^ter to the Bastard of Bourbon, and the assura^ces were made in the
Town house of Paris.
He married the first to the Admiral of Bourbon, and the other to the Lord of
Saint Valier: The letters which were dispatched for the declaration of her
Arms, would not be unprofitable to insert in this place, and they were in
these terms.

Lewis, by the Grace of God, King of France, to all to whom these present
Letters shall come greeting: Having of late treated, and accorded, the Marriage
of our dear and loving Base daughter, Mary, with our dear and faithful
Cozen, Aymard of Poicters, Lord of Saint Valier, We have thought it expedient
to appoint the Arms which it shall please us our said daughter shall carry: We
therefore give to understand that, being assured that the said Mary is truly
our base daughter, and desiring to honor her and her posterity, that she may
enjoy the honors, dignities, and prerogatives which belong to the Bastards of
Princes, for the great love and affection which we bear her: Du Tillet says
that the Surname of France is allowed to the base daughters of Kings, if upon
the aduow there be no other Surname given the^, and the Arms of France with
the difference of a Bend: Some have been aduowed by letters Pattents, and
others by fact being nursed.
We will, and ordain, by these presents, that the said Mary, our base
daughter, carry the Arms of France, and for a difference a Bend Or, beginning
at the sinister Canton, as base children have accustomed to do, for the which
we have and do give her power and faculty for ever: In witness whereof we
have caused our Seal to be set to these Presents. Given at Meslay, the
eleventh of July, 1467. and of our Reign the sixth: By the King, the Lord of
Crussol. Peter Doriole and others being present. L. Toustain.

It were a great proof of Inconstancy, Opinion that Charles the 8. was
supposed.
and profane policy, if that were true which many have said, that King
Charles the 8. was not son to Queen Charlot, and that the King having him by
a Mistress made this supposition: They that write things whereof they cannot
speak, which are not known to all men do often err, for that they trust to
their own conduct, and turn away their eyes from that which might give them
light in the darkness of such difficulties. It is the melancholy of men of
this profession; presumption and vanity Vanity has much power among learned
men. Iustus Lipsius has observed it in his time. O litterae, litterae! quam
semper a vobis aliqua vanitas, and quam illud verum, oportere omnibus corydalis
crista^^inesse.
makes them think that they see clear enough, and as the Cities of Greece
ruined themselves for that they would do their business a part, Error of
learned men not to communicate.
they loose by this disunion that which they might preserve by conference. I
have always held it an honor to learn, and a happiness to be reprehended.
A man should hold himself more bound to be warned of a fault in his writings
then of a blemish in his face: Upon this supposition I went to Monsieur du
Haillan, for that in the second book of the estate of the affairs of France
he reports this opinion, and promises a more ample discourse in the History of
this King not yet printed: Many were of opinion that Charles the 8. was
supposed, others held that he was the Kings son but not by the Queen, and
that the King to quench the troubles which had been raised by his brother,
made this supposition, the which is more amply written in the History of the
said King, and not yet printed. Bernard of Girard Signior of Haillan in his
second book of the estate of the affairs of France.
He answered me that he held it from them who thought they knew it well, and
that he has written many other things of like consequence upon the belief of
Tradition.

Princes will have their loves excused, for that love does not alter the
generosity of a great courage, Caesar did sacrifice his heart to Arms and
Ladies: We cannot find a more perfect pattern of Ambition and Love then
Caesar. As for Ambition, his life is full of it: For Love, he had the
Maidenhead of Cleopatra, he made love to Eunoe Queen of Mauritania, to
Posthumia wise to Seruius Sulpitius, to Lollia of Gabinius, to Tertulla of
Crassus, to Mutia of Pompey, and to Seruilia, Sister to Cato, and mother to
Marcus Brutus: He changed wives four times.
But I find this Prince sometime in delights which were not ordinary, nor
scarce known to the Kings of France his Predecessors: His Chronicle speaks
of Bathes prepared for him, for the Queen and Ladies. I was of opinion that he
had brought that custom from Flanders: when Phillip de Commines speaks of the
excess and dissolutions which peace had brought into the Low Countries, he
makes mention of Bathes. The great and superfluous expenses (says he) of men
and women in apparel. The greatest and most prodigal bankets that I have
known in any place: The Bathes, and other feastings with women, great and
disordered, and with little modesty.

Delights and pleasures are not fashioned in an instant Besides the Bathes of
Agripina, of Nero, of Vespasian, and of Titus, Rome has been beautefied with
them of Domitius, of Alexander, of Gordian, of Seuerus, of Aurelian, and of
Constans. Marcus Agrippa, to purchase the peoples favor caused 170. Bathes to
be built in Rome, to the end that every Quarter should have one, Antonin was
the first that decreed they should pay nothing for Bathing, for before him they
gave the fourth part of an Assis.
they have their beginning, increase, and continuance: That of Bathes was the
like. At Rome, in the beginning, they did wash nothing but their Arms and
legs, after labor and painful toil, for that they would not have their
members unclean, and their pores stopped with sweat: They did wash the whole
body at Faires, and health was the end of Bathing, as a thing generally held
holdsome, since health is grown unto voluptuousness, and they add unto it
vanity and needless pomp. The rarest Marbles of Afric and Alexandria were
sought for, and the most industrious Caruers and Architects were employed in
these Bathes as for the building of Temples.

If Temperance gave no other content unto a Prince but the quiet enjoying of
health, Fruits of temperance.
he should be wonderful curious, Health is to be preferred before all things,
as the richest present of nature. Pithago^as said that men should demand 3.
things of God, Beauty, Riches, and a good constitution of mind and body.
for there is not any thing but we should do for that which is the best, and
richest present which Nature has given, and without the which li^e is but a
languishing, and all other felicities troublesome, and importune; men are
miserable, in that they know not the price of things but by the loss of them:
They do not taste of rest but in labor, nor of peace but after war, nor
health but in sickness; When they are sick they make vows to health, when
they are in health they do what they can to be sick. They sacrifice to health
and eat the meats of the sacrifice even until they burst, so as drinking,
eating, sleeping, playing, watching, sickness itself, health, and all the
actions of man's life are so many steps to death: One demanded of Hypocrates a
rule for his health, he answered him, Cibi, potus, somni, Venus, omnia^ oderata
sint. Let thy meat, drink, sleep, and Venus sports be moderate.
And although that delay of payment be no quittance, yet life is longer or
shorter according to the Order of these things.

Princes are not always known in these eminent places, they must be seen in
actions which are not so glorious: Let us look upon Lewis the 11. in his
private carriage and course of life: Great spirits have not their heads always
busied with great affairs, their thoughts descend often to mean things and of
small consequence: Egypt worships her Gods clothed in those forms which are
farthest from the Majesty and greatness which she thinks is in them. Nicias
going from Council shut himself up, and caused Hieron his man to say that he
left his own affairs to think of the public, yet in the mean time he
informed himself by a Divine of the issue of his affairs, and thought of his
mines of Silver which he caused to be dug. Plut. in Nicias.
Nicias makes men think that he extracts the quintessence of his wit for the
affairs of State, whilst that he entertaines himself with the hope and
profit of his Mines: Traian did sometimes spend whole nights in telling tales
with his servants. It is good a Prince should be sometime familiar with his
servants, but the more rare the better. Traian surprised them sometime at
meat, he came to their houses without Guard, and spent whole nights there:
Xiphilinus: But they do not all w that Titus went to the Bathes and washed
himself openly with the people; Affability is a goodly thing so as it draw not
near to contempt.
When as Lewis the 11. was in his solitary aboade at Plessis, he took delight
to go into the Offices, and to talk with the first he met. One day he went
into the Kitchen whereas he found a young Lad turning of the spit, he demanded
his name, of whence he was, and what he did earne: This Turne-spit, who knew
him not, told his name, that of his father, of his Village; and although he
were in the Kings service, yet he got as much as the King: For the King (said
he) has but his life and so have I, God feeds the King, and the King feeds
me. A small matter rayseth the fortune of a man, and changes his basensse
into greatness, Mahomet Bachas who was Vizier to three Emper^urs, was
beholding for all his greatness to a leap which he made when he was young:
Sultan Solymari being at a window which did look into a Garden let fall a
Letter, every man ran down the sl^ires to fetch it, but Mahomet who was a young
Lad leapt out at the window, and brought the letter unto the Emperor.
This ready answer pleased the King, who drew this Boy out of the Kitchen to
make him serve in his Chamber, and fro^thence raised him to great wealth:
Behold how fortune favors even the^ which have no knowledge of it, nor seek
it not. He added to the pleasures of solitariness those of rusticke
Husbandry. I have seen by the Accounts of the Chamber of the Treasure, that in
the year one thousand four hundred three score and seventeen, he caused a
woman of Bethune, with two more with her, to come to Plessis, having two horses
and four Kine, to make Butter and Cheese for his own mouth, and that for the
voyage, implements, and provision of this woman and her Family, he paid seven
pounds.

This popular facility did much avail him to win the hearts of the
Parisians, Popularity of Lewis the 11.
whom the pretext of the Commonweal had much shaken. The Signior of Haillan
says: That being come to Pares he went from street to street, and from house
to house, to dine and sup with them, talking familiarly with every one, to make
himself pleasing unto the people, and to incense them against his enemies;
That the Parisians never held the better party, nor did any thing commendable,
but at this time, for they were for the King, and did support and releive him.
His Chronicle observes, for an example of his affection to Paris, that he came
in the year, one thousand four hundred three score and eleven, with the Duke
of Guienne his brother, and there made great feasts, and kindled the Bonfire at
the Grieve, on Saint John Baptists Eve: His most confident servants fate
commonly at his Table, and he made them discourse of diverse subjects. He
would not have their hearts in the clouds whilst their bodies were at the
Table: (...) the mind (...) the necessary pleasures of the body, not that
(...) wallow in them: He must s^bmit his violent occupations and (...)
Lbhorious thoughts to the use of the ordinary life, and if he be w^se let him
use moderation.
He would be entertained in his ear by them that came from other Provinces to
understand all things, and to draw out the Quintessence. Among the profits of
Commerce the knowledge they have of that is done among strangers should be
esteemed one of the chief, for by the going and coming of Merchants Princes
are advertised of many things, whereof they should otherwise be ignorant, and
they that report them do not conceive of them after the same manner as they do
that receive them. Great Understandings draw profit from every thing, and can
judge of the resemblances of things which do nothing resemable, the which is
one of the highest points of humane wisdom. It is true that the wise observe
other discommodities which grow by commerce, to alter and degenerate men's When
as Caesar would give a reason of the Belges valor, he says: Propterea quod a
cultu and humanitate Prouinciae long issime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores
saepe commeant, atque ea quae ad effemina^dos animos pertinent, important.
Caes. l. 1. de Bell. Gall. For that the Provinces are far from ciuility and
humanity neither do Merchants go often unto the to carry those things that may
make their minds eff^minat.
manners and courages.

The King being very familiar with men of this sort, caused them to eat at his
Table to discourse more freely: The Kings good countenance, added to the place,
and good cheer, makes them speak that are most stayed: A Merchant seeing
himself often in this honor, disdained to see himself still called Sir John,
and besought the King to make him an Esquire: The King gave him letters of
gentry, after which the Merchant ware a Rapier and apparel accordingly:
Merchandise is incompatible with Nobility, not for that the one propounds
honor only, and the other profi^e, for both may be united: But for that
Gentry cannot be purchased but by birth, and the service of the sword, or by
the d^gnity of Offices which make men Noble: wherefore the Emperor Maximilian
answered a merchant who besought him to make him a Gentleman: I can make thee
much richer then thou art, but it it is not in my power to make thee a
Gentleman.
He presented himself unto the King, thinking that by this new honor he had
been raised to the Epicycle of Mars, and that he should go equal with the
chief Noblemen in Court. The Ass is entertained with blows when as the
Spaniell is cherished at the Table. But he would not vouchsafe to look on
him, and left him always attending. The Merchants would gladly have left his
letters to return unto his first course; and not able to endure this change,
he complained unto the King, who said unto him: When I made you sit at my
table, I held you as the first of your condition, and did no wrong unto this
Gentlemen to honor you for such. The change of condition is not always
honorarable nor fortunate. It is better to be the head of a slye, then the
tail of a Lion.
Now that you would be a Gentleman, and that in this quality you are preceded
by many, who purchased it by the Swords of their Ancestors, and by their own
merits, I should do them wrong in doing you the like favor. Go Mr Gentleman.

Of all exercises he was most earnest at hunting; Lewis 11. delighted in
hunting.
and indeed it is the most royal and most necessary for a Prince, to inure him
to toil, Hunting is the true exercise of Princes. The Roman Emperors being
always in war, had no pleasures, and besides, they were forced to hunt very
far from Rome. The Kings of Macedonia, Persia and Parthia have always been
great Hunters.
to know the Country, and to entertain, in time of peace, a goodly table of
war; but he would not have this exercise common, although it does rightly
belong unto the Nobility, when they are dispensed withal from the service of
the sword. He did forbid hunting in the beginning of his reign, and added to
this defense odious punishments. It was a hanging matter for a Gentleman to
fly idleness: they punished him as rigorously that had slain a wild beast,
as a Man: To take the exercise of hunting from a Gentleman, is to declare him
base. Besides it, he can not do any thing in time of peace, and to play the
Gentleman for time that is not, is to do nothing. A Lacedemonian seeing that the
Ariopage had condemned an Athenian of Idleness, entreated his friends that
were about him, to show him the man that was condemned to live a Gentleman.
and thereof come so many tales of the severity of this Prince, which have
dishonored his life, and which now beautify this History as Toads, Serpents,
and Monsters are admired and pleasing upon Marbles and Agathes. It was more
pardonable, says Claud Seyffel, to kill a man, then a Stagge, or a wild Boar.


Princes have always made choice of a great number of servants, in some they
have had more confidence and credit, they have done them greater favors, and
advanced them more then the rest. And although these elections be not always
grounded upon merit, and that honors conferred upon unworthy men are the less
esteemed, yet it were to clippe the wings of the Kings Authority to restrain
him from this liberty. He made of men as an Auditor does of Counters, placing
some for hundreds, others for thousands, some for ten, and some for units. He
allowed many petty Companions in his Cabinet, who could not remember the
condition of their forefathers without blushing, or disavowing them. Honor
meeting with an unworthy subject, has less luster and esteem. When as the
people of Athens saw that Yperbol^^ (...) decayed man, and who had nothing to
loose) was intreatreated equally with good men, they dissolved the (...) an
honorable punishment for those whose virtue was suspected. In like manner they
took it ill at Roma when as Flauius being freed by Appius, was made Edilis
Curulis.
But for all that he did not leave to have about him, and to employ in great
charges. Noblemen issued from houses which were then illustrious, both by
their own virtues, and by those of their forefathers. Of this number was John
of Daillon, Lord of Lude, The Lord of Lude.
and Imbert of Baterney, Lord of Bouchages. They came in favor with this
Prince by diverse means, and maintained it in like manner. The Lord of Lude had
been bred up with this Prince, and the affection which begins so soon, does
not wither easily. Philip de Commines adds this reason, that he knew well how
to please the King.

Fortune favored the merits of Imbert of Baterney. Imbert of Baterney.
Lewis Dauphin of France retiring himself into Dauphine, and going from Moras
to Romans, he stayed in a valley under the Castle of Baterney, to take the
cool air, and demanding some refreshing in the heat of the season, and the
tediousness of the way, the Lord of Baterney sent some things unto him, and
came himself to do his duty; he brought with him Imbert of Baterney, being
then but a youg man, who carried a Hawk, with the which he killed some
Partridges. The pleasure of hunting, which had been the ra^ing of his fortune,
was (in a manner) the cause of his ruin. Claude of Seyell says, that going to
(...) to see the Dauphin, and having had him to field to see his Hawks fly,
the king was much inc^sed, thinking that he had a design to make him see the
wo^ld, and to know it.
The Dauphin took pleasure in it, and commanded him to come unto him to
Romans, for that he had a desire to see that Hawk fly again. He went, and
did so please this Prince, as he demanded him of his father, and from that time
he never abandoned him until his death. He made him great in riches, and
honor, as he was in merit and virtue.

Charles of Artois, Charles of Artoix.
Earl of Eu, having remained three and twenty years prisoner in England,
returned into France, and was much beloved of king Lewis the eleventh, for that
he held nothing of the sower and arrogant humors of his predecessors, and he
continued in the Kings service at such time as the Noblemen left him to follow
the Princes Army. He reconciled the King, and the Duke of Brittanie, and soon
after died in July, in the year 1471. without any children: John of Bourgondy,
Earl of Neuers his Nephew, was his heir. The accord betwixt the king and the
Duke of Brittany was made at Saumur in the year 1469. and the difficulties
were decided by the de^terity of the Earls of Eu and Dunois.


John of Orleans, Bastard of Orleans.
Earl of Longueville, base son to Lewis Duke of Orleans, was the greatest
and most fortunate Captain of his time: he alone of all the Noblemen of the
league of the Commonweal, pursued the fruits which France expected of such an
enterprise. He was chief and President of the Commissioners appointed for the
reformation of the disorders of the Realm, and died before he could see the
effects of that which he had so earnestly pursued in the year 1470.

Andrew of Laual, Andrew of Laual.
Lord of Loheac. Lewis 11. took from him the dignity of Marshall of France,
wherewith Charles 7 had honored him, and rewarded his service. He restored it
unto him again, when as necessity made him know, that none was more capable
then he. For his sake he gave unto his brother the Lord of Chastillon, the
Office of great Master of the Waters and Forests.

Alaine of Albret purchased the surname of Great by the same greatness of
courage which gave the sword of France to Charles of Albret his grandfather.
Alaine of Albret.
Charles of Albret was not only entreated, but in a manner forced by the King
to receive the sword of Costable. The king p^t it into his hand, the Dukes of
Orleans, Burgondy, Berry, and Bourbo girt him with it, a little before he had
carried Charles the seventh unto the font.
He left the league of the Commonweal as soon as he was entered into it, and
remained more constant in the assurance of his word, then the Duke of Nemours:
his great courage found nothing impossible: He was often wont to say, that he
which had force in hand, needed no other thing. He married Francis Vicountesse
of Limoges, and was father to John of Albret, King of Navarre.

John of Bueil, John of Bueil.
Earl of Sancerre, presently after the coronation of Lewis the eleventh, was
dismissed from his Office of Admirally, The Earl of Sancerre was Admiral of
France by the death of Pregent of Coitiuy, Son-in-Law to Giles of Raix,
Marshall of France.
for no other reason, but for that he had served Charles the seventh. He
returned to Court and favor, but yet he stood always upon his guard against
that Lion which struck with his paw when they least thought of him.

John of Andie, John of Andie.
Bastard of Armagnac, Lord of Lescun, and Earl of Cominges, was Admiral of
France after the dismission of the Earl of Sancerre, and then Marshall of
France, he chased the Britains from Baieux, and was Governor of Dauphine.

Ioachim of Rouvault, Ioachim of Rouvault.
He had done great s^ruices under King Charles the seventh, and had been
present at the battle of Fromigny, and at the siege of Bourdeaux. The King
gave him the place of Marshall of France: and Monstrelet says, that Charles
the seventh made him constable of Bourdeaux, and that he took his oath in the
hands of the Chancellors of France.
Lord of Gamasches served him worthily and courageously in the war of the
Commonweal, and was the cause of the preservation of Paris. He always
coasted the Duke of Bourgondy his Army to keep it from scattering to the hurt
of the Kings subjects; and that it should not make profit by the surprise of
any places in passing. Then he cast himself into Paris* and by his presence
fortified the courages which an accident (rather feared then foreseen) had
much dejected. The King gave him the government with a troop of two hundred
masters, and made him Marshall of France.

Tanneguy of Chastel, Tanneguy of Chastel
He was one of the Commissioners whom the King appointed for the accusation and
Imprisonment of the Cardinal of Balue.
one of the Architects of the league, found in the end, that there was no
better lodging then at the kings arms. His fortune was ruined in Brittany, and
raised in France. He did negotiate the enter-view of the King and Duke of
Bourgondy at Peronne, he was employed in the Truce of nine years, 1475. and
was advanced to the government of Rousillon.

The Lord of Nantoillet had for a time the authority over all the Armies of
France, Lord of Nantoillet
he wanted nothing but the name of Constable, for he did exercise the
Functions, the King having made him his Lieutenant General throughout his
whole Realm, and afterward Lord Steward of France. He was so favored, as the
King gave him often the moity of his bed. This favor lasted not long. The
Chronicle of the Kings library says, That the King could not pardon any one of
whom he had suspicion. Death of the Lord of Nantoillet.
He caused his head to be cut off in the year 1468. and that the Hangman
having cut off but a piece at the first blow, he lest him force and courage
enough to stand up, and to protest before heaven and the people, that he died
an Innocent. After that Philip de Commines had said, that he had served the
king well in Paris in the war of the Commonweal, he adds: In the end he
was ill rewarded, more by the pursuit of his enemies then by the Kings fault,
but neither the one nor the other can well excuse themselves.

Anthony of Chabannes, Anthony of Chabannes.
Earl of Dammartin, brother to James of Chabannes, Lord Steward of France, saw
the ship of his fortune cast upon the shelfe in the beginning of this Princes
Reign. His good fotune drew him out of the Bastille to go to the war of the
Commonweal, in the end whereof he was made Lord Steward of France, he had
the chief charge of the Kings Army in Guyenne, and was then much favored by
this Prince, with whom he was so inward, as when he meant to marry his second
Daughter to the Duke of Orleans, he discovered his secret affections unto him
by a letter which he did write unto him upon that subject, where of the
Chronicle (in written hand of King Lewis the twelfth) makes mention: he sent
him word, that whatsoever they said, he was resolved to give his daughter to
the young Duke of Orleans, but no man should be troubled to nourish the
Children that should be borne of that marriage.

Peter of Termouille, Peter of Tremouille.
Lord of Croan, saw not his life to end with the favors and honors he had had
of this Prince. His Predecessors, Guy of Tremouille and John of Tremouille,
Lord of Ionuelle, were made great in following the Duke of Bourgondies party.
The eldest of this house married Ioane Countess of Boulleyn and Comminges,
Widow to John of France, Duke of Berry. K. Charles (...) year 1430.
King Charles 7 supported George of Tremouille, Lord of Craon, in the quarrel
which he had with the Earl of Richmont for the Lands of Thouars and Benon.
Peter of Tremouille defeated the troops of the Prince of Orange before Gy in
the Franch-County, but having been repulst from the siege of Dole, he was
disgraced by Lewis the eleventh, who loved the services better then the
servants. He was (says Philip de Commines) a very fat man, who being
reasonably well content and rich, retired himself to his house.

Charles of Ambois did long feel the disgrace of Peter of Chaumont his father,
Charles of Ambois.
who retired himself in the beginning of the reign of Lewis with the Duke of
Berry. The House of (...) by the Kings Commandment in the (...) 1465.
He was afterward employed in great affairs, and continued unto the end. His
brother was Bishop of Alby, and then Cardinal, and the greatest favorite of
Lewis the twelfth, who called him Mr. George. Philip de Commines calls
Charles of Ambois, a most Valiant, Wife, and Diligent Man.

Peter of Rohan, Peter of Rohan.
Lord of Gy, did govern his fortune happily amidst the waves and storms of
this Princes reign, who made him Marshall of France. He was one of the four
which undertook the government of affairs during the Kings infirmity, and
disability. (...) the Bishop of (...) the Lord of Ch^umont, the Marshall of
Gye, and the Lord of Lude, governed the Estate for 10 or 12 days.
He continued this great Authority under the reign of Charles the eighth: for
the respect whereof, the Lady Anne of France, Regent to the King, and Wife to
Peter of Bourbon, offended that the Duke of Orleans attempted upon her
Authority, would have taken him prisoner by the Marshall of Gye. The Duke of
Orleans retired himself, and he that was chosen to stay him, was the
Instrument of his return, and made his peace with the Regent.

John of Chalons Prince of Orange, John of Chalons.
left the Duke of Bourgondy to serve Lewis the eleventh: then he left Lewis to
serve Mary, daugther to the Duke of Bourgondy. This first coffeehouse
against his first master, grew, for that disputing the succession of John of
Chalons, Prince of Orange his Grandfather, John of Chalons, son to Lewis and
Margaret of Vienne, was married to Mary of Baussac, heir of the principality
of Orange, by whom he had Lewis, surnamed the Good. Lewis first married Ioane
of Montbel^art, by whom he had William: and then he ma^^ied Elenor of
Armagna^, by whom he had Lewis and Hugh. William was married to Katherine of
(...), of (...), John of Chalons was borne, of whom we now make mention.
against Lewis and Hughe his uncles, the Duke of Bourgondy being President in
his Council when as the cause was pleaded, made a Decree against him. This
despite drew him to the Kings service, who promised to restore him to his
lands, and to give him the government of Bourgondy; but when as he saw that he
had but the name, and that the Lord of Tremouille had the command of all the
forces, he returned to the service of the Princess of Bourgondy; and caused
the whole Country to revolt from the King. He troubled him much, and let him
see, that a great Prince has no small enemies; that a Hornet is able to put a
Bull into fury.

John of Esteteuille, John of E^^teuille.
Lord of Torcy, governed his fortune amidst so many rocks and shelues unto a
safe port. The King made him master of the Cross-bowes, and committed unto him
the guard of the Cardinal of Balue in the Castle of Montbason. It was he that
came and advertised the King of the danger in suffering such numbers of English
to enter into Amiens, during the Treaty of Piquigny.

Philip of Creuecoeur, Philip of Creuecoeur.
Lord of Esquerdes, or Cords, Marshall of France. He had great honors, and
deserved great aduancements in the house of Bourgondy: he received the Collar
of the golden Fleece, when as D. Charles did first solemnize the order at
Bruges after his fathers death, Charles (...) should have stood with these
words, which are read in a Chronicle, M. S. of the Kings library: The Earl of
Neuers being adiourned by the letters patents of the most high, and most
excellent Prince, my redoubted Lord the Duke, sealed with the seal of his
order of the Fleece, to appear in person at this present Chapter, there to
answer upon his honor touching witchcraft and abusing the holy Sacraments of
the Church, has not appeared, but has made default. And to avoid the suit and
deprivation of the order to be made against him, he has sent back the Collar,
and therefore has been, and is declared out of the order, and not called in
the offering.
when as the Earl of Neuers was degraded more unworthily then the respect of
his house made him to hope from a Prince his near kinsman. The Duke gave him
the government of the County of Boullein, and afterward of Artois. He came
unto the Kings service, and delivered into his hands the Town of Arras after
the Dukes death. It seems that Philip de Comines would not speak all he knew,
nor call a Fig, a Fig. He knits it up shortly in these words: He could not
mistake in submitting himself unto the Kings service, unless he had taken a
new oath to the young Lady of Bourgondy, and in yelding up that unto her which
he held of hers. They have and will speak diversely hereof, wherefore I refer
my self to the truth.

Tristan the Hermit whom the rigor of this reign has made so famous for the
suddenness of his executions, was high Provost. Tristan the Hermit.
King Charles the 7th made him knight after the siege of Fronsac After the
siege of Fronsac there were made knights, John of Bourbon, Earl of Vendos^ne,
John of ^ourbon his base brother, the Vicount of Turaine, the Lords of
Rochefautaut, Commery, Rochechouart Grignaux, de Bars, Mommorin, Bordeilles,
Fontenelles and Estauge.
The name of Tristan was given to Princes borne in some great affliction. John
of France was surnamed Tristan, for that he was borne at Damiete during the
Imprisonment of S. Lewis his father. In like manner, the son to the King of
Sicile was called Tristan, for that he was borne in Catelonia, when his father
was a prisoner.

Philip de Commines Lords of Argenton. Philip de Commines.
Some have thought that he freed the king from the danger of Peronne; and that
it was the cause of the great favor which he had purchased with the king. I
have wondered why the king did not add the honor of the Order of S. Michael,
and how it was possible that it should fail a man who wanted not any thing,
and who was so much favored, and so familiar with the king, as he did often
lie in his Bed, eat at his Table, sit at his Council, and carried his most
secret designs to Princes (...) treated We do often find the (...) of the
secrets in Lawyers books. Procopius says, that the w^ters of (...) were called
a Secretis. Honor qui tunc daba^ur egregijs, dum ad Imperiale Secretum tales
constet eligi, in quibus reprehonsionis vitium nequeat inveni^i. An honor
which was then given to worthy men, whilst such are chosen to the secrets of
the Empire, in who^ no vice of reprehension can be found.
happily, but by them that know them by the beginning, Secretary of state a
necessary Office.
progress, and effects, by whose eyes and hands they see them, and then
dispatch them. Sufficiency, Experience, and Fidelity, serve as a lamp in
obscurest deliberations, and gives them Ariad^es thread, which keeps them from
meeting the Minotaure of repentance The Venetians (whose state is
Aristocraticall) change all their Officers yearly, and some every two months;
but the Duke, the (...) of St. Mark, the Chancellor, and the Secretaries of
State, are for life: the which the Florentines ordained in their state wh^^ as
Lewis the twelfth freed them from the tyranny of Count Valentine.
in the intricate Labyrinth of Enterprises. For this reason in some
well-gouerned Commonweals, where as Offices are annual, that of Secretary is
perpetual; to the end that one alone may be Register of that which is concluded
by many, and an inviolable Guardian of Secrecy; which is the soul of
affairs, and returns never when it is once let slip. Secrecy is the soul of
affairs, and as Valerius calls it, Optimum ac (...) agend^rum vinculum: The
best and safest hand for the managing of Affairs.


France cannot pass without the Counsel and experience of him: who for that
he has served four Kings in that great and painful charge, is held by all
Europe for the Oracle of all resolutions and reuolutions. There is not any
thing vnpenetrable to his Judgment: who entering into the most confused and
obscure affairs, does presently draw light. But it is time to go to land. This
name so famous and renowned throughout all the world, is the rock of Adamant
which draws my ship. He is the Port of this Navigations which I finish: he
shall be the North-starre of another which I continue. The profit of them shall
redound to all in general; the thanks unto the King; and the glory unto God.

The end of the History of Lewis the eleventh.
MAXIMS, IVDGEMENTS, AND POLITIC OBSERVATIONS OF PHILIP DE COMMINES Lord of
Argenton.

UPON THE LIFE, REIGN, AND ACTIONS OF LEWIS the eleventh, and of diverse other
occurrents.

PLACES AND TITLES of these Maxims.
Providence of God. Princes. Realm. Salique Law. Enter-view of Princes.
Governments. Councels and Counselors. Court of Parliament. Ambassadors.
Treasure of the Prince. Assemblies and Treaties. People and Subjects. Towns
and Nations. House of Bourgondy. Enemies. Enterprises. Battles. War.
Souldiars. Sieges. Victories. Changes. Prosperity and Adversity. Division.
Tumults and Sedition. Liberality. Justice and Injustice. Punishment. Injury
and Offense. Wisdom. Secrecy. Experience. Knowledge. History. Nourishment.
Nature. Hope. Age. Foresight. Carelessness and Vigilance. Pride and
Presumption. Treachery. Duty. A good Man.
POLLITICKE MAXIMS.
PROVIDENCE OF GOD.
ALL well considered our only hope should be in God, In the end of the first
book.
for in him consists all our assurance and all goodness, which cannot be
found in any other thing in the world: But we do, every man, acknowledge it
too late, and after that we have need: yet it is better late then never.

Grace and good fortune comes from God. Lib. 1. chap. 4.


In all enterprises we must have God of our side. Lib. 2. chap. 1.


God has always loved the Realm of France. Lib. 4. chap. 1.


To see things which God has done in our time, Lib. 4. chap. 13.
and does daily, shows that he will leave nothing unpunished; And we may see
plainly that these strange works come from him, for they are supernatural,
and his sudden punishments, and especially against them that use violence and
cruelty: Who, commonly, are no mean men, but great Personages, either by their
own absolute power, or by the Princes authority.

When God means to change the fortune of a Prince, Lib. 1. chap. 3.
from good to bad, or from prosperity to adversity, he prepares him enemies of
no force, suffers his servants to become treacherous, and makes him
distrustful and jealous of them that are most faithful. Example of Charles
Duke of Bourgundy.

God gives the Prince as he means to punish Subjects, Lib. 5. chap. 9.
and to Princes Subjects, and disposes of their affections toward them as he
means to raise or ruin them.

God has not created any thing in this world, Lib. 5. chap. 18.
neither men nor beasts, but he has made him some thing opposite, to keep him
in fear and humility.

God speaks no more to men, neither are there any more Prophets which speak
by his Mouth; For his Faith is ample and plain to all those that will hear
and understand it, and no man shall be excused for Ignorance, at least they
which have had hope and time to live, and which have had their natural wits.

The misery of Princes is when as God is so offended as he will no longer
endure them, Lib. 5. chap. 18.
but will show his force and his Divine Justice, and then he does first of all
take away their judgments, which is a great wound for them it touches: He
troubles their house, and suffers them to fall into division and murmr. The
Prince falls into such indignation with God, as he flies the counsel and
company of wise men, and does advance Vp-starts, Indiscreete, Unreasonable,
Violent men, and Flatterers, who applaud whatsoever he says: If he must impose
a penny, they say two: If he threatens a man, they say he must be hanged; and in
like manner of all other things: And that above all things they cause
themselves to be feared; They carry themselves insolently and proudly, hoping
that they shall be respected and feared by this means, as if Authority were
their inheritance.

Princes.
THere is good and evil in Princes, In the Prologue.
for they are men like unto us, and to God only belongs perfection.

When as the virtues and good conditions of a Prince are greater then his
vices, In the same.
he deserves great praise; for that such personages are more inclined to all
voluntary things then other men, as well for their breeding and little
correction they have had in their youth, as for that coming to the age of man,
most men seek to please them, and to applaude their humors.

No man should attribute any thing to himself, Lib. 1. chap. 4.
especially a great Prince, but should acknowledge that grace and good fortune
comes from God.

Great Princes are much more suspicious then other men, Lib. 1. chap. 5.
for the doubts and aduertisements which are given them, and oftentimes through
flattery without any necessity.

Princes and they which rule in great Estates should be very careful not to
suffer any faction to grow in their house, from whence this fire flies
throughout the whole Province: But this happens not but by a Divine
instigation. For when as Princes or Realms, have been in great prosperity and
wealth, and have forgotten from whence that Grace did come, God has raised
them enemies of whom no man doubted.

God does a great favor unto a Prince when he makes him capable to win men,
Lib. 1. chap. 9.
and it is a sign that he is not infected with the odious vice and sin of
pride, which does purchase hatred with all men.

Princes and great men that are proud and will not give ear to any, Lib. 1.
chap. 10.
are sooner deceived then they that are affable and hear willingly.

God shows a great grace unto a Prince, Lib. 1. chap. 10.
when he knows good and evil, especially when the good precedes.

Adversity teaches a Prince to be humble, Lib. 1. chap. 10.
and to please them that he has need of. Example of Lewis the eleventh,
expelled from his fathers Court in his youth.

A Prince which has entered into league with others, Lib. 2. chap. 12.
should dissemble many things which may breed division betwixt them: and as he
is the stronger, so should he be more wise. It is the counsel which the Lord
of Contay gave unto the Earl of Charolois, who was discontented; for that the
Dukes of Berry and Britany held councels in his chamber and presence, divided
from him.

I never knew Prince that could discern the difference of men, Lib. 2. chap.
12.
until he had been in necessity and in action.

Princes have sometimes need of them whom they have contemned: Example in King
Lewis the 11. Edward the 4. and the Earl of Charolois.

Princes impart their authority to them that are most pleasing unto them, both
for the age which is most sortable unto them, and for that they are well
conceipted of them: or sometimes they are led by them who know and govern
their delights. But they which have understanding, return soon when there is
need.

I have seen Princes of two humors, some so subtle and suspicious, Lib. 1.
chap. 16.
as no man knew how to live with them, and they did still imagine that they
were deceived: the others trusted enough in their servants: but they were so
gross and understood their own affairs so ill, as they could not discern
who did them good or evil. And these are presently changed from love to
hatred, and from hatred to love. And although that of both sorts there are few
found good, nor any great assurance in them: yet I had rather live under the
wise then under fools. For there is more means to purchase their favor: but
with the ignorant there is no means to be found, for that there is nothing
done with them, but with their servants whom many change often. Yet every man
must serve and obey them in the Countries where they are, for they are bound
unto it.

To pardon, to be bountiful, or to do any other grace, are things belonging to
the Office of Princes.

A Prince, or any other man, that was never deceived, cannot be but a beast,
nor have knowledge of good and evil, nor what difference there is.

Men are not all of one complexion, Lib. 1.
and therefore the Prince for the lewdness of one or two, should not forbear
to do pleasure to many. For one alone, being the least of all those to whom he
has done any good, may happily do such service as it shall recompense all the
villainies which the others have committed. Example in the Hostages of Liege,
whom the Duke sent away free, contrary to the opinion of the Lord of Contay,
who concluded to put them to death, some made the Liegeois grow obstinate in
their revolt, others were the cause of their reduction, and the instruments of
the wise negotiation of the Lord of Imbercourt to draw in the Duke.

One of the greatest signs of Judgment that a Prince can show is to draw unto
him virtuous and honest men: For he shall be held in the opinion of the world
to be of the disposition and humor of such as are nearest about him.

God has not ordained the Office of a King or Prince to be executed by beasts;
nor by them who through vain glory say, I am no Clarke, I refer all to my
Council, I trust in them, and so giving no other reason, go to their sports:
If they had been well bred in their youth, they would have other reasons, and
be desirous that both their persons and virtues should be esteemed.

God cannot send a greater plague unto a Country, then a Prince of weak
understanding: for from thence proceed all other miseries; First grows
division and war, for he always puts his authority into an other man's hand,
the which he should be more careful to keep then any other thing, and from
this division proceeds famine and pestilence, and all other mischiefs which
depend of war.

Princes hate them mortally that seek to keep them in fear.

Wise Princes do always in their Designs seek some honest and apparent
color: Example in Lewis the eleventh, who caused the Estates to assemble at
Tours, and there made his complaints against the Duke of Bourgundy, to have a
Subject to break the peace.

Of those bad Princes, and others, having authority in this world, which use it
cruelly and tyrannously, not any, or few, have remained unpunished: but it is
not always at a prefixed day, nor at such time as they that suffer desire it.

It is no blemish to Princes to be suspicious, and to have an eye over those
that go and come: But it is a great shame to be deceived, and to loose by his
own error; yet suspicions should have a mean; for to exceed is not good.

A weak and covetous Prince endures any thing: Example in the Emperor
Frederick, whom the Author calls a man of a faint courage, and who endured all
for fear of spending.

There is no reason a Prince should thrust himself into danger for a small
matter, Lib. 1. chap. 1.
if God has not abandoned him: Example in the Duke of Bourgundy, who
undertook a war against the Suisses for a very light occasion, and without
hope of profit, considering the nature of the people and country.

Princes give not honors and riches at their pleasures that demand them. In
the (...)


Princes fear not to thrust a servant into danger if need require. Lib. 3.
The Duke of Bourgundy had commanded Phillip de Commines to go to Calice, which
he durst not do without some assurance: The Duke commanded him to pass on,
although he should be taken, promising to redeem him.

A Prince governed by other counsel then his own does in the end return to
that which is most necessary for him: Lib. 3. chap. 10.
Example in the Duke of Brittany.

A Prince should always fear to put any thing in hazard. Lib. 6. chap. 2.


There is not any man, Lib. 6. chap. 12.
of what dignity soever, but does suffer, either in secret or in public, and
especially they that cause others to suffer.

The condition of two Princes, which have been enemies, is therein miserable;
that they cannot by any means assure themselves one of an other. Example in
Lewis the eleventh, and Charles Duke of Bourgundy: When they were together at
Liege, there were not fifteen days past that they had made and sworn a
Peace, and yet (says the Author) there was no trust.

The old age of a Prince makes him patiently to endure many things: Lib. 1.
chap. 2.
Example of the Duke of Bourgundy, who dissembled that which the Earl of
Charolois his son did against the house of Crouy.

Realms.
GOD has had, Lib. 4. chap. 7.
and has still the Realm of France in special recommendation.

The divisions of Realms are made in heaven: Lib. 1. chap. 3.
Example of the houses of Lancaster and York, and of the crowns of Castile
and Portugal. Lib. 5. chap. 18.


God has given to the Realm of France the English for Opposites, Lib. 3.
chap. 18.
and to the English Scots, to Spain Portugal, to Castile Grenado, to the
Princes of Italy the Commonweals, to the house of Arragon the house of Anjou,
to the Sforca's that of Orleans; to that of Austria that of Bauaria and the
Swisses, to that of Cleues that of Guelders, to that of Guelders that of
Iuliers: The Princes and Towns of Germany are opposite one to another, and it
is necessary it should be so throughout the world.

Salique Law.
With wise and great deliberation, Lib. 6. chap. 3.
and the Assistance of Gods Grace, that Law and Ordonance was made in France,
that the daughters should not inherit the said Realm, least it should fall
into the hands of a foreign Prince, for hardly should the French ever have
endured it, neither do other Nations: And in the end there is no great command
whereas the Country does not remain to them which are of the Country; the
which you may see by France, whereas the English have had a great command
within these forty years, and at this day they have nothing left but Callice,
and two little Castles, which cost them much to keep: The rest they lost with
much more ease then they conquered it, and they lost more in one day then they
got in a year. The like we may say by the Realm of Naples, the Island of
Sicile, and other Provinces, which the French have enjoyed many years, and at
this day there is no sign nor memory of them, but by the Sepulchers of their
Predecessors. And although they should endure a Prince of a Foreign Nation,
with a small train well ordered, and himself wise, yet shall they hardly do
it with a great number of men: For if he brings with him a great Train, or he
sends for them upon any occasion of war, they fall out with the Subjects, as
well for the diversity of their humors and conditions, as for their violence,
and for that they are not beloved in the Country as they that are borne there,
and especially when they seek Offices, Dignities, and the Managing of great
affairs in the Country. A Prince that will show himself wise, when he goes
into a Foreign Country, must reconcile all his Towns, and if he be endowed
with this virtue (which only comes from the grace of God) it is to be esteemed
before any other thing: And if he live the age of a man he shall have great
troubles and affairs, and all they that shall live under him, especially when
he shall come to age, and his men, and servants, shall have no hope of
amendment.

Enterueiw of Princes.
IT is almost impossible that two great Lords shall ever agree, Lib. 1. chap.
14.
for the reports and suspicions which they have howerly, and two great Princes
which desire to love should never see one another, but send honest and wise men
one unto another, who should entertain their friendships, and reconcile their
errors.

It is a great folly for two great Princes (which are in a manner equal in
power) to see one an other, unless they were very young, at which time they
have no discourse but of pleasures: But when as they begin once to envy one
another, although there were no danger for there persons (which is in a manner
impossible) yet there hatred and envy increases. Wherefore it were better they
should reconcile their quarrels by good and wise servants.

Gouernements.
A Prince should have a great care what Governors he sets in a Country newly
conquered, or joined to his State, to the end the Subjects may be better
entreated then they were before. Example of Archam^and of Hagembach, who was
the cause that the Duke of Bourgundy lost the Country which he held by
engagement from the Archduke Sigismond.

Councelles and Counselors.
A Wise man cannot be bought at too dear a rate. Lib. 2. Chap. 1.
It is very necessary for a Prince to have many of his Council, for the wisest
err very often, either for that they are passionate in matters whereof they
speak, through love or hatred, or for that they will oppose one against
another, and sometimes by the indisposition of persons, for we must not hold
that for Council which is done after dinner. Some may say, that men committing
any of these errors, should not be of a Princes Council. To whom I must answer
that we are all men, and he that would find out such as should always speak
wisely, and should never be moved nor distempered, must seek them in Heaven,
for they are not to be found among men: but to recompense it, there may be
some one in Council which shall speak very wisely, and much better then he
has been accustomed, and so one helps another.

There are few things secret in this world, Lib. 2. Chap. 8.
especially of those that are spoken.

About great Personages there are always some Clerks or Lawyers, as it is fit
and reasonable when they are good, but very dangerous when they are bad, they
have still the Law in their mouths, or some History, and the best that can be
found, may be turned to a bad sense: but wise men that have read will never be
abused, neither will any be so hardy as to tell them lies.

It is a great treasor for a Prince to have a wise man in his company, and very
safe to give him credit, and that he may have liberty to speak the truth.

Court of Parliament.
IT is the custom of France to publish all Accords in the Court of Parliament,
Lib. 2. Cha. 14.
else they should be of no force, yet the King may always do much.

Ambassadors.
WHen as Ambassadors return from Treaties and Negotiations, Lib. 1. Chap. 9.
they must be heard alone, or in little company, to the end that if their
discourse be to terrify, they should give such words as they ought to them
that are inquisitiue, for every man desires to hear news of them that come
from such Treaties, and many will say: Such a one will not conceal any thing
from me. But yet they will, if they be as I say, and that they know they have
wise Masters.

It is not very safe to have many goings and commings of Ambassadors: Lib. 3.
Chap. 8.
for many times they treat of things that are prejudicial, yet it is necessary
both to send and receive it.

Ambassadors which come from true friends, Lib. 3. Chap. 8.
and where there is no cause of Jealousy, should be well entertained, and may
see the Prince often, according to the quality of the Princes person, for if
he be not wise nor honest, the less he is seen the better. If Ambassadors
come from Princes, which are not friends, they should be received and entreated
honorably, they must appoint trusty and wise men to accompany them, and
dispatch them presently, for it is a bad thing to keep an enemy with him.

Although war were begun, Lib. 3. Chap. 8.
yet should they not break off any Treaties or Ouertures that are made of
Peace, (for they know not when they shall have need of it) but intertaine them
all, and hear all Messengers, doing the said things, and keeping good guard,
what men should go unto them, and who should be sent both by day and night,
but as secretly as might be. And for one message or Ambassador which they
should send me, I would send them two: And although they were weary, saying,
that I should not send any more, yet would I send when as I should have means
and opportunity. For you cannot send a better Spy, which should have so good
means to see and understand. And if they be two or three, it is impossible to
keep so good guard over them, but the one or the other will have some speech,
or learn some thing from some of them: I mean holding honest terms, as they
do to Ambassadors. And it is likely that a wise Prince will always endeavor to
have some friends with his adverse party, and prevent it as he can: for in
such affairs they cannot do as they would; Some will say that your enemy will
grow more proud. I respect it not; for I shall know more of his news, and in
the end shall reap both the profit and honor. And although that others may
do the like with me, yet will I not forbear to send: And to this end will
hear all practices, and not break any, but still find new matter. Moreover,
some are not always so judicious as others, nor have so great experience in
these affairs, neither have they so great need. And in this case the wisest
gain always.

Treasure of the Prince.
KIng Charles 7. did never raise above one hundred and fourscore thousand
pounds sterling a year. Lib. 5. Cha. 18.
And King Lewis his Son did raise at the hour of his death, four hundred,
threescore and ten thousand pounds starling, besides Artillery and such other
like things: and without doubt it was a great pity to see the poverty of the
people. But our good Master had one good thing in him, that is, he laid up
nothing in his Treasure. He took all, and spent all, and made great buildings
for the fortification and defense of the towns and places of his Realm, more
then any of the Kings which had been before him.

Assemblies, Conferences, and Treaties.
THe Assemblies and Conferences which are made from party to party are very
dangerous, Lib. 1. Chap. 9.
especially for him that is in danger to fall. Most men have naturally a desire
to raise or save themselves, the which draws them easily to the stronger. Some
are so good and so constant, as they have none of these respects, but there are
few of them. And this danger is chiefly, when as they have a Prince which
seeks to win new. Example of the conference which was made at the Mercers
grange, which was since called the Market, for that both parties did debauch
one another men.

Treaties of peace should be managed by the most faithful Servants of Princes,
Lib. 1, Chap. 9.
and men of middle age, least their weakness cause them to make some dishonest
bargain, or to amaze their Master at their return more then is needful; and
they should be rather employed that have received most favors from him: But
especially wise men, for no man ever made his profit of a fool, and these
treaties should be rather handled a far of then near.

There was never so good a marriage but some dined ill. Lib. 1. Chap. 4.
Example in the Treaty of Conflans where as some did what they would, and
others got not any thing.

There are some good people which have this glory to think that they will end
matters whereas they understand not any thing, Lib. 1. Chap. 16.
for sometimes their Masters discover not unto them their most secret intents.
In the company of such, who, most commonly, go but for show, and many times at
their own charge, there goes always some mean man which does negotiate apart.

Princes should have a wise care to whom they commit their affairs, Lib. 1.
Chap. 16.
and so should they also have that are employed for them, and deal in such
business. He that could excuse himself and not meddle (unless he saw that
they themselves understood it well, and had an affection unto the matter)
should be very wise.

It is an honor for a Prince to fear that which is to be feared, and to
foresee it.

A Prince if he has age should be very wary not to make this excuse, I did
not think such a thing would have happened, for it is not allowable.

Princes fear not to thrust their Servants into danger when they have need.

In Treaties Princes must employ men that are pleasing, and such as will pass
over all things, and all words, to attain unto the end of their Masters
desseignes.

Allyances.
BEtwixt the Kings of France and the Emperors, there are great oaths and
confederacies not to attempt one against another. (...)

The first Suisses that were seen in this Realm, Lib. 1. Chap. 6.
and who have given credit to them that have come after them, were at the Siege
of Paris, in the war of the commonweal, whereas they behaved themselves most
valiantly, and in all other places where they were employed.

The English are in a manner unprofitable in the wars of France. If the Duke of
Bourgundy would have made use of them, Lib. 4. Chap. 5.
it had bin needful that for a season he should have accompanied them, to
help, to direct and govern their Army, according to the manner of our wars.
For there are none more ignorant nor more untoward when they first pass: But
in a short space they become good Soldiers, wise and valiant.

There is but one high Chamberlain in England: Lib. 6. Chap. 2.
and for that there is but one, it is a great office.

The English are the best Archers in the world. Lib. 1. Chap. 3.


The English are suspicious. Lib. 6. Cha. 11.


The English have a common saying, Lib. 3. Chap. 8.
whereof they have sometime told me treating with them: That in battails which
they have had with the French, they have always, or most commonly won: But in
all treaties with them they have ever lost. And in my opinion I have known men
in this Realm, as worthy to manage a great Treaty, as any other in the World,
and especially of the breeding of our King.

The Florentines did every three months change their Lords who had all the
government of the City. Lib. 6. Chap 5.


The English are not so subtle in Treaties and Accordes, Lib. 4. Chap. 9.
as the French: and whatsoever is said they go grossly to work, but they
must have patience and not debate matters cholerickly.

The Italians take not Towns besieged so speedily as the French. Lib. 6. Chap.
5.
They know not so well how to force places and to defend them: but to hold the
field, and to settle a good order for their victuals, and all other things
necessary to hold the field, they understand it better then we do.

I do not think that I lie, Lib. ^. Chap. 2.
to say that I believe, that since the first battle of Granson, unto the
death of the King our Master, the said Towns, and private men of the Suisses,
have gotten of our King a Million of Florins of the Rhin, of the Towns I mean
but four, Berne, Lucerne, Friburge, Zurich, and their Cantons, which have
their Mountains. Suisses is one, yet it is but a Village. I have seen one of
this village, being an Ambassador with others, in a very mean habit, who
notwithstanding gave his advice with the rest. Soleuure and Ondreual are called
the other Cantons.

The English, Lib. 6. Chap. 2.
as well Nobility, Commons, as Clergy, are inclined to war against this
Realm, as well under color of their quarrels which they pretend, as for the
hope of gain; for that God has suffered their Predecessors to win many great
battles within this Realm, and to have a long possession, both in Normandy and
in Guyenne, which they had held three hundred and fifty years, when as King
Charles the seventh won it first, as I have said elsewhere, at what time they
carried great spoils and riches into England, as well of Princes and Noblemen
of France, which had been their Prisoners, and in great numbers, as of Towns
and places which they had taken in the said Realm, and hope still to do the
like. But hardly should such an adventure have happened in the time of the King
our Master: for he would never have hazarded his Realm, by putting himself,
and all his Nobility, on foot to fight with them, as they did at Agincourt,
but would have proceeded more wisely if it had come to that point.

The Earldom of Flanders is a small matter, Lib. 6. Chap. 7.
without the Country of Artois; which lies betwixt France and them, and is as
it were a curb unto them.

Offices and Estates are more desired in Paris then in any other place of the
World, Lib. 1. Chap. 6.
for they that have them make of them what they can, and not what they ought:
There are Offices without fees, which are sold for above eight hundred Crowns,
and others which have very small entertainment, are sold for more then their
wages amount unto in fifteen years. Wherefore seldom do any disappoint
themselves. And the Court of Parliament maintains this Article. It is reason,
for it concerns them all. Among Counselors there are also some good and
worthy men, and in like manner there are some ill conditioned: So is it in all
Estates.

House of Bourgundie, her greatness and fall.
AFter along felicity and great riches, Lib. 2. Chap. 9.
and three great Princes good and wise going before this, who had continued
sixescore years or more, and lived well and virtuously; God gave this duke
Charles, who contin^ally held his Subjects in great wars, toil, and expense,
and in ^ manner in Winter as much as in Summer, so as many rich men were slain
or ruined by imprisonment in these wars. The greatlosses began before Nuz,
and were continued by three or four batels, even unto his death, so as in this
last battle all the force of ^is Country was consumed, and his men either
slain or taken pris^ners, who might and would have defended the State and
honor if his house. And so (as I have said) it seems that this loss hat^
been equal to the time that they were in felicity: for (as I have said to
have seen it great, rich and honored) so I may say to ha^ seen it all in his
Subjects; for I think that I have seen and known the best part of Europe,
yet have I not known any State or Country, so much for so much, nor of larger
limits, that did so much abound in riches, moueables, and buildings, nor in
prodigaliti, expense, feasting, and good cheer, as I have seen during the
(...) I was there. And if it seem to any one (who was not there in ^ose times)
that I speak too much, others that were then prese^, will happily say that I
speak but little.

It is God which made this great and sumptuous building to fall suddenly; that
powerful house which has fed and maintained so many good men, and has been
so much honored both far off and near, by so many trophies and victories, as
not any Neighbor in those times has received the like. And this felicity and
grace of God continued an hundred and twenty years, when as all their
Neighbors did suffer (as France, England and Spain) and they have all come
thither to require aid; as you have seen by experience of the King our
Master, who in his youth, and during the life of King Charles the seventh his
Father, lived six years there, in the time of the good Duke Philip, who
received him lovingly. From England I have seen King Edwards two Brethren
there, the Duke of Clarence, and the Duke of Gloucester; who afterward called
himself King Richard, and of King Henry's party (who was of the house of
Lancaster) I have seen in a manner all that race there. I have seen this house
honored from all parts, and then suddenly fall, and to be the most desolate
and ruinous house both in Princes and Subjects of all her Neighbors.

Enemies.
THere is not any thing which a Prince should not do to send an Enemy out of
his Realm; Lib. 4. Chap. 8.
but he must not yield to give him any land: by the example of king Lewis the
eleventh to have Edward the fourth repasse the Sea: who said that he would
hazard all, rather then give him any places.

Enterprises.
WE must be slow and fearful in Enterprises, Lib. 2. Cha. 10.
and pursue them in such sort, as we may be sure to be the stronger. Such was
Lewis the eleventh.

In all Enterprises we must rely cheefely upon God. Lib. 2. Chap. 1.


Battles.
THe cheifest things in battles are Archers; Lib. 1. Chap. 3.
(...) as there be thousands (for being in a small number they are not of any
force) and that they be ill mounted, to the end that the be not grieved to
loose their horses; or that they have not any at (...). And it is better for
this kind of arms, in a day of battle, to have those that never saw any
thing, then others that have had much pra^ise. The English hold this opinion,
who are the flower of all the ^rchers of the world.

Battles are in the hand of God, Lib. 1. Chap. 3.
who disposes (...) victories at his pleasure.

Matters succeed not in the field, as they are concluded in a Chamber. Example
of the battle of Montlehery, wherea^he Earl of Charolois did quite contrary
to that which had been resolved.

It is dangerous for any one to hazard his estate upon a battle, Lib. 2. Chap.
2.
if he may avoid it. For although the number be small that he loose, yet the
hearts of his men are danted, and the change more then can be imagined, as well
in fear of their enemies, as in contempt of of their Master and of their
trusty servants, and they fall into mutinies and practices, demanding more
boldly then they were wont, and they grow angry if they be refused. One Crown
before would have satisfied them better then three will now. And if he that has
lost be wise, he will not at such a time hazard any thing with them that have
fled: But only stand upon his guard, and seek out something easy to vanquish,
whereas they may be Masters to put fresh courage into them, and take away
fear. Howsoever, a lost Battle has always a great train, and bad for the
looser: True it is that Conquerors should seek it to shorten their work,
especially they that have good footmen, and better then their neighbors, as
we may say at this day the English or Suisses. I speak not this to contemn
other Nations, but those have had great victories, and their men are not to
hold the field long without imploiment, as the French or Italians can do, who
are wiser, or more easy to lead. Contrariwise he that gains grows into
greater reputation and esteem with his men then before. His obedience
increases among his subjects. In this estimation they grant him whatsoever he
demands, and his men grow more courageous and hardy: Also the said Princes do
sometimes grow so glorious and proud, as they miscarry afterward, and hereof I
speak upon knowledge: But such grace comes only from God.

Every one should be fearful to hazard a battle that is not forced: Lib. 2.
Chap. 4.
But if there be no remedy, before he come to it, he must cast all the doubts
that can be thought on. For commonly they that do things fearfully make
provision for all events, and gain oftener then they that proceed with pride:
yet when God will have a hand in it nothing can prevail.

Every man should do what he may, Lib. 2 Chap. 3.
and what he ought in a day of Battle, and acknowledge that it is one of the
accomplishments of the work of God, begun sometimes upon small occasions, and
giving victory sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other. And this is
so great a mystery, as Realms and great Siegnories are sometimes ruined, and
others increase and begin to reign.

War.
IT is an easy matter to begin War betwixt two great Princes, but hard to
pacify it, by reason of the accidents which happen: For many exploits are done
of either side to anoy his enemy, which on the sudden cannot be recalled.

It is a great folly in a Prince to submit himself to the power of an other,
especially when they are in war.

It is a great show of pride or folly for any one to hold himself too strong,
Lib. 2. Cha. 10
and yet Captains do it sometimes to be held valiant, or for that they do
not well understand the business which they have in hand.

Among other things that are fit to make conquest, if there be not a great
judgment all the rest is of no force, and I think that it must come from the
grace of God.

He that has the profit of the War has the honor.

There must be no have nor precipitation when they undertake, Lib. 5. Chap. 28
and begin a war: And I tell you that Kings and Princes are much the stronger
when they undertake it with the consents of the subjects, and are more feared
of their enemies. When it is a defensive war this cloud is seen coming a
far off, especially if it be from strangers, and therein good subjects should
not complain nor refuse any thing, and the accident cannot be so sudden but
they may call some men, such as shall be named. It is not done without cause,
and therein they use no fixion, nor entertain a petty war at pleasure, and
without cause, to have occasion to leuy money.

The greatest miseries come commonly from the stronger: For the weaker seek
nothing but patience.

Soldiers.
I Hold that men at Arms entertained are well employed under the authority of
a wise King or Prince, Lib. 3. Chap. 3.
but when he is otherwise, or that he leaves Infants, the use, whereunto their
Governors employ them, is not always profitable, neither for the King nor for
his subjects.

Men at Arms lie continually upon the Country, without paying any thing,
committing infinite insolences and excess, as all others know: For which they
are not content with an ordinary life, and with that which they find in a
laborers house, from whom they are paid: But contrariwise they beat the poor
men and force them to fetch bread, wine and victuals from abroad: And if he
has a fair Wife or a Daughter, he shall do well to keep her safely. Yet
seeing there is pay, it were easy to reform it, so as the men at Arms were
paid every two months at the farthest, and so they should have no excuse to
commit those insolences which they do, under color of want of pay: For the
money is levied and comes at the end of the year. I speak this for our
Realm, which is more oppressed in this case then any other that I know, and no
man can help it but a wise King. Other neighbor countries have other
punishments.

Sieges.
ALthough that sometimes sallies be very necessary, yet are they dangerous
for them that are in a place, for the loss of Ten men is greater to them then
a hundred to the enemy without, their numbers not being equal: neither can
they recover more when they will, and they may loose a Commander or a Leader,
which oftentimes is the cause that the rest of the soldiers demand nothing
more then to abandon the place.

In sieges of places the loss of one man alone is the cause to preserve his
Master from a great inconvenience, Lib. 5. Chap. 3.
although, he be not of his house, nor of any great extraction, but only has
judgment and virtue. Example in Cohin, an Englishman, who being slain with a
Canon shot within Nancy, the Englishmen whom he commanded mutined and caused
the Town to be yielded.

After that a Prince has laid siege against a place, Lib. 5. Chap. 6.
and planted his Artilerie, if any come to enter and to relieve it against him
they are worthy of death, by the law of Arms. Yet it is not practiced in our
Wars, which are more cruel then the wars of Italy or Spain, whereas they
use this custom.

Despair of succors make men besieged to put all things in hazard. Example by
the furious sallie of them of Liege who had like to have taken or slain the
King, or the Duke of Bourgundy.

Victory.
THey do always augment the number of the vanquished. Lib. 2 Chap. 2.
I have seen in many places whereas for one man they said they had slain a
hundred, to please them, and with such lies they do sometimes abuse their
masters.

He that gains in war grows in greater reputation with his Soldiers then
before. Lib. 2. Chap. 2.
His obedience increases. They grant him what he demands, and his men are
more hardy and courageous.

Changes.
THe changes are great after the death of great and mighty Princes, In the
Prologue.
where some loose, and others gain.

Great changes proceed not from fortune, Lib. 1. Chap. 12.
which is nothing but a Poetical fiction. The Author speaks this upon the
Constables ruin, and concludes in these terms. He should be very ignorant
that should believe that fortune, or any such like thing, should cause so wise
a man to be hated of these two Princes at one instant who in their lives did
never agree in any thing but in this, and most of all of the King of England
who had married his Niece, and did wonderfully love all his wives kindred, and
especially those of this house of St Pol. It is likely and very certain that
he was deprived of the grace of GOD to have made himself an enemy to these
three Princes, and not to have any one friend that durst lodge him one night,
and there was no other fortune that had any hand in it but God, and so it has
happened and will happen to many others, who after great and long prosperities
fall into great adversities.

When as a great man has lost all his own, he soon wearies them that support
him. Example of Rene Duke of Lorraine, who retired into France after the Duke
of Bourgundie had taken his Country.

God gives extraordinary wills unto Princes when it pleases him to change
their fortunes. Lib. 5. Chap. 5.
Example of Charles Duke of Bourgundie who grew obstinate at the second siege
of Nancy, against the advice of his Council.

Prosperity, Adversity.
A Misfortune never comes alone. Lib. 3. Chap. 5.


Prosperity makes people proud. Lib. 4. Chap. 3.
Example of them of Arras.

Princes are proud and seek not the true remedies in their misfortunes, Lib.
5. Chap. 5.
whereof the first is to return unto God, and to consider if they have
offended him in any thing, and to humble themselves before him, and acknowledge
their errors: For it is he that judges of such suites whereas no error can be
propounded. After this, it will do him great good to confer with some
private friend, and boldly to discover his griefs unto him, for it does ease
and comfort the heart, and the spirits recover their virtue, conferring thus
with some one in private; or else he must seek another remedy by exercise and
labor, for of necessity, seeing we be men, such griefs must pass with great
passion, either in public or in private.

In time of adversity every one murmures and contemnes all the actions of the
afflicted. Lib. 5. Chap 7.
Example in the Duke of Bourgundy after the loss of the battles of Granson and
Morat.

We must hold for certain that the great prosperities of Princes, Lib. 5.
Chap. 6.
or their great adversities, proceed from the Divine providence.

If men were always wise, Lib. 1. Cha. 15.
they should be so temperate in their speeches in time of prosperity, as they
should have no cause to change in time of adversity. The Flemings during the
life and prosperity of their Duke, spoke not to the King, nor of the King with
such reverence as they have done since.

Affliction troubles the mind and alters the complexion. This was known in
the Duke of Bourgundy after the Battle of Granson. He was never so wise as he
had been, his choler and natural heat was so great before as he drank no
wine, and after this they caused him to drink it pure.

Division.
ALl good things in this world are overthrown by division, Lib. 2. Cha. 16.
and it is almost impossible that many great Noblemen of like estate can long
entertain themselves together, if there be not a head above them, and if it
were necessary he should be wise and well esteemed to draw obedience from them
all.

A wise Prince having the command of ten thousand men, Lib. 1. Chap. 16.
and means to entertain them, is more to be feared then ten having either of
them six thousand, all allied and confederate together, for that they have so
many things to decide among them, as half the time is spent before any thing
can be conceived.

The true sign of the ruin of a Country is when as they that should hold
together are divided and abandon it. Lib. 2. Chap. 1.
Example in the Town of Dinand, which left the alliance of them of Liege.

Factions are much to be feared in a Realm when as they happen, Lib. 3. Chap.
7.
and cause great ruins. Example of the divisions of England betwixt the houses
of Lancaster and York.

When as a faction begins, Lib. 3, Chap. 8.
although there be but two or three Princes, or meaner men that deal in it,
yet before the feast has continued two years all the neighbors are invited.

There was never any faction begun in the country but the end was prejudicial
and hard to be quenched. Lib. 4. Chap. 9.


Divisions are the springs of War from whence grow mortality and famine,
Lib. 5. Cha. 18
and all these miseries proceed for want of faith.

We must confess (considering the wickedness of men, and especially of great
men who know not, neither do believe that there is a God) that it is
necessary that every Nobleman and Prince should have his contrary to keep him
in fear and humility, else no man should be able to live under them or near
them.

Commotions and Seditions.
IN tumults and Seditions the most wicked are most bold and hardy. In the
Prologue.


Liberality.
RIches and Honors are not given at their pleasures that demand them. In the
Apology.


King Lewis the eleventh gave much to Churches. Lib. 5. Cha. 18.
In some things less had done better: ^or he took from the poor to give to
them which had no need. To conclude, there is no perfect measure in this world.

Justice and Injustice.
THere are Princes which punish under a color of Justice, and have Instruments
fit for their humors, who of a venialll sin make it mortal. If they have no
matter, they find means to delay the hearing of the parties and witnesses, to
ruin them in expenses, expecting still if any one will complain of him which
is in durance, and whom they hate. If this course will not serve to compass
their intention, they have others more sudden; saying that it were necessary
to make him an example, making his case as they think good.

To others that hold of them and are somewhat stronger, they proceed by way of
fact, and say: Thou disobaiest or do contrary to the homage which thou owe
me, and so by force they take from him that which he has, if they can, (at the
least they do their best) and make him to live miserably. He that is but their
Neighbor (if he be strong and resolute) they suffer him not to live: but if he
be weak, he knows not what course to take. They will say unto him, he has
supported their enemies, or they will send their men at Arms to live in his
Country, or will buy quar^els, or find occasions to ruin him, or will
maintain his Neighbor against him, and will lend them men. Of their Subjects,
they will disgrace such as have served their Predecessors well, to raise new
men.

Punishment.
TO see the things which God has done in the World, Lib. 4. Chap. 13.
and does daily, it seems that he will leave nothing unpunished, and we may
see plainly that these strange works come from him: for they are beyond the
works of nature, and his punishments are so sudden, especially against them
that use violence and cruelty; who commonly are no mean persons, but great,
either in Signeurie, or the Princes Authority.

Injuries, Offenses, and Outrages.
PRinces and they that are in great Authority, should fear to do or speak
outragiously, and have a care to whom they speak them: For the greater they
are, the more sencible and distasteful are the outrages they do; for it seems
that outrages will be more noted for the greatness and authority of the
person that commits them, and if he be their Master or Lord, they will
despair ever to receive honor or favor from him, and more men serve for the
hope of future good, then for that which they have received. Example of the lie
which the Constable gave to the Lord of Imbercourt at the conference of Roy.

Prudence, Experience, and Occasion.
I Have seen few men that could fly time, Lib. ^. Chap. 3*
and avoid their misfortunes, neither here, nor in any place else: For the one
has no experience, having not seen their neighbor Countries, which is a
great error in all men of worth, for it gives a great judgment and resolution
to have seen things by experience. Others have to great a love to their
Goods, Wives, and Children. And these reasons have been the causes of the
ruin of many good men.

Men which have no experience, Lib. 1. Chap. 3.
maintain many ill grounded arguments, and with sm^ll reason. Wherefore it is
good to follow the opinion of him which says, That no man repents himself of
speaking little, but oftentimes for speaking to much.

Secrecy.
AS soon as Princes depart one from another, Lib. 11. Cha. 8.
they secretly whisper whatsoever has been observed in them, and then through
indiscretion speak of it openly at dinner and supper, and then it is reported
of both sides, for few things are kept secret in this world, especially of
those which are spoken.

Knowledge.
A Prince, Lib. 5. Cha. 18.
or man of any Estate whatsoever, if he have force and authority where he
lives over others, if he be learned and has seen or read, it will either
amend him or impair him: For the bad impair with much knowledge, and the good
amend. Yet it is credible, that knowledge does rather amend him then impair
him, were there nothing but the shame to know his own evil, it were
sufficient to^keepe him from doing ill, at the least not to wrong any man,
whereof I have seen many experiences among great personages, whom knowledge
has drawn from many bad desseignes, and also the fear of Gods punishment,
whereof they have greater knowledge then ignorant men, who have neither seen
nor read.

History.
IT is a great advantage for Princes to have read Histories in their youth,
Lib. 2. Chap. 6.
where they may plainly read of such assemblies, and of the great frauds,
deceipts and periuries, which some of the ancients have used one against
another, having taken and slain them that have relied upon such assurances. It
is not said that all have used it, but the example of one is sufficient to make
many wise, and to give them a will to stand upon their guard: And in my opinion
one of the greatest means to make a man wise is to have read ancient Histories
and to learn to govern himself wisely thereby, and by the example of our
predecessors. For our life is so short as it suffic^th not to have experience
of so many things. Besides we are decayed in age and the life of man is not so
long as it was wont to be, nor their bodies so strong,

All the Books that are written were to no use, if it were not to reduce
things past to memory, where we see more in one book in three months, then
twenty men living successively one after another, can see by the eye or learn
by experience. Although that enemies nor Princes be not always alike
(notwithstanding that the subject be) yet is it good to be informed of things
past.

Nourishment.
ALl men that have been great, Lib. 1. Chap. 9.
and done great matters, have begun very young. And it co^sists in the
education, or coms from the grace of God. This is spoken by the Author upon
the good education of Lewis the eleventh, without the which it had been
impossible for him to have surmounted those great difficulties which he had in
the beginning of his reign, and to blame that of the noblemen of his time, who
were not bred up but to show their folly in their speech and apparel. They
have no knowledge of any learning, and there is not a wise man among them. They
have Governors to whom they talk of their affairs, and not to themselves, and
they dispose thereof, and there are such Lords which have not sixescore and ten
pounds starling yearly rent which take a glory in saying, speak unto my
officers, thinking by these words to seem great men. In like manner I have
often seen such servants make their profit of their masters, giving them to
understand that they were beasts. And if happily any one returns and desires
to know his own, it is so late as it serves him to small purpose.

A Princes subjects have cause to grieve, when they see his Children ill bred
up, and in the hands of bad conditioned men.

Nature.
A Natural wit, perfectly good excells al other sciences, that may be learned
in the world. Example of Lewis the eleventh who without any knowledge of
learning had the reputation and the effects of the wisest Prince of his age.

Hope.
ALL well considered our only hope must be in God, In the end of the first Book.
for in him lies all our assurance and all bounty, which cannot be found in any
worldly thing, But every man knows it too late, and after that he has need,
yet it is better late then never.

Age.
THe fathers old Age makes him to endure the Insolences of his son
patiently. Lib. 1. Chap. 2.
Example of Philip Duke of Bourgondy, who dissembled the bad usage of his son
the Earl of Charolois to them of the house of Croy.

Foresight.
Wise Men discern so far off as their life is not sufficient to see half of
those things which they have foreseen. Lib. 3. Chap. ^.


Carelesnes and vigilance.
MAd and distracted Princes are not to be blamed if they govern their affairs
ill: Lib. 6. Cha. 4.
but they that have their judgments sound and are well disposed of their
persons, if they spend their whole time in idleness, and folly, they are not to
be pitied if they fall into misfortunes: But they which divide their times
according to their age, sometimes seriously and in Council, and sometimes in
feasts and pleasure, are much to be commended, and the subjects are happy to
have such a master.

An Alphabeticall Table of the principal matters contained in the first seven
Books of this History.
A
ACcord betwixt the King of Castile and Portugal. fol. 220. Affairs of a
Prince are then effected with most safety and advantage, when he has won that
person, who is most in credit and authority with the other, with whom he
Treates. 166. Affection of Masters to bad servants is the cause of much
disorder. 14. Alphonso King of Portugal, comes to demand succors in France.
215. But is refused by the French King. 218. Alphonso proclaimed King of
Castile. 217. His death. Ibid. Amazment breeds strange effects. 80. Ambition
has no other law, then the fancy of the Ambitious. 77. Amurath puts
Scanderbegs brethren to death, 120. and grows fearful of Scanderbegs valor.
Ibid. Army of the Earl of Charolois. 79. Articl^s of a peace between France
and England. 165. Attempt against the Duke of Bourgundies life, discovered by
the King. 206.
B
Balue the Cardinal, imprisoned in a cage of his own invention. 132. Basile
besieged by Lewis the Dauphin. 22. Battle of Firmigny, 30. Battle at
Montlehery. 81. Battle at Wakefield. 56. Battle of Varna. 121. Battle of
Morat. 213. Battle of Nancy. 224. Beauuais besieged. 164. Birth of Charles the
eight. 146. Boldness after danger past. 86. Bothwell in great favor with the
King of Scotland. 232.
C
Cadet rescueth the Earl of Charolois. 83. Challenge sent to the Duke of
Bourgundy. 3 Charles the seventh disinherited by his father Charles the sixth.
1. He arms against his son Lewis the Dauphin. 12. He takes the Castle of S.
Maxiant. 13. His reprehension of the Duke of Bourbon. 14. His fragility. 26.
His Death. 27 Charles Duke of Orleans led prisoner into England. 3. He dies
for sorrow. 69. Charles of Navarre poisoned by his Mother in Law. 61. Charles
Duke of Berry retires into Brittany. 70. His solicitatio^ of the Duke of
Bourgundy to assist him for reformation of disorders in France. Ibid.
Campobasse his treason against the Duke of Bourgundy. 223. Charles, Earl of
Charolois, afterward Duke of Bourgundy; his negligence in trayning his Army.
82. Is in danger to be slain or taken. 83. His repast among dead bodies. 84.
Runs into unseen danger. 94. His Humor and disposition. 105. Is constrained
to grant the Gantois their demand. 107. Is forced to raise the siege of Nuz,
and comes to Callice to the King of England. 180. His profit and blame by the
death of the Constable. 205. His journey against the Suisses. 207. etc. He
loses the battle, but not his courage. 211. He seizes upon the Duchess
of Sauoy and her children. 214. His affliction after the Battle of Morat. 220.
His defeat and death. 224. An example of his Justice* 227. 227. Charles Prince
of Navarre makes war against his father. 151. Chastity and Beauty are rare
companions. 27. Choler and Praecipitation are two blind guides. 67. Combustions
in England. 53. Complaints against Lewis the Dauphin. 30. Complaints for the
Pragmaticall Sanction. 135. Confidence is the true cyment of friendship. 187.
Considerations of the King to have a peace. 179. Conspiracy against King Henry
the sixth. 54. Constantinople taken. 123. Consultation taken to put the Hostages
of Liege to death. 108. Contention in Scotland for the Regency. 230.
Contentment of priuateme^ makes them forget the public. 96. Council of
Basile seeks an accord with the Dauphin. 24. Counsels in perplexity. 85.
counsels savor of the passions of counselors. 173. counsel contemned draws
on destiny. 223. Courage of the women at the siege of Beauuais. 165. Courtesy
proffered but not meant. 189. Cross of S. Laud. 179. Croysado published
against the Turk. 64. Cruelties makes Princes odious. 125. cruelties committed
at the taking of Nesle. 163. cruelty base and villainous. 227.
D
Death of Charles Duke of Orleance. 2. Death of the Signior of Contay. 108.
Death is sweet, when it is the end, and not the punishment, of life. 204.
Declaration of the house of Bourgundy. 36. Delight in public miseries for
profit sake. 24. Desire of rule sets father and son at variance. 60. Desire to
have things as we would, makes us oftentimes accept appearances for the things
themselves. 87. Dignities change the Maxims of conscience. 48. Disability
supplied by Deputy. 216. Disobedience rightly punished. 81 Displeasure of the
Duke of Bourgundy against his son. 34. Disposition of the Earl of Charolois.
33. Distraction of Charles the sixth. 1. Duchess of Bourgundy drawsher husband
to the treaty of Arras. 8 Duke of Bourgundy flies into Flanders. 2. and is
slain by Taneguy Du Chastel. 4.
E
Earl of S. Paul is made constable of France. 97. His natural affection.
Ibid. His bad conduct. 98. His policy. 143. His dissimulation to creep again
into the Kings favor. 168. the manner of his coming to the King. 169. His
double dealing with the King of England. 181 Is abandoned of all his friends.
196. His grievous perplexities. 198. Is delivered prisoner to the King. 200.
His confessions, Arraignement, sentence, and execution. 201. 202. etc. Ease
found in conference of troubles and afflictions. 27. Education is as another
nature. 16 Edward 4. proclaimed King of England. 57. He declares himself for
the Bourgundian. 77. He sends the Garter to the Earl of Charolois. 88. Is
defeated, and taken prisoner. 141. His passage into France. 177. His repentance
for his passage. 182. Eloquence, natural in Lewis the eleventh. 133. Embassage
from the Fren^h King to the Emperor Frederick. 176. Enemies that are ambitious
must have more work made the^ then they can compass. 173. English, well
entertained at Amiens. 187. Enterveiw of the Kings of France and Cistile. 62.
Enterveiw of the French King, and Earl of Charolois. 93. Enter veiw of the
French King and King of England. ^89. Estates assembled at Cl^rmont. 13
Exploits done by captain Salezard at the siege of Beauuais. 165.
F
Faction of the Orleano^s, and Bourgonians. 1. Famine extreme in Nancy. 222.
Fatality of names. 6. Fear, and the strange operation thereof. 93. Ferdinand
King of Naples, seeks the alliance of the Queen of Cyprus. 127. Fidelity and
devotion of the French toward their Kings. 5. France the Sanctuary of Popes.
47
G
Galeas Duke of Milan, his death, 229. His cruelties and whooredomes. 230.
Gantois profit by the Ligeois. 110 George Castriot circumcised, and called
Scanderbeg. 120. He leaves the Turk, and ioynes with John Huniades. 121. He
demands succors of the Pope. 123 his death. 124. His force and dexterity. Ibid.
Gyles of Brittany his Tragical end. 151. Good of a peace, and necessity of
affairs, respect not formalities. 9. Government of Venice commended. 129,
Guienne given to the Kings brother. 135.
H
Heirs tears are soon dried up. 41 Henry the sixth, King of England, is crowned
King of France at Paris. 4. He flies into Scotland. 57. Is imprisoned in the
Tower of London. 58. Is set at liberty again. 143. Henry King of Castile
degraded. 217.
I
James the first, King of Scotland, murdered. 7. Jests should end, when they
begin to move laughter. 28. Jews probation^waters. 146. Impatience of the
Earl of Charolois. 67. Importance of the Office of the Constable of France.
205. Indignities and insolences of people revolted. 103. Inequality of
recompense after the battle of Montlehery. 84. Inhumanity of the Duke of
Bourgundy. 164. Injuries done to faith and reputation, are not easily repaired,
nor recompensed. 100. Insolence in victory punished. 23. Institution of the
order of Saint Michael. 136. Intelligences continued betwixt Bourgundy and
Bourbo^. 139. Intellige^ces of the Constable with the Duke of Bourgundy. 177.
John Earl of Armagnac expelled his Country. 154. accused by a Welchman. 155.
Desires a safe conduct to justify himself. 156 Is reconciled to the King.
157. And is afterward slain, under the assurance of a Treaty. 158. His incest
159. His superstition, in holding it a bad presage to meet an Englishman with
a Red Cross. 160. Isabella of Cstaile marries Ferdinand of Arragon. 218.
K
Katherine Cornari adopted by the Venetians. 126. King Lewis in danger to be
taken or slain. 116. His letters to the Lord of Lude. 152. King and Queen of
Cyprus driven out of their own Realm. 126. King of Scotland given to Sorcery.
234. and is slain in fight by his Nobility. 235. Knights habit of the Order
of St. Michael, and the mark of the Order. 137. Knowledge better how to die
then to kill, is the best and only part of valor. 17.
L
League of Armagnac. 2. Learning is silent when war speaks. 26. Letters from
Amurath to Scanderbeg. 121. And the answer ot it. 122. Letters of the Solda^ to
the King of Cyprus. 125. Letters of defiance from Edward 4. to the French King.
178 Lewis excited against his father by bad counsel. 10. He soliciteth the
good Towns of France to join with him. 12. Is reconciled to his father. 14.
He desires rather to be held a bad son, then a bad master. 15. He takes Deipe.
20. Is too true in his threats, and promises of revenge. 29. avoiding one
danger he falls into another. 31. Is dispossessed of his revenues in Dauphine. 32
His wandering being in Hunting. 34. His coronation. 42. His voyage into
Brittany. 52. Is made Arbitrator between the Kings of Castile and Arragon. 62.
Is received with great pomp into Tournay. 64. His message to the Duke of
Britany. 65. He separates the heads of the League. 107. Two errors which he
committed in the assurance of his person. 111. 112* His politic dissimulation
with the Constable. 170. His judgment to distinguish spirits. 183 His message
to the King of England. Ibid. He discouers the Constables double dealing to the
Bourgundian. 186. His jests upon the peace made with Edward 4th. and his fear
to have them related again. 191. Learning disalowed by the Turk. 219.
Liberty, the ancient color for innovation. 80. Lie, especially in a Gentleman
how to be punished. 169. Liege reuolts against the Duke of Bourgundy. 103. Is
supported by the French king. 107. Submits it self, and demands pardon. 109
Has her walls beaten down. 110. Is again besieged by the Bourgundian. 114.
Love, without regard of honor or profit. 58. Love continued toward children
for their fathers sake. 76.
M
Marriage of Lewis the 11th. 6. Misery of imprisonment, mittigated by kind
usage. 177. miseries of France for 70. years. 5. Modesty of Blanch, daughter
to John King of Navarre. 6. Money levied under the pretext of war, and ill
employed. 46. Multiplicity of Popes. 38. Murder justified by the Duke of
Bourgundy. 2.
N
Navigations contemned by the French. 180. Neutrality in a subject is mere
Treason. 98. Normandy yielded to the King. 99
O
Obedience in a Soldier is as much commendable as courage. 177. Observations
of the Duke of Guiennes life. 150. Occasion which caused an ouerture of peace
betwixt the French and English. 182. Opinion causes terrible motions in the
soul. 15. Opportunity of fight neglected. 81 Ostentation of Majesty not
suitable with misery. 6.
P
Paris reduced to the French Kings obedience. 9. Famisheth the Army which would
have famished it. 91. Almost unpeopled. 99. Parpignan besieged, and won by
famine. 154. Parts which frame a Prince. 16. Peace of Bourges. 3. Peter
Hagembach his crimes, injustice, and death. 174. Phillip Duke of Bourgundy wins
Dinan by force, and ruins it. 104. His death; and the greatness of his house.
Ibid. His bounty, courage, and moderation. 105. Pius 2 presses the abolition
of the Pragmaticall sanction. 44. His affection to the house of Arrago^, and
his threat against France. 45. He disauowes his own writings. 48. His death,
birth, fortune, and dignities. 72. Plurallity of chiefes is for the most part
ruinous and unprofitable. 88 Pontoise taken by assault. 18. Power which is not
feared by strangers is not well obeyed by Subjects. 32. Pragmaticke Sanction
abolished, and dragged through the streets of Rome. 51. Praecipitation is a
shelfe, covered with the shipwrackes which she has caused in great occasions.
78. Princes are especially to provide, that great houses under their
government, ally not themselves against their liking. 19 Princes seem very
weak, or very fearful, which give an Enemy-army leisure to make a bridge. 89
Princes, in marrying, regard not their pleasure, but the necessity and profit
of their affairs. 144. They are no less bound by simple words, then private
persons are by Oaths. 163
Q
Quality of Cardinals. 50
R
Reasons which persuaded the English to peace. 184 Reformations of the
disorders of the Realm. 95 Reception of the King of Portugal into Paris. 219
Representations ridiculous. 43 Reputation of a generous Father, makes a valiant
son less remarkable. 20 Rigor of Lewis in the beginning of his reign. 53
Royalty endures no equal. 8 Rubempre staid at the Hage by the Earl of
Charalois. 66 Ruin and desolation of the Legeois. 118
S
Sedition ought to be smothered in the beginning. 76 Sedition cloked by
Religion. 106 Siege of Pontoise. 17 Siege of Saintron. 109 Siege of Nancy. 221
Severity of discipline is hardly obseruable in civil wars. 80 Son-in-law
against father-in-law 3 Succors of Men and Money sent to the Earl of
Charalois. 94 Suisses before Zurich, 21. defeated. 23. they send succors to
the Duke of Lorraine. 222 Sum of the Pragmaticke Sanction. 49
T
Talbot relieues Pontoise. 17 Temporising profitable. 149 Thorns and Roses of
Marriage. 44 Treachery most damnable. 158 Treaty made without Liberty, binds
not. 119 Treaty of peace between the French King and the Bourgondian. 192
Trifles want not their moment, and serve many times to drive weightier matters
out of the heads of the people. 132 Troubles in England. 140 Truce between
France and England prolonged. 24 Truth not to be found in an enemies tongue. 25
Tumults in Cyprus. 127 Turks make their profit of the division of
Christendom. 46
V
Valor and bounty of Lewis the Dauphin. 9 Valor and fidelity of the
Scottishmen. 117
W
Water not to be dug for in a neighbors house before we have sought for it
in our own. 148 Wisdom and temporising surmount all difficulties. Words of
S. Bernard. 49 Words of the Duke of Bourgondy. 79 Words of K. Lewis at his
departure from the Duke of Bourgondy. 119 Words betwixt the King of England and
the Duke of Bourgondy. 187
Y
Youth and Inconstancy are Sisters of one Mother. 78
A Table of the principal Matters contained in the last four Books.
ADmonition made by the king to the Dauphin. 70 Age becomes covetous when it
has not any need of goods. 64 Alponso King of Castille, his death. 87
Anaxagoras his speech of the Sun. 11 Andrew, Archbishop of Krane, preaches
against the Pope, 58. and persisteth in his proposition. 60 Armies are not to
be entertained without tribute. 42. Arras yielded to the French King by
composition 14 Artillery invented. 43 Audiences of Henry the third at his
return from Poland. 159 Authority of the King is an Ocean. 135
B
Balue the Cardinal his policy to get out of prison. 66 Barbarism in the time
of Lewis the eleventh. 190 Basnesse advanced, forgets it self and the favor
which raised it. 10. Basil excommunicated by the Pope. 58 Beginnings of the
diminution of Flanders. 76. Bishop of Liege trecherously slain, being
abandoned of his own people. 37. and 38 Boloigne under the virgin Mary's
homage. 13 Bosio's error in the History of Malta. 137
C
Changes of government at Florence. 2 Charlemaine founder of the University at
Paris. 124 Chauvin Chancellor of Brittanie his lamentable end. 10 Chronicles
often follow toys, and leave out most famous actions. 88 Claudius Seissel his
hard judgment. 121. Comandements extraordinary of the King. 110 Confession of
the fault is the best rethorick to appease just choler. 9 Conspiracy against
the life of the French King miraculously discovered. 31. 32. etc. Contempt is
the fore-runer of sedition. 65 Contempt of discipline in Soldiers. 184
Controversy for the Lands of Berne, Foix, and Bigorre. 84 Cosmo de Medicis his
great riches and bounty. 167. his exile and return. 168 Credit of
Astrologians. 188 Cruelties of Mahomet at the taking of Constantinople. 46
Curing of the kings evil. 123
D
Danger in employing foreign Soldiers. 39 Death of the Lord of Nantoillet.
199 Desolation is the house of Bourgondy. 161 Discourse of a powerful charm.
127 Discommodities of provision for Horsemen. 39 Disposition of Charles the
8th. 117 Dispute of the Authority of the Pope and Council. 61 Dissimulation of
the Duke of Brittanie. 9
E
Edict to reform Soldiers. 185 Edward the fourth his death. 81 Ambassadors
of France make Ouerture for a peace. 5 Embassages ambitiously affected, never
succed happily. 185. Error of learned men not to communicate. 194 Estate of
Lorraine. 49 Estate of the Low Countries at the discretion of the Gantois. 75
Estates that are popular, have always some one private man more eminent then
all the rest. 2 Estates unhappy which are forced to seek strange Masters. 30
Example is a clear light in doubtful things. 154 Examples of diverse
disorders. 114 Excess esteems nothing but what is rare and chargeable. 158
Expenses ruled by occasions. 176
F
Favors of Princes last not. 148 Ferdinando, base son to Alphonso of Arragon,
crowned King of Naples by Pope Pius the 2d. 52. is overthrown by John Duke of
Calabria. Ibid. and restored by Scanderbeg. 53 Flatterers pleasing to Princes.
106 Florence in one hundred years, changed estate seven times. 3 Forms of
war changed. 43 France cannot be disarmed of footmen. 40. it sends Spain
to the Indies. 177 Francisco de Paulo an Hermit of admirable holiness. 105
G
Garniers Oak. 178 Generosity of a young Boy of Sparta. 47 God the Judge of
hearts. 122 Gravity ridiculous. 133 Grief of Pope Sixtus for the peace
between the Venetians and Ferrarois. 57
H
Henry the fourth, the last French King, his worthy commendations. 143 Heralds
creation. 137 History should be free from love or hatred. 89 Hugonet and
Imbercourt condemned to dye. 15
I
James of Luxemburg, his generous answer to the King. 172 Ignorance and
Weakness fear any encounter. 67 Impiety overtaken by Justice. 10 Ingratitude
and Impiety of Adolph of Guelders. 16 Inhumanity of Mahomet. 45 Intelligences
of the Duke of Brittanie discovered. 8 Inventions are not perfect in the
beginning. 44 Judgment transported with choler is like a ship without a
Pilot. 67 Judgments are free after death. 120 Judgment upon the recompense of
services. 187 Justice is the felicity of Empires. 154
K
Katherine of Foix, Queen of Navarre. 84 Kings have long hands, and many
snares to entrap their enemies. 51
L
Lewis counseled to make his profit of the division in Italy. 1. He declares
himself for the Florentines. 3. He seeks a peace of Maximilian. 38. His
designs upon Lorraine and Prouence. 48 Hetakes possession of Proue^ce. 54 He
neglects the calling of a council. 57. His waywardness and melancholy. 69.
his visitation of his son at Ambois. 70. he falls into new apprehe^sions of
death 95. his distrust. 104. his devotion. 107. his curiosity. 108. his last
actions. 109. he could not endure to hear of death. 111. his superstition.
Ibid. his death. 112. his children 115. his pilgrimages. 122. the Latin which
he would have his son to learn. 130. his custom at Ceremonies. 134. his
contempt of the marks of Majesty. 136. he knew not how to pardon. 144. his
rigorus prisons 145. his fear of the revenge of women. 150. he was neither
liberal nor covetous. 171. his mean borrowings. 175. his proper Science. 185.
his letters pattents whereby he gave Arms to his base daughter 193. his great
popularity. 196. his delight in hunting. 197. his favorites and Contemporaries.
Ibid. etc. Lightness, Choler and Facility do not well become a Prince. 37
Loyalty of the Earl of Vandosme. 89 Love of God, and contempt of the world.
106
M
Magistrates should not quit their charge for any respect. 153 Magnificence of
the house of Burgondy. 137 Magnificence of Lewis 11th 140 Magnificence how far
it extends. 141. Religious Magnificence. 142 Mahomet dies for grief after the
loss at Belgrade. 48 Majesty compared to Moses rod. 133 Marriages of France and
Sauoy. 164 Mathias Coruinus his resolute answer to the Turks Ambassadors. 28.
his commendation. 98. is chosen king of Hungary. 100. his valor and conduct
with other worthy acts. 101. his war against the Emperor 103. his death. Ib.
Maxim of Machiuel. 122 Miscounting in the History. 74 Misery of the Duke of
Brittanie. 11
N
Necessity of Horsemen. 41 Neighbour-estates have always some disputes. 38
New discipline for Soldiers. Ib. Nobility of Hungary discontented. 102
O
Oath of the government of Florence. 3. an Oath should have three conditions.
Truth, Judgment and Justice. 32 Obedience is the Science of Princes. 130
Observations of the advantages of footmen over horsemen. 39 Offers of Bajazet
to the King. 95 Office of Heralds at Arms. 137 Offices that are great should
not be hereditary. 138 Offices are to be maintained if they be good. 139
Oppression of the people. 68
P
Philip Earl of Bresse, his marriages and children. 165 Policy to bring an
enemy into suspicion of his own people. 2 Policy in England for the Titles of
families. 135 Popes bound to the Crown of France. 125 Poverty of France in the
time of King John. 176 Practice against the life of an enemy, by any other
means then by Arms, is unworthy of of a Prince. 35 Predictions upon the Life
of Lewis the eleventh. 189 Presumption of Oliver le Daine. 12 Pride trodden
under foot. 47 Princes rely upon their Ministers 157 Privileges of the
Parisians. 170
R
Relapse of the Kings sickness at Tours. 69 Rene of Anjou his commmendation.
53 Reputation grounded upon great and eminent virtues. 155 Revenge taken by a
woman. 46 Rhodes besieged by Mahomet. 25
S
Sack and desolation of Dole. 166 Science of Treasure. 179 Sentence against
the Duke of Alencon. 146 Sentence very rigorous. 150 Sermons of sedition. 126
Silence the soul of great actions. 163 Simplicity of the eloquence in old
time. 129 Sleping for a Benefice. 173 Stablishment of Posts. 169 Sterrility of
Suisserland. 180 Suspension of Arms not always necessary to make a peace. 7
T
Temperance, wherein it consists, 193. the fruits thereof. 195 Treaty of peace
and marriage between France and Bourgondy. 75 Tributes, by which the means to
make war are maintained, may not be touched. 42 Tristan his barbarous
behavior. 145
V
Valor is natural to the French Kings. 183 Vanity of iuditiary Astrology. 189
Venetians contempt of the Popes fulminations. 4. their Accord with the great
Turk. 6. They proclaim war against the Duke of Ferrara, and soon after
conclude a peace with him. 56 Virtue envied for the luster thereof. 10 Vision
miraculous. 27
W
Wisdom of the Lord Hastings. 167 Witnesses of our faults and imperfections
we seldom desire to see. 65. Works of vanity and ostentation.
Z
Zizimi reuolts against Bajazet. 95. his letter to Bajazet. 96. he repaireth to
Rhodes, and is conducted into France. 97
FINIS.

