THE MASK OF FLOWERS.

PRESENTED By the Gentlemen of Graies-Inne, at the Court of White Hall, in the
Banqueting House, upon Twelfe night, 1613.

Being the last of the Solemnities and Magnificences which were performed at
the marriage of the right honorable the Earl of Somerset, and the Lady
Francis daughter of the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain.

printer's device (McKerrow 316): "Device of a Pegasus above a caduceus and
cornucopia upheld by hands emerging from clouds."

LONDON Printed by N.O. for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Graies-Inne new gate. 1614.

TO THE VERY HOnorable Knight, Sir FRANCIS BACON, his Majesty's Attorney
general.
Honorable Sir;
THis last Mask, presented by Gentlemen of Graies Inn, before his Majesty,
in honor of the marriage, and happy alliance between two such principal
persons of the kingdom, as are the Earl of Suffolk, and the Earl of
Sommerset, has received such grace from his Majesty, the Queen and Prince,
and such approbation from the general. As it may well deserve to be repeated
to those that were present, and represented to those that were absent, by
committing the same to the Press, as others have been. The dedication of it
could not be doubtful, you having been the Principal, and in effect the
only person, that did both encourage and warrant the Gentlemen, to show their
good affection toward so noble a Conjunction, in a time of such Magnificence.
Wherein we conceive without giving you false attributes, which little need
where so many are true. That you have graced in general the Societies of the
Innes of Court, in continuing them still as third persons with the Nobilite and
Court, in doing the King honor. And particularly Graies Inn, which as you have
formerly brought to flourish both in the auncienter and younger sort, by
countenancing virtue in every quality. So now you have made a notable
demonstration thereof in the later and less serious kind, by this, That one
Inn of Court by it self, in time of a Vacation, and in the space of three
weeks, could perform that which has been performed, which could not have
been done, but that every man's exceeding love and respect to you, gave him
wings to overtake Time, which is the swiftest of things. This which we allege
for your Honor, we may allege indifferently for our excuse, if any thing were
amiss or wanting, for your times did scarce afford moments, and our experience
went not beyond the compass of some former employment of that nature, which
our grauer studies might have made us by this time to have forgotten. And so
wishing you all increase of honor, we rest

Humbly to do you service, I. G. W. D. T. B.


The Device of the Mask
THe Sun willing to do honor to a Marriage, between two noble persons of
the greatest Island of his universal Empire, writes his Letter of Commission
to the two Seasons of the year, the Winter and the Spring, to visit and
present them on his part, directing the Winter to present them with sports,
such as are commonly called by the name of Christmasse sportes, or Carnaual
sportes, and the Spring, with other sportes of more Magnificence.

And more especially, that Winter for his part take knowledge of a certain
Challenge which had been lately sent and accepted between Silenus and Kanasha
upon this point; That Wine was more worthy then Tobacco, and did more cheer
and relieve the spirits of man. This to be tried at two weapons, at Song and at
Dance, and requiring the Winter to give order that the same Challenge be
performed in the days of Solemnity of the same Marriage.

The same Letter contains a second Special direction to the Spring, that
whereas of ancient time certain beautiful youths had bin transformed from Men
to Flowers, and had so continued till this time, that now they should be
returned again into Men, and present themselves in Mask at the same Marriage.

All this is accordingly performed, and first the two Seasons Inuierno and
Primauera come in, and receive their dispatch from the Sun, by Gallus the
Suns Messenger: Thereupon Winter brings in the Challenge, consisting of two
Anticke-Maskes, the Anticke-Maske of the Song, and the Anticke-Maske of the
Dance.

Then the Spring brings in the Mask it self, and there is first seen in the
fabrique, a fair Garden upon a descending Ground, and at the height thereof
there is a stately long Arbor or Bower arched upon Pillars, wherein the
Maskers are placed, but are not discovered at the first, but there appear
only certain great tufts of flowers betwixt the Collumnes. Those flowers upon
the Charm do vanish, and so the Maskers appear every one in the space or
intercolumne of his Arch.

The Mask.
AT the entrance of the King, at the lower end of the Banqueting house,
appeared a Trauers painted in Perspectiue, like the wall of a City, with
battlements, over which were seen the Tops of houses. In the middle whereof
was a great gate, and on either side a Temple, the one dedicated to Silenus,
and the other to Kawasha, in either of which opened a little gate.

Out of the great gate, in the middle of the City, entered Inuierno or Winter,
attired like an old man, in a short gown of silk shagge, like withered grass
all frosted and snowed over, and his Cappe, Gown, Gamashes, and Mittins furred
crimson, with long white hair and beard, hung with Icecicles, he marches up
to the middle of the Hall, and looks round about him.

Inuierno. Why thus it should be; such a night as this
Puts down a thousand weary long some days
Of Somer, when a Sun, and Moon, and Stars
Are met within the Palace of a King,
In several glory shining each on other,
With rays of comfort, and benign Aspects
When hearts are warm: it is for the seely birds
To sacrifice their Pipes unto the Spring,
And let the Pilgrim bless the Summers day,
But Courts, and Youth, and Ladies needs must praise
The Winters rain.

While Inuierno was thus speaking, enters the Spring or Primauera, attired
like a Nymph, a high tire on her head, Antike with knottes of fair hair, and
Cobweb Lawnes rising one above an other, garnished with Flowers to some height,
and behind, falling down in a pendant: an vpper-body of cloth of silver
florie, naked neck, and breast, decked with Pearls: a kertle of yellow cloth
of gold, brancht with leaves, a mantle of green and silver stuff, cut out in
leaves, white buskins tied with green ribands, fringed with flowers.

She ouertaking Inuierno, clappes him on the shoulder.

Primauera. Well overtaken Winter.


Inuierno? Primauera?

Inuierno. What Is that I see? why, how dare you approach?
In Ianus month, Do You mean to give the lie
To all the Almanackes that are come forth?
As if they had not lide enough besides,
Provoke me not, fly hence you wanton gerle,
Stay not one minute.

Primauera. Good old lad! I know you a merry one
Within doors: bluster not, I Will choose thee for
My Valentine, and tell thee tales and riddles
These liuelong nights: Thou Art ever borrowing
Some days of me, then let this one day pass,
Good frost-beard now. But stay, me thinks I see
The Trumpet of the Sun, he will stint this strife.

Gallus comes in Post, attired like a Post: in yellow damask doublet and
bases, the doublet close wings, cut like feathers, a Powch of carnation Satin,
wherein was his packet hung in a Bawdricke of the same, a pair of yellow
boots, spurs with one long prick like a Cock, a little Hatte of yellow
Damask, with a plume of red Feathers like a Crest.

Inuierno. Gallus mine own brave Bird! welcome in troth,
Thou art no peeping creature that attends
This gaudy wench, Thou wakest the feathered hours,
And call'st to labor, Tell us, what is the news?

Primauera. What, crest and spur! welcome, thou come in time,
Winter has almost given me the agew, faith
He is so bitter, but thou shall end our quarrel.

Gallus. Seasons both, God save you in your times,
I know you both so well, as if I should
Give leave for you to chirpe, and you to chat:
How you make all things green,
And you make all things fat.
Time would away: peace then, read this dispatch,
For I must back to my accustomed watch.

Winter reads the Letter. The Letter superscribed: To our faithful and
neuer-fayling Quarter-waiters, Inuierno, and Primauera.
We have taken knowledge of a Marriage to be solemized between two noble
Persons, in the principal Island of our universal Empire, unto which we are
pleased to do honor, and thereupon have directed our several Letters to you
the Seasons of the year to visit, and present them on your part. To this
purpose we would have you Inuierno to present them with such sports as are
commonly known by the name of Christmasse sports, or Carnaual sports: and you
Primauera, with sports of a more delicate nature, either of you according to
your quality. And for your better instruction and enablement toward the due
execution of this your Commission, We require you Inuierno, That whereas we
vnderstaad that Silenus has lately sent a Challenge to Kawasha, upon this
point, to maintain, That Wine is more worthy then Tobacco, and cheereth man's
spirit more, The same to be tried at two several weapons, Song, and Dance;
which Challenge the said Kawasha has also accepted, you take order that the
said Challenge be performed at this Marriage, taking your convenient time. And
we require you Primauera for your part, That whereas of ancient time there
were certain fair Youths turned into Flowers, which have so continued until
this time, that you deal with Flora by virtue of this Commission, That they be
now returned to Men, and present a Dance at this Marriage. Here of fail you
not.

Given at our Palace your Lord and Master, I, the Sun.
Postscript.
We have also directed our Letters to the Summer and the Harvest, the one to
present them with length of days, and the other with fruit, but those Letters
come with the next dispatch.






Antickemaske of the Song.
HEreupon they depart all three, and presently entered Silenus at alitle gate on
the right hand, mounted upon an artificial Ass, which sometimes being taken
with strain of the Music, did bow down his ears, and listen with great
attention, the trappings were of Iuie, attended by a Satyr for his Palfreueir,
who led the Ass.

At the same instant entered Kawasha, at the other little gate, riding upon a
Kowle-staffe, covered with a foote-cloth of pide stuff, borne upon two Indians
shoulders attired like Floridans.

Silenus an old fat man, attired in a crimson Satin Doublet, without wings,
collar, or skirts, a great panch, so as his Dublet, though drawn with a lace,
would not meet together by a handful, sleeves of cloth of Gold, bases and
gamashaes of the same, a red swollen face, with a bunched nose, gray beard, bald
head, prick ears, and little horns.

Kawasha had on his head a Nightcap of red cloth of gold, close to his skull,
tied under his chin, two holes cut in the top, out of which his ears
appeared, hung with two great Pendants, on the crown of his Cappe a Chimney, a
glass chain about his n^cke, his body and legs of Oliue-colour stuff, made
close like the skin, bases of Tobacco-colour stuff cut like Tobacco leaves,
sprinkled with orcedure, in his hand an Indian Bow and Arrows.

Before either of these went a Sergeant.

The Sergeant of Silenus carried a copper Mace, and a bunch of Grapes carved at
the upper end.

The Sergeant of Kawasha carried on his shoulder a great Tobacco Pipe, as big
as a Caliuer.

Before Silenus marched four singers, and behind him fiue-fidlers: Before and
behind Kawasha as many of each kind.

The Singers on Silenus part were a Miller, a Wine Cooper, a Vintners boy, a
Brewer.

His music, a Taber and a Pipe, a base Violin, a trebble Violin a Sagbut, a
Mandora.

Kawashaes Singers, a Skipper, a Fencer, a Peddler, a Barber.

His music, a Bobtaile, a blind Harper, and his boy, a base Violin, a
tenor-Cornet, a Sagbut.

Upon their entrance the Music on both sides played till they came to the
middle of the Stage.

Then Silenus Singers began his Catch, and so marched forward toward the
State.

The Catch.
Silenus. Ahay, for and a hoe,
Lets make this great Potan
Drink off Silenus kan:
And when that he well drunk is,
Return him to his Munkeis,
From whence he came.

Then Kawashaes side answered.

Kawasha. Ahay, for and a hoe,
We Will make Silen fall down,
And cast him in a sown,
To see my men of Ire,
All snuffing, puffing smoke and fire,
Like fell Dragon.

The Freemans Song.
Silenus. Kawasha comes in majesty,
Was never such a God as he,
He is come from a far Country,
To make our Noses a chimney.

Cho. Silenus Ass does leere to see
His well appointed company.

The Fiddlers of Silenus frumpled over the last verses.

Kawasha. The Wine takes the contrary way,
To get into the hood:
But good Tobacco makes no stay,
But seizes where it shood.
More incense has burn
At great Kawashaes foot,
Then to Dilen and Bacchus both,
And take in Jove to boot.
Therefore do yield,

Cho. And quit the field,
Or else I Will smoke ye.

These verses frumpled over by the Music of Kawasha.

Silenus. The Worthies they were nine, it is true,
And lately Arthurs Knights I knew,
But now are come up Worthies new,
The Roaring Boys Kawashaes crew.

Cho. But if Silenus Ass should bray,
It Would make them roar and run away.
Silenus tappes the Barrel, but
Tobacco tappes the Brain,
And makes the vapors fine and soote,
That man reuiues again.
Nothing but fumigation
Does chase away ill spirits,
Kawasha and his Nation
Found out these holy rites:
Therefore do yield,
And quit the field,
Or else I Will smoke ye.

This Song all join and sing. Ahay, for and a hoe,
Tee Ass still looks ascaunce a,
But strife in Song,
It is too long,
Lets end it in a dance a.
After the Song ended, they marched all out in the same order they came in,
their Music playing.

Then entered the Anticke-maske of Dance, consisting on Silenus side of a
Pantalon Curtezan. Swisse and his wife. Usurer Midwife. Smugge and his wench.
Kawashaes of a Fretelyne Bawd. Roaring Boy Citizen. Mountebancke Iewesse of
Portugal. Chimney sweeper and his wench.


The Dance ended, the loud Music sounded. The Trauers being drawn, was
seen a Garden of a glorious and strange beauty, cast into four quarters, with
a cross walk and allies, compassing each quarter. In the middle of the cross
walk, stood a goodly Fountain raised on four columns of Silver. On the
tops whereof stood four statues of silver, which supported a bole, in
circuit containing four and twenty foot, and was raised from the ground nine
foot in height, in the middle whereof upon scrowles of silver and gold was
placed a Globe garnished with four golden Maske-heads, out of the which issued
water into the bole, above stood a golden Neptune, in height three foot,
holding in his hand a Trident, and riding on a Dolphin so cunningly framed,
that a River seemed to stream out of his mouth.

The Garden walls were of brick artificially painted in Perspectiue, all along
which were placed fruit trees with artificial leaves and fruit.

The Garden within the wall was rayled about with rayles of three foot high,
adorned with Ballesters of Silver, between which were placed pedestalls,
beautified with transparent Lights of variable colors, upon the Pedestalls
stood silver columns, upon the tops whereof were personages of gold, Lions
of gold, and Unicorns of silver, every personage and beast did hold a torchet
burning that gave light and luster to the whole fabrique.

Every quarter of the Garden was finely hedged about with a low hedge of
Cipresse and Juniper: The knottes within set with artificial green herbs,
embelished with all sorts of artificial Flowers. In the two first quarters
were two Piramides garnished with gold and silver, and glistering with
transparent lights, resembling Carbuncles, Saphires, and Rubies. In every
corner of each Quarter were great pottes of. Iilliflowers, which shadowed
certain lights placed behind them, and made a resplendent and admirable luster.

The two further quarters were beautified with Tulipaes of diverse colors, and
in the Middle, and in the Corners of the said quarters were set great tufts of
several kinds of Flowers, receiving luster from secret lights placed behind
them.

At the farther end of the Garden was a Mount raised by degrees, resembling
banks of earth, covered with grass: on the top of the Mount stood a goodly
Arbor substantially made and covered with artificial trees, and with arbor
flowers, as Eglantine, Honnysuckles, and the like.

The Arbor was in length three and thirty foot, in height one and twenty,
supported with terms of gold and silver, it was divided into six double
arches, and three doors answerable to the three walks of the Garden. In the
middle part of the Arbor rose a goodly large Turret, and at either end a
smaller.

Upon the top of the Mount, on the front thereof was a bank of Flowers,
curiously painted, behind which within the Arches the Maskers sat unseen.

Behind the Garden over the top of the Arbor were set artificial trees
appearing like an Orchard joining to the Garden, and over all was drawn in
perspectiue, a firmament like the Skies in a clear night.

Upon a grassy seat under the Arbor sat the Garden-Gods, in number twelve,
apparrelled in long roabes of green rich taffata, Cappes on their heads, and
chaplets of Flowers.

In the midst of them sat Primauera, at whose entreaty they descended to the
Stage, and marching up to the King, sung to Lutes and Theorboes.

The Song that induced the Charm.
CANT. 1.
Give place you ancient powers,
That turned men to Flowers,
For never Writers pen,
Yet told of Flowers returned to Men.
Cho.
But miracles of new event,
Follow the great Sun of our firmament.
The Charm.
Hearken ye fresh and springing Flowers,
The Sun shines full upon your earth,
Disclose out of your shady bowers,
He will not blast your tender birth:
Descend you from your hill,
Take spirit at his will,
No Flowers, but flourish still.
The Charm ended, the Gods retire to their places, the loud Music again
sounded. The banks of flowers softly descending and vanishing, the Maskers, in
number thirteen appeared, seated in their Arches, apparrelled in doublets and
round hose of white satin, long white silk stockings, white satin pumpes.
The doublet richly imbrodered in curious panes with imbossed flowers of silver,
the panes bordered with imbrodery of carnation silk and silver. The hose cut
in panes answerable to the embroderie of the doublets. The skirtes of the
doublets embrodered and cut into Lillies flowers, and the wings set forth with
flowers of several colors, made in silk, and frosted with silver, ruff
bands, edged with a lace of carnation silk and silver, spangled very thick,
and stuck full of flowers of several kinds, fair vizards and tresses,
delicate Cappes of silk and silver flowers of sundry kinds, with plumes of
the same, in the top whereof stuck a great bunch of Egrets. Every Maskers
pump fastened with a flower suitable to his cappe; on their left arms a white
skarfe fairly embrodered sent them by the Bride, and on their hands a rich
pair of embrodered gloves, sent them by the Bridegroom.

The loud Music ceasing, the Maskers descend in a gallant March through three
several doors of the Arbor to the three several Allies of the Garden,
marching till they all met in the middle Allie under the Fountain, and from
thence to the Stage, where they fell into their first measure.

That ended, the Priests descend again, and sung the second Song.

The Song referring to the Device of the Transforming.
CANT. 2.
THrice happy Flowers,
Your leaves are turned into fine hair,
Your stalks to bodies straight and fair,
Your sprigges to limbs, as once they were,
Your verdure to fresh blood, your smell
To breath, your bloomes your seedy Cell,
All have a lovely parallel.
Cho.
The Nimphs that on their heads did wear you,
Henceforth in their hearts will bear you.
That done, they dance their second measure, after which follows the third
Song, referring to the Ladies.

CANT. 3.
OF creatures are the flowers (fair Ladies)
The prettiest, if we shall speak true,
The Earths Coronet, the Suns Babies,
Enamild cups of Heavens sweet dew,
Your fairer hands have often blessed them,
When your Needles have expressed them.
Chapter
Therefore though their shapes be changed,
Let not your favors be estranged.
This ended, they took their Ladies, with whom they daunced Measures,
Corantoes, Durettoes, Moriscoes, Galliards.

Then was sung the fourth Song, having reference to the King.

CANT. 4.
ALl things return with Time,
But seldom do they higher clime
Yet virtue sovereign
Mends al things, as they come again;
This I Will was Britain in times past,
But then was Britiain rude and waste,
But now is Britain fit to be,
A seat for a fifth Monarchy.
Offer we to his high deserts,
Cho.
Praises of truth, incense of hearts,
By whom each thing with gain reuerts.
Then they daunced their parting Measure, at the end whereof followed this last
Song, having reference to the married couple.

Lovely couple, Seasons two,
Have performed what they can do,
If the Gods inspire our Song,
The other two will not stay long,
Receive our Flowers with gracious hand,
As a small wreathe to your Garland.
Flowers of honor, Flowers of beauty,
Are your own, we only bring
Flowers of affection, Flowers of duty.
The Mask ended, it pleased his Majesty to call for the Anticke-Maske of Song
and Dance. which was again presented; and then the Maskers uncovered their
faces, and came up to the State, and kissed the King, and Queen, and Princes
hand, with a great deal of grace and favor, and so were invited to the
Banquet.

Selenas side first. MEDIVS.
^AHey, * ahey, for and ahoe, * weell make this great potan Drink of Si --
lenas Can. And when that he well drunk is, well drunk is, Weel turn him to his
Munkies, From whence he came.

Silenas. CONTRATENOR.
^AHey, * for and ahoe, * Weel make this great potan Drink of Sile -- nas Can,
And when that he well drunk is, * weell turn him to his Munkies from whence
he came.

Silenas. TENOR.
^AHey, for and ahoe, * weell make this great potan Drink of Silenas Can, And
when that he well drunk is, * Weell turn him to his Munkies, From whence he
came.

Silenas. BASSVS.
^AHey, for and ahoe, weell make this great potan Drink of Silenas Can, And
when that he well drunk is, * * * Weell turn him, * to his Munkies, From
whence he came.

Kawasha's side, first time. MEDIVS.
^AHey, * ahey for and ahoe, * weel make Silen fall down, And cast him in
asowne, To see his men of Iere, All snuffing, puffing smoke and fire, Like
fell Dragoune.

Kawasha's. CONTRATENOR.
^AHey, * for and a -- hoe, * weel make Silen fall down, And cast him in a
sown, To see his men of Iere, * All snuffing, puffing smoke and fire, Like
fell Dragoune.

Kawasha's. TENOR.
^AHey, for and ahoe, * weel make Si -- len fall down, And cast him in a
sown, To see his men of Iere, * All snuffing, puffing smoke and fire, Like
fell Dra -- goune.

Kawasha's. BASSVS.
^AHey, for and ahoe, weell make Silen fall down, And cast him in a sown, To
see his men of Iere, * * * All snuffing, puffing smoke and fire, Like fell
Dragoune.

Silenas side, second time. MEDIVS.
^ KAwashe comes in Majesty, Was never such a God as he: He is come from a far
Country, To make our noses a chimney. * Silenas Ass does liere to see This
well appointed company.

Silenas. CONTRATENOR.
^ KAwashe comes in Ma -- iestie, Was never such a God as he: He is come from a
far Country, to make our noses a chimney. * Silenas Ass does liere to see
This well appointed company.

Silenas. TENOR.
^ KAwashe comes in Majesty, Was never such a God as he: He is come from a
far Country, To make our nose a chimney, * Silenas Ass does liere to see
This well appointed company.

Silenas. BASSVS.
^ KAwashe comes in Majesty, Was never such a God as he: He is come from a
far Country, To make our nose a chimney, * Silenas Ass does liere to see
This well appointed company.

Kawasha's side, second time. MEDIVS.
^MOre Incense has been burned at great Kawa -- sha's foot, Then to Silen and
Bachus both, and take in Jove to boot: Wherefore do yield, and quit the field.

Kawasha's. CONTRATENOR.
^MOre Incense has been burned at great Kawasha's foot, Then to Si -- len and
Bachus both, and take in Jove to boot: Wherefore do yield and quit the field.

Kawasha's. TENOR.
^MOre Incense has been burned at great Kawasha's foot, Then to Silen and
Bacchus both, and take in Jove to boot: Wherefore do yield, and quit the field.

Kawasha's. BASSVS.
^MOre Incense has been burned at great Kawasha's foot, Then to Silen and
Bacchus both, and take in Jove to boot: Wherefore do yield and quit the field.

All together. MEDIVS.
^AHey, * ahey, for and ahoe, * the Ass looks yet a -- sconce -- a: But
strife in Song, Will be too long, Let Us end it in a dance -- a. * But strife,
etc.

All together. CONTRATENOR.
^AHey, ahey, for and ahoe, * the Ass looks yet asconce -- a: But strife in
Song, Will be too long, Let Us end it in a dance -- a. * But, etc.

All together. TENOR.
^AHey, for and ahoe, * the Ass looks yet asconce -- a: But strife in Song,
Will be too long, Let Us end it in a dance -- a. * But, etc.

All together. BASSVS.
^AHey, for and ahoe, the Ass looks yet a -- sconce -- a: But strife in Song,
Will be too long, Let Us end it in a dance -- a. * But, etc.

FINIS.

