A HANDFVL OF ESSAIES. OR Imperfect Offers:

By W: MASON Master of Arts.

Neque Imperiale est libertatem dicendi negare, neque Sacerdotale quod sentiat,
non dicere: Ambr. Epist. 17. LONDON Printed by Aug. Mathewes for John Grismand,
and are to be Sold in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1621.

Essaies.
1 OF Disloyalty. 2 Of Sermon-hearers 3 Of Atheism. 4 Of Parents. 5 Of the
Commons. 6 Of Bribing. 7 Of Usury. 8 Of Pride. 9 Of Covetousness. 10 Of the
deay of Hospitality. 11 Of Glutony and Drunckennesse. 12 Of ill gotten Goods.
13 Of Whooredome. 14 Of Idleness. 15 Of Cosenage. 16 Of Swearing and
Forswearing. 17 Of Bad Company. 18 Of Envy. 19 Of Flatterers.
A HANDFVL OF ESSAIES.
1 Of Disloyalty.
WHat our friends counsel us, is left unto our own discretion, to do or leave
undone* but what a Religious Prince commands, that of force must be
performed; It is well said of Samuel, that Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, for as the Witch knowing the Devil to be the Father of lies, yet
will trust him: So the disobedient knowing, that he owes all good loyalty to
the King, will yield none unto him: These have made mercy a warrant for sin,
which is only a warning from sinning, busying themselves (with Haman) to
provide their own gallows: Zimry, who slew his master, had no peace; the
Earth cloue asunder, and swallowed up rebellious Corah and his faction, it was
at once an executioner and a grave unto them: Plutarch well observes, that all
those who had any hand in the conspiracy against Caesar, did come to bloody
ends; and Cassius one of the conspirators, slew himself with the same Dagger
wherewith he wounded Caesar.

They that resist shall receive to themselves judgment, Romans 13. 2. acquirunt
sibi damnationem, as the vulgar reads it; they do not only receive, but pull
upon themselves heavy judgments; Kings are Gods by deputation: he who
resists their authority resists Gods ordinance, for the powers that be, are
ordained of God. Traianus is commended for that saying of his, when he gave
the sword unto a chief Officer. Hoc pro me vtere, si iusta imperauero, contra
me si iniusta: Yet David would not lay violent hands upon Saul (though none of
the best Kings) because he was the Lords anointed. The rule of Augustine is
good, Bonus si fuerit qui tibi praeest nutritor, tuus est, malus si fuerit
tentator, tuus est, and nutrime^ta libenter accipe and in tentatione approbare:
Ser. 6. dev. D: sec. Mat. So there must be no rebelling: good Governors we must
obey willinglingly, bad ones we must endure patiently: Gods ordinance must not
be resisted, no not for the personable crimes of those who supply the seat of
Justice, but rather be obeyed, because they bear divinity about the^, and the
sparks of Gods Majesty remains in some measure in every Maiestrate.

The image and superscription of a Prince stamped in base metal is current
among his Subjects, as well as that which is made in the finest silver, though
indeed it be not so precious. Saint Peter 1. 2. 18. admonishes servants, and
under that title Subjects, to be obedient in all fear, not only, to the good
and gracious, but also, to the froward. Julian was an infidel Emperor, an
Apostata, an Idolater, yet the Christian Soldiers served the Infidel Emperor;
but when he would have them worship Idols, they preferred God before him: In
such a case it is better to obey God then man: Aug
Hic contemn potestatem, timendo potestatem. But when Julian led those
Soldiers against an enemy, they presently obeyed him, propter Domiuum eternum
subditi etiam erant domino temporali: Aug. de Psalm. 124. If nothing plucketh
down sooner then that which promises an untimely end; Let no man think that
God will leave that unpunished in us, which he has not pardoned in our betters.

2 Of Sermon-hearers.
I Observe three sorts of Sermon-hearers, one of which, I may not unfitly call
indifferent professors; these walk (like Nicodemus) in the twilight of their
Infolded Faith, and not unlike that white liuered Jew, Ioh. 9. which chose
rather to conceal his knowledge of Christ then to be put out of the
Sinagogue; and so it fares with every lanus in Religion. These have good cause
to pray, that by their wilful blindness they fall not with Judas into that
everlasting night, whilst for their evening repentance, their be found with
God no place of acceptance. These Heare-Sermons, as travelers in the time of
the Law, might take Grapes, eat some for the present time, but carry away none
with them.

A second sort are such, as being tempestiously carried with the violence of
their own affections, do come to Church, as did the Athenians, to hear
news, whose itching ears would have scratching doctrine; they think not the
word of God to be his power to salvation, except it be delivered by a
Chaplain of their own choosing.

Such Ammons of the people cannot be persuaded to let any cakes go down but
those of Thamars baking. If others look but into the Pulpit, presently they
cry out against him as those did against Paul. Quid vult seminilegus dicere;
They hold it lawful to check their Teacher, as they taunt their Tailor, if
he fit them not with a Sermon of the fashion.

The last in place, but the first in price, are zealous Protestants, who being
backed by the Holy Ghost, do resemble their Father Abraham, with a fire in one
hand, and a knife in the other, to figure their full resolution, to affect what
God affects, having their hearts bleeding at their eyes in sorrow for their
sins.

If a Raven bring these men food with Elias, they will receive and eat it. Dum
cadunt eundo, cauent cadendo: they loose not the faculty of going, but learn
to look better to their feet by falling: though their brains should be
beaten out of their heads, yet the justifying Faith is never banished out of
their hearts. They are as willing to suffer evil, as to receive good at the
hands of God: else were they guilty of charging God foolishly; like good
N^aboth they are ready and willing to defend the Vine with their heart-blood:
whilst others (being but Comedians in Religion) act in voice and gesture divine
virtues, but in the course of their lives renounce the persons and parts they
play: These with Simeon take Christ in their arms by Faith, and carry him
about in their lives by a holy conversation, having learned that the practike
knowledge of the Scriptures, is the perfect knowledge of them, and the art of
doing that saues the soul.

3. Of Atheism.
A Theisme not daring to say with Rabsaketh that our God deceives us, as an
Imposture, like envy creeps closely, where it dares not appear openly: In
cord dixit insipiens non est Deus: Diagoras was but a fool for saying so; if
he had but asked the heavens they would have told him that they are the work
of Natures God. The world is a fair table wherein God has drawn and imprinted
himself in so many Charrecters and legible letters, as the simplest man living
may read and understand the same, and by the greatness of the beauty of the
creature may the Creator thereof be seen and known. Those who in old time
were accounted Atheists, some of them rather iested at the falsehood and number
of their own Idols, then denied the being of one true God. Socrates, who was
pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo to be the wisest man of all, was put to
death for jesting at the number and multitude of Gods amongst the Heathens.
Though there be some such fools which suffer their hearts to be divorced from
the know

self is unfruitful, and like the Vine unproven, runs forth into many
superfluous stemmes and branches: nothing on man's part but a holy and virtuous
education can make it fruictifie; goodness, although it may be repaired in our
selves, yet it cannot be propagated unto ours: very seldom do men see the
sons of excellent men, excellent: vice is propagated not virtue: Even the
clearest grain sends forth that chafe from which it was fanned before the
sowing.

Yet many Parents take more care to leave their Children rich in goods then in
goodness, by reason whereof, their riches make them retchlesse; For coming to
their Inheritance too young, their heads being as full of folly, as their
purses of money, They (like the Prodigal Son) consume all in riotous living:
so giving their Parents just cause to complain, as Tiberius once did of his
Son Caligula, that he had brought him up to be the ruin of his House. This
mischief, good and Religious education will help to prevent: Socrates
confesses that with the study of Philosophy he had made dull and blunt his
dishonest inclinations; those infectious and venomous qualities which are in
the springs of youth, the falt of good education will help to cure: for want
of this, Parents, who have named their Sons Caine, a Possession, in the end
find them to be Abell, Loss and Vanity.

5. Of the Commons.
POpulari vento nihil inconstantius; for the Commons (as unstable as
quicksiluer) fawning on a man will make him a King to day, and a Beggar to
morrow: Seianus in the forenoone was so favored and followed by the people,
that they would have made him their Caesar, yet hated him so much in the
afternoon, that they sent him as a malefactor unto prison; The same Antiochus
was at one time saluted both (...) and (...) a glorious Prince, and a furious
Tirant. Homer (as blind as he was) saw as much; he compares the disposition
of the common people to the standing corn, there comes a puff of wind and
blows it all on the one side, there comes another blast and swayes it as much
on the other side. It is a fit comparison made by that Kingly Prophet: It is
the Lord that stilleth the rage of the Sea, the noise of the waves, and the
madness of the people. Psalm: 65. Agreeing therein with the Prophet Esaias, Chap:
17. 12. Where the nature of the people is compared to the billows of the
working-sea that cannot rest; so easily set agog, so delighted with novelties,
so full of alteration and chang are the affections of the common people: The
Mariner may as well wrap up the wind in his saile-cloth, and keep it for
another voyage, as the Prince can manage the untamed multitude; those mouths
which cried, Hosanna, at the first, cried out ere long, Crucifige.

6. Of bribing.
THe best Governors are not all-seeing Gods, for Gehezi will have a bribe,
though he serve a most reverend Master, of him none can expect a blessing,
until with Isaac he has felt your hands; all his senses being turned into
feeling: He speaks to poor suitors, as that old strumpet in Plautus did to a
worneout Customer of hers, (who asked days of payment for his pleasure)
oculatae nostrae sunt manus, credunt quod vident: people of our trade have eyes
in their hands, they believe nothing but what they see. Petty Officers diue
deep into poor suitors purses, for spinning out a short subject into a long
matter, they do bring in a large reckoning for much needelesse writing; And
yet as timesellers, the Clarke causes the poor Clyent to pay for expedition
too, when the suite has depended seven years before: This often causes both
an ebb and a flood both in an hour, the emptying of the Clyents purse, being
the full, filling of the Clerks, who like Gehezi when he receives a bribe,
belieues he receives a blessing: but as there lay a curse under Gehezi his
hoping for blessing (as he felt to his own cost, when the Leprosy of Naaman
cleaued unto him,) So there is a curse under their blessing; For fire (as Job
speaks) shall devour the houses of bribes, Job. 15. 34. It was a worthy
answer made by the Heathenish Prince Tiberius to a polling Customer of his,
that thought to have highly pleased him with racking his subjects, and exacting
great sums: Meum tonderi pecus volo non deglubi: It is the property of these
underhand dealers to pretend great husbandry for their Masters, and double
diligence in their service.

Under which color they practice their iniquity without check or
controulement, I refer such to that threatening of the Lord in the Prophet. I
will visit all those that stand upon the threshold so proudly, which fill their
Masters houses by cruelty and deceit: Zephan: 1. 9. The Throne of King Solomon
had Lions carved about it to declare a kind of Majesty and gravity in the
steps of it; not Ravens, not Wolves, Birds and Beasts of prey. So should
great men's servants, and Officers of Justice, be Lions in show for gravity;
yet harmeles as those Images about Salomons Seat, rather terrible to them that
stand aloof, then hurtful to any who have occasion to come near.

7. Of Usury.
THis sin of unlawful getting unlawful gain is as the forbidden Tree; for
men having many honest Trades to get their living by Gods ordinance, yet they
use indirect means, turning the Princes tolleration into an imparatiue law,
like them Math: 19. Who said unto our Savior, Moses commanded, when of force
he was feign to suffer diuorcements to avoid further inconneniences. This
sin is like Salomons loving of strange women. 1. Reg: both estrange men and
turn their hearts from the love of God, and enrich their bodies with the sin
of their souls; for Faenus pecuniae, funus animae. This is he who makes
something of nothing, mauger the head of natural Philosophy; for he makes
that breed and increase, which by nature is barren and unapt to increase.
Basil terms Usury a beast of a strange and monsterous nature, because in
bringing forth it differs from other Creatures, which he shows because
other creatures have a time to bring forth perfect young, but the usurers money
is borne to day, and to day begins to bring forth. They say hat Hares (says
Basil: Hom: aduers. vsur.) at one time do litter, give suck, and are with
young. So the Usurers money at one time is put to usury, and borne, and breeding.

Albeit this sin is contrary to the fear of God, Levit: 25. 36. and 15. A
forgetting of God. Ezech 22. 12. Albeit it shuts out from Gods Tabernacle, Ps:
15. And excludes from Eternal Life, and made subject to Eternal Death,
Ezech: 18. 13. Yet hitherto all labor has bin lost in washing this blackemore.

8. Of Pride.
Our Savior said that silken raiment was in Kings Courts, but now it is in
every private house where costly attire is used as a net to catch King Salomons
fools; Pride (like a Dog) has licked up all the outcast fashions that every
Nation has vomited.

If his Majesty should banish (as did Licurgus) all inuenters of new fashions,
I think the Land would be much unpeopled, The Proverb was, the garment must
be well made, that shall please all; but now it is, the garment must be well
made that shall please any at all.

Men now have as much labor to clothe their Wives, as Mercury had to cloth the
Moon; Send they must to the Indians for Silk to apparel them, for Pearls
(the excretions of Shel-fish) to adorn the^; for Smells (the excrements of
beasts) to fume and sent them; for Gold, (Iliaterrae) to deck and lace them;
forgetting themselves to be Daughters of Adam, whom God at first turned out in a
plain leather Suit.

And if any of these be challenged for their excessive pride; they answer (as
Iulia did) wittily, but not wisely; they have a care of their husbands credit.
In the mean time, it robs the Master of his money, the Mistres of her
honesty* for these fleeces of vanity are banners of Pride and nests of lust,
one wears a loosebodied gown, an other a gown with a loose body: Sometime
the Husband is proud of his welath, like Haman, whose pride ended on a high
pair of Gallows: sometime of his wife, as Assuerus was of Vasthi for her
beauty.

The Scripture mentions but of one who painted her face, and soon after the
dogs eat her; nor but two, who wore long hair, and it was the destruction of
them both, which proves the Proverb true, that which men make their chief
felicity, does often prove their heavy desteny; Let no man fashion himself
like unto this world: howsoever foolish men (like Ierobo^m,) worship a golden
Calfe; yet man, not God looks on the outward appearance. He who with Jacob
desires to get the better blessing of our heavenly Father; must (as Hagar was
commanded) humble himself: there is no nearer way to heaven, no not for
Princes; for God resists the proud: God and pride cannot dwell in the same
mind* which could not dwell in the same heaven: and pride once fallen from
heaven, ascends no more from whence it is fallen.

9. Of Covetousness.
IF we may not trust in the person or power of Princes, who are styled Gods,
much less should man's confidence consist in their silver pictures, seeing they
either leave us suddenly like Crates coin, or Jobs substance; Or we them, as
did that ouerioyed Penny-father. Luk: 1^.

The wisest King did well compare the eager holding of wealth to a sore
sickness, which brings pain to the party and grief to his good friends, God
made the world of naught because men should set it at naught not choking
themselves with too much, nor suffering others to pine with want, but the
covetous not seeing what God has in store for them, they take beforehand what
the world offers them, not caring how they get so they have their desire.

The wealth of these men is unto them, as the wings of the Grassehopper
wherewith she cannot fly. It fares with these men as it does with the
Sea-Eagle, Cum far quod coepit nequeat in gurgitem demergitur, being not able
to lift up that which she fastened on, she is drawn under water and drowned:
Dum vultesse prado, fit praeda. Aug: of the covetous; of all, he is the most
miserable man in the world; God abhorres him, he speaks good says David of
the covetous whom God abhors: for the covetous man is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5,
5. He adores graven Images in his coin, Sculpturam ipsius nummi colit: Heron:
in Loc: Others worship Aurum in imagine, but the covetous does adore aurum in
aerugine. So Saint James speaks. Your Gold and Silver is cankered, and the
rust of them shall be a witness against you. Iam: 5. 3. Heaven gates stand
fast bard against him, amongst those who shall not inherit the Kingdom of
heaven. Saint Paul reckons Covetous, 1. Cor. 6. 10. the Swallows dung of
this world does so blind his eyes: that as he seeks not, so he sees not
the way to the Kingdom of God. Fulgentius in his Fable of Midas (who desired
Apollo, that every thing he touched might instantly be turned into gold) is
so called in Greek, Mida Quasi (...), because covetousness has so blinded his
eyes that he cannot perceive what is for his own good, nor see to enter that
Needles eye of Gods Kingdom: Men hate him, because he is nemini bonus, good to
no man, He loves to Rake, the Shouell he cannot endure, All his days he
eats in darkness. Ecc. 5. 16.

Sleep he would but cannot, Et motae ad Lunam trepidabit arundinis vmbram:
His saciety will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5. 11. If he saw a greater
man then himself in the day time, he thinks on him in the night, and fears
he will oppress him* if he saw a poorer then himself, he cannot sleep, for
fear he should rob him: Out of these fears he starts up, and asks, whether
the doors be barred, where be the Keys? at the least noise he calls up his
servant, sends him then forth, bolts the door after him, and then studieth
whether it were better to keep within doors, or go forth and see.

Eat he may, but will not, one good meal, but at his neighbors table: corpus
extenuat, vt lucrum extendat; he fears to eat, because he fears in
Albertus, which dares not eat of the earth, for fear he should want earth to
eat.

If he eateh it is commonly of the worst and coursest, like the Bakers boy,
though he has White bread in his basket, yet himself feeds upon brown.
Amongst his many wishes, one is (that Camelion like) he could live by the
air: nothing can more vex him then to hear that Corn falls, or that there
is store of Danske Rye, then could he hang himself, but that he is unwilling
to cast away a little money to buy a Cord. What he enjoys never contents him:
Like another Ahab, he is ficke of his next neighbors field: though his mouth
be full of Silver, yet like Peter's Fish he is still biting, still gaping to get
more.

His greedy affections are like unto Pharaohs lean Kyne, of whom the Text
says, When they had eaten up the fatt, it could not be known that they had
eaten them, but they were still as euill-fauoured as they were at the
beginning: Gens. 41. 21. Unto wealth he esteems no way (whether it be of
fraud or violence) to be indirect, for Gain is his godliness: if* he have
goods enough, he thinks he is good enough. Trust him with the poores stock,
and like Judas he will rob the poor: If he be then to cloth them, he will
do as Hanun did with David's servants, 2. Sam. 10. Cut off their Garments by
the middle and reserve the rest for a horsemans Coat for himself when he
rides to the Devil.

Until this earthworme come unto the earth, he minds nothing but earthly
things, like a Swine he never does good till his death: as an Apprentices box
of earth, apt he is to take all, but to restore none till he be broken: And
having made many beggars by Usury and oppression in his life; at his death he
will command his Executor to build some Hospital, as a monument of his bloody
devotion: After he has bought and sold Christ, he will buy a Field to bury
strangers in: I fear this man, whilst with Shemei he runs after his
servants, his riches, in forbidden ways, in the end will loose himself.

10. Of the decay of Hospitality.
IT was St: August: complaint long ago, and men may now take it up: Religio
peperit diuitias et filia deuor auit matrem: For many Professors in these times
have made all the body a tongue, Ostentantes non Ostendentes pietatem, Abraham
said not to the rich man, Memento quod rapuisti, sed quod accepisti: So that
the evil using of what they have shall be a witness against them, who
notwithstanding their great profession, are but blessed thistles and have
suffered their hands to mock their tongues: There is great reason that they
should do more good then others; who have received more goods then others.
Unto whom-soeuer much is given, of him shall be much required, Luk: 12. 48.
Moisture was not given unto springs that they should remain in the places
where they were bred, but to be conveyed by Conduits to the watering of barren
and dry grounds.

And Plato that Divine Philosopher, had this conceit, that Nature at the first
was delivered of two Daughters, Plenty and Poverty, to this end, that the one
needing might crave what she lacked, and the other abounding might supplye all
that wanted. Dives factus est propter pauperem, et pauper propter diuitem,
pauperis est rogare, diuitis erogare* August: It is observed of Joseph of Arim
athea who buried our Savior, that he was a rich man, and the reason why our
Savior would be buried by the hands of a rich man, was, to teach rich men
that they above all others are bound to liberality and works of mercy, because
God above others has blessed them with wealth, and plenty.

A duty too much forgotten by many men who N^abal-like, live, as if they were
only borne to themselves and their Families. The Jack has turned John out of
doors; where in the former times (as at the poole of Bethesda) the Orphan, and
the Widdowe, and the poor have found comfort and relief: now (as to Lazarus
at the rich man's gates) there is not any one to give them crummes, for many
have left fair houses without any dwellers in them; The poor must tread
their Winepresse, and yet be a thirst, they find no more taste in them then in
the white of an egg, Cum fame cruciantur Christi pau^ peers, effusis
largitatibus nutriunt histriones, said Gregory of some in his time; their like
we have in ours, who when the poor are pinched with famine, they wastfully
spend their substance on Rymers and Players; This is not dispensare, but
dissipare, bona domini: the creatures by them abused, the pot, the pillowe, the
candle will accuse them that they have bin unjust Stewards. These men should
imitate Job, as he did the Eagle, who is so honorable that he eats not his
prey alone: the thing that keeps rich men from giving, is a faithless fear
that they should lack before they die, When David never saw the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.

But so good is God unto them, that he takes them away in the midst of
their Mammon, ridding them of what they are afraid of, and providing for
posterity what they have need of. The Widdowe of Sarepta might have answered
Elias with her own want, The Macedonians might have pleaded against St. Paul,
that they had sufficient poor of their own to receive their relief; but
without delay these did minister to their necessities; knowing well; hoc est
hominem occidere, vitae, ei subsidia denegare. This it was that made our
forefathers so open-handed as they were: with that good Samaritan they never
passed by any wounded man, without some compassion.

To do good, and to distribute, to lodge strangers they were not forgetful,
for thereby some have received Angels into their houses unawares, Heb. 13. 2.
They knew, Non quod abstulerit aliena, sed quod non donarit sua, the rich
Glutton is not tormented in hell, for that he did hurt, but because he did not
help poor Lazarus: when he did beg a drop of water in Hell to cool his
tongue, God would not hear him, because when Lazarus begged of him on earth,
he would not help nor reliue him; Audiant ista diuites qui nolunt esse
misericordes; Audiant irrogari supplicia, qui nolunt erogare subsidia. Give
unto every man that asks, is our Saviors counsel, Luke 6. 30.

Plenty shall furnish the Table, where Charity takes away, and gives to the
poor. Rich men's goods (like those five Barlye Loaves and two Fishes which that
little boy did bear John 6.) Clausa onerabunt, reclusa recreabunt: He who
demands mercy, and shows it not, is like unto him who ruins a Bridge, over
which he himself is to pass.

11 Of Gluttony and Drunkenness.
ALthough pot Companions be seldom good Trencher-men, yet here I will yoke
these beasts together, they both usurping Sobrieties Kingdom, as Adoniah did
Salomons. There are in this Land an infinite number of these vain persons,
which pass under the title of true Trojans and boon Companions: They will pay
their Host for their superfluous drink, sooner then for any other debt;
whereby it comes to pass, that when money fails, they can drink upon their
credit, chalk being as good payment with them as ready money. Their first
Sacrifice is offered to Bacchus, they will be in the Tavern, or
Tipling-house, before they come to Gods house.

These think no Wine good which is brought over two thresholds; Amongst them
there is a kind of accursed emulation, for the expert drunkard, counts it a
great disgrace that another should be druncke before him, Mensuras sine
mensura; Measures are now drunck without measure, healths without health.
Habebitur aliquando ebrietati honor, et plurimum meri cepisse, virtus erit,
said Seneca long since, the time shall come when honor shall be ascribed unto
drunkenness, and to drinck much wine shall be held a virtue, that time is come,
non hahet vlterius quod nostris potibus addat posteritas, there are those of
whom we may say that which was spoken of the Emperor Bonosus, Non vt viuat
natus est, sed vt bibat. He it was who (having strangled himself with a
halter) was thus iested at by the people. Amphoram pendere, non hominem: But
woe to those who rise up early to follow drunckennesse: Esai: 5. 11. Crates
throwing his money into the Sea said, I will drown thee, that I may not be
drowned of thee.

But Drunckards so drown their money, that themselves are drowned with it, Dum
absorbet vinum absorbetur a vino. Amongst these accusationis occasio est (said
Hierom long since) adiuratum per Caesarem frequentius non bibisse; Who will not
be druncke for Caesar, is thought no friend to Caesar.

Our Savior seeks to beat men from this sin with a take-heede unto your
selves. Luk: 21. 34. For this sin robbes a man of himself, and lays a beast
in his room. Noah's nakedness is seen in his Wine, drunckennes does both
make imperfections, and show those we have to the eyes of every scoffing
Cham: To whom is strife, To whom is woe? says Solomon, Even to those who tarry
long at the Wine: Prou: ^3. 29. For Drunckards are commonly quarrelsome.
Bacchus (termed by the Heathens the God of Wine) is painted with horns, to
signify that drunken men are ever pushing and quarrelling. Men herein are
like Elephants, If once made druncke, they presently grow angry, and fall a
fighting: Alexander in his cups killed his dear friend Clitus: Saint Aug: ad
fratres eremo. sermon: 33. reports of a young man the son of Cyrillus, who
being drunk, ravished his Mother, killed his Father, and wounded two of his
Sisters unto the death. Nunquam egoebrium putabo castum, said Jerome; A
drunckard will soon become wanton. Saint Paul, having persuaded from gluttony
and drunckennesse, Rom: 13. 13. Adds withal, neither in chambering and
wantonness, noting that these birds of a feather will fly together, for
pascitur libido conuiuijs nutritur delicijs, vino accenditur ebrietate
inflammatur. He that could not be tainted with uncleanness in Sodom, was
overtaken with Incest and drunckennesse in a Cave; drunckennesse is the high
way to all bestiall affections and actions; It is therefore Saint Paul's
exhortation, Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5. for then a
man is drawn to excess, and led by the Devil to commit any villainy even with
greediness.

The Devil in this is like your blacke-smith, when his Iron is red-hot, he
can then forge it unto what fashion himself pleases; So when a man is made
hott with Wine, the Devil can work him then to any villainy whatsoever: Saint
Paul yokes this swine with the covetous man, and excludes both these beasts
from the Kingdom of God: some collect as much from the Greek word, (...)
which is the name of an intemperate man, he is so called says Phaeuorinus,
Quod non possit (...) because he cannot be saved, 1. Cor. 6. 9. I leave this
Brewers friend, and come to the Powlters, to Gluttons: As for them the Apostle
makes them plain Idolaters, Phil: 3. 19. As the Babilonians used daily to
sacrifice to their Idol Bell: so does the Glutton to his belly making this his
God, and the grave wherein he burieth all his substance, for venture vitae
Caribdis: As Diogenes sometimes said, the gut is a gulf wherein many one
drowneth all his Patrimony, Solebant Dijs construi templa, altaria erigi, etc.
In former times men did use to build Temples, erect Shrines, maintain
Priests, to offer Sacrifice, and burn Incense to the Eternal Deity said the
Heathen, but the belly now has eaten up all these, for now many maintain no
Priests but a Cook, and serve no other God but their belley.

Their chiefest care is to provide meat for their bellies, and their bellies
for meat, as Brewers ordain drink for their barrels, and their barrels for
drink: with Philoxenus they wish that their throats were as long as a Cranes
neck, that the sweetness of their meats and drinks might the longer abide.
All their Faith is in the Kitchen, all their Hope in the Pantery, all their
Love in the Kettle; The Kitchen is their Temple, the Cook their Priest, God
their Cater, and their belley their God; Their exercise is walking to get them
a stomach to their meat, as others labor to get them meat for their
stomach: With the Sodomites they feed themselves against the day of
slaughter, which cannot be far off: If you ask (says Seneca) why we die
suddenly, it is because we live by the death of many creatures. And how can
they live long, Qui meris mortibus viuunt: The Fowls are more endaungered by
these two-legged then by the foure-footed Foxes, and themselves may fear one
day with their fellow-glutton to be most tormented in their tongues, because
they have offended most in their tastes: Nothing is more absurd then that
Epicurean resolution, Let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall die: As if we
were made only for the panch, and lived that we might live. We should say
rather, let us fast and pray, to morrow we shall die. A strong body makes thy
death more violent; bestow not then a costly roof upon a ruynous teneme^t, or
a mudde-wall: That man's departure will be happy and easy, whom Death finds
with a weak Body, and a strong Soul.

12 Of Goods ill gotten.
NOthing is more hunted after in this world among many men then wealth and
riches, as if store of Gold and Silver were the only Venison that could
procure a blessing; we make our selves drudges and slaves beneath all names of
baseness, to get a little white or red earth, which have made many prouder,
none better for enjoying them: and yet nothing is more uncertain then are
riches: Quem dies vidit veniens superbum: hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem.
Saint Paul's advise is not to trust in uncertain riches 1. Timoth. 6. Fugitiuus
est and ingratus seruus pecunia: quamvis seruorum adhibita sit custodia,
saepius tamen seruis persuadens cum ipsis fugit Custodibus: Chrysostom. Among other
reasons, why Riches are so uncertain, one is, because they are ill gotten:
There are those who grow rich and wealthy by the oppression of the people. Job
speaks of a man who builds his house as the moath, Chap: 27. As a moath is
made rich by spoiling the garments, books, and barks in which it lives, so
there are those who grow rich and wealthy by devouring the poor; thinking with
Vespasian, that gain is sweet howsoever gotten: but wealth which is gained by
unjust means (like Jonas his gourd) soon withers: the owners thereof are
like Esdras his visions, for a time goodly and glorious to behold, but in a
moment vanished.

He has devoured substance, and he shall vomit it says Zophar of the
Oppressor: Job 20. 15. The meaning is that ill gotten goods lie upon the
conscience as raw meat upon a sick stomach: which a man is never well until
he has cast it up again by restitution.

As Lewis the leauenth King of France did on his deathbed restore two Counties
to the heirs of John, King of Arragon, to which in his life time he would
never before condescend.

As the Partridge gathers the young which she has not brought forth, so he
that gets riches unjustly and wrongfully, shall leave them in the midst of
his days, and at his end shall be a fool, 17. Ierem: 11. The Partridge,
(says Ambrose) makes her a neast of stolen eggs which she has not laid,
but as soon as the birds are hatched, the true mother calls them all away from
their theeuish stepdame, so it is with the covetous and cruel man Incubat
auro: Like a Hen that sits he may keep his neast for a while, and sit at home
to hatch more wealth by unjust and unlawful means: But when his Chickens are
hatched, God the true owner of them will call them away, draw them out of his
belly, and none of his meat shall be left, Job: 20. 15. 21. He shall have
nothing to his posterity as some expound it; for what is gotten upon the
Devils back will surely be spent under his belly. She gathered it of the hyre
of an Harlot, and they shall return to the wages of an Harlot: Mich: 1. ^.
What men get by Usury, Fraud, Sacrilege, or Extortion, Usury, Oppression, or
somewhat else shall consume it; Talis substantia non est stabilis, aut ipsis
inventibus est peritura, aut a malis haeredibus est dissipanda, Chrysostom: in
Math: The Eagle stole a piece of flesh from the Altar, but with the meat she
carried away a coal that set her neast on fire: who sees not this verified in
those who get their wealth by Sacrilege and unjust means, themselves and their
heirs (like those who robbed the Temple of Tholossa) never prosper afterward.
Gain so gotten may seem a sweet spoil: yet will it prove as pernicious as
Achans wedge; or as that lucklesse belt to Turnus which bereaved him of his
life, that otherwise should have been spared. So Christ when he would
graciously pardon, beholding the stolen cognizance of his Spouse, may take away
his mercy, or add a vengeance further, (Pallas te hoc vulnere Pallas immolat)
One torture more for this.

The Arc when it was in Dagons house, broke Dagons neck, our Arc has so
dealt with our Dagons, who with lay hands have imprisoned it, where there is
Gloria Patri, without a sicut in principio, there cannot be gloria filio nunc
et in saecula: Gnipho the Usurer (as Lucian faineth) lies in Hell lamenting
his miserable estate, that one Rodochares an incestuous Prodigal did on earth
co^sumne his goods wastfully, which he with care and unjust means had scrapt
together. There is a worthy observation made upon the fortunes of the house of
Desmond in Irelaud, that as Maurcice Fitz-Thomas the first Earl did first
raise the greatness of that house by Irish exactions and oppressions: So Girald
the last Earl did at last ruin and reduce it to nothing by using the like
extortions: what oppression and extortion shall get and build up; oppression,
or extortion, or prodigality, will ruin and pull down, which may well be
expressed by the old Emblem of a Torch turned downwards with this word. Quod
me alit extinguit.

That which does nourish and maintain my flame, Even that ere long does quite
put out the same.

13 Of Whooredome.
Whoredom although a Bastard, yet me thinks it does naturally father it
self upon Pride, while the harlot trimmed up places her self in the door to
call in customers, and having impudently kissed a man in the streets, she
easily leads the willing Ox unto the slaughter. This sin, though not so
generally, is among many lewd ones as openly professed as some honest and
lawful vocaton: by this craft (as Demetrius by his silver Temples of Diana)
many get their goods: some esteem this sin but a trick of youth, Detur
aliquid aetati, non est creed mihi vitium, etc. As that unwise Tutor sometimes
spoke: youth must be borne withal, And to follow harlots it is not, trust me,
a fault in young men, but by these tumbling-tricks, they often break their own
necks.

God never said unto Adam and Eve, increase and multiply before they were
married, to show that God has a curse, not a blessing; for that increase
which is not lawful: Turdus sibi malum. The Adulterer does busy himself to
work his own Babel: Ulysses was slain by Telegonus his base son begot on
Circe.

When Paris bestowed the Ball on Venus, she gave him back again Helena, who
in the end proved his ruin and destruction; for Whoremongers and Adulterers,
God will judge, Heb: 13. 4. Into this sin men are often drawn by their eyes;
Of Putiphars Wife it is said, that she cast her eye upon Joseph and said lie
with me; Vritque videndo foemina. Among other marks of false Teachers, Saint
Peter sets down this one remarkable, having eyes full of Adultery that cannot
cease to sin, 2. Pet: 2. 14. From whence some collect that the very chair of
Adultery is seated in the eye: but indeed the eye is but a Pipe to lead it to
the soul, (...): An nescis? oculi sunt in amore Duces: Upon this ground was
founded that same wise and wholesome Law of Zaleucus of Locris, which commanded
that the eyes of Adulterers should be pulled out, because they steal away the
heart, and guide, or counsel men to uncleanness. The beauty of the daughters
of men betrayed the holy seed; they saw, and lusted: their sin began at their
eyes; they looked, lusted, sinned, dyed.

As that Chalky brimstone (spoken of by Pliny lib. 2. Cap. 105.) draws and
snatcheth fire unto it self though far removed and distant from the same: so
the eyes draw the fire of Lust to the Soul, in a far larger distance; Upon
which consideration Alexander (who named the Persian maids dolores oculorum)
refused to have Darius wife (a Lady of incomparable beauty) brought before him,
fearing least he who had lately subdued the Husband, should himself in the
end be conquered at the sight of the Wife. This it was that moved Job to make
a covenant with his eyes, not to look upon a maid, for by them commonly,
Satan creepes into the Heart. This will one day be the lascivious man's
complaint, I saw and lusted.

That Soul which desires to fly Fornication must not suffer his eyes, with
Dinah, to go and see the maids of the Country, for the mind of Man will
conceive great and little spots by the mediation of the eyes, as Labans sheep
did their young, at the sight of the pilled rodds, which Jacob laid in the
watring troughes.

14. Of Idleness.
THat Proverb is as old in truth as it is in time, Otia dant vitia, Idleness
brings much evil. This is the Mother of Adultery, If you would know why
Aegisthus was an adulterer, In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat: When David
speaks of sensual men, he says, Non sunt in laboribus, what was the issue?
This was the cause They be so holden with pride Psalm. 73. 6. We know that
Idleness was one of the sins of Sodom, this with others did help to lay her
in the dust: whilst the Romans had wars with Carthage, and enemies in
Affricke, they knew not what vices meant in Rome.

The time when the envious man did sow his tares, was whilst men slept. The
Crab-fishe (whenas the Oyster does open her self) casts a stone into her
shell, and so not being able to shut her self again, becomes a prey unto the
Crab. The Fathers apply this unto the Devil, when he finds men gaping and
idle, he casts into them some stone of temptation, whereby he works their
overthrow: The slothful man is the Devils shop; there he works, ever busy
when men are lazy. A wise and ancient Counselor, sometimes of this Kingdom,
saw as much when he wittily rebuked the manners and customs of a strange
Country not much differing from his own, but in the little, for that they
first made thieues and taught them to steal, and after hanged them up: They
made thieues says he, in that they suffered such a multitude of Seruingmen to
be trained up in ydlenes and pride, who afterward being thrust out of service
must needs be driven unto thieuery, for then (like their fellow in the
Gospel) to dig they cannot, and to beg they are ashamed; many ruo into this
vice out of wealth and abundance, these with the Nightingale having feathered
their neasts sing no more: as unprofitable are they unto the world as Margites,
of whom it is said, that he never plowed, nor dug, nor did any thing all his
life-long that might tend unto any goodness. Their care is to seek out merry
company, and idle pastimes to spend away time: If otherwise then (with
Domitian) they fall to catch flies; having wearied themselves in this spider
business, they get them out toward the evening unto the fields, not to pray
(like Isaac) but to provide them a stomach, which as they get upon other
men's grounds: So they study where they may allay it at other men's tables, and
there they lay about them like the Priests of Bell, of whom it is said, they
did eat and drink up all; For howsoever they are less then women at their
work, yet at their meat they are more then men. Other idle bodies there are
who blame need, when but for sloth they might work and have enough. These
Caterpillars devour the sweet which others have swett for. If God would deal
with these justly, and men strictly observe the Apostles rule, That he which
would not work, should not eat. 2. These: 3. 10. I think as many would die of
Idleness, as of sickness. Pity it is that like Droan bees they should eat
of the honny, or live in the hyue, much less swarm and muster like the flies
and frogs in Pharaohs Kingdom.

For these men God has no blessing, it was not said, call the loyterers or
idle bodies, but Call the laborers and give them their hire: Mat: 20. 8. And
none but laborers had the penny; every man must have either a sweating browe,
or a working brain. It was not Adams case alone, but it is the case of every
one in his calling, In sudore vultus. tui; those who were found idle were
rebuked with a Quid statis? God who has made nothing to be idle, can endure no
ciphers in his Arethmetick, no slothful persons in his Vineyard: Adam was put
into the Garden to till and dress it; no sooner created but by and by he is
set to labor,: Paradise which was the storehouse, was also his workhouse, it
served not only to feed his senses, but to exercise his hands; All his delight
could not make him happy in an idle life, therefore no sooner made but by and
by he is set to work. He must labor, because he was happy; much more must
we, that hereafter we may be. As for idle bodies, whenas like drunken
seruingmen, they have spent the allowance of their lights in riot, they shall
at last go to bed darkeling, And then shall they weep and howl, because they
did not those things in time which belonged to their peace.

15. Of Cosenage.
THis Sin, (like the Sunshine day, which deluded Esops Dog) beguileth men
of that they have, with a vain hope of that they never shall have. And
although every day some buy repentance too dear, yet one young Master, or
other, is persuaded to pay aforehand for the Pigge in the poake: for when the
simple go to Market, the^ the Crafty get money: and had I wist, coming always
at the last, comes ever to late, as Esau was sorry when he had sold his
Birthright.

Great is the number of these subtle Foxes, who like the Devil are always
compassing the earth, and daily go up and down seeking who^ they may devour.
These are sons of those Locusts, which have faces like the faces of men, but
killing stings in their tails: like Gnatts, after they have made a sweet kind
of Music with their entising words, they evermore sting before they depart.
Not unlike the Herb Sardonia of which Solinus reports, that it makes the
eaters thereof to look as if they laughed, but in laughing dye. Though many
be skillful in this guilefull practice, yet Achans wedge of Gold, and
Babylonish garment, in the end shall work his confusion; These Men with
Perillus perish in their own inventions, their cunning at the last fails and
leaves them as Absoloms Mule left his rebellious Master between Heaven and
Earth.

16. Of Swearing and Forswearing.
THere are many living that cannot tell how to begin to Pray, and know not when
to make an end of Swearing, oaths strive for number with words, and no wonder,
Impunitas transgressionum nutrix est; He is seldom corrected who blasphemeth
the dreadful God: Some are of opinion that the sin of that Israelite who was
stoned for Blasphemy, was only this, that he durst name that ineffable name
Jehovah: there fear could keep them from mentioning the dreadful name of
God, our fear cannot bridle us from abusing it; a sin detested even by the
very Heathens. Among the Egiptians the common Swearer was to be beheaded: The
Grecians punished it with loss of Ears: But our righteousness should exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, that so we may escape the
judgment denounced by the Prophet Jeremy, The Land is full of Adulteries, and
because of Swearing the Land mourns. 23. 10. The Light (not being a bare
brightness but a clear discerner of things unseen) does well express and
declare the nature and use of an oath, which the Grecians call (...) of (...)
for truth lies hidden; And the Latins note no less, in calling it,
Iusiurandum, because a truth and nothing but a truth is to be sworn; as in
calling it Sacramentum they imply the conscience we should make of it; a matter
quite forgotten by our Knights of the Post; who (like Putiphars Wife) do only
show the Garments of an honest Man to prove their dishonest cause, being of
Lysanders mind, who was wont to say Pueri talis, viri Sacramentis, Children
must be deceived by Dice and Blanckes, Men by oaths.

Ancient Pleas passing by record, and latter controversies Viua Voce, both
seem to say, that Men of less wealth and more honesty are most worth. The
rest have sprung up as Nettles and Thorns when God cursed the Earth. These
Priscilianists are of great antiquity, though never grown so shameless as now.
Moses provided Legem talionis for them who would bear false witness. The Judges
(says he) shall make diligent inquisition, and if the Witness be found false,
and has given false witness against his Brother, then shall ye do unto him as
he had thought to have don to his Brother; Life for life, Eye for Eye, Tooth
for Tooth. Deuteronomy. 19. 18. As that decree argues that in his time such
ungodliness was feared; So the plot of Iesabel (who, writing to the Judges
commanded them to set up two wicked Men, Sons of Belial or Unthrifts as some
translation has it suborned Witnesses against the life of innocent Naboth)
plainly shows, that this abuse was both known and practiced by those who
should rather have sought out and punished such Sons of Belial then have made
use of their falsehood. Iuuenal the Poet in his time derided these lewd and
loose companions, for betaking themselves to such professed villainy, and
wished them rather to be Brokers of old Stuff, Hoc satius quam si dicas sub
Iudice, vidi, quod non vidisti: Any base Trade were far better then to affirm
before a Judge, I saw that which thou never saw: Faciant equites Asiani: Let
the Asian Knights, renowned for Perjury and false evidence, live by that
professed villainy; He thought it a disgrace for Romans, and we may think such
damned practices unworthy to be named amongst Christians, except it be with
reproof and hatred: For the Lord himself (who is a swift Witness against false
Swearers) will shoot at those with a swift Arrow: And as when the Elders left
Susannaes cause in wrong sentence; Daniel took it in hand to right it with the
ruin of those who did bear false witness against her: So when these wicked
Men by their perjury and falsehood, have perverted the seat of Judgment and
course of Justice: God him self will take it in hand to decide it with the
confusion of those, who mock at Judgment and swallow Iniquity. Pro. 19. 28.
For although with great patience God bears with this intolerable Sin for a
long season, yet Tarditatem supplicij grauitate Iudicij recompensat, Gr: They
shall not be unpunished for ever; Truly in this thing speaks the Poet
Tibullus.

Ah! miser et si quis primo periuria caelat,
Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus.
Ah: wretched man though periuries, at first full secret be:
Though slowly, yet due penalties, will come assuredly.
This as it seems was fulfilled in Phillip King of Macedon his posterity,
whom Pausanias records to have fallen into many miseries and very great
calamities, because he made no conscience to violate and falsify his oaths:
Eusebius in his 6. Book 8. Cap: reports how three lewd varlets accused
Narcissus a holy and reverend Bishop of a heinous crime, and confirmed their
accusations with oaths; the first swore, If I lie let me be burned to ashes.
The second, If I report not the truth, let me be consumed with some cruel
disease: The third, If I bear false witness, let me be smitten with
blindness.

In process of time, God punished their periuries by wrapping them in the same
curses which they had wished to themselves; The first, had his house fired in
the night, wherewith he and all his family were burnt: The second had the
Iaundice whereof he died most uncomfortably: The third seeing the miserable end
of the other two (though he repented and confessed the conspiracy,) yet he
lost his sight and became blind with weeping. God in Justice oftentimes taks
men at their word, and effects that which their lips speak against their
hearts. There is no better remedy against false swearing, then not to swear
at all; not to accustom our selves to swearing; admonitio non iurandi
conseruatio est a peccato periurij. August: The admonition in Scripture not to
swear: is a preservation from false and wrongful swearing. As for those who
make no conscience of an oath, but will swear and forswear for the wages of
unrighteousness, I wish them no other punishment then that which Phillip of
Macedon inflicted upon two of his Subjects in whom he saw no hope of Grace,
Vnum a Macedonia fugere, alterum persequi iussit, He made the one of them to
run out of Macedonia, and the other to drive him, a fair riddance of them
both* (as it is in the proverb) without a Sessions.

17. Of bad company.
Howsoever Fishes living in salt waters do retain a fresh taste, and never
savor of the brinish quality of the Sea wherein they are bred and do live.
And it may be true which Solinus reports of the River Tigris in Armenia, that
passes many miles through the lake of Arethusa, yet it neither mingleth waters
nor fishes with the lake, but is quite of another color from the same, yet
inficitur terrae sordibus vnda fluens, As silver streams having any vicinity
with putrified and infected soiles, are tainted with their corrupt qualities,
and vary their savors with the veins of the soil through which they pass,
so it fares in the manners of men for the most part, if they among whom we
live be infected with any sin, we do often savor of their corruptions.

Rerum natura sic est, vt quoties bonus malo coniungitur, non ex bono malus
melioretur, sed ex malo bonus contaminetur: Chrysostom: Such is the nature of
things, that when a good man is joined with a bad, the evil is not bettered by
the good, but the good corrupted by the evil. The Lacedaemonians very wisely
inquiring after the behavior of their children, demanded with what
playfellowes they were lincked, not doubting but they would be like unto such,
whose fellowship they fancied. Amicitiae vt pares quaerunt ita et faciunt,
Friendship as it seeks, so it makes men alike in conditions.

Even Joseph by living in Pharaohs Court did learn to swear by Pharaohs life:
Peter being among the high Priests servants did deny his Master, Quanto
calescebatigne sacerdotali, tanto frigescebat amore diuino, The warmer he was
by the high Priests fire, the colder he was in love to his Master: Commisti
sunt inter gentes, said David of the people of God; what was the issue? and
they learned their works. If we be companions to Ostridges we shall savor of
their wildness, as they who sleep with dogs, shall swarm with fleas.

One Corah did but kindle the fire of conspiracy, and presently two hundredth
and fifty Captains brought sticks to increase it. A leawd man is a most
pernicious creature, he commonly draws vengeance upon others, either by the
desert of his sin, or by the infection of it. So venomous is wickedness
(especially, when it lights amongst Gods people) that one dram of it is able to
corrupt the whole lump of Israel. Saint Paul therefore gives this wholesome
admonition, Be not Companions with them. Ephesians: 5. 7. For if we live with the
froward, we shall love frowardness. The sons of God by marriing with the
daughters of men, were drawn from their former purity; these marriages did not
beget men so much as wickedness: Vitia ad vicinos serpunt et contactu nocent:
Seneca. Sin among men, like the rot among sheep is of a catching and
infectious quality: many have fallen into a fashion of swearing, drinking, and
theeuing, out of the evil practice of others: it is a hard matter for that
soul not to fall into those vices unto which the eyes and the ears are
invred. Swallows would not come within Thebes, because the walls were so
often besieged, let not men, put on wings to fly into the company of those men
whose manners are corrupted, for fear of destruction: Be not partakers in her
sins that ye receive not of her plagues, Revel: 18. 4. The reason why our
Savior would not give that Disciple leave to go bury his dead father, was
(say some Divines) least his unbelieving kindred (who would be present at his
fathers Funeral) should corrupt him again, and so he should die with them:
bad men keep others from goodness as those dead carcasses did the Raven from
Noah's Arc: Run we then from these as Moses did from his rod turned to a
Serpent; for if we join our selves to Baal Peor: Like the Israelites, we will
eat the offerings of the dead, and bow down to their Gods. Number: 25. 2. 3.

18. Of Envy.
Envy in some sort is like the eye that sees other things, but not it self;
it is the canker of good minds, reaching up to the Crown on the Kings head:
For Athalia crying Treason, Treason, when Ioash was crowned lawful King
points at all such as say; that is unfit for others, themselves would have:
it is as true of envy as it is of love that it will creep where it dares not
go: Haman has all favor of the King, yet being at odds with Mordecaie
makes the Queen her self a mark to shoot at, it is like a fly sucking
sores to make them sorer: Felicity and virtue (which are the life of good men)
are death to the euuious: paru^ est si ipse sit faelix nisi alter fuerit
infaelix: (...) and (...) are joined together by the Apostle, because Inuidia
^ons Cladium, envy is the fountain of murder: when I behold Envy (as the Poet
describes her) to have a pale face without blood, a lean body without
moisture (like one of Pharaohs lean Kine) squint eyes, foul or black teeth,
a heart full of gall, a tongue tipped with poison, never laughing but when others
weep; never sleeping because she always thinks on mischief; I then abhor
this Monster: But when I consider the delicate food whereon the envious man
feeds, I then abhor and hate him: for the envious man is fed with the
daintiest food that may be: he feeds on his own heart: for there was never
Envy that was not bloody, if it eat not another heart it will eat it own.
Socrates called envy an impostume of the soul: Solomon, Proverb: 14. Terms
it the rotting of the bones; it shorteneth the life says Ecclesiasticus, 39.
24. Amongst other evils God has furnished Envy with one only profitable and
just quality. Authori incommoda, says Basil, the owner thereof is most plagued
with it: As Aetna consumed it self, so the envious man is burnt and consumed
with the fire of his own heart, Carpitque et carpitur vna, He biteth and is
bitten again, and becomes his own hangman. I leave this moath laboring to
extinguish the light of other men's goodness I know in the end he will sindge
his own wings.

19. Of Flatterers.
FLatterers like the reflection of a looking glass, do imitate any action
that you use: their end is to catch Dotterels. These live of gentle minds,
honorable personages, and worshipful gentlemen, like Apes and Parrats, by
showing feats of actiuity, piping, wanton disoursing, and magnifying all that
is done. Antisthenes said truly of them, Praestat (...) quam (...) incidere:
for Ravens feed only upon dead carcasses, but Flatterers upon living men. Of
all wild beasts the Tyrant is the worst; of all tame beasts, the Flatterer,
said Diogines. For a man's greatest enemies, are his greatest praisers: The
tongue of a flatterer, says Augustine, wounds worse then the hand of a
murderer.

The one kills but the body, the other both body and soul, whereas it is the
speech of the Spouse in the Cant: 2. Take us the Foxes which destrooy the
Vines. Ber: Upon those words says, Duo sunt vulpium genera, There are two
kinds of Foxes, the Slanderer, and the Flatterer; these destroy the Vines, and
bring destruction to the sons of men, the Flatterer tickleth his friends to
death, stealing goodness from them by his intising speeches, as Absolon stole
the hearts of the people by flattering words. This man is a friend for his own
occasion. Like the Polipus he turns himself into any color for advantage.

For a crust this Spaniell will fawn upon any man: but if a storm of
affliction begins to beat upon thee, this sommer-bird sings no more: he has
the persons of men in admiration because of advantage: The Ass which carried
the Egyptian Goddess, had many bared heads, and bended knees; yet none to the
beast, but all to the burden; if there be no honny in the gallypott, these
waspes will no longer houer about it, but fly and run from it as Myce from
an empty barn, or Lice from a dead body which has neither heat nor moisture:
they deceive others and maintain themselves (like Tobacco-sellers) with a
little smoke; it were no great injustice with smoke to choke them: So
Alexander Seuerus (a great enemy to flatterers) served one Turinus, who had
craftily gotten many great bribes and gifts in making the people believe that
he was of great authority with the Emperor, and could help them to
whatsoever they sued for, whereof the Emperor being certified, caused him in
the open Market to be fastened to a stake and there killed him with smoke.
The Crier thus crying to the people, Fumo pereat qui fumum vendidit, Smoke he
sold, and with smoke he is choked.

FINIS.

