THE EPICVRES FAST: OR: A SHORT DISCOVRSE, DISCOVERING THE LICENCIOVSnesse of
the ROMAN Church in her religious FASTS.

BY HENRY MASON, Parson of St. Andrews Undershaft, London.

LONDON: Printed by G. P. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop,
under St. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Dr. JOHN KING, one of the Canons of Christ-Church in
Oxford, and second Son to the worthy Prelate, Dr. KING, late Bishop of
LONDON. (*)
Good Sir,
I Did heretofore offer to your Dr. Hen^y King.
elder Brother a little Book of the right use of Fasting: and now I bring unto
your self one much less, of the abuses of Fasting. My intention in both is
the same; to testify toward your deceased FATHER, now with the Lord, my
thanks, service, duty, and whatsoever a Domesticke could owe to a loving, wise
and virtuous Lord: and withal to express, according to my power, the love and
affection which I shall ever bear to his suruiuing Posterity; praying also,
that you who have received from him life and being, may follow him, and, if it
may be, even exceed him in his virtues. Which intention and desire of mine, if
you shall please to accept of in this small Treatise, as your Brother did in
the other; I shall esteem it in you both, as a token of your Fathers continued
love unto me in his succeeding Issue.

My purpose in this small Treatise is, to lay open the several abuses, which
in these later years have corrupted this holy exercise of fasting, and made it
both odious to God, and less passeable among men. And this I did for two
causes. First, to admonish good Christians, that they beware of formalitie and
empty shows in religious duties: and more especially, that when they fast, they
be not like the Hypocrites of our time, who in so foul a manner have defiled so
good a work. Secondly, superstition and the pride of the Roman Church; in hope
that some, even amongst them, may be moved to lay these things to heart. And
first, for their superstition, pride, that appears in this, that finding many
corruptions crept into their practice of fasting, contrary to the custom both
of Scriptures and the ancient Church, as themselves cannot but confess; yet
they had rather defend their gross practices, then acknowledge that the Church
of Rome can do any thing amiss. Which two foul faults, as they are usual
with that Church in other things; so they are palpable in this exercise of
fasting, as will clearly appear by the particulars in this ensuing Treatise.
Would GOD, our seduced Countrymen, Romans 10.2.
who have a zeal of GOD, but not according to knowledge, would hereby learn,
that all are not ancient customs that carry the old name: but that the Church
of Rome can retain the titles of Antiquity, when she has utterly abolished
the things which were before time meant by them. And my prayer to God is for
such among them, as desire to know the truth to salvation, that God at length
will open their eyes, to discern between things that differ; and will move
their hearts to consider how unsafe it is for them to commit their souls to
those men's guiding, who make the corrupt practice of their Church, the
unquestionable rule of their Doctrine. And with this Prayer I end my Preface;
commending my self to your love, my labors to your acceptance, and you and
all yours to GODS blessing and gracious protection. June 12. 1626.

Your loving and obliged Friend, HENRY MASON.

To the Reader.
IN the Authorities alleged, beside the quoting of the Books, Chapters,
numbers, etc. I have most times named the leaf or page, where the words are to
be found. I did it for 2. causes. 1. That when I should have occasion to reuiew
any Authority, I might with the more speed be directed to the place. 2. That
if there should happen any error in the number of the Books, Chapters, etc.
the addition of the leaf or page might be an help to amend it. And because
the Reader may make the like benefit of these quotations, if he chance upon the
same Impression that I have ^sed; I thought it not amiss to specify what
Edition I followed in the several Authors: Which is, as follows.

Iosephi Angles Flores theologic. Qq. Part. 1. in 4o. Burgis. 1585.
Antiquitates Liturgicae. A Book in three tomes in 8o. without the name of the
Author, Printer, place or year: but it was licenced by Petrus Lintrensis of
Doway, 1604. and granted with privilege to Bellerus the Doway Printer, by the
Archdukes, 1603. Io. Azorij Institut. part. 1. Coloniae. 1602. Bellarmini
Controuersiae. in fol. Paris. 1608. Beyerlinck. Promptuar. Moral. part. 3.
Colon. in 8o. 1616. Martin. Bonacinae Opera in folio. Lugduni, 1624. Cajetani
Summula in 8o. Paris. 1539. Cassiani Opera in 8o. Duaci, 1616. Eusebius. Histor.
Graecolat. in fol. Coloniae Allobrogum, 1612. Anton. Fernandes Examen
Theologiae in 8o. Colon. 1621. Joan. Filesaci Opera, in 8o. Paris. 1614.
Vincentij Filliucij Morales quaest. Lugduni, 1622. Barthol. Fumi Aurea armilla,
8o. Lugduni, 1596. Matthaei Galeni Catecheses in 4to. Lugd. 1593. Iac. de
Graffijs Decisiones aureae in 4to. Antwerp. 1604. S. Hieronymi Opera. Paris,
1609. Joan. Hofmeisteri Loci communes, in 16o. Paris. 1573. Hieron. Llamas
Summa ecclesiastica in 8o. Mogunt. 1605. Cornel. a Lapide, in Prophetas
majores. Antwer. 1621. Leonar. Leffius, de Iustitia and Iure. Antw. 1612.
Guliel. Lindani Panoplia. Colon. 1575. Iodoci Lorichij Thesaurus. Friburgi.
1609. Barthel. Medinae Instructie Confessari^rum in 8o. Venet. 1601. Joan.
Medinae Cod. de Iejunio. 4o. Brixiae. 1606. Alphon. Pisanus de Continentia and
Abstinentia. 8o. Colon. 1579. Valor. Reginaldi Praxis fori poenit. fol.
Coloniae. 1622. Emman. Roderiquez Su^ma Casuu^. Colon. 1620. Franc. Toleti
Instr. Sacerd. 8o. Rothomagi, 1609. Greg. de Valentia in Thomam. Venet. 1608.
THE EPICVRES FAST.
Our Savior, in his Sermon on the Mount, among other lessons tending to
Religion and an holy life, does instruct his Hearers in the right use of
Fasting. Mat. 6.16, 17, 18.
When ye fast, says he, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for
they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast: Verily I
say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy
head, and wash thy face, etc. In which words our Lord does two things. 1. He
gives a Caveat, to beware of an abuse in fasting, such as the Scribes and
Pharisees did defile this holy work with; Be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad
countenance, etc. And secondly, he gives us counsel to take the right way in
fasting; But thou, -- anoint thy head, etc. According to which example of my
Lord and Master, I did heretofore endeavor to give some rules for the right
use of fasting; and now I am led by the same example, to give warning of some
abuses that may defile it. For, the Scribes and Pharisees of our time, I mean
the Doctors of the Church of Rome, have by their doctrine much more corrupted
this holy exercise, then the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors time did
corrupt it by their practice. And for the detection of these abuses, I have
thought it requisite to consider of these two points in the Popish doctrine of
fasting.

1. How the Church of Rome does describe a Fast. 2. What Indulgence or liberty
they give and take, contrary to the custom of Scriptures, practice of the
ancient Church, and their own rules of Fasting.
CHAP. I. The Description of a Fast, given by Popish Doctors.
THe first point considerable, is, How the Church of Rome does describe a Fast;
or wherein the nature of a Fast, according to their doctrine, does consist. The
answer whereto is to be fetched from their own words and writings. And from
thence for this purpose I note these 2. things.

1. They distinguish the several sorts of fasting, that it may be known what
kind of Fast it is, whereof they speak. So Bellarmine does; Accipitur vox
[ieiunium] quatuor modis, etc. Bellar. de bon. oper. in party. l. 2. cap. 1..
Igitur nomen.
This word [Iejunium] or a Fast, says he, is taken four ways, out of which
do arise, as it were, four sorts of Fasts; 1. a spiritual Fast, 2. a moral
Fast, 3. a natural Fast, and 4. an Ecclesiastical Fast. The spiritual Fast
is an abstinence from sin: The moral is temperance and sobriety in diet: The
natural is an abstinence from all meat and drink: And the Ecclesiastical is
such an abstinence as the Church does prescribe. And of this last kind of Fast
only, is all the question in this place. Thus, or to this effect, speaks
Bellarmine. And to the same purpose, but more distinctly, speaks Gregory de
Valentia, another Jesuit: Greg. de Valentia in secunda^ secu^dae, Disput. 9.
q. 2. punct. 1. in initio. pa. 1751. A.
The Schoole-Doctors (says he) do use to distinguish of four kinds of
Fasts. The first is called jeiunium generale, a general Fast, which is an
abstinence from all unlawful pleasures, or sinful delights. The second is
called jeiunium naturae seu natural; a natural Fast, which consists in an
utter abstinence from meat and drink, in the sense that he is said to be
fasting, who has taken no meat or drink at all, that day. The third kind
may be called jeiunium morale, a moral Fast, which consists in a right and
moderate use of meat and drink, according to the rules of sobriety or
temperance. The fourth kind is jeiunium aliud quoddam peculiare, a certain
peculiar kind of fasting, which is not to be used of all men, nor at all
times; and it consists both in a longer forbearing of meat and drink, then
the common rule of temperance does require; and also in a more sparing and
strict or rigid use of meat and drink, then is necessary by the common rules
of sobriety. And this kind of abstinence is most properly called a Fast: and
is that (says he) which is commended in Scriptures, and acknowledged by Calvin
and Kemnitius. And when it is kept by the rule and prescript of the Church, it
is called by the Schoole-Doctors, jeiunium Ecclesiasticum seu sacrum, the
Churches Fast, or an holy Fast. And this is it which all sides do mean, when
they entreat or dispute of a Christian Fast. And to like purpose speak others
of them; whom I shall not need to allege: because by this that has been said
out of these two learned Jesuits, it is evident, what they mean by the name
of a Fast, namely this Fast of the Church, or this peculiar and strait kind
of abstinence and fasting, as it is prescribed and practiced by the Church.

2. Secondly, having distinguished the kinds of fasting, and thence singled
out that which fitted their purpose, in the next place they do describe or
declare the nature of this Ecclesiastical Fast, and tell us what are the
essential or necessary properties of it. And for this purpose, Bellarmine
defines this Fast to be Bellarm. de bonis oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 1..
Ieiunium Ecclesiast.
Abstinentia cibi, secundum Ecclesiae regulam assumpta; an abstinence from
meat, undertaken according to the rule of the Church, or that rule, which the
Church does prescribe to be observed in a Fast. And the things required by the
Churches rule, he Ibid.. vlt.
tells us, are three: 1. Vt qui jeiunat, semel tantum in die cibum sumat;
That he who fasteth, do take meat but once only in the day. 2. Vt vna illa
refectio sit coena, non prandium; that that one meal or refection be a supper,
not a dinner. 3. Vt habeatur ciborum delectus; that there be observed a choice
of meats, especially that men forbear flesh, when they fast according to the
Orders of the Church. Thus Bellarmine. And Valentia he notes Lo. citat. page
1753. C.
3. things as essential to this Fast: 1. Quod per illud diutius quam exigit
co^munis regula temperantiae, abstinetur a cibo; that men do then forbear
meat longer then the common rule of temperance does require. 2. Quod in ipso
vsu cibi, abstinetur a quibusdam escis, etc. that when men do eat, they
abstain from some certain meats, flesh, eggs, and milke-meates. 3. Quod
hujusmodi abstinentia, tum quoad diuturnitatem, tum etiam quoad ciborum
qualitatem, ordinatur ad finem ipsum temperantiae, qui est edomatio carnis, and
refraenatio concupiscentiae; that this abstinence, both for the continuance of
it, and for the quality of the meat at the end of it, be referred and
ordained for the taming of the flesh, and the bridling of lust, that it do not
too violently withstand reason. These things Valentia requires, and thence
frames an essential definition of a Fast, consisting on these three things,
as the essential parts or properties of it. And Pisanus, another Jesuit,
agreeing with his fellows for the substance, describes this kind of Fast
thus; Est igitur ieiuniu^ abstinentia quaedam arctior, qua home ab omnibus
cibis, aut saltem a quibusdam lautioribus se abstinet, qua et semel duntaxat in
die, nempe post consuetam prandtoru^ horam corpus reficit Pisan. de Abstinent.
ca. 1. pa. 98.
It is a straiter kind of abstinence, [to wit, then the rules of temperance
do require] by which a man does forbear all meats, or at least some of the
finer or more dainty meats; in which abstinence also he does feed or refresh
his body but once only in the day, namely, after the accustomed hour of
dinner. Thus he; and so do others more; who though they may vary in their
manner of speech, or in some circumstanciall point, yet do for the most part
speak in the like manner, of the nature of this Fast, as these three Jesuits
do.

In which sayings and Descriptions of theirs, I desire the Reader to take
notice of two things by the way, which being well remembered, may serve for
further use hereafter.

1. That these Descriptions are in part so fitted to their own Fasts, as that
they disagree with the Fasts both mentioned in Scriptures, and practiced in the
Primitive Church: as when they define a Fast to be an abstinence from meat
only: for so it is used in the Church of Rome: but it was not so in the
ancient Church of God. For the practice of Gods people in the Scriptures, and
of the ancient Fathers in the Primitive Church, was as well to forbear drink
as meat, during the time of their abstinence: as hereafter may appear more
fully.

2. That these Descriptions of a Fast, are in other things so fitted to the
practice of Antiquity, that they do condemn the Fasts of the Roman Church:
as for example, When they say, that in an holy Fast, men must have but one
refection, and that must be a supper, not a di^ner; and that both their
abstinence, and their choice of meats when they eat, must be such, as may
tame the flesh, and bridle the lusts of it. For all these things are most true
in true and sincere Fasts, such as the Scriptures do commend, and the ancient
Church did practice; but in Popish Fasts they find no place at all: as shall
be manifest (God willing) in the due place.

And the reason of this medley or mixture of ancient and latter customs in
their definition of a Fast, I take to be this; because our new Roman Doctors
do so describe fasting, as their elder Schoole-Doctors, Thomas and Hales, had
done before them: and these men did so describe a Fast, as the Roman Church
did then practice and prescribe it. And their custom then was, to drink at
all times, but not to eat save once in the day, and not sooner then three of
the clock in the afternoon. For as for the noone-tide dinner, and the evening
Collation, things now allowable in a Popish Fast, they are abuses of later
times, since Hales and Thomas were departed this life. And this shall suffice
to be said of the first point, namely how the Roman Church does define a
religious Fast.

THe next point to be considered is, What Indulgence or liberty they take and
grant, contrary to the practice of Scriptures, customs of the ancient Church,
and these rules of their own. And this may be considered or observed in five
particulars: 1. In their choice of meats. 2. In the number of their
Refections. 3. In the time of their eating, or breaking up of their Fast. 4. In
the quantity of their meat and drink. And 5. in their dispensations with the
Rules or Laws of Fasting.

CHAP. II. Choice of meats in a Popish Fast.
OF the five particulars, the first is, their choice of meats. Concerning
which, I note these things for the present purpose.

I. They do not require in any Fast of theirs, a total abstinence from all
meat and drink. For first they define Ieiunium est abstmentia quae dam
ar^^ior, quae homo ab omnibus cibis, aut saltem a quibusdam lautioribus se
abstinet, etc. Pisan. de Abstinent. cap. 1. page 98.
a Fast to be an abstinence from all meats, or at least from the more delicate
or dainty meats. In which speech I note two things. 1. That they allow a
total abstinence in Fasts: and therefore the Fasts in the reformed Churches
are in this respect warrantable, even our enemies being Judges. 2. That in
their Fasts it is held sufficient abstinence, if a man forbear some meats,
though he feed on others. Secondly, they allow men any sort of drink in the
time of their fasting. For, De cibi tantum, non de poeus abstinentia datum est
praecepeum ecclesiasticu^. Reginal. prax. fori Poenitent. l. 4. number. 173. page
155.
the precept of the Church for fasting, was made and meant of abstinence from
meat only, and not from drink; says Reginaldus. And Azorius, Ecclesiae
ieiuniun est, quo non a potione, sed a cibo abstinemus. Azor. Instit. part. 1.
l. 7. c. 8. pa. 555. 1. Joseph. Angles Flor. in 4. Sententiaru^, part. 1. de
Iejunio, q. 9. Difficult. 2. page 433. Alijque passim.
The Fast of the Church (says he) is that, in which we do abstain, not from
drink, but from meat. And by this it appears, that they do not require a
total abstinence in their Fasts, either from all meats, or from any drink.

II. They do allow of wine, hot waters, and any other strong drinks on their
fasting day. So Azorius says, Consentiens est opinio, potion^ vini, five mane
ante prandium, sieve post prandi^^ vespere ieiunium non soluere. Azo. Instit.
part. 1. l. 7. c. 10. q. 7. page 562.
It is an uniform opinion of Divines and Canonists, that the drinking of Wine,
whether it be in the morning before dinner, or after dinner in the evening,
does not break a man's fast. And so say others also: but it will be needless
to allege them, seeing the Jesuit says, that it is an opinion, in which they
generally agree.

III. They allow Electuaries and spices, and whatsoever else does principally
serve to help infirmity, or to further digestion. So Lessius says, Insertur
secundo non probiberi vsum Electuariorum and conditerum, etc. Less. de Just.
and Iure, l. 4. c. 2. nu. 10. page 719.
that the use of Electuaries and condited things is not forbidden in the time
of a Fast. And Reginaldus, having said that a man breaks not his Fast by
drinking, adds, Nec etiam frangitur sumpts one Electuarioru^, nisi sumantur
in fraudem ieiunij. Reginald. l. 4. nu. 173. pa. 155. v. Bellar. de Ieiun. cap.
1. page 168, 169.
Neither is the Fast broken by taking of Electuaries. And because no man should
be ignorant how far they stretch the use of this word, he says, they mean
by it, Nec item Electuariae. Quo nomine Palud. ipse quid intelligat, exprimit
his verbis; Dico antem omnia buiusmodi, quae consiseuerunt, sicut species, sumi
post prandium ad inuandam digestionem, etc. Reginald. l. 4. number. 152. page 151.
all manner of things which are used, as spices are, to be eaten after meals,
to help digestion. And to like purpose Josephus Angles, Ea, quae per modum
medicinae tradisolent, quanquam saepe accipiantur, Ecclesiae ieiunium minime
soluunt. Haec conclusio intelligitur non solum de syrupis and pharmacis, verum
etiam de quibuscunque alijs condime^ti^ and Electuarijs, quae vere per modum
medicinae assumu^tur, etc. Joseph. Angles in 4. Sencent. part. 1. q. 9. art. 2.
Difficult. 3. page 434.
Those things (says he) which are given by way of medicine, though they be
often taken on a fasting day, do not break the Fast of the Church. He adds,
that this Conclusion is not only meant of syrups and physical druggs, but also
of all other preserved things and electuaries, which are truly taken by way of
medicine. Besides, in their Fasts, they say, that abstinence from meat only
is required, not from drink nor medicine. And what they mean by these words,
they explain in this manner: Id quod principaliter institutu^ est ad
nutritione^, dicitur cibus: -- id vero quod principaliter facit ad bonam
nutrimenti dispositionem^ and ciborum digeflionem, vocatur potus: and id quod
principaliter est contra morbos, -- vocatur medicina. Reginald. l. 4. nu. 125.
p. 147.
That which is principally ordained for nourishment, that is called Meat; that
which is principally for the good disposition of the food, and the digestion
of meats, that is called Drink; and that which is principally against
diseases and infirmities, that is called Medicine. And so in the conclusion,
Spicerie, Confections, Electuaries, Preserues, and such like Iuncates, commonly
used at the end of meals, these they approve as lawful and warantable enough,
without any danger of breaking their Fast, though they be used many times in
one day, and without any just cause of infirmity in the party that takes
them: for by their doctrine, if the things so taken be ordinarily meant for
drink or medicine, they may lawfully be used by any man, whether for this or
for other ends.

IIII. Though Secunda propositio est, in Quadragesimali ieiunio prohibitu^ esse
non tantum carnium vsum, sed etiam eorum quae ex carne originem habent; vt
lactis, butyri, casei, ouorum: in alijs autem ieiunijs, prohibitu^ tantum esse
carnium vsum. Reginald. l. 4. nu. 144 page 150.
in Lent time, they forbid the use of eggs, cheese, butter, etc. yet in other
Fasts, the use of flesh only is forbidden by their Laws. So Reginaldus says,
and he gives this reason for it; because non datur in lure textus, there is no
Text in the Law, to forbid other meats in their ordinary Fasts. And to like
purpose others of them speak also; unless (as some add) the custom of some
place do perhaps require more then the Canon of the Church does. And so, when
all is laid together, it is clear, that the Church of Rome in her ordinary
Fasts, does forbid no other meat but flesh only; and in her strictest Fasts,
allows the best wines, and the finest juncates, and the hottest spices, and
whatsoever else is of the like nature. And this is it which they teach for
their choice of meats.

But herein they swerve not a little, both from the practice of Antiquity,
and the right uses of a religious Fast. And first, that they swerve from the
practice of Antiquity, recorded as well in the Scriptures, as in the writings
of the ancient Fathers, may appear by these two considerations. 1. That the
Ancients, during the time of their abstinence, did forbear all as well drink
as meat, not allowing themselves for that time any kind of sustenance. To
this purpose it is that Moses his Fast in the Mount is thus described; He was
there with the Lord forty days and forty nights, he did neither eat bread,
nor drink water. Exodus 34.28. and Deuteronomy. 9.9, 18. And so, when David fasted for
Abner, So do God to me, (says he) and more also, if I taste bread or ought
else till the Sun be down. 2. Sam. 3.35. And when Esther appointed the Jews
to fast, Fast ye for me (said she) and neither cate nor drink three days,
night nor day. Esther 4.16. And the King of Nineveh proclaiming a public Fast
through the City, Let neither man nor beast, (said he) heard nor flock taste
any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water. Ion. 3.7. Nor can there be
found any example in the Scriptures, in which any drink was used or allowed
during their fasting day, till euentide, when their Fast broke up. For as for
that place of Daniel, where he says of himself, I was mourning three full
weeks: I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, etc.
Dan. 10.2, 3. which the Doctors of Rome do so frequently urge for their choice
of meats, it makes nothing for the purpose. For Daniel did not fast with
those meats, but rather broke his Fast with them: I mean, that Daniels Fast
was a total abstinence from all meat and drink for the whole day; and the
course fare there spoken of, was the diet that he used at night, when his
days Fast was ended: as I have proved Treatise of Fasting, cap. 1.
elsewhere. And as this was the practice of holy men in Scriptures, so the
like was the practice of religious men mentioned in ancient Writers. Eusebius
relating the History of certain religious men about Alexandria in Egypt,
tells out of Philo, Cibum aut potionem ante solis occasum nemo illorum capit.
Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 16.
that none of them did take any either meat or drink before the Sun
setting. And Cassian prescribing rules of abstinence for the religious men of
his time, Hanc inprimis cautionem sibimet indicat, vt non potus quicquam, non
osus vlla oblectatione deuictus, ante flationem legitima^, communemque
refectionis horam, extra mensam percipere sibimet prorsus indulgeat. Cassian.
Institut. l. 5. cap. 20. p. 216.
Let every one (says he) impose upon himself this caution, that he do not
any way permit himself to taste any drink or meat, before the set time of
fasting be accomplished, and the usual hour of feeding be come. By all which
it may appear, that the ancient custom of Gods servants in their Fasts was,
to forbear all, as well drink as meat, during the time of their abstinence.
Secondly, It is to be considered, that the Ancients, when they did refresh
themselves on their fasting days, which was in the evening, they used not
wines, nor spices, nor juncates, but course and unpleasant fare, such as might
at once both refresh nature and afflict it. So Daniel speaking of his diet,
while the days of his fasting continued, says of himself, Dan. 10.3.
I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth. Where we may
note, that Daniel upon his fasting days abstained as well from strong drink
and fine bread, as he did from flesh. And therefore, as before I showed that
this place does make nothing for Popish choice of meats; so hereby it
appears, that it does utterly overthrow it. And so in the ancient Church of
Christ, St. Hierom teaching Nepotianus the true properties of an holy Fast,
Sint tibi pura, casta, simplicia, moderata, and non superstitiosa iciunia. Quid
prodest oleo non vesci, and molestias quasdam difficultatesque ciboru^
quaerere, caricas, piper, nuces, palmarum fructus, similam, mel, piflacia? Tota
hortorum cultura vexatur vt cibario non vescamur pane: et dum delicias
sectamur, a regno Coelorum retrabimur. Hieron. ep. 2. ad Nepotian. pa. 18. A.
Let thy Fasts (says he) be pure, chaste, sincere, moderate, and not
superstitious. For what avails it (says he) to forbear oil, and to seek
after far fetched and dear bought niceties, as dry Figgs, Pepper, Nuts,
Dates, Simnels, Honey, Pistace nuts? Wel-dressed Gardens are tumbled over, that
we may not feed on brown bread: and while we follow after delicates, we are
drawn back from the Kingdom of Heaven. And if this holy Father do not allow
of these so mean delicates in comparison, how would he thunder against sweet
wines, and sweet meats, marchpanes, preserved stuff, and condited juncates,
all of them very warrantable on a Roman fasting day? And this custom of the
ancient Church, is so clear and well known to all that know any thing in
Antiquity, that the Writers of the Church of Rome do confess it to be true.
The Author of the Book called Antiquitates Liturgicae, says, Antiq. Liturg.
to. ^ feria quarta quatuor temporum. cap. 1. page 101.
[Fuit olim par ratio vini, quae carnis;] There was anciently the same reason of
wine, that was of flesh. And not long after he adds, that the meats
forbidden by the Canons in time of fasting, were delicate meats, either by
nature, or made such by Art. Postremum a quo abstinere inbent canones, sunt
cibi delicati, sieve natura, sieve art conditi. Ibid. page 105.
Lindan says, that Jeiunia nostra, quae -- dum olei stammas, vini aestum,
omnisque aromatum generis ignes Helluoni infarciunt stomacho, veteribus
Christianis omnino fuisse non modo incognita, sed and intolerabilia, atque adeo
abominanda, pijs omnibus vetera cogitantibus arbitramur notius, quam vt de ea
re vlla sint verba profundenda. Lind. Panopl. l. 3. c. 11. page 89.
Wines, and Spices, and Confections, now familiar in their Fasts, would have
seemed intalerable to the ancient Church. Beyerlynck says, that Abstinebant
illi piscibus, omnique potu, qui inebriare potest: nunc in solis carnibus
ciborum delectus fere consistit. Beyerlinck. prompt. in festo Cinerum, tex. 3.
page 64.
they (the Ancients) did abstain from fish, and all drink that might
ouerturne the brain; but that now among them, their choice of meats
consists almost in flesh only. Reginaldus says, Licet vinum olim fuerit de
numero rerum quae in die ieiunij sumi prohibentur, nunc tamen non esse.
Reginald. l. 4. number. 151. page 151.
Though wine anciently was in the number of those things which are forbidden on
fasting days, yet it is not now so. Matthaeus Galenus says, Vinum vix
puerperis concedebatur: sanos autem and valentes illudgustare in Quadragesima
and quartis, sextisque feriis, nefas fuisse testantur Epiphan. Timotheus and
Balsamon. Mat. Galenus Catech. 93. page 291.
Wine was scarce permitted to women in childe-bed: but that men in health
should taste it in Lent, or on Wednesdaies and Frydaies, was held as an heinous
thing. And Pisanus, Veteres Canones non solum vinu^, sed etiam siceram
interdixere, and omne quod inebriare potest, and mulsam ac ceruisiam: olera
tantum concedebant in esum, seclusis etiam ipsis piscibus. Pisan. de Abstinent.
cap. 14. page 162.
The ancient Canons (says he) did not only forbid wine, but strong drink,
and Mead, and Ale, and all that might overcome the brain: they only allowed
herbs for meat; fishes being forbidden also. And Hofmeister cites a saying
out of Theophilus Alexandrinus, that Qui legum praecepta custodiunt, ignorant
vinu^ in ieiunijs, carniu^ esum repudiant. Hof. Loc. com. cap. 17. fol. 176.
pa. 2.
they who keep the rules of the Laws, know not any wine in their Fasts. It is
a clear case then, that the Ancients did forbear wine and strong drink, and
pleasant meats, when they refreshed themselves upon their fasting days. And
consequently, the choice of meats, which the Church of Rome does make, is most
opposite to the practice of Gods people in elder and purer times.

Secondly, the choice that the Church of Rome does make of her meats for a
fasting day, does overthrow the very use of a religious Fast. For by their own
definitions and determinations, the use of a right Fast is for afflicting of
the body, and subduing of lust, and elevating of the mind to Godward: but
their choice of meats overthrows these ends and uses. For, spices, and
sweetmeates, and preserved stuff, and confectionary ware, and strong wines,
(all which, and much more, are allowable with them in their religious Fasts:
nay, they do ordinarily provide the best wines, or where wines are not so
usual, Braggot and Mead, and other choice drinks, to keep Lent Fast
withal:) these, I say, do please nature, inflame the blood, fill the head,
and provoke lust; so far are they from helping to clear the brain, elevate
the mind, cool lust, and afflict the body. This truth, besides the evidence
of it in reason, is acknowledged by the Adversaries also. Iacobus de Graff is,
Etsi vinum sit nutritiuum; and ad concupiscentiam magis prouocet potus vini,
quam esus carnium, -- tamen, etc. Iaco. de Graff. part. 1. lib. 2. c. 37. number.
24. page 215.
Although (says he) wine be nutritive or of a nourishing nature, and the
drinking of wine does more provoke men to lust then the eating of flesh does;
yet, etc. Pisanus, A quibusdam terrae fructibus abstinebant olim Catholici, in
Quadragesima, vt docuit Augustinus contra Faustum, nempo ab Aromatis, aut ijs
quae venerem excitant. Pisan. de Abstinent. cap. 14. page 165.
Catholics (says he) in times past, did abstain from some fruits of the
earth in Lent time, as Augustine does witness; as namely from spices, and such
things as stir up or provoke lust. And so speak others: but I will content
my self with one testimony more, and that is of Cornelius a Lapide, a late
learned Jesuit. He writing on these words of Daniel, Neither came there flesh
nor wine in my mouth; notes, that the Veteres Christiani vsi sunt
Xerophagia.i. cibis aridis, vti teflantur Tertul. Cypr. Basil. and alij. Idque
facieba^t triplici de causa. Primo, ad poenitentiam. Sicut enim potus, quia
liquidus and subtilis and penetrans intima, intimius singulas corporis parts
afficit and recreat; ita abflinere a potu et a liquidis, vescique aridis, mayor
est poenite^tia, quam vesci liquidis and abstinere aridis. Sis, sitis magis
affligit hominem quam fames: ac proinde facilius est esurienti abstinere a
cibo, quam sitienti abstinere a potu. Secundo, ad castitatem. Cibi enim aridi
arefaciunt corpus, and humorem venereum consumunt. Tertio, ad sapientiam,
studiu^ and orationem. Qui enim liquidis abstinet, caret vaporibus and fumis,
qui caput, rationem and iudicium offuscont, obscurant and bebetant. Hinc vetus
dictum, Anima suca est sapientissima. Corn. a Lapide in Daniel. 10.3.
Ancients did use a dry kind of food, (consisting of bread, salt, water, and
raw roots, and such like) which they called Xerophagia,.i. a dry feeding. And
they did it, (as he says) for three causes. 1. Ad paenitentiam; for an act of
repentance, or (to use their own phrase) for doing of penance. For, as drink,
because it is liquid, and of a subtle substance, and easily piercing into the
inward parts, does more affect and refresh all the parts of the body; so
abstinence from drink, and liquid things, and eating of dry food, is a
greater penance, then if a man should eat moist things, and abstain from dry.
So, thirst does more afflict or chasten a man, then hunger does; and therefore
it is more easy for an hungry man to forbear meat, then for a thirsty man to
forbear drink. Secondly, They used this dry feeding (says he) ad castitatem;
for preserving of chastity. For dry meats do dry the body, and consume
venereous moisture. Thirdly, Adsapientiam, studium and orationem; for
furthering of wisdom, meditation and prayer. For he that refraineth moist
meats, is free from vapors and fumes, which do darken and dull reason and
judgment. And hence came the old saying, Anima sicca est sapientissima; The
dry soul is the most wise. And if this be true, as both reason does teach,
and learned men of the Roman Church do acknowledge; we have two conclusions
from hence for our purpose.

1. Concl. Seeing Daniel and the ancient Christians, upon good ground and
reason, did forbear wine and moist meats, and eat dry things, when they
refreshed themselves upon their fasting days: therefore Papists, who permit
all sorts of wine, and do use to chasten the body, by filling it with strong
drinks, are most unlike to the holy men of elder times. And therefore it is an
idle flourish, when they allege Antiquity for the bolstering up of their
choice of meats: the custom of the Ancients being herein no more like to the
custom of the present Roman Church, then Chalk is to Cheese.

2. Concl. Seeing wine and drinks, and moist things, and spicerie wares, do
more provoke lust, and more dull the brain, and more refresh and content
nature, than dry meats do: therefore Papists make a mad choice of meats;
when on their fasting days, which should serve for abating of lust, and
afflicting of the body, and eleuating of the mind in prayer and meditation,
they allow all sorts of wine and strong drinks; and add to their drinks,
sweet-meates, and conserues and confections, and spices, and what else may
either please the taste, or content nature, so it be not flesh. Let them cease
then to boast of their mortifying of the flesh by prescribing of many fasts:
for the Drunkard and the Glutton would, to choose, wish such a fasting day once
or twice a week, for the satisfying of their appetite, as these men do
prescribe and practice for the macerating and crucifying of their flesh.

CHAP. III. The number of refections allowed in a Popish Fast.
THe second particular, wherein the liberty, or licenciousnesse rather, which
the Roman Church does take and use in her Fasts, is, the number of refections
allowable with them on a fasting day. And for this purpose, I find, that they
allow, first, a set meal, which is their Dinner. Secondly, a little meal,
which they call, Coenulam, a little Supper; and Refectiunculam, a small
refection; or Collationem vespertinam, a Collation in the evening. And thirdly,
they allow Drinkings all day long, as many as ye will; which we may call their
continual or all-day Beuers.

And for the first of these, that is, their Dinner, they acknowledge that to be
a full meal; and they say that it is the only refection which they allow upon
a fasting day. And therefore I shall not need upon this occasion, to say any
more of it; all that herein I do intend, being only to show how many
refections they do allow. But for the other two, they do so mince the matter
when they speak of them, as if these deserved not the name of any Refreshing
or Refection. And therefore it will be requisite to insist upon these a little
longer: that we may see what they say, and what we may think of them.

1. To begin then with the former, which is their evening Collation, or
little Supper, as they call it; we may, for discovering of their indulgence
therein, consider three things. First, the quality of the meat then allowed.
Secondly, The quantity of it. And thirdly, the reason and grounds, from whence
this indulgence did arise. In all which, that no man may think them to be
charged wrongfully, I will deliver their opinion in their own words.

And first, for the quality of the meat, or the kinds of things allowed by
them, Azorius says, Communi iam^ vsu receptu^ est, vt parum panis etiam
edatur, vel seorsim solum, vel vna cum fructibus, herbis, vel alijs cibis
leuioribus, cuiusmodi sunt ficus, vua passa, nuces, pira, poma, vel alia ex
saccharo vel melle confecta, vel pisciculus paruulus. Azor. Instit. part. 1. l.
7. cap. 8. q 7. pa. 557.
that the common custom is, (and that both he and the rest do approve of) for
men to eat a little bread, either by it self alone, or together with fruits,
herbs, or other lighter meats, such as are figgs, raisins of the sun,
pears, apples, or other things made of sugar, or of honey, or a little small
fish. Filliucius says, Dico omnes conuenire, quod licite sumi possint ea, quae
communiter in ientaculis and collatiunculis apponi solent: qualia sunt arborum
fructus, herbae, and cibi leuiores; vt ficus, amygdalae, vuae passae, nuces,
pirae, poma, oliuae, bellaria. Filliuc. Moral Qq. Tract. 27. part. 2. c. 2.
number. 29. page 280.
that all do agree, that those things which commonly are brought to table at
breakfasts and banquets, may lawfully be used; such as are the fruits of
trees, herbs, and lighter meats, as figgs, almonds, raisins of the sun,
nuts, pears, apples, olives, juncates, or banketing stuff. And De pane,
qua^uis aliqui dubitarint; secure tamen adhiberi potest ex consuetudi^ne. Ibid.
as for bread, though some have made question of it, yet it may be taken
without fear, and without danger. Bonacina says, Qua^uis communiori vsu
receptum sit, vt in secunda refectione ij sumantur cibi, quibus in die ieiunij
vescimur ante vel past prandium, vt sunt vua, nuces, pon a, vel alia ex
saccharo aut melle confecta; licite tamen etiam sumi potest iusculum, ^odo ron
sit ex coctis cibis, qui tempore ieiunij interdicuntur. Posset etiam comedi
pisciculus, aut exigua pars piscis maioris. Martin. Bonacina Sum. Moralis, to.
2. de Legib. Disput. vlt. q. 1. punct. 3. number. 3. page 320.
Although it be received by the more common custom, that in the second
refection, those meats may be taken, which on a fasting day we eat either
before or after di^ner; such as are raisins, nuts, apples, or other things made
of sugar or honey: Yet broth also may lawfully be taken, so it be not of such
boiled meats, as are forbidden in the time of the Fast. A little fish also may
be eaten, or a little portion of a greater fish. These and such like be the
meats, which they allow men to feed on in the evening of their fasting day;
and by eating of these in stead of their usual supper, they macerate the body
mightily, and pull down the pride of the flesh, that it shall never dare to
kick against the spirit any more.

Secondly, for the quantite of meat in their evening Collation, they say, it
may be such and so great, as the custom of the place is. Fernandes says, that
the custom of the Country is to be observed. For, Non est mortale talem
consuetudinem seruare, licet quantitas sit aliquantulu^ grauis. Fernand. Exam.
part. 2.. 2. cap. 8. nu. 9. pa. 389.
it is no mortal sin to follow that, though the quantity be somewhat great.
Fumus says, Facientes Collationem grossam secundum consuetudinem Romans Curia
vel tinelli, non frangunt ieiunium. Aur. Armill. v. Ieiun. nu. 12. page 541.
that they which make a gross or great Collation, according to the custom of
the Court of Rome, do not violate their Fast. Filliucius says, Etiamsi
paruitas cibi, qui sumitur, non excusaret, adhuc tamen inducta consuctudo
liberat a culpa. -- Non ergo adaequata ratio liciti vsus Resectiunculae est,
quia sit exigua, sed quia consuetudo iam induxit. Filliuc. Moral. Qq. Tract.
27. part. 2. c. 2. nu. 26. page 279.
that the proper or adequate reason for the lawful use of the evening
Refection, is not because it is little, but because custom has brought it in:
and that though the small quantity of meat should not excuse it, yet the
received custom does free it from fault. Tolet says, that In Collatione vero
est mensura: non debet enim esse tanta, vt potius sit Coena; tunc enim
solueretur ieiunium. Quanta tamen debeat esse, consideranda est consuetudo
communis patriae, quae viget communiter apud homines bonos and timoratos. Non
enim est peccatum mortale, talem consuetudinem seruare, licet quantitas sit
aliquantulum grandis. Tolet Instruct. Sacer. l. 6. c. 2. nu. 6. pa. 738.
a measure is to be kept: for it may not be so great, as that it do rather
become a Supper, then a Collation; for then it were a breaking of a man's fast.
But to know how great it may be, respect is to be had to the common custom of
the country, used by men of tender conscience. For it is no mortal sin, to
observe that, though the quantity be somewhat great. Where we may observe by
the way, that in this Jesuits judgment, men of tender consciences among them,
may use a great quantity of meat in their little Supper. But if ye desire
further to know what quantity men of tender conscience in the Roman Church do
use, Azorius tells us, De Collatione noctis Natiuitatis Domini respo^des, --
quod consuetudo non solum hominum parum de sua salute spirituali curantiu^
Secularium; -- Sed omnium Clericorum, imo Religiosorum and Praelatorum, etia^
Episcoporum and Archiepiscoporu^ bonoru^ invaluit, vt illa nocte opuientas
Collationes fructuum et conseruarum -- and rerum ex saccharo confectarum in
suis mensis ministrentur: quoru^ mensis adfui, and testis sum, and fic dico
posse fieri illa nocte cum talibus, non seruata mensura ieiunij. Llamas Sum.
Ecllesiast. part. 3. c. 5.. 25. pa. 392, 393.
that in the Popes Court (and there I trow there be men of tender conscience:
sure I am, their learned Doctors do approve of the custom there) that In
Curia Romana and Pontificia solet Refectiuncula sumi panlo mayor. Azor. Instit.
part. 1. l. 7. c. 8. q. 8. page 557.
in the Popes Court they use to take a somewhat greater nights refection, then
elsewhere is used. And therefore the common custom abroad cannot be excepted
against, for being greater then men of tender consciences do approve. Llamas a
Spanish Friar and Doctor says, that on Christmas Eve it is the custom not
only of Laymen careless of their salvation, but of all the Clergy, yea, of
religious persons and Prelates, yea, and of good Bishops and Archbishops, to be
served at their tables with plentiful Collations of fruits, and conserues, and
confections of Sugar: that himself has been at their tables, and is an eye
winesse of it, and that it may at that time lawfully be done by such men,
without observing a measure of Fasting. And for the common custom of other
men, Beyerlinck speaking of themselves of the Roman Church, says, Nos longo et
pleno prandio vespertinam adijctmus Refectiunculam, quae saepenumero in coenam
degeneret. Beyerlinck. Pro^pt. Moral. in festo Cinerum, text. 3. in fine, page
64.
We to a long and full dinner do add an evening refection, which oftentimes
does degenerate into a Supper. And this he mentions as a motherly indulgence
which the Church of Rome does permit unto her children. And Lindan says, That
such has been the licenciousnesse of people, that beside the drinking of Wine
and eating of Fish, things not used among the Ancients, Immo and canulam, --
postremo etiam iustam adderent Coenam, quae veteribus procul dubio iustum
fuisset prandium. Lindan. Panopl. l. 3. c. 11. page 89.
they added also Coenulam, a little Supper, and last of all, a full Supper,
which the Ancients out of all question would have esteemed a full dinner. Nor
may any man except against this last testimony, because he speaks not of men
of tender Consciences, but of the ordinary multitude, who as he says, had
taken an irreligious liberty against the strict Rules of their forefathers.
For that limitation of Tolets, when he approves only that custom which is
allowed by tender consciences, is but a flourish, or a varnish to color over
their licencious dealing and doctrine with. For otherwise in deed and in truth,
their Doctrine is, that in this case of Fasting, custom, whether it be
reasonable or unreasonable, yet does still make the practice lawful, as I
shall have occasion to show more fully when I come to the last particular. And
by this it may appear, what quantity of meat is allowable in their little
Supper, as they call it.

In the third place now, we are to consider of the reason or ground of this
Supper on Fasting-dayes; for it was not so from the beginning: and therefore it
will be worth the labor to search how it came in. But we need not to bestow
any great pains: themselves do tell us, that Quanquam olim sumerentur
[Collationes] tantum per modum medicinae ad captandum somnum; iam tamen
consuetudo obtinuit, vt etiam aliquid per modum nutritionis sumatur. Fernand.
Exa^. part. 2. c. 8.. 2. nu. 9. page 389.
in former time, when it first began, it was allowed only by way of medicine
to procure sleep, when men through abstinence and emptiness could not take
their natural rest: but that now custom has prevailed, that it may be used
for nourishment or to feed the body. And (as another says) Verius mihi
videntur sentire, qui eiusmodi Refectiunculam absolute and simpliciter
esselicitam arbrtrantur, tametsi indigentiae excusationem non habeat. Eam enim
a peccato defendit and liberat non somni velnaturae necessitas, sed co^suetudo
recepta: and -- fateor quidem illa^ primo coepisse causa^ somni capiendi, and
idcirco etiam indigentiae; more tamen and consuetudine est introductu^, vt ea
absolute et simpliciter vtamur. Azor. Inst part. 1. l. 7 c. 8. q. 4. p. 556.
at the beginning it was brought in to make men sleep, and so upon a kind of
necessity: but now it is by custom warranted, that we may use it without any
such respect. And so, or to the same purpose speak Fillinc. Moral. Qq. Tract.
27. part 2. c. 2. nu. 25. page 279. Less de Iustit. and Iure, l. 4. c. 2.
Dubit. 2.. Item sumentes. page 719. Llamas Sum Eccles. part. 3. c. 5.. 24.
page 391, 392. Joseph. Angles in 4. de Iejun. q. 9. art. 2. diffic. 4. page 435.
others also. So in conclusion we see, that besides their set meal at
noone-tide, they allow a little meal (as they call it) in the evening,
consisting of bread, fruits, herbs, spices, confections, and a small fish, and
that in such measure or quantity, be it small or great, as by the custom of
the place is made usual; and all this for refreshing and nourishing of the
body. And thus much they say.

Now I say to the contrary, that this rule and custom of theirs does both
swerve from all practice of Antiquity, and does cross the rules and properties
of an holy Fast, even such as themselves do require.

First, it is repugnant to Antiquity. Olim quum in diebus ieiuntoru^ ad nonam
coenassent omnes, nulla vespertina refectioncula vtebantur: sed postquam edere
seu coenare coeperunt ad sextam, qui iei^um seruabant, introducla est
refectiuncula vespertina. Azor instit. l. 7. c. 8. q 5. page 556.
For anciently (says a Jesuit) when all men fasted till three of the clock,
they used not any evening Refection: but after that men on their fasting days
began to eat their Supper at midday, (which was but a few years ago, and
more then a thousand years after Christ) then was the evening Refection
brought up. And as another Jesuit confesses, Quia Canones teiunantibus cibum
prohibent, potu^ no prohibe^t; subingressa sunt, conniuentibus Hierarcbis,
nostrae nocturnae refectiunculae veteribus prorsus ignotae, eo videlicet
praetextu, ne potus noceat. Pisa. de Abstinent. ca. 14. pa. 167.
Because the Canons of the Church do forbid meat, but do not forbid drink:
by the conniuence of the Prelates, our evening Refections utterly unknown to
the Ancients entered in, upon pretense, for sooth, lest drink alone should do
hurt to the stomach. And Beyerlinck more freely and plainly Illi vnicam
vefectionem, ea^que tenuem ieiunantibus indulgeba^t; nos long et pleno prandio
vespertinam adijcimus Refectiunculam, quae saepenumero in Coenam degeneret.
Beyerl. Prompt. Moral. in festo Cinerum, text. 3. page 63. 64.
They, says he, (he means the Ancients) permitted one only Refection, and
that a spare one too: but we to a long and full dinner do add a small
Refection more, which oftentimes does degenerate into a Supper. Thus themselves
confess (as indeed they cannot with any face deny so clear and evident a
truth) that their evening Collation is a novel custom, unheard of in the
primitive Church, or among good Christians in the purer times.

Secondly, this custom of theirs in taking an evening Collation after a full
noone-tide Dinner, does cross and overthrow the nature and right use of a
religious Fast. For themselves describe a Fast to consist of one Refection
only; and they add by way of reason, that if more were granted, it would take
away the end aimed at in an holy Fast, which is the afflicting of the body,
Probatur ex universally consuetudine, quae sic interpretatae est praeceptum
ieiunij, vt non nisi femel in die comedendum sit. Siluester, Medina, Azorius,
and alij. Et iure meritoque quia si pluries Refectio sumeretur, non
castigaretur corpus; passim enim bomines contenti sunt duplici refectione.
Filliuc. Tract. 27. part. 2. c. 2. nu. 22. page 279. Quum homines communiter
bis in die comedant, volens iciunare debet tantum semel in die comedere. Atque
ob id vnica comestio in die ieiunij (a media nocte in mediam vsque nostem) est
necessaria ad essentiam ieiunij. Ideoque bis parum comedens non censetar
ieiunasse. Lorichius Thesaur. v. Ieiunium nu. 6.
because men ordinarily are contented and satisfied with two Refections in a
day; and consequently, more then one, would be no affliction or chastisement to
the body. And they say true: and the truth of it is verified in this case. For
who cannot without feeling any want of meat, go to bed with such a Collation
in the evening, after he has eaten a good dinner before? By their own rules
then it follows, that the allowing of such an evening Collation after a
noone-tide dinner, is an abolishing of the right use of an holy Fast.

And thus much for their evening Refection or Collation: I come now to consider
their custom of drinking on their fasting days, which I call a continual
Bever. For they do allow a man in their Fasts to drink what drink he will,
and as often as he will. In Ecclesiastica Quadragesima vnica refectio tantum
est concessa, and in potatione nulla est apposita limitatio. Io. Medina Cod. de
Ieiunio. q. 2. in fine page 329.
In drinking in Lent fasts there is no limitation or restraint, how often it
may be used, says Medina. And Fernandes, having first propounded the
question, Poteritne quis in die ieiunij saepius bibere, quamuis sciat se potu
maxim ali? Resp. Poterit. Fernand. Exam. p. 2. c. 8. nu. 17. pa. 392.
Whether upon a fasting day a man may drink oftentimes, although he do know
he shall be nourished very much by it: he answers readily and roundly,
Poterit, he may do it. And so Filliucius, Dico potum aquae vel vini vel
ceruisiae, sieve ante sieve post prandium; sieve sumatur ad sustentatienem, sieve
non, haud frangere ieiunium.
I say (says he) that drinking of water, or wine, or beer, whether it be
before or after dinner; whether it be taken for nourishmen or not, does no way
break a man's fast. And agreeably hereunto the rest of their Doctors do teach,
as I showed before out of AZorius.

Now lay these things together, that upon a Fasting day a man may eat a full
dinner, and after that in the evening take a little Supper, which by virtue of
common custom does grow to a true or just meal many times; and besides all
this, Colligitur, quod non prohib^tur bibere quantum quis voluerit ante and
post comestionem. Sequitur praetereaeum non infringere te^un^u^, qu^sumit
Collationem: nam am plius quam sen el in die non comedit. Barthol. Medina
Instruct. Confessariorum, l. 1. c. 14. 10. page 142. Nondicitur Refectio, sed
Refectiuncula. Bonacina Moral. Theol. to. 2. disp. vlt. q. 1. punct. 3. page
320.
may drink sweet wines and strong drinks, what he will, at all times of the
day, and then tell me, what great penance is to be found in a Popish Fast? They
say, that drinking of the best wines, is no feeding; and that eating a
Collation in the evening, and spices and conserues at other times of the day,
is no Refection. But Jonathan, when he tasted a little honey upon the point of
his spear, felt himself much refreshed by it; as it is 1 Samuel 14.27, 28, 29.
And we find it in experience, that strong drinks, spicerie and confections,
do so satisfy the desire of nature, that they take away a man's appetite from
his meat; and themselves confess, that wines, and strong drinks, and
Electuaries, do nourish the body, and breed blood and spirits. What gluttons
then are they in their religious Fasts, that esteem all this as no refection
of the body? And if it be a Voco Refectionem, sumptionem cibi ad alendum
corpus, Filliuc. Tract. 27. part. 2. cap. 2 nu. 22. page 279 and Sumere
tenraculum si rotinum ad sustentationem naturae, est procul dubio iterum
comedere. Caiet. Summula, v. Ieiunium. fol. 120. page 2.
Refection, (as they which use it do feel, and all that consider it, even
themselves not excepted, will confess it;) then a Popish Fast is not contained
in the definition of a true Fast, one essential part whereof is this, that
there be taken one only Refection for the space of a whole day.

CHAP. IIII. The Time of refection in a Popish Fast.
THus I have done with the second particular, concerning their Indulgence,
namely, the Number of their Refections: the third is, the time that they
prescribe or allow for the breaking of their Fast. For in the ordinary Fasts of
the Church, one refection in the day has ever been allowed, but that in times
past, when Religion was not defaced with superstition and hypocrisy, was
toward the end of the day; that so nature might be chastened, and yet not
destroyed. But in the Fasts of the Church of Rome, this usage of the Ancients
is perverted also. For clearing of which point, I will set down their own
sayings and conclusions.

1. They say in the general, that that time for breaking of a man's Fast is
lawful, which custom does approve. So Medina says, Hic taman non est immor
endum, nec opus est scrupulos infer. Seruetur in hoc, sicut in alijs multis
patria consuetudo, Ioh. Medina Cod. de ieiun. q. 6. page 338. Col. 2.
that concerning this point we are not to make any stop, nor is it needful to
move any scruples: but let the custom of the Country be observed herein, as in
many other things. Fernandes first propounds the question: Interr. Quae est
hora co^petens sumendi cibum? Resp. Ea, quae secundum consuetudinem loci
seruari solet paulo plus minusue. Fernand. Exam. part. 2. c. 8.. 2. nu. 4. page
388.
What is a competent hour for receiving of meat on a fasting day? and then he
shapeth the answer to it, That hour which is used to be kept according to the
custom of the place; or thereabouts not much under or over. And Cajetan, Hora
quidem conueniens, ante quam non est comedendum, est meridies grossa
aestimatione. Sed vbi communiter non seruatur a ieiunantibus, potest quis
comedere illa hora, qua co^muniter ieiunantes ibi comedunt. Caie. Summul. v.
Ieiun. fol. 120. page 1.
The convenient hour (says he) before which we must not eat, is midday:
But where that is not commonly observed, a man may eat at that hour, at which
those that do fast, do commonly eat in that place. And to the same purpose
speak others also.

Secondly, for more particular determination of the time, they say, that the
custom among them is, to dine on their fasting days about midday, or an hour
or two sooner. Cajetan says, that Nunc autem Religiosi, etiam multum ante
meridiem aestiuo tempore and in Quadragesima videntur comedere. Caietan. Ibid.
even their religious men, in summer and in Lent do eat their meal long
before midday. And Azorius tells us, that their Seculares reiunium laxant ac
soluant, hyeme quidem vna ante meridiem hora; aestate vero duabus fere horis
anre meridiem: Monachi vero and caeteri religiosi, hyeme aut semi hora ante
meridiem, aut in meridie, aut etiam hora ante meridiem; aestate vero vna hora
integra, aut etiam vna and semi bora ante meridiem. Azor. Instit part. 1. l. 7.
c. 11. page 564. Col. 1.2.
Seculars do break off their Fast in winter, one hour before midday, and in
summer almost two hours: and that Monckes and other religious persons do it,
in winter, about midday, or half an hour, or a whole hour before; and in
summer, a whole hour, or an hour and an half before midday. And to him agree
Filliuc. Tract. 27. part. 2. c. 4. nu 73. pa. 284.
Filliucius, and Reginald, Prax. l. 4. nu. 156. page 152.
Reginaldus.

Thirdly, They think it not unlawful, to break Fast longer before noonetide,
if so it be used. Barthol. Medina says, De hoc non est scrupulus habendus. Nam
videtur mos esseinter Christianos introductus, quod edere sufficit quasi bora
ante meridiem; suntque nonnulli Doctores sentientes seruari ieiunium, si mane
comeditur tribus aut quatuor anticipatis horis ante aneridicm, modo non
comedatur niagis quam semel. Barthol. Medina Instruct. Confess. l. 1. c. 14..
10. page 143.
that we are not to stand scrupulously upon this point, because the custom is
brought in among Christians, that it suffices to eat about an hour before
noone: and that some Doctors think that a Fast is kept, if men eat in the
morning, three or four hours before midday, so they eat not oftener then
once. And he and they speak according to their own grounds and principles.
For seeing custom is of such power with them, both in this and in other
things, that it may dissanull and cancel the Churches orders in greater
matters then this is, as Reginald. l. 4. nu. 156. pa. 152.
Reginaldus says it may; then if custom have prevailed to have Dinner many
hours before noone, it will be safe enough to use it.

Fourthly, because the rules and Canons of the Church did require, that their
afternoon service, which they call Officium Nonae, their noone or ninth-houre
Service, which was at three of the Clock after midday, should be said in
their Churches, before they did break off their Fast; they translated their
afternoon Service to the fore-noone, that so they might eat their Supper
about midday, or sooner. And though they altered the time, in this manner,
from the ninth hour to the sixth, or sooner, that is, from three of the Clock
to twelve; yet they kept the old name of their Service still, and called it
Preces Nonae, the noone or ninth-houre Prayers. And from hence a learned man of
their own Church observes, that Est hoc nostris moribus receptum in officio
Ecclesiastico, vt diebus ieiuniorum Preces Nonae, and quas hora nona dicere
oportebat, ante prandium recitentur. Et vulgus Rusticorum apud Walones meridiem
vocant Nonam, and Flandri tam Rustici quam Ciues meridiem suo idiomate vocant
Nonam; and ad pulsum duodecimae, quae est nobis hora meridiei, obtinuit vetus
proborum Catholicorum consuetudo, vt detecto capite oretur Deus and cogitetur
mors Christi, quae accidit hord nona Antiq. Liturg. to. 1. feria 4 quatuor
Temporum cap. 1. pa. 100.
in Flanders, and among the Wallons, midday or twelve of the Clock has been
used to be called Noone. And so we see it is called among us here in
England. Nor did they rest contented with this; but because the Tempore
Quadragesima non manducant ieiunantes ante dictas vesperas: sed dicunt illas
omnes Ecclesiae decima hora, vt vndecima comedant. Hieron. Llamas Sum. Eccles.
part. 3. c. 5. 26. pa. 394. Erat illa consuetudo in Quadragesima, vt hora nona,
hoc est, nostro more, hora tertia post meridiem, inciperent fieri missae, and
post missas O^fficium Vespertinum, ac deinde solueretur ieiuniu^. Cui legi
nostri mores fraudem faciunt. Ita enim dicimus missas vt vna cum Vespertinali
Officio, quod illis in Quadragesima continuo recte subiungimus, finiantur hora
sexta, quae respondet nostrae duedecimae seu meridiei, and tunc soluimus
ietunium. Antiq. Liturg. to. 2. feria sexta post Cineres. page 105.
Canons required, that in Lent time they should fast till after the Vespers or
Evening Service was ended, which was toward night; they said their Vespers or
Evening Service in the morning, that having dispatched them, they might go to
meat at 11. or 10. of the clock. And so Quum ieiunium, quod antea non nisi ad
nonam horam, sieve ad tert am nobis po eridianam soluebatur, ante meridiem
interrumperetur, atque eam in rem non modo mysteria, sed and vesperae suum
mentientes tempus anticiparentur; factum est vt -- horae ieiuniorum labor
molestiores praeciderentur. Lindan. Panopl. lib. 3. cap. 11. page 89.
their Evening Service (as a learned Bishop of their own does observe) belyeth
his time, being performed long before that time of the day. And the reason of
all this was, because (as Tunc vespertinae borae post horam tertiam post
meridiem celebrabantur; quam horam quum multis esset difficile expe^tare vt
coenam sumerent; postea vsu mductum est, vt ante vel iuxta meridiem
celebrarentur, vt illis finitis, competens ad co edendum tempus fidelibus
relinqueretur. Io. Medina Cod. de Ieiun. q. 6 page 338. Col. 2.
themselves do tell us) it was too long for many to stay till three of the
clock for their supper; and therefore it was brought in by custom, that the
Evening Service should be said before or about midday, that that being ended,
there might be left a competent hour, for Gods faithful people to eat on
their fasting day. The sum is, they made haste with their Service, that they
might not stay long for their Dinner.

Now against this part of their Indulgence, I say,

1. That it is against all practice of Antiquity in Scriptures. For, the
custom related there, was to abstain till Evening, or the Sunne-setting; as
may appear by the examples of Fasts recorded in Scriptures, and gathered and
alleged by Bellarmine to that purpose. In Testamento veteri quum de ieiuniis
agitar, borae vespertinae fit mentio, Jud. 20. Ieiunauerunt illa die vsque ad
vesperam. Idem babetur. 2 Reg. 1. and 3. and alibi. Ex quo intelligimus apud
Patres Veteris Testamenti ieiunium fuisse semel tantum, idque ad vesperam eibum
capere. Bellar. de bo. oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 2.. unam igitur.
In the Old Testament, (says he) where there is speech of fasting, there is
mention made of the euentide, as the time when they broke off their Fast: as
Judge. 20.26. They fasted that day until even. And the like is said, 2. Sam.
1.12. They mourned and wept and fasted until even for Saul and for Jonathan,
and 2 Samuel 3.35. So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread or ought
else, till the sun be down. And so else where. Whereby we understand (says
he) that among the Fathers of the Old Testament, a Fast was, to eat meat but
once only, and that in the evening. The case is both clear and confessed; and
therefore needs no further proof.

2. I say, that it is against the practice of the ancient Christian Church. For
In principio n^sientis Ecclesiae ieiunium vsque ad solis occasum tendebatur. Et
ratio est, quia Apostoli formam ieiunandi acceperunt ab antiquis Patribus,
quibus praeceptum erat, vsque ad vesperam ieiunium seruare: and ita Discipuli
Apostolorum per multa tempora seruaue ut. Lege Eusebius. l. 2. Hist. Eccl. c. 17.
and Basil. Sermon. 1. de Ieiun. and D. Ambros. Sermon. 33 and B. Aug. Ep. 86.
Joseph. Angles in 4. Sent part. 1. de Iej. q. 9. ar. 3. Diff. 1. pa. 440. v.
Antiq. Liturg. to, 2 feria 6. post Cineres. p. 104.
in the beginning of the Church, Fasts were continued till the Sunne-setting,
says Joseph Angles. He adds, that the reason thereof was, because the
Apostles received their form of fasting from the Fathers of the Old Testament,
who were commanded to keep their Fast till evening. And so the Apostles
Scholars kept it for many years after. And for proof thereof, he bids us
read Eusebius, Basil, Ambrose, and Augustine. And if he had pleased, he might
have added others more. Bellarmine cites Tertullian, Athanasius, Basil,
Epiphan. Ambrose, Hierom, Prudentius, Paulinus, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Cassian, Benedict, Gregory, Bernard, Micrologus, Gratian. Out of which Authors
he concludes, that Christiani Veteres ieiunia non soluebant, nisi hora nona ab
ortusolis, vel etiam hora vesportma in Quadragesima. -- St. August. in Epist.
86. ad Casulanum, passim accipit non prandere pro co quod est ieiunare, and
co^tra non ieiunare, pro eo quod est prandere. -- apud Veteres -- inauditum est
prorsus, vt ante horam nonam, quae est tertia post meridiem, ieiunium
quodcunque soluatur: quemadmodum etiam nulla est apud Veteres mentio binae
Refectionis, qua^ de ieiunijs agitur. Bellar. de bonis operibus in part. l. 2.
cap. 2.
The Ancients did not break off their Fasts til three of the clock in the
afternoon, or till evening in Lent time: that in S. Augustines dialect, Not to
fast, and to dine; or to fast, and not to dine, is all one: and that it is a
thing never heard of among the Ancie^ts, that any Fast should be broke off
before three of the clock in the afternoon. And (as another learned man
notes) Tanta fuit alim cura non comedendi ante nonam tempore ieiunij, vt
prandere and non ieiunare passim omnibus Veterum libris sint synonyma. Antiq.
Liturg. to. 1. feria quarta, 4. temporum. cap. 1. page 99.
So great was the care in old time, not to eat before three of the clock on
their fasting days, that to dine, and not to fast, are euerywhere in all the
Books of the Ancients, words of the same signification. And the like is
acknowledged generally by the rest of their learned men: as indeed the case is
so clear, that it cannot be denied, or any way shifted off. And heerewith we
may rest satisfied for this point: Only I will add one consideration more,
that the Ancients, though they did eat but one only meal, and that a sparing
one; yet they esteemed it not the keeping of a fasting day, if they took that
meal about noonetide or dinner time. And hence it was, that because the Church
did forbid any fasting days to be kept between Easter and Whitsunday, that
they might express their joy for Christ's Resurrection; the ancient Monks, not
willing to use any fuller diet then they were accustomed unto at other times,
did only change their supper into a dinner, without altering the quantity of
their meat. So St. Hierome, relating the customs of the Coenobitae, that is,
such-religious persons as lived together in a Collegiate life, says among
other things, A Pascha ad Pentecosten Coenae mutantur in Prandia; quo and
traditioni Ecclesiasticae satisfiat, and ventrem cibe non onerent duplicate.
Hieron. Epist. 22. ad Eust. pa. 186. F.
From Easter to Pentecost, their Suppers are changed into Dinners, that so they
may both satisfy the Orders of the Church, and yet not stuff the belly with a
double portion of meat. And in Cassian we find, that one having moved a
doubt, how a religious man, accustomed to fasting and spare diet, might pass
this long time of Festiuitie between Easter and Whitsuntide, without making
the flesh too wanton, if he should feed more fully or finely then before;
answer was made, to this purpose; that Vt ergo and diebus festiuis statutae
consuetudo solennitatis consernetur, and saluberrimus parcimoniae modus minime
transcendatur; sufficit vt indulgentiam remissionis eo vsque progredi patiamur,
vt cibus, qui hora diei n^na fuerat capiendus, paulo citius, id est, sexta hora
pro festiuitatis tempore capiatur, ea ratione duntaxat, vt escarum solitus
modus vel qualitas non mutetur. Cassian. Collat. 21. cap. 23. page 1030.
for the keeping of this festival solemnity appointed by the Church, without
breaking of the wholesome order of their spare diet; it would suffice so far
only to remit of their rigor, that the meat which was used to be taken at
three of the clock in the afternoon, should for that space of time be taken
somewhat sooner, that is, about twelve of the clock, in that manner only, that
neither the wented measure, nor the quality of their meat be changed. By
which places it is apparent, that Antiquity thought a man's Fast to be broken,
if there were nothing else in it, but only this, that he did eat about
midday; though the quantity and quality of his meat were altogether the
same that is usual on fasting days. And this may serve to show how unlike the
Church of Rome is in this point also, to all Antiquity both of the Jewish and
Christian Church.

Thirdly, I say, it is against the nature of a Fast, as it is described by
Popish Doctors. For, a Fast is for afflicting of the body by subtraction of
food. And therefore, (as Thomas speaking of this very point, says,) Vnde
aportet, quod aliquid addat supra communem consuetudinem; ita tamen quod per
hoc non multum natura grauetur. Est autem debita and communis consuetudo
comedendi hominibus circa horam sextam; tum quia iam videtur esse completa
digestio nocturno tempore, naturali calore interius reuocato propter frigus
noctis circumstans; and diffusio humoris per membra, cooperante ad hoc calore
diei, vsque ad su^mum solis ascensum: tum etiam, quia tunc praecipue natura
corporis humani indiget iuvari contra exteriorem aeris calorem, ne humores
interius adurantur. Et idea vt ieiunans aliquam affictionem sentiat pro culpae
satisfactione, conueniens hora comedendi taxaturieiunantibus circa horam nonem.
Aquin. 2.2. q. 147. art. 7. in C.
Something must be added, above the common custom; yet so, that nature hereby
be not burdened overmuch. But the custom of eating about midday, is the due
and common time; both because now digestion seems to be fully ended in the
night season, natural heat being called inward, because of the external cold
about, and the diffusion of the moisture or juice by the members of the body
seems now also complete, the heat of the day cooperating thereunto, until
the highest ascent of the Sun. And also because man's nature does especially
then stand in need to be relieved against the external heat of the air, lest
the humors within be burned by it. And therefore that he that fasteth may
feel some affliction, a convenient hour of eating is imposed about three of
the clock. And Bellarmine, and Valentia, and Pisanus, besides other more, in
their definitions of a Fast, or among the essential things belonging to it,
do (as I showed in the beginning) require this for one, that in a Fast, the
abstinence is to be longer then at other times, and the refection is to be
later and after the usual time of Dinner, that by this forbearance of meat,
nature may feel a want of food, and the body may be afflicted by it. But the
usual time of feeding on ordinary days, is about noone, or eleven of the
clock, or not before ten at the soonest. And therefore when the Church of
Rome does allow mento eat their dinner on fasting days at those hours or
sooner; it does by this indulgence overthrow the essence of a Fast.

To this Bellarmine answers, Quando Veteres definierunt horam nonam pro
solutione ieiunij, tempus ordinarium cibum sumendi solebat esse meridies. Satis
enim esse putauerunt ad carnis afflictionem and castigationem, si ad spatium
trium borarum, id est, ab bora sexta, vsque ad nonam refectio differretur.
Nostro vero tempore magna pars hominum non hora sexta, sed tertia prandere
solet. Ex quo sequitur, vt si tempore ieiunij cibum sumant hora sexta, hoe est,
ad meridiem, tribus horis serius ad reficiendum corpus accedant, quam ordinary
soleant; ac per hoc ab antiqua consuetudine non recedant. Bellar. de bo. oper.
in part. l. 2. c. 2.. Addimus.
that when the Ancients did prescribe three of the clock for the breaking of a
man's Fast, men then did use to dine about mid day. For they thought that this
was sufficient affliction for the flesh, if the refection of the body were
deferred for three hours space, namely, from twelve, till three of the clock
in the afternoon. But now-a-dayes, (says he) the greatest part of men is
accustomed to dine, not at twelve, but at nine of the clock in the morning.
Whence it follows, that if men do now in the time of their fast, dine about
noone-tide, they come to feed the body three hours later then ordinary: and so
they keep the old custom still. Thus the Cardinal. But Filliucius says, Vt
omittam communiter ieiunandi difficultatem sentiri in Refectiuncula Vespertina,
non autem in prorogatione prandij, quae vix differ solet ab hora consueta
prande^di in diebus co^munibus. Fill. tract. 27. p. 2. c. 4. nu. 71. p. 284.
that commonly the difficulty or hardness which is in fasting, is felt in the
evening refection, and not in the forbearing of dinner, which does scarce
differ from the ordinary hour of dinner on other days. Which answers of
theirs do indeed deserve no reply, because they are evidently frivolous. For
where do men now-adaies ordinarily dine at nine of the clock, as Bellarmine
says? Or if they do so in some places, yet certainly in most places it is
not so; and what will he say for the Fasts that be there used? Or if it were so
in most Countries, yet they do allow men to dine on their fasting days, at
eleven or ten of the clock, or sooner. And then what great penance were
there in that forbearance, longer then which every man must and will yield unto
at their greatest Feasts, before the Cooks can be ready? And for their little
refection at night, that sure pincheth the body but easily, being such as
before was declared, and after a full meal at noone-tide before. These
frivolous answers then deserve no serious reply; nor would I fear lest any man
should be persuaded or misled by them: yet I thought it not amiss to relate
the^, that men might see both what poor and miserable shifts they are driven
to, for defense of their loose and licencious Fasts: and also how in things
evident to the eye, the one does cross and contradict the other; Bellarmine
saying that the customarie hour of dinner is now-a-daies about nine of the
clock; and Filliucius affirming, that there is small difference between their
dinnerhoure on their fasting day, and on another day. But a desperate cause
requires such miserable shifts.

Fourthly, I say, that this dining at noone upon fasting days, sprang from
indeuorion and want of zeal, or from Epicurisme, and a love of the belly. I
presume in reason I may well think so, seeing no other probable cause can be
imagined, why it should otherwise be admitted and received. But I shall not
need to stand upon conjectures or surmises, how probable soever otherwise they
be. For themselves do acknowledge as much as I say. Filliucius says, Oline
apud Hebraeos ieiunia produce bantur vsque ad occasum solis and apud Veteres
Christianos idem erat in more positum. -- Qua^uis deinde, feruore intepescente;
coeperit etiam quoad horam temitti. Filliue. Tract. 27 part. 2. c. 4. nu. 64.
page 28^.
that in old time, the Jews fasted till sunne-seting, and that the same was
the custom of the ancient Christians also; although afterward, zeal waxing
cold, they began to abate of the hour. And to the same purpose speaks
Azorius. For having first said, that the Hebrews did use to fast till night;
and that thence the old Christians were accustomed to keep the same order, he
adds; Deinde tepescente sensim vetere illo feruere, coeptum est solui
ieiunium primo quidem antequam sol occideret, deinde vero etiam paucis horis
ante solis abscessum. Nam coena sumi coepit ad horam nonam, hoc est, tribus
horis post meridiem exactis, and totidem ante solemn occidentem. Azor. Instit.
part. 1. l. 7. c. 11. q 1. page 563, 564.
Afterward, the old zeal waxing cold by degrees, the Fast began first to be
broke off before the Sun went down; and after that, a few hours before
sunne-setting. For they began to eat their supper at three of the clock, that
is, three hours after midday, and as many hours before the sun set. And if
zeal may be said then to wax cold, when they prevented the old time, by
taking their supper at 3. of the clock in the afternoon, then we may boldly
say, that now zeal is key-cold, or quite quenched in the Church of Rome,
seeing she allows her children on their fasting days, to eat their dinner
before the midday. And so, or more sharply then so, does Filesacus censure
this disorder; Nostra imbecillitate irreligiosa (vt ita dicam) factum est, vt
ad meridiem cibum sumamus, soluamusque ieiunium. Filesac. de Quadrag. cap. 6.
page 437.
It is come to pass (says he) by our irreligious infirmity, that we take
meat at midday, and so break off the Fast. He means, that men did pretend
infirmity, because it was too long for their feeble bodies to forbear meat,
as the Ancients did; but that the true reason was not weakness and
indisposition of body, but irreligion and deadness of soul. And this may
suffice to be noted for the time of their eating on fasting days.

CHAP. V. The Quantity of meat and drink in a Popish Fast.
THe fourth particular is the quantity of meat and drink allowable in the
Church of Rome in their holy Fasts. And for that, I find no stint among them,
but that every man measure himself by the belly. But that their meaning may
more plainly and distinctly appear, I will first consider the quantity that
they allow in their dinner, and then in their drinkings.

And first, for their dinner on fasting days, they say, That he Excedeus in
quantitate cibi, vtcunque recedens ab aequalitate quantitat is determinatae,
non frangit ieiunium. Ios. Angles in 4. de Ieiun. q. 9. dub. 5. Concl. 2. page
432.
who exceeds in the quantity of meat, how much soever he swerve from the
equality or even measure of the set quantity, breaks not his fast. They say,
Sequitur, quod si quis in die ieiunij illa tria ex intent seruet, and tamen in
vnica refectione quam sumit, regulam temperantiae per gulam excedat,
satisfaciat praecepto de ieiunando, quandoquidem sub illo praecepto non cadit
quantitas refectionis. Ioh. Medina. Cod. de Ieiun. q. 11. page 354.
that if a man do with intent and purpose keep the three things which they
require in a Fast, and yet in that one refection or dinner which he takes,
do through gluttony exceed the rule of temperance; yet he does satisfy or
sufficiently keep the Precept of fasting; because the quantity of the dinner
does not fall under that precept, or is not comprised in it. Again they say,
Quandocunque quis semel tantum in die hora praescripta comederit, and a cibis
vetitis abstinuerit; quicquid aliud comedat vel bibat, sieve moderate sieve
immoderate, and sieve delectabiliter, sieve aliter, nonfrangit ieinnium
Ecclesiasticum. Reginald. lib. 4. nu. 163 page 154.
Whenever a man does eat but once in the day, at the appointed hour, and
abstaineth from forbidden meats; whatsoever else he either eats or drinks,
whether moderately or immoderately, and whether to delight appetite or
otherwise, he breaks not the Fast of the Church. Yea, Interrog. Quantum licet
comedere die ieiunij? Resp. Quantum quis edere poterit, loquendo de ratione
praecepti. Fern. Exam. part. 2. c. 8.. 2. page 389.
but is there no measure how much a man may eat? Yes. He may eat as much as
he can, for ought that the Precept of the Church does require. Yea, but say
that a man do gormandize, how then? Qui vsque ad ingurgitationem comederet,
talis excessus illicitus esset, sed non ex hoc soluitur ieiunium. Iac. de
Graff. decision. aur. part. 2. l. 2. c. 16. nu. 22. pa. 158.
If a man should eat till he glut himself, that excess were unlawful, but
hereby his Fast is not broken. Well: but Sed an hi seruent praecepta ieiunij,
qui semel comedendo tantu^ cibi sumunt, tot cibarijs and condimentis vtuntur
adingluuiem vsque, vt nullam carnis afflictione^ sentiant, immo gulam
impensissime irritent, libidinem excitent tantum cibi sumentes vnico prandio
quantum sit tribus hominibus satis ad congruam eorum sustentationem? Resp. Quod
^onsideratis considerandis, haec quaestio potest ita decidi, quod si nos
loquimur quoad substantiam praecepti, ieiunium non dissoluitur, and ita potest
habere locum communis opinie, scilicet hosee homines ieiunij precepto
satisfecisse. -- Aut vero loquimur de ieiunio quoad meritum, and ita
nonsatisfaciunt. Jacob. Graff. part. 1. l. 2. c. 37. nu. 39. page 217.
what if a man at his meal take so much meat, use so many dishes and sawces,
even to gluttony and gormandizing, that he feels no affliction of the flesh,
yea that he does exceedingly provoke his gluttonous appetite, stir up lust,
and take so much meat at one dinner, as may be sufficient for three men to
feed upon in a convenient sort; does this man keep the Laws of fasting? I
answer (says Iacobus de Graffijs) that if we speak according to the substance
of the Precept, his Fast is not broken: and in this sense the common opinion
may be admitted, which is, that these men do satisfy the Precept of the
Church concerning fasting. Or else we may speak of Fasting, with respect to
the merit of it; and so these men do not satisfy or fulfill the Precept. Thus
these men speak for the quantity of their meat at dinner. And their practice
is not unlike their doctrine. For, Nos prandia sumimus, eaque talia, vt
praeteritam abstinentiam copia and varietate ciborum facile compensemus.
Beyerl. prompt. in festo Cinerum, tex. 3. page 63.
We (says Beyerlinck) take our dinners on our fasting days, and they such,
that we may easily by the store and variety of meats, make amends for the
abstinence that is past. But Lindan speaks more broad, and says that the
fasts of their Catholics are every where such Fasts as Epicures do keep. To
which purpose I have cited his words Treatise of Fasting. cap. 4.
elsewhere.

The like they say for the quantity or measure of their drinking all times of
the day. For, Been potest bibere ante prandium and post prandium, quantum
videbitur illi absque peccato non ieiunandi^ Verum est, quod peccabit peccalo
gulae, etc. Rod. Sum. Cas. part. 1. c. 23. nu. 1. page 28.
a man may drink well enough before dinner and after dinner, as much as he
thinks good, without any sin of not fasting: it is true, that he shall
sin by intemperance. So speaks Rodriquez. And to the like purpose Lessius;
Ex his infertur primo, Potus sumptionem crebriorem non ^etari; -- quare etiam
si quis eo fine vtatur, etiam immoderate, non violabit praeceptum Ecclesiae de
ieiunio, e^si contra temperantiam peccet. Les. de Iustit. and Iure, l. 4. c. 2.
Dubitat. 2. nu. 10. page 718.
from hence (says he) it follows, that often drinking is not forbidden in
the time of a Fast, etc. -- that although a man do use drink for that end,
(namely for nourishment) and that immoderately, he does not violate the
Churches Precept of fasting, though he sin against temperance. And to like
purpose speak others. So in sum their doctrine consists in two points;

1. That a man by playing the Glutton or the Drunkard on a fasting day, may
sin by intemperancie or excess, in the like manner as he should do on any
other day, if he used the like excess.

2. That no excess in the measure either of meat or drink, is any offense or
sin against the rules of a Roman Fast: so that a man may play both the
glutton and the drunkard upon a fastingday, and yet keep all the rules of a
Popish Fast. Only the question further is, Whether a man sinning by
intemperance in gluttony and drunkenness, and yet at the same time keeping
their rules of fasting, do merit at Gods hands by his Fast? And their answer
hereto is, That Si tantus sa excessus, vt peccet mortifere, amittit meritum
ieiunij, sicut and aliorum bonorum operum. Si autem non peccot mortifere, non
amittit absolute, sed solum ex part. Quia qua part voluntary abstinet a
cibis vetitis and a secunde refectione propter Ecclesiae praceplum, meretur;
quod meritum non eliditur, eliamsi in vsu cibi vel petus non seruet debitam
moderationem: qua tame^ part excedie, non meretur. Less. de Just. and Iure, l.
4. c. 2. dubitat. 2. nu. 10. p. 718, 719.
if the excess be so great, that it be a deadly or mortal sin, then he
loses the merit of his fast, as he does of all other his good works: but if
the man do not sin mortally, (by this excess) then he does not absolutely
lose the merit of his Fast, but only in part. For in that he does volun tarily
forbear forbidden meats and a second refection for the Churches commandment,
he does so far forth merit by his fasting; which merit is not done away,
though he keep not due moderation in the use of meat or drink: but so far
forth as he uses excess, he does not merit. The meaning of which speech is to
this purpose; that his fasting is a good work, though at the time of his
fasting, he do surfeit and be drunk: and if his surfeiting and drunkenness
be such and so great, that it puts him out of the state of grace, then he
cannot merit by it, because a man that is not in the state of grace, cannot
merit by any work at all, how good soever otherwise it be: but if his gluttony
and excess be not such and so great, that it does exclude him out of the state
of grace; then he meriteth still by his glutionous and drunken Fast. And thus
ye have the sum of what they say in this case, concerning the quantity of
their meat and drink on their fasting days: Which is a most drunken conceit,
and unworthy the profession of learned men or Christians. But the vanity may
appear by these considerations.

First, it is against the practice and opinion of all Antiquity. For their
fayings are, Sint tibi quotidiana iciunia, and refectio satietatem fugiens.
Nibil prodest biduo triduoque transmisso, vacuu^ portare ventrem, si pariter
obruatur, si compensetur saturitale ieiunium. Hier. Ep. 22. ad Eust. page 175.
B.
Let thy Fasts be daily, and thy refection without satietie. For it profits
it nothing to carry an empty pauch for two or three days together, if at
once it be ouercharged, if the Fast be recompensed by fullness after. So
writes Saint Hierom to Eustochium, giving her rules of a religious Fast. And
the same Father writing to Rusticus, a man that had devoted himself to a
religious life, he gives him this counsel concerning fasting; Quae and ipsa
(ielunia) moderata sint, ne nimia debilitent stomachu^, and maiorem refectionem
poscentia, erumpant in cruditatem, quae parens libidinum est. Modicus ac
temperatus cibus, and carni and animae vtilis est. Hier. Ep. 4. ad Rustic. pa.
43. A.
Let Fasts be moderate; lest being immoderate, they weaken the stomach, and
requiring greater refection afterward, they break out into crudity and
inconcoction, which is the mother of lust. Sparing and temperate diet is good
both for body and soul. And yet again the same Father, Nonnulli vitam pudicam
appetentium, in medio itinere corruum, dum solam abstinentiam carnium putant,
and leguminibus onerant stomachum, quae moderate parceque sumpta innoxia sunt.
Et, vt quod sentio loquar, nihil sic inslammat corpora and litillat membra
genitalia, sicut indigestus cibus, ructusque convulsus. -- Parcus cibus and
venture semper esuriens triduanis ieiunijs praefertur. Hieron. Ep. 10. ad
Furiam, page 93. D. E.
Many (says he) who do desire a chaste life, do fall in the midway, while
they think that abstinence is only in forbearing of flesh, and fill the belly
with pulse, which being taken moderately and sparingly is without harm. And to
speak what I think, (says he) nothing does so inflame men's bodies, and
stir up lust, as undigested meat. He yet adds, Sparing diet, and a stomach
still hungry, is better then Fasts three days long. From which speeches of
this learned and religious Father, any man may collect, that if he thought a
full meal after immoderate abstinence would engender lust, then sure he never
could imagine, that surfeiting on a fasting day can be a means to cool lust,
and to beat down the body. And if he thought, that it was in vain and
without profit, to fast much, if a man did make amends for his abstinence by
fullness afterward; then certainly he would never yield, that men did a
meritorious work, if abstaining from flesh, they did on the very day load
themselves with excess of any meats and drinks. But to proceed, Cassian
says, that Non qualitas sola, sed etiam quantitas escarum aciem cordis
obtundit, ac mente cum corn pariter impinguatae noxium vitiorum fomitem
igneumque succendit. Cassian. Inst. l. 5. c. 5. page 195
not only the quality of meats, but the quantity also, does blunt the edge
or vigor of the heart, and fatting the mind with the body, it does kindle a
noxious and fiery fuel of vices. And a little after he adds, Esculentiores
cibi, vt procurant corporis sanitatem, ita castitatis non adimu^t puritatem, si
cum moderatione sumantur. Cassian. ibid. cap. 7. page 198.
that the more nourishing meats, as they breed health to the body, so they do
not take away the purity of chastity, if they be taken moderately. By which
speeches we see, that this ancient Father is so far from allowing excess in a
Fast, that he prefers a sparing meal of the best meats, before a full
meal of the coursest: as also in the former restimony of St. Hierome we may
observe, that that Father prefers a moderate refection of flesh, before a
plentiful refection of pulse; and (as if he had meant to reprove the error of
the present Roman Churth) he derideth them who think to preserve chastity,
while they abstain from flesh, and fill themselves with pulse. To the same
purpose it is, that Malunt by, qui perfectionem discretionis ignorant, etiam
bidus protelare ieiunia, idque quod hodie sumpluri fuer^t, in crastinum
reseru^re: dummodo ad refectionem peruenientes, desiderata satietate
potianantur. Quod nuper Benjamin ciuem vestrum pertinaciter tenuisse
cognoscitis, qui ne quotidie paximacia duo percipiens, aequali castigatione
continuam parcitatem iugiter retentaret, maluit biduana ieiunia semper
continuare, dummode ad refectionem veniens, duplicata mensurarepleret ventris
ingluviem, etc. Cassian. Collat, 2. c. 24. page 125.
Cassian tells us of a young Monk named Benjamin, who after his days fast,
finding his evening refection to be far short of satisfying his hunger,
desired to fast two days together, without any thing at all: so that at the
end of the second day he might have his allowance for the two days together,
and so satisfy his hunger for the time. But the religious Fathers of that time
would not consent unto it. And Cassian sets us down this fact of Benjamin,
as an example of indiscretion, which he warns all wise Christians to beware
of. Thus far were these truely-religious Fathers from giving way to this
gluttonous feeding, and intemperate drinking, now allowed in the Church of Rome
to consist with the observance of an holy Fast.

Secondly, this excessive quantity of meat and drink on a fasting day, is
against the nature and use of a Fast, and the description which they of the
Roman Church do give of it. For, (as has been declared already out of
Valentia) one essential thing in a religious fast is this, that the abstinence
then used, be ordained to the taming of the flesh, and bridling of
concupiscence. But he that drinks wine to the full all day, and feeds at
noone by the belly, and eats as much as might suffice three moderate men,
does afftict the body but a little: such a one, I suppose, might go
supperlesse to bed, and feel no hunger, though he did forbear his evening
Collation. And upon this ground (as I conceive) one of their own faith,
Postremum, a quo abstinere iubent Canones sunt cibi delicati -- sum cibi multi,
licet semel sumpti. Scio quid hac de re dicant multi, qui ad nostros m^res
tolerandos, quam ad velerem disciplinam exp^candam rectius loquuntur: tamen, si
quod res est, licet prefiteri, qui possit dic^ ieiunus, qui non sit temperans,
non equidem intelligo: tam non, quam non id esse hominem, quod animal non sit.
Ant. Liturg. to. 1. ferin quarta quatuor temporum, p. 105.
that one thing which the Canons of the Church did forbid, was [^ibi multi,
licet semel sumpti,] much meat, or many meats, though but taken once in the
day. He adds, that notwithstanding this excessive eating have his patrones
among them, yet (faith he) If I may profess that which is the truth, I cannot
tell how he may be said to be fasting, that is not temperate; no more then how
he can be a man, that is not a living creature.

And this shall serve for the fourth particular.

CHAP. VI. Dispensations in the Roman Church, against the rules offasting.
THe last is their Dispensations; and they be of two sorts: some are
explicit, and others are implicit. The explicit or express Dispensations
are, when the Pope or other Prelates do by word or writing, give leave or
license to some men, not to observe their rules of fasting; as for example,
when they dispense with men to eat cheese and eggs in Lent; or such like.
Their implicit Dispensations are, when the people take liberty in their
practice against the rules or precepts of the Church, and their Bishops or
Prelates seeing it, say nothing to the contrary, but wincke at it: for this
conniuence in the Prelates, especially in the Pope, they hold as good as an
express Dispensation. Now concerning these two kinds of Dispensations, we
are to consider 2. things 11. What power they are of in the Roman Church to
dissolve the rules of fasting; and 2. What way is given to them in the practice
of that Church.

And first, for their express Dispensations, they say, Summus Pontifex potest
dispensare in praecepto ieiunij, quomuis fuit ab Apostolis institutum. Ratio
est; quia in hac lege ferenda Apostoli vsi fuere potestate gubernandi sibi a
Christo concessa; and in ijs quae periment ad gubernationem Ecclesiae summus
Pontifex habet aequalem potestatem, sicut Apostoli babuerunt. Ios. Angels in 4.
de Ieiunio. q. 5. diffic. 2. concl. 1 p. 394. v. Ioh. Medin. in Cod. de
Ieiunio. q. 3.
that the Pope may dispense in the Precept of fasting, although it were made by
the Apostles. The reason is, because in making of this Law, the Apostles used
the power of government, which Christ did grant them; and in those things,
which pertain to the government of the Church, the Pope has as much power as
the Apostles had. They say also, that the Dico primo Papam posse dispensare
quemcunque etiam per tolam vitam. Communis Doctorum in Rubricis de obseruatione
ieiunij, Syluest. Ieiun. 47. Nauar. nu. 21. Est enim supra hoc praeceptu^, quu^
sit tantu^ de iure canonico; vude etiam sine causa valida esset dispensatio.
Fill. tract. 27. part. 2. c. 6 nu. 126. pa. 290.
Pope may dispense with a man for his whole life. For he is above this Law of
Fasts, seeing it is only enjoined by the Canon Law Ibid. nu. 127.
: and from hence it follows also, that his Dispensation is good, though it be
granted without cause. And for inferior Bishops and Prelates, they may dispense
with those which are under them, upon just cause, etc. Bartholomew Medina
says, Qua^do habet quis just aut iniusle dispensatione^ non iciunandi, non
tenetur; quamuis peccaret huiusmodi dispensatione^ sine occasion petendo: at
si eam obtinuerit, valida crit. Ratio est: nam quu^ humana sit lex ista, potest
^amsilmus Pontifex aut alius toll^re. Barth. Med. Inst. Conf. l. 1. c. 14.. 10.
p. 150.
that when a man has a Dispensation for not fasting, whether justly or
unjustly, he is not tied to the Law; though he sinned in asking such a
Dispensation without cause. But if he obtain it, the Dispensation is good.
For seeing that Law is only positive, and of man's making, the Pope or an other
Bishop may dissanull it. So, their express Dispensations are omnipotent
against all Laws of fasting. And the like they say in a manner for their
implicit Dispensations, or the conniuence of the Pope and Prelates at the
peoples practice. For, Co^suetudo Tinelli Romanae Curiae in omnibus ieiunys no
improbatur a Caietan^. Fill. Tra. 27. par. 2. c. 2. nu. 34. p. 280.
the custom used in the Popes Court on fasting days, is, not to be disallowed
in any thing, as Caietan says. The like they say of customs in other places
also. Vt consuetudo priorem legis obligationem tollat, non opus est vt sit
rationabilis and praescripta; sed satis est, si per tantum tempus sit buiusmodi
consuetudo inducta and obseruata, vt ad notitiam Maiorum peruenerit, qui quum
came sciant, minime contradicunt, quum commode si vellent, contradicere possent,
and prauaricatores punire, etc. Io. Medina Cod. de Ieiun. q. 8. page 347.
Nor is it needful in this case, that the custom be reasonable and by
prescription; it is sufficient, if it have bin kept so long, that it do come
to the knowledge of Superiors, who when they know it, do not contradict or
gainsay it, when they might conveniently gainesay it if they would. They be the
words of Medina, subscribed unto by Prax. fori Poenitent l 4. nu. 134. p. 148,
149.
Josephus Angles, that he has transcribed them out of him word for word, and
published them for his own. By this it may be seen, what power they place in
their Dispensations, whether they be given by express words, or only brought
in by the custom of the people, and the conniuence of the Bishops.

And all this were not so great a matter; if Pope and Prelates were wary in
granting Dispensations, and winking at licencious customs. But it is far
otherwise. For Fuit praeceptum de abstinetia a carnibus, primum Clericis
impositum, deinde ad fideles omnes fuit diffusum: in omni autem loco cibus
quadragesimalis intelligitur absque ouis and lacticinijs. Iam vero est
communissima dispensatio, quam qui obtinuerunt, sine scrupulo possunt vti
praemissis. Joseph. Angles in 4. de Ieiunio. q. 9. difficult. 2. concl. 4. page
424.
a Dispensation against the rules of Lent is most common; which he that has
obtained, may without scruple of conscience use the premises; that is, he may
eat flesh and white meats. And Papa in Bullis suis concedit pussim facul^atem
comedendi oua, caseum and lac in Quadragesima, and carnem ex solo medici
consilio, and parum deest, quin generaliter cum omnibus dispenset, vt ieiunent
carnes comedendo; sicut dicitur cum multis Nobilibus dispensasse. Ioh. Med.
Cod. de Ieiun. q. 2. pa. 328.
the Pope (says Medina) does every where in his Bulls grant license to cate
eggs, cheese and milk in Lent time, yea and flesh too, by the alone advice of
a Physician: and there wants but a little of dispensing generally with all
men, that they may fast with eating of flesh, as it is said that he has
dispensed with many Noblemen. And Beyerlinck showing the easiness of a Roman
Fast now-a-dayes, over that it was in time past, says, that Veteres Christiani
quoad hanc ieiunandi legem admodum rigidi, paucissim^s ab illius obseruatione
eximebant. Nunc infiniti aut imbecillitatis aut necessitatis titulo hac
obligatione liberantur. Beyer. in festo Cine^um, tex. 3. in fine page 64.
the ancient Christians being very strict and rigid about this Law of fasting,
did release very few from the observation and keeping of it: but now an
infinite number, upon pretense either of weakness or necessity, are freed
from the bond of it. So they are very liberal of their Dispensations, and that
not only in ordinary Fasts, and at common times; but even in the holy and
strict time of Lent. Nor have these Dispensations gone so far, but their
customs, by which the rules of abstinence are abrogated, have extended much
further. For, Consuetudo abrogauit ieiunium Rogationum, quod praecipitur in
Cap. Rogationes de Consecrat. Did. 3. Item ieiunium quartae and sextae feriae,
iam inde ab Apostolorum temporibus in praecepto positum, constat consuetudine
abrogatum esse, and arbitrio nostro relictum. -- Denique ieiunium Aduentus,
alias solitum seruari in Ecclesia Romana -- contraria consueludo iam sustulit.
Reginald. Prax. l. 4. nu. 133. page 148.
custom [not controled by the Prelates] has abrogated the Fast of the
Rogation week, which was commanded by the Canon Law: as also the Wednesday and
Friday Fast, which, as they say, was enjoined by Precept ever since the
Apostles time: and so likewise it has taken away the Fast of Aduent, which
otherwise was used to be kept in the Roman Church by virtue of the Canon. And
custom Hinc excusantur a Doctoribus, qui iuxta morem and consuetudinem
patriae, in die ieiunij longiores Collationes faciunt, etc. Hinc etiam
Mediolanenses excusantur, non ieiunantes primis quatuer diebus Quadragesimae.
-- Hine etiam excusantur ante horam vesperarum manducantes. -- Hire Britones
excusantur, qui in Quadragesima butyro vtuntur, vbi talis viget consuetudo, aut
ouis, alissque ex carne originem trabentibus, quum contrarium sit iure
definitum. Hinc a peccato liberantur comedentes carnes in aliquibus locis in
die Sabbathi. Joseph. Angles in 4. de Ieiun q. 5. Diffic. 1. page 393. Who has
transcribed Medina. Cod. de Ieiun. q. 8. page 346.
it is that brought in long Collations at night, and made them lawful: and
custom that excuses the inhabitants of Milane, for not fasting the four
first days in Lent: and that excuses men for eating their Supper before Even
song: and custom that excuses the Britons for eating of butter in the Lent
time, where that custom is on foot, or eggs and other things which come of
flesh. And finally, custom has made it lawful to eat before noone on a
fasting day, to use a gross Collatio^ on Christmas Eve, as before I showed: as
also, In nostra Hispania, -inualuit consuetudo maiori ex part, vt comedantur
in Sabbatho omnia interiora animalium and extrema, vt pedes and capita, and
omnia lardasagimina, etiam porcinum crassum, etc. Llamas part. 3. c. 5.. vlt.
pa. 399.
on Saturday to eat the entrales of beasts, with their heads and feet, and
besides, bacon and swines flesh also: Yea, Statutum de abstinendo a carnibus in
dominicis diebus Quadragesime olim obligatoriu^ no^ fuit, quia non fuit
vtentium moribus approbatum, vt ait Greg. in Epist. ad Episcop. Anglorum. Ioh.
Medina. Cod. de Ieiun. q. 8. p. 346. Col. 2.
to eat flesh on Sundaies in Lent, contrary to the Law, where the use of men
was to the contrary. Thus, and in this manner custom with them has
prevailed, to the abrogating both of the ancient Laws, and their own rules:
and to the bringing in and justifying of strange liberty, contrary to the
practice of Gods ancient people, and the descriptions of fasting approved by
the Church of Rome. And how far further it may grow, we could not imagine,
saving that we see there is little or nothing in a manner left, that is worth
the dispensing with. For what with their doctrine, and what with their
Dispensations and customs, fasting with them is become so easy and pleasant a
course, that an Epicure may satisfy his voluptuous appetite, and yet keep a
Roman Fast.

And this may suffice for manifesting their Indulgence and licenciousnesse.

Out of all which, we may further deduce and observe these Collections
following.

1. That a Popish Fast, in most points of moment, is most unlike to the ancient
Fasts. For the Ancients abstained from Wine, and Spices, and Iuncates; the
Papists allow these, as most innocent on a fasting day. The Ancients had one
only refection in the day of their Fast; the Papists have two or three, or
more; for the all days drinking is more then one refection. The Ancients did
fast till evening, or when zeal was somewhat decayed, till three of the clock
at least; the Papists break off their Fasts at noone, or an hour or two
sooner. The Ancients were sparing in their one refection, and fed on course
fare; the Papists in their set refection feed by the belly, and choose such
meats and sawces as best please the appetite, provided only that they eat
not flesh. And finally, the Ancients were strict and rigid obseruers of their
rules and orders of fasting; the Papists are most loose in dispensing with all
men, and in all things that have any show of hardness or affliction in them.
These contrarieties between our new Doctors and the old Fathers, I have proved
already, as I passed through the Particulars: but if any man desire to see them
all together in one heap, he may find them collected and acknowledged by the
friends and wel-willers of the Church of Rome: who reckon up these, not to
their Mothers shame, but for the praise of her love and tenderness to her
children, whom she would not chasten so severely, as the old Church of Christ
was wont to chasten her children. Pisanuc then the Jesuit, thus commends the
tender love of the Roman Church to her babes and sucklings. Si qua in
redisciplina Ecclesiastica laxata and and lapsa est, id maxim in ieiuniorum
ratione videre licet, ac ex huius lectione libelli fatis animaduertetur. Sane
pia matter Ecclesia, imbecillitati nostrae se accommodat, cuius proinde pietatem
commendare debemus. -- Ad Veterem and Apostolicam Ecclesiam plerique omnes
prouocant, sed huius ieiunia s^ata and solennia vel non probant, vel ne per
somnium quidem sequuntur. Pisan. Praefat. ad Lector. praefixa libro de
Abstinent. page 96, 97.
If (says he) the Discipline of the Church be any where relaxed and fallen
down, it is most of all to be seen in the matter of Fasts, and may be well
enough perceived by the reading of this book. Forsooth, our holy Mother the
Church does apply her self to our weakness, whose motherly care we ought
therefore to commend. And again; All men for the most part, do appeal to the
ancient and Apostolic Church: but her set and solemn Fasts they either do
not allow, or do never a whit follow her in them. And the same Author, Non est
-- quod aliquis ieiunij difficultate deterreatur. Siquidem tanta moderatio est
adhibita, per Ecclesiae praxin, antiquorum Canonum perfectioni, vt qui hodie
sciens praeceptum absque necessitate ieiunium negligit, non leave profecto
crimen incurrat. Ecce enim veteres Canones non solum vin^m, sed etiam siceram
interdixere, and omne quod inebriare potest, and mulsam ac ceruisiam. Olera
tantum concedebant in esum, seclusit etiam ipsis piscibus, etc. Hodie and vino
and piscibus vti licet. Nec amplius, vt olim, semel tantum vesperi reficimur;
sed coenae in prandia sunt commutatae, etc. Quid? quod a quibusdam terrae
fructibus abstinebant olim Catholici in Quadragesuna (vt docuit Augustinus
contra Faustum) nempe ab aromatis, aut ijs quae Venerem excitant, iuxta
praeceptum Apostolerum, sola Olera admittentium: in quo etiam Ecclesia
Catholica potestatem habens Apostolicam, vt and in alijs multis benign
nobiscum dispensauit, etc. Postremo, quia Canones ieiunantibus cibum prohibent,
potum non prohibent; subingressae sunt, conuiuentibus Hierarchis, nostrae
nocturnae Refectiunculae, Veteribus prorsus ignotae, eo videlicet praetextu, ne
potus noceat, etc. Pisan. de Abstinent. cap. 14. page 162, etc.
There is no cause (says he) why any man should be deterred with the
difficulty of fasting. For the practice of the Church has so moderated and
mitigated the perfection of the old Canons, that whosoever now does wittingly
neglect the Fast that is required without necessity, out of doubt he shall
incur no small crime. Yea, but what is that mitigation, which the Church has
used in tempering the old Canons? He goes on to tell us that in these words:
Behold, (says he, and sure the thing deserves attention) the old Canons did
not only forbid wine, but all strong drink that might trouble the brain, and
Mead, and Ale or Beer: they allowed only herbs to be eaten on their fasting
days, forbidding even fish also, etc. But now-a-dayes, we may lawfully use
both fish and wine. Nor do we any longer, as aforetime they were wont, refresh
our selves once only in the evening; but suppers are turned with us into
dinners, etc. Nay, the Catholics of ancient time did in Lent abstain from
some fruits of the earth, (as Augustine teaches against Faustus) namely from
spices, and such things as stir up lust, according to the precept of the
Apostles, who admit herbs alone: wherein, as in many other things, the
Catholic Church, having Apostolic authority, has favorably dispensed with
us, etc. Lastly, because the Churches Canons do forbid meat, but not drink;
our evening Refections, unknown to the Ancients, have, by the conniuencie of
the Prelates, privily crept in; upon pretense, forsooth, lest drink alone
should do harm. Thus he: and in like sort another: Quantum de prima illa
Veterum ieiuniorum seueritate bact^nus detractum est? Maiores nostri feria 4,
6. and plerique etiam Sabbatho, non solum carnibus abslinebant, sed etiam
ieiunabant: nunc feriam sextam and Sabbathum in Dominicae passionis and mortis
memoriam, delectu tantum ciborum celebramus. Illi ieiunijs adiungebant
vigilias, and nocturnos ad orandum deum agebant conuentus: nos vnius exiguum
specimen retinuimus, scilicet, Natiuitatis Domini. Jlli in horam nonam, imo
vsque ad vesperam ieiunia extendebant, nec prandere, sed canare soliti: nos
cadem statim in meridie relaxamus, and prandia sumimus, ea^que talia, vt
praeteritam abstinentiam copia and varietate ciborum facile compensemus. Illi
vnicam refeetiunculam, eamque ten^em ieiunantibus indulgebant: nos longo and
pleno prandio vespertinam adijcimus refectiunculam, quae saepenumere in coenam
degeneret. Abstinebant illi etiam piscibue, omnique potu, qui inebriare potest:
nunc in solis carnibus ciborum delectus fere consistit. Denique veteres
Christiani, quoad hanc ieiunandi legem admodum rigidi, paucissi^ os ab illius
obseruatione eximebant: nunc infiniti, aut imbecillitatis aut necessitatis
titulo bac obl'gatione l'berantur. Laurent. Beyerl. prompt moral. part. 3. in
festo Cinerum, tex. 3. page 63, 64.
How much (says he) has hitherto been abated of the former severity of the
ancient Fasts? Our forefathers, on Wednesday, Friday, and most of them on
Saturday also, did not only abstain from flesh meats, but did also fast: but
now we keep Friday and Saturday for the memory of Christ's Passion and death,
only with forbearing some meats, [without intermitting any meal.] They to
their fastings joined watchings, and had night-assemblies for prayer unto God;
we have only kept a little semblance of one of them, namely of Christmasse
Eve. They continued their Fasts till three of the clock, yea till evening; nor
were they wonted to dine, but to sup: we break off our Fasts at midday, and
take our dinners, and them such, that we do easily recompense the foregoing
abstinence with plenty and variety of meats. They allowed but one only
Refection, and that a slender one: we to a long and full Dinner, do add an
evening Refection, which many times does degenerate into a Supper. They
abstained from fish, and all drink that may intoxicate the brain: now our
choice of meats consists for the most part in the forbearing of flesh alone.
Finally, the ancient Christians, being very strict about the rules of fasting,
did exempt very few from the observance thereof: but now the number is infinite
of them, that upon pretense of weakness or necessity are freed from this bond.
And from all this he infers, Vnde quum dominum habeamus tam mansuetum,
Ecclesiam matrem tam benignam, quae infirmitatibus nostris condolere non
negligit, nihilque quod supra vires sit, exigal: exhibeamus nos etiam dicto
eorum audientes, etc. Beyer. l. c.
that seeing we have so mild a Lord, (I suppose he means the Pope) and so
tender a mother, the Church, which is not backward to condole our infirmities,
and requires nothing of us above our strength; let us yield our selves
obedient to their command, etc. And surely, he that will not yield to so easy
a penance, deserves to pay for it in Purgatory. But the thing that I intend
in transcribing these two Authors, is, at one view to let the world see, how
much the Church of Rome, even by the confession of her own flatterers, is
degenerated from the practice of the Primitive and purer Church. And therefore
when they allege unto us the sayings and doings of Fathers and ancient
Writers, for defense and commendation of their Fasts, they do therein play the
Gibeonites with us. They tell us of old fasting days aforetime, of choice of
meats used in the Primitive Church, and what account the Fathers made of the
Fast of Lent; but when they put these names upon their own Fasts, they show us
but their own worn rags and broken bottles, and clowted shoes, which they
would make us believe came afar off, even from the first times of the
Primitive Church: and if we will believe them upon their own word, as the
Israelites believed the smooth tale of the Gibeonites, then we may be deceived
by these Iebusites, as they were by those Gibeonites. But if we ask counsel
at the mouth of the Lord, or if we advise with the ancient Fathers of the
Church, we shall find that all this stuff is but counterfeit trash; no more
like to the Fasts of the Prophets, Apostles, ancient Fathers and Christians of
former times, then an Ape is like to a man.

Secondly, We may note out of the former passages, that they know not how to
define a Fast, but so, as that they must withal contradict their own rules,
and condemn their own practice. For in their definition of a Fast, they say,
that it is a straiter abstinence then the rules of Temperance do require: and
yet by their rules a man may eat and drink excessiuely, without breaking of a
Roman Fast. They say in their definition, that in a Fast there must be but one
Refection; and yet by their rules, a man may eat a full Dinner, and a little
Collation, which proves a just supper, and drink what he will all day long.
They say in the definition, that a Fast is a longer abstinence then ordinary,
and that the time of refection then must be later: and yet by their rules a man
may take his meal at twelve, eleven, or ten of the clock; which is, I
think, as soon as any man uses to dine on ordinary days. And lastly, in
the definition they say, that a Fast, both for the continuance of the
abstinence, and for the quality of the meat when the abstinence is ended,
must be such as may beat down the body, tame the flesh, and bridle
concupiscence; and yet by their rules, a man may eat and drink so much and so
often, as will breed no affliction to any man living. Thus their doctrine is
crossed by their own definition. Nor could it well be otherwise. For both
their doctrine in the particulars, and their practice in the use of a Fast is
such, as that if they had framed a general definition of a Fast, that had bin
agreeable thereunto, it would plainly have appeared, that they had bidden open
defiance to all Antiquity, yea, and to their elder Schoolmen too. And
therefore they thought it better in general to profess conformity to
Scriptures and the ancient Church, and in particular so to molde it by
distinctions and considerations and congruities of a reasonable alteration, as
might serve to bleare their eyes that are wilfully blind. But a wise man, who
has his eyes in his head, will easily see the disproportion between their
general definition and their particular doctrines.

Thirdly, we may gather from the premises, that the religious Fasts of Rome are
nothing but a superstitious fopperie; and a mere mocking both of God and men.
For all is but an outside, there is no pith nor virtue within: a Fast in name,
but in deed nothing less. I shall not need to declare this further in this
place; it is sufficiently demonstrated already: and if need be, we have the
witness of one of their own Prophets, who confesses in a manner as much as I
have said. For, Et sane non multum ieiunat, qui in diebus ieiuniorum non
^rctius ieiunat, quam Ecclesia iubet; hoc est, qui edit and bibit omnia quae
Ecclesia permittit, vel quae non punit. Lorich. Thesaur. v. Ieiun. nu. 10. page
1130.
to say the truth, (says he) he fasteth not much, who on fasting days fasteth
not more straitely then the Church does command: that is, who eats and
drinks al things which the Church does permit, or which it does not punish.
By which last words, added (as I conceive) by some Censor before he licensed
the Book to the Press; though he mayseeme to sup up again his own breath,
and only to say, that the Church does tolerate these things without giving
allowance to them: yet this qualification will not help the matter. For
whatsoever they suffer to go uncontrolled, that they allow as lawful and
without fault; as has already bin declared. But Lindan is plain, and
speaks home, when he calls their Fasts [Ieiunia Epicurea,] Epicures Fasts.
And indeed they have more affinity with the feeding of an Epicure, then with
the fasting of a devout Christian. In respect of all which, as our Savior said
to his Disciples, When ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance,
etc, so let me say to all sincere Christians, When ye fast, be not as these
Hypocrites, al for show and nothing for substance. But when ye fast, use a true
abstinence, such as may afflict the body, master the flesh, eleuate the soul,
and humble the whole man by repentance and sorrow: and together with outward
abstinence join inward exercises of devotion, examining your consciences,
acknowledging your sins, condemning your own selves, as unworthy to taste of
any of Gods creatures; and running to the Throne of grace for mercy and
forgiveness: that your sins being pardoned, your consciences may be
comforted, and your souls better enabled for Gods service.

Fourthly, we may gather, what a smooth and easy way the Church of Rome does
paue for men unto heaven and happiness. For these loose and licencious Fasts
of theirs, they say that they have great power both to merit heaven, and to
free a man from Purgatory. But if they can merit and satisfy in this manner,
and by this means; they may with much ease have many merits, and great store
of satisfactions: nor is it any wonder that they talk of such a multitude of
these things laid up in the Churches Treasury. It is a wonder rather, if the
Treasury of the Church be not long since so full, that they want souls to
bestow them upon. Yea, and a wonder it may well seem, if on the other side,
there be any man so careless of himself, as to stand in need of them. For he
that for his souls health will not fast (as they call fastnig) so often and so
much as they do require, is a most negligent man of his salvation; and it is
pity that ever he should go to heaven, or be delivered from Purgatory or
hell. But those who hear Christ say, and consider what he means, when he
says, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; cannot think to buy heaven at so
easy a rate, nor to make satisfaction for their sins with so slight a
penance. They will think all little enough, though with David, and Daniel, and
Ezrah, they chasten and afflict their souls with fasting. Nor will they think
when all is done, to merit heaven, or to satisfy Gods Justice by it. Let
Papists preach their merits while they will, true Christians will be both more
penitent, and less proud.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9. in marg. lit. c. Bellar. -- page 168, 169, r. page 1068, 1069. Page
10. in marg. lit. a. distositionem and ciborum digestionem. r. dispositionem
and digestionem. Page 14. in marg. lit. a. flammas. r. flammas. Page 25. in
marg. lit. c. add in the end, Filliuc. Tract. 27. part. 2. c. 2. number. 42. page
281. Page 28. in marg. lit. c. soluant. r. soluunt. Page 35. in marg. lin. vlt.
prandedi. r. prandendi.


