THE NEW ART OF LYING, COVERED BY IESVITES under the Veil of EQVIVOCATION,
DISCOVERED AND DISPROVED BY Henry Mason.

LONDON: Printed by George Purslowe for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his
Shop under Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1624.

TO THE MOST REVErend Father in GOD, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan.
Most Reverend Father,
THe first news that I heard of the Equiuocating Art, a Pr^efa^ praefixa Sex
Pre^lection. cap. 1. and cap. 1. de Mendac. number. 12, 13, 14.
was that which I learned out of your Graces writings. And well might this be
to me the first news. For, if I mistake not, you were the first Writer, that
published those tricks in print to the World: though (as beginnings use to be)
that discovery of this Art was but brief in comparison, either because that
occasion did not admit of any long or full discourse, or because, but little of
this mystery could then at the first be discovered; the professors of that
Trade, as your self also signify, laboring to hide their secrets from the
knowledge of other men. And indeed it may be observed, that in managing of the
Papacy, they have certain mysteries of State, which the more they use, the
more they coceale. One of which, is their power to murder Kings, and blow up
Parliaments, and kill all that stand in their way, like the Assassini, who held
it a point of great merit to murder all that were their adversaries in
Religion: but yet they are not willing that the world should know that this is
any part of their Creed. Another such policy may be that of their Indices
Expurgatorij, by which they have circucised the lips of such Writers, as spoke
any word against the Roman Church: but this they kept as a great mystery among
some few of themselves, till misfortune brought it to light, full sore against
their wills. And for a third suchlike policy, I may reckon also this Art of
Equitiocation, which the Masters thereof did keep secret as long, and as much
as they could. And therefore it was no marvel, if your first discovery of this
mystery were but brief in comparison. But afterward D. Morton B. of Lichfield
and Couentry, Confutat, of Equiuccation.
another Reverend and learned Prelate, lighting upon a more complete Treatise
then formerly had appeared, penned by a Popish Priest in defense of this Art,
and approved by the Archpriest, and the Provincial of the Jesuits: he pursued
the point more fully according as that Treatise gave him just occasion. The
cry of which pursuit did vnkennell the old equiuocating Persons, who by
occasion of the Bishopps book wrote a large Treatise in defense of Equiuoca^on.
Fox, and hunted him into the open field, there to display himself, and to
show what tricks he could use, for saving his new Art from the infamy of
lying. And here I finding him well chafed, did by the sent follow after him
unto his Den, to epsy if I might, what he and his Cubs were devising in the
dark. And I found them very busy in hammering Reseruations and mental
frauds, upon every occasion and in all kinds of dealing, thereby to catch us
at unawares, who being plain and simple men our selves, could not suspect such
frauds and impostures in others. And in case these things should come abroad,
as in part themselves had discovered them against their wills: yet so confident
and resolute did I find them, to maintain all for good and honest dealing, as
that Father Mitigat. cap. 9. nu. 81. p. 403.
Persons makes a wonder of it, and thinks that God should deal worse with
men then he had done with beasts, if he should not grant them equiuocating
tricks, and reserved wiles, as he has granted to the Hare and the Fox, their
leapes and turnings, and windings, and going back again in the same trace
they come, to deceive the Dogs that pursue them. And yet all this confidence
I take to be but a copy of their countenance. For even in their printed
Apologies of this Art, they seek to cast mists before the Readers eyes, that
he may not be able to see the depth of their meaning. These things when I had
found, as I thought, (though I know I am much short of finding all) I was
willing, according to my ability, to impart them unto wellmeaning Christians,
that they seeing the deep frauds of these men, may learn to shun their
company and acquaintance.

In which endeavor of mine, what service I may have done for the public good,
I cannot tell: but sure I am, if there be any good in it, I should in reason
return it thither, where I first found it. The consideration whereof, has
made me to presume so far upon your Graces clemency, as to lay down at your
feet thi^ poor Treatise, the grounds whereof I first learned from your own
pen: desiring (if therein I be not ouer-bold) that it may, vinder your name and
protection, be sent forth into the world. Which being all, that at this time I
have to say, I humbly take my leave, desiring the God of peace and truth, to
preserve you from every evil word and work, that you may maintain his truth
in this world, and enjoy his peace both in this world, and the World to come.

Your Graces devoted in all service, HENRY MASON

TO MY LOVING AND Dearly beloved Parishioners, the Inhabitants of S. Andrews
vnder-shaft in London, GRACE and TRVTH in JESUS CHRIST.
IN the ordinary exercise of my ministry among you, when I came to speak of
the ninth Commandment, the first thing that I met with to be considered, was
the matter of Truth and Lying. And considering hereof, I found two sorts of
Lies frequent among men: the one, an open and professed Lie; and the other, a
cunning and artificial Lie. The former was defended by the Priscillianists, an
old kind of Heretics: and the latter is now defended by the Romanists, a
latter sort of false Prophets. Both of them are odious to God, who is honored
by Truth; and pernicious to the society of men, which is vpheld by Truth: but
the latter is the more dangerous, because under a color of Truth it beguileth
simple souls, who are otherwise enemies to Lying. The consideration hereof,
made me to enquire a little further into this Art; which the favorers thereof
have sought to conceile, by calling it by a new name. For being ashamed of the
name of Lying, they have christened it by the name of Equiuocating: a name as
unknown in this meaning, as the Art it self was unheard of before these
latter days. The mystery and iuggling tricks of which device, I did then and
upon that occasion, in part discover unto you: but briefly and plainly, the
time, and place, and occasion not admitting of any long or Schoole-like
discourse. But since considering, that together with the increase of false
Prophets in this Kingdom, this Art of falsehood has abounded also: I thought
it a part of my duty, (God having pleased to place me as a Watchman over your
Souls) to give you a fresh warning of this danger, and that in a more ample
and large discourse, then formerly I had done, and in such a manner and sort,
that you might have something lying by you, that might advertise you of this
dangerous deceit, when I could not have opportunity to speak unto you our of
the Pulpit. And this I was moved to vnat this time the rather; because I have
of late observed, that these artificial Liars (among their other devices and
forgeries, which upon confidence of this Art, they take liberty to use without
remorse) do instill into the minds of their credulous followers, an opinion;
and do labor to spread abroad among others a suspicion, that among our
Learned men, many in heart are of their Church, howsoever for the worlds sake
they dissemble their opinion: and that there are a good number among us of the
Clergy, who are better persuaded of their Religion, then of our own. Doctor
Sheldon, a man well acquainted with their dealings, as having lived in their
bosom, and taken the Orders of Priesthood in their Church, does write, that
Sheldon of the mira^les of Antichrist, ca. 4. page 52.
whilst he fed on Romes husks, he often heard of many grievous imputations
laid upon some of the greatest Clerks in the Church of England, as though in
heart they were theirs, which he then believed to be true, as others did; but
since has found to be much otherwise. And my self have met with some, (which
persuades me, that they abuse others in this kind, beside our greatest
Clerks) who have more then intimated to my self, that I knew that which might
justify their cause, if I would speak it. Which might well put me into a
muse, what had ever slipped from me, why they should be persuaded that I had
such an opinion of their Church: saving that I considered, that this might well
be one of the Iesuires equiuocating devices, to instill that opinion concerning
us, into their Disciples minds, that so they might gain more credit to their
cause. Upon which occasion, entering a more serious consideration of the point,
I perceived, that besides this Art, they use other devices also, for this
purpose, which I thought good, for your better caution and safety, briefly to
relate in this place.

First then, if they meet with any of our Clergy, which are of weak brain,
and unsettled resolution, (as it is possible, we may have some such as well as
they) they set upon such weaklings, with plausible tales in commendation of
their Church; whose open abominations practiced at home among themselves, are
not so well known to us, who have never traveled into Popish Countries. And if
by this means they chance to pervert a weak and unsettled man, then the cry
goes, that such a Learned man, is become a Catholic, because evidence of
truth forced him to forkake his old Profession.

Secondly, if they meet with men, who being either opinatiue of their own
worth, think their good parts not sufficiently rewarded; or being indeed of
good parts, have but slender means: they tempt such, as the Devil did our
Savior, with offers of gifts and preferments. And if by these allurements they
can bribe any man to become their Proselyte, for filthy lucre sake, then they
blaze abroad the conversion of such a great and learned Scholar, who could not
withstand the light of truth shining in the Roman Church.

Thirdly, if by these, and such like policies, they prevail not: (for these
devices fit them best, because then they bring men over to their side, with
their own mouths to publish their own shame; but if thus they prevail not)
yet one shift they have behind, which is, to devise lies, of such and such men's
conversion to their Church, who ever hated it from their very souls. In which
kind of forgerie, they have so far proceeded, that they have spared neither
living nor dead. For, as if they had cast off all fear of shame, which was
sure in the end to be their reward, they have in writing belyed in this manner,
the chiefest Doctors in our Church, who have suruiued to refute, and to detest
their forgeries in Print. But when men are dead, then they become more bold:
and of the most constant and zealous Professors of our Religion, they give it
out to the world, that such and such men of chief esteem in the Protestant
Church, did recant upon their death beds, it being then no time to dissemble
any longer. And when themselves have first devised these tales on their fingers
ends; then they produce them in their serious books of Controversy, as grave
arguments to confirm the Roman faith by. The discovery of which falsehood, I
wish it may work the like effect in your hearts, that it has done in mine:
which is, that whereas I utterly disliked Popery before, I do now detest it
more then ever. And for this purpose I was the rather moved to pen this small
Treatise, that you, of whose souls I know my self to have undertaken the
charge, seeing these forgeries, may learn to beware of Equiuocating Spirits:
who, though otherwise they profess strictnes of conscience, and according to
the rules of the Roman Faith, are very devout and religious; yet can cozen you
with an hundred lying devices, and never feel the least grudge of conscience
for it. For so Father Persons tells us, that Apology of Eccles. Subordinat.
cap. 12. in the very end.
Equivocations are allowed principally to (...) of scrupulous conscience, for
avoiding of lying. By which he gives us a fair warning, (and I desire you
take notice of it) that if there be any scrupulous and tender consciences
amongst them (as some no doubt there are) though they would not tell a lie, if
they knew it, for all the world, yet even such men may without any scruple or
fear, deceive us with equiuocating reseruations, and mental devices. And
having thus given you this fair warning, now me thinks I may speak unto
you, to the same purpose as our Lord did to his Disciples; Matt. 24. 5, 23, 24.
If they shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or lo there, believe it not;
for there are many false Prophets arisen, and do deceive many. Behold I have
told you before. And if after all this warning, Ez^k. 33. 4, 9.
any of you shall suffer himself to be deluded by lying Equiuocators, his
blood will be upon his own head, but I have delivered mine own soul. But I
fear not this in you, of whose constancy and zeal I have had good
experience: Gal. 5. 10.
so that I may rather take up that saying of the Apostle, I have confidence in
you through the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise minded; but that, if any man
shall trouble you, (or seek to withdraw you from your faith) he shall bear
his judgment, whosoever he be. And in assurance hereof, Gal. 6. 18.
I leave you to Gods grace, in the words of the same Apostle; Brethren, the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirit. Amen.

Yours, the unworthy Minister of Jesus Christ, and your servant for Jesus sake,
HENRY MASON.

To the READER.
WHen the Impression of this Treatise was almost finished, I obtained the sight
of two several papers of Latin Verses, composed long since, in the year
1606. by two then Students in the Universities, now Doctors in Divinity, and
my worthy friends. Which Verses being (according to the Academicall custom)
made upon Questions then disputed in both the Universities, in Publicis
Comitijs, and happily concurring with the subject of this Treatise, as I was
glad that my self had gotten, so I was willing to impart them to the Reader,
presuming that my two friends, and much-respected brethren, will not be
offended, that I send them their Verses back again in Print.

Aequivocationis tenebrae pugnant cum rationis lumine. Quaestio philosophica in
Comitis Cantabr.

Ecloga. Cui nomen Pseudolus, sieve Aequiuocator.
Personae. Simia. Pseudolus. Sim. HOc quoque Vide passi^ Horatij Satyram
quintam, and Plauti Pseudolum, cui^ste supp^r.
docte Pater, praeter narrata, pete^ti,
Pseudole, responde, quibus artibus invia re^^^
Essugiam, nostrae propriora pericula Sectae.
Nonne vides quam non satis est maria omnia circum
Romuleae quaesisse diu responsa Cathedrae,
Vnctos, adrasos, Jesus cognomen adeptos,
I am revehi in patriam, Roma duce, and auspice Roma!
Hinc crucis, hinc vrget malus horror carceris; aut nos.
Explorat densus, capita heu damnata, Satelles.

Pseud. Sic Blackwellus Archipresbyter in sua ad Cathol^cos Epistola. dat. 7.
Nouemb. 1605.
Nos nil interea mis^ri, nil tendere contra,
Nos tantum lachrymas, and nulli auditae Deorum
Vota damus: vel, si nostra hoc Ecclesia poscat,
Idque V^nculo cucae obedicnlpe obstringi omnes Iesuitas and no^itios
Seminariorum pullos abunde noluin est; Quo tenentur, quidquid Superior
imperaverit, (...) exequi,
Patri (qui nos in Sancta incepta remittit)
Praecepisse lubet, bello, sicave venenove
Extinxisse nefas, and gentem abolere nefandam
Conamur; vel, si zelus slagrantior adsit,
Forsan sulphureo disperdimus obvia statu.

Sim. Cuncta pie ac recte. Pseud. Quid rides? Sim. Simia vester
Ille ego. Nos inter quasi I^upus Iupus nouit, etc.
nos non norimus. Pseud. Euge
Simia quandoquidem tam sancte, tamque severe
Ista rogas, nostram missis ambagibus Artem,
Artem, quam magnus docuit Pater Arij haeresiarchae sophiticuns and Acquivoc
atorium coram Imperatore Constantino iusiurandum recole apud S^cratem Hist
Eccles. lib. 1. c. 25.
Arius, Artem,
Cortinam quae Phoebe tuam, quae te quoque Proteu,
Vinciat, and vincat (paucis adverte) Plautus in Pseudolo Act. ^. Scen. 4.
Pseud. Onerab^meis praeceptis Simians Quid agat, ne quid titube^, docte vt hanc
sera^ sallaciam.
docebo.
Putide Tiresia. Quicquid loquere aut erit, aut non:
O quam divinare tibi donavit Apollo.
Lentu^ est. Quicquid ego edixo simul ipsum erit, and non.
Aequiuocare mihi Stygius dedit Apocal. 9. 11.
(...)

Sim. Est, and Non semper sibi contradicere dixi,
Et didici a puero. Si iam haec mutaverit aetas,
Ausa ratam violare fidem, and convellere prima
Fundamenta, quibus verorum innititur ordo,
Submetuo ne nos (quotum venerabile nomen
Amsanctum populis, and formidabile Sceptris
Nunc sedet ad primas) Quod olim femplarijs, quid ^i tandem Iesititis accidat!
olim, volventibus annis,
Mutati in peius fastidia publica simus.
Sed tu perge loqui quorsum haec adeo ardua tendant.

Pseud. Recta ad te, fili. Si te, sub iudice (qualis
Haereticae nimium est vigil indagatio turbae)
Contigerit responsa peti, vel dicere causam,
Accipe qua ratione queas nec prodere verum,
Nec male mentiri, nec te obiectare periclo,
Nec reticere tamen. Captes astutus oportet
Lucifugam sermonem, and versicoloria dicta.

Sim. Vt ne vireludam pueri de more Sophistae?
Praeterea, si quid perplexi subloquar, omnes,
Evolve, Aristot. (...). 1. cap. 1.
ingeminant. Pseud. Vah nil sapis: vtere verbis
Ex se perspicuis, sed mente interpret tortis,
Mente tua, non mente illa, quae consona voci.

Sim. Me vero memini primo didicisse Lyaeo
Sensa animi rerum, sensorum symbols v^ces.
Scilicet vtibilem linguae articulantis honorem
Naturam tribuisse patet mortalibus, vt sit
In quo conueniant, and posint mutna fungi.
Quinetiam ratio. -- Pseud. Act. 2. Sc. 2. Pseud. Tu inventus vero meam qui
(...) fidem?
Number tu rationibus audes
Iniussu certare meo? meminisse decebat,
Me Patre cum primum nostratu^ elementa Scholarum
Imbiberes, in verba manus te nostra dedisse.
Imperio iam disce meo: ac, dum prosequor, audi.
Forsitan hoe de te quaeratur, Tune Sac^r^os?
Non ^go Respo le. Sim. Quid? mentiar? Hand ita Romae.

Pseud. Ipse fui Romae; mentiti nefcio. Number tu
Esse Sacerdotem te credis Apollinis, Orci,
Isidos, aut Cereris? Tu si^ intellige. Act. 2. Sc. 3. Pseud. Die immortales
(...) contra non (...)
Fraus haec
Argento contra non chara est, aut ori^halco.
Sic itidem. Tw^ Roman (...)? Non ego Romam
V^quam adii (capite incede s, aut compede vinctus,
Aut furcam ore gerens, humerove molatile saxum)
Simia, ne risu te ruperis. Haec ego trado
Sobrius, ac prudens. Sim. Act. ^. Sc. 8. Nimis (...) mortalis d^^tus, n^mis
(...), nimis m^bes
O te, Pater alme, ce^ebri
Foelicem! quam Dia doces! Haud talia dictant
Pythagoras, Superavit do^^m Troianum at^^^ (...) Pseudolus.
Anytive reus, vel dogma Platonis.

Pseud. Te praestas nobis Act. 2. Sc. 2. Pseud. Hic mihi incusest, procudam ego
hodie hine multes delos.
incudem Simia: tecum,
Dum loquor, ipse novas videor producere t^chnas.
Si, to mule reseruatio^un mentali^ Ies^ui^ vsitatae. Non no^i i.e. (...).
cui consilii socium te adiunxeris, idem
Cum suerit Patriae suffossor, petque-duellis,
Is coram sistatur, and hunc norisne rogeris?
Haud te nosse hominem, Non vidi. (...) c. visione b^ati^ic^i.
ptius aut vidisse, repone.
Non nosse (ex auium cantu, 'Boreave susurro,
Non ex Aethiopum, histori^s, Troiaeve ruinis,
Non ex notitia, quae Demonstratio dicta est.)
Non vidisse (oculis palpebrae tegmine clausis, Velnon vt dicom tibi.

Non oculis Argus, non alt^* nostis in vmbris,
Non disiunctarum trans saxea septa domorum,
Non hoc, quem Coelum dabit oli^ Patria, visu:
Denique non, vt rent tibi, Iudex improbe, narren^.)
Sic non lingua tibi mendax, sed dictio fallax.
Interea Act. 2. Sc. 1. Pseud. Ego in m^o pectore ita param c^pias dupli^ts
triplicis dolos Posidies, vt vbiet^nque (...) hostibus congrediar malorum mcor^
Fr^tus virtute dicam mea indust^a and maltitia Fraudulent^a Facil^ vt vin^^l,
facile vt ^pelicm mcos perducllis me^ persidijs.
duplicies condens in pectore sensus,
Viceris, and trbidos praeda spoliaveris hosts.

Sim. O Pater; o nulli quidquam mentite, quid autem,
Quid si iuratos recta ad responsa lacestant,
Si tangendae arae, si coelum in vota vocandum,
Fallemusne fidem? Pseud. Fidei est sine corpore nomen
Haereticis concessa ^ides. Periuria non sunt,
Quae varium sumunt ex vocum ambage colorem,
Aut iniuratae sunt dissona nuncia mentis.

Sim. Haec super Haeretici iurabunt protinus omnes,
Papicolis non esse Deum: Act. 1. Sc. 3. Quid ais quanti^ terra tegit hominum
(...) etc. Bal. fat^or. Call. nempe conceptis verbis. Bal. ^tia^ consultis
quoque. Call. Periurauisti
Iudibria Coelo
Conceptis fieri, consultisque impia verbis:
Ibidem. Pseud. Non potest pietate obsisti ^uic, vt res sunt (...), Deos
quide^, quos maxim aequum est metuere, cos minimini facit.
Non posse (vt reliquae cessant hoc nomine lites)
His pietate malis obsisti. Pseud Simia, quicquid
Hic nob^s inimica cohors obganniat (vt se
Ruperit inuidia) tu sic, licet vndique crescat
Suspicio, corvum Iudes Act. 5. Sc. 4. Pseud. Quid (...) Chapter Anguilla est,
el^bitur.
elapsus hiantem
Tortilis in morem anguillae, and nova slumina inibis.
Deprendi miserum est, vel Apolline iudice vincam.
Me memini quondam bis terve his artibus vsum:
Act. 4. Sc. 6. Bal. Malum and s^clestum, peri^^rum arebant esse me. S. P^l
haud mentitu^ st. Bal. (...) iratus fui.
Periurum a^ebant. Quid tum? Non hoc mihi bilem
Moverat. Irascor, quod non irasceris hosti
Arcius. Sim. Ipse quidem (sic me rationis egentem
Dementisse modo fat^or) vix ista putaram
Digna side* Iam me Magnae reuerentia Romae,
Iam tua me virtus, censuraque nescia falli
Imperiis egere suis, vt singula credam,
Et cupiam vt capiam tam sanctae imitamina fraudis:
Iam liqueo in laqueos, totusque interfluo rimis:
Iam me vtinam celebres Romani nominis hosts
Exagitent. Sic est. An mecum Pseudolus vnquam
Verba habuit, quaerunt. Nunquam, respondeo, quicqua^
Verborum (virides urentum flatibus ornos,
Aut animas Erebo, Scopulis, glacieve cientum.
Non per canalem sonuit, Taurumve Perilli.
Non Arabum lingua Chaldaeorumve loquutus,
Non lingua (...),
(...),
(...). Pseud. Quo tendis nnbila supra?

Sim. (...) Pseud. Satis o satis. Vnde sed ista?

Sim. Nomina sunt long populorum vtroque sub Indo,
Quos e barbary nuper sub foedera Christi,
Pontificisque iugum nostri misere Sodales.

Pseud. Act. 4. Sc. 1. Pseud. O heminem lepidum! It quoque etiam dolis
O lepidu^, charumque caput, quam Pseudolicissas!
Simia non magis est imitatrix, Simia, quam tu.
Te mihi, te servet Romae, ac sibi Jupiter.

Sim. Atqui
Pluris adhuc ego sum. Siquando (scilicet haud sunt
Semper in occulto nostrae mysteria Sectae)
Suspicio est caecos verbis me affingere sensus, Atque etia^ menda^^s. Jupiter
te mihi seruet.

Iurabo me non hoc fingere: dumque ita iurem,
Interea me non quicquam finxisse, negantem
Fingere, iurabo. Tum tertia, quarta secundis
Iuramenta superiiciam catus. Omnia falsa,
Et falsura omnes. Haec Aequiuocatio nomen
Me tribuente, potest Reflexa aut Aequiuocatio circularis.
Orbica dici.

Pseud. Act. 4. Sc. 1. Vt ego ob tuam, Simia, perfidiam te amo, et metuo, and
magnifacio.
Dapsile ob inventu^ hoc, nequeo, mi Simia, quin te
Osculer, argutumque caput demulceam. Abunde
I am scio te nostris aurem adiecisse lubentem
Consiliis; and, quae superaddis, facta daturum.

Sim. Qui vero nosti number non, dum, Pseudole, tecum
Haec loquor, aequivoce me iam tibi credere fingam,
Aequivoce tibi pollicear me strenue in hosts
Vocibus aequivocis vsurum?

Pseud. O improba virtus!

Sim. Dum (...).
pullum doceas oculos transfigere, corve
Ipse tuis caveas.

Pseud. Act. 4. Sc. 3. Pseud. Peiorem ego hominem, magisque versute malum,
Metuo male, Nunqua^ aedipol quenquam vidi quam hic est Simia,
ne malus iste, Nimisque ego illum hominem metuo, and formido male, Ne malus
item ergame sit, vt ergaillum fuit;

Et nimium praecox Patris anticipator, Ne in resecunda mihi obuertat cornua.
ab host
Protinus in nostros obuertat cornua.

Sim. Nam quid
Impedit, in Caium qui sit periurus eundum
In Titiu^ quoque --

Pseud. Sed nostris sermonibus eccum
Nescioquis captator adest. Discede.

Sim. Valeto.

Quid ni igitur

Pseudolus aequivocare docens, and Simia discens,
Verborum laqueos ambo luant laqueo^
THO. GOAD Magister Artium.
An Societati humanae infestiores sinte vafr Amphibologi, Quaestio philosophico
ptoposita in (...).
quam aperte periuri. Affirm^.

Guido Faux.
FAuxerebi patriae fax, faex mundi, Garnet les.
vnu^ at habebis
Patrem flagitii, slagitio parem.
Herculeas ^mbo sceleri posuere columnas,
N^l vltra, hic calamo pessimus, hic manu.
Nomine qui varius, qui vestibus, ore, color es
Vectus trans mare tu? Non ( Parenthesis includit mentalem Iesuitae
rescruationem.
mare mortuum)
Curia Papalis tibi visa est? Non (sine scortis)
Sacris Papa caput? Non (caput aneum)
Number tu mendicans abraso crine Sacerdos?
Non (ritu antipodum; Non (apud inferos)
Nonne a te binis grauidata est Fuluia natis?
Non, verum fateor (bimula cum fores.)
Heus laqueo nodos claudas hos ocyus vno,
Et nodo laqueos, in cruce carnifex.
Ignare aequiuocae fraudis constringito fauces,
Garnetto vniuoce guttura frangito.
Pendeat infoelix, membris truncetur, aperte
Periuro aequiuocus crimine dirior.
Pectore diffisso videas, quae mente reseruat;
Evulsi latebras cordis et explices.
Ancipiti gladio Iesuitica texta secentur:
Solvi nam nequeunt ancipites doli.
DAN. FEATLY, Magister Artium.
THE NEW ART OF Lying, covered by Jesuits under the Veil of Equivocation.
THe These. 2. 7.
Apostle describing the state of Antichrist, does signify, that a mystery of
iniquity should appear in the managing of it: and this does implie, that in
the kingdom of Antichrist iniquity should reign under a coue^t of holiness.
And the same Apostle does foretell, 1. Tim. 4. 1, 2.
that in the latter times (which are the times of Antichrists reign) men
should speak lies in hypocrisy. And this, though it may be extended farther,
yet cannot be more literally understood, then of such as teach a practice of
lying, under a pretense of preserving truth. Now of these Prophecies of the
Apostle I may speak in a like manner, and almost in the same words, as our
Luke 4^1.
Lord spoke of the Prophecy of Isai; This day are these Scriptures fulfilled
in our eyes; for now we see those who exercise a mystery of iniquity, and
speak lies, pretending thereby to maintain and preserve the truth: as (to
omit all further instance) may evidently be seen in a newfound Art of
Equivocation. For the Masters and maintainers thereof do tell us, Lequendo cum
Art dissimulationis vitatur peccata, quae comuuiter, committuntur, etc.
Rodrique^ suma, v. menda^. nu. 4.
That by speaking according to this Art of dissembling, sins are avoided,
which, without it, are commonly committed. And that Acquiuocatio, quam ^citam
(...) omnino ad mendacia (...), vitanda consert. Heissias Re^ut. Aphoris. cap.
4. Aphor. 4. nu. 130.
Equivocation altogether serves, or is of good use for avoiding of lies and
periuries. And Sieve recreationis gratia, sieve quocunque al^o fine, iuret se non
fecisse aliquid quod reuera fecit, intell^gendo intra se aliquid aliud etc.
reuera non mentitur. San^ho^ oper. moral. to 1. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 15. page 25.
that for what end or reason soever a man swear, that he did not do a thing,
which indeed he did do, yet having his reservation within himself, he in
very deed tells no lie. And Per (...) doctrinam singularem, postumus euitare
innumera peccata, (...) passim aliquot neg^gentiores admittimus negando vel
assumando passim sine aliqua subintellectione, cum qua coniuncta essent vera.
Nauar. Commen^^n C. Humanae aur. q. 3. nu. 13.
that by this singular doctrine we may avoid innumerable sins, which through
heedlesnesse diverse of us do every foot commit, by denying or affirming
things usually, without a reservation understood, with which if they were
joined, they would be true. And to this purpose it is, that Father Proceeding
against Traitors. (...) l. 1.
Garnet, a Master of this Art, when a book was to be licenced by him, the
title whereof was, A Treatise of Equivocation, he scored out that title, and
put this in the place of it, A Treatise against lying and fraudulent
dissimulation. By all which it may appear, that these men, while they teach
the Art of Equivocation, do profess notwithstanding, that all which they do,
is with a religious observance and preservation of the truth. But now in the
second place I offer to prove in this short Treatise, that whatsoever shows
they make to the contrary, yet this device of Equivocation is in truth, an Art
of falsehood and deceit, and such as the Scriptures do condemn under the name
of lying. Which point if it be once cleared, then there can be no doubt, but
that the Church of Rome, and her Doctors, are they which exercise a mystery of
iniquity, and speak lies in hypocrisy.

Now for the clearing hereof, and that the world may see more fully what to
think of this mystery, there are five things, which I have thought necessary
to be considered of. 1 The name, or what is meant by the word Equivocation in
this Question. 2 The Original of it, or who be the Authors and vpholders of
it. 3 The object and matter, or in what cases they allow it to be lawful. 4
The use, or rather abuse of it, or for what turns it may serve the Patrons of
it. 5 The Grounds, or what the proofs or reasons are either for or against it.


CHAP. 1.
Of the name, and what is meant by the word Equivocation in this Question.
THat we may the better understand what is meant by this word, we must note
that there are two famous acceptions and uses of the word Equivocation among
men. The first is a proper and ancient use of it, frequent among all sorts of
writers, but handled and spoken of, especially in Logic. The second is an
improper and abusiue acception of it, which was of late years devised by some
writers and Doctors of the Roman Church. Father Parsons calls the form,
verbal, and the later, mental Equivocation. And of these he says, Mitigat.
cap. 8 nu. 10. pa. 314.
that the verbal is proper Equivocation; the mental is so called, rather by a
certain similitude, then propriety of speech, and that Ibid. nu. 15.
the verbal is only true and proper Equivocation, for that mental in rigor
is none. And again, that Ibid. nu. 10.
Equivocation has of later years only been accustomed to be used in this
sense, that is, for mental Equivocation. And Heissius another Jesuit, and
Patron of this Art, says, Refut. Apho^r. cap. 4. Ap^ons. 3. nu. 129.
that their mixed speech (which they call mental Equivocation) is not properly
Equivocation. By which speeches of these Jesuits (especially seeing the one of
them is a man so well seen in this Art, and so much exercised in this
argument of Equivocation) I presume I have sufficient warrant to say as I did,
without the control of any of our punie Jesuits, that the one use and
acception is proper and ancient, the other improper, and of a later growth,
that is, since the mystery of iniquity did open it self more fully to the
world, and men did more apparently speak lies in hypocrisy. But yet for the
distinguishing of these two kinds, I will rather call the first Logical
Equivocation, as being that which Logic does only acknowledge: and the later
I will call Jesuitical Equivocation, as having, if not its first devising, yet
at least, its polishing from men of that Order. The Question in this place is
only concerning the later, which I call Jesuitical Equivocation.
Notwithstanding for the better clearing of the point in controversy, somewhat
is first to be said concerning the former, which I call Logical.

First then for the Logical Equivocation; it is an ambiguous or doubtful
saying, when one word or speech has mo^ senses then one, and it hapeneth three
ways.

1. When a word by it self has diverse significations and meanings; as this
word [to know] has. For sometimes it signifies to apprehend and understand
the certainety of some truth: ^. Ioh. 3. 20.
as when S. John says; GOD is greater then our hearts, and knows all things.
2. [To know] is as much as to approve and allow of: as when David says; Psalm.
1. 6.
The Lord knows the way of the righteous. And when Christ says to the
foolish Virgins; Math. 25. 12.
Verily I say unto you, I know you not. The meaning is; I do not acknowledge
you for any of mine. In this, and such like words as this, there is an
Equivocation; because the word has diverse acceptions and uses.

2. When words, which have but one signification of themselves, yet are so
joined together in some sentence, as that they may, by reason of the
composition, make and yield diverse meanings: or when by reason of their
contexture, they may have more meanings than one: Acts 19. 5.
as when S. Luke says; When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus: these words are diversely construed by the Learned. For some
think them to be the words of S. Paul, and to have reference to the speech of
John Baptist, immediately going before: and then the meaning must be this;
that when those brethren, there spoken of, heard John so teaching concerning
Christ, they were baptized of John, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. But others
think them to be the words of S. Luke, and to have reference to the former
speech of S. Paul: and then the meaning must be; that when those brethren had
heard Paul discoursing in this manner of John and his Baptism, then They were
baptized of Paul, in the Name of Christ. In this Clause then, there are two
senses given by the Learned; and that shows that there is an ambiguity; but
that ambiguitie rises not from the diversity of significations in any of the
words, but from the different consideration of the contexture or composition of
the sentence.

3. When the circumstances of time, place, persons, etc. are such, as that in
reason, and in the judgment of sober men, being well and duly considered,
they may limit or restrain the speech to some special matter or subject; or
otherwise alter the meaning of it from that which it should have, if it were in
some other place, and upon some other occasion. As for example: when S. Paul
says; I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God. Acts 20.
27.
These words considered by themselves, do comprize all the Secrets of God, and
all the mysteries of His Wisdom: but if we consider the circumstances of the
persons, time, place, and occasion; as that the speaker was Paul, an Apostle,
whose office and employment was to teach the mysteries of Religion; that the
hearers were the Church of Ephesus, who expected information in matters of
salvation; and that the occasion of their meeting at this time, and in this
place, was only for teaching and learning the Word of God, and the Gospel of
Jesus Christ: these circumstances, in reason, may teach us, that in this place,
those words [all the Counsel of God] are not to be extended to all the
secrets and depth of Gods Wisdom; a great part whereof, is neither revealed,
nor necessary to be known of any man; and some part whereof, though it be
revealed, yet was not pertinent to this occasion; but rather, that those words
are to be limited and restrained, according to the present occasion, to
signify and note, all necessary things for them to know for their souls
health and salvation. Or, to give a more familiar example, and such as a
Jesuit has given instance in^ we may suppose, that two men going together in
a journey; the one of them (his money sailing him) desires to borrow ten pound
of his fellow; who makes answer, that he has not so much: here his meaning
must be supposed to be, that he has not so much in his purse, or so much in a
readiness about him, though he had four times the like value in his Chest at
home. But if the same thing should be desired of him, when he were at home in
his own house, then the meaning would be, that he had not such a sum at
home. And the same answer, which was true, being given to his fellow.
Traveler by the way; would be a lie, if it were uttered to him in his house.
Thus there may arise an ambiguity in a speech, by reason of the circumstances
of person, place, time, and occasion; where otherwise there is no ambiguity
either in the signification of any word, or in the composition of the sentence,
considered in and by themselves.

And in what kind soever, of these now specified, there happens an ambiguity;
that I call a Logical Equivocation; concerning which our present question is
not. For as the Doctors of the Roman Church, so the learned of our side do
acknowledge, that there may be a lawful use of equivocal speeches in every
of these kinds, if they be not extended too far, or mis-applyed to a wrong
cause. For, to speak more particularly, it is granted.

1. That we may lawfully use words, which may indifferently be taken in diverse
acceptions and meanings, as they are then used. And this is plain, partly
because the Scriptures are full of such speeches; and partly, because our
common conversation and life cannot be without them.

2. It is not unlawful, when some case of further good does require it, to use
these ambiguous speeches in the less known and common signification, and in
another meaning then it is likely the hearers will understand them for the
present. For so, when our Lord said, Lazarus our friend sleeps: Ioh. 11. 11.
He meant that he was dead, which was the less common and known
signification; and therefore the Disciples, according to the more usual
meaning, understood him of natural sleep. And he did this for good purpose,
and for the profit of the hearers; that they might hereby learn, either that
death in general is to Gods children but as a sleep, by which they are
refreshed, and made the more lively: or that this death of Lazarus, was rather
to be called asleep, then a death, because he was so speedily raised from it
again.

3 It is not unlawful, if there be just cause for concealing of a truth, to
use an ambiguous speech in any of these kinds, that thereby we may hide some
thing from the hearers, which they should not know. This assertion has not so
direct proof from Scripture, as the others have; and yet it is not without all
proof from the Scriptures neither. For there we find, that a man may
lawfully utter one truth, thereby to hide another truth from the hearer. As
for example, 1. Sam. 16. 1, 2.
God appointed Samuel to go to Bethleem and anoint one of Iesses sons to be
King; and when Samuel objected, How can I go? If Saul hear it, he will kill
me. The Lord said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice
to the Lord. And so Samuel did, as it follows in the same Chapter; and by
this he co^cealed his purpose of anointing a new King; which was the special
intent of his going to that place. And if it be lawful and warranted by Gods
own appointment to utter one truth, for the concealing of another: then in
reason I think it cannot justly be condemned for unlawful, if a man, upon
just occasion, do use an ambiguous speech in a true sense, thereby to hide
from the hearer, something which he should not know. For if in so doing any
thing be faulty, it must be, as I take it, the one of the two; either because
an ambiguous speech is used in another meaning then it is likely the hearer
will take it; and that to be lawful, is proved in the former assertion: or
because this true sense in the ambiguous speech, is uttered to conceal another
thing from the hearer; and that to be lawful, is clear by this example of
Samuel. And therefore I think the conclusion may hence be inferred, that it is
not unlawful, if there be just cause for concealing of a truth, to use an
ambiguous speech, that thereby we may conceal some other thing, which is not
fit to be uttered. And hereto agree our learned divines also For one, speaking
of Equiuocatio^, as it consists in the ambiguitie of words uttered, adds,
(...) maxim in liber^ s^rmone, hoc quidem sensu vti licere nemo dubitat. Abbot
Antilog. aduersus Eudaemono loan. cap. 2 fol. 18.
That this kind of Equivocation, especially in ordinary speech, no man doubts
but that it may lawfully be used. And, Sit per illam ce^ndus consiligs, tegend
isque arca^^ suuo locus. Ibidem.
this Equivocation may have his due place for concealing of Counfe^s, and
hiding of secrets. And again, speaking to his adversary, Tuscias
taciturnitates illas, quas narra^, Confessionum and consi^^orum, vbi
amphibologijs, and ambiguitatibus consistunt, noble non improbari: damn^ri
prors^s a nohis, vt mendacio tegantur:
Know (says he) that those concealements, whether of Confessions or Counsels,
whereof you speak, where they do consist of ambiguities in the words, we
dislike not: only if they be covered with a lie, that we do wholly condemn.
And another learned writer in our Church, speaking of one, that magnified the
use of Equivocation, adioineth, Si appellatione Acquiuocationis, simplicem
quandam and modest^ reticent^am signisicet, aut dissimulationem consiliorium in
hac miscra vita saepe necessariam; plane cum ipso sentio. Casaubon. epi. ad
Fronton. Duc. page 110.
If by the name of Equivocation he understand a plain and sober concealing and
covering of secret counsels, which in this miserable life is often times
necessary, I am of his opinion too. This is the opinion and judgment of our
learned men, concerning the use of Logical Equivocation; and herein we agree
with them of the Church of Rome: or if there be any difference among the
learned of both sides in these cases already mentioned, as perhaps about some
circumstances in the use of those ambiguous speeches there may be, it is
nothing to the present Question in hand, which is not concerning any of the
kinds of these Logical Equivocations, which consist in the ambiguous
acception and meaning of the words uttered. And therefore when the Equiuocaters
of our time do labor to confirm their Art, by the authorized use of such
speeches, as are ambiguous by reason of the diverse meanings which the words may
receive, they miss the mark, beat the air, and spend their labor to no
purpose.

And this being briefly noted, concerning the true and Logical Equivocation, I
come now to the improper and Jesuitical. And that what it is, I will set down
in their own words, who profess to be Patrons of it. Father Persons Mitigat.
cap. 9. nu. 53. pa. 382
then, a man very laborious in the polishing of this Art, defines it thus;
Equivocation or Amphibologie in this our Controversy, is nothing else, but
when a speech is partly uttered in words, and partly reserved in mind, by which
reservation the sense of the proposition may be diverse. And again, Mitigat. ca.
12. nu. 3 p. 484.
mental Equivocation (says he) is, when any speech has or may have a double
sense, not by any double signification or composition of the words themselves,
but only by some reservation of mind in the speaker, whereby his meaning is
made different from the sense which the words that are uttered, do bear or
yield without that reservation. And Sanchez giving a Rule concerning the words
used in this their Equivocation, says, Posium absque mendico (...) verba
vsurpari, etiams^ exs^^ significatione non suit ambigua, nec eum seasum verum
admittant exse, nec ex circumstantijs occurrentibus, sed tantum verum serisum
reddant ex aliqo addito mente proferentis retento, q^^^elique illud sit. Sanch.
oper. moral. l. 3 c. 6. nu. 15.
A man may without telling of a lie, use those words, although they be not
ambiguous by their signification, and do not make a true sense, either by
themselves, or by reason of the circumstano^s then occurring, but do only
make a true sense by some addition, kept in the speakers mind, whatsoever that
addition be. Thus they. By which descriptions it appears, that Jesuitical
Equivocation, is a mixed proposition, (as Persons also diverse times calls it)
part whereof is uttered in words, and so taken it has one sense; and another
part of it is reserved and understood in the speakers mind, which being added
to the words spoken, makes another sense; as for example, A Seminary, or a
Iesuite-Priest being asked by a Magistrate, Are you a Priest? He answers, I
am no Priest, understanding and reserving in his mind this clause, So as I am
bound to tell you, or any other which himself pleases to like purpose: here
(say they) is but one mixed proposit^^ part whereof is uttered in words, namely,
I am no Priest; and that taken alone as it is uttered, breeds a false s^tise,
and in this sense they would have the Magistrate to conceive it: and another
part of that proposition is reserved and kept secret and close in the Priests
mind, and that is this, So as I am bound to tell you. And this secret and
mental reservation, being added to the words, makes this one entire
Proposition; I am no Priest, so as I am bound to tell you: and that being taken
all together, makes a true sense, and so the Priest understands it. And
therefore, if he do but keep, or reserve, or understand that or any such
clause in his mind, though the words which he speaks be never so false, yet
this man tells no lie, nor speaks no untruth. Such is the virtue of this
new found Art; and thus they describe it.

But that it may yet appear more fully and more distinctly, it will not be
amiss to set down the mystery of this Art in certain distinct Propositions,
all gathered from their own writings, and approved dealings.

l. That this mixed Proposition of theirs, or this Equivocation, as they call
it, whether we consider that part of it which is uttered in words; or the whole
Proposition, as it has the reseruatio^ added to it, which is kept in the
speakers mind; has in neither respect or consideration, Mitigat. cap. 8. nu.
10. page 313.
as F. P. says, any doubtful sense of speech or words, by their doubtful or
double signification; but only that it utters not all the whole sense of the
speaker; and therefore cannot be properly called equivocal, according to
Aristotle's meaning and Definition. And again, These mixed Propositions ( Mitig.
cap. 11. nu. 14. page 447.
says he) be not properly equivocal in the sense that Aristotle did define,
etc. for that they do not of themselves nor their own natures, signify
equally diverse things; but being understood wholly, have a simple and single
signification in the mind and understanding of the speaker: yet, for that the
hearer concerning but (...) thereof, apprehends a different sense from the
speaker; they may ab effectu, be called ambiguous; for that they leave a
different sense in the hearer and speaker, albeit of themselves they be plain,
cle^re, and true, etc. Out of which words, considered and joined with that
which was formerly cited out of Sanchez and Parsons, we may note three things.
1. That there is no ambiguity or doubtful sense, either in the words uttered,
if they be taken alone; nor in the whole Proposition, as they compound it of
the words uttered, and ^he reservation understood, taken together. 2. That
therefore they call it Equivocation, or an Equivocal Proposition or speech;
because they signify or express one meaning to the hearer, which is false;
and retain or understand another sense within themselves, which is true. 3.
That the taking of this word Equivocation in this meaning, is not proper, and
such as Aristotle did understand and conceive by it. He might have said, that
it is not proper, nor such as either Aristotle, or any man either learned or
unlearned, having but common sense in his head, and common honesty in his
heart, did ever acknowledge before this last Age. And the truth is, they
therefore call it an Equiuocatio^, though the word was never known to have any
such meaning or signification* because they are ashamed to call it by its right
name, which is, A Lie. But as the covetous man, though he practices the thing,
yet abhorres the name; and therefore will be called a good husband, or a
thrifty man: And as a thief is ashamed of his right name, and when he meets
with a Traveler to whom he would signify his e^rand; he says, that he is a
Goodfellow which wants money: So the Romanists teach an Art of lying; and
because they are ashamed of the infamous name of Liars, they call themselves
Equiuocators: and that which other men call Lying, they call Equiuocating.

2. That if a man will use this benefit of Equiuocating, he must be wary and
careful, that he reserve some secret clause in his mind, which being added to
the words uttered, do make a true speech; or else all is marred, and he, for
want of that clause, become a plain Liar.

To this purpose, Father Persons Mitig. cap. 10. nu. 22. page 424
says, that the Equiuocator speaks a truth in his own meaning, and in the
sight of God; which always he must do, when he uses this Evasion; for that
otherwise he should lie, and commit sin, if he had not some true sense
reserved in his mind, etc.

To declare this yet further: Say that two Priests were questioned by a
Magistrate, whether they were Priests or no; and the one should say, I am no
Priest: and should withal reserve in his mind this clause, So as I am bound to
tell you: and the other should answer in the very same words, I am no Priest:
but should forget or neglect to frame or imagine in his mind that reservation,
or some such like: the former, who imagined that reservation in his mind,
should be an Equiuocator, Risum teneatis, amici?
and speak the truth; but the latter, who had omitted it, should be a Liar,
and utter a falsehood and untruth, though he speak none but the very same
words; and they have none but one signification and meaning.

This they say, to show us, how an Equiuocator does differ very much from a
Liar. The truth is; this Equiuocator and this Liar do differ as much as two
false knaves, the one of which is called a Thief, and the other, a Good Fellow
that takes a Purse.

3. That whatsoever a man do say or swear, be it otherwise never so false and
absurd; yet if a man do imagine a clause in his mind, which being added to the
words spoken, would make a true meaning; then the former speech or saying, how
false soever otherwise becomes true, and without all compass of lying:
because (says Father Mitigat. cap. 10. nu. 14. page 418.
Persons) it is freed from the nature of a Lie, by the due and just reservation
in the speakers mind. By the due and just reservation, says he. But suppose
the reservation be not just and due, but that a man use this art, when he
ought not to equivocate? Why, yet even then, he is by this reservation freed
from telling of a Lie, though not freed from all sin. For though is should
not be properly the sin of Lying, nor against the negative Precept of Truth:
yet should it be another sin, against the public good of civil society, and
consequently against the affirmative Precept of Truth, etc. Thus speaks
Father Mitigat. cap. 10. number. 23. page 424
Persons. And to the like purpose Valentia Tom. 3. disp. 5. q. 13. punct. 2.
page 1136.
. But Sanchez more plainly and roundly: If a man ( (...) sine propria sponte;
sine recreationes gratia sitie quocum^ alio sine iurets^ non secisse aliqurd
quod reuera fecit, intelligendo ^^tra se aliquid al^^d, quod nonfecit, velal am
diem ab eain qua fecit, vel quodius aliud add^^um verum, reuera non mentitur,
etc. Sanchez op. moral. l. 3. cap. 6. number. 15. p. 25.
says he) either alone or before company, either being asked or of his own
accord, either for recreation sake, or for any other end, do swear that he
did not do something, which indeed he did do; understanding within himself
some other thing then that he did doc; or some other day then that in which he
did do it, or any other addition that is true; this man, in very deed, does
neither lie nor forswear.

Thus they speak, and so must all they that will maintain this Art. For
whereas Father Persons, speaking of the Wife of Ananias, says; Mitigat. cap.
11. nu. 29. page 459.
that she being lawfully demanded by S. Peter in a lawful cause, touching
her own vow and promise, no clause of reservation could save her speech from
lying: he does herein not only contradict himself, as Liars usually do, but
does also thereby overthrow the very grounds of this fond Art. For if a
reservation in the mind do free the Equiuocator from lying; because that
being added to his words, both together do make a true Proposition; why should
not a reservation in this woman's mind, save her speech from lying, if it were
such, as being added to her words, both together might yield a true meaning;
which, according to the rules of this Art, it had been easy for this woman
to frame*

4 That in any case, in which Equivocation may be used, a man may frame any
reservation, whatsoever himself pleases, so it be such, as being added to the
words, does make the whole compound to be true. Mitig c. 10. nu. 22. p. 424.
Persons sometimes seems to require, that the reseruatio^ be conformable to
the matter, time, and place; and not fained at random, as some fondly do
imagine. But he does but mock his Reader; making show of following the former
Schoole-Doctors, whose words these are; when he has no such meaning as they
had in them. For, when he speaks plainly, and so as you may understand his
distinct meaning. them his Mitig. cap. 8. nu. 55. p. 344.
words are; I do truly and really mean, that I am no Priest, in the sense
that I speak it, which may be any that pleases me, or that I list to frame to
my self: so as I may mean, that I am no Priest, such as I should be, such as
I desire to be, such as is worthy of so great an office, and sacred a function;
such as he ought to be, that occupies the place of God in governing of souls;
I am no Priest subject to the demander, or obliged to answer his demands; or
the like. Thus, and such like, whatsoever he pleases, he professes may be his
reseruations, when he denies himself to be a Priest: and what conformity
these have, at least the most of them, with the Circumstances, I leave to be
declared by the Patrons and Masters of this Art. Sure I am, if such large
scope may be granted, and yet the reservation be conformable to the matter,
etc. and not fained at random, then it will be an easy matter to keep within
compass, and to observe the wise rule of this grave Father. But, let Persons
go with his doubling, and let us hear what others say. Sanchez allows any
words, if they yield a true sense, (...) dito, mente proferentis retento
quodcunque illud sit. Sanch. op. moral. l. 3 c. 6. nu. 15. pa. 25.
By any addition, reserved in the mind^ of the speaker, whatsoever that
addition be. And Jacob (...) Graffijs, proposing a Case of one, who being
taken by thieves, does for fear promise them somewhat with an oath; Siiste
aliud mente cogitauerit, verbi gratia, promitto dare aut sacere, si a Iudiac
^oactus fuero, vel si coelum ruat, aut quid simile, tune a peccato erit
immunis. Decis. Aur. par. 1. l. 2. ca. 17. nu. 12.
If (says he) he do imagine some other thing in his mind, for example, I
promise to give this, or do that, if the Iudgo shall compelme to it, or if the
sky shall fall, or the like, then he shall be clear from sin. And Sanchez,
Oper. mor. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 26. page 28.
that a man may lawfully answer, that he killed not Peter, meaning another man
of the same name, or that he killed him not, antequam nasceretur, before he
was borne. And Strange the Jesuit, to show what strange and unlimited liberty
they do take in the framing of this fancy, affirm that he was in the
company, reserving and intending secretly as added, this word, Not; when he
was questioned before the Lord Chief Justice of England, Proceeding against
Traitors. litt. l. 1.
and the Kings Attorney. These reseruations, and others not much better, do
they allow and practice in the Art of Equiuocating, whereof there is frequent
mention in their Books and Treatises of this argument. By all which it
appears, that they approve of any reseruatirn, which a man can fancy, if
the case be such as they allow of, and the clause such, as may signify a
truth.

5. That this Equivocation of theirs, is lawful, not only in ordinary speech,
but in oaths also. This is plainly avouched by Father Persons, and upon this
reason, Mitigat. ca. 11. nu. 17. page 449.
Because it is a most certain principle, as well in reason, as in Divinity,
that what a man may truly say, he may truly also swear. And again, Mitig.
c. 11. nu. 43. pa. 468.
As all Divines held (says he) that which may lawfully be said, may also
lawfully be sworn. And to this do agree others of this Crew, who commonly
handle this question of Equivocation in their Treatises of Oaths, and allow it
as a thing very lawful, and of good use.

6. That this Art was devised, and so by them is used, that by it they may
deceive the understanding of the hearer, and make him believe an untruth, when
it may serve for their turn. To this purpose those words of Father Persons
sound, Mitig. c. 7. nu. 14. page 284
Equivocation must sometime be practiced, when no other evasion can be found
for defense of innocence, justice, secrecy, and other like urgent occasions.
And speaking of some cases of inconvenience, which he would have to be
avoided by Equivocation, he demands, Cap. 7. nu. 22. pa. 289.
Has God and Nature, and Law of Justice left no lawful evasion in such cases?
And again, Cap. 7. nu. 2. page 274.
We delight not (says he) in this Art or manner of evasion by Equivocation.
By this it appears, that Equivocation (to use the Jesuits own words) is an
Art of evasion, which cannot be understood without a meaning and purpose to
deceive the hearers understanding, and to make him believe an untruth. The
same Doctor of this Art goes on, and teaches us, that this their
Equivocation is, Mitig c. 12. nu 3. page 484.
when any speech has, or may have a double sense, not by any double
signification or composition of the words themselves; but only by some
reservation of mind in the speaker, whereby his meaning is made different from
that sense which the words that are uttered, de bear, or yield without that
reservation. And by this is employed, that the purpose of this is, to imprint
one sense in the speaker, which they acknowledge to be false, and to keep
within themselves another, which they imagine to be true. Becanus also,
another Jesuit, having first proposed the question, An liceat vti
Aequiuocatione: Whether it may be lawful to use Equivocation: he explaineth the
point thus; Sensus est, an licea^ alios fallere, decipere aut cludere per
Aequiuocationes. Manual Controu. l. 5. c. 21. page 530.
Whether it be lawful to deceive and beguile others by Equivocations. In the
prosecution of which question, though he wrangle, and would gladly shift off
from themselves the imputation of this equiuocating fraud; yea, and flatly
denies it: yet by explaining the question in such sort, he acknowledges, that
their meaning who defend it, is to beguile and deceive men. And in like sort
Tolet says. Aliquando licet vti aquiuocatione, and fallere audientem. Tolet.
Instruct. Sacerd. l. 4. c. 21. nu. 9.
It is sometimes lawful to use Equivocation, and to deceive the hearer. And
therefore when Father Persons Mitig. cap. 8 nu. 58. page 346 and 347. See also,
Sober Reckon. c. 4. nu. 89. page 285
says, that his intention is not to deceive in this mental proposition, but
to defend himself, etc. and that the Priest (who denies himself to be a
Priest) that his principal intent is not intentio fallendi, an intention of
deceiving; but rather, euadendi desiderium, a desire to escape and defend
himself: he does either too boldly presume upon his Readers simplicity, or
too grossly bewray his own. For first, when he says, that his principal
intent is not to deceive, but rather to escape, he implies, that an intention
he has to deceive, though that be not his principal intention; and that is
enough to prove (which he denies) that his Equivocation does herein agree
with the nature of a lie, that as a lie is said to be, cum intention
fallendi, so his Equivocation cannot be denied to have the same purpose and
intention in it. And secondly, where he says plainly that his intention is
not to deceive, but to defend, he speaks as wisely, and to as good purpose,
as if a thief by the high way side should say, that he intended not to take
away the true man's purse, but to supply himself with money for his own
spending. For as the thief intends to rob, that thereby he may supply
himself; so the Jesuit intends to deceive, that thereby he may defend
himself.

7 That to forbear the use of this Equivocation (unless where by duty a man
is bound to use it) is better and more Meritorious then to use it. To this
purpose speaks the great Master of this Art; Mitig. c. 7. nu. 2 page 274.
We delight not (says he) in this Art or manner of evasion by Equivocation,
though it be no lie at all; but rather do allow and like far better of simple,
plain, and resolute speech in all Catholics, concerning as well matters of
ordinary conversation, as of their conscience, etc. And presently he adds;
Yet for that perfection is one thing, and obligation is another, we may not
bind men to more then Gods precept binds. By which speech he plainly
teaches, that though it be not unlawful to use Equivocation, because it is
not forbidden by any precept; yet it is a work of perfection, (such as they
use to call a work of supererogation) not to use a man's lawful liberty in
this case. And yet f^rther, It is evident, that albeit good men desirous of
perfection, Cap. 7. nu. 5. page 276.
and prepared to suffer injuries, may live without going to Law, without
swearing, without diuorcing their wives, without Equivocation, etc. yet for all
that, men are not bound to this exactness, etc. And yet again, My wish is
(says he) that Catholic people, Cap. 13. nu. 3. page 548.
but especially Priests, whose example must instruct the rest, should yield
also of their right, for increase of their merit and Crown in heaven, and use
all plainness and synceritie in speech, and free discovering, not only of
their religion, but also of their state, where it is hurtful to none but
themselves. See Persons also in his Sober Reck. ca. 7. nu. 22, and 23. page
484, 485.
And in a word, plainness and syncerity of speech, he compares with
virginity, (which in their esteem, is a glorious work of perfection or
supererogation:) and the practice of Equiuocating to Wedlock, which is lawful,
but not of such merit.

Now hence I infer two Conclusions.

1 That the practice of Protestants in using plainness and syncerity in
speech, according to their doctrine, is by the confession of the Jesuit,
better and more holy, then the practice of Papists in using Euasions and
Equivocations, according to the doctrine of the Equiuocators.

2 That according to the doctrine of Popish Equiuocators, Jesus our Savior was
not so perfect, nor used not so much exactness in his speech, nor merited not
so much, as the Jesuits do, many of them at least. For Father Persons says,
that albeit good men desirous of perfection, may live without Equiuocating, yet
etc. he means that though it may be seen in such men, yet others are not
bound to that exactness: and he implies, that men desirous of perfection, do
use to do so. And such, I trow, the holy Order of Jesuits is, who for desire
of this perfection, have by solemn vow abandoned the world, and all the glory,
and profit belonging to it. Besides, Father Persons grave advice is, that not
only Priests, but other Catholics too, should yield of their right, by
forbearing to equivocate, for the increase of their merit and Crown in heaven:
and, I trow, the followers of JESUS will not be slack to perform, what one
of their own Fathers does advise to be so behoofefull, not only for seculars
of the Clergy, but for lay^ Catholics also. But now JESUS our Lord, see how
far off the Jesuit makes him to be from this degree of perfection. For he
was so frequent in equiuocating, that Father Persons Sober Reck. Append. nu. 16
page 682.
finds him to have used the same in one only Chapter of S. John's Gospel,
above seven or eight times at the least. Nay, and that Sober Reck. in append.
nu. 24. page 687.
more then one Equivocation was used by our Savior in one sentence: and that
eight or nine Equivocal speeches at the least, are contained within a piece of
one only Chapter of our Saviors talk with the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees.
And indeed he has recited and alleged nine several examples out of our
Saviors words, recorded in the latter part of the eighth Chapter of S. John.
And sure, he that did equivocate so often in so little compass, cannot be
imagined to have forborne his right in this practice, for the increase of his
merit and Crown in heaven. Or if they will say, that notwithstanding this
frequent use of Equivocation in so short space, that yet he did forbear his
right still, and so increased his merit thereby; then they will give us
occasion to think, that Jesuits and Priests, and other Roman Catholics may
attain this height of perfection, unto which Father Persons advises them, and
coozen and deceive us silly fellows with their Equivocations seven, or eight,
or nine times in one hour.

I leave it then to be considered by the wise Reader, whether Father Persons
do cog with us all this while, and make no small use of this deceitful Art,
while he labors to defend it: or, whether in good earnest he thinks that
our Lord and Savior did not follow so exact a rule of perfection, as he
advises all his Catholics unto.

These be the most special properties belonging to Jesuitical Equivocation,
as near as I could gather and observe them out of their books, which be the
abettors of this Art, among whom the principal, Father Persons, must needs
be acknowledged to be. For he has labored herein more then they all. Out
of all which observations laid together, I leave it to the consideration of any
understanding man, to judge, whether these two things do not follow.

1 That the Roman Doctors have such rare wits, as that they can by their
devised sleights, transform the nature both of words and things, even as well
as Alchymists can turn lead into gold. For as in matter of State, they Clerici
Rebellio in Regem non est (...) S^. Aphor. v. [Clericus] printed at Antwerp,
1599. and allowed and commended by Silu. Pardo, the Inquisitor.
have found out a mystery; that a Clergieman of their Church may move Rebellion
against his Prince, and yet be no Traitor: so in Conferences with men, they
have found a like mystery; that any man of the Roman Church, may speak, and
say, and swear whatsoever himself pleases, though it be never so false, and
yet be no Liar. The one they fetch from their doctrine of Exemption; and the
other from their doctrine of Equivocation: both dangerous practices to all
humane society. The one whereof should teach Kings to be aware of their Swords,
and the other should teach all men to beware of their words.

2 That by their doctrine, a man is at liberty to lie, without any grudge in
his conscience; and that the Abettors of this Art, by a secret iuggling
device, do s^t open a school for deceit and perjury; Cuius^cne ficio, qui ad
normam men^iatur aut peicret, baud ille periurio aut mend^cioreus c^nsendus sit.
in which they teach an Art of Lying; by the help whereof, he that can lie
and forswear by the Rule, shall be free either from lying or peri^rie: as
Abbot. Ant^log. adu. Eudeaemon-Ioann. c. a. in prine. fol. 11. fac. 1.
a reverend and learned Divine has noted. But hereof there will be fitter
occasion given to say more hereafter. In the mean while, thus much shall serve
to be said of the first Point.

CHAP. II.
Of the Original of Equivocation; and who they be that uphold it, and give
life unto it.
COncerning the Original of this Art, Hospinian. Histor. Jesuit. l. 4. c. 2.
p. 228.
some learned men refer (...) to the Priscillianists, or Arius the
Arch-heretike, who are read to have used fraudulent and deceitful speech. And
such Heretics had not been unmeet Fathers for such a deformed child. But
this Brat was not then borne, nor for many Ages after those days. For mine
own part, unless I shall hereafter meet with some thing more clear then
yet I have seen, I must say with a judicious and learned Writer, Quos Autores
habuerit, non (...) Casaub. epist. ad ^^ont. Du^^um. page 108.
I cannot readily say who were the first founders of this Art. Nor is it
marvel, that a thing of this nature, though found out but yesterday, should
appear to the world without the name or notice of his Author. For, as the head
or spring of Nilus has been long enquired after, and for ought I know, is yet
scarce heard of; and the reason may be, because it is supposed that that River
does rise somewhere in montibus L^nae, in some place of those great Mountains,
whose greatness does hide the place of the Wellhead or Spring: So devices of
State, which never prosper after they are discovered, are commonly smoothered
for a time, and do usually appear without name; themselves being unwilling to
own them, and others being unable to d^scrie them. And such is this Art of
Equivocation, hatched by some rare wit, who yet had rather lose the glory of
the invention, then to lay open the mystery of it: and smoothered by the
Roman State as long as was possible, till misfortune brought it to light
against their wills And yet now, that the River appear^th with a full st^eame,
notwithstanding, the Spring will hardly be found. And if any Rom^nist shall
hence infer, that this Doctrine is therefore an Apostolical I^radition, and
came from Christ himself; because I cannot tell who was the first Author, and
at what time since it was first hatched; as they use to dispute in other cases
against us: I will send him to find me the head of Nilus, and when he has
found that, I will go about to enquire for the Original of this Art. And yet
in the mean while, though I cannot precisely say who was the first Father of
this black Art, yet some things may be said, not impertinent to this
purpose. And those (as I conceive them for the present) I will, lay down in
certain Propositions or Assertions. And they be these.

1 It is certain that it is a late device, and found out the other day.
Persons claims Universality, Antiquity* and Consent, for the proof of this
Art, Mitigat. c. 7. nu. 12. and 13. p. 281. and 282.
His words are, that every man may hear him speak in his own dialect; Let us
consider (says he) how this absurd and impious opinion (if such it be) could
come to be received so generally, both in approbation and practice, doctrine
and action, throughout the Christian world, that is to say; The Doctrine in all
Schools, Pulpits, Chaires, Universities, where teaching has been used,
extant also in the Books and Works of all learned men of what sort soever,
before Jesuits were borne or heard of: but especially those have most treated
thereof, who have written most tenderly of matters belonging unto conscience,
whom we call Casuists. Lawiers in like manner, both Canon and Civil; Divines,
both Scholasticall and posi^^ue, have approved the same. And as for practice,
it has in due cases been received in all Courts, in all Countries, in all
Tribunals, and S^ates of judgment, both ecclesiastical and temporal; and
never refused, condemned, or controled by any, so it were used with the due
circumstances, etc. And alittle after; Was there no man to stand for truth and
reason in any Country, in any Province or State? in any place or time for this
400. years, etc? Where it must be noted, that when he mentions 400 years,
his meaning is not to limit the approbation of this Art to the compass of
those years; but because he supposes, but falsely, that his Adversary had
granted so much; and so here he disputes ex Concessis upon the Confession of
his Adversary: but he intends and means the consent of former times also;
as himself signifies in the same Chap. Nu. 16. p. 285.
whereof he there promises to speak afterward; and so he does. cap 9. nu. 17,
etc. and repeateth it again^ in his Sober Reckon. cap. 7. nu. 26, etc.
For he brings the testimonies and practice of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, and Jesus Christ himself, and that frequently declared. Where it may
be noted, that this Father is as bold to allege Universality, Antiquity, and
Consent for the proof of this Art, as the rest are for the proof of their
Church. And sure the proof is as good and sound in the one, as the other.
Only, Father Persons affirms more boldly, and confirms what he says,
more weakly. But the reason is alike good in both cases. But here I have
only to deal with Persons, about his Equivocation. And against these great
cries, Da mihi vnum exemni homiuii antiquitate, Ethnica, luda^^a, Christiana;
davci vnum, cut Reseruatien^s istae tuae probat^ su^t, misi siq^i forte in
infamni^^ not al^, etc.
I oppose the confident and just challenge of a Reverend man; Name me one man
(says he) out of all antiquity, Heathenish, Jewish, Christian: name but one
man, who ever approved these your Reseruations, unless perhaps some who were
noted with infamy for their pains. I may add; Nay, name me one, who defended
this Equivocation, which Jesuits call a mixed or mental Proposition, or by a
secret reservation, in all the time from Adam to the Trent Council. I will not
say none such can be named; Abbot Anti. cap. 2. fol. 25.
for who can say or presume, that he knows the sayings and opinions of all
former Ages? but this I will say, that whereas the Abettors of Equivocation have
bin challenged by two learned Doctors in our Church, to show any who in former
times have allowed this devilish Art; hitherto I have seen no one man
produced, who does give any plain or direct allowance hereof. For as for the
many autorities, which Persons does allege, they be Conclusions of his own,
spun out of other men's sayings, by such consequences as himself fancieth or
pleases to frame. For where holy or learned men have used speeches, that may
admit diverse interpretations, either by reason of the words used, or some
circumstance occurring, according to which only former Ages were wont to
expound them; he presently runs away with an outcry of mental reservation,
or mixed Proposition: as every man that considers the Allegations, may easily
perceive. In a word, Persons claims very boldly, and to speak truth,
impudently, Universality, Antiquity, and Consent, for this novel, new-deuised,
and vpstart fancy of their own. Where I wish the Reader to consider, how
far he may credit such men, when they lay the like claim to all Antiquity
and Consent of Nations, either for the proving of their Church, or for
maintaining of any other subordinate point of Controversy. For mine own part,
till they show me one who approved a mental Equivocation or reservation, I
will think and say there is none. And this is my first assertion; whereof see
further proof in the next assertion.

2 My second is, that the latter sort of Schoolmen and Casuists gave
occasion, and laid grounds for this ensuing Art; which at that time
themselves, it seems, did not so much as think or dream of. For, whereas
some Cases were then debated, how far a Priest might deny the things which
he had heard in Confession; and in what sort any man that was questioned by an
unlawful Judge, or proceeded against in an vnlalwfull manner, etc. might deny
the things which he knew to be true: they, considering the circumstances of the
persons, place, and business, did allow some hard Equivocations, which the
words would hardly bear in any true sense, yet such as they thought might be
allowed and gathered out of those circumstances, and might well be understood
in those words, as there and then they were uttered. As for example; If a
Priest were questioned, whether he knew or had heard any thing of such or such
a matter; he might say, No: if he did not know or hear it any other way, but
only by Confession. And the reason of this answer is, because, Voces co modo
significant, quo (...) a populo: populus autem Christianus, ^um audit
Sacerdotem iurantem se nii^l scire, nihil intelligit de (...) quae noiut in
Confessione: Qua^e verba illa solum significant nihils^ sciire extra
confessionem.
Words (says Dominicus a Soto) do so signify, as they are understood or
taken by the people. Now Christian people, when they hear a Priest swear,
that he knows nothing of such or such a matter, they understand him not to
speak or mean any thing that he heard in Confession. And therefore those
words (of the Priest) do only signify or import, that* he knows nothing
out of Confession. And the like defense of this answer is given by Sepulueda,
de Rat. dicendi test. cap. 3. Again, it is a further Case, If the Priest be
asked concerning the same thing, whether he know or have heard it in
Confession; whether may he then say, No, I heard it not? And the common opinion
of the Doctors was, Soto Relect. de Secreto, mem. 3. q. 3. Concl. 2. Hi^reto.
that in this case, h^ may swear he did not hear it. Relect. de secreto memb.
3. q 3. Cond. 4. Hactenus opinionem. pa. 312.
But Soto, upon better advice, disliketh this answer, because in this
Sentence, Nihil audiui in Confessione; I heard nothing of it in Confession; the
Restriction allowed in the former case, cannot fitly be understood, to say, I
heard nothing in Confession, to wit, out of Confession. And therefore he
concludes, that that answer in this case cannot be excused from being a lie;
because the words cannot have that construction. Another case is proposed;
Suppose a Tyran should ask of a Priest, whether Peter (for example) did kill
John (which the Priest knew in Confession only) may the Priest say and swear,
that Peter did not kill John? Adrian, who afterward was Pope, and was called
Adrian the sixth, he resolved the question, that he might answer negatiuely,
that ^e killed him not: but Soto again replyeth, that this which Adrian said,
had no show of reason; because the words admit no interpretation, that may
excuse them from a Lie. For, says he; Ineptisima interpretatio (...), non
occidit, ut dicam.
It were a most fond interpretation to say, He killed him not that I may tell
you, or (as our Equiuocators use now a days to speak) He killed him not, so
as I may tell you. And he gives a further reason hereof, Quia facta non habent
or dinem immediatum ad hoc quod est, dicere; sicut scire and alia verba
sensationum. Soto ibid. page 314.
because deeds have no immediate relation to this word, [that I may tell it]
(...) the wo^d [I know] and other such words of sense have. And in his Book de
Iustit. and Iure, disputing the like question, whether a man being questioned
concerning his own Act, may by Ambiguity elude the question; he resolves, It
Quod liceat ei diceu se no^ fecisse, nullatenus est sustentabile. Soto de
Ius^it. and Iure, l. 5. q. 6. art. 2. prope finem.
can no way be defended, that he may lawfully say, that he did not do it: and
hereof he gives this reason; Quoniam, Non feci, nullo modo amplecti potest
sensum, Non seci, ut dica. [facere] enim non habet (...) cum eo, quod est, ut
dicam, quaem habet [scire.]
Because this speech [I did not do it] cannot receive this sense; I did not
do it, to tell it, or that I may tell it, etc. His meaning in more plain
words, is this; that the Priest might truly say in the case proposed, I know
not that Peter did kill John; because he might reasonably understand it thus,
or with this restriction, I know it not out of Confession. And of such a
knowledge the Judge is supposed to ask, and men do usually understand the
Priest to speak. But the Priest might not say without telling a lie. Peter did
not kill John; because, this restriction cannot without absurdity, be applied
to those words,. And consequently, these words could not be so understood by
the hearers. A fourth case may be added, and with that I will end. Suppose a
guilty person be against order of Law examined by a Judge, whether he have
committed such a crime, which indeed he has done, but is not in this case
bound to answer him: suppose (I say) he be enforced to answer, may he truly
say, I did not do it? And Adrian's resolution of the doubt, was; that in such
a case, Potest secundi^ omnes Doctores respondere quod nihil de sacto ille
(...), velcerte, quod non (...). Adrian. in 4. de Sacr. Cons. ^esp. ad 2. prin.
page 143. col. 4.
he may truly answer, according to the opinion of all Schoole-Doctors, that,
he knows nothing of that fa^t, or at least, that he did not (...) it. And
his reason is, because in this answer, he is supposed to speak Descientia, en
quatil^^ eat reuolare.
of such a knowledge of the fact, as he may lawfully discover. But Soto
replyeth again, Nescio qui s^nt ill^ omnes De^tores: fateor me nullum legisse.
De Secreto, mem. 3^ q. 3. Concl. 4. p. 316 v. etiam de lustit et Iute, l. 5. q.
6. art. 2.
I know not who all those Doctors are, that Adrian speaks of: I confess, I
have read none of that opinion. And he adds; Se^sus ille violent^ssimu^ est
etc.
That meaning, in which Adrian interprets these words, is a most forced and
violent sense.

Thus Soto declares his own opinion, and the opinion of other Schoole-Doctors
and Casuists of that time, in these and other cases of like nature. And the
like does Io. Genesius Sepulueda, another learned man of the same nation, and
about the same time. For having heard some defend some such like Equivocations
and ambiguities, he undertakes to prove, and that by the testimony of ancient
Divines, that in witnesse-bearing (for thereof he does in particular entreat)
a Witness may not, art vorborum, by cunning words, deceive the Judge; but
that he is bound to speak plainly, and according to the meaning of the Judge,
who asks the question. And of the contrary opinion, he says, Nemo veterum
and nobilium Theologorum, quod equidem sciam, affirmauit. Sepulu. de rat.
dicend. testi^. cap. 17.
None ancient and renowned Divine that I know, did affirm it to be lawful.
And in the Preface to that Book, he says, that while he was in Rome, he
met with one, who maintained this opinion, which he calls Quorundam iuniorum
Theologorum decretis consentan^am.
agreeable to the Determinations of some young or late Divines: and when he came
back again into Spain, that praeter spem, contrary to his expectation, he
found some of their learnedest Divines, maintaining, and instilling into their
Students hearts and ears, ^llam veterum (...) summorum Theologorum consensu
damnatam opinionem.
that opinion which was condemned by the ancient and chief Divines. And, Chap.
15. he shows who they be, whom he calls ancient Divines; and that is in
his own words, Nastra and patrii memori^ superiores, qual^ est Aqui. Thomas.
those which lived before our and our Fathers days, such for example sake, as
Thomas Aquinas is.

Out of which testimonies and sayings of these two learned men (the one of
which was Confessor to Charles the fifth, and the other his Historiographer;
and the one flourished about the year 1560. as Possouin says, and the other
died in the year 1572. says the same Posseuin, out of these their sayings) I
gather and observe these things.

1 That in the days of these two learned men, which was about some 60 years
ago, there was little or no speech of any Equivocation by mental reservation,
or of any such mixed propositions, as the Romanists now fancy. This I gather,
first, because Soto, in oppugning these ambiguous Answers and speeches allowed
by some Schoole-Doctors of that time, does no where (to my knowledge) charge
them with any such opinion, or ever labor to refute it. Which (considering the
argument that he had in hand, and the diligence that he used in handling of
it, and clearing of all doubts that belonged unto it) no man may with reason
imagine that he would have for borne to do, if those times had given occasion
of disputing such a question. Secondly, the same learned man, in oppugning that
liberty, which others did grant, does still overthrow or confute their
opinion, because the interpretation and the meaning which they do allow those
answers to be taken in by the speaker, are such as do not agree to the use
and signification of the words spoken, nor cannot be applied to them, without
incongruity and absurdity. By which reason of his, he implies, that these
Divines meant no other ambiguity, or interpretation, or meaning, in those
answers, then such as they thought, the words in that case in which they were
uttered might bear. Or else his reason had been insufficient and foolish;
which yet he supposes to be such, as that his adversaries could not dislike as
impertinent, if the thing which he urged were true. Thirdly, the same Author
does still so set down his opinion, that in the cases proposed, and others of
the like nature; he allows any ambiguity or Amphibologie, Quam vsita^us sermo
citra mend^cium far possit. Soto de lustit, and lure l. 5. q. 6. art. 2.
which the use of the speech can bear without a lie, as in express words he
explaineth himself, but refuses and condemns all such, as is not noted and
implied in the words. Fourthly, Sepulueda, he also disputes against those, who
think themselves not bound in the cases propounded to answer according to the
common meaning, and acception of the words: and confuteth them, who hold it
lawful simply to deny the crime truly laid to their charge, although they
purposely speak some other thing in their mind, Which the Judge, taking their
words in the common meaning, understands not: Cap. 17. and throughout the
whole Book. But yet I have not observed in all that Book any speech, in which
he mentions a mixed proposition, a mental Equivocation, or an ambiguitie
made by a reservation Against which opinion, (if there had then appeared any
such to the world) he might have disputed with more probability and show of
substantial reason. But he no where (as far as I can observe) either
refelleth or mentions any such opinion among these late and punie Divines.
For whereas in the place last cited, he has these words, though purposely he
speaks some other thing in his mind, (...) ex industria aliud praeter ea
mente liquatur.
that makes nothing, as I think, for the mental reservation, which our
Equiuocators have devised. For he means nothing else, as I take it, but that
the speaker does frame in his mind, another sense and meaning of his words,
then they in the common understanding of men do make, or then the Judge
according to the common vnderstauding does take them in. And therefore those
very Schoole-Diuines, whom he and Soto do refute for going too far, and
allowing too much liberty, yet go not so far as our now Jesuits do, who
build all upon a fancied reservation of their own framing, no way included in
the words spoken. Fifthly, say that those Divines, whom these learned men do
refute, did maintain such a mixed proposition, and mental reservation as our
Romanists do strive for: yet Soto says, that he had read no Schoole-Doctor,
who allowed such a fancy as Adrain imagined, which yet by a reservation of a
Jesuit, might easily be solued. And Sepulueda, when he came out of Italy
into Spain, thought it strange, that he found Divines, who contrary to the
meaning of all the Ancients, did allow that opinion, which he there refuteth.
And therefore if we shall say, that the Divines against whom these men wrote,
did hold this Equivocal reservation, yet it was then a novel opinion, lately
sprung up, such as Soto had read in no Schoole-Doctor of former time, and such
as Sepulueda did marvel to find set on foot in his own Country, where he
lived. But, as I said, these learned men did not know of any such opinion risen
up at that time. And therefore in those days either this Art was not yet
found, or if it were, it was rather whispered in corners, or taught obscurely,
then published in Schools.

Secondly, I gather out of these learned men's writings alleged before, that
Schoole-Doctors about that time, allowed and gave liberty for such ambiguities,
as in opinion of these men, and in truth the words could not bear: and
therefore their interpretations were forced and violent, and such as could not
free their speeches from being lies. This without further deduction, is evident
by the words before cited.

Thirdly, I observe, that these hard and harsh Equivocations, by some Divines
then allowed, and the violent constructions that they made of the words, were
then newly taken up, and were unknown to the elder and more judicious
Schoolmen.

And out of all this, I leave it to the judgment of the learned Reader,
whether I may not upon good reason infer; that therefore in all probability,
the later sort of Schoole-Doctors, by the hard Equivocations, which they
allowed, did give occasion and laid grounds for this Jesuitical Art of
Equivocation, though at that time themselves did not think of it. For, may it
not hence be reasonably conceived, that the progress and proceeding to the
framing of this Art, was on this manner? that first of all, and in elder times,
there was nothing, but simplicity in their Oaths and answers, or if any
ambiguitie was allowed to be used, it was but in some such sense, as the
circumstances of the persons, time, place, and occasion, did put upon them, and
that according to the intention of public Laws, and the reasonable
construction that the Hearers might make of them: and that afterward they
allowed violent constructions, and such as the words, together with the
circumstances, could not bear, in any reasonable man's understanding, but such
as the speaker, in his mind did fancy to be agreeable to that business and
occasion. And lastly, that this ouer-bold liberty in them, in framing such a
sense, as the words in reason and co^gruitie could not bear, made way to fine
wits following after, to add something to the former invention, and to frame a
sense of words spoken, which they acknowledge not to be signified by them, but
made up by a Reservation in their own breast, such as themselves would please
to fancy, what ever it were, either pertinent to the business, or as far
different from it, as the falling of the sky is different from the paying of
money. But this will appear yet more plainly, if it be considered, that
Navarre, Nauar. Com. in c. Humanae aures, q. 1. nu. 4. and nu. 8. and 9.
who lived at the same time with Soto, and Sepulueda, but wrote after them, and
when they were dead, does from the opinion of those Divines, and in special
from the opinion of Soto also, and from his sayings, labor to infer and
prove the lawfulness of the Jesuitical Equivocation; because (as he says)
there is the like reason of them both. How truly he infers his Conclusion,
from the sayings of Soto and the rest, I dispute not; I only note in his
course of disputation, that he takes their assertions for a ground to prove
his own by. And that shows that those former Writers gave occasion, etc. And
thus I have declared my second Assertion concerning the original of this new
Art.

3. The third is, that whosesoeuer wit devised it, yet it seems to me most
probable, that it received the first life and credit from the Sea of Rome, and
the Roman state. My reason is from these grounds.

1. Doctor Navarre, who (as Persons says, Mitig. cap. 7. nu. 41. page 301.) is
held to be one of the most liberal and largest in admitting Equivocations both
in words and oaths, was thought a fit man to be the Popes Reader of Cases in
Rome. And if I mistake not, he was the first that broached this new art. For
he read at Rome not long after the time of Soto and Sepulueda, who (as before
was noted) had not yet heard any thing of this art. And there he read and
framed that Praefat. ante initium Commentar. in c. Human. aures*
Commentary, in which he teaches this mystery, for the instruction of the
Jesuits College and dedicated the same unto Gregory 13. the present Pope:
which may breed suspicion, that the Pope was well pleased with this new device
of Navarre, of whom he made choice to be his public Reader of Cases; and who,
while he was employed in this service, did perfect that art, and from whose
Readings, the very Jesuits themselves may seem to have borrowed the grounds of
that Doctrine, which afterward they polished with great dexterity and care.

Secondly, In Queen Elizabeth's time, there was a Treatise found out, which
before was in the secret keeping of Jesuits or Priests: in which, beside the
Resolutions of Navarre, were contained sundry instructions and directions,
given by Sixtus Quintus, for the practicing of this mystery of Equivocation.
Which, if the Reader be desirous to know more fully, he may read a Relation
thereof set down by G. Abbot in the Preface to his Six questions. cap. 1.
page 7. 8. etc.
a most reverend and learned Prelate.

Thirdly, I find that Emm. Sa in his Aphorisms V. Mendac. had given his
opinion concerning this Equivocal reservation, in this manner: that in a case,
Quidam dicunt, -- posse respondere aliquid subintelligendo, vt non esse, s^z
^ta vt e^ dieere teneatur; ve^se non habere, scilicet vt ei d^t. At alij id non
admill^nt, and sort potiori ratione.
Where a man is not bound to reveal the truth according to the intention of
the Demander, some say, that a man may answer by understanding or reserving
something in his mind, as that is not so, to wit so, as that he is bound to
tell him: or that he has not such a thing, meaning, that he has it not to
give it unto him. But others admit not of this kind of answer; and perhaps,
upon better ground and reason. Thus he gave his judgment of this point; and
so the Book passed in the Low Countries, and with approbation and commendation
of Silu. Pardo, the Inquisitor and Censor there, and was printed at Antwerpe
1599. But when it came to be perused, and reuewed at Rome, the Censor there,
Io. Maria, Master of the sacred Palace, he purged the Book, and put out the
last words, which were, Et sort potiori ratione.
And perhaps upon better reason. In which words Sa had signified, that he
inclined to their opinion, who disliked this Equiuocating by reservation. And
hence it appears, how acceptable and welcome this Doctrine of Equivocation is
in the Popes Palace. For whereas F. Sober Reckon. cap. 4. nu 76. pa. 276.
Persons says, that in the last Edition of Saes Book at Rome 1607. this whole
last sentence was left out, as though he had changed his opinion. And Ibid. nu
80. page 279.
that it seems that Emm. Sa did afterward change his opinion; it is but a
trick of iugling, such as this Father often uses to delude his Reader with.
For Sa died, as Ribaden. Catalogo Scriptotum Soc. Jesus. in ^man. Sa.
Ribadeneira reports, in the year 1596. eleven years before this edition of
Rome, and three years before the impression of Antwerpe, being then above
threescore and ten years old. And if Sa, after so many years deliberation,
had changed his opinion, how came it about that that change was not seen in
the Antwerpe Copy, which was printed 3. years after he was dea^* Besides, the
Edition of Rome, reprinted also at (...), An. 1612. does profess, that that
Book was purged by Joan. Maria, the Master of the Palace, and not that it was
corrected or amended by Sa, the first Author of it. Further, Persons gives no
one piece of a reason, by which the Reader may imagine, that Sa did ever change
that point. And therefore, this is but one of Persons usual tricks of
fittening, with which his Brethren of the secular Clergy do so often charge
him.

Now these considerations laid together, make me think it very probable,
that this Art received its life from the State and See of Rome. But if any man
can show me, whence it might rather have its first ground, I will willingly
yield to him; and be thankful to him, that can and will discover the Spring,
or Wellhead, whence first flushed forth this muddy Nylus, so fertile of
Crocodiles, I mean of this sophistique Crocodilites, whereby unware men are
ouer-reached and caught.

4. My fourth Assertion is; It is observed by learned men, that whosoever was
the Author, yet the Jesuits, especially those of our English Nation, have
been the chief Abettors, Defenders and Polishers of this Art. For proof of
this, I will set down the words of some learned men. The Relation. nu. 33.
fol. 36.
learned Gentleman, who wrote the Relation of Religion, speaking of false
news, frequent at Rome, for advantage of their Sect, adds, that he found by
observation, and judgment of some wise men, that the Jesuits were the Masters
of that Mint, and that all those coins were of their stamp; and, that the
Jesuits were noted by some of their own friends, to be too hardy
Equiuocators, and their Equivocations too hard. And Hospinian Histor. Jesuit.
l. 4. cap. 2. page 228.
having cited many testimonies of Jesuits for this Art, concludes that
thereby it is evident, that many Jesuits with great care have explained and
defended it, (...) non immerito Autores and inuentores eius esse vulgo dicantur.
that not without cause they are commonly thought to be the Authors and
Inuentors of it. Add hereto that which the learned Casaubon observed, who was
well acquainted not only with the writings of all sorts of Jesuits, but with
the proceedings and dealings of our English Jesuits also. He tells Front^
(...), a learned Jesuit, Constat multos vestri (...) Theologos -- ^am (...)
magna cura, and expli^uisse and asseruisse. Sed qui p^aecipne Acqui^oc catione^
ex^o^uerint, ^os video fuisse Anglos. Cas^ub. Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum, page
108.
It is a clear case, that many Divines of your Order have explained and
maintained that Art: but they which have especially polished it, I find to be
English men. Yea and their own Brethren, the Secular Priests, lay the
ouer-bold use of Equivocation in their dish. Reply to Father Persons Libell,
fol. 22. etc 23.
For so famous (say they) and so notorious are their Equivocations, and so
scandalous, that the very Protestants take notice thereof, etc. and, such
iugglings, and shiftings of late have been used by them, that not only
Protestants, but also Catholics, yea Priests can scarce tell when they speak
sincerely, when otherwise. And a little after, Howsoever this kind of dealing
may seem excusable unto them, under the name of honest Equivocation; sure I am
that few honest men will excuse it from dishonest lying. And Master Watson
Quodl. 2. art 6. page 39.
calls it the Jesuits rule of swearing and forswearing in a contrary sense
and meaning; and Quodl. 3. art. 4. page 66.
a shift, which they call a lawful Equivocation. And again, he Quodl. 2.
art. 4. page 31.
calls these Equivocations, their absurd paradoxes of Equivocation. And the
like speeches may be found in diverse other places of the Priests books. By all
which it may appear, that learned men on both sides, not only among the
Protestants, but also among Popish Priests, have noted this device especially
in the Jesuits: which may be reason enough, (beside that which is to be found
in their own writings) to make any sober man resolve, that the Jesuits have
had their fingers chiefly in this new devised Art. And reason may persuade the
same to be most likely; because the Jesuits are an Order consecrated and
devoted from their very first birth to the Popes will, to do what may serve
his turn. For so the Jesuits themselves, who published Sanchez. Moral work,
do profess in the Epistle Dedicatorie to Pope Gregory 15. Prefixed before
the second tome.
that their first founder Se suamque Societatem Pontisieijs imperijs more
pro^sus nouo mancipauit.
did make himself and his Order or Society vassals to the Popes command, in
a new and unheard of manner. And therefore if the Sea and State of Rome, did
(as before I showed) give life, and credit and authority to this Art; then,
in reason it must be conceived that the Jesuits, who by their first
institution are created the Popes vassals, to serve at his pleasure, and to do
his will, would be the most forward in the rank, to uphold and maintain with
all their wit, this dear Child of the Popes own breeding. And yet when I
conclude that the Jesuits are the most forward, and the men that have polished
this Art, my meaning is not, either to include all of that Order within this
compass, or to exclude all others not of that Order from it. For first among
the Jesuits, Becanus does disclaim it, as Manual. Controu. l. 5. cap. 21. and
Opusc. Theolog. tom. 1. Opusc. 17. in Respons. ad Aphoris. 13, 14, 15, 16. and
tom. 2. Opusc. 1. in Append de fide Haer. seruanda in exam. 4. propositionis.
being not taught by the Jesuits, and unlawful to be practiced by any.
Wherein he says well, that it is unlawful; but ill, that it is not taught by
the Jesuits. For their Doctrine this way is so clear, and so open to the view
of all men, that Becanus in denying it, must needs either use the Art of
Equivocation, which himself condemns, or else tell a flat and downright
lie, which is not much better. And the like may be noted in the writings of
some other Jesuits, who deny and renounce this device. But they had best keep
themselves from Rome; for if they come in the Censors hands, it is to be feared
he will deal with them, as he has done with their fellow S^ already; that is,
circu^cise their lips, and teach their pens to speak the Roman Language more
purely. Secondly, among those that be no Jesuits, we have experience and
examples good store, of them who have learned this Art, and maintained it as
stiffely, as the best Jesuit can. In which number, I may place Doctor Norrice,
who being apprehended in Oxford, denied himself to be a Priest, and
afterward in prison did defend it by this sleight of Equivocation, and that he
maintained to be lawful, by the example of our blessed Savior; Mar. 13. 32.
But of that day and hour knows no man, neither the Son, etc. and Ioh. 7. 8.
Ego non ascendam, etc. For so he then alleged the place, as Father Persons
also does, against both the Greek, and their own approved Latin. In
expounding, and applying of which Texts to his purpose, how weakly he behaved
himself, he may now be pleased to call to his remembrance: that as he
braggeth of his victories over other men, so for his humiliation, he may
sometimes call to mind his own infirmities. And that perhaps may stand his
soul in as good stead, as the meritorious forbearing of Equivocation, when he
might lawfully use it: which (as Father Persons says) may increase his Crown
and merit in heaven.

But in earnest, he shall do well, if in the next edition of his Antidote, he
place this question of Equivocation among the rest of his Controversies, and
tell us in good sadness, what, after so many years more, he thinks of this
Point. But in the mean while, the Reader may understand, that Dr. Norrice is
not the only man that joins with the Jesuits in the practice and maintenance
of this Art. For in this small Treatise may be seen diverse testimonies for
it, out of other Writers. And the secular Priests, though they charge and
vpbraid the Jesuits with a nimium, too often and too bold a practice of it,
yet themselves do allow it, even when they show greatest opposition against
the Jesuits. So Master Watson Quod lib. 3. art. 4. p. 66, 67.
speaking of Equivocation, as a shift which the Jesuits use; says, that
though there be no question to be made of it, but that in some sense it may
be lawful, etc. In which place, the sum of that, wherein he shows his
dissent and dislike of the Jesuits, (for his own words are too many to be set
down in this place) is in these two things* First, That the Jesuits do allow
Equivocation in a case, wherein he thinks a man is bound to speak the plain
truth. And secondly, that they do hold, that they may not only to their
Adversaries (to Protestants) but even also to any Catholic Magistrate, yea to
the Pope himself, answer one way, and mean another. And to like purpose, the
Author of the Reply to Persons Apology, being to answer for D. Bagshaw,
whom Persons had reproved, as denying the doctrine of Equivocation; says,
that the Doctor, Cap. 17. in the very end page 331.
no doubt, knows in what cases doubtful answers and Equivocations are to be
made to curious questions: neither is it to be thought (says he) that he
dissallowed thereof, but only of the liberty, which is in the Jesuits and
their Adherenes, in all their dealings with other men. By which it may appear,
that the difference between the Secular Priests and the Jesuits in this
point, is not about the equity and lawfulnes of this Art, but about the
liberty and large scope that the Jesuits take, to practice it among their own
Brethren, and before their own Magistrates and Superiors, and in all their
dealings. And surely, for our own experience, I cannot learn any thing to the
contrary, but that our Tribunals and places of Judicature, our Bishops,
Justices, and other Officers, who have to deal in their Examinations, yea and
that our common sort of Christians who converse with them, do find in their
experience, that Secular Priests, and ^ale Papists of all sorts, do iumpe with
the Jesuits in the practice of this Art. Notwithstanding, if any among them,
which call themselves Catholics, do renounce and disclaim it, as well in
deeds as in words; I am so far from fastening any imputation of disgrace upon
them for this iniquity of their brethren, as that I wish and pray they may go
on, to forsake and abandon all other the abominations and errors of the Roman
Church. But (to draw toward an end in this Point) all things considered, my
Conclusion comes to this head; That this mystery of iniqu^ty spreads far
and near in the Papal Kingdom, having received authority and countenance
from the very Roman See, and finding entertainment and acceptance among all
inferior sorts: but yet the Jesuits are they that have chiefly polished it,
and most boldly practiced it; and among the Jesuits, our Englishmen (be it
spoken to the credit of our Nation) do bear the bell away. And from hence
the Reader may see why our Divines do usually ascribe this Doctrine to the
Jesuits: and consequently what we have to answer to Becanus his question.
For Quaro eur h^nc fallendi artem appelles Aequiuocationem Iesuiticam. to^. 2.
Opusc. 1. in Append. in examinatione ^. propos.
I desire to know (says he) why you call this Art of deceiving, Jesuitical
Equivocation: and our answer is ready; We call it Jesuitical, because men of
that order, have been the chief Abettors and polishers of that Art.

CHAP. III.
Of the matter or object of Equivocation, or in what cases it is allowed by the
Patrons of it.
FOr the matter or object, about which this Art may be exercised, F. Persons
Mitigat. cap. 7. nu. 7. pa. 277. and cap. 10. nu. 23. pa. 424. and cap. 11. nu.
31. p. 460. and cap. 13. nu. 2. p. 547.
seems to except two cases, in which they hold it unlawful to equivocate
First, In matters of faith: and secondly, in buying and selling, in common
conversation and humane traffic, to the hurt or prejudice of any. But this is
but another trick of his iuggling, by which he would bleare the eyes of his
Reader; and make the world believe that they use no fraud, either in matters of
Religion, or in businesses with their neighbors, so that any body should be
hurt or beguiled by them. For first, where he says, that they may not use
Equivocation in matters of faith, perhaps in this saying he does equivocate
with us; and means, that we may not so use Equivocation, as to deny any point
of faith. But that in handling and dealing about matters of faith, it may be
lawful with them to use this Art; there are good proofs from their own
Writings, beside all the experience of their practice. For F. Persons says,
that Mitig. c^. 11. nu. 23. p. 454.
in matters of Religion, it belongs to the faith of the hearer-to seek out
the speakers reservation for his better assurance. Which is but a sclender
comfort to a poor Christian, who had as good seek a Needle in a bottle of
hay, as a reservation locked up in an Equiuocators mind: but hence it
follows, that he allows Equivocation in matters of Religion. A-Againe, the
same Father Persons tells us, that Mitig. cap. 13. nu. 3. p. 548.
no man can deny, but many facts and cases may fall out concerning matters of
Religion, not tending to Confession (especially in time of persecution) wherein
a man may, or perhaps also must by obligation use equivocal speeches. Here he
grants, that by their principles, it is an undoubted conclusion, that in
cases concerning Religion, a man may equivocate, so the case be not such, as
tends to Confession; 1. as I understand it, if by equiuocating he do not
seem to deny the Roman faith, which at such times, they hold it necessary for
their Children, without any tergiuersation to confess. But elsewhere he
unfolds himself a little more plainly, when he says of Equivocation, Sober
Reckon. in Append. nu. 25. page 687.
that it may not be used in matters of Religion, where Confession of our Faith
is required. For this implies, that where Confession of faith is not required,
there it may be lawful enough to equivocate. But evident and clear it is,
that the Mitigat. cap. 9. number. 25. and seqq.
Jesuit makes our blessed Savior to equivocate in sundry matters of
Religion, and thence would persuade us, that by his example, they may do the
like. As for example, he did equivocate, when he said of the day of Judgment,
Mar. 13. 32.
Of that day and hour knows no man, nor the Son, etc. And when he said of
himself, Ioh. 8. 15.
I judge no man: the Jesuit says, that this speech without a mental
reservation is false, and cannot stand, for that it should be contrary to many
other places of Scripture: and should imply a denial of Christ's office to be
our Judge. He proceeds to other examples, and tells us, that Christ did
equivocate about the Sacrament of Baptism, when he said, Mar. 16. 16.
He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: and about eating of
the flesh of Christ, Ioh. 6. 51.
If any man shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and about
Prayer, when he said, Ioh. 16. 23.
If ye shall ask any thing of my Father in my name, he will give it you. Now
the points here spoken of, and others of like nature, in which the Jesuit
finds Equivocation to have been used in Scriptures, are, I trow, matters of
faith and Religion. And hence it follows, that Equiuocators must either
confess that they abuse the world in alleging these and such like Texts, to
prove and uphold Jesuitical Equivocation, which is not there meant; or that
they hold their Equivocations to be lawful, and sufficiently warranted, even
in principal matters of Religion, such as are Christ's office of judging, the
doctrine of the Sacraments, and prayer in Christ's name. In the first place
then, when Persons excepteth matters of faith from the practice of
Equivocation, he mocketh his Reader with general speeches, when he means
no such thing; but only that men may not equivocate, by denying in words their
belief of the Roman faith, or some such like. Secondly, where Persons says
that they allow not equivocation in common conversation, in buying, etc. it may
be observed that Navarre, Comm. in c. Human. aures. q. 3. nu. 1^.
the famous Reader in Rome, does highly commend this Equivocation as a Per hanc
doctrinam singularem possunius euitare innumera pe^cata, etc.
singular point of Doctrine, by which we may avoid innumerable sins which
we commit by denying and affirming without this mental reservation, with
which if the words spoken were joined, they would become true. This he
explaineth and confirms thus: Passim enim interrogamur, Quo vadimus, quid
comedimu^, etc.
We are asked and demanded every foot, whither we go, what we have eaten, how
much money we have, or have borrowed, or have given, what letters and news we
have received, what we have written and related; what such or such a man said
to us, what we know of such or such a one: and many hundred like. To all which
(says he) we might answer without sin, Subintelligendo aliqua, quibus
fient vera quae annuimu^, vel falsa quae negamus.
by understanding somewhat in our minds, which may make that true, which we
affirm, and that false, which we deny: As for example, when a man asks of
us, money, or a Book, or news, etc. if we answer him, I have them not, or I
know them not; understanding, Ita vt tenear vel conueniat illi praestare,
tradere, dicere, etc.
so as I am bound, or, as it is convenient to do it, or give it, or to speak
and make is known. The like is affirmed by Summa v. mendac nu. 4. page 385.
Emm. Rodriquez, who alleging this determination of Navarre, and transcribing
also some of his words, adds in the end, to show how he esteemed this
device, Quae doctrina deb^t notari.
which Doctrine ought to be marked and observed. And Fernandes De praecept. 2..
1. nu. 8. p. 49.
in his Examen says, that if a man being requested to lend a thing to his
neighbor, Causam habeat non illam dandi.
have a cause or reason, why he will not grant or give it, etc. he may swear
by Equivocation, that he has not such a thing. And Sanchez, In comm^^n
loquutione interrogato de re, quam secreto seruare exp. dit, licitum est
dicere, se nescire, intelligendo, ita vt expediat dicere. Sanchez O. per moral
l. 3. c. 6. number. 25.
In common talk (says he) if a man be asked of a thing which it behooves
him to keep secret, it is lawful for him to say, that he knows not,
understanding so as that it is expedient to tell it. And Father Persons
Mitigat. c. 9. nu. 81. and 83. page 403, 404.
also thinks it most just and necessary, if a man come to borrow money, whom
we may not deny without inconvenience, that we may then answer equiuocally
that we have it not; understanding, with any mind to lend it: or that we
have it not in our purse, etc. Which instances and examples, if they be not
matters of common life and conversation, I know not where to find any. But it
may be said, that Persons, when he excepteth matters of common conversation in
buying, etc. he adds, to the hurt or prejudice of any; as if he meant by
that restriction, to leave a liberty of equiuocating, even in buying and
selling, and humane traffic; so it be without the hurt of any man: but then
utterly to forbid it. And I grant, he adds those words: but I cannot tell,
whether he meant the vulgar Reader to conceive that meaning in them. Howsoever,
there is a mystery in those words, which In c. Human. ^ures. q. 2. nu. 12.
Navarre, (who uses to deal aboue-boord, and to speak more plainly) has
unfolded, when he calls it, Verum and iniustum damnum.
a real and unjust hurt or prejudice; by which he understands such an hurt,
as we may not do to another, without sin and injustice. And then, the
meaning of this goodly Exception of Persons, will be this; that in buying, and
selling, and humane traffic, and common conversation, we may not equivocate,
if thereby we do hurt any man unjustly and unlawfully: but else, if any of
their Catholics should think that the hurt which redoundeth to one of us, is
lawful and just, that then they may freely delude us with their amphibologies
and reseruations, in what matter soever, and for what end they please, though
it were for massacring of an assembly, or for murdering of a Prince, or for
blowing up of a Parliament, or for the invasion of the Kingdom by hostile and
foreign forces. And so by this exception we are well freed from the fear of
these deluding and equiuocating spirits. Let us then dismiss Persons, with his
shifting Exceptions and enquire more particularly and directly what the cases
be, wherein they do in sober sadness allow their Scholars to use the benefit
of this Art. And for this purpose I find two things said by them. First, that
whenever a man may lawfully keep silence, and say nothing, or whenever he
is not bound to reveal and lay open the truth, then he may lawfully
equivocate, and use this sleight of amphibologie: be it a matter of faith, or a
business of commerce and traffic, or a point of State, or what else you
will, it mattereth not to this purpose. For proof of this, first take the
resolution of Father Garnet. He being prisoner in the Tower, and required to
declare his opinion concerning this point, set down his mind in writing,
which is yet kept upon Record: and it was this, De Aequinocatione ita censio.
In rebus moralib. and co^muni vsa vitae, quando veritas inter amicos
requiritur, vti aequ^ocatione haut licet: id enim Societati hominum magno mala
cedere^. Quare hoc remedio in istis null^^ loc^^. Quoties vero de necessari^
defensione agitur, dequs, iniuria aliqua euitanda, aut damno, aut de
consequando aliquo non parui. momenti hon^, sine vll^ cuiusqua^r periculo, tum
luita est. Aequinocati^. Casaub. Ep. ad Fronton, Du^. page 1. 1.
Concerning Equivocation this is mine ^^pinion. In moral matters and common
use of (...); to have among friends it is required of a man to speak truth,
then he may not use Equivocation, etc. But as often as there is occasion for
necessary defense, or for avoiding of some injury or damage, or for obtaining
some good of weight or moment, withal the peril of any (...) Equivocation
(...). In which speech, Master Casaubon does truly note by the way, that those
words, without the peril of any man, are only added for a color, and to
blind the simple with: as I noted the like before, in a like sentence of Father
Pers^ns. But the thing that I now note for this purpose, is, that he says; In
common use of life, when it is required of a man to speak truth, then it is
not lawful to equivocate. By which words he implies, that where a man is not
of duty bound to speak or reueile the truth, there he may obscure and hide it
by this Art. The same Father Garnet, while he stood at the Bar, in fewer
words, and plainer manner explaineth his meaning thus; Proceeding against
Traitors, lit. u. 4.
No man may equivocate when he ought to speak the truth, otherwise he may.

To like purpose Fernandes Ea etiam vti licet, quum just quis interrogatur, si
datur rationabilis causa non responderdi ad metem Interrogantu. Fernand. Exam.
de praec. 2. cap. 5. 1. nu. 8. p. 49.
A man may lawfully use it also, when he is justly or lawfully demanded, if he
have a reasonable cause not to answer according to the meaning of the
Demander. And Heissius the Jesuit, Non solum Qu^^ iniuriosa est interrogatio,
sed etiam absque culpa interroganti, saepe non tenemur ad mentem eius
respondere, quandocunque scilicet Interrogans non habet ius impe^a^^
responsionem, and Interrogato id^nea miniineq, leuis illius dene gandae causa
suppe^t. Nam cui tacere licet, (...) praeter quaesita, aliud quid cum Deo
Coelitibus, aut sec^^n loqui po^si, seu ^ocall, seu (...) se^ mixta, ^i. partim
vocali, partim mentali. Heiss. Refut. Aph. c. 4. Aph. 2. nu. 117. p. 191.
Not only (says he) when the question is unjust, but also when it is without
fault; we are many times not bound to answer him that asks the question,
according to his intention and meaning: and that is, whenever the Demander
has not right to command an answer; and the Demanded has a sufficient and
not idle reason to deny it. For he that, may lawfully hold his pe^ce, ^ay,
passing by the things that are asked him, speak some other thing with God, the
heavenly Spirits, or with himself, either by vocal or mental speech, or by a
mixed, speech, which is partly vocal and partly mental. In these two last
testimonies, the instance is in a particular case, when a man is examined or
questioned: but the ground on which they build their determination, is a
general Rule, that whenever a man may lawfully say nothing, then he may
lawfully equivocate, and speak by a mixed Proposition; as appears plainly in
the reason of Heissius, now set down in his own words. And in a word,
Equiuocators say, that if Persons mit. c. 10. nu. 23. pa. 424. Greg. de Valent.
tom. 3. Disp. 5. q. 13. punct. 2.. Ad. 2 Arg. Sanchez moral^. 3. c. 6. nu. 16.
p. 26.
a man use Equivocation with mental reservation, he does not offend against
the negative Precept, which for, b^ddeth a man to lie; because, whatsoever he
speaks in that manner, is a truth: only he may offend against the
affirmative Precept, if he do then equivocate, when he is bound to utter and
reueile the truth. And hence I infer, that whenever a man may lawfully say
nothing, as not being bound to reueile the truth; then in these men's opinion,
he may lawfully speak by Equivocation. And this is the first thing that they
say for this purpose.

The second thing is, that Causa iusta vtendi his amphibologiis est, quoties id
necessarium aut vtile est ad salutem corporis, honor, res samil^ares tuenda,
vel ad quemlibet alium virtutis actum: ita vt veritatis occultatio censeatur,
tunc expediens ac studiosa. Sanchez op. moral. l. 3. c. 6. number. 19.
there is just cause for using of Equivocation, whenever it is necessary or
expedient for preserving of bodily safety, honor, household goods, or for any
other act of virtue; so that the hiding of the truth may then be thought to be
expedient and honest. So speaks Sanchez, meaning this rule of such an
Equivocation as is joined with an oath. For else, Dum Sotus ait non esse culpam
Amphibologus uti joco, and in ridiculis, intelligo quando absque iuramento id
fieret. Tunc enim honestus ille ludus, recreationis iusta causa exereitus, honc
stum redderet amphibologiae vsum. At si iuramentum adesset, est manifesta
culpa, propter vanamet indiscreta^ Diuini Nominis vsurpationem. Sanchez moral.
l. 3. c. 6. nu. 22.
if there be no oath used, then honest sport used for lawful recreation, may
make the use of Equivocation lawful. But if there were an oath added, then it
is an evident fault, because of the vain and indiscreet using of Gods Name. So
speaks the same Author not long after. From which words of the Jesuit we may
gather two things. 1. That an easy cause may suffice for justifying of
Equivocal speeches, in a simple assertion without an oath. If there be no
other cause but only for merriment and recreation, yet that is reason enough
to make the use of Equivocation lawful and honest. 2. That when other
Equiuocators do require some kind of necessity or vtility which may draw men
to use it; they are to be understood of Equivocation joined with an oath, and
not when it is used in a bare and simple affirmation or negation: unless we
may conceive, that sport and merriment goes with them for a matter of
necessite or great moment. And indeed, this difference given by Father Sanchez,
between Equivocation with an oath, and without it, has reason in it, if we
consider their grounds and principles. For in affirmations and negations, there
are two things required. 1. That no lie be told: for this is required by the
negative precept of truth, as they use to speak. And this fault, as they
think, they avoid by their art of Reservation. And secondly, that men
conceal not a truth, when they are bound to disclose it: for this is required
by the affirmative precept of truth. But in an Oath, besides truth in the
speech, there is a third thing required, and that is, that it be undertaken
with judgment, that is to say, advisedly and with due discretion. Else, by
swearing a truth unadvisedly, Gods Name may be profaned. There is reason then
for this difference which Sanchez makes. And now by all this, the Reader may
see, that an easy cause is thought sufficient for the using of this Art. If
it be for ease of the body, safety of a man's goods, preserving of his credit,
etc. then by their doctrine, a man may equivocate with an Oath: but if it be
for sport and merriment only, yet then it may be lawful in affirmations and
negations without an Oath: provided that it be such a case, in which a man may
lawfully hold his peace, and be not bound then to disclose the truth.

By this it appears in general, in what cases they allow the use of this
Art. But for fuller satisfaction of the Reader, and for more distinct
conceiving of their meaning in this point; it will not be amiss to point out
some special and particular Cases, in which they give express leave for the
practicing of this slight. And they be these, and such like.

1 If a Priest, that has heard another man's Confession, should be demanded,
whether such a one had confessed such a sin unto him, or not; -- he may
answer directly, that he has not confessed any such thing unto him, albeit
he had done so: yea, he may swear also this answer of his, understanding and
reserving in his mind, that the Penitent has not confessed the same unto him,
so as he may utter it. These be Father Persons Mitig. cap. 10. nu. 2. page 407,
408.
words. And he says, they be agreeable to the mind of all Schoole-Doctors.

2 Vltimo, Deducitur Poenitentem temere rogatum, an hoc vel illud peccatu^
fassus sit, posse iurare se non confessum, intelligendo ita vt teneatur illi
explicare. Sanchez mor. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 44.
If a Penitent be asked without a just cause, whether he have confessed such or
such a sin (which he had confessed to the Priest) he may swear he confessed
it not, understanding, so as that he is bound to tell him. So speaks Sanchez,
and cites others of the same opinion.

3 Si contra iustitiam petit, et iuridice eum non interrogas, potest vti
aequiuocatione, et iurare secundum propriam mentem. Tolet. de Instruct. Sa. l.
4. c. 21. number. 10.
If a Judge do against justice question a Defendant, and do not question
according to order of Law; the Defendant may use Equivocation, and swear
according to his own meaning: that is, by a secret reservation kept in his
mind. So says Tolet. And Sanchez says the like, Iisdem amphibologijs potest
vti Reus, quando Iudex interrogans non est legitimus Interrogati Iudex, aut in
hoc casu peculiari, Sanchez l. 3. c. 6. nu. 27.
When the Judge that questioneth, is not the lawful Judge of him that is
questioned, or is not his Judge in that peculiar case; the Defendant may use
Equivocation. And the like he says, if the Judge be an Excommunicate person.
And the like Father Persons does largely confirm, Mitig. cap. 10. nu. 11. and
in the rest following.
When the Judge is not lawful, or not competent at least in that cause, or
proceeds not lawfully. In these cases, they think that a man questioned
before a Magistrate, may upon his oath, by an equivocal reservation, deny that
which he knows to be true.

4 Si quis homine^ ignora^ter, putans esse feram, occidat, aut in propriam
defensionem-potest de eo facto rogatus in iudicio, id negare. Sanchez moral. l.
3. c. 6. nu. 29.
If one do ignorantly kill a man, thinking him to be a wild Beast, (a Dear
for example) or if he kill a man in his own defense; he may being questioned
of the fact, deny it upon his oath.

5 Quando taxa alicutus rei est iniusta, si pluris vendens, aut defraudans in
pondere and mensura, ita vt sibi satisfaciat propretij injustitia, and reddat
correspondentes merces pretio date; potest hic interrogatus a Iudice, an pluris
vendiderit vel desecent in po^dere aut mensura id negare, assacreque se pretio
taxato vendidisse and integre pondus and mensura^^ tradi ^isse, intelligendo
haec, ita ut pluris vendens aut deficiens in pondere aut mensura deliquerit.
Sanehez moral. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 29.
When an unjust tax is set upon a commodity, if a man sell it for more, or
makes light weight, and scant measure, so that he make himself satisfaction
for the wrong of the Tax, and yet sell his commodities worth the moeny; he
being examined by a Judge, whether he sold the commodity for more, or came
short in his weight or measure, he may deny it, and say, that he sold it for
the price that was set him, and that he gave full weight and measure; meaning
so, as that selling for more, or coming short in his weight or measure, he did
commit an offense.

6 Si reperto cadanere, quis interrogatur, an gladius ibi repertus fit suus,
vel tali ho^^ illaec transierit, quae vera sunt, and petuntur ab eo, tanquam
illiu^ homi^idiji indi ^ia quod vere no commisa potest negare. Sanch l. c. nu
30.
If a man be found slain, with a Sword lying by him; and a guiltless person
should be asked, whether that sword were his, or whether he passed that way at
such an hour, (which things are true, and are inquired after as signs of that
murder, which he committed not) he may deny it.

7 Ratione optima docent cum, qui nummos mutuo acceptos soluit, posse a Iudice
rogatum de mutuo, iucarese illud non accepisse, intelligendo ita ut teneatur id
soluere. -- Atque idem credo si tunc non teneretur soluere, eo quod terminus,
ad quem matuum datum fuit non est impletus; vel prae paupertate excusatur debit
or a tunc soluendo. Sanch l. c. nu. 31.
If a man have borrowed money, and paid it again, and be examined of the
Judge, concerning the money that he borrowed; he may swear that he borrowed
not that money; understanding so as that he is now bound to pay it. And so a
man may swear, that he had not such money, which he did receive; if through
poverty he be excused from making payment, or if he should be urged to pay it,
before the day that it is due.

8 Nono, deducitur Creditorem virtute Instrumenti publici exigeteur eoram
Iudice debitum, -- et si pars illius sunun^^ debita s^luta sibi sit. etc. Si
Debtor reconcentat eoram Iudice Creditorem, vt iuret an pars illius debiti
soluta sit sibi, potest iuarare solutam non esse, intelligendo vt modo non sit
tantundem sibi debitum. Sanch. l. c. number 36.
If a Creditor have money owing him upon Bond, part whereof is p^yed unto him,
but as much is due unto him some other way, for which he has no Instrument to
show: if he be required before a Judge, to swear whether part of that debt
were paid him; he may swear that it was not paid, understanding, so but that
as much is now due to him, some other way.

9. Vndecimo deducitur, co^ctam aliquam actipere in sponsam, quam ducere non
tenetur, posse iurare se accepturum, intelligendo in^^a se, Si teneor vel si
postea placuent mihi. Sanchez ibid. number. 39. Tolet. de Instruct Sacerd. l. 4.
21. nu. 11.
If a man be forced to promise marriage to a woman, whom otherwise he is not
bound to marry [the meaning is, if he be urged and pressed by a Judge against
reason, to make that promise] he may swear, that he will marry her, though
he mean it not, understanding within himself, If I be bound to do so, or,
if afterward I shall like of it.

10 Si vir ab vxore petat an sit^dultera, ista potest dicere, Non sum, squam^is
verum fuerit eam adulterium co^mississe) intelligendo, vt tibi reuelem Tolet.
Instruct. l. 4. c. 21. nu. 11. Sanch. moral. l. 3. ^6. nu. 41. Persons, mitig.
c. 10. nu. 37. pa. 436.
If a Woman, that has played the whore, be asked by her husband, whether she
have committed adultery, she may swear that she has not done it,
understanding within her self, so as I may or mean to tell you of it.

11 Contraxit quit matrimonium per verba de praesenti, qua de re postulatus
little Episcopo, potest ad^ibito iuramento respondere, non se contraxisse per
verba de praesenti; seruata sibi clausula, ita ut matrimonium fuerit. Treatiso
of Equivocation, allowed by Blackwell and Garnet, cited by D. Abbot Antilog.
cap. 2. fol. 13. and Casaub. Epist. ad Front. page 115.
If a man have contracted himself to a woman, and afterward make another
contract with another, by words de praesenti: and being called before the
Bishop, and there asked, whether he made such a contract de praesenti with this
later woman, he may swear he did not, understanding, so as that it is a
marriage.

12 Decimo quinto deducitur, eum ti quo mutuo pecunia petitur, quam reuera
habet, posse iureiurando affirmare se eam non habere, intelligendo intra se, ut
det. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. number. 43. and Nauart. Com^n c. Human. aures, q.
3. number 13. Persons mitigall. cap. 9. number. 81. pa. 401, 403.
If a man be requested to lend money, when he is not bound to lend it, though
he have the money by him, yet he may swear that he has it not, understanding
within himself, so as that he will lend it him.

13 Iondino quis, sauten^e ibi peste, proficiscitur Countriam, qu^m magistratus
de vebis suae imolumitate soilicu^, diuersai iibi non pert^untur, misi prius
iuret se Londiat nuper non fuisse, non end venisse, turare poterit non se
venisse Londino, cum hac reseruatien^ mentis, ita ut insectus po^le venerim.
Treatise of Equivocation, apud D. Abbot Antilog. c. 2. fol. 13. The like is
said by Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 35. by Tolet. de Instruct. l. 4. c. 21.
number. 12. by Navarre Enchirid. cap. 12. nu. 19.
If a man come from London in a time of Infection, to Couentrie, were he cannot
be admitted to ledge, unless he will swear, that he came not lately from
London; he may swear that he came not from London, reserving in his mind, so
as that I am infected with the plague, if upon good reason he think that he is
not infected.

14 In communi loqtuitione interrogato de re quam secre^o seruare expedit
^citum est dicere se nescire, intelligenda, ita vt expediat dicere. -- potest
estam -- uti quauis alia amphibologia etc. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. number. 25.
If a man in common talk be asked of any matter which it behooves him to
keep secret, he may lawfully say, that he knows not, understanding, so as it
is behoouefull to tell it: or with any other reservation that he will imagine.

Lastly, Obseruandum quoties ^icitum est ad se tuendum vti aliqua
aequiuocatione, id quoque erit licitum, etsi interrogans vrgeat excludens illam
aequiuocationem. and, Quatum cunque reduplicet iniquus Interrogator, vt inret
se nulla aequiuocatione vti, and absque omni prorsus aequiuocaione id
intelligere: adhuc id iutare potest intelligendo its vt plane debe at loqui et
explicare vel aliquid aliud mente concipiendo, quo verum id reddatur. Sanchez
moral. l. 3. c. ^ number. 45. and the same is said in the Treatise of Equivocation
apud D. Abbot Antilog. fol. 13. fac. 2.
If he that asks the question, do exclude the use of Equivocation, and
require a man upon his oath not to use any Equivocation, and that he means
what he speaks without any Equivocation at all (as it is in the Oath of
Allegiance) yet he may swear it still, understanding, so as he ought to speak
plainly; or framing some other reservation in his mind, by which it may be
made true.

These and such like be the cases, in which they allow their Equiuocating
frauds. I could add more, but I fear I have wearied the Reader by too many
already.

Surely, by this that has been said, we may learn two things, which it is
requisite all plaine-meaning Christians should take notice of.

1 That Equiuocators, and such as are instructed in this Art, do take unto
themselves a large liberty of using this fraudulent device. For out of the
premises it may appear, that whatsoever business or occasion be offered, be the
matter sacred or civil, public or private, in open Courts of Justice, or in
common practice of life; yet if they can persuade themselves that they have any
serious cause to conceal the truth, whether it be for some good to their
souls, or for safety of their bodies, or keeping of their goods, etc. they may
freely swear the contrary to that truth, by an Equivocal or mental
reservation. And if they have any light cause or reason, if it be but for sport
or merriment to recreate themselves, then they may deceive us by an
Equivocation, in a simple affirmation or negation, having no Oath in it.

And this being so, I desire every Christian, that would not be deceived, to
consider with himself, whether he can think of any business that passes
between man and man, in which he may promise to himself plain dealing, or
may presume that he shall not be deceived by some mortal device or other, if
he have to do with them, who do profess this Equouicating Art.

Secondly, we may learn, that there is no limitation, or exception, or
explication, be it never so wise or wary, nor any thing which man's wit can
devise, that may restrain or keep back these Equiuocators, from deluding us
by their equivocal speeches; but that say or do what a man will or can, they
will take liberty to equivocate still: so that no Oaths, how warily and
carefully soever they be framed, can hold these men, further then themselves
will. Vide intanta astutia quanta sit simplicitat, Quii omnem sec^^ritatem in
eo i^^amento sibi statuisset, talam se m^dum iuramenti, tot circumstantijs
conne^^^isse existim^bat, qui, salua conscientia, nulla ratione a quoqua^
dissolui posset. Sed videre non potuit, si Pontifex iuramentum dissoluerit,
omnes illius nexus, sieve de sidelitate Regi praestanda, sieve de dispensatione
non admittenda, peritor dissolutos fore. Immo aliud dicam admirabilius. Nosti,
credo, iuramentu^ iniustum, si tale esse euidenter s^tatur, vel aperte
declaretur, neminem obligare; Reg^ iura mentum iniustu^ esse, ab ipso Ecclesie
Pastore sufficienter declaretam est Barthol. Pacenius, (...). Epistol. Monit.
Jacob. Regis lit. ^. 2. and 3.
Pacenius discoursing of the Oath of Allegiance, laugheth at the simplicity
(as he calls it) of our King and State, who thought by that Oath to provide
for their safety: as having hedged it about with so many circumstances, as
that, to their thinking, no man could wind himself out of it with a safe
conscience. But they consider not (says he) that if the Pope shall dissolve
this Oath, all the bands of it, either for performance of fidelity to the King,
or for not admitting a dispensation from Rome, are shattered in pieces. Nay, I
will say one other thing (says he) that is more admirable. An unjust Oath,
when it is declared to be such, binds no man: but that this Oath is unjust,
has been sufficiently declared by the Pastor of the Church. He means the
Pope. And hereupon he infers in an insulting manner; Vades igitur tam in
sumum ab^^sse Illius obs^gatione; vt vnculii quod a tot sapientibus ferreum
putabat^^, manus fit quam stramilie^.
Thou see now (says he) that the band of that Oath is v^nished into smoke,
so that the (...) which so many wise men thought to be as strong as Iron,
proves weaker then straw. Thus this man boasts, that by the Popes
dispensation, or declaration of the unlawfulness of it, no Oath in the world
is any thing worth. A great privilege sure for them, that can so easily wind
themselves out of bands, even the strongest that can be thought of, among men.
And yet me thinks, aliud admirabilius, the Equiuocators have found a more
admirable device then this of Pacenius is. For he sends a man to Rome, to
fetch a dispensation thence, or to get the Popes declaration of the
unlawfulness of the Oath, and then they may break all. But our Equiuocators
have that at home, and within their own breasts, that may free them from all.
For if themselves do but think that the thing is unlawful, or that they have
some reasonable cause, to dissemble, they may take this or any other Oath
whatsoever, and by an equivocal reservation, break the band of that Oath,
before they take it. And if such be the privileges of these men, how great is
their danger, that live and converse with them? God preserve all well-meaning
men from such deceitful tongues.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the use, or rather abuse of Equivocation, and for what turns it may serve.
Equivocation, such as has been described before, may be beneficial to them
that use it many ways, and for diverse purposes. For in the general it may
serve them for all turns, in which by mis-leading the Hearer, they may make
any advantage to themselves: and more particularly it may serve them for these
special ends and purposes.

First, in State-businesses, and matters of policy, it may serve great men, to
hide their plots, and to work their ends by: and yet to make fair weather
toward all men, and beat them in hand that they mean nothing but friendship
and love. In this kind In c. Human. aur. q. 3. nu. 14. page 353.
Navarre tells us of a great Monarch, Monarcha ^um prim^ maximu^.
who he thought had used, and did then use this good art (as he calls it) by
the benefit whereof, every man was contented and pleased, that came to him, or
had to deal with him about great affairs. Creditur enim ita excipere and
audire ad se vementes, and sic ijsdem respondendo, significare tam gestu, quam
verbis and factis, vt placeaut eis, cum quibus rem gerit, intellecta secundum
intentionem illorum, licet sint in se falsa, etc.
For (says he) he is thought so to entertain and to hear those that come
unto him, and in answering, so to express and declare himself unto them with
whom he has to deal, as well by gesture, as by words and deeds, that the
things being understood according to their meaning, do please and content
them, though in themselves they be false, but are true according to the
reseruations understood by the Answerer. The same Navarre adds further, Ibid.
nu. 15.
that he thinks another great Monarch meant to teach his son Hanc doctrinam
and artem bonam.
this doctrine and good art of Equiuocating, when for some secret defect, he
drew him back from the study of learning, saying, I would not have my son
to have any more Latin, then only that one Apophe he give, He that knows
not to dissemble, knows not to reign.
Qui deseit dissimulare, nescit regnare. Do they thus instruct their
Catholic Princes, to dissemble and equivocate? and call they it a good Art,
by which they may possess men with a good opinion of them, when they mean
quite otherwise; that so they may work their ends, and bring about their
proiects and plots? Why, then I need not fear to say, that one turn, for
which the Doctrine of Equivocation does serve them, is in State businesses to
hide their plots, and to work their ends by it. Which as it is aduantagious to
themselves, so it is dangerous for those that have to deal with them.

Secondly, It may serve them, for a means to hide their mischievous plots
against the State and Religion, and yet to escape the hand of justice after
all. For when they have plotted and acted Treasons, or are about any unlawful
business, forbidden by the wholesome Laws of the Kingdom; Equivocation
serves to hide both themselves and their Associats, from the enquiry of the
Magistrate, be he never so vigilant and careful. For if one of them be
examined or asked, whether he have reconciled such a man to the Pope, or
absolved such a subject from his bond of Allegiance, or have conspired against
the life of the King, or have been acquainted with a plot of blowing up the
Parliament; though all these things be most true, yet he may without scruple
deny them all upon his Oath. Or in case one be detected otherwise, and
examined, who were his Associats, whether such a Priest, or such a Jesuit, or
such a Gentleman were privy to the thing; though these men were all of them as
deep in the villainy, as himself; yet he may swear that none of them all did
know the least jot of the matter. And by these tricks they can work all
mischief to Kings, and Nobles, and People, and Parliaments; and yet wind
themselves and their accomplices out of the hands of justice; unless God do
disclose them, as many times he does beyond the providence or expectation of
man. For rather then Treasons should go unespied, God makes Eccles. 10. 20.
the Bird of the air to carry the voice, and that which has wings to tell the
matter; says Solomon. This use southwell the Jesuit made of this Art. For,
fearing to be detected, G. Abbot praelect. de mendacio. pa. 50. nu. 13. and R.
Abbot Antilog. cap. 2. fol 13. fac. 2.
he instructed a Woman-Disciple of his, that if she should be examined,
whether himself were or had been in that house, she should upon her oath
utterly deny it; and so she might safely do, using but the help of this
Art, though she had often seen him there, and knew him to be in the house.
And to like purpose Proceeding against Traitors. C^. 2.
Tresham, one of the Gunpowder Traitors, upon examination did confess that
Father Garnet was privy to the Treason, and had talked with him about it: but
afterward, having been better instructed or confirmed in this rare mystery,
when he lay sick on his deathbed, and not above three or four hours before
his death, he protested, and took it upon his Salvation, and set it down
under his hand, that his former Confession was false, and that he had not
seen Garnet of sixteen years space before, at the least. And thus he died.
Which protestation of his, upon his oath, was proved not long after, to be most
untrue. Yea, and Garnet himself confessed, that within that space he had
seen him many times. Whereupon this grave Father, and grand Equiuocator being
demanded what he then thought of Treshams Testamentall protestation, he
answered, Proceeding against Traitors. Y. 3.
It may be he meant to equivocate. And this reverend Father himself, who was
Provincial of the Jesuits, when after secret conference between him and Hall,
another Jesuit in the Tower, he was asked before all the Lords Commissioners,
whether Hall and he had any conference together, and was desired not to
equivocate; he stiffely denied it upon his Soul, reiterating it with so many
detestable execrations, as wounded their hearts to hear him. And afterward,
when he knew that the thing was known, and that Hall his fellow-Iesuite had
confessed it; he cried the Lords mercy, and said he had offended, if
Equivocation did not help him. And though the Priests accuse the Jesuits for
it, yet when they are examined before a Magistrate, or Officer, they also say
and swear and protest all manner of falsehoods and untruths, that so they may
wind either their fellows or themselves out of the danger of the Law. And
indeed this is the chief and principal turn, for which Equivocation is
intended to serve them.

Thirdly, In matters of Religion this good Art may serve them to avoid
arguments and evident reasons brought against them, which their own
consciences do acknowledge to be true. For hereby they can gloss the Fathers
sayings against their meaning, and deny all sorts of authorities that are
alleged against them. For so themselves profess to their friends in secret,
Quum in Catholicis veteribus alij^, plurim^s feramus c^r^res, and extenuemus,
excusemus, excogitato commento persaepe negemus, and commodum ijs sensum
offingamus, dum opponuntur in disputationibus aut in constictionibus cu^
Aduersarijs: non videmus cur non eandem aequit item and diligentem recognitione
mereatur Be^tramus. Index Belgic. lit. B. in Bertramo. page 12. in 8^.
Seeing (say the Belgicke Censurers) in other ancient Catholics, we bear
with very many errors, and do lessen and excuse them, and very often by some
devised shift do deny them, and feine unto them some commodious meaning, when
they be objected against us in disputations and conflicts with the adversaries:
we see no reason why Bertram may not deserve the like equity or favorable
dealing, and diligent reuising. This they profess among their friends (for
their meaning was not that ever it should come to our sight:) and being that
they hold all lying to be so sinful, that they may not tell a lie for the
saving of a soul, it were too hard a censure to think, that against the light
of their own consciences, they would so wilfully thrust themselves on that
danger, and so boldly profess it in the ears of their friends. But by this
fine Art they can quiet the murmuring of their consciences, because by it,
they can say any thing, never so false, and yet by a reservation, make it as
true as the Gospel.

This consideration makes me not to marvel, when in men, that profess such
religious strictness, (as Father Persons Mitigat. ca. 7. number. 34. and seqq.
says they do,) I find such broad and unreasonable expositions and glosses
of Fathers and other Writers, as that no man of understanding who reads the
places, but will see, that the gloss does corrupt the Text, and the
expositions do clearly deprave the Authors meaning. For I know that an
Equiuocator has an Art, by which he can make all speeches to become true, if
once they do but come forth of his mouth.

Fourthly, It may serve them for devising and counterfeiting of strange
apparitions, and heavenly visions, and divine miracles. This, how frequent it
has been heretofore, the wisest and most learned among their own Writers do
confess and bewail. And of late years their own The Author and the
Publishers of the Jesuits Catechism.
Brethren do say, that the miracles and visions reported of L. 1. c. 18. fol.
64.
Ignatius, and L. 1. c. 17. fol. 62.
Justinian and Ibid.
Xauier, and others of the Jesuitical strain and order, are not much better.
And what should let us to think, but they which presume so much in other
things, in ordine ad Deum, and pro bono societatis, in reference to God, and
for the good of their Order; would not stick to fitte^ and feign and tell of
glorious facts, and admirable wonders which were never done, and make fair
shows without substance, if these may help to advance the papal dignity, or
the Jesuitical order, especially seeing they know how to say and write and
swear any thing for so great a good, without the least grudge of conscience?

Fifthly, It may serve them for forging and diuulging of false, especially
slanderous reports against their adversaries and enemies of their profession. A
thing so generally and so boldly practiced by the men of this faction,
especially by the Fathers of Ignatius his Order, that Relation of Religion,
number. 33. Beza Red^^^. Epist. ad Gul. Stuck.
wise men have much wondered, when in such politic persons as Jesuits are,
they have seen and observed such a strange liberty in coining of forged tales,
as that the untruths which they have broached, might well be called splendida
mendacia, transparent lies, such as by their own light bewray themselves, or
such as within a few days might and have appeared to the world to be loud and
lewd lies, that might shame their Master. And we might well wonder, if we knew
not the Jesuits new Art, that men of any either conscience or honest mind,
could let pass out of their mouths, or from their pens, such shameful and
yet shameless fictions. For example (to give the Reader a taste of their
forgeries and lying slanders) Luther was a great mawle, that battered their
Babel; and of him they reported, and printed it too, that he was dead and
buried, which was no great wonder: but (that which was worth the straining of
their wits) when he lay a dying, he took order, that his body should be
laid on the Altar, and adored as a God. And when he was dead, and buried,
that there was such a terrible noise and tumult about his grave, as if heaven
and earth had gone together. And the night after his burial, that there was a
much greater and more hideous noise and shricking then before. And when, upon
the occasion of this fearful noise, which frighted all the Citizens out of
their sleep, his grave was opened the next day, there was neither body, nor
bones, nor graue-clothes to be seen; but so hellish a stink came out of his
grave, as with the poison of it, it had almost killed the standers by. And all
this while Luther was alive, and did help to demolish their Babel still; and
not long after the same time, published a book in print, and gave it this
title, Contra Papatu^ a diabolo institutum, Against the Papacy sounded by the
Devil.

This story if any man be desirous to see, he may read Melch. Adamus, in the
book which he wrote of the lives of German Divines. In vita Luther^ page 152.
Where he may also read the words of the lying Relation, printed by them in
Italian, and afterward translated into Latin. After this practice against
Luther, they fell upon Calvin, the wounds of whose pen were deep in their
sides; and of him they scattered this news in the Courts of the German
Princes, and in a general Assembly in Germany, that Calvin now was weary of
his Religion, had revolted, and was turned Papist. And at this very time, was
he printing his book of Institutions: and in a Directed to the Reader.
Preface prefixed before this book, does make answer to this slander, and
tells these lying Spirits, Fallitur cum tota sua caterna diebolus, etc.
The Devil and all his rowt of lying spirits are deceived, if they think by
lading me with base lies, to discourage or hinder me in my course. In like
manner, but with more shameless impudency, they afterward traduced Beza. Of
whom there were not only false reports scattered through Italy, See the
Jesuits Cate chisme, l. 1. cap. 17. f. 62.
Germany, and other Countries, but letters also were written and diuulged to
this purpose; That Beza Vise morti vicinum sensit, ^oram pleno Sena^u Geneuensi
palinodiam (...). Beza Red^^^. Epist. Colonia misaa, page 9.
a little before his death had recanted his Religion in a full Assembly of the
Senators of Geneua, beseeching them that if ever they would be saved, they
should renounce Caluins errors, and betake themselves to the profession of the
Romish faith; that for more full testification of his unfeigned Conversion,
after his death he desired them to send for and to be advised and directed by
the Jesuits; that hereupon the Pope had appointed the Bishop of Geneua to
absolve Beza, and other learned men, such as could be had near at hand, to go
to Geneua, and consider of the business, and deal with the Inhabitants, if
any were more backward, about points and Articles of Religion in question.
After which Relation, the Reporter adds, that this news is most certain and
true; as may appear by the numberless company of letters written to this
purpose, and will (as he says) appear at the next Franckford Mart, by the
store of Books which would then fly abroad in the World, for the witnessing
of this thing. He yet goes on further, and for more abundant proof, tells
us, that Puteanus, the General of the Jesuits, who lived within twelve miles
of Geneua, had by writing related this news, adding moreover, that himself
was one of those Fathers, whom the Pope had appointed to go and instruct the
Citizens of Geneua. Yea, and moreover, says the Relator, the Landgraue of
Hessen, being scared with this news, sent messengers to Geneua, who after
their return confirmed all this to be true. This they reported of Beza;
without either fear of God or reverence of men. For all this while Beza was
alive; and continued preaching and writing against the superstitions and
idolatries of the Roman Church, for diverse years after. And for the clearer
detection of this shameless lie, he wrote a Book, the title whereof is Beza
rediuiuus, Beza returned to life again: Wherein he has laid open the Jesuits
forgeries, to the shame of their Order. I could bring more instances of their
abominable forgeries of this kind, but I am afraid to cloy the Reader with
such unsavory fictions. Yet two examples there are, (both within mine own
knowledge and experience) which I cannot omit, without some short rehearsal.
The one is, of the famous Divine, Doctor Rainolds, President of Corpus Christi
College in Oxford: and the other, of the worthy Prelate Doctor King, Bishop of
London, my euer-honoured Lord. Of the former, some well-willers to the
Romane-Church, were discovered to have diuulged reports, in the time of his
long sickness, (for he died of a lingering consumption) that he voyded his
own Ordure upward by the mouth: (of which lie what construction ill minds
would frame, any man may easily conceive.) This report was brought to him while
he was yet alive, which made him to send for the party, who was said to be the
author, or at least a reporter of this forgerie, and showed him what the matter
was, that he used to spit out of his mouth, even the very same that other such
sick men use to do. But these liars might have proceeded perhaps to fowler
fictions, had they not been prevented by the timely providence of some
learned, and his loving and religious friends. For they remembering and
considering the shameless practices of Papists, in scattering false news to
disgrace the Worthies of our Church, came to him the day before his death, put
him in mind of their false dealing, and desired him, that for the preventing
of such slanders after his death, he would now make an open confession of his
faith, and constant belief. Which he being not able to do with his own
mouth, his speech having failed him some days before, left the composing of a
form of Confession to them, to which he would subscribe. And they considering
his weakness, framed it in general and few words, in this manner*

These are to witness unto all the world, that now in this my weakness,
wherein I look for my dissolution, and hope shortly to be with my Christ, I
die in a constant belief, persuasion, and profession of that holy truth of
God, in defense whereof I have stood both by writing and speaking, against the
Church of Rome, and what soever other Enemies of Gods truth. And for mine own
resolution touching mine own state of Salvation after this life, I assure my
self thereof, by the merits of Christ Jesus only, into whose hands I commend
my spirit, as unto my faithful Redeemer.

To this he readily subscribed with his own hand;

John Rainolds.

And his friends then present, who had been eyewitnesses and eare-witnesses of
the whole passage of this business, did by their hands witness the truth of
the act to the world, in these words:

That he made this Subscription with his own hand, with such willingness and
cheerfulness, as ministered great comfort unto us, who were then present; we
testify by this subscription of our names also hereunto. May 20. 1607. Henry
Airay Vice-Chancelor. Henry Wilkinson. Edward Rilston. Richard Tailor. Henry
Hindle. Daniel Faireclough. Henry Mason. Alexander How. John Dewhurst.


The Original hereof signed with Doctor Rainolds own hand, and subscribed by
the aforementioned parties, I have in my custody: out of which this is a true and
faithful Transcript here published. Now blessed be his counsel, and blessed
be he of the Lord, that gave this advise for the stopping of these slandrous
mouths. For had not this prevention been used aforehand, we may fear that
such as belied him in his sickness, would not have spared him after his death.
And for want of some such providence and prevention it is, that that Reverend
and learned Prelate, (whose memory is precious with all good men that knew him)
our late Bishop of London I mean, mine euer-honoured Lord and Patron: for
want, I say, of some such providence aforehand, this glorious Soul has been
traduced by worthless pens, and foule-mouthed fiends (the indignity of the
thing makes me, against my nature and custom, to give them that name whereof
they are most worthy) as if he had made defection to the Roman Church; to
whose errors notwithstanding he showed himself an Enemy to his dying-day: as
those that knew him inwardly, do know very well, how in the very time of his
sickness, he spared not upon occasion to express his zeal that way. But of
all foule-mouthes, that have slandered that blessed Soul, he that wrote the
Bishop of Londons Legacy, is the most shameless and impudent lier. The Author
of the Protestants plea is but a milke-sop to this noble Champion: and Father
Persons himself must now be forced to resign up to him the Whetstone, which
his secular Brethren bestowed upon him for his excellency in the fittening
Trade. For they and other of their fellows, have played their prizes well:
(...).
but this L^yer excels them all. He has made two publications of one
individual Book, qualifying, or rather destroying in the latter, some
transparent lies, which with an Whores forehead, and without regard of the
Worlds censure, he had auerred in the former. For, in the year 1622. when he
first diuulged this Libell, he made the worthy Bishop to speak those silly
Motives, which his worthless self ^ad devised. And so he went masked under
the Bishops name: but with such difformitie and disproportion every way, as
made me remember the Ass in the Fable; which presuming to wear the Lions
skin, did by his long ears bewray himself to be an Ass notwithstanding. He
says, that the Bishop himself did pen those Motives, and delivered them to
this Publisher, this public Liar, to be committed to the Press. I would the
world were worthy to understand what rare man this is, that had such inward
acquaintance with that learned and wise Bishop, as to hear from him the
secrets of his heart, and to receive from him the studied Reasons of his
Conversion, which were never made known to any body else. And sure, it were a
great honor to see that face, that could come and go, and converse with the
Bishop about these weighty affairs, and in this serious manner, without being
once seen of any other man; as if by the virtue of some Gyges his Ring, he had
bin transformed into an invisible Spirit. But he goes on, and says that the
man is known that reconciled the Bishop to the Roman Church. But it is to be
feared, he will never make known the man's name to the world, lest if the
Reconciler should prove more shamefaste, then this Publisher is, he might
return the lie upon the Author that devised it, and spit his shame in his own
face. And yet say, he both can and will name the man, what great mastery is in
this? or what great credit might such a circumstance, coming from an
Equiuocator, gain to his cause? For did not Puteanus the Provincial of the
Iaesuites, name the man that reconciled Beza to their Church? Yes* He said
expressly (not with Ifs and Ands, as this Publisher does) that the man was the
Bishop of Geneua. And did he not name beside, both the man that was sent to
catechize the Citizens of Geneua in the Roman Faith; and the man that sent
messengers to enquire of this news in Geneua, and found it to be true? Yes.
For, for the one* he names himself, who among others, was going to Geneua to
instruct them. And for the other, he names the Lantgraue of Hessen, who was a
Prince not far off, and knew the undoubted truth of this news. Jesuits and
Equiuocators are ashamed of nothing. And yet, I would we might be so much
beholding to this Publisher, as to publish the Reconcilers name, that performed
so great a work for this great man. To this purpose this public Liar spoke in
the first publication of his Book; which not long after was suppressed and
kept from the view of the world. I suppose, some of his Superiors more wary
then himself, being ashamed of such shining lies, did call in the Book, till
some kind of qualification might temper those shameless and hideons untruths.
And then in the year following 1623. he made a new publication of the same
worthy Work, changing only the Title-leafe, and the Preface to the Reader.
And in this second publication, he is contented to own his own abortiue
Brat, which in the former he had without shame fathered upon the worthy
Bishop: and wishes that himself may be taken to have written those motives,
as a precedent or pattern warranting any Protestant in the change of his
Religion, though by a Poetical freedom peculiarly applied to the Bishop. And
whereas throughout the whole Book, he makes the Bishop speak what himself
had forged; he now gives his Reader leave with his full consent and
allowance, to suppose all these passages to be fictiones personarum, and
warranted by the figure Prosopopeia, that is, a fiction of the Person. It were
some sign of grace, if he had acknowledged the whole fiction, as he does this
part of it. But he goes on still: and even in the new altered Preface, or
Advertisement to the Reader, he accuses the Bishop of defection from his
Religion; and by a figurative kind of Pre^er^tion, he spares pere^^p^orily
to affirm, that the Bishop did write and deliver to others any Reasons or
Motives of his change in Religion. In which speech, this Slanderer would have
his Reader to understand that, which himself dares not speak; that when it
shall appear to be a shameless forgery, he may wipe his mouth with the Whore
in the Proverbs, and say, that he said it not. But, foule-mouth, if thou have
any thing to say, spit out: and labor to give some satisfaction to the World,
to avoid the evidence of coozening the living, and slandering the dead. For
know, that the World already is possessed with this opinion, that thou must
needs be some ignorant Jesuit* (for none else can be imagined to be so
Bayardly bold.) And if now thou forbear to produce some proof, or some
probability, or some possibility, how these things might be; we shall resolve
upon it, that Persons his ghost is risen from the dead, and has brought with
him seven other spirits worse and more lying then himself* and that that is
the reason, why such vast and shameless Forgeries do show themselves in this
man. But I leave this Liar for this time: and humbly pray the Worthies of our
Church, that they would take these things into their consideration: and as men
that deal with Thorns, do fence their hands with thick Gloves; so seeing
they do live, and must die in the midst of such slanderous Tongues, they
would arm themselves against such malice, by an open profession of their
Faith, at such times especially as they are ready to leave the World; lest they
may be slandered after their deaths, when they will want liberty to defend
themselves. But here I stay my course. For I perceive I have in part digressed
already; and yet not so, as that I am gone from the matter in hand. For I was
saying, that Equivocation did serve the Masters of it for this turn among
others; that by it they might without scruple of cons^lence, defame and belie
the Worthies of our Church, that so they might gain the more credit to their
own. Now how they use to defame our learned men, I have declared fully by this
digression, if the Reader will so esteem it: and what use Equivocation may
stand them in this practice, will not be hard for any man to conceive. For a
wonder it might seem, that men of any religion or conscience, should endure
themselves, while they broach such broad-faced lies. But the Art of
Equivocation will presently remove all such scruple or grudge. For it teaches
how to speak all untruths, without telling of the least lie: and so the
Equiuocator needs not to have any scruple in that respect. And this doubt
being once removed, there can be no further let to hinder their proceeding.
For, what though the Heretics complain of wrong and injustice done to them
in their good name? that skilleth not. For, in ordine ad Deum, and pro bono
Societatis, that is lawful enough, or rather very meritorious. For the Reply
to Persons Libel. page 18.
Seculars tell us, that when a Priest complained to the Jesuits, or some one
among them, of wrong done to Master Bennet by their defamation, reply was made,
that it was necessary or convenient he should be disgraced, because he was
against their Society. Where the Author or Authors of that Book add further,
that the Jesuits hold such deuillish Principles, whereby they may at pleasure
defame whom they please. And if they take such liberty of Conscience against
their own Catholic Brethren; they will out of question make no bones to
slander and disgrace an Heretic. This then is one turn among the rest, and
it is a special one and of great use for their purpose, that by this Art of
Equiuocating, they can defame and disgrace, and (as we plaine-dealers do call
it) belie whom they will, without any offense or grudge of conscience.

Sixthly, In ordinary dealings and course of life, Equivocation may serve them,
for concealing of any truth, or persuading of any untruth, if either of them
may make for their advantage. So Comment. in c. Human. aur. q. 3. nu. 13.
Navarre tells us, that if we be asked what we have eaten, how much money
we have, what we have heard, etc. In these and all such cases as these, if
there be advantage to be gotten by it, we may by this fine Art, conceal the
truth, or speak an untruth, so as by subintell^ction* or a mental
reservation, we make up the matter. And the Reply to Persons Libel. page 23.
Seculars tell us, that the Jesuits make Equivocation to serve their turns so
frequently in this kind, as, that their own Catholic Brethren; nay, their
fellow- Priests can scarce tell when they speak sincerely, when otherwise.
They might have added, no nor their holy Father the Pope neither. For, Father
Standish coozened and deluded him also, by Equivocation, thereby to oppress
the Secular Priests; as Reply to Persons Libel. cap. 3. page 57. True Relation
page 55, 56. Quod^. 3. art. 4. page 66. in the Margin.
they complain in diverse places of their Books. And if this Art can serve
for this turn, when they deal with his Holiness himself; no marvel if they
make the same use of it, whenever they have to deal with (...) enemies of
their Religion: as Father (...) who Answer to a Letter of a Iesuited
Gentleman, p. 104.
giving his Faith, in verbo (...) prisoner to the Knight-Marshall, yet did
(...) word and that Oath. But the good Father (say his Secular Brethren) had
perhaps some mental (...)* wherewith to rescue his Soul, at least from
remorse, though not from the Devil. As for example, as he was in that mind
he would be true prisoner, or for any thing the Keeper should know to the
contrary, till he were escaped; or that he meant not to run away on his
head, but on his feet; or that he would not break away so long as the
Knight-Marshall or his Deputy stood by and looked on; or that he wo^ld not
break away as a Priest, but is a Jesuit; or that he would not (...) with a
mind ever to come again with his will (...) that null^ fides s^uanda
Haereticis; or, how many Ors might I make upon this point? says the Author of
that Book. But the point is plain, and as well proved to be true, of all
sorts, as here it is affirmed of the Jesuits; though I will not deny these
Fathers the precedencie in this practice. Equivocation then serves for many
singular turns, and for uses of great consequence and moment: and therefore it
is no marvel that they do so hug and embrace it, as a dearling of great
worth.

CHAP. V.
Of the Grounds and Arguments, either for or against Equivocation.
IN setting down the Reasons on either side, I shall not need to be long;
because I have been large already in vn^olding the nature and conditions of
this Art, in the points hitherto spoken of: and the discovery of such a
monstrous device is argument enough to disprove it. It may then be sufficient
for this place, first, to answer the chief Arguments, which are brought in
defense of it; and then in the second place, to set down some few Reasons,
that may refute it.

And first, for their Arguments, they are many in particular; for Father
Persons finds 8 or 9 at least, in one piece of a Chapter: and how many then
might he have found, if he had sought all the Chapters of the Bible, in the
like manner? But the Wren has more birds then the Eagle: and errors do more
usually abound with their rotten proofs, then Truths do with sound and
substantial Reasons. And it is no marvel. For a false Conclusion has no
direct or good proof at all: and Cauils and impertinent flourishes for every
thing, may be infinite and without number. And so it is in this case. For such
proofs, as the 8 or 9 are, which Father Persons finds in one Chapter, he
might have found 8 or 900 in the compass of the Bible. But howsoever the
particular allegations be so many; yet all of them may easily be reduced to
some few heads: and so many of them together may be cut off at one blow.

The Heads then, to which the substance of all that they say, may be reduced,
are these three. 1. Examples of holy men. 2. Examples of God himself. And 3.
Examples of Jesus Christ our blessed (...).

And first, for Examples of holy men, they being in, the Patriarchs and
Prophets, Genesis 20. ^.
and other Saints of God. For Abraham, say they, did equiuoca^e, when he said
of Sarah, Genesis 27. 19.
that she was his Sister: and (...), when he said, Exodus 5. 1. and 8. 27.
I am thy firstborn Esau^ and Moses, when he said to Pharaoh, that they would
(...) the Wilderness, but meant to go to (...) and Samuel, when he said, 1. Sam.
16. 1, 2.
he went to offer (...), but principally intended to anoint David to be King
of Israel: and David, 1. Sam. 21. 2.
when he told Ahimelech* The King (...) a business, etc. and Jeremy, when ^o
question of the Nobles, who demanded of him, What said thou to the King, Ier.
38. 25, etc.
etc. He answered, I presented my supplication to the King, that he would not
cause me to return to Ionathans house, to (...) there: whereas he talked with
(...), concerning his yielding up to the King of Babylon.

For answer to these and the like, I note (...) things, by way of preamble. 1.
That the old Heretics, the Priscillianists, who defended the lawfulness of
(...), as now the Papists do of Equi^^cating, did allege (...) same places
and examples, at least many of them, for proof of their heresy; which our
Jesuits do for confirmation of their opinion. And they had better show of
reason then these men have; for diverse of those Instances were either direct
and culpable untruths, or seemed at least to border too near upon such
obliquity: but as for this new found Equivocation by mental reservation, it
has no show nor semblance of probability, to be gathered from them. 2. That
neither S. Augustine, who most diligently confuted those Heretics, nor any
other ancient Writer, for answering of these objections, did ever flee to this
Art of Equivocation; or once say, that those Fathers and holy men did not lie
in any of those speeches, for that they spoke the truth by a mental
reservation. Which answer, if it had bin true, had been most pertinent and
easy; as our late, Equiuocators do not only confess, but brag of it too.
For Comm^n C. Human. aures q. 3. nu. 7.
Navarre says; that from his doctrine of Equiuocatio^, there arises, or may
be gathered, nouus modus excusandi a mendacio Patriarchas, a new way to excuse
the Pa^riarches from lying. Where, when he says that it is a new way, he
acknowledges that it was not known to St. Augustine, or those other Worthies,
who in former times did beat down these Errors of the Heretics. And when he
says, that this way arises out of his doctrine, he intimates, that if the
Fathers had known this, they might easily have answered the Priscillianists,
by interpreting those Texts after his new way. Now from hence it follows,
that the Ancients did not understand these passages of Scripture, as making any
thing for Equivocation. And therefore, when Equiuocators allege S. Augustine,
and some others of the Fathers, for their interpretation, they abuse both their
Readers, and the ancient Fathers.

These things being first noted, I come to give a more direct answer to the
objections; and it is this; As they affirm, so I deny, that these or any of
these sayings alleged, were meant, or are to be understood and construed with
any Equivocal reservation.

Yes, say they, that they are. For if they be not so construed, they are
apparent lies, which may not be supposed of those holy men.

Answ. 1. If they be not understood and made true by mental reservation, they
are apparent Lies, say they. If this do not follow, then our Equiuocators do
great wrong to those ancient Worthies. And plain it is, for diverse of them,
that they do so. For when Abraham said of Sarah, She is my Sister; and when
Moses said to Pharaoh, We must go three days etc. and when Samuel said to the
Elders of Bethleem, I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord --; and when Jeremy
said, I presented my supplication etc. these speeches were all of them true, in
the words as they lie, and according to the common acception and meaning of
them. And therefore there is in them no Jesuitical Equivocation, in which the
words are false, till a secret thought does make them true. And in this sense,
and to this purpose, Abraham does interpret his own meaning, and explain his
words. For when Abimelech challenged him for concealing his wife, and asked,
What saw thou, that thou have done this thing? he answered for himself,
Genesis 20. 11, 12.
Because I thought, Surely, the fear of God is not its this place, etc. and
yet indeed she is my Sister; she is the daughter of my Father, but not the
daughter of my Mother. In which answer we may note three things. 1. He shows
the reason which moved him to conceal her to be his wife; Because I thought
the fear of God, etc. 2 He defends his speech to be true as the words do
sound; and yet indeed she is my Sister. q. d. That which I said is very true.
And hereby it appears, that Abraham did not equivocate; because Abraham's
words in their usual signification, and as they were uttered by him, were
true: but the words of an Equiuocator, as they are uttered, are false, till an
inward reservation do patch them up, and make a truth of them. And it further
hereby appears also, that F. Persons did not only belie Abraham, but Almighty
God himself, when he says, that Apology for Eccles. Subo^d. c. 12. in the
end fol. 202.
both Abraham and Sarah said, that she was not his Wife, but his Sister: and
that this was one among diverse sayings and speeches in Scripture allowed by the
Holy Ghost. Thirdly, Abraham explaineth his words, or rather shows how they
were true and unfeigned, and that is, because she So S. Aug. interprets this
place, lib. contra mendac. cap. 10.
was his near kinswoman on the Fathers side, and such women in the usual
language of those Countries, were called their Sisters. Abraham then shows
that his speech was true, because the thing was so, as his words did sound; and
not because he had some secret reservation in his mind, by addition whereof
they became true* And this shows again, that in these words of Abraham,
there was no Equivocation, such as our new Doctros do imagine. And Abraham's
example in interpreting his own words, may serve us for a pattern to
interpret the rest by. And so; as he said, Indeed she is my Sister, as I said:
so we may say of them, Indeed, and intruth the things were so, as they said.
Only in these examples, though all that was said, was true: yet something that
was true, was concealed; which we grant to be lawful: nor does it any way
help the Jesuits, or favor their imaginary fiction.

Answ. 2. When they say, If the speeches be not understood with mental
reservation, then those men told a Lie: I answer, that that may be granted of
some of them, without any absurdity, or wrong of those worthy men. For if we be
forced to confess, that David did commit murder, why should we be afraid to
confess that he told a Lie, if he uttered any such words as had not a true
meaning, as our Equiuocators say that he did? And if we grant it in David, what
harm is there, to acknowledge it in others of Gods best servants, if by the
Text and their own speeches, any such thing do appear? If then any of these
holy men did speak words which were untrue, we may without inconvenience
grant, that as they did sin in other things, so they might in this: and
therefore herein we must not take example by them, to do as they have done
before us. This answer S. Augustine makes to the Priscillianists, when they
alleged the example of ancient men and women, to prove that Lying was
lawful. For Haec quando in Scripturis sancti^ legimus, non ideo quia facta
credimus, etiam faciend^ cred^mus, ne violem^^ praecepta, dum passim s^ctamur
exempla. Aug. contra menda^. c. 9. p. 18. A.
when we read of these things in the Scriptures (says he) we must not
therefore think that we may do them, because we know that they did do them;
lest we violate Commandments, while without choice we follow examples. Say
then, that the words of some of those holy men cannot have a good meaning or
true construction, in themselves considered; it will be no inconvenience, to
grant that such good men did therein do amiss, and made a Lie. And (to speak
more particularly to the point) so I think Jacob did, when he said, I am thy
firstborn Esa^: and David, when he said, that he had made a rode against
the South of Judah, etc. 1. Sam. 27. 10. And so we may say of Rahab, and the
Mid-wiues of Egypt, and some others.

Object. But S. Augustine Contra mendac. cap. 10.
does excuse those words of Jacob, from being a lie.

Answ. 1. Be it so. Yet S. Augustine does not interpret them to be understood
and made true by any reservation in the mind. And this does no way help our
Equiuocators at all.

2. Say that S. Augustine do give unto those words a more favorable
construction; yet Cornelius a Lapide disliketh that, and prefers the other
opinion, which grants that Jacob did lie, in Genesis 27. 19.
before this of S. Augustine. And for that interpretation, he cites S.
Chrysostom, Lyra, Caietan, Lippoman, Pererius, and others.

3. Dominicus Soto, Relect. de Secreto memb. 3. q. 3. Conclus. 7. page 3^1.
a learned Friar, does defend or excuse both Saint Augustine and Jacob in this
manner; It may be (quod puto sentit Augustinus, Which I think was Augustines
meaning) that those words of Jacob, were used in that Country, in that
signification and meaning that they might be uttered by him, without telling a
lie.

But howsoever it be, Jacob was so plain a man, (says a Lapide) that it is
not to be supposed that he did use equivocation in his speech: nor does any of
former time so understand his words.

2. The second head of Arguments, contains the example of Almighty God, the
God of Truth. But what has this just God, this God of Truth done or said, for
which he should be thought to equivocate, that is, to keep one meaning to
himself, and to deliver another to his people, and by a double-sensed
proposition to deceive them, whom he professes to teach? Yes, say these men,
he said to Nineveh, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown, Ion. 3.
4. And he said to Ezekias, Set thine house in order: for thou shall die and not
live. I^. 38. 1. And yet neither of these came to pass, according to these
words spoken. And therefore they are not true, unless they be helped by some
inward reservation, seeing in the sense that the words yield, they were not
fulfilled.

Answ. These and other such speeches of God, are words of Commination and
threatening. Now words of Commination in Scripture, are meant by Almighty God
that spoke them, and are understood by men that hear them, with exception of
repentance and amendment, or some such conditions in the persons against whom
they are uttered, as may move GOD to revoke the sentence. For God himself has
declared his own meaning to be so, in such like sentences and speeches. Ier.
18. 7, 8.
At what instant (says he) I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning
a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it: if that Nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the
evil, that I thought to do unto them. And Ezekiel. 33. 13.
when I shall say to the Righteous, etc. And when I say to the Wicked, Thou
shall surely die: if he turn from his sin, etc. none of his sins, that he
has committed, shall be mentioned unto him* etc. And according to this plain
Rule given by God himself concerning his own words, we are to understand Gods
threatenings, with some such exception. As for example, yet forty days, and
(...), etc. that is, unless Nineu^h repent, and obtain Gods favor for their
preservation. And, Thou shall die, etc. that is, unless thou by prayer and
humiliation obtain Gods favor, to lengthen thy life beyond the ordinary
course, or such like. And these exceptions are not secret reseruations, kept in
Gods own breast, and concealed from the hearers, as the Jesuits reseruations
are; but they are conceived and ever have been understood by men acquainted
with Gods language, to be meant by the very words. And therefore when God had
threatened the Jews, yet the Prophet exhorts them to repentance, that so they
might move God to stay his judgments, Joel 2. 14.
Who knows (says he) if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him? And Daniel, when he had told Nebuchaduezzar of Gods Decree against
him, yet he gives him counsel Dan. 4. 27.
to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquity by showing mercy
to the poor, that this might be a means to lengthen his tranquillity. Yea,
and in the very examples alleged to the contrary, when Jonas pronounced, yet
forty days, etc. the men of Nineu^h, as either having had some advertisement
thereof by Scriptures, or by some of Gods people, or conceiving so much by the
common light of reason, they did understand these words of the Prophet as a
threatening, that employed an exception of repentance.

And therefore the King with his Nobles proclaims a Decree, Jonah 3. 8, 9.
Let Man and Beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, etc.
For, who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not? And when God had threatened Ezekiah, Set thine
house, etc. yet Ezekiah Isai. 38. 2.
turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord, etc. Where his prayer for
freedom, shows that he understood not Gods threatening to be meant without
exception. And thus the people of God have ever been wont to understand such
like speeches, till our late Doctors of Rome have made God to be an
Equiuocator, that they might allege him for a patron of their sin.

The third head of Arguments, contains the example of our blessed Savior;
who though he were the Truth it self, and that there was never any guile
found in his mouth, yet these men will needs draw him in, to be a favorer and
ringleader of their falsehoods and untruths. And so did their Predecessors,
the Priscillianists do before them. For they (as Contra Me^dac. cap. 2. page
14. A.
Saint Augustine says of them) for defense of their Doctrine of lying, brought
testimonies out of Scriptures, and encouraged their Scholars by the examples
of Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and Angels, non dubitantes addere
etiam ipsum Dominum Christum, making no scruple to adioyne also our Lord Jesus
Christ, as a pattern of their lies. And right so for all the world, do our
Equiuocators deal now-a-dayes. They bring examples of Patriarchs, and
Prophets, and Apostles, and blessed Angels, not fearing to draw in God
himself, and Jesus Christ his blessed Son, to be Abettors of their frauds.

But of God we have heard what they say already: let us now hear what they
say of Jesus Christ: and how, and when, and wherein he used this Art of
Equivocation. Yes, say they, he did equivocate, when being with two of his
Disciples, Luke 24. 28.
he made as though he would go further: and when speaking of the day of
Judgment, he said, Mar. 13. 3^.
But of that day and that hour knows no man --, nor the Son, but the Father
only: and when he said to his Brethren, Ioh. 7. 8. Persons Mitig. c. 7. number.
29. page 293.
Ego non ascendam, etc. I will not go up to Jerusalem to this Feast, and yet
he meant to go up, and so went; and diverse other times.

Ans. Neither in these, nor in any other place, was our Lord, the spotless
Lamb of God, ever found to equivocate, according to the rules of this new Art.

Not in the first place, Luke 24. 28. For first, there our Lord is said to do
something; he made as though he would go further: but he is not said there
to have said any thing in which this supposed reservation might be understood.

Ob. Yes, but deeds also may signify as well as words.

Ans. Deeds sometimes are equivalent to words, and do signify as well as
words do: and that is, when as words, so they do declare our meaning, ex
instituto, or by some kind of compact and agreement among men. And that may be
done two ways. First, expressly, when some words joined with the deeds, do
declare that to be the meaning and purpose of him that uses them. As when
Judas kissed his Master: this signified that he was Jesus, whom they came to
apprehend, because before he had given them this sign, Matt. 26. 48.
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he. And when Jesus gave a sop to
Judas, that signified that he was the Traitor, because he had told them
before, Ioh. 13. 26.
He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it. And so, when an
oath is ministered or tendered unto us, if we lay the hand upon the Book, and
kiss it, this signifies that we consent to the taking of the Oath, because
that is appointed and required for this purpose. Secondly, deeds may be
equivalent to words, when by some outward circumstances we do declare, that
we intend them as signs of our meaning, and do refer and use them to that
purpose. In this kind, we may see a man, who is borne deaf and dumb, to
talk and confer with his neighbors. And in this kind a shrugge of the
shoulder, (if as Persons says, it be so meant and taken in Italy) may be a
sign, and have the signification of a Negation or denial. And when a man
opens his mouth, and shows a defect in his tongue, and makes a gabbling
noise and vndistinct sound, this is a signifying deed, and does import that
that man is dumb. In either of these kinds, deeds and gestures are
equivalent to words, and may contain truth or falsehood in them, as well as
words do. But else, deeds and gestures, if in some such manner, ex instituto,
by appointment and agreement among men, Facta nihil huc auin^^, nisi certam and
expectatam (...) altera part sine siga^ ficat^onem si^e quasi respension^
contra (...) de^^^u. Abbat. Antilog. c. 2. Page 26. And again, Otio^e totum
hoc de shategemets vs^^satcy quia nulla ibi consiliorum Communicatio, nulla
signorum intercessio, quae mentibus nostris inui^em aperiendis constituta sunt.
Ibid. page 26.
they be not referred and intended for signification of our mind, though they
may carry show, and men may gather some meaning from them, yet they are not
equivalent to words; neither is there any lie contained in it, though the show
be not answerable to the thing. And such a deed as this, was that of our
Savior, when he showed by his gesture, a purpose of going further: and
therefore this needs no reservation to make it true; seeing without any
reservation it has no false or lying signification, such as words have. And
thus Lucas Brugensis, a learned Divine of the Roman Church, does understand and
interpret this place. His words (that the Reader may judge of his meaning the
better) are these, Non magis in ^oc facto video inendacij specie, quam in eo
quod simulauit se peregrinum seu ^^ator^m. Lucas B^ugens. in hunc locum.
I see ^o more show of a lie in this fact of Christ, then when before he seemed
to be a stranger or a wayfaring man. And he gives his reason, why he
thinks there is no untruth in this deed and gesture, Magaum discrimen est
inter voba and opera^ verba exp^^ma iustitutione, significandi vim habent; non
item opera.
for there is a great difference between words and deeds. For words by their
first institution have the power or use of signifying; but so have not deeds.
And hence he infers that deeds, actions, and gestures, though oftentimes
they be, yet they are not always signs either of some ensuing action to
follow, or of our present purpose and meaning; nor have they the nature of a
lie in them, etiamsi ad decipiendum aliquando siunt, though they be sometimes
done, to deceive the understanding of the beholder, and to make him believe
that which is not true. So that if our Lord did make show of going further, and
intended it not, as Father Persons says; yet in this learned man's judgment,
there was no lie in it: and consequently there needs no mental reservation
to save it from being a lie.

Secondly, and more agreeably to our Saviors mind, we may answer and say,
that our Lord made as if he would go further: yea, and meant it too, if their
entreaties and importunity had not stayed him. Therefore the Text says, They
constrained him; that is, they importuned him to stay; and he, overcome by
their entreaty, stayed with them. The clearer meaning of which words, we may
the better conceive and understand by a like speech, Luke 9. 53. For there it
is said, The Samaritans received him not, because his face was as though he
would go to Jerusalem; that is, by his behavior it seemed that he meant to
go thither: and so he did mean it indeed. And so in this place, when it is
said, that he made as though he would go fur^^^r; the meaning is, that he
took his leave, and bad them farewell, or used some other such like behavior,
which made it seem, that he meant to go further. Yea, and so he meant
indeed, saving that at their request he was contented to abide with them. And
thus Barradius, and Ribera, two famous Jesuits, do interpret this place. We
may answer says the one of them, Barrad. to. 4. l. 8. c. 1^. page 356. 2.
Dominu^ voluisse vlterius progredi, si non retineretur a Discipulis, etc. That
our Lord indeed would have gone further, had he not been detained by his
Disciples, and that there was no untruth in this show. And the other, Ribera in
Amos 2. nu. 21. page 344.
Nihil veritas fingii, Christ who is the Truth does not feine any thing. But
the common sort might think that he did feine, but it was no fiction or
counterfeiting; Si enim eum non (...), tra^^^sset sine dubio, and iss^t lo^gi^s.
For if they had not detayned him, he out of doubt had passed by, and had gone
on further. Thus not only the evidence of truth, but the authority of Romish
Doctors and Jesuits do vindicate this place from that false gloss that
Persons puts upon it; and do free our Lord Jesus from that slanderous
imputation, which the Jesuit does lay upon him, when Mitig. cap. 9. nu. 58.
pa. 386.
he says that Christ in this place did equivocate: and when Mitig. cap. 9. nu.
72. pa. 397.
he calls this dealing of his, The dissimulation and fiction of our Savior.

The second place mentioned, and produced for Equivocation, is that speech of
our Savior, Mar. 13. Of that day, and that hour, etc. This pr^position (says
Mitig ca. 9. nu. 45. pa. 378.
Persons) had some reservation of mind, for that otherwise it had been false.

Ans. Not so* Nay this inference of the Jesuit is false and foolish too: for
our Savior, according to his wonted manner elsewhere, speaks of himself, as
he was reputed and known to be, that is, as he was man. And in that sense, the
words have an usual and clear construction and signification; which is, that
as he was man, he knew not of that day. This interpretation (as Mitig. cap. 9.
number 48.
Persons does acknowledge) is given by ancient Fathers in great number. Nor is
this a mental reservation, as Persons would have his ignorant Reader to
believe: but an interpretation usually meant and understood by Christians, in
these and such like speeches as these. And therefore our Savior in this
sentence did not keep one secret sense to himself in his inward mind, and
signify another to his Disciples in the words uttered.

But if it be an Equivocation, such as they fancy, what then shall the
reservation be? Persons, knowing that no man before the late invention of this
new Art, did ever think of secret reseruations, or mental imaginations in our
Saviors words; calls every Exposition that any good Author gives, by the
name of reservation, and reckons that Author, for a favorer of his, like the
mad man in Athenaeus, who when any ship came to the Haue^, put it in his Tables
as one of his own. I. c. nu. 49.
But that which carries most show of a reservation, is this; The Son does
not know the day of judgment, meaning that he knew it not so, as he would
discover it unto them. For this explication is given by Saint Augustine, and
other Fathers, says Persons; and he adds, (as triumphing in so plain a
proof) that this exposition expresses the very same reservation in Christ's
words, which they talk of in their mixed and equivocal propositions.

Ans. To this I answer two things: First, That the Exposition given by those
Fathers, does not imply any equivocal reservation. Secondly, That it does not
give the true sense or meaning of the place.

First, It contains not any Jesuitical reservation. For those Fathers which
give that interpretation, The Son knows not; that is, not to make you know
it: or rather, the Son knows it not; that is, he does not make you to know
it; do fetch and gather this exposition, not from any secret conceit reserved
in our Saviors mind, but from the use and acception and signification of the
word, as it is used in Scripture. For so, say they, this word, scio or noui, is
often used. As when God said to Abraham, Genesis 22. 12.
Now I know that thou feare^^ God: Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
and to the Israelites, The Lord your God proves you, that he may know,
whether ye love the Lord, etc. the meaning is, that he may make you to know.
And from this use of the word scio, to know, frequent, as they say, in
Scriptures; they think they may be the like reason, keeping the same
proportion of speech, interpret the word Nescit, knows not the day; that is,
he does not make you to know it. Concerning which meaning of the Fathers
exposition, if the learned Reader desire any further proof, Rob. Abbot An^^l.
cap. 2. page 22, and 23.
he may have enough to satisfy his mind, in that reverend and learned Bishop
who wrote against Eudaemon-Ioannes. Now this interpretation of the word, being
drawn from the usual acception of it in Scripture, is nothing at all to the
Jesuits purpose, who fancieth a secret clause kept in the mind, but no way
included in the use of the word.

Secondly, This interpretation, The Son knows no^; that is, he does not
reveal or make it known to you, as it makes nothing for the Jesuits
Equivocation, so it is not greatly to our Saviors meaning. My reasons are two.
First, If that were the meaning, then it would follow, that the Father did so
know the day of judgment, as that he did reveal it unto them. For that which
this sentence does deny of the Son, it does by virtue of the exceptiue
particle adjoined, affirm of the Father; No man, no nor the Son does know
it, but the Father. Where, if we fill up the construction, and make the
sentence perfect, the whole speech must be this; No man, nor Angel, neither
the Son, does know it, but the Father he does know it. Now in this speech
take the word [know] in the sense of those Fathers, he knows; that is, he
makes to know, and then the sentence thus expounded, in plain words will be
this, No man, nor the Angels, neither the Son, does make you to know the day
of judgment: but the Father he does make you to know it. But this is not true
of the Father; and therefore that is not the true interpretation or meaning of
the word.

My second reason is, Our Savior in these words, No man -- knows; meant to
show how secret and unknown the day and hour of Gods judgment was; but take
the word in this sense, he knows not; that is, he reuealeth not, or does
not make you to know: and then this sentence does not imply or infer or
signify any secrecy of that day. For, if thousands knew it, yet it might be
said of them all, They know it not; that is, they do not reveal it, or make
you to know it. And consequently, this interpretation does cross our Saviors
meaning, and overthrow that, for which he intended it. Now, lay these
together, and then there is less then nothing in our Saviors speech for the
Jesuits purpose: both because the word cannot bear that sense in this place,
which only might seem to favor them; and because, that sense, as it was
understood by the Fathers, was not meant to include any such reservation. And
so I have done with this second place, which is the one of the places, that
Doctor Norrice did defend his Equivocation by.

Only, lest some Popish Cauiller, according to their usual manner, should
raise clamours after me, that I do deny and gainsay the exposition of the
Fathers: let the Reader remember, that the other interpretation, which I
follow, is confessed by Father Persons to be given by other Fathers in great
number. And again, if any shall quarrel with me for leaving an exposition of
some Fathers, where I have so good reason for it; let him know, that I can
produce diverse of their own Writers, who do reject as great a number, and
perhaps upon lesser reason.

Thirdly, The third testimony is from the words of our Savior, John 7. 8.
which Father Persons and other Equiuocators recite thus, Ego non ascendam ad
diem festu^ istum, I will not go up to Jerusalem to this Feast; and yet (say
they) he meant to go^ up, and so he went. And therefore here he had a secret
reservation.

Asw. They corrupt the Text two ways, 1 by altering the words. 2 by perverting
the sense.

1. By altering the words. For the Original Greek is, (...), that is, I do
not yet go up. And their authentic Latin, Ego non ascendo, I do not go up.
And whereas some Copies had corruptly read it, non ascendam, I will not go;
Roman. Correct. Ioh. 7. 8.
Lucas Bragensis, lest any man might afterward mistake, has given admonition,
that according to the Roman Correction of their Bible, set forth by the Popes
authority, they may not change ascendo into ascendam. Yea, and their Rhemists
read it in their English Translation, I go not up to this Festival day.
Which was true in the very Letter, and meant by our Savior according to the
express words. For he did not mean then to go up, but afterward when time
served. And yet our Equiuocators, to gain some show from our Saviors words,
do corrupt not only the Original and truly authentic^ Greek, but their
own Latin Text too. But it is no marvel: for such a false Art could never
be vpheld by true dealing.

2. By perverting the sense. For say the words had been, I will not go up, as
Persons and Doctor Norice, and others would fame have it: yet the circumstances
of the Text do show, that that could not be meant of the whole time during the
feast, or that he would not go up at all; because it follows in the next
words by way of reason, because my time is not yet accomplished, as the
Rhemists translate it; or because my time is not yet fully come, as it is more
plainly in our Translation. Which words do plainly show his meaning to be
this, that he would not then go, when they would have him: but would go when
he saw his own time. And this he might both do and mean, according to the
plain sense of the words spoken. By which it may appear, that it is want of
proof, and weakness of their cause, that made them to draw in this Text,
which is so clear against them. And so, it is the very same reason also, that
forces them (for necessity has no law) to produce the many other speeches of
our Savior, which have as much affinity with Popish Equivocation, as there is
agreement between Christ and Belial, or between Christ and Antichrist: as I
could easily show, if it were convenient to stand upon all their frivolous and
idle allegations. But I think it not worth the while, either to tire the
Reader, or to trouble my self with such fond Cauils. Only for a general
answer to them all, let this be remembered; that there is never a Text produced
by them for this purpose, but that learned expositers, both ancient and
modern, as well of their Church, as of ours, do interpret and expound it in
some determinate sense, which they gather or observe either from the
signification of the words, or the use and application of them in the
Scriptures, or from some circumstances or considerations in the Text it self.
And therefore such Texts, in the judgment of all such Interpreters, are not to
be expounded or understood of any Popish reseruations, kept secret in the
Speakers mind. For such reservation as I showed before, may be any that
themselves will fancy. Insomuch, that the Priests do frame seven several and
distinct reseruations, all alike fit for Father Listers Equivocation, when he
deceived his Keeper; and do intimate that they might have framed many more, and
all to as good purpose. And no doubt, as they imagined those seven, they might
have invented seventy more, that would have served the turn. In all which it
is not possible, for the Hearer or Reader of such a speech, to imagine, what
the Speakers reservation is; it being not such as the signification of the
words, or any circumstances of the business do yield, but as the mind of the
Equiuocator will fancy within his deceitful heart. Nor do they in their
Equivocations mean, that the Hearer should know^ their reseruations. For their
intent is, to reserve one sense in their own breast, and to imprint another in
the Hearers mind. This only short note being observed, it will be easy for
every Christian, that will open his eyes, to see that no place produced by them
out of the Bible, does include their secret and hidden reseruations. Or if any
Equiuocator will cavil, or can say, that there is any testimony of theirs,
which may not receive satisfaction by this general Rule, and is in his opinion
worth the standing upon; let him produce it: and I will promise him either a
solution of his reason, or a recantation of mine opinion. And thus much shall
serve to be said concerning the Grounds and Reasons which Equiuocators do
build upon.

Now I proceed to set down some few reasons against this newfound Art, and
fond device of Equivocation. And those for this time shall be these five.

1. Because this late doctrine of Equivocation destroys the true nature of
Equivocation, whose name it bears. 2. Because it maintains a practice of
lying, under a color of Truth. 3. Because it disturbeth humane society, and
hinders mutual commerce. 4. Because it impeacheth God of folly, in making
his Laws against Lying. 5. Because it freeth the Devil from all just
imputation of being a Liar.
Arg. 1. The Jesuitical doctrine of Equivocation, does destroy the true nature
of Equivocation, which hitherto has been received of all men, and now (for
ought I know) is not rejected of any. This I prove thus; Equivocation, in the
true nature thereof, is, when a word or speech has more senses than one. This
the word does import. For Aequiuocum, by the very notation of the name, is vox
aequi plura significans, a word indifferently betokening more things. And in
some such manner as this, do Writers of all sorts explain and describe
Equivocation. But in this new-deuised Equivocation, there is no word, nor no
sentence, or saying, that has more significatious or senses than one. For in
their mental equivocal Proposition, which they fancy, neither the words
taken by themselves, nor the whole saying and sentence intended by the speaker,
have any Ambiguity or doubtfulnes of signification, or any more senses then one;
as I have showed Cap. 1. p. 1^.
before, out of the Equiuocators own Rules. And hence I may infer, that
either their reserved Proposition, is not an Equivocal and double-sensed
Proposition, as they call it without reason, and consequently, that they do
not by Equivocation speak truth in one sense, and mis-leade the Hearer with
another sense: or else, if notwithstanding this, that Proposition be
Equivocal and double-sensed still, then we must say, that there may be an
Equivocation, where there is but one single sense and meaning. And that
destroys the true nature of Equivocation.

To this reason, first their confession is, that Pers. mitig. cap. 8. number. 8.
verbal Equivocation, which is, when a word or speech signifies diverse things
equally, Pers. ibid. number. 15.
indeed is only true and proper Equivocation, and agrees only to the
Defiuition of Equivocation, delivered not only by Philosophers, but Orators
also: and that Pers. ibid. number 8.
it is properly called Equivocation, when a speech or word signifies diverse
things equally, if we consider the proper nature of Equivocation: and, ibid.
number. 15
that mental Equivocation in rigor is none.

2. Their answer is notwithstanding, that their mixed Proposition may be Pers.
mitig. cap. 8. number. 10. page 313.
called Eq^^uocation, in a more large and ample signification, as Equivocal
may signify an amphibologicall, doubtful or double-sensed Proposition, in
respect of the Speaker and Hearer, whereof the one understands the same in
one sense, and the other in another. And the cause why it is so called, is
rather by a certain similitude, then propriety of speech: to wit, that even as
Equivocation properly by community of name in things of different natures, by
variety of significations in the selfsame words or speech, by custom of
phrase and composition of sundry sorts, does make different and doubtful
senses and meaning to the Hearer: so in this case, by mental reservation of
some part of the foresaid mixed Proposition, the like effect of doubtfulnes is
bred in the Hearers understanding. For more ready understanding of which
perplexed speech, I note that there are three things said by this doubling
Equiuocator. 1. That it is only true and proper Equivocation, and such as is
comprised in the Definitions given both by Philosophers and Orators, when there
are diverse senses and significations in the words. 2. That Equivocation as they
mean it in this question, has no such property in it, nor is comprised in
the Definition, that Philosophers and Orators have described Equivocation by.
3. That notwithstanding all this, yet it may rightly be called Equivocation,
because as true Equivocation breeds diverse senses to the Hearer, by the
Ambiguity that is in the words; so this new-deuised Equiuocatio^ may breed
diverse senses, one in the Hearer, and another in the Speaker, by reason of the
secret reseruatio^ that the Speaker imagines in his own mind. And this may
seem not so unreasonable, because words do signify ad placitum, and may be
changed every day. And therefore it is no such fault, to frame a new meaning
and another signification in this word, then ever any body did think of
heretofore.

Rep. This answer does not weaken mine Argument, it confirms and
strengthens it rather. For first, I do not except so much against their new
signification of the word, as against the new explication and description of
it. For they say, that they call it Equivocal, because it is a double-sensed
Proposition; and a double-sensed Proposition there fore they call it, because
by it they signify one sense to the Hearer, and imagine another to themselves.
But this does utterly destroy the very essence and entity of true Equivocation.
For true Equivocation cannot be conceived to be without a diversity of
meanings in the speech: nor was it ever heard of, that a Proposition could be
double-sensed, which had none but one single meaning: nor is it imaginable that
that saying should be ambiguous, which the Hearet can take or construe but one
way.

Secondly, Their change and alteration of the word, to another different
meaning, as it is by them here used* does convince them of false and naughty
dealing; such as we may observe Thieues to use, when they have purloyned other
men's goods. For Thieues (says Vt reliqui ^ures, carum rerum quas cepericat,
signa commutan^: sic illi -- nomina, tanquam rerum notas, mutaucrunt, Cic. de
finib. bon. and mal. l. 5. nu. 74. page 111.
Tullie) when they have taken away other men's goods, do change the marks of
them, that it may not be known whose they are, or to whom they belong. And
right so do our Equiuocators deal in this case. For they change the names,
which are true marks of things; that hereby they may conceile and hide the
nature and property of the things themselves. I grant then, that names may
change with times; nor is it any fault to alter the use of a word, so there be
no wrong done to the thing, by the misse-applying of the word: as likewise it
is no fault neither, to change the marks of goods, when there is no fraud
intended by it. But if the marks of goods be changed, that the property of
them may be conceiled, that is a plain trick of thieuerie. And so, if names
be changed, that the nature of the things may be perverted or obscured, that is
a trick of iugling, not inferior to that cousonage of the Thief. And so it
appears to be in this case. For this mungrill Proposition of theirs, if it
should be censured by Philosophers, Orators, or other learned men, no man but
would judge it at the first sight to be a lie: and so hither to all men have
ever called such speeches. But now our new Artificers have found another name
for their new Art: they call it, Equivocation. And this they do for a
colorable show, that it may be thought that there is no untruth, but only an
Ambiguity in the speech: and that they in deceiving men by mental
reseruations, do nothing but what honest men are wont to do, when they utter
sentences, that may have diverse meanings. Thus, while they change the names,
they do also confound the things, and destroy their true nature, which wise
men, and Aristotle among the rest, have ever acknowledged to agree unto them.

Object. Nay, says Father Mitig. cap. 8. number. 16. page 310.
Persoons, but if Aristotle did not comprize this our reserved Proposition
under (...) of the three sorts of Logical Equivocation, mentioned by him in
his Elenchs, then he erred grossly in making an insufficient Division, which
comprehends not all the parts of the thing divided. For if the said mixed
Proposition (says he) be an Equivocation, (as Jesuits say it is, in spite of
all reason, and against the doctrine of all ages) then must it have place among
some of these three kinds; or else the Division should be insufficient.

Rep. A ridiculous conce it: whereto I know no example, that may be parallel;
but I will imagine one as near as I can. Suppose then, a Father deuideth his
Lands among his own Children, and a Conie catcher there by steppeth in, and
lays claim to a share among them: and when the matter comes to be debated,
in the Court, the Judge parts the Lands among the Brethren, to whom only
they belonged, and shuts out the Conie-catcher for a wrangler, that lays
claim where he has no right. What if in this case, the Conie-catcher should
complain of the Judge, for partial dealing, and reason against him, as
Persons does against Aristotle, that if this Conie-catcher have a right, and a
share in those Lands, as himself says he has, then the Judge erred grossly,
that had excluded him? Would not every Boy kick such a wrangling fool or
knave shall I call him? out of the Court? And such a ridiculous wrangler, is
Father Persons, who accuses Aristotle of a gross error, for not rancking
among his kinds of Equivocation, this of the Jesuits, never heard of in the
world before; and which the wrangler himself does elsewhere acknowledge not
to be true Equivocation.

Arg. 2. This doctrine of Equivocation does maintain a practice of lying,
because he whom they call an Equiuocator, is in truth a Liar, and that which
they call an Equivocal Proposition, is a lying assertion. I prove it thus. He
that speaks to another that which himself knows to be false, is a Liar,
and a lie it is, whenever there is Aug. conta mendac. c. 12.
falsa significatio cum voluntate fallendi, a false signification with a mind
to deceive the Hearer. Or, to speak in a Jesuits words, Tolet Instr. l. 8. c.
54.
A Lie is verbum falsum, cum intention fallendi, a false speech, with an
intention to deceive. Which description of a Lie, so far as concerns this
purpose, he explaineth thus. A false speech is here meant, when a Non est
mendacium, dicere quod nou ita est, sed dicere aliter quam homo putat. Tolet.
ibid.
man speaks otherwise, then himself thinks: and it is said to be with
intention to deceive, because Qui aliter qu^^ sentit proloquitur, alteru^
fallit, et fallere intendit. Non etenim sic profert, nisi vt diuersam opinionem
in animo alterius generet. Hoc autem est fallere. Tolet. ibid.
He that speaks otherwise then himself thinks, does deceive another, and
intends to deceive him. For he would not so speak, but that thereby he may
engender a contrary opinion in another man's mind: and this is to deceive. Thus
the Jesuit describes a Lie, and that agreeably to the received Doctrine of
the Schools. But this which is said to contain the nature of a Lie, is all of
it found in the new-deuised Equivocal Proposition. For first, that which the
Equiuocator utters, is false, and so he knows it to be: for Pers. mitig. c.
12. number. 2. page 484. and cap. 10. number. 22. p. 424.
it may seem (says Persons) to have salsitie in it; and sometimes also has
indeed, in respe^t of the words only, or understanding of the Hearer. And the
case is clear, that the words uttered by the Equinocator, contain an untruth
and a falsehood: for else they could not serve him for evasion. But the words
uttered are all that the Equiuocator speaks: and therefore that which he
speaks, is verbum falsum, a false word or speech. And secondly, that he
utters this falsehood with mind and purpose to deceive the Hearer, in the
sense that Tolet here explaineth it, I have Cap. 1. page 16. number. 6.
showed and proved out of their own writings: nor can it stand with common
sense, to conceive it otherwise. And hence it follows that the Equiuocator is
a plain liar.

Ans. Their answer is, that though the words considered by themselves, and as
they are understood by the Hearer, be false: yet as they are meant by the
Equiuocator, and as they are joined with the reservation kept in his mind,
they are true. The sum is, they are false of themselves, but they are made
true by the imagined reservation.

Re. This is a weak answer, and an impertinent shift; because their mental
reservation has nothing to do either with Truth or Lying; as may appear by
this reason. Truth as it is here meant, and Lying which is the contrary to it,
are moral acts contained in the second Table of the Decalogue or Ten
Commandments: and therefore do include a respect to our Neighbors, nor can
they be understood without reference and relation unto other men: so that lying
consists in a signification of falsehood unto others, and truth in signifying
or uttering of that which is true; and without such signification, either
performed by outward signs, or meant and intended to be performed, if occasion
should be offered, Lying and Truth morally taken, can have no place. Upon this
ground, which has clear evidence in it, Bannes a learned Schoole-man does
refute their opinion, who think that there may be a lie, where there is no
purpose to deceive. Mihi vsque ad^o videtur ille animus fallendi necessarius ad
rationem mendacij; quod sine illo mendacium esse non possit. Vt v. g. fi Petrus
absque aliqu^ test proferat propositionem, qu^ scit esse falsam; ille non
mentitur, quamuis dicat folsum in voce. Similit^r si Petrus dicat ^oann^; Tu
(...) es Ioctnes: (...) non mentitur, quamuis dicat falsum, quia illud non
potest dicere animo fallendi ipsum Ioannem. Huius ratio esse potest, quia
mendacium est fiotio quaeda, quae est in voluntate, propterca quod est ad
alteris per quam intendit homo, vt alius credat aliter, quam sentit ille, qui
fiugit, and mentitur. Quod autem menda^^u^ sit ad alterum, patet. Nam (...)
veracitas, quae est virtus oppofila, est ad atterum, quum sit pa^s iustiti^; vt
ai^ S. Tho. Dominic. Baunes to. 3. in 2. 2. q. 1. art. 3. Dub. 1. Pro
decisione. page 16.
I think (says he that a mind to deceive, is so necessary in a lie, as that
without it, a lie cannot exist. This he declares thus: If Peter, no man being
within hearing, should utter a speech, which he knows to be false, yet he
should not lie, though he should speak an untruth in the words. In like sort,
if Peter should say to John, Thou art not John, doubtless he should not lie,
though he spoke an untruth, because he cannot speak that with purpose to
deceive John himself. And hereof he gives this reason, Because a lie is a
kind of fiction or faining, which is in the will, with reference to another,
by which a man intends that another man may believe otherwise than himself,
who tells the lie, does think. And that a lie does include such respect and
refirence to another, is plain (says he) because that veracirie, or the
virtue of speaking truth, which is opposite to lying, does consist also in
relation to another, because it is a part of justice. Thus reasons this
learned Friar. In this discourse of his we may note two things. First, His
Conclusion, which is, that both lying and truth morally taken, which he
calls veracitie, do consist in a relation and reference to others; so that
no words uttered, without respect of signifying somewhat to some other by them,
can be either the sin of lying, or the virtue of true-speaking. Secondly, we
may note his reason for proof of this Conclusion; which is, that veracitie, or
the virtue of speaking truth, is a part of justice: and justice has a respect
to some other, to whom it gives that which is his due. This reason I take to
be unanswerable; and then his Conclusion must needs be undeniable. It is proved
then that truth morally meant, for a virtue or act of speaking truth, which is
a part of justice, and a duty which we owe to our neighbors; does include a
reference and respect to others, which respect consists in signifying or
declaring our meaning to them, truly and sincerely. But now in the mental
reservation, shut up in the Equiuocators breast, there is no such reference or
relation, nor does it admit of any intendment, to signify or declare his
meaning to others. Nay, it is therefore suppressed, and broken off from the
speech which is uttered in words, that nothing thereby may be signified to the
Hearer. It follows then, that this reservation has no point nor piece of
moral truth in it. And therefore, if that part of the Equiuocators
proposition, which he utters in words, were a false and lying speech before;
it must needs remain a lie still, for any help that this Reservation can
yield it.

Arg. 3. The Doctrine of Equmocation does disturb humane society, and
destroys that mutual commerce that one man should have with another. I prove
it thus. This society and commerce must needs be disturbed, when men in
wisdom may not believe one another, upon their words or oaths: but if this
Doctrine of Equivocation be received, men may not believe one another, either
upon their words or oaths. This is proved thus. The Equiuocator professes to
equivocate, whenever he may lawfully hold his peace; and if it be for any
advantage of weight, upon his Oath too. Which how far it may extend, I have
declared in part already, and every man may easily conceive by himself: but
sure in what business soever I have to deal with such a man, I cannot tell,
but that he may think it lawful to conceal the truth, and consequently to
equivocate with me. And in case his conscience will permit him to equivocate
with me, (as in what case it will not permit him, I know not) then am I as
sure to be deceived, and ouerreached by him, if I do believe him, as if I
believed a plain and downright liar. For, my credence or belief can reach
no futher then to the words uttered; nor can I learn any thing from the
Equiuocator, but that which I can gather from his words: but all that is false
and lying; as has been showed by their own Confession. And therefore if I
believe a man, when he does equivocate, I am sure to be deceived. I declare
this yet further by a familiar example. Say, two Priests have laid a plot of
Invasion for the Kingdom, and being questioned upon their oaths concerning the
plot, they both deny it. And the one, he says, I never meant or intended any
such thing, understanding within himself, so as I mean to tell you of it: and
the other, he answers in the very same words, but has forgotten to frame a
reservation in his mind: the one of these by their Doctrine is a liar, and the
other an Equiuocator* But in respect of being deceived by them, what difference
is there between them? Shall I not as soon be deceived by the Equiuocator, as
by the Liar? Yes certainly, it is no more safe to believe an Equiuocating
Jesuit, then a lying Devil. And if this be so; then where men teach and
profess the Art of equivocation, there in wisdom men may not believe one
another: and consequently, they cannot have that commerce and society that men
should have among themselves. I conclude this argument against Equiuocators, in
the very same manner, as Saint Augustine did against Liars, only putting the
name of Equiuocator, where he did the name of Liar. Aut non est credendum
bonis; aut credendum est ijs, quos credimus debere aliquando mentiri; aut non
est credendum bonos aliquando (...). Horum trium primum pernici^sum est
secund^^ stultum. Restat ^rgo, vt nunquam ment^antur boni. Augustine. de Mendac.
cap. 8. page 6. f.
Either (says he) we must not believe honest men; or we must believe them,
who we think ought sometimes to tell a lie; or else, we must believe that
honest men will not at any time tell a lie. The first of these three is
pernicious, (and overthrows society.) The second is folish, (and exposes a
man to the mercy of every cheating companion.) It remains therefore to say,
that an honest man will never tell a lie. Thus that learned Father: by whose
example I may reason against Equiuocators in the very same manner. Either we
must not believe honest men on their words or oaths: or we must believe them,
who we think may equivocate with us both in words and in oaths: or else, we
must believe that an honest man will not equivocate. The first is pernicious,
the second is foolish: and therefore we must resolve upon the third, which is,
that an honest man will not equivocate.

Arg. 4. This Doctrine of Equivocation defeateth all Laws made against lying*
and does by consequence impeach God of folly for making any such Laws. I prove
it thus. It is a folly to make such Laws, as are unavailable, and cannot
reach to the ends, for which they were made. But if Equivocation be admitted,
Laws against lying cannot serve for the purpose, to which they are intended.
This appears by two things. First, Gods Laws and precepts against lying were
made for this purpose, to restrain men's tongues from speaking of falsehoods and
untruths. But by the Art of Equivocation a man may speak any and all
falsehoods that he will, and yet these precepts against lying shall never take
hold of him: because by a mental reservation warranted by this Doctrine, he
may make any falsehood to become true. And therefore the Equiuocator,
notwithstanding all Laws of God and men against lying, yet is at his liberty
to utter what untruths he will, without the least transgression of any of
those Laws. Secondly, Laws against lying do intend prevention of hurt and
deceit to be used against our neighbor. But admit once of this new doctrine of
Equivocation, and no deceit toward our neighbor can be prevented by any Laws
against lying. For if this Doctrine be warrantable, then all Laws against
lying must be meant only against such as do not keep a reservation in their
minds, to make true the falsehoods that they utter in their words. And so, for
example, when Moses says, Leuitie. 19. 11.
Ye shall not lie one to another: and when Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 25.
Put away lying, and speak truth every man with his neighbor; the meaning of
these Precepts must be to this purpose* Speak no untruth, nor utter no
falsehoods to your neighbors, unless ye have some secret reservation kept in
your mind, which if it be added, will make them to become true. For, by the
Equiuocators Doctrine, if such reseruations be kept in the mind, then all
their words become true: and therefore they are no way included within these
Precepts against lying. But if this interpretation of such Laws may be
admitted, and such liberty of speech may be granted, without any breach of
these Laws: then these Laws do no way prevent the least danger of deceit and
damage that may come to our Neighbor by untrue and false speeches; because I
can deceive him as much by this equivocal reservation, as by a formal lie: as
has been proved already. And from these considerations it follows, that
Precepts against lying are vain, if the practice of Equivocation be lawful.

Arg. 5. If the Doctrine of Equivocation be true, then neither men nor Devils
can be convinced of lying. First, men cannot. For though they speak never so
vast and apparent falsehoods, yet who can say but that they have some
reservation in their mind, that may free their words from being lies? And yet
all sorts of men, when they hear evident untruths uttered, do without
control of any, charge the speakers with falsehoods and lying. Which shows
that all men judge of lying and truth, by the words uttered, and not by fancies
reserved in the mind. As for example, the Secular Priests do charge Father
Persons with a continual practice of lying, so that D Ely in his Notes upon
the Apology. cap. 9. page 311. D. Bagshaw in his Answ. to Persons Apology,
page 42. Reply to a brief Apology, cap. 2. page 11.
they give him the Whetstone, and leave it with him too, as if they thought
there were no such a bold and impudent liar in the World, that could win it
from him. But how did the Priests know, but that Persons spoke with some
equivocal reseruations? And if so, then they broke the rule of charity, in
censuring him for a liar, when he was but an Equiuocator. And again, Father
Persons charge the Seculars with Apology for Subord. cap. 12. in the latter
end.
infinite number of untruths, lies, slanders, and open falsehoods uttered
without scruple of conscience; so that the use of Equivocations was little
needful for them; because they could take liberty enough without it. But how
does Father Persons know, that his Secular Brethren did not use Equivocation in
all these untrue speeches: and so made them true by some reservation? Thus all
men, when they find apparent untruths uttered, stick not to charge the
speakers with lying. But if the Doctrine of Equivocation be true, no man can be
convinced of the least lie, unless himself will confess it.

Secondly, The Devil himself, if this Doctrine be true, cannot be convinced
to be a liar. For who can say, but when he tells us most palpable untruths,
yet he may reserve within himself some clause to help all? Nay, if this
Doctrine be true, it cannot be supposed with any reason, that the Devil ever
would or ever did tell any lie at all. For, whatsoever he has spoken at any
time, be it otherwise never so false and lying; yet it might be made true by a
reservation: and he neither wanted wit to devise such reseruations, nor will,
by such or any other means to free himself from the imputation of lying.
First, he wants not wit. I shall not need to prove this; because, as I
suppose, it will be confessed, that he is as quick and nimble at such
devices, as the finest witted Jesuit in the pack. But, if any man shall
question it, I will engage my self to prove it. Secondly, he wants not
will, by this or any other trick to save his credit, and to avoid the
imputation of lying. For, he knows that the greatest hinderance to his
proceedings, is, because the World esteems him for a liar, and the Father of
lies: and if he could once but gain to be accounted a true and honest dealer,
(as by using Equivocation, he might as well prove himself to be no liar, as
any Jesuit can:) then he might find more credit in the World. For which
cause, 2 Corin. 11. 14.
the Apostle says that he transformeth himself into an Angel of light. And
an ancient Writer tells of a Monk, who was a strict and religious liver,
that the Devil, Quum volens eum consuetudine visionum, ad credulitatem futurae
deceptionis illicere, verissima quaque multo tempore, Diabolu^, velut
veritatatis nuncius, reuclasset: ad ^x^^emum, etc. Cassian. Collat. 2. cap. 8.
purposing by a custom of Visions to win him to the belief of a futur^
illusion which he intended for him, did for a long time, as a messenger of
truth, show him all true Visions. And when by this means* he had gained
credit to be believed* then by another Vision, he persuaded him to renounce
Christ, and to become a Jew. And it is an usual observation among Christians,
that the Devil will tell some truths, that he may gain afterward the more
credit to his lies. And therefore it can be no doubt, but that the Devil
desires not to be reputed a liar; and would gladly put off from him all such
imputation, if by any tricks he could devise how to effect it. Now lay these
two positions together: first, That the Devil wants no wit to devise
reseruations; and secondly, That he wants no will, by this or any other such
device, to avoid the discredit of a liar: and then it will follow, that in
reason we cannot imagine, that the Devil ever would or did tell a lie, if by
an equivocal reservation he could clear himself. And hence again it may be
deduced, that as our Equiuocators do challenge us for slandering them; because
we call them liars, when they swear falsehoods by imagined reseruations: so
the Devil himself might challenge GOD (be it spoken with reverence to his
Majesty) for injustice and slander, because he has branded him with the note
of a liar, and calls him the Father of lies. But these consequents are most
absurd: and therefore the Doctrine of Equivocation, from whence they follow, is
most false.

Thus, by Gods grace, I have declared, and I trust, in some measure also
cleared the points propounded in the beginning. Now, for conclusion, I will
only commend one Caveat to the well-meaning Christian; and that is, to beware
of trusting them, whose profession is to equivocate. For such men are both more
impious and more dangerous than any other sort of liars, that I know beside.

First, They are more impious, because among men of other Religions, though
there may be vicious persons, that make too common a practice of lying deceits;
yet that is the fault of the men, and not of their Doctrine. But in the Church
of Rome, their great Doctors do not only practice this deceit, but praise it
too: and commend it to their Disciples, as a good Art; very fit for scrupulous
consciences. Which doctrine cannot be conceived to be without great dishonor
to God, and much disgrace to Religion.

Secondly, They are more dangerous then any other sort of Liars, because they
come masked under a vizard of truth, and armed with resolution to protest, and
swear, and pawn their souls and saluations, upon the truth of that which they
say, notwithstanding that for so much as they utter, and for all that you can
hear or gather by them, all is most false, which they speak. From the
consideration whereof, I inferred before, that it was not safe to believe a
Jesuit, or any of his fellows or scholars; for that a man may as soon be
deceived by an Equiuocating Jesuit, as by a lying Devil. Now I add,
therefore wise Christians must beware of them; and if we will not be decei^ed,
we must not believe either their words or oaths, in what business soever we
have to do with them. This Caveat, that it may the b^tter appear how far it
is to be extended; I will, for example sake, set down some special cases of
ordinary use, in which it will (...) to believe them.

1. first then we may not safely believe them, when they are disputing* and
arguing for their Religion, and delivering points of their faith. For they tell
us, that Jesus our Lord did equivocate, when he preached of Prayer and
Sacraments, and of his office of judging the World, etc. And I trow, Jesuits
will be ready to imitate the example of Jesus, whose name they bear. But we
need not doubt of their meaning in this case; for they therefore allege the
example of Christ; that they may defend and make good their own practice. And
therefore when I hear a Priest or a Jesuit telling of Popes Pardons, and
preaching of S. Patricks Purgat^rie, etc. and when for these, he tells me, of
the consent of the ancient Church, and alleges many Fathers to confirm his
Assertion; how can I be sure, that he does not equivocate with me in that
case? or what reason have I to think, but that he speaks against his
knowledge, and conscience? or how can I, without a note of rashness and
temeritie, believe that he^ does not wilfully belie the Fathers, and other
Authors to serve his own turn? and when he has done all, make up all with a
secret Reservation, that I never dreamed on?

Secondly, We may not believe them, when they give Answers, or bear witness
in a Court of Justice, or before a Magistrate; no, not though they swear what
they say, and take it upon their souls and saluations. For they profess to
equivocate in such cases, if either the Judge be incompetent, or if he proceed
incompetently. And when I hear one of them speak and swear before any of our
Governors or Rulers, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, what can I tell, but he
may think either the Judge, or his proceedings to be incompetent, and unjust?
Nay sure, in most cases, in which they have to do before our Governors, they
are known to hold, either the Judge, or the proceeding, or both, to be
incompetent* And therefore I cannot see how we may safely believe them, when
they make answer, or give evidence upon their oath.

Thirdly, We may not believe them, when they tell of great wonders and
Miracles, done by men of their Order and profussion; and by Saints and Images
of their own making. For they profess to equivocate, when it may be for some
good to themselves, and therefore much more when it may prove so great a good
to their Order, to their Church, and to their Religion. And therefore, when
they tell me of many great miracles done by their men in the Indies, and by
the Ladies of Lauretto and Hall; how can I tell, that they do not fitten and
devise all that upon their fingers end, to gain credit to their profession?

Fourthly, We may not believe them, when they publish and disperse disgraceful
tales and reports against the professors and Doctors of our Church. For the
disgracing of these men, may breed great advantage to their Religion: and
beside, it is an Axiom of theirs, He must be disgraced, because he is an Enemy
to their order. And therefore, when they tell me of Luther, and Calvin and
Beza and Bucer and such others, that they either despaired, or recanted, or
renounced their Religion; how may I believe them, that they do not Equivocate?
Nay it is certain, that in the forging of these reports, they did either lie,
or Equivocate, or both. And therefore when they now tell us, that many of our
Reverend Bishops, and learned Preachers and Scholars, are of their opinion,
and think them to be in the right, but that for the worlds sake, they
dissemble their judgment; how can I give credit to their words, or to their
writings? And when they tell us, that such a Doctor, upon his deathbed; and
such a Bishop toward his latter end, turned Papist, and renounced in their
ear, what he had taught in the Pulpit, and was reconciled to the Church of
Rome, by one that came and went inuisibly; shall we believe them to speak as
they think? Nay, we should rather spit in the Liars faces, that presume us to
be so simple, as to believe an Equiuocator in a case so available for his
Order, and in a thing so unlikely and absurd in it self; that the narration
of such a thing, might call in question the truth of a known honest man.

Fifthly, We may not believe Equiuocators in matters of common life, and civil
conversation. For they profess to equivocate in most cases of common practice,
and in all cases in which they are not bound to reueile the Truth, if the thing
may be for their advantage. And therefore if one of them should contract to
marry a man's daughter amongst us, how can any of us tell, that the Equiuocator
thinks himself bound to lay op^n his heart, and to speak the truth in this
case; and that therefore in his opinion he may not equiuo^ate and deceive us?
And if he promise to pay me a sum of money, how can I tell that he keeps
not a reservation behind, that may disanull his promise aforehand; as that he
will pay it, if himself shall think it necessary, or if he shall have so much
to spare, or if he have nothing else to do with his money? etc. And so, if he
undertake to be my Solicitor for my Law-businesses, or my Physician for my
body, or my Counselor in any doubtful case, etc. how shall I be assured that
I may believe his word, and that he does not for some secret reason kept to
himself, think it lawful to cheat me by a mental reservation? Surely, for
mine own part, if I may know him that professes the Art of Equivocation, I will
trust him no further then I would do a common and noted Liar, that is no
further then I do see him. ()

FINIS.

