THE PICTVRE A TRAGAE COMAEDIE, As it was often presented with good allowance,
at the Globe, and Blackefriers play houses, by the Kings Majesty's servants.

Written by Philip Massinger.

LONDON. Printed by I. N. for Thomas Walkley and are to be sold at his shop
at the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse. 1630.

Dramatis personae. The Actors names. Ladislaus King of Hungary. Robert
Benfield. Eubulus an old Counsaylor. John Lewin, Ferdinand General of the
army. Richard Sharp. Mathias a knight of Bohemia. Joseph Tailor. Vbaldo,
Thomas Pollard. Ricardo, 2. wild courtiers. Eylardt Swanstone. Hilario, servant
to Sophia. John Shanucke. Iulio Baptista a great scholar. William Pen. Honoria
the Queen. John Tomson. Acanthe a maid of honor. Alexander Goffe. Sophia wife
to Mathias. John Hunnieman. Corisca, Sophias Woman William Trigge. 6. Masquers.
6. servants to the Queen Attendants.
To my Honored, and selected friends of the Noble society of the Inner Temple.
IT may be objected, my not inscribing their names, or tittles, to whom I
dedicate this Poem, proceeds either from my diffidence of their affection to
me, or their unwillingness to be publishde the Patrons of a trifle. To such as
shall make so strict an inquisition of me, I truly answer. The Play in the
presentment found such a general approbation, that it gave me assurance of
their favor to whose protection it is now sacred, and they have profes'd they
so sincerely allow of it, and the maker, that they would have freely granted
that in the publication, which for some reasons. I denide my selfe^ one, and
that is a maine one: I had rather enjoy (as I have done) the real proofs of
their friendship, then mountebancke like boast their numbers in a Catalogue.
Accept it noble gentlemen as a confirmation of his service who has nothing
else to assure you, and witness to the world how much he stands ingagd for your
so frequent bounties, and in your charitable opinion of me believe, that you
now may, and shall ever command,

Your servant Philip Massinger.

To his worthy friend Mr. Philip Massinger, upon his Tragaecomaedie styled, The
Picture.
ME things I here some busy Critic say
Who Is this that singly vshers on this Play?
It Is boldness I confess, and yet perchance
It may be constur'd love, not arrogance.
I do not here upon this leaf intrude
By praising one, to wrong a multitude.
Nor do I think that all are tied to be
(Forced by my vote) in the same creed with me.
Each man has ^iberty to judge; free will,
At his own pleasure to speak good, or ill.
But yet your Muse alreadie's known so well
Her worth will hardly find an infidel.
Here she has drawn a picture, which shall lie
Safe for all future times to practisse by.
What ere shall follow are but Coppies, some
Preceding works were types of this to come.
It Is your own lively image, and setts forth
When we are dust the beauty of your worth.
He that shall dully read and not advance
Ought that is here betrays his ignorance.
Yet whosoever beyond desert commends
Errs more by much then he that reprehends,
For praise misplaced, and honor set upon
A worthless subject is detraction.
I cannot sin so here unless I went
About, to style you only excellent.
Apollo's gifts are not confind alone
To your dispose, He has more heirs then one,
And such as do derive from his blessed hand
A large inheritance in the Poets land
As well as you, nor are you I assure
My self so envious, but you can endure
To here their praise, whose worth long since was known
And lustly to, preferred before your own.
I know yo^ would take it for an injury,
(And it is a well becoming modesty)
To be paraleld with Beaumont, or to hear
Your name by some to partial friend write near
Vnequal'd Ionson: being men whose fire
At distance and with reverence you admired.
Do so and you shall find your gain will be
Much more by yielding them prioritie
Then with a certamety of loss to hold
A foolish competition; It Is to bold.
A tasque, and to be shunde, nor shall my praise
With to much weight ruin, what it would raise.
Thomas Iay.

THE PICTVRE, A true Hungarian History.
Actus primi,
Scena prima.
Enter Mathias in armor, Sophia in a riding suit, Corisca, Hilario with other
servants. Mathias. SInce we must part Sophia, to pass further
Is not alone impertinent but dangerous.
We are not distant from the Turkesh camp
Above five leagues, and who knows but some party
Of his Timarious that scour the country
May fall upon us, be now as thy name
Truly interpreted has ever spoke thee,
Wise, and discreet, and to thy understanding
Marry thy constant patience.

Sophia. You put me Sir,
To the utmost trial of it.

Mathias, Nay noe melting,
Since the necessity that now seperates us,
We have long since disputed, and the reasons
Forcing me to it, too often washed in teates,
I grant that you in birth were far above me,
And great men my superiors riualls for you,
But mutual consent of heart, as hands
Ioynde by true love has made us one, and equal;
Nor is it in me mere desire of fame,
Or to be cride up by the public voice
^or a brave soldier that puts on my armor,
Such aerie tumors take not me you know
How narrow our demeanes are, and what is more
Having as yet no charge of children on us
We hardly can subsist.

Sophia. In you alone sir
I have all abundance.

Mathias. For my minds content
In your own language I could answer you
You have been an obedient wife, a right one,
And to my power, though short of your desert
I have been ever an indulgent husband.
we have long inioyd the sweets of love, and though
Not to satisfy, or lothing, yet
We must not live such dotardes on our pleasures
As still to hug them to the certain loss
Of profit, and preferment, competent means
Maintains aquiet bed, want breeds dissension
Even in good women.

Sophia. Have you found in me sir
Any distaste, or sign of discontent
For want of what is superfiuous?

Mathias, No Sophia.
Nor shall thou ever have cause to repent
Thy constant course in goodness if heaven bless
My honest undertakings; it is for thee
That I turn soldier, and put forth dearest
Upon this sea of action as a factor
To trade for rich materials to adorn
Thy noble parts, and show'em in full luster.
I blush that other ladies less in beauty
And outward form, but in the harmony
Of the souls rauishing music the same age
Not to be named with thee, should so out shine thee
In jewels, and variety of wardrobes,
While you (to whose sweet innocence both Indie^
Compared are of no value) wanting these
Pass unregarded.

Sophia. If I am so rich or
In your opinion, why should you (...)
Additions for me?

Mathias. Why? I should be censur^^
Of ignorance possessing such a Jewel
Above all price, if I forbear to give it
The best of ornaments. Therefore Sophia
In few words know my pleasure and obey me,
As you have ever done to your discretion,
I leave the government of my family
And our poor fortunes, and from these command
Obedienoe to you as to my self,
To the utmost of what is mine live plentifully,
And ere the remnant of our store be spent,
With my good sword I hope I shall reap for you
A harvest in such full abundance, as
Shall make a merry winter.

Sophia. Since you are not
To be diuerted Sir from what you purpose
All arguments to stay you here are vselesse.
Go when you please Sir, Eyes I charge you waste not
One drop of sorrow, look you hoord all up
Till in my widdowed bed I call upon you,
But then be sure you fail not. You blessed Angels
Guardians of humane life, I at this instant
Forbear t'inuoke you, at o^^ parting 'tw^^
To personate devotion. My soul
shall go along with you, and when you are
Circl'd with death and ho^our seek and find you:
And then I will not leave a Saint vnsu'd to
For your protection. To tell you what
I will do in your absence, would show poorly,
My actions shall speak me, 'twere to doubt you
To beg I may here from you, where you are,
You cannot live obscure nor shall one post
By night, or day pass unexamined by me.
If I dwell long upon your lips, consider
After this feast the griping fast that follows
And it will be excusable, pray turn from me.
All that I can is spoken.
Exit Sophia.
Mathias. Follow your miste^sse.
Forbear your wishes for me, let me finde'em
At my return in your prompt will to serve her.

Hilario. For my part sir I will grow lean with study
To make her merry.

Corisca. Though you are my Lord,
Yet being her gentlewoman, by my place
I may take my leave, your hand or if you please
To have me fight so high, i will not be coy
But stand a tiptoe for it;

Mathias. O farewell gyrle.

Hilario. A kiss well begged Corisca,

Corisca. It Was my fee,
Love how he melts! I cannot blame my ladies
Unwillingness to part with such marmulade lips.
There will be scrambling for'em in the camp,
And were it not for my honesty I could wish now
I were his leager landresse I would find
Soap of mine own, enough to wash his linen
Or I would strain hard for it

Hilario. How the mammet' twitters!
Come, come my lady stays for us.

Corisca. Would I had been
Her ladyship the last night.

Hilario. Noe more of that wench.
Exunt Hilario.
Mathias. I am strangely troubled: yet why I should nourish
A fury here, and with imagind food.
Having no real grounds on which to raise,
A buildings of suspicion, she was ever
Or can be false hereafter I in this
But foolishly inquire the knowledge of
A future sorrow, which if I find out,
My present ignorance were a cheap purchase
Though with my loss of being, I have already
Dealt with a friend of mine, a general scholar
One deeply read in natures hidden secrets,
And though with much unwillingness have wone him
To do as much as Art can to resolve me
My fate tha^ follows to my wish, He Is come.
Enter Baptista. Iulio Baptista, now I may a^firme
Your promise, and performance walk together.
And therefore without circumstance to the point,
Instruct me what I am.

Baptista. I could wish you had
Made trial of my love some other way.

Mathias. Nay this is from the purpose.

Baptista. If you can,
Proportion your desire to any mean
I do pronounce you happy I have found
By certain rules of Art your matchless wife
Is to this present hour from all pollution
Free and untainted.

Mathias. Good.

Baptista. In reason therefore
You should fix here, and make no farther serach
Of what may fall hereafter.

Mathias. O Baptista
It Is not in me to master so my passions,
I must know farther, or you have made good
But half your promise while my love stood by,
Holding her upright, and my presence was
A watch upon her; her desires being met to
with equal ardor from me; what one proof
Could she give of her constancy being vntempted?
But when I am absent, and my coming back
Uncertain, and those wanton heates in women
Not to be quenched by lawful means, and she
The absolute disposer of her self,
Without, control, or curb nay more invited
By opportunity and all strong temptations
If then she hold out.

Baptista. As no doubt she will,

Mathias. Those doubts must be made certainties Baptista
By your assurance, or your boasted Art
Deserves no admiration, how you trifle
And play with my affliction? I am on
The wrack till you confirm me.

Baptista. Sure Mathias.
I am no God, nor can I diue into
Her hidden thoughts, or know what her intents are
That is denied to art, and kept conceald
even from the devils themselves: they can but guess
Out of long observation what is likely,
But positiuely to foretell that this shall be
You may conclude impossible, all I can
I will do for you when you are distant from her
A thousand leauges as if you then were with her
You shall know truly when she is solicited,
And how far wrought on.

Mathias. I desire no more.

Baptista. Take then this little model of Sophia
With more then humane skill limde to the life
Each line, and lenament of it in the drawing
So punctually observed that had it motion
In so much't were her self,

Mathias, It is indeed
An admirable piece, but if it have not
Some hidden virtue that I cannot guess a^
In what can it advantage me?

Baptista. I Will instruct you,
Carry it still about you and as often
As you desire to know how she is affected
With curious eyes peruse it while it keeps
The figure it now has entire, and perfect
She is not only innocent in fact
But unattempted: but if once it vary
From the true form, and what is now white, and red
Incline to yellow rest most confident
She Is with all violence courted but vnconquerd
But if it turn all black it is an assurance
The fort by composition, or surprise
Is forced or with her free consent surrenderd.

Mathias. How much you have engaged me for this favor,
The service of my whole life shall make good

Baptista. We will not part so, I Will along with you
And it is needful with the rising Sun
The armies meet yet ere the fight begun
In spite of oposition I will place you
In the head of the Hungarian Generals troop
And near his person.

Mathias. As my better Angel
You shall direct and guide me.

Baptista. As we ride
I Will tell you more.

Mathias. In all things I Will obey you.
Exeu^
A^tus primi scana secunda,
Enter Vbaldo, Ricardo. Ricardo. When came the post?

Vbaldo. The last night.

Ricardo. From the camp?

Vbaldo. Yes as it is said, and the letterwrit and signd
By the general Ferdinand

Ricardo. Nay then sans question
It is of moment.

Vbaldo. It concerns the lives
Of two great armies,

Ricardo. Was it cherfully
Recciued by the King?

Vbaldo. Yes, for being assured
The armies were in view of one another
Having proclaimed a public fast, and prayer
For the good success, dispatched a gentleman
Of his privy chamber to the general
With absolute authority from him
To try the fortune of a day.

Ricardo. No doubt then
The General will come on and fight it bravely
Heaven Prosper him, this military art
I grant to be the noblest of professions
And yet I thank my stars fort I was never
Inclined to learn it, since this bubble honor,
(Which is indeed the nothing soldiers fight for
With the loss of limbs, or life) is in my judgment
Too dear a purchase.

Vbaldo. Give me our Court-warfare,
The danger is not great in the encounter
Of a fair Mistress.

Ricardo. Fair and sound together
Do very well Vbaldo. But such are
With difficulty to be found out, and when they know
Their value prizde too high. By thy own report
Thou wast at twelve a gamester, and since that
Studied all kinds of females, from the night-trader
In The street with certain danger to thy pocket,
To the great Lady in her Cabinet,
That spent upon thee more in cullises
To strengthen thy weak back, then would maintain
Twelve Flanders mares, and as many running horses:
Besides Apothecaries and Surgeons bills
Paid upon all occasions, and those frequent.

Vbaldo. You talk Ricardo, as if yet you were
A nouice in those mysteries.

Ricardo. By no means,
My Doctor can assure the contrary,
I loose no time. I have felt the pain and pleasure
As he that is a gamester, and plays often
Must sometimes be a looser.

Vbaldo. Wherefore then
Do you envy me?

Ricardo. It grows not from my want,
Nor thy abundance, but being as I am
The likelier man, and of much more experience,
My good parts, are my cursies, there is no beauty
But yeeldes ere it be summoned, and as nature
Had signed me the monopoly of maidenheads,
There Is none can buy till I have made my market,
Satiety cloyes me, as I live I would part with
Half my estate, nay travail ore the world
To find that only Phaenix in my search
That could hold out against me.

Vbaldo. Be not rapp'd so:
You may spare that labor, as she is a woman
What think you of the Queen?

Ricardo. I dare not aim at
The petticoate royal, that is still excepted:
Yet were she not my Kings, being the abstract
Of all that is rare, or to be wished in woman,
To write her in my catalogue, having inioy'd her
I would venture my neck to a halter, but we talk of
Impossibilities, as she has a beauty
Would make old Nestor young, such majesty
Draws forth a sword of terror to defend it,
As would fright Paris, though the Queen of love
Vowed her best furtherance to him.

Vbaldo. Have you observed
The gravity of her language mixed with sweetness?

Ricardo. Then at what distance she reserues her self
When the King himself makes his approaches to her,

Vbaldo. As she were still a virgin, and his life
But one continued wooing.

Ricardo. She well knows
Her worth, and values it.

Vbaldo. And so far the King is
Indu^gent to her humors, that he forbeares
The duty of a husband, bxt when she calls for it.

Ricardo. All his imaginations and thoughts
Are buried in her, the loud noise of wa^re
Cannot awake him.

Vbaldo. At this very instant.
When both his life and Crown are at the stake,
He only studies her content, and (...).
She Is pleased to show her self, music and masks
Are with all care and cost provided for her.

Ricardo. This night she promised to appear.

Vbaldo. You may ^eleeue it by the diligence of the King
As if he were her harbinger.

Enter Ladislaus, Eubulus, and attendants with perfumes. Ladislaus. These rooms
Are not perfumed as we directed.

Eubulus. Not Sir,
I know not what you would have, I am sure the smoke
Cost treble the price of the whole weeks provision
Spent in your Majesty's kitchins.

Ladislaus. How! I scorn
Thy gross comparison. When my Honoria
Th'amazement of the present time, and envy
Of all succeeding ages does descend
To sanctify a place, and in her presence
Makes it a Temple to me, can I be
Too curious, much less prodigal to receive her?
But that the splendor of her beams of beauty
Has struck thee blind?

Eubulus. As dotage has done yon.

Ladislaus. Dotage, O blasphemy! is it in me
To serve her to her merit? is she not
The daughter of a King?

Eubulus. And you the son
Of ours I take it, by what privilege else
Do you reign over us? for my part I know not
Where the dispairity lies.

Ladislaus. Her birth old man,
Old in the Kingdoms service which protects thee,
Is the least grace in her: and though her beauties
Might make the thunderer a rival for her,
They are but superficial ornaments
And faintly speak her, from her heavenly mind
Were all antiquity and fiction lost
Our modern Poets could not in their fancy
But fashion a Minerua far transcending
Th'im^g n'd one, whom Homer only dreamt of,
(...) she is mine, mine Eubulus.
(...) one glance from her fair eyes
(...) her ido^a^ers,
She is so sparing of their influence
That to shun superstition in others,
She shootes her powerful beams only at me.
And can I then, whom she desires to hold
Her Kingly captive above all the world,
Whose Nations and Empires if she pleased
She might command as slaves, but gladly pay
The humble tribute of my love and service,
Nay if I said of adoration to her
I did not err?

Eubulus. Well, since you hug your fetters
In loves name weare'em. You are a King, and that
Concludes you wise. Your will a powerful reason,
Which we that are foolish Subjects must not argue.
And what in a mean man I should call folly,
Is in your Majesty remarkable wisdom.
But for me I subscribe.

Ladislaus. Do, and loooke up:
Upon this wonder.

L^wd music, Honoria in state under a Canopy, he^ train borne up by Siluia
and Acanthe. Ricardo. Wonder? it is more Sir.

Vbaldo. A rapture, an astonishment.

Ricardo. What think you Sir?

Enbulus. As the King thinks, that is the surest guard
We Courtiers ever lie at. Was Prince ever
So drowned in dotage? Without spectacles
I can see a hansome woman, and she is so:
But yet to admiration look not on her.
Heaven how he fawnes; and as it were his duty,
With what assured gravity she receives it!
Her hand again! O she at length vouchsafes
Her Lip, and as he had sucked Nectar from it
How he is exalted! Women in their natures
Affect command, but this humility
In a husband and a King marks her the way
To absolute tyranie. So, Juno's placed
In Jove's Tribunal, and like Mercury
Forgetting his own greatness, he attends
For her employments. She prepares to speak,
What Oracles shall we hear now?

Honoria. That you please Sir,
With such assurances of love and favor,
To grace your handmaid, but in being yours Sir,
A matchless Queen, and one that knows herself so,
Binds me in retribution to deserve
The grace conferd upon me.

Ladislaus. You transcend
In all things excellent, and it is my glory,
Your worth weighed truly to depose my self
From absolute command, surrendering up
My will and faculties to your disposure:
And here I vow, not for a day or year,
But my whole life, which I wish long to serve you:
That whatsoever I injustice may
Exact from these my subjects, you from me
May boldly challenge. And when you require it,
In sign of my subjection, as your vassal,
Thus I will pay my homage.

Honoria. O forbear Sir,
Let not my Lips envy my Robe: on them
Print your alegiance often. I desire
No other fealty.

Ladislaus. Gracious Sovereign,
Boundless in bounty!

Enbulus. Is not here fine ^ooling?
He Is questionless bewitched. would I were g^lt
So that would disenchant him. Though I forfeit
My life for it I must speak. By your good leave sir,
I have no suit to you, nor can you grant one
Having no Power. You are like me a subject.
Her more then serene Majesty being present.
And I must tell you, it is ill manners in you,
Having deposed your self to keep your hat on,
And not stand bare as we do, being no King,
But a fellow subject with us. Gentlemen vshers
It does belong to your place, see it reformed,
He has given away his Crown, and cannot challenge
The privilege of his bonnet.

Ladislaus. Do no tempt me.

Enbulus. Tempt you, in what? in following your example?
If you are angry question me hereafter,
As Ladislaus should do Eubulus
On equal terms, you were of late my sovereign
But weary of it, I now bend my knee
To her divinity, and desire a boon
From her more then magnificence.

Honoria. Take it freely.
Nay be not moved, for our mirth sake let us hear him,

Eubulus, It Is but to ask a question, have you never read
The story of Semiramis and Ninus?

Honoria. Not as I remember.

Eubulus. I will then instruct you,
And it is to the purpose, this Ninus was a King,
And such an impotent loving King as this was
But now he is none, this Ninus (pray you observe me)
Doted on this Semiramis, a smiths wife,
(I must confess there the comparison holds not,
You are a Kings daughter, yet under your correction
Like her a woman) this Assirian monarch
(Of whom this is a pattern) to express
His love, and service, seated her as you are,
In his regal throne, and bound by oath his Nobles
Forgetting all allegiance to himself
One day to be her subjects, and to put
In execution what ever she
Pleased to impose upon 'em, pray you command him
To minister the like to us and then
You shall hear what followed.

Ladislaus. Well sir to your story.

Eubulus. You have no warrant, stand by, Let me know
Your pleasure Goddess.

Honoria. Let this nod assure you.

Eubulus. Goddess like indeed, as I live a pretty Idol,
She knowing her power wisely made use of it
And fearing his inconstancy, and repentance
Of what he had granted (as in reason Madam,
Yo may do his) that he might never have
Power to recall his grant, or question her
For her short government, instantly gave order
To have his head struck off.

Ladislaus. I'^t possible?

Eubulus. The story says so and commends her wisdom
For making use of her authority:
And it is worth your imitation Madam,
He loves subjection, and you are no Queen
Unless you make him feel the weight of it.
You are more then all the world to him, and that,
He may be foe to you, and not seek change,
When his delights are sated, mew him up
In some close prison, if you let him live
(Which is no policy) and there diet him
As you think fit to feed your appetite
Since there ends his ambition.

Vbaldo. Devilish counsel.

Ricardo. The King's amazed.

Vbaldo. The Queen appears too full
Of deep imaginations, Eubulus
Has put both to it.

Ricardo. Now she seems resolved
I long to know the issue.

Honoria descends. Honoria. Give me leave,
Dear sir to reprehend you for appearing
Perplexed with what this old man out of envy
Of your vnequal'd graces showered upon me,
Has in his fabulous story sawcily
Applide to me, sir that you only nourish
One doubt Honoria dares abuse the power
With which she is invested by your favor,
Or that she ever can make use of it
To the injury of you the great bestower,
Takes from your judgment, it was your delight
To seek to me with more obsequiousness,
Then I desired. And stood it with my duty
Not to receive what you were pleased to offer?
I do but act the Part you put upon me,
And though you make me Personate a Queen,
And you my subject, when the play your pleasure
Is at a period, I am what I was
Before I entered, still your humble wife,
And you my royal Sovereign.

Ricardo. Admirable!

Honoria. I have heard of Captains taken more with dang^
Then the rewards, and if in your approches
To those delights which are your own, and freely
To heighten your desire, you make the passage
Narrow and difficult, shall I prescribe you?
Or blame your fondness? Or can that swell me
Beyond my just proportion?

Vbaldo. Above wonder!

Ladis^uus. Heaven make me thankful for such goodness.

Honoria. Now Sir,
The state I took to satisfy your pleasure
I change to this humility, and the oath
You made to me of homage, I thus cancel,
And seat you in your own.

Ladisluus. I am transported
Beyond my self.

Honoria. And now to your wise Lordship,
Am I proved a Semiramis? or has
My Ninus, as maliciously you made him,
Cause to repent the excess of favor to me,
Which you call dotage?

Ladisluus. Answer wretch.

Enbulus. I dare Sir,
And say how ever the event may plead
In your defense, you had a guilty cause;
Nor was it wisdom in you (I repeat it)
To teach a Lady, humble in her self
With the ridiculous dotage of a lover
To be ambitious.

Honoria. Eubulus, I am so,
It Is rooted in me, you mistake my temper.
I do profess my self to be the most
Ambitious of my sex, but not to hold
Command over my Lord, such a proud torrent
Would sincke me in my wishes; not that I
Am ignorant how much I can deserve
And may with justice challenge.

Eubulus. This ^ looked for;
After this seeming humble ebb I knew
A gushing tide would follow.

Honoria. By my birth,
And liberal gifts of nature, as of fortune,
From you, as things beneath me, I expect
What Is due to majesty, in which I am
A sharer with your sovereign.

Eubulus. Good again!

Honoria. And as I am most eminent in place,
In all my actions I would appear so.

Ladislaus. You need not fear a rival.

Honoria. I hope not;
And (...) I find one, I disdain to know
What envy is.

Ladislaus. You are above it Madam.

Honoria. For beauty without art, discourse, and free
From affectation, with what graces else
Can in the wife and daughter of a King
Be wished, I dare prefer my self.

Eubulus. As I
Blush for you lady, trumpet your own praises?
This spoken by the people had been heard
With honor to you; does the court afford
No oyle-tongu'd parasite, that you are forced
To be your own gross flatterer?

Ladislaus. Be dumb,
Thou spirit of contradiction.

Honoria. The wolf
But barks against the Moon, and I contemn it.
The masque you promised.

Ahorne. Enter a Post. Ladislaus. Let Them enter. How!

Eubulus. Here Is one, I fear unlooked for.

Ladislaus. From the Camp?

Post. The General victorious in your fortune,
Kisses your hand in this Sir.

Ladislaus. That great Power,
Who at his pleasure does dispose of battles,
Be ever praised for it. Read sweet, and partake it:
The Turk is vanquished, and with little loss
Upon our part, in which our joy is doubled.

Eubulus. But let it not exalt you, bear it Sir
With moderation, and pay what you owe for it.

Ladislaus. I understand thee Eubulus. I Will not now
Enquire particulars. Our delights deferred,
With reverence to the Temples, there we will tender
Our Souls devotions to his dread might,
Who edged our swords, and taught us how to fight.
Exeunt om^es.
The end of the first Act.
Actus secundi,
Scaena prima.
Enter Hilario, Corisca. Hilario. YOu like my speech?

Corisca. Yes, if you give it action
In the delivery.

Hilario. If? I pity you.
I have plaide the fool before, this is not the first time,
Nor shall be I hope the last.

Corisca. Nay I think so to.

Hila. And if I put her not out of her dumps with laughter,
I Will make her howl for anger.

Corisca. Not too much
Of that good fellow Hilario. Our sad Lady
Has drank too often of that bitter cup,
A pleasant one must restore her. With what patience
Would she endure to hear of the death of my Lord,
That merely out of doubt he may miscary
Afflicts her self thus?

Hilario. Vm, it is a question
A widow only can resolve. There be some
That in their husbands sicknesses have wep'd
Their pottle of tears a day: but being once certain
At midnight he was dead, have in the morning
Dried up their handkerchers, and thought no more on it.

Corisca. Tush, she is none of that race, if her sorrow
Be not true and perfect, I against my sex
Will take my oath woman nere wep'd in earnest.
She has made her self a prisoner to her chamber,
Dark as a dungeon, in which no beam
Of comfort enters. She admits no visits;
Eats little, and her nightly music is
Of sighs and groans tuned to such harmony
Of feeling grief, that I against my nature
Am made one of the consort. This hour only
She takes the air, a custom every day
She sollemnly observes, with greedy hopes
From some that pass by to receive assurance
Of the success, and safety of her Lord:
Now if that your device will take

Hilario. Nere fear it:
I am provided cap a pe, and have
My properties in readiness.

Sop^i^ within. Bring my veil there.

Corisca. Be gone, I hear her coming.

Hilario. If I do not
Appear, and what is more, appear perfect, hiss me.
Exit Hilario.
Enter Sophia. Sophia. I was flattered once I was a Star, but now
Turned a prodig^ous meteor, and like one
Hang in the air between my hopes, and fears,
And every hour the little stuff burnt out
That yields a waning ^ight to dying comfort,
I do expect my fall and certain ruin.
In wretched things more wretched is delay,
And hope a parasite to me, being vnmasqu'd
Appears more horrid then despair, and my
Distraction worse then madness: even my prayers
When wi^h most zeal sent upward, are pulled down,
With st^ong imaginary doubts and fears,
And in their sudden precipice orewhelme me.
Dreams, and phantastic! evisions walk the round
About my widdowed bed, and every slumber
Broken with loud alarms: can these be then
But sad presages girl?

Corisca. You make 'em so,
And antedate a loss shall never fall on you.
Such pure affection, such mutual love,
A bed, and vndefil'd on either part,
A ho^^^ without con^ention, in two bodies
One will, and Soul like to the rod of concord,
Kissi^g each other, cannot be short lived
Or end in barrenness: if all these dear Madam
(Sweet in your sadness) should produce no fruit,
Or leave the age no models of your selves,
To witness to poster^y what you were
Succeeding times frighted with the example
B^t hearing of your story, would instruct
Their ^aire^t issue to meece sensually,
Like other crea^ures, and for bea^e to raise
True love, or Himen Altars.

Sophia. O Corisca,
I know thy reasons are like to thy wishes,
And they are built upon a weak foundation,
To raise me comfort. Ten long days are past,
Ten long days my Corisca, since my Lord
Embarked himse^fe upon a Sea of danger,
In his dear care of me. And if his life
Had not been shipwrack'd on the rock of war,
His tenderness of me (knowing how much
I languish for his absence) had provided
Some trusty friend from wohm I might receive
Assurance of his safety.

Corisca. Ill news Madam,
Are swallow-wing'd, but what is good walks on crutches:
With patience expect it, and ere long
No doubt you shall hear from him.

A sowgelders horn blown. A Post. Sophia. Ha! What Is that?

Corisca. The fool has got a sowgelders horn
As I take it Madam.

Sophia. It makes this way still,
Nearer and nearer.

Corisca. From the Camp I hope.

Enter Hilario, with a long white hair and beard, in an anticke armor, one
with a horn before him. Sophia. The messenger appears, and in strange armor.
Heaven if it be thy will!

Hilario. It is no boot
To strive, our horses tired let us walk on foot,
And that the Castle which is very near us,
To give us entertainment may soon hear us,
Blow lustily my Lad, and drawing nigh a,
Ask for a Lady which is clep'd Sophia.

Corisca. He names you Madam.

Hilario. For to her I bring,
Thus clad in in arms, news of a pretty thing,
By name Mathias.

Sophia. From my Lord? O Sir,
I am Sophia, that Mathias wife.
So may Mars favor you in all your battles,
As you with speed unload me of the burden
I labor under, till I am confirmed
Both where, and how you left him.

Hilario. If thou art
As I believe, the pigs-ney of his heart,
Know he is in health, and what is more full of glee,
And so much I was willed to say to thee.

Sophia. Have you no letters from him?

Hilario. No more words.
In the Camp we use no pens, but write with swords
Yet as I am inioyn'd, by word of mouth
I will proclaim his deeds from North to South.
But tremble not while I relate the wonder,
Though my eyes like lightning shine, and my voice thunder.

Sophia. This is some counterfeit bragart.

Corisca. Hear him Madam.

Hila. The Reere marched first, which followed by the Van,
And winged with the Battalia, no man
Durst stay to shift a shirt or louze himself;
Yet ere the armies joined, that hopeful el^e,
Thy dear my dainty duckling, bold Mathias
Ad^anc'd, and star'd like Hercules or Golias.
A hundred thousand Turks, it is no vaunt,
A^^ai^'d him, every one a Termagaunt,
But what did he then? with his keen edge spear
He cut, and Carbonadode'em, here, and there,
Lay legs and arms, and as it is said truly
Of Beuis, some he quartered all in three.

Sophia. This is ridiculous.

Hilario. I must take breath
Then like a Nightingale i will sing his death;

Sophia. His death?

Hilario. I am out.

Corisca. Recover dunder-head.

Hilario. How he escaped I should have sung, not did
For, though a knight, when I said so I lide
Weary he was, and scarce could stand upright
And looking round for some courageous Knight
To reskue him, as one perplexed in woe
He called to me, help, help Hilario,
My valiant servant help.

Corisca. He has spoyld all.

Sophia. Are you the man of arms then? i will make bold
To take of your martial beard, you had fools hair
Enough without it. Slave, how durst thou make
Thy sport of what concerns me more then life,
In such an anticke fashion? am I grown
Contemptible to those I feed? you mignion
Had a hand in it to, as it appears,
Your petticote serves for bases to this warrior.

Corisca. We did it for your mirth.

Hilario. For my self I hope,
I have spoke like a soldier.

Sophia. Hence you rascal.
I never but with reverence name my Lord
And can I here it by thy tongue prophain'd
And not correct thy folly? but you are
Transformed, and turned Knight ^errant, take your course
And wander where you please, for here I vow
By my Lords life (an oath I will not break)
Till his return, or certainty of his safety,
My doors are shut against thee.
Exit Sophia.
Corisca. You have made
A fine piece of work on it: how do you like the quality?
You had a foolish i^ch to be an actor,
And may strowle where you please.

Hilario. Will you buy my share?

Corisca. No certainly, I fear I have already
Too much of mine own, I Will only as a damsel
(As the books say) thus far help to disarme you,
And so dear Don Quixote taking my leave,
I leave you to your fortune.
Exit Corisca.
Hilario. Have I swear
My brains out for this quaint and rare invention,
And am I thus rewarded? I could turn?
Tragoedian, and rore now, but that I fear
'T would get me too great a stomach having no meat
To pacify Colon, what will become of me?
I cannot beg in armor, and steal I dare not:
My end must be to stand in a corn field
And fright away the crows for bread, and cheese,
Or find some hollow tree in the high way,
And there until my Lord return sell switches
No more Hilario, but Dolorio now.
I Will weep my eyes out, and be blind of purpose
To move compassion, and so I vanish,
Exit Hilario.
Actus secundi Scaena secunda.
Enter Eubulus, Vbaldo, Ricardo, and others. Eubulus. Are the gentlemen sent
before as it was ordered
By the Kings direction to entertain
The General?

Ricardo. Long since, they by this have met him,
And given him the beinvenue.

Eubulus. I hope I need not
Instruct you in your parts.

Vbaldo. How! us my Lord!
Fear not, we know our distances and degrees
To the very inch where we are to salute him.

Ricardo. The state were miserable if the Court had none
Of her own breed, familiar with all garbes.
Gracious in England, Italy, Spain or France,
With form, and punctuallity to receive
Sranger Ambassadors. For the General
He Is a mere native, and it matters not
Which way we do accost him.

Vbaldo. It Is great pity
That such as sit at the helm provide no better
For the tiraning up of the Gentry. In my judgment
An Academie erected, with large pensions
To such as in a table could set down
The congecs, cringes, postures, methods, phrase,
Proper to every Nation.

Ricardo. O it were
An admirable piece of work!

Vbaldo. And yet rich fools
Throw away their charity on Hospitals
For beggars, and lame soldiers, and nere study
The due rega d^o complement and court-ship,
Matters of more import, and are indeed
The glories of a Monarchy.

Eubulus. These no doubt
Are state, points, gallants, I confess, but sure,
Our court needs no aids this way, since it is
A school of nothing else: there are some of you
Whom I for bear to name, whose coining heads
Are the mints of all new fashions, that have done
More hurt to the Kingdom by superfluous bravery
Which the foo^ish gentry imitate then a war
Or a long famine, all the treasure by
This foul excess, is got into the merchants,
Embroiderers, silkemans, Iewellers, Tailors hand,
And the third part of the land to, the nobility
Engrossing titles only.

Ricardo. My lord you are bitter.

Enter a servant. a trumpet, Ser. the General is alighted, and now entered.

Ricardo. Were he ten Generals I am prepared
And know what I will do.

Eubulus. Pray you what Ricardo?

Ricardo. I Will fight at complement with him.

Vbaldo. I Will charge home to.

Eubulus. And that's a desperate service if you come off well.

Enter Ferdinand, Mathias, Baptista, two captains. Ferdinand. Captain command
the officers to keep
The soldier as he marched in rank and file
Till they hear farther from me.

Eubulus. Here Is one speaks
In another keye, this is no canting language
Taught in your Academie.

Ferdinand. Nay I will present you
To the King my self.

Mathias. A grace beyond my merit,

Ferdinand. You vndervalew what I cannot set
Too high a price on,

Eubulus. With a friends true heart
I gratulate your return.

Ferdinando. Next to the favor
Of the great King I am happy in your friendship:

Vbaldo. By courtship, course on both sides,

Ferdinando. pray you receive
This stranger to your knowledge, on my credit
At all parts he deserves it.

Eubulus. Your report
Is a strong assurance to me, sir most welcome

Mathias. This said by you, the reverence of your age
Commands me to believe it.

Ricardo. this was pretty.
But second me now, I cannot stoop too low
To do your excellence that due observance
Your fortune claims.

Eubulus. He nere thinks on his virtue.

Ricardo. For being, as you are, the soul of soldiers,
And bulwark of Bellona,

Vbaldo. The protection
Both of the court and King.

Ricardo. and the sole mignion
Of mighty Mars

Vbaldo. One that with justice may
Increase the number of the worthies.

Eubulus. hoye day.

Ricardo. It being impossible in my arms to circle
Such giant worth.

Vbaldo. At distance we presume
To kiss your honored gauntlet.

Eubulus. What reply now
Can he make to this ^opperie?

Ferdinand. You have said
Gallants, so much, and hitherto done so little,
That't ill I learn to speak, and you to do
I must take time to thank you.

Eubulus. As I live
Answered as I could wish. How the fops gap^ now!

Ricardo. This was harsh, and scuruie.

Vbaldo. We will be revenged
When he comes to court the ladies, and laugh at him.

Eubulus. Nay do your offices gentlemen, and conduct
The General to the presence.

Ricardo. Keep your order.

Vbaldo. Make way for the General.

Exeunt omnes praeter Eubulum. Eubulus. What wise man
That with judicious eyes looks one a soldier
B^t must confess that fortunes swinge is more
Ore that profession, then all kinds else
Of life pursued by man, they in a state
Are but as chirurgions to wounded men
Even desperate in their hopes, while pain and anguish
Make them blaspheme, and call in vain for death;
Their wives and children kiss the chirurgions knees
Promise him mountains, if his saning hand
Restore the tortured wretch to former strength.
But when grimme death by AEsculapius art
Is frighted from the house, and health appears
In sanguin colors on the sick man's face,
All is forgot, and asking his reward
He Is paid with curses, often receaues wounds
From him whose wounds he curde, so soldiers
Though of more worth and use, meet the same fate,
As it is too apparent. I have observed
In one hue.
When horrid Mars the touch of whose rough hand
With Palsies shakes a kingdom, has put on
His dreadful Helmet, and with terror fills
The place where helike an unwelcome guest
Resolve to revel, how the Lords of her, like
The tradesman, merchant, and litigious pleader
(And such like Scarabes bred'ith dung of peace)
In hope of their protection humbly offer
Their daughters to their beds, heirs to their service,
And wash with tears, their sweat their dust, their scars,
But when those clouds of war that menaced
A bloody del^ge to the aff^ighted state,
A^e by their breath dispersed, and over blown,
And famine, blood, and death Bellona's pages
Whipped from the quiet continent to Thrace
Soldiers, that like the foolish hedge sparrow
To their own ruin hatch this Cucckow peace,
Are straight thought burdensome, Since want of means
Growing from want of action breeds contempt,
And that the worst of ills fall to their lot
Their service with the danger soon forgot.

Enter a servant. Ser. The Queen, my Lord, has made choice of this roome^
To see the masque.

Eubulus. I Will be looker on
My dancing days are past.

Loud music as they pass, a song in the praise of war, Vbaldo, Ricardo,
Ladislaus. Ferdin. and Honoriu, Mathias, Silua, Acanthe, Baptista, and others.
Ladislaus. This courtesy
To a stranger My Honoria, keep fair rank
With all your rarities, after your travail
Look on our court delights, but first from your
Relation, with erected ears i will hear
The music of your war which must be sweet
Ending in victory.

Ferdinand Not to trouble
Your majesty's with description of a battle
To full of horror for the place, and to
Avoid perticulers which I should deliver
I must trench longer on your patience then
My manner will gieue way to, in a word sir
It was well fought on both sides, and almost
With equal fortune, it continuing doubtful
Upon whose tents plumed victory would take
Her glorious stands, impatient of delay
With the flower of our prime gentlemen I charged
Their maine Bartalia, and with their assistance
Brake in, but when I was almost assured
That they were routed, by a Stratagem
Of the subtle Turk, who opening his gross body,
And ralyng up his troops on either side,
I found my self so far engaged (for I
Must not conceal my errors) that I knew not
Which way with honor to come off.

Eubulus. I like
A General that tells his faults, and is not
Ambitious to ingrosse unto himself
All honor as some have, in which with justice
They could not claim a share.

Ferdinand. Being thus hemmed in
Their Cimitars raged among us, and my horse
Killed under me, I every minute looked for
An honorable end, and that was all
My hope could fashion to me, circl'd thus
With death and horror, as one sent from heaven
This man of men with some choice horse that fo^lowed
His brave example, did pursue the tract
His sword cut for'em, and but that I see him,
Already blush to hear what he being present,
I know would wish unspoken, I should say sir
By what he did, we bouldly may believe
All that is writ of Hector.

Mathias. General
Pray spare these strange Hyperboles.

Eubulus. Do not blush
To hear a truth, here are a pair of Mon^iuers
Had they been in your place would have run away
And nere changed countenance.

Vbaldo. We have your good word still.

Eubulus. And shall while you deserve it.

Ladislaus. Silence, on.

Ferdinand. He as I said, like dreadful lightning thrown^
From Jupiters shield dispersd the armed Gire
With which I was enuirond horse and man,
Shruncke under his strong arm more with his looks
Frighted, the valiant fled with which encouraged
My soldiers (like young Eglets praying under
The wings of their fierce dame) as if from him
They took both spirit, and fire bravely came on.
By him I was remounted, and inspired
Wiih trebble courage, and such as fled before
Bouldly made head again, and to confirm 'em
It suddenly was apparent, that the fortune
Of the day was ours, each soldier and commander
Performd his part, but this was the great wheel
By which the lesser moved, and all rewards
And signs of honor, as the Ciuicke garland,
The murall wreath, the enemies prime horse,
With the Generals sword, and armor (the old honors
With which the Roman crown their several leaders)
To him alone are proper.

Ladislaus. And they shall
Deservedly fall on him, sit, it is our pleasure,

Ferdinand. Which I must serve, not argue,

Honoria. You are a stranger,
But in your service for the King, a native.
And though a free Queen, I am bound in duty
To cherish virtue wheresoere I find it:
This place is yours.

Mathias. It were presumption in ^e
To sit so near you.

Honoria. Not having our warrant

Ladislaus. Let the masquers enter by the preparation
It Is a French brawle, an apish imitation
Of what you really perform in battle,
And Pallas bound up in a little volume

Apollo with his lute attending on her
Serve for the induction.

Song and dance: Enter the two Boys, one with his lute, the other like Pallas,
A song in the praise of soldiers, especially being victorious: the song ended
the King goes on. Song by Pallas. Though we contemplate to express
The glory of your happiness,
That by your powerful arm have binne
So true a victor, that no sin
Could ever taint you with a blame
To lessen your deserved fame.
Or though we contend to set
Your worth in the full height, or get
C^lestiall singers (^rownd with bays
With florishes to dress your praise)
You know your conquest, but your story
Lives in your triumphant glory.
Ladislaus. Our thanks to all
To the banquet that's prepared to entertaine'em,
What would my best Honoria?

Honoria. May it please
My King that I who by his suffrage ever
Have had power to command, may now entreat
An honor from him.

Ladislaus. Why should you desire
What is your own, what ere it be you are
The mistress of it.

Honoria. I am happy in
Your grant: my suit sir is, that your commanders
Especially this stranger, may as I
In my discretion shall think good, receive
What Is due to their deserts.

Ladislaus. What you determine
Shall know no alteration.

Eubulus. The soldier
Is like to have good usage when he depends
Upon her pleasure? are all the men so bad
That to give satisfaction we must
A woman threasourer, heaven help all.

Honoria. With you sir
I will begin, and as in my esteem
You are most eminent expect to have,
What Is fit for me to give, and you to take;
The favor in the quick dispatch being double
Go fetch my casket, and with speed.

Exit Acanthe. Eubulus. The Kingdom
Is very bare of money: when rewards
Issue from the Queens jewel ^ouse, give him gold
And store, no question the gentleman wants it.
Good Madam what shall he do with a hoop ring,
And a spark of diamond in it, though you took it
Enter Acanthe. For the greater honor from your majesty's finger,
'Twill not increase the value. He must purchase
Rich suites, the gay comparison of court-shipp,
Revel, and feast, which the war ended is
A soldiers glory, and it is fit that way
Your bounty should provide for him

Honoria. You are ^ude,
And by your narrow thoughts proportion mine.
What I will do now, shall be worth the envy
Of Cleopatra open it, see here
Honoria descend^ The Lapidares Idol gold is tr^sh
And a poor salarie fit for grooms, wear these
As studded stars in your armor, and make the Sun
Look dim with jealousy of a greater light
Then his beams guild the day with: when it is
Exposed to view, call it Honorias gift,
The Queen Honorias gift that loves a soulder,
And to give ornament, and luster to him
Parts freely with her own, yet not to take
From the magnificence of the King, I will
Dispense his bounty to but as a page
To wait on mine, for other tosses take
A hundred thousand crowns, your hand dear sir,
And this shall be thy warrant.

Takes of the Kings signs. Eubulus. I perceive
I was cheated in this woman now she is
I the giruing vein ^o soldiers let her be pro^d
And the King dote, so she go on, I ca^e not

Honoria. This done, our pleasure is that all arrearages
Be paid into the Captains, and their troops
With a large donatiue to increase their Zeal
For the service of the kingdom.

Eubulus. Better still,
Let men of arms be vsd thus, if they do not
Charge desperately upon the Cannons mouth
Though the Devil ror'd, and fight like dragons, hang me.
Now they may drink sack, but small beer, with a pasport
To beg with as they travail, and no money,
Turns their red blood to buttermilke.

Honoria. Are you pleased sir
With what I have done?

Ladislaus Yes, and thus confirm it,
With this addition of mine own, you have sir
From our loved Queen received some recompense
For your life hazarded in the late action,
And that we may follow her great example
In cherishing valor without limit, ask
What you from us can wish

Mathias. If it be true,
Dread sir as it is affirmd, that every soyl^
Where he is well, is to a valiant man
His natural country, reason may assure me
I should fix here, where blessings beyond hope
From you the spring like rivers flow unto me.
If wealth were my ambition, by the Queen
I am made rich already, to the amazment
Of all that see, or shall hereafter read
The story of her bounty, if to spend
The remnant of my life in deeds of arms
No region is more fertile of good knights
from whom my knowledge that way may be beter^
Then this your war like Hungary; if favor,
Or grace in court could take (...) by your grant
Far far beyond my merit, I may make
In yours a free election, but alas sir
I am not mine own, but by my destiny
(Which I cannot ^esis^) forced to prefer
My countries smoke before the g^orious fire
With which your bounties warm me all I ask sir
Though I cannot be ignorant it must relish
Of foul ingratitud is your gracious license
For my departure.

Ladislaus. Whether?

Mathias. To my own home (...)
(...) own poor home, which will (...) my return^
Grow rich by your magnificence, I am here
But a body without a ^oule, and till I find it
In the embraces of my constant wife, and to set of that constance
In her beauty and matchless excellencies without a rival
I am but half my self.

Honoria. And is she then
So chaste, and fair as you infer?

Mathias. O Madam
Thoug it must argue weakness in a rich man
To show his gold before an armed thief,
And I in praising of my wife, but seed,
The fire of lust in others to attempt her,
Such is my full sayld confidence in her virtue
Though in my absence She were now beseeg'd
By a strong army of lascivious wooers,
And every one more expert in his art,
Then those that tempted chaste Penelope,
Though they raisd batteries by Prodigal gifts,
By admorous letters, vows made for her service
With all the Engines wanton appetite
Could mo^nt to shake the fortress of her honor,
Here, he^re is my assurance she ho^des out
kiss the picture. And is impregnable,

Honoria. What Is that?

Mathias. Her fair figure.

Ladislaus. As I live an excellent face!

Honoria. You have seen a better.

Ladislaus. I ever except yours, nay frown not sweetest,
The Cyprian Queen compard to you, in my
Opinion is a Negro, as you orderd
I Will see the soldier paid, and in my absence
Pray you use your powerful arguments to stay
This gentleman in our service.

Honoria. I will do
My parts.

Ladislaus. On to the camp.

Exeunt Ladislaus, Ferdinand, Eubulus, Baptista, Captains. Honoria. I am full
of thoughts.
And something there is here I must give for me to
Though yet an Embrion, you Signiers
Have no business with the soldier, as I take it,
You are for other warfare, quit the place,
But be within call.

Ricardo. Employment on my life boy.

Vbaldo. If it lie in our road we are made forever.

Exeunt Vbaldo, Ricardo Honoria. You may perceive the King is no way tainted
With the disease of jealousy, since he leaves me
Thus private with you.

Mathias. It were in him Madam
A sin unpardonable to distrust such pureness,
Though I were an Adonis.

Honoria. I presume
He neither does, nor dares: and yet the story
Delivered of you by the General
With your Herc'nk courage (which sinckes deeply
Into a knowing woman's heart) besides
Your promising presence might beget some scruple,
In a meaner man, but more of this hereafter
I Will take another Theme now and conjure you
By the honors you have woone, and by the love
Sacred to your dear wife, to answer truly
To what I shall demand.

Mathias. You need not use
Charms to this purpose Madam.

Honoria. Tell me then
Being your self assured it is not in man
To ^ully with one sport^th'immaculate whitenes
Of your wifes honor, if you have not since
The Gordion of your love was tide by marriage
Played false with her?

Mathias. By the hopes of mercy never.

Honoria. It may be, not frequenting the converse
Of handsome ladies, you were never tempted
And so your faith's untried yet.

Mathias. Surely Madam,
I am no woman hater, I have been,
Received to the society of the best,
And fairest of our climate, and have met wi^h
No common entertainment, yet nere felt
The least heat that way,

Honoria. Strange; and do you think still
The earth can show no beauty that can drench
In Lethe all remembrance of the favor
Your now bear to your own?

Mathias. Nature must find out
Some other mold to fashon a new creature
^ airer then her Pandora, ere I prove
Guilty or in my wishes, or my thought^,
To my Sophia.

Honoria. Sir consider better
Not one in our whole sex?

Mathias. I am constant t^
My resolution.

Honoria. But dare you stand
The oposition, and bind your self
By oath for the performance?

Mathias. My faith else
Had but a weak foundation.

Honoria. I take hold
Upon your promise, and enjoy ^e your stay
For one month here

Mathias. I am caught.

Honoria. And if I do not
Produce a lady in that time that shall
Make you confess your error I submit
My self to any penualtie you shall please
TO impose upon me, in the mean space write
To your chaste wife, acquainte her with your fortune
The jewels that were mine you may send to her,
For better confirmation, I Will provide you
Of trusty messengers, but how far distant is she?

Mathias. A days hard riding.

Honoria. The^ ^no retiring
^ll bind you to your word.

Mathias. Well since there is,
No^ way to (...) I will stand the hazard
And instantly make r^ady my dispatch
'Till then, (...) your majesty.
Exit Mathias.
Honoria. How I bu^st
With (...) there lives besides my self
O^^ ^aire, ^^d loyal woman, ^twas the and
Of my ambition ^o be recorded
The only wonder of the age, and shall ^
Give way (...) a competitor? nay more
To add to my aff^i^tion ^the assurances
Tha^ I placed in my beauty have decea^d ^e
I thought one amorous glance of mine could bring
All heart^ (...) ^^bjection, but this stranger
(...) ^oc^^s co^temnes me, but I cannot
Sit down ^o with my honor, I will gai^^
A double victory by working him
To my desire, and tainte her in her honor
Or loose my self, I have read that (...)
Is useful, to suplant her i will employ
With any cost Vbaldo, and Ricardo
Two noted courtiers of approved cunning
In all the windings of lusts labirinthe,
And in corrupting him I will ^^r go
(...) Poppaea, if he shut his ea^^s^
Against my S^ren notes, ^e boldly ^wea^e
(...) lives again, or that I have found
A frozen Cynike, cold in spite of all
Allurements, one, whom beauty cannon mo^e
Nor softest blandishments (...) to ^oue.
Exi^ H^^oria^
The end of the second Act.
Actus tertij,
Scaena prima.
Enter Hilario. Thin, Thin, provision, I am dieted
Like one set to watch hawks, and to keep me waking
My c^oaking guts make a perpetual larum,
Here I stand centinell, and though I fright
Beggars from my ladies gate, in hope to have
A greater share I find my commons mend not.
I looked this morning in my glass the river
And there appeard a fish called a poor John
Cut with a lenten face in my own likeness,
And it seemd to speak and say goodmorrow cosen.
^o man comes this way but has a fling at me,
A Surgeon passing by asked at what rate,
I would sell my self, I answered for what use?
To make said he a liueing Anatomy
And set thee up in our hall, for thou art transparent
without dissection, and indeed he had reason,
^or I am scourd with this poor purge to nothing.
^hey say that hunger dwells in the camp, but till
My Lord returns, or certain tidings of him
He will not part with me, but sorrows dry
And I must drink howsoever.
Guide. That is her castle
Enter Vbaldo, and Ricardo, Guide. Upon my certain knowledge.

Vbaldo. Our horses held out
To my desire: I am a fire to be at it.

Ricardo. Take the iades for thy reward, before I part hence,
I hope to be better carried, give me the Cabinet.
So leave us now

Guide. Good fortune to you Gallants.
Exit Guide.
Vbaldo. Being joint Agents in a design of trust to
For the service of the Queen, and our own pleasure,
Let us proceed with judgment.

Ricardo. If I take not
This fort at the first assault, make mean Euenuche,
So I may have precedence.

Vbaldo. On no terms.
We are both to play one prize he that works best
IN the searching this mine shall carry it
Without contention.

Ricardo. Make you your aproaches
As I directed

Vbaldo. I need no instruction
I work not on your anuile, I Will give fire
With my own linstocke, if the powder be dancke
The Devil rend the touchhole. Who have we here?
What ^^elliton's this?

Ricardo. A ghost! or the image of famine!
Where do thou dwell?

Hilario. Dwell sir? my dwelling is
In The high way, that goodly house was once
My habitation, but I am banished.
And cannot be called home 'till news arrive
Of the good knight Mathias.

Ricardo. If that will
Restore thee thou art safe

Vbaldo. We come from him
With presents to his Lady.

Hilario. But are you sure
He is in health?

Ricardo. Never so well, conduct us
To the lady.

Hilario. Though a poor snake I will leap
Out of my ^kine for joy, break picher break,
And wallet late my cubbard ^ bequeath thee
To the next beggar, thou red herring swim
To the red sea again me thinckes I am already
Knuckle deep in the flesh potts, and though waking, dream^
Of wine and plenty.

Ricardo. What Is the misery
Of this strange passion?

Hilario. My belly gentlemen,
Will not give me leave to tell you, when I have brought you
To my ladies presence I am di^enchanted,
There you shall shall know all follow if I outstrip you
know I run for my belly.

Vbaldo. A mad fellow.

Exeunt. Astus tertij, Scaena secunda.
Enter Sophia Corisca. Sophia. Do not again delude me.

Corisca. If I do, send me a grasing with my fellow Hilario,
I stood as you commanded in the turret
Observing all that pas'd by, a and even now
I did diserne a pair of Caualiers
For such their outside spoke them with their guide
Dismounting from their horses, they said something
To our hungry Centinell that made him caper
And frish'ith air for joy, and to confirm this
See Madam they in view.

Enter Hilario, Vbaldo, Ricardo. Hilario. News from my Lord?
Tidings of joy, these are no counterfaites,
But Knights indeed, dear Madam sign my pardon
That I may feed again, and pick up my crumes
I have had a long fast of it,

Sophia. Eat, I forgive thee.

Hilario. O comfortable words; eat I forgive thee
And if in this I do not soon obey you
And ramne in to the purpose billet me again
IN the high way, butler and Cook be ready
For I enter like a tyrant.
Exit Hilario.
Vbaldo. Since mine eyes
Were never happy in so sweet an object,
Without eniury I presume you are
The lady of the house, and so salute you.

Ricardo. This letter with these jewels from your Lord
Warrant my boldness Madam.

Vbaldo. in being a servant
To such rare beauty you must needs deserve
This courtesy from a stranger.

Ricardo. You are still
Before hand with me, pretty one I descend
To take the height of your lip, and if I miss
In the altitude hereafter if you please
I will make use of my Jacobs staff,

Sophia having in the interime redd the letter and gend the Casket. Corisca.
These gentlemen
Have certainly had good breeding, as it appears
By their neat kissing, they hit me so bat on the lips
At the first sight.

Sophia. Heaven in thy mercy make me
Thy thankful handmaid for this boundles blessing
In thy goodness showered upon me.

Vbaldo. I do not like
This simple devotion in her it is seldom
Practisd among my mistresses.

Ricardo. Or mine
Would they kneel to I know not who for the possession
Of such inestimiable wealth before
They thanked the bringers of it? the poor lady
Does want instruction, but I Will be her tutor
And read her anothr lesson.

Sophia. If I have
Shown want of manners gentlemen in my shows
To pay the thanks I owe you for your travail
To do my Lord, and me (howere unworthy
Of such a benifit) this noble favor
Impute it in your elemencie to the excess
Of joy that over whelmed me.

Ricardo. She speaks well

Vbaldo. Polite, and courtly.

Sophia. And howere it may
Increase the offense to touble you with more
Demandes touching my Lord, before I have
Inu^ted you to rest, such as the coursenesse
Of my poor house can offer, pray you conuine
On my weak tenderness though I in^reate
To learn from you something he has it may be
In his letter left vnmention'd.

Ricardo. I can only
Give you assurance that he is in health,
Graced by the King, and Queen

Vbaldo. And in the court
With admira^ion looked on,

Ricardo. You must therefore
Put off these widows garments, and appear
Like to your self.

Vbaldo. And en^ertaine all pleasures
Your fortunes marks out for you.

Ricardo. There are other
Particular p^iuacies which on occasion
I will deliver to you.

Sophia. You oblige me
To your service ever.

Ricardo. Good! your service, mark that.

Sophia. In the mean time by your good acceptance make
My rusticke entertainment relish of
The curiousness of the court.

Vbaldo. Your looks sweet Madam
Cannot but make each dish a feast.

Sophia. It shall be
Such in the freedom of my will to please you.
I Will show you the way; this is to great an honor
From such brave ghests to me so mean an hostess.

Exeunt. Actus tertij, Scaena prima.
Enter Acanthe, two, four, or five with vizards. Acanthe. You know your
charge, give it action, and expect
Rewards beyond your hopes.

1. If we but eye'em,
They are ours I warrant you.

2. May we not ask why
We are put upon this?

Acanthe. Let that stop your mouth,
And learn more manners groom, it is upon the hour
In which they use to walk here, when you haue'em,
In your power, with violence carry them to the place
Where I appointed, there I will expect you,
Be bold, and careful.
Exit Acanthe.
Enter Mathias and Baptista. 1. These are they.

2. Are you sure?

1. Am I sure I am my self?

2. Cease on him strongly, If he have but meant
To draw his sword. it is ten to one we smart fort,
Take all advantages.

Mathias. I cannot guess
What her intents are, but her carriage was
As I but now related.

Baptista. Your assurance
In the constancy of your lady is the armor
That must defend you, whers the picture?

Mathias, Here.
And no way altered

Baptista. If she be not perfect,
There is no truth in art.

Mathias. By this I hope
She has received my letters.

Baptista. Without question
These courtiers are rank riders, when they are
To visit a handsome lady.

Mathias. Lend me your ear.
One piece of her entertainment will require
Your dearest priuacy.

1. Now they stand fair
Vpon'em.

Mathias. Villains.

1. Stop their mouths, we come not
To try your valures, kill him if he offer,
To open his mouth, we have you, it is in vain
To make resistance, mount 'em and a way.

Ex^^nt. Actus tertij, Scaena quarta.
Enter servants with lights, L^dislaus, Ferdinand, Eubulus. Ladislaus. It Is
late go to your rest, but do not envy
The happiness I draw near to.

Eubulus. If you enjoy it.
The moderate way the sport yields I confess
A pretty titillation, but to much often
will bring you on your knees, in my younger days
I was my self a gamster, and I found
By a sad experience, there is no such soker
As a younger spongie wise, she keeps a thousand
Hor sele^hes in her box, and the thieues will suck out
Both blood, and marrow, I feel a kind of crampe
In my joints when I think o'nt, but it may be Queene^
And such a Queen as yours is, has the art

Ferdinand. You take leave
To talk my Lord.

Ladislaus. He may since he can do nothing

Eubu. If you spend this way to much of your royal stock
Ere long we may be puefellowes.

Ladislaus. The door shut,
Knock gently, harder. So, here comes her woman,
Take of my gown.

Enter Acanthe. Ac^nthe. My Lord, the Queen by me
This night desires your pardon,

Ladislanus. How Acanthe!
I come by her appointment 'twas her grant
The motion was her own

Acanthe. It may be sir
But by her Doctors Since she is advised
For her health sake to forbear.

Eubulus. I do not like
This physical lechery, the old down right way
Is worth a thousand out.

Ladislanus. Prithee Acanthe.
Meditate for me.

Eubulus. O the fiends of hell
Would any man bribe his servant to make way
To his own wife, if this be the court state
Shame fall on such as use it.

Acanthe. By this jewel
This night I dare not move her, but to morrow
I will watch all occasion

Ladislaus. Take this
To be mindful of me

Exit Acanthe. Eubulus. Slight, I though a king
Might have took up any woman at the Kings Price
And must he buy his own at a deerer rate
Then a stranger in a brothell?

Ladislaus. What is that
You mutter sir?

Eubulus. No treason to your honor
I Will speak it out though it anger you, if you pay for
Your lawful pleasure in some kind great sir
What do you make the Queen, cannot you clicket
Without a fe^? or when she has a suit for you to grant?

Ferdinando. O hold sir.

Ladislaus. Off with his head.

Eubu. Do when you please, you but blow out a taper
That would light your understanding, and in care often
Is burnt down to the socket, be as you are sir
An absolute monarch, it did show more Kinglike
In those libidino^s Caesar's that compeld
Matrous, and virgins of all ranks to bow
Unto their ratenous lusts, and did admit
Of more excuse then I can urge for you,
Tha^ slave your self to the imperious humor
Of a proud beauty.

Ladislaus. Out of my sight.

E^bulus. I will sir
Gi^e way to your furious passion, but when reason
Has got the better of it I much hope
The counsel that offends now, will deserve
Your royal thanks, tranquillity of mind
Stay with you sir. I do begin to doubt
There Is something more in the Queens strangnes, then
Is yet disclosd, and i will find it out
Or loose my self in the search.

Ferdinand. Sure He is honest,
And from your infancy has truly served you
Let that plead for him and impute this harshnes
To the frowardnes of his age.

Ladislaus. I am much troubled
And do begin to stagger, Ferdinand good night
To morrow visit us, back to our own lodgings.

Exeunt. Actus tertij, Scaena quinta.
Enter Acanthe, the vizarded servants, Mathias, Baptista. Acanthe. You have
done bravely, lock this in that room,
There let him ruminate, I Will anon vnhood him.
they carry of Baptista The other must stay here, as soon as I
Have quit the p^ace give him the liberty,
And use of his eyes, that done disperse your selves
As privately as you can, but on your lives
No word of what has pas'd.
Exit Acanthe.
1. If I do, sell
My tongue to a tripe wife, come unbind his arms,
You are now at your own disposure and howeuer
We used you roughly, I hope you will find here
Such entertainment, as will give you cause
To thank us for the service, and so I leave you,

Exeunt servants. Mathias. If I am in a prison it is a neat one,
What O edipus can resolve this riddle? Ha!
I never gave just cause to any man
Basely to plot against my life, but what is
Become of my true friend? for him I suffer
More then my self.

Acanthe. Remone tha^ idlefeare
He Is safe as you are.

Mathias. Whoso'ere thou art
For him I thank thee, I cannot imagine
Where I should be, though I have read the table
Or errant knighthood, stuffed, with the relations
Of magical enchantments, yet I am not
So sottishly credulous, to believe the devil
Has that way power, Ha? music!

Music above, a song of pleasure. The blushing rose and purple flower,
Let grow to long are soonest blasted.
Dainty fruits, though sweet, will sower
And rot in ripenes, left untasted.
Yet here is one more sweet then these
The more you taste, the more she will please.
Beauty thotgh enclosed with ice,
Is A shadow chaste as rare,
Then how much those sweetes in^ice.
That have issue full as fair,
Earth cannot yield from all her powers
One equal, for Dame Venus ^owers.
A song too, certainly be it he, or she
That owes this voice, it has not been acquainted
With much affliction, whosoere you are
That do inhabit here, if you have bodies
And are not mere aeriall forms appear
Enter Honoria. And make me know your end with me, most strange
What have I coiur'd up? sure if this be,
A spirit it is no damned one what a shapes here;
Then with what majesty it moves. If Inno
Were now to keep her state among the Gods,
And Her^ules to be made again her ghest
She could not put on a more glorious habit
Though her handmaid Iris lent her va^ious colors
Or ou^d Oceanus rauishd from the deep
All jewels shipwrack'd in it, as you have
Thus far made known your self, if that your face
Have not too much divinity about it
For mortal eyes to gaze on, perfect what
You have begun with wonder, and amazement
To my ashonish'd senses, how! the Queen!
kneeles she pulls of her masque. Honoria. Rise sir, and hear my reasons in
defense
Of the rape for so you may conceive, which I
By my instruments made upon you, you perhaps
May think, what you have suffered for my lust
Is a common practice with me, but I call
Those ever shining lamps, and their great maker
As witnesses of my inocence, I nere looked on
A man but your best self, on whom I ever
(Except the King) vouchsafed an eye of favor

Mathias. The King indeed, and only such a King
Deserves your rarities Madam, and but he
'Twere giant like ambition in any
In his wishes only to presume to taste
The nectar of your kisses; or to feed
His appetite with that ambrosia, due
And proper to a prince, and what bind mores
A lawful husband, for my self great Queen
I am a thing obscure, di^furnish'd of
All merit, that can raise me higher then
In my most humble thankefulnes for your bounty
To hazard my life for you, and that way
I am most ambitious.

Honoria. I desire no more
Then what you promise, if you dare expose
Your life as you profess to do me service,
How can it better be imployd, then in
Preserving mine? which only you can do.
And must do with the danger of your own.
A desperate danger to, if private men
Can brook no riuals in what they affect
But to the death pursue such as invade
What law makes their inheritance, the King
To whom you know I am deerer then his crown
His health his eyes his after-hopes with all
His present blessings must fall on that man
L^ke dreadful lightning that is won by prayers,
Threats, or rewards to stain his bed, or make
His hoped for issue doubtful.

Mathias. If you aim
At what I more then fear you do, the reasons
Which you deliver should in judgment rather
Deter me, then invite a grant, with my
Assured ruin.

Honoria. True if that you were
Of a cold temper one whom doubt, or fear,
In the most horrid forms they could put on
Might teach to be ungrateful, your denial
To me, that have deserved so much, is more
If it can have addition.

Mathias. I know not
What your commandes are.

Honoria. Have you fought so well
Among armi'd men, yet cannot guess what lists
You are to enter when you are in private
With a willingly lady, one, that to inioye
Your company this night denied the King
Access, to what is his own, if you will press me
To speak in playner language.

Mathias. Pray you forbear,
I would I did not understand too much
Already, by your words I am instructed
To credit that, which not confirmd by you,
Had bred suspicion in me of untruth
Though an Angel had affirmed it, but suppose
That cloyd with happiness (which is ever builte
On virtuous chastity, in the wantonness
O^ appetite, you desire to make trial
Of the false delights proposed by vicious lust:
Among ten thousand every way moreable
And ap^er to be wrought on, such as owe you
Obedience being your subjects, why should you
Make choice of me a stranger?

Honoria. Though yet reason
Was nere admitted in the court of love,
I Will yield you one unanswerable, as I urged
In our last private conference, you have
A pretty promising presence, but there are
Many in limbs, and feature who may take
That way the right hand file of you, besides
Your May of youth is pas'd, and the blood spent
By wounds, though bravely taken, render you
Disabld for loves service, and that valor
Se^ off with better fortune, which it may be
Swells you above your bounds 'is not the hook
That has caught me good sir I need no champion
With his sword to guard my honor, or my beauty,
In both I can defend my self, and live
My own protection.

Mathias. If these advocates
The best that can plead for me, have no power?
What can you find in me else, that may tempt you
With irrecouerable loss unto your self
To be a gayner from me?

Honoria. You have Sir
A jewel of such matchless worth and luster,
As does disdain comparison, and darkens
All that is rare in other men, and that
I must or win, or lessen.

Mathias. You heap more
Amazement on me, what am I possessed of
That you can covet? make me understand it,
If it have a name?

Honoria. Yes an imagined one,
But is in substance nothing, being a garment
Worn out of fashion, and long since given ore
By the court and country, it is your loyalty,
And constancy to your wife, it is that I dote on,
And does deserve my envy, and that jewel
Or by fair play, or foul, I must win from you.

Mathias. These are mere contraries, if you love me Madam
For my constancy, why seek yo to destroy it?
In my keeping it preserve me worth your favor,
Or if it be a jewel of that value,
As you with labored rhetoric would perswad me
What can you stake against it?

Honoria. A Queens fame,
And equal honor.

Mathias. So whoeuer wins
Both shall be loosers.

Honoria. That is that I aim at
Yet on the by I lay my youth, my beauty
This moist palm, this soft lip, and those delights
Darkness should only judge of, do you find'em
Infectious in the trial, that you start
As frighted with their touch?

Mathias. Is it in man
To resist such strong temptations?

Honoria. He begins
To waver.

Mathias. Madam as you are gracious
Grant this short nights deliberation to me,
And with the rising sum from me you shall
Receive full satisfaction.

Honoria. Though extremes
Hate all delay, I will deny you nothing,
This key will bring you to your friend you are safe both
And all things useful that could be prepared
For one I love and honor wait upon you,
Take counsel of your pillow, such a fortune
(As with affections swiftest wings flies to you
Will not be often tendered.
Exit Honoria.
Mathias. How my blood
Rebels! I now could call her back and yet
There Is something stays me, if the King had tenderd
Such favors to my wife it is to be doubted
They had not been refused, but being a man
I should not yield first, or prove an example
For her defense of fraylty, by this sans question
She Is tempted too, and here I may examine
look on the picture. How she holds out, she is still the same, the same
Pure Christa ^ rock of chastity perish all
Allurements that may alter me, the snow
Of her sweet coldness, has extinguished quite
The fire that but even now began to flame!
And I by her confirmed, rewards, nor titles,
Nor certain death from the refused Queen
Shall shake my faith, since I resolve to be
Loyal to her, as she is true to me.
Exit Mathias.
Actus tertij, Sc^na secunda.
Enter Vbaldo, Ricardo. Vbaldo. What we spoke on the voley begins to work,
We have laid a good foundation

Ricardo. Build it up
Or else it is nothing, you have by lot the honor
Of the first assault, but as it is conditioned
Observe the time proportioned, I Will not part with
My share in the atchieuement, when I whistle,
Or hemme fall off.

Enter Sophia. Vbaldo. She comes Stand by, I Will watch
My opportunity.

Sophia. I find my self
Strangely distracted with the various stories
Now we^l, now ill, then boubtfully by my ghests
Delivered of my Lord: and like poor beggars
That in their dreams find treasure, by reflection
Of a wounded fancy, make it questionable
Whither they sleep, or not; yet teickl'd with
Such a phantasticke hope of happiness,
Wish they may never wake in some such measure,
Incredulous of what I see, and touch
As 'twere a fading apparition, I
Am still perplexed, and troubled, and when most
Confirmed it is true a curious jealousy
To be assured, by what means, and from whom
Such a mass of wealth, was first deserved, then gotten
Cunningly steal into me, I have practiced
For my certain resolution with these courtiers
Promising private conference to either,
And at this hour, if in search of the truth
I hear or say more, then becomes my virtue
For give me my Mathias.

Vbaldo. Now I make in,
Maddam as you commanded I attend
Your pleasure.

Sophia. I must thank you for the favor.

Vbaldo. I am no ghostly father, yet if you have
Some scruples, touching your Lord, you would be resolved of
I am prepared.

Sophia. But will you take your oath
To answer truly?

Vbaldo. On the hemme of your smock if you please
A vow I dare not break it being a book
I would gladly swear on.

Sophia. To spare sir that trouble
I Will take your word which in a gentleman
Should be of equal value, is my Lord then
In such grace with the Queen?

Vbaldo. Yon should best know
By what you have found from him, whether he can
Deserve a grace or not.

Sophia. What grace do you mean?

Vbaldo. Tha special grace (if you will have it)
He labored so hard for between a pair of sheets
On your wedding night
When your Ladyship lost you know what.

Sophia. Fie be more modest
Or I must leave you.

Vbaldo. I would tell a truth
As cleanely as I could, and yet the subject
Makes me run out a litt^e.

Sophia. You would put now
A foolish jealousy in my head my Lord
Has gotten a new mis^ris.

Vbaldo. One? a hundred
But under seal I speak it, I presume
Upon your silence, it being for your profit,
They talk of Hercules, back for fifty in a night
'Twas well but yet to yours he was a pidler
Such a soldier, and a courtier never came
To Alba regalis, the ladies run mad for him,
And there is such contention among 'em
Who shall ingrosse him wholly, that the like
Was never hard of.

Sophia. Are they handsome women?

Vbal. Fie noe course mammets, and what is worse they are old to
Some fifty, some threescore, and they pay dear fort
Believing, that he carries a powder in his breeches
Will make 'em young again, and these suck shrewdly,

Ricardo. Sir I must fetch you off.

Whistles. Vbaldo. I could tell you wonders
Of the cures he has done, but a buisnesse of import
Ca^ls me away, but that dispatched I will
Be with you presently.
st^ps aside
Sophia. There is something more
In this then bare suspicion.

Ricardo. Save yo^ lady
Now you look like your self! I have not looked on
A lady more complete yet have scene a Madam
Were a garment of this fashion, of the same stuff to,
One just of your dimensions, sat the wind there boy.

Sophia. Wha^ lady si^?

Ricardo. Nay nothing, and me thinks
I should know this rubie ver^ good? it is the same
This chain of orient pearl, and this diamond to
Have been worn before, but much good may they do you
Strengh to the gentleman's back he toyld hard for 'em,
Before he got'em

Sophia. Why? how were they gotten?

Vbaldo hemms. Ricardo. Not in the feeld with his sword upon my life
He may thank his clo^e stille^to, plage upon it
Run the minutes so fast, pray you excuse my manners
I left a letter in my chamber window,
Which I would not have seen on any terms, fie on it
Forgetful as I am, but I strayt attend you
Ricardo steps aside.
Sophia. This is strange his letters said these jewels were
Presented him by the Queen, as a reward
For his good service, and the trunckes of clothes
That fo^lowd them this last night, with have made up
By his direction.

Enter Vbaldo, Vbaldo. I was telling you
Of wonders Maddam.

Sophia. If you are so skillful
Without premeditation answer me,
Know you this gown, and these rich jewels?

Vbaldo. Heaven.
How things will come out, but that I should offend you,
And wrong my more then noble friend
Your husband for we are sworn brothers, in the discovery
Of his nearest secrets I could.

Sophia. By the hope of favor
That you have from me out with it.

Vbaldo. It Is a a potent spell
I cannot resist, why I will tell you Madam,
And to how many several women you are
Beholding for your bravery, this was
The Wedding gown of Pa^lina a rich strumpet
Worm but a day when she married old Gonzage,
And left of trading.

Sophia. O my heart.

Vbaldo. This chain
Of pear^e was a great widows, that invited
Your Lord to the masque, and the wether pro^ing foul
He lodged in her house all night, and merry they were,
But how he came by it I know not.

Sophia^ Periurd man!

Vbaldo. This ring was Iuliettas, a fine piece
But very good at the sport, this diamond
Was Madam Acanthes given him for a song
pricked in a private arbor, as she said
When the Queen askd for it, and she hard him sing t^
And danced to his hornepipe or there are liars abroad
There are other toys about you
The same way purchased but paraleld
With these not worth the relation.
You are happy in a husband never man
Made better use of his strength, would you have him wast,
His body away for nothing? If he holds out,
There Is not an Embrodered peticote in the court
But shall be at your service.

Sophia. I commend him
It is a thriuing trade, but pray you leave me
A little to my self.

Vbaldo. You may command
Your servant madam, she stung unto the quick ladd.

Ricardo. I did my part if this potion work not hang me
Let her sl^epe as well as she can to night, to morrow
We Will mount new batteries,

Vbaldo. And till then leave her?

Exeunt Vbaldo, Ricard^ Sophia. You powers that take into your care, the guard
Of inocence aid me, for I am a creature,
So forfeyted to despair, hope cannot fancy
A ransom to redeem me, I begin
To waver in my faith and mark it doubt^ull
Whither the Saints that were canonized for
Their holiness of life ^ind not in secret.
Since my Mathias is fallen from his virtue
In such an open fashion, could it be else
That such a husband so devoted to me,
So vowed to temperance, for laciuious hire
Should prostitute himself to common harlots
Old, and deformed to wast for this he left me?
And in a faind pretense for want of means
To give me ornament? or to bring home
Diseases to me? suppose these are false,
And lusts^^ll goats if he were true and right
Why stays he so long from me? being made rich
And that the only reason why he left me.
No he is lost; and shall I wear the spoils.
And Salaries of lust? they cleave unto me
Like Nessus poisoned shirt? no in my rage
I Will tear 'em of, and from my body wash
The venom with my tears, have I no spleen
Nor anger of a woman? shall he build
Upon my ruins and I vureueng'd
Deplore his falsehood? no? with the same trash
For which he has dishonored me, I Will purchase
A just revenge, I am not yet so much
In debt to years, nor so misshap'd that all
Should fly from my Embraces, chastity
Tho^ only art a name, and ^^^nounce thee,
I am now a servant to vo^uptuousnesse,
Wantons of all degrees and fashions welcome
You shall be entertained, and if I stray
Let him condemn himself, that lead the way.
Exit.
The end of the third Act.
Actus quarti,
Scaena prima.
Enter Mathias, Baptista. Baptista. We are in a desperate straight, there is no
^^asion
Nor hope left to come of, but by your yielding
To the necessity, you must feign a grant
To her violent passion, or

Mathias. What my Baptista?

Baptista. We are but dead else.

Mathias. Were the sword now heau'd up,
And my neck upon the block, I would not buy
An hours repriue with the loss of faith and virtue
To be made immortal here, art thou a scholar
Nay almost without parallel, and yet fear
To dye which is inevitable you may urge
The many years that by the course of nature
We may travail in this tedious pilgrimage,
And hou'd it as a blessing, as it is
When innocence is our guide, yet know Ba^ptista
Our virtues are preserved before our years
By the great judge to dye vntaynted in
Our fame, and reputation is the greatest
And to loose that can we desire to live?
Or shall I for a momentary pleasure
Which soon comes to a period, to all times
Have breach of faith and perjury remembered
In a still living Epitath, no Baptist,
Since my Sophia will go to her grave
Unspotted in her faith, I Will follow her
With equal loyalty, but look on this
your own great work, your masterpeese, and then
She being stil^ the same teach me to alter.
Ha! sure I do not sleep! or if I dream,
The picture altered, This is a terrible vision! I will clear
My eiesight, perhaps melancholy makes me
See that which is not.

Baptista. It is to apparent.
I grieve to look upon it, besides the yellow
That does assure she is tempted there are lines
Of a dark color, that disperse themselves
Ore every mi^iature of her face, and those
Confirm.

Mathias. She is turned whore.

Baptista. I must not say so.
Yet as a friend to truth if you will have me
Interpret it, in her consent, and wishes
She Is false but not in fact ye^.

Mathias. Fact Baptista?
Make not your self a pandar to her loosenes,
In laboring to palliate what a vizard
Of impudence cannot cover did ere woman
In her will decline from cha^ety, but found means
To give her hot lust fu^ll? it is more
Impossible in nature for gross bodies
Descending of themselves, to hang in the air,
Or with my single arm to underprop
A falling ^ow^r, nay in its violent course
To stop the lightning then to stay a woman
Hu^^ied by two ^u^ies lust and falsehood
In her full cari^r to wickedness.

Baptista. Pray you tempter
The violence of your passion.

Mathias. In extremes
Of this condition, can it be in man
To use a moderation? I am thrown
From a steep rock headlong into a gulf
Of misery, and find my self past hope
In the same moment that I aprehend
That I am falling and this the figure of
My Idol few hours since, while she continued
In her perfection that was late a mirror
In which I saw miracules shapes of duty,
Stayed manners with all excellency a husband
Could wish in a chaste wife, is on the sudden
Turned to a magical glass, and does present
No thing but horns, and ^orror

Baptista. You may yet
And it is the best foundation, build up comfort
On your own goodness.

Mathias. Noe, that has undone me
For now I hold my temperance a sin
Worse then excess, and what was vice a virtue,
Have I refused a Queen, and such a Queen
Whose rauishing beauties at the first sight had tempted
A hermit from his beads, and changed his prayers
To amorous Sonets, to preserve my faith
Inuiolate to thee, with the hazard of
My death with tortrne, since she could in^^ict
No less for my contempt, and have I made
Such a return from thee? I will not curse thee,
Nor for thy falsehood rail against the sex
It Is poor, and common, I Will only with wise men
Whisper unto my self, howere they seem
Nor present, nor past times, nor the age to come
Has heretofore, can now, or ever shall
Produce on constant woman.

Baptista. This is more
Then the Satirists wrote against 'em.

Mathias. There Is no language
That can express the poison of these Aspicks,
These weeping Crocadiles, and all to little
That has being said against 'em but I Will mould
My thoughts into another form, and if
She can out-liue the report of what I have done
This hand when next she comes within my reach
Shall be her executioner.

Enter Honoria. Baptista. The Queen sir.

Honoria. Wait our commnnd at distance, sir you have to
Free liberty to depart.

Baptista. I know my manners
And thank you for the favor.
Exit Baptista.
Honoria. Have you taken
Good rest in your new lodgings? I expect now
Your resolute answer, but advise maturely
Before I hear it,

Mathias. Let my actions Madam,
For no words can dilate my joy in all
You can command with cherefulnes to serve you,
Assure your highness, and in sign of my
Submission, and contrition for my error.
My lips, that but the last night shund the touch
Of yours as poison, taught humility now
Thus on your foot, and that too great an honor
For such an vndeseruer seals my duty,
A cloudy mist of ignorance equal to
Cimmerian darkness, would not let me see then
What now with adoration, and wonder
With reverence I look up to: but those foggs
Dispersd and scatterd by the powerful beams
With which your self the Sun of all perfection,
Vouchsafe to cure my blindness like a suppliant
As low as I can knee^e I humbly beg
What you once pleased to tender.

Honoria. This is more
Then I could hope, what find you so attractiue
Upon my fac^ in so short time to make
This sudden Metamo^phosis? pray you rise;
I for your late neglect thus sign your pardon.
I now you kiss like a lover, and not as brothers
Coldly salute their sisters.

Mathias. I am turned
All spirit and fire.

Honoria. Yet to give some allay
To this hot feruor 'twere good to remember
The King, whose ^ies and ^ares are every where
With the danger to that follows, this discovered.

Mathias. Dang^r? a b^ggebeare Maddam let ride once
Like Phaeton in the the Chariot of your favor,
And I con^emne ^o^es thunder though the King
In our embraces stood a looker on,
His hang-men and with studied cruelty ready
To dragge me from your arms, it should not fright me
From the inioying that, a single life is
Too poor a price for, O that now all vigor
Of my youth were recollected for an hour
That my desire might meet with yours and draw
The envy of all men in the Encounter
Upon my head, I should, but we loose time,
Be gracious mighty Quee^e

Honoria. Pause yet a little
The bounties of the King, and what weighs more
Your boasted constancy to your machlesse wife,
Should not soon be shaken.

Mathias. The whole fabric
When I but look on you, is in a moment
Ore turned, and ruind, and as rivers loose
Their names, when they are swalloed by the Ocean
In you alone all faculties of my sou^e
Are wholly taken up, my wife, and King
At the best as things forgotten.

Honoria. Can this be?
I have gaynd my end now.

Mathias. Wherefore stay you Madam?

Honoria. In my consideration what a nothing
Man's constancy is.

Mathias. Your beauties make it so,
In me sweet lady.

Honoria. And it is my glory:
I could be coy now as you were, but I
Am of a gentler temper, howsoever,
And in a just return of what I have suffered
In your disdain, with the same measure grant me
Eq^all deliberation I ere long
Will visit you again and when I next
Appear, as conquered by it, slauelike wayt
On my triumphant beauty.
Exit Honoria.
Mathias. What a change
Is here beyond my fear but by thy falsehood
Sophia not her beauty is it denied me
To sin but in my wishes? what a frown
In scorn at her departure she threw on me?
I am both ways lost; storms of Con^empt, and scorn
Are ready to break on me, and all hope
Of shelter doubtful I can neither be
Disloyal, no^ yet honest, I stand guilty
On either part, at the worst death will end all,
And he must be my judge to right my wrong,
Since I have loved too much and lived too long.
Exit Mathias.
Actus quarti, Sc^na secunda.
Enter Sophia sola with a book and a note. Sophia. Nor custom nor example,
nor vast numbers
Of such as do offend make less the sin,
For each particular crime a strict account
Will be exacted, and that comfort which
The damnd pretend, fellows in misery,
Takes nothing from their torments, every one
Must suffer in himself the measure of
His wickedness, if so, as I must grant
It being vn^efutable in reason,
Howere my Lord offend, it is no warrant
For me to walk in his forbidden paths,
What penancet^ en can expiate my guilte
For my consent (transported then with passion)
To wan^onnesse? ^he wo^^des I give my fame
Cannot recover his and though I have fedd
These courtiers with promises and hopes
I am yet in fact vn^ainted and I trust
My so^row for it with my purity
And love to goodness for it self, made powerful
Though all they have alleged p^oue true or false,
Will be such exorcisines as shall command
This fury jealousy from me, what I have
Determind touching them I am resolved
To put in execution, Within there?
Where are my noble ghests?

Enter Hilario, Corisca, with other servants. Hilario. The elder Maddam,
Is drinking by himself to your Ladyships health
In Muskadine and eggs and for a rasher
To draw His liquor down he has got a pie
Of marrow-bones, Pota^os and Eringos,
With many such ingredients, and it is said
He has sent his man in post to the next town,
For a po^nd of Amber gris, and half a pecke
Of fishes called Cantharides.

Corisca. The younger
Prunes up himself as if this night he were
To act a bridegroomes part, but to what purpose
I am ignorance it self,

Sophia. Continue so.
gives a paper. Let those lodgings be prepared as this directs you,
And fail not in a circumstance, as you
Respect my favor.

1 servant. We have o^r instructions

2 servant. And punctually will follow 'em

Exeunt servants, Enter Vbaldo. Hilario. Here comes Madam
The Lord Vbaldo.

Vbaldo. Pretty on, there is gould,
To buy thee a new gown, and there is for thee,
Grow fat, and fit for service, I am now
As I should be at the height and able to
Beget a giant, O my better Angel
In this you show your wisdom when you pay
The lech^r in his own coin, shall you sit p^ling,
Like a patient Grissell, and be laughed at? no
This is a fair reueng, shall we to it?

Sophia. To what sir?

Vbaldo. The sport you promisd.

Sophia. Could it be done with safety.

Vbaldo. I warant you, I am sound as a bell, a tough
Old blade, and steel to the back, as you shall find me
In the trial on your anuill.

Sophia. So, but how sir
Shall I satisfy your friend to whom by promise
I am equally engaged?

Vbaldo. I m^st conf^sse
The more the merier, b^t of all men living
Take heed of him you may sa^e^ run upon
The mouth of a cannon, when it is vnlading
And come off colder.

Sophia. How! is he not wholesome?

Vbaldo. Wholesome? I Will tell you for your good, he is
A spittle of diseases and indeed
More loathsome and infections, the tubbe is
His weekly bath; He has not drank this seven year
Before he came to your house, but compositions
Of Sassafras, and Guacum, and dry mutton
His daily portion; name what scratch soever
Can be got by women and the Surgeons will resolve you
At this time or at that Ricardo had it.

Sophia. Bless me from him.

Vbaldo. It Is a good prayer Lady,
It ^eing a degree unto the pox.
Only to mention him, if my tongue burn not hang me
When I but namd Ricardo.

Sophia. Sir this caution
Must be rewarded.

Vbaldo. I hope I have marrd his market.
But when?

Sophia. Why presently follow my woman
She knows where to conduct you, and will serve
To night for a page, let the wastcote I appointed
With the cambricq shirt pe^fumd, and the rich cappe
Be brought into his chamber.

Vbaldo. Excellent Lady.
And a ca^dle too in the morning.

Corisca. I will fit you.
Exeunt Vbaldo and Cor
Enter Ricardo. Sophia. So ^o^ on the scent here comes the other beagle.

Ricardo. Take purse and all

Hil^rio. If this company would come often.
I should make a pretty term on it,

Sophia. For your sake
I have put him off, h^ only begd a kiss
I gave it and so parted.

Ricardo. I hope better
He did not touch your lips?

Sophia. Yes I assure you.
The^e was no danger in it.

Ricardo. No? eat presently
These lozenges, of forty crowns an ounce,
Or you are undone.

Sophia. What is the virtue of 'em.

Ricardo They are preservatives against stinking breath
Rising from rotten lungs.

Sophia, If so your carriage
Of such dear antidotes in my opinion
May render yours suspected.

Ricardo. Fie no I use 'em
When I ta^ke with him I should be poysond else.
But ^'ll be free with you. He was once a creature
It may be of Gods making, but long since
He is turned to a druggists shop, the spring and fall
Hold all the year with him that he lives he owes
To art not nature, she has given him ore.
He moves like the faery King, on s^rues and wheels
Made by his Doctors recipes, and yet still
They are out of joint, and every day reparing
He has a regiment of whores he keeps
At his own charge in a lazar house but the best is
The^e^s not a ^ose among 'em: He Is acquainted
With the green water and the spitting pill
Familiar to him, in a frosty morning
You may thrust him in a pottle pot his bones
Rattle in his Skin like beans tos'd in a bladder
If he but here a coche the fomentation
The Friction with funigation cannot save him
From the chine evil in a word he is
No^ on disease but all, yet being my friend
I will forbear his caracter, for I would not
Wrong him in your opinion.

Sophia, The best is
The virtues you bestow on him to me
Are mistries I know not but howeuer
I am at your service. Sirrah let it be your care
T'vncloth the gentleman, and with speed, delay
Takes from delight.

Ricardo. Good, there is my hat, sword, cloak,
A vengeance on these buttons, off with my dublet
I dare show my Skin, in the touch you will like it better
Prithee cut my codpeese point, and for this service
When I leave them off they are thine.

Hilario. I Will take your word sir.

Ricardo. Dear lady stay not long.

Sophia. I may come too soon sir

Ricardo. No, no I am ready now,

Hilario. This is the way sir.
Exeunt Hilario, and Ricardo.
Sophia. I was much too blame to credit their reports
Touching my Lord that so traduce each other
And with such virulent malice, though I presume
They are bad enough, but I have studied for 'em
A way for their recovery.

The noise of clapping a door, Vbaldo above in his shirt, Vbaldo. What do
thou mean wench?
Why do thou shut the door upon me? ha
My cloths are taine away to! shall I starve here?
Is this my lodging? I am sure the lady talkd of
A rich cappe, a perfumed shirt, and a wastcote
But here is nothing but a little fresh straw,
A pettycote for a couerlet and that torn to,
And an old woman's biggen for a night cappe,
Enter Corisca. Slight it is a prison, or a pigstie, ha!
The windows grated with Iron I cannot force 'em
And if I leap down here I break my neck
I am betrayed, rog^es villains let me out
I am a Lord, and that is no common tittle,
And shall I be vsd ^hus?

Sophia. Let him rave, He Is fast
I Will parley with him at leisure.

Ricardo entering with a great noise above, as fallen. Ricardo. Zoones have you
trap ^oores?

Sophia. The other bir^s in the cage too let him flutter.

Ricardo. Whither am I fallen into Hell?

Vbaldo. Who makes that noise there?
Help me if thou art a friend?

Ricardo. A friend? I am where
I cannot help my self, let me see thy face.

Vbaldo. How Ricardo! prithee throw me
Thy cloak, if thou can to cover me I am almost
Frozen to death.

Ricardo. My cloak, I have no breeches
I am in my shirt as thou art, and here is nothing
For my self but a clownes cast suite.

Vbaldo. We are both undone
Prithee rore a little, Madam.

Enter Hilario in Ricardos suite. Ricardo. Lady of the house.

Vbaldo. Grooms of the chamber

Ricardo. Gentlewomen, mi^ kemaydes.

Vbaldo. Shall we be m^rthered?

Sophia. Noe but soundly punished
To your diserts.

Ricardo. You are not in earnest Madam?

Sophia. Judge as you find, and feel it, and now here
What I irr^uocablie purpose to you.
Being received as ghests into my house
And with all it afforded entertaind
You have forgot all hospistable duties,
And with the defamation of my Lord
Wrought on my woman weakness in revenge
Of his injuries, as you fashiond 'em to me,
To yield my honor to your lawless lust.

Hilario. Ma^ke that poor fellows.

Sophia. And so far you have
Transgres'd against the dignity of men
(who should, bound to it by virtue, still defend
Chaste ladies honors) that it was your trade
To make 'em in famous, but you are caught
In your own toiles like lustful beasts, and therefore
Hope not to find the usage of men from me
Such mercy you have forfeited, and shall suffer
Like the most slavish women.

Vbaldo. How will you use us?

Sophia. Ease and excess in feeding made you wanton
A p^urifie of ill blood you must let out.
By labor, and spare diet, that way got to,
Or perish for hunger, reach him up that distaffe
With the f^ax upon it, though no Omphale
Nor you a second Hercules, as I take it
As you spinne well at my command, and please me
Your wages in the coursest bread, and water,
Shall be proportionable.

Vbaldo. I will starve first.

Sophia. That Is as you please.

Ricardo. What will become of me now?

Sophia. You shall have gentler work I have often observed
You were proud to show the finenesse of your hands,
And softnes of your fingers, you should reele well
What he spins if you give your mind to it, as ill force you
Deliver him his materials. Now you know
Your penance fall to work, hunger will teach you
And ^o as slaves to your lust, not me I leave you.
Exit Sophia. and servants.
Vbaldo. I shall spinne a fine thread out now

Ricardo. I cannot look
On these devices but they put me in mind
Of rope-makers.

Hilario. F^llow think of thy task
Forg^t such vanities, my linery there
Will serve the to work in.

Ricardo. Let me have my clothes yet,
I was bountiful to thee.

Hilario. They are past your wearing
And mine by prom^se, as all these can wi^nes
You have no holydaies coming, nor will I work
While th^se, and this lasts and so when you please
You may shut up your shop windows.
Exit Hilario.
Vbaldo. I am faint
And must lie down.

Ricardo. I am hungry to, and could
Ocursed women

Vbaldo. This comes of our whoring.
But let us rest as well as we can to night
But not ore sleep our selves, least we fast to morrow.

They drew the curtains. Astus quarti, Sca^na tertij.
Enter Ladislaus, Honoria, Eubulus, Ferdinand, Acanthe, attendance. Honoria.
Now you know all sir with the motives why
I forced him to my lodging.

Ladislaus. I desire
No more such trials Lady.

Honoria. I presume sir
You do not doubt my chastity.

Ladislaus. I would not,
But these are strange inducements.

Eubulus. By no means sir
Why though he were with violence ceasd upon,
And still detaynd the man sir being no soldier
Nor vsd to charge his pike when the breach is open
There was no danger in it: you must conceive sir,
Being relligious, she Chose him for a Chaplain
To read old Homelies to her in the dark,
She Is bound to it by her Cannons.

Ladislaus. Still tormented
With thy impertinence.

Honoria. By your self dear sir.
I was ambitious only to over throw
His boasted constancy in his consent,
But for fact I contemn him, I was never
Unchaste in thought, I labored to give proof
What power dwells in this beauty you admire so,
And when you see how soon it has transformed him,
And with what superstition he addores it,
Determine as ^ou please.

Ladislaus. I will look on
This pageant but.

Honoria. When you have seen and hard sir.
The passages, which I my self discovered,
And could have kept concealed had I meant basely
Judge as you please.

Ladislaus. well Ill observe the issue.

Eubulus. How had you took this General in your wife?

Ferdinand. As a strange curiosity, but Queene^
Are priuiledgd above subjects, and it is fit sir.

Exeunt. Astus quarti, Scaena quarti.
Enter Mathias, Batista. Baptista. You are much alterd sir since the last night,
When the Queen left you, and look cheerfully
Your dullness quite blown over.

Mathias. I have seen a vision
This morning makes it good, and never was
In such security as at this instant,
Fall what can fall, and when the Queen appears
Whose shortest absence now is tedious to me,
Observe 'th encounter.

Enter Honoria, Ladislaus, Eubulus, Ferdinand Acanthe, with others above.
Baptista. She already is
Entered the lists.

Mathias. And I prepared to meet her.

Baptista. I know my duty.

Honoria. Not so you may stay now
As a witness of our contract.

Baptista. I obey
In all things Madam.

Honoria. Where Is that reverence,
Or rather superstitious addoration,
Which captive like to my triumphant beauty
You paid last night? no humble knee? nor sign
Or vassal duty? sure this is the foote^
To whose proud cover, and then happy in it,
Your lips were glewd; and that the neck then offered
To witness your subjection to be trod on
Your certain loss of life in the Kings anger
Was then to mean a price to buy my favor.
And that false gloweworme fire of constancy
To your wife, extinguished by a greater light
Shot from our eyes; and that it may be (being
To g^^r^ous to be looked on) has deprived you
O speech, and motion: but I will take off
A little from the splendour, and descend
From my own height, and in your lowness here you
Plead as a suppliant.

Mathias. I do remember
I once saw such a woman.

Honoria. How!

Mathias. And then
She did appear a most magnificent Queen
And what is more virtuous though somewhat darkened
With pride and self oppinion.

Eubulus. Call you this courtship?

Mathias. And she was happy in a royal husband,
Whom envy could not tax, unless it were
For his too much indulgence to her humors.

Eubulus. Pray you sir observe that touch, it is to the purpose
I like the play the beter for'^.

Mathias. And she lived
Worthy her birth, and fortune; you retain yet
Some part of her angelical form, but when
Envy to the beauty of another woman
Inferior to hers, (one she never
Had seen but in her picture) had dispersed
Infection through her veins and loyalty
Which a great Queen as she was should have nourished
Grew odious to her

Honoria. I am thunder strocke.

Mathias. And lust in all the bravery it could borrow
From majesty, howere disguisde had took
Sure footing in the kingdom of her heart
(The throne of chastity once,) how in a moment
All that was g^atious, great, and glo^ious in her
And woone v^o^ all hearts, like seeming shadows
Wanting true substance vanished.

Honoria. How his reasons
Work on my Soul.

Mathias. Retire into your self.
Your own strengths Madam, strongly manned with virtue
And be out as you were, and there is no offense.
So base beneath the slavery, that men
Impose on beasts, but ^ will gladly bow to.
But as you play, and iugg^e with a stranger
Varying your ^^^pes like Thetis though the beauties
Of all that are by Poets raptures Sain^^d
Were now in yo^ united, you should pass
Pitied by me perhaps, but not regarded.

Eubulus. If this take not I am cheated.

Mat^ias. To slip once
Is (...), and ^x^nsde by humane f^aylty,
B^^ to fall ever damnab^e we were both
Guilty I grant in tendering our affection,
B^t, as I hope you will do, I repented.
When we are grown up to ripeness, our life is
Like to this picture. While we run
A constant race in goodness, it retains
The just proportion. But the iourneyes being
Tedious and sweet temptations in the way,
That may in some degree divert us from
The rode that we put forth in, e^e we end
Our pilgrimage, it may like this turn yellow
Or be with b^acknesse clouded. But when we
Find we have gone astray, and labor to
Return unto our nuer failing guide
Virtue, contrition wi^h v^ fained tears,
The spots of vice washed off will soon restore it
To the first pureness.

Honoria. I am disenchanted
Mercy, O mercy heavens?
kneeles
Ladislaus. I am (...) with
What I have see^^ and hard.

Ferdinand. Let us (...) and here
The rest be^^^.

Eubulus. This has fallen out beyond
My expe^ta^ion.

they descend^ Honoria. How have I wandered
Ou^ of the tract of piety and (...)
By ouerweening pride, and flattery
Of fawning sycophants (the bane of greatness)
Could never meet till now a passenger
That in his charity would set me right,
Or stay me in my precipice to ruin.
How ill have I returned your goodness to me?
The horror in my thought often turns me marble.
Enter the King and others, But if it may be yet prevented, O sir,
What can I do to show my sorrow or
With what brow ask your pardon?

Ladislaus. Pray you rise.

Honoria. Never, till you forgive me, and receive
Unto your love, and favor a changed woman.
My state, and pride turned to humillity henceforth
Shall wait on your commands, and my obedience
Steered only by your will.

Ladislaus, And that will prove
A second and a better marriage to me, all is forgot

Honoria. Sir I must not rise yet
Till with a free confession of a crime,
Unknown to you yet, and a following suite
Which thus I beg be granted.

Ladislaus. I melt with you.
It Is pardoned, and confirmed thus.

Honoria. Know then sir.
In malice to this good knights wife I practiced
Vbaldo, and Ricardo, to corrupt her.

Baptista. Thence grew the change of the picture.

Honoria. And how far
They have preuaild I am ignorant now if you sir
Or the honor of this good man, may be entreated
To travail thither, it being but a days journey
To fetch 'em off,

Ladislaus. We will put on to night.

Baptista. I if you please your harbinger.

Ladislaus. I thank you.
Let me embrace you in my arms, your service
Done on the Turk compard with this waighs nothing.

Mathias. I am still your humble creature.

Ladslaius. My true friend

Ferdinand. And so you are bound to hold him.

Eubulus. Such a plant
Imported to your Kingdom, and here grafted
Would yield more fruit then al^ the idle weeds
That suck up your reign of favor.

Ladislaus. In my will
Ill not be wanting, prepare for our journey.
In act be my Honoria now, not name,
And to al^ after times preser^e thy fame.

Exeu^^, The end of the fourth Act.
Actus quinti,
Scaena prima.
Sophia, Corisca, Hilario. Sophia. Are they then so humble

Hilario. Hunger and hard labor
Have tamde 'em Madam, at the first they below'd
Like staggs taken in a toil and would not work
For sullenness, but when they found with out it
There was no eating, and that to starve to death
Was much against their stomachs, by degree
Against their wills they fell to it.

Corisca. And now feed on
The little pittance you allow with gladness

Hilario. I do remember that they stopped their noses
At the sight of beef, and mutton as course fee^ing
For their fine palats, but now their work being ended
They leap at a barley crust and hold che^e parings
With a spoonefull of pal'd wine poured in their water,
For festival excedings.

Corisca. When I examine
M^ spinsters work he trembles like a prentice
And takes a boy on the ^are when I spi^ faults
And botches in his about, as a favor
From a cu^st mistrisse.

Hilario. The other to re^le well
For his time, and if your ladyship would please.
To see 'em for your sport, since they want ayring
It would do well in my judgment, you shall here
Such a hungry diologe from 'em.

Sophia. But suppose
When they are out of prison they should grow
Rebellio^s?

Hilario. Never (...) Ill undertake
To lead 'em out by the nose with a course thread
Of the o^nes spinning and make the other reele after
And without grumbling, and when you are weary of
Their company as easily return 'em.

Corisca Dear Madam it will help to drive away
Your melancholy.

Sophia. Well on this assurance
I am content, bring 'em hither.

Hilario. I will do it
In stately Equipage.
Exit Hilario.
Sophia. They have confessed then
They were set on by the Queen to taynt me in
My loyalty to my Lord?

Corisca. It Was the maine cause,
That brought 'em hither.

Sophia. I am glad I know it
And as I have begun before I end
Ill at the height revenge it, let us step aside
They come the objects so ridiculous
In spite of my sad thoughts I cannot but
Lend a forced smile to grace it.

Enter Hilario, Vbaldo spinning, Ricardo reeling. Hilario. Come away
Work as you go, and loose no time it is pr^cious
You Will find it in your Commons.

Ricardo. commons call you it
The word is proper I have grazed so long
Upon your commons I am almost starved here

Hilario. Work harder and they shall be bettered

Vbaldo. bettered?
worser they cannot be would I might lie
Like a dog under her table and serve for a footstool
So I might have my belly full of that
Her Island curr refuses.

Hilario. How do you like
Your ayring? is it not a favor?

Ricardo. Yes
Just such a one as you use to a brace of gray-houndes
When they are ledd out of their kennels to scumber
But our case is ten times harder, we have nothing
In our bellies to be vented, if you will be
And honest yeoman phenterer, feed us first,
And walk us after?

Hilario. Yeomen phenterer?
Such another word to your Governor, and you go^
Supperlesse to bed fort.

Vbaldo. Nay even as you please.
The comfortable names of breake-fasts, dinners.
Collations, supper, beuerage, are words
Worn out of our remembrance.

Ricardo. O for the steame
Of meat in a cooks shop?

Vbaldo. I am so dry
I have not spittle enough to wett my ^ingers
When I draw my flax from my distaffe

Ricardo. Nor I strength
To raise my hand to the top of my reeler. oh.
I have the crampe all over me

Hilario. What do you think
Were best to apply to it, a crampstone as I take it
Were very useful.

Ricardo. Oh no more of stones
We have been vsd to long like hawks already.

Vbaldo. We are not so high in our flesh now to need casting
We will come to an empty fist.

Hilario. Nay that you shall not
So hoe birds, how the eyasses scratch, and scramble
Take heed of a surfeit do not cast your gorges,
This is more then I have commission for, be thankful.

Sophia. Were all that study the abuse of women
Vsd thus, the city would not swarm with Cuccholds
Nor so many trads-menbreake.

Corisca. Pray you appear now
And mark the alteration.

Hilario. To your work
My Lady is in presence, show your duties
Exceeding well.

Sophia. How do your scollers profit?

Hilario. Hold up your heads demurely^ Prettily
For young beginners.
Corisca and will do well in time
If they be kept in awe.

Ricardo. In awe I am sure
I quake like an aspen leaf.

Vbaldo. no mercy Lady?

Ricardo. Nor in^^rimission?

Sophia. Let me see your work.
Fie upon it what a thredds here, a poor cobblers wife
Would make a siner to sow a clounes rent start up
And here you reele as you were druncke,

Ricardo. I am sure it is not with wine

Sophia. O take head of wine
Could water is far better for your healths
Of which I am very tender, you had foul bodies
And must continue in this physical diet
Tell the cause of your disease be taken away
For fear of a relaps and that is dangerous
Yet I hope already that you are in some
Degree recouerd and that way to resolve me
Answer me truly, nay what I propound
Concerns both nearer, what would you now give
If your means were in your hands to lie all night
With a fresh and hansume lady?

Vbaldo. How a lady?
O I am pasd it, hunger with her razor
Has made me an euenuch

Ricardo. for a mess of porridge
well sop'd with a bunch of raddish and a carret
I would sell my bar on rye but for women. oh
Noe more of women not a doyte for a doxeie
After this hungry voyage.

Sophia. These are truly
Good symptoms, let them not venture to much in the air
Till they are weaker.

Ricardo. this is tyranie

Vbaldo. Scorn upon scorn

Sophia. You were so
In your malicious intents to me
Enter a servant And therefore it is but justice what is the busnesse?

Servant. My Lords great friend signior Baptista Madam
Is newly lighted from his horse with certain
Assurance of my Lords arrival.

Sophia. How
And stand I trifling here, hence with the mungrells
To there several kennels, there let them houle in private
I Will be no farther troubled.
Exeunt Sophia and servant.
Vbaldo. O that ever
I saw this fury

Ricardo. Or looked one a woman
But as a prodigy in nature

Hilario. Silence
Noe more of this

Corisca. methincks you have noe cause
To repent your being here

Hilario have you not learnt
When your states are spent your several trades to live by and never charge
the hospital?

Corisca. Work but titely
And we will not use a dishe-clou^e in the house
But of your spinning

Vbaldo O I would this hemp
Were tu^nd to a hal^^r

Hilario Will you march

Ricardo. A soft one
Good general I beseech you

Vbaldo. I can hardly
Draw my legs after me

Hilario. For a crouch you may use
Your distaffe, a good wit makes use of all things.

Exeunt. Actus quinti, Scaena secunda.
Enter Sophia, Baptista. Sophia. Was he jealous of me?

Baptista. There Is no perfect love
Without some touch often Madam.

Sophia. And my picture
Made by your devilish art, a spy upon
My actions? I never sat to be drawn,
Nor had you sir comision for it,

Baptista. excuse me,
At his earnest suit I did it.

Sophia. Very good,
Was I grown so cheap in his opinion of me?

Baptista. The prosperous events that cround his fortunes
May qualify the offense.

Sophia. Rood the events
The sanctuary fools and madmen f^ie to,
when their rash and desperate undertakings thrive well
But good, and wisemen are directed by
Grave counsels, and with such deliberation
Proceed in their affairs that chance had nothing
To do with 'em, howsoere, take the pains sir
To meet the honor in the King, and Queens
Approches to my house, that breaks upon me
I will expect them with my best of care

Baptista. To entertain such royal ghests.

Exit Baptista. Sophia. I know it
Leave that to me sir what should mo^e the Queen
So given to ease and pleasure, as fame speaks her,
To such a journey? or work on my Lord
To doubt my loyalty? nay more to take
For the resolution of his fears, a course
That is by holy writ denide a christian?
'Twas impious in him, and perhaps the welcome
He hopes in my embraces may deceive
His expectation the trumpets speak
The Kings arrival, help a woman's wit now,
To make him know his fault and my just anger.
Exit Sophia.
Actus quinti, scaena vltima.
Loud music, Enter Mathias, Eubulus, Ladislaus, Ferdinand, Honoria, Baptista,
Acanthe, with attendants Eubulus. Your majesty must be weary.

Honoria. No my Lord
A willing mind makes a hard journey easy

Mathias. Not love attended on by Hermes, was
More welcome to the cottage of Philemon,
And his poor Baucis, then your gracious self.
Your matchless Queen, and all your royal train
Are to your servant and his wife.

Laudislaus. Where is she?

Honoria. I long to see her as my now loud rival

Eubulus. And I to have a smach at her, it is a cordial
To an old man, better then sack, and a to^t
Before he goes to supper.

Mathias. Ha is my house turned
To a wilderness? nor wife nor servants ready
Withal rites due to majesty to receive
Such unexpected blessings? you assurd me
Of better preparation, has not
The Excess of joy transported her beyond
Her understanding?

Baptista. I now parted from her,
And gave her your directions.

Mathias. How shall I beg
Your majesty's patience? sure my famelie's druncke
Or by some witch in envy of my glory
A dead sleep thrown upon 'em.

Enter Hilario, and servants. 1 servant. Sir.

Mathias. But that
The sacred presence of the King forbids it,
My sword should make a massacre among you.
Where is your mistress?

Hilario. First you are welcome home sir
Then know she says she is sick sir, there is no notice
Taken of my bravery.

Mathias. Sick at such a time!
I cannot be though she were on her death bed,
And her spirit even now departed here stand they
Could call it back again, and in this honor
Give her a second being, bring me to her,
I know not what to urge, or how to redeem
This morgage of her manners.

Exeunt Mathias and Hilario. Eubulus. There Is no climate
On the world I think where on ^ades trick or other
Reigns not in women,

Ferdinand. You were ever bitter
Against the Sex.

Ladis^aus. This is very strange.

Honoria. Mean women
Have their faults as well, as Queens.

Laudislaus. O she appears now.

Enter Mathias, Sophia. Mathi. The injury that you conceive I have done you
Dispute hereafter, and in your perue^senes
Wrong not your self, and me.

Sophia. I am pas^d my childhood,
And need no t^to

Mathias. This is the great King.
To whom I am engaged till death for all
I stand posess'd of.

Sophia. My humble roof is proud sir.
To be the canopie of so much greatness,
Set off with goodness.

Ladislaus. My own praises flying
In such pure air, as your sweet breath fair Lady
Cannot but please me.

Mathias. This is the Queen of Queens,
In her magnificence to me.

Sophia. In my duty
I kiss her highness robe.

Honoria. You stoop to low
To her whose lips would meet with yours.

Sophia. Howere.
It may appear prepostrous in women
So to encounter, it is your pleasure Madam
And not my proud ambition, do you here sir.
Without a magical picture in the touch,
I find your printe of close and wanton kisses
On the Queens lips

Mathias. Upon your life be silent.
And now salute these Lords.

Sophia. Since you will hane me
You shall see I am experienced at the game
And can play it titely, you are a brave man sit
And do deserve a free and hearty welcome
Be this the prologe to it.

Eubulus. An old man's turn
Is ever last in kissing, I have lips too
Howeuer cold ones Madam.

Sophia. I will warm 'em.
With the fire of mine.

Eubulus. And so she has I thank you.
I shall sleep the better all night for it.

Mathias. You express
The boldness of a wanton courtezan,
And not a matrons modesty, take up,
Or you are disgraced forever.

Sophia. How? with kissing
Feelingly as you tought me? would you have me
Turn my cheek to 'em, as proud ladies use
To their inferiors, as if they intended
Some business should be whisperd in their ^are
And not a salutation, what I do
I will do freely, now I am in the humor
I Will fly at all, are there any more?

Mathias. For b^are.
Or you will raise my anger to a height,
That will descend in fury.

Sophia. Why? you know
How to resolve your self what my intents are,
By the help of Mephostophiles, and your picture,
Pray you look upon it again, I humbly thank
The Queens great care of me, while you were absent.
She knew how tedious 'twas for a young wife,
And being for that time a kind of widow,
To pass away her melancholy hours
Without good company, and in charity therefore
Provided for me, out of her own store
She culd the Lords Vbaldo, and Ricardo,
Two principal courtiers for Ladies service,
To do me all good offices, and as such
Imployd by her, I hope I'haue receaud,
And entertaind 'em, nor shall they depart
Without the effect arissing from the cause
That brought 'em hither.

Mathias. Thou do be-lye thy self,
I know that in my absence thou were honest,
Howeuer now turned monster.

Sophia. The truth is
We did not deal like you in speculations
On cheating pictures; we knew shadows were
No substances and actual performance
The best assurance, I will bring 'em hither
To make good in this presence so much for me.
Some minutes space I beg your majesty's pardon
You are moved now champe upon this bit a little
Anon you shall have another, wait me Hilario.

Exeunt Sophia, and Hilario. Ladislaus. How now? turned statue sir?

Mathias. Fly, and fly quickly
From this cursed habitation, or this Gorgon
Will make you all as I am, in her tongue
Millions of adders hiss, and every hair
Upon her wicked head a snake more dreadful
Then that Tisiphon, threw on Athamas,
Which in his madness forced him to dismember
His proper issue O that ever I
Reposed my trust in magic, or beleeud
Impossiblities, or that charms had power

Eubulus. These are the fruits
Of marriage, and old bachelor, as I am,
And what is more will continue so, is not troublde
With these fine fagaries.

Ferdinand. Till you are resolved sir,
Forsake not hope.

Baptista. Upon my life this is
Dissimulation.

Ladislaus. And it suits not with
Your fortitude and wisdom to be thus
Transported with your passion.

Honoria. You were once
Deceaud in me sir as I was in you,
Yet the deceipte please both.

Mathias. She has confes'd all,
What further proof should I ask?

Honoria. Yet remember
The distance that is interposed between
A woman's tongue, and her heart, and you must grant
You build upon no certaineties.

Euter Sophia, Corisca, Hilario, Vbaldo, and Ricardo, as before. Eubulus. What
have we here?

Sophia. You must come on and show you selves.

Vbaldo. The King ^

Ricardo. And Queen too, would I were as far under the earth
As I am above it.

Vbaldo. Some Poet will
Prom this relation, or in verse, or proo^e,
Or both together blended render us
Ridiculous to all ages,

Ladislaus. I remember
This face when it was in a better plight
Are not you Ricardo^

Honoria. And this thing I take it
Was once Vbaldo.

Vbaldo. I am now I know not what.

Ricardo. We thank your majesty for employing us
To this subiil^ Circe.

Eubulus. How my Lord? turned spinster.
Do you work by the day or by the great?

Ferdinand. Is your Theorbo
Turned to a distaffe Signior, and your voice
With which you chanted rome for a lusty gallant
Turned to the note of lacreymae?

Eubulus. Prithee tell me
For I know thou art free, how often and to the purpose
Have you been merry with this lady.

Ricardo. Never, never.

Ladislaus. Howsoever you should say so, for your credit
Being the only cou^^ bull.

Vbaldo. O that ever
I saw this kicking heyfer,

Sophia. You see Madam
How I have curd your servants, and what favors
They with their rampaht valor have woone from me.
You may as they are phisickd, I presume
Trust a fair virgin with 'em, they have learnd
Their several trades to live by, and paid nothing
But cold, and hunger for 'em, and may now
Set up for them selves for here I give 'em over,
And now to you sir, why do you not again,
Peruse your picture? and take the advice
Of your learned consort? these are the men, or none
That made you, as the Italian says a beco.

Mathias. I know not which way to entreat your pardon
Nor am I worthy of it my Sophia,
My best Sophia, here before the king,
The Queen, these Lords, and all the lookers on
I do renounce my error, and embrace you
As the great example to all after times
For such as would dye chaste, and noble wives
With reverence to immitate.

Sophia. Not so sir.
I yet hold of, howeuer I have purged
My doubted innocence, the foul aspertions
In your unmanly doubts cast on my honor
Cannot so soon be washd of.

Eubulus. Shall we have
More ijggobobs yet?

Sophia. When you went to the wars
I set no spy upon you to observe
which way you wandered, though our sex by nature
Is subject to suspicions and fears,
My confidence in your loyalty freed me from 'em.
But to deal as you did against your religion
With this inchanter to survey my actions
Was more then woman's weakness, therefore know
And it is my boon unto the King, I do
Desire a separation from your bed
For I will spend the remnant of my life
In prayer, and meditation.

Mathias. O take pity
Upon my weak condition, or I am
More wretched in your innocence, then if
I had found you guilty, have you shown a jewel
Out of the cabinet of your rich mind
To lock it up again? She tur^es away
Will none speak for me? shame, and sin has robbed me
Of the use of my tongue.

Ladislaus. Since you have conquered Maddam
You wrong the glory of your victory
If you use it not with mercy.

Ferdinand. Any penance
You please to impose upon him I dare warrant
He will gladly suffer.

Eubulus. Have I lived to see
But on good woman, and shall we for a trifle
Have her return nun? I will first pull down the cloister
To the old sport again with a good luck to you
It Is not alone enough that you are good,
We must have some of the breed of you, will you destroy
The kind, and race of goodness? I am converted
And ask your pardon Madam for my ill opinion
Against the sex, and show me but two such more
I Will marry yet, and love em.

Honoria. She that yet
Nere knew what 'twas to bend but to the King
Thus beg remission for him.

Sophia. O dear Madam
Wrong not your greatness so.

Omnes. We all are suitors.

Vbaldo. I do deserve to be hard among the rest.

Ricardo. And we have sufferd for it

Sophia. I perceive
There Is no resistance but suppose I pardon
What Is past, who can secure me, He Will be free
From jealousy hereafter.

Mathias. I will be
My own security, go ride where you please,
Feast, reuele, banquet, and make choice with whom
I Will set no watch upon you, and for proof, often
This cursed picture I surrender up
To a consuming fire,

Baptista. As I abuire
The practice of my art.

Sophia. Upon this terms.
I am reconciled and for these that have paid
The price of their folly, I desire your mercy.

Ladislaus. At your request they have it.

Vbaldo. Hang all trades now.

Ricardo. I will find a new one, and that is to live honest.

Hilario. These are my fee's.

Vbaldo. Pray you take 'em with a mischief.

Ladislaus. So all ends in peace now
And to all married men be this a caution.
Which they should duly tender as their life
Neither to dote to much nor doubt a wife.

Exeunt Omnes FINIS.

