AN OTHER SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING AT GREENEWICH ON Tuesday before
Easter, being the 26. of March. 1605.

BY ANTHONY MAXEY, Bachelar in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty.

The points herein handled are these.

1. That there is an Hardening. 2. That God Hardens not. 3. How men become
Hardened. 4. The means to avoid it.


PRO. 28.14. Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that Hardens his
heart shall fall into evil. IN DO MINO ^ON^ DO

blazon or coat of arms

AT LONDON, Printed by George Snowdon and Lionell Snowdon, for Clement Knight,
and are to be sold at his shop, in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the
Holy Lamb. 1605.

HARDENING.
EXODUS 10.20. And the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, and he did not let the
children of Israel go.
THE heart of man is deceitful and wicked above all things, Ier. 17.9.
who can know it? Although the heart of man be so little, that it will scarce
serve a Kite for a bait, yet there are not more windings, nor more turnings in
a Maze, or in a Laborinth, then are in the heart of man. The Heathen were so
forward in acknowledging a divine power, that rather then they would be without
a god, they gave divine honor to any kind of creature.

The Assyrians worshipped Idols; the Persians stars; the Egyptians plants, and
all manner of beasts; the Graecians their own conceits, and the Romans made
their city a shop for all kind of gods. So many were the windings, and so
infinite the turnings of the heathen touching divine worship; that Varro
observed in the world thirty thousand gods. The dissolute and cunning Atheist,
he has a fetch by himself alone, he lets lose the reins, and follows the
streanie of his sensual affections, because he conceiues in his heart, and
clean contrary to the Heathen, says there is no God at all. Psalm. 14 1.
There is a third kind, who though in show they outwardly acknowledge God, yet
they again have an other winding, secretly to themselves they plod on,
swallowing any sin, for why? Zeph. 1, 12.
The Lord will neither do good nor evil. Because there is not present
punishment for every sin. Tush all is well, no harm shall happen unto us;
For God cares not for any thing. Psalm. 10.12.
Lastly, in these our days, there is yet a fourth sort, who have a more
strange turning then all the former. For many having a general notion of Gods
omnipotency, hearing and reading sometimes of Gods Election and Reprobation
(whereof they understand no ground, nor conceive aright) they will presume to
commit any sin; for (say they) All is in God, no man can resist his power, if
he has chosen me to life, I am sure for one, if otherwise (as he did with
Pharao) he has appointed me a Vessel of his wrath, it is not possibly to be
avoided. Such are the windings, and these are the turninges in the hearts, and
secret thoughts of men, either, every creature a God, or else no God; either a
God that regards not sin, or else a God that causes us to sin. Esaias.
29.15.
These turnings and devises in the sight of the Lord, are esteemed as clay,
before the potter. To convince the palpable errors of the three former, I hold
it not convenient: For, to think, there is any one here present, who does
acknowledge no god at all, or such a GOD as regards not the actions of men, I
hold it wrong to this holy assembly, and I hope better things of this Christian
audience.

But to meet with this latter sort, who leaving all good means of their
salvation, do inwardly fall away from GOD, and yet in their wilful ignorance
would shift off, and shoue the cause of their condemnation upon God. For such
chiefly, have I undertaken the exposition of this Scripture, in opening
whereof I will touch these four points. First that there is 1 An Hardening. 2
That God Hardens not. 3 How men become Hardened. 4 The means to avoid it.


Concerning the first point. There are in the Scriptures two Greek verbes,
which are commonly used for this Hardening. The first is (...), which does
properly signify, to dry up and wither, used often in the 3. to the Hebrews.
8.13.15. verses (...). Harden not yoour hearts. The other verb is (...), which
signifies to obdurate, or to make hard. Ephesians. 4.18. (...), They became
strangers from the life of God, through the hardness of their hearts. Having
thus recourse unto the Greek tongue, we shall see, that in the heart of man,
first, there is a drying up, and a certain withering: For in natural things,
and also in the soul, as there is a watering which is good and comfortable, so
there is a drying up, and withering which is dangerous and hurtful. In the
earth there is a watering, for the hills are the teates, and the springs the
milk to moysten, and to water the valleys. Psalm. 104. verse, 10. He sends
the springes into the rivers which run amongst the hills. In the earth
there is a dryness, Joel. 1.20.
for (says Ioell) The people mourn for want of moisture, the rivers of waters
are dried up, and the trees of the field are withered. In the body there is a
watering, for the Liver is the spring of blood that runs into every vein,
and therefore Solomon calls the Liver, Ficcles. 12.7.
The golden well. In the body, there is a withering, for David complains in
the Psalm. 22.15. verse, My moisture is like the drought in Summer, and my
bones are dried up like a potshard. As in the earth and body of man, so
likewise in the soul, there is a watering and a withering. In the 4. of Saint
John and.14. verse, there is mention of a well of living waters for the soul:
The preaching of grace in Christ is called the watering of Apollo. 1. Cor. 3.6.
The prophet Esaias says, Esaias. 12.3.
with joy ye shall draw waters out of the wells of salvation. Contrariwise,
where this grace does not water, Greg. mag.
there is withering. Si spiritus irrigatio defuerit, omnis plantatio exarescit.
Every planting that has not the watering of Gods spirit, it withers and
dryes away: therefore says the Psalmist, the godly, they are like the tree
panted by the rivers side, Psalm. 1.^.
there is watering: but the ungodly are as a Garden that has no water, and as
the broken leaf that fades, there is withering. Esaias. 1.30.


The other Greek verb is (...), which signifies to harden. There be Phisicae
and aethicae vicissitudines, there is a natural and a spiritual Philosophy.
In the natural course of things, there is a congealing and an hatdening, Job.
38.30.31.
as of the ice and frost, which Job very fitly calls the bands of Orion:
because by the cold East and North winds the water becomes as a stone, and the
clods are bound together. Contrary to this Haraening, Psa. 147.18.
there is a melting: He sends out his word, and melts them. As when the
frost does give, and the showers fall, which Job calls in the same place, The
sweet insluence of Pleiades. Both in nature, and in the soul also, there is a
Resolving, and a Hardening: Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 2. The word is called Dew, and
there is a thaw or spiritual melting, when the heavenly dew does cause the
soul to give, and to resolve into tears of Repentance: so in the 2. of Kings.
22.10. Josias heart did melt, when he heard the law read. When King David had
committed murder and adultery, very grievous sins; he never be thought
himself of the matter, but begann to congeale, and to be Hardened in his
sin, but as soon as the prophet Nathan had awaked him, and his heart (like
Gedeons fleece) had drunck up the heavenly dew, then presently David began to
relent, his soul melted with sorrow, and as appears in the 51. Psalm, he
resolved into tears of Repentance. Hezechias, when God had given unto him a
sodaino and triumphant victory over the host of Zenacharib; presently after, in
the pride of his heart, he forgot God and began to congeale in sin: but
as soon as the word of the Lord came unto him by the prophet Esaias, then
presently his heart melted, the blood of his soul flowed forth in his
repentant tears, as appears in the 38 of Esaias: he turned his face unto the
wall, Esaias. 38.3.
and wept bitterly.

Now, as there is a Melting, so also there is an Hardening in the soul, and
that is, when the custom of sin has beaten such an hard tracke, and so
trampled the soul, that the word of God (the seed of life) cannot enter. This
is expressed in the 13. of Saint Matthew, by the parable of the seed which fell
by the high way side, where there was such an hard way, such a beaten path made
by the common entrance of sin, that the seed could take no root, but the
devil comes like an Harpie, and deuoureth it, before it can enter: For example
hereof, we will take Cain, and King Pharao, whom my Text concerns: Cain
having slain his brother Abell, and committed horrible murder: the word of the
Lord came unto him, saying: Where is thy brother Abell? did Cains heart relent?
did he confess and say, I have finned? or did he resolve into tears with
David? no such matter: but first he answered with a foul word: I cannot tell
where he is: then he despised the Lord to his face, as if he should say, you
may go look him, am I my brothers keeper? mark but this answer of Cain, and
his carriage therein, and you need no other example of an heart that is
Hardened: neither affection in kindred could touch him, nor shame of the world
check him, nor the blood of his slain brother move him, nor the glorious
presence of the Lord astonish him, nor the guilt of his own thoughts raze him,
nor (at last) the quickening word of God, which is powreful to raise the very
dead; none of these could any whit revive him. Triplex circa praecordia ferrum,
as Job says of Leuiatha^, ^orat. Tob. 41.15.
his heart was harder then the nether millstone, Pharao, when the word of God
came unto him by Moses and Aaron, Pharao.
he was so far from yiedling, that he seemed presently as though he would have
fought with GOD: Who is the Lord, I know no Lord, neither will I let Israel
go. And whereas the word, and miracles joined with that word were sufficient
to convince any living: Pharaohs heart was so stony, that though by a strange
miracle, all the water in the land were become blood, and did savor most
vnholsomely, yet it is said, Pharao went home, Exodus 7.2^^
and all this could not enter into his heart, it could not pierce him. When the
Prophet cried to the Altar of Jeroboam, O Altar, Altar, hear the word of the
Lord: the Altar heard, and elaue a sunder. 1. Kina 3.
But the word of God which in Jeremy. 23.29. is called an Hammer, because it
bruiseth the stony hearts of men, this Hammer with ten miracles gave ten
mighty strokes at Pharaohs heart, and yet it could never bruise it.

Thus we may plainly see, there is a watering by grace, and a meiting by Gods
word, as appears by David and Hezechiah, who resolved into tears: again
through want of grace, there is a withering, and by custom of sin there is
an Hardening, as in Cain and Pharao, whose hearts the word of God could not
pierce, but the more they were beaten on, the more hard and flintie they became.

It remains in the second point to discuss, whether this Hardening be of
God. In opening whereof it is strange to hear how untruly, how uncharitably we
are charged by our adversaries, not only Campion and Bellarmin, but especially
in certain ARTICLES or Forcible Reasons lately published, wherein it is
directly set down, that the Protestants do make God the author and only
cause of sin, that deride Gods permission; Artic. 5.
and plainly affirm, God is worse then the devil, and so are bound in
conscience never to ask God forgiveness of their sins. Oh fearful
blasphemy, and words unseemly Christian ears: Where is Modesty? where is
truth and Christian piety? Is this our doctrine? do we thus teach? no verily:
both in word and writing we acknowledge the Lord our GOD to be full of
compassion and love, the bowels of his merciesweete and amiable; he would not
the death of any, he is gracious and kind, gentle and ready to forgive, and
(to the death) we affirm, more then most holy, pure and just are all his
works and ways: therefore the Lord be judge between them and us, and lay not
this sin unto their charge.

Touching this doctrine, how sin first came to be, how it came in, where it
first took beginning, and that GOD is not the author of it, I have showed
heeretosore in handling the Golden Chain, the means of our salvation: namely,
that the devil was Primitiuus peccator, John. 6.
the first offender: from him sin first boyleth up, as out of the maine Sea;
from Satan when it comes to Adam, it arises as out of a Spring; from this
Spring it is reserved in nature as in a Conduit; from nature conveyed to
concupiscence (as by a pipe), and from thence does flow all the mischief and
wickedness that is in the life of man. Well then: if sin do proceed from
the suggestion of Satan woorking through our own coucupiscence; and so GOD
wholly freed from all imputation of evil: why is it so often said in the
Scripture. Deuteronomy. 2.30. And the Lord hardened the heart of Sihon King of
Heshbon, and made him obstinate: Joshua the 11.20. It came of the Lord to
harden their hearts: and here often in the book of Exodus, and the Lord
hardened the heart of Pharao. To make this plain: it is a point well known
unto the learned, that this speech (where it is said) God Hardened: Flaccus.
Illiricus. P. Lomb. li. 1. did. 41.
the Hebrew Dialect does signify a permission, and not an action. Verbes that
signify to do, they often express a suffering and not a doing. Destruit cum
deserit, The. Aquin. ^.1. q. 23. arti, 3.
God is then said to Harden, when he does forsake. Impios cum non retrabit a
malo culpae, dicitur dimittere. As the enduing with grace is the effect of Gods
Election, so the withholding of his grace is the effect of Reprobation. Dei
includere est clausis non aperire, says Saint Gregory upon the 12. of Job.
and fourteen verse. Every action has his quality from the root of the
affection, and from the intention of the Author: Deus autem (quoad peceatum)
non habet positive velle, sed tantum privative, Touching sin, God has no
Positive will, but only in regard of former sins a Privation of his grace.
To be short: God does Harden, as Saint Augustine says: Non malum obtrudendo,
sed gratiam non concedendo, August.
not by causing us to commit sin, but by not granting unto us his grace. I,
but how comes it to pass, that we (as well as others) are not partakers of Gods
grace? why have not we also his good Spirit to direct and guide us? Saint
Augustine makes it plain again. August.
Non idco non habet home gratiam, quia Deus non dat, sed quia home non aceipit:
men become Hardened, and want the spirit of grace, why? not because GOD does
not offer it unto them, but because they receive it not, when it is offered.
For example: One of us being sick, and like to dye, the Physicion knowing our
case, he takes with him some preservative to comfort us, and comes to the
door and knocks; if we will not, or be not able to let him in, we perish and
dye, and the cause is not in the Physicion, but in our selves that let him not
in. Plato de leg. 10.
(...). Sin is a disease, whereof we are all sick, for we have all sinned:
Romans. 6.12. verse. Christ, he is the Physicion of our souls: Aug^in Mat.
9.12.
Venit de coelo magnus medicus, quia per totum vbique iacebit aegretus. Christ
the great Physician came down from heaven, because all mankind was generally
infected. He comes to the door of our hearts, and there he knockes. Revel.
3.20. Behold, John. 6.35.
I stand at the door and knock, He brings with him (...) the bread of life,
his eternal word to comfort us, if we let him in, if we open the door of
our hearts, Lue. 10.
he will come in, and suppe with us, as he did with Mary, and forgive us all
our sins; but if we will not, or through long contagion of our sin be not
able to let Christ in, we dye in our sins, and the case is evident, not
because Christ does not offer grace, and comfort unto us, but because we
receive it not, when it is offered. Merito perit aegretus qui non medicum
vocat, sed vltro venientem respuit, worthily does that sick patient perish,
M^sculus.
who will neither send for the Physicion himself, nor accept of his help,
when it is offered.

More plainly thus, in the 14. of Saint Matthew. Our Savior walking on the
sea, he badde Saint Peter come unto him, who walking on the water, seeing
storm and tempest arise, his heart failed, and he began to sinck, upon his
cry unto our Savior, he presently stretched forth his hand, took him into
the shipp, and saved him. This world (we know by daily experience) it is a sea
of trouble and misery: our Savior (as he said to Saint Peeter) so most
lovingly he wills every one of us to come unto him: as we walk, storms
and tempests do arise, through frailty of our flesh, and the weakness of our
faith, we beginn to sinck, our Savior, he stretches forth his hand, he
gives us (...) his word, his Sacraments, the good motiones of his Spirit, to
save us from sincking, and to keep us in the shipp of his Church: if we refuse
these means, we perish, we sinck in our sins, why? not because Christ does
not most kindly put forth his hand unto us, but because in want and distress
we lay not hold upon him. This is condemnation, that light is come into the
world, men refuse it, and love darkness more then light. Our blessed Savior
with great loving kindness, John 3.18.
he does inuit all men to his Great Supper, if we make excuses, or wilfully
refuse to come, he may justly pronounce, none of those that were bidden shall
ever taste of my supper. Lue. 14.24.


Therefore let not men deceive themselves, and complain as though God did
harden their hearts and deny them grace and mercy, for as Jonas says in his
2. Chapter, John. 2.8.
and 8. verse. They forsake their own mercy. Deus prior in amore, God never
hates until he be first hated, and so I conclude with Saint Ambrose: Nemo
tibi Christum potest auferre, Ambros.
nisi te illi auferas, no man can separate Christ from thee, except first thou
do separate thy self from him. This is plainly to be observed in Pharao,
had he (being long before peacably settled in a rich and mighty Kingdom) made
right use of the blessings of GOD, had he at the first, or oftentimes after,
yielded unto the word of the Lord, he had never come to the state of Hardninge,
nor left himself such a fearful spectacle of Gods wrath for ever. But
Pharao, feeling wealth and reuenew coming in so fast and abundantly, that he
builded new Cities ( Pithom and Raamses) to lay up his treasures, Exodus 1.11.
his heart was so bent and set upon covetousness (such multitudes of people
moyling and labouringe in sundry works for his profitte) that in no case he
could endure to hear of their departure. Exodus 5.2. Chap. 7.11.
First, he said flatly, they should not go; Secondly, he sought to shift off
the matter, affirming the miracles not to be done by Gods hand, but by
enchantment; Thirdly, 8.25.
he yielded they should offer sacrifice, but only in his own land; Fourthly,
he was content they should go sacrifice out of his land (but still he would
condition with God) None but the men should go; 10.11.
Fifthly, the men should go, the women go, 10.2^.
the children go, but their sheep and Oxen (wherein their wealth stood)
should not go.

Thus Pharao (through a wretched and griple mind) never left winding and
turning, dallying and presuming of the Lords mercy, and patience, till adding
one sin unto another, his heart became Hardened: Nay, Observe here how
fearful a thing it is, wilfully to sin against our own conscience.
notwithstanding so many miracles, and that before he confessed the Lord to be
God, he and his people sinful, and earnestly desired Moses to pray for him,
yet contrary to his own thoughts, and against his own knowledge, when he saw
the people of Israel were gone, he flies to strength of war, he calls his
Captains, he musters his people, he gathers his Chariots, he pursues with all
might and maine, till at last both he and his (over whelmed in the sea)
received the fearful and final judgment of wilful disobedience. Now then
let all the earth know the goodness of the Lord, and wisely observe his love
unto mankind for ever. It is true, Pharaohs heart was Hardened, and he with
his Nobles utterly overthrown. But before this overthrow, all means possibly
that could be, were used to win Pharao. Blessing upon blessing before
received; punishment upon punishment after inflicted; Moses still and again
prayed for him; Aaron ever and anon persuaded him; the plagues to astonish him,
were sudden and exceeding wonderful; the deliverance, to win him, was
present, and more miraculous: the Enchanters confessed, the People cried out,
his Servants were offended, Egypt was almost quite destroyed, the land of
Goshen was still untouched; God again, and again, and still again was
entreated, and yet Pharao remained obstinate. Shall we then say that God
Hardened Pharaohs heart? Be it far from us: for it is directly set down in
the 9. chap. 34. verse. And when Pharao saw the hail and thunder were gone, he
sinned again, and Hardened his heart; and again the 8. chap. 15. verse. When
Pharao saw that he had rest, he hardened his own heart.

Oh, I would to God it were only Pharaohs case, and that we also being
Christians did not abuse the long forbearance, and much loving kindness of our
God. For, now fear of the storm is over, but even one year or two: now that
our loving God through his unspeakable mercy has so sweetly set all in
order, Behold our unthankfulness to God enjoying so religious and peaceable a
Prince.
that all Nations round about us stand amazed, now that he has settled amongst
us a most happy and religious peace; now that he gath given honor, plenty,
and rest throughout all the land; still, still we dally and trifle with the
Lord, according to our private humors, and several sects; we will not
prosesse the Gospel, except we first condition (as Pharao did) both with our
God and King: with humble hearts we do not submit our selves peaceably to serve
the Lord: For this blessed Catastrophe, our souls flame not with thankful
love, neither (as they ought) break forth into everlasting praises: Nay,
whereas the word of GOD came ten times to Pharao, willing him to let the
people of Israel go, and serve the Lord, the same word comes an hundred times
ten to our hearts, crying and beating upon us to have us let go our
contentions, our carnal and perverse affections, and yet we never relente at
the same. A man's heart will tell him more then seven watchmen in a Tower: We
know, Ecceus. 37.14.
we know (every one in his own bosom) the sins, which we secretly foster,
and will not let go. But as Saint Paul exhorts the Jews, Hebrews 3.12. so
I advise you in the name of GOD. Take heed, take heed, least in any of you
there be found a false and an evil heart, to depart from the living GOD. For
assuredly it is a fearful and bitter thing to carye ever a selfe-wild and
perverse mind, to respect merely the applause of men, and fading pleasures of
this life; so, inwardly falling away from God, and losing the blessed comfort
of our salvation. O Savior sweet, and secret hope, turn us, that we may be
turned; bow our hearts, and the hearts of our seed unto thee, that we may
fear thy judgments, acknowledge thy goodness, and stand fast in thy love for
ever.

The third point is to show how men become Hardened; in opening whereof, we
are to understand that there are three sorts of Hardening: Naturalis,
Voluntaria, Hidicialis. The first is by Nature, the second by Habit and
Custom, the third by the Just judgment of GOD. The first is the
forgetfulness or dullness in a natural man, when he ouershootes himself,
for want of wise observation and remembrance.

In this sixth of Mark, our Savior Christ fed five thousand men with five
loaves, Mark. 6.
and two fishes, a miracle sufficient to prove unto his Disciples, that he was
the Son of GOD. Yet presently after, when he came walking on the Sea, and
caused the wind to cease, they stood amazed, and did not acknowledge his
Divinity: for (says the Scripture) in the two and fifteth verse. Gods
children may be blinded in mind, and hardened in heart for a time
They considered not the miracle of the loaves, because their hearts were
Hardened, that is, through natural imperfection they had for got it.

Secondly, there is an Hardening by habit, when (through a careless security)
men do continue in sin, and take such a custom, as they can hardly leave.
So Simon Magus, his heart by custom was so long bent, and set upon
covetousness, that being conversant amongst the Apostles, and daily employed
in most divine and holy actions. Yet even then, his mind and thought still
ran upon money, upon gain. This is Habitualis obduratio, an Hardening which
grows, by continuance in sin. He that is in this case, it stands him upon
to gather up his spirits, and strongly to resist sin, to sequester himself
ost-times unto devout and private Meditations, to joy in hearing the word, with
reverence to receive the blessed Sacraments, especially to be fervent in
prayer, for so Saint Peter willed Simon Magus: Acts. 8.22.
Repent and pray, that (if it be possible) the thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven.

The third and last is Iudicialis obduratis, an Hardening which proceeds from
the just judgment of God. Cumpeccatum fit paenapeccati, when sin becomes a
punishment to him that commits it, Romans 1.2.7.
as Saint Paul says (...) a recompense of former errors; when the thought is
so poisoned, the mind and soul so generally infected, that the spirit of God
is utterly quenched: no light of nature, no private counsel, no public
exhortation out of the word, no inward motions of Gods spirit can prevail,
but he goes on so long, and is so far spent, that being past all fear to
offend, careleslye he makes no scruple of any sin whatsoever; till at
length finding in himself no hope of recovery, either God strikes him
apparently with his judgment, as he did Pharao; or else by his death he
passes silent to the grave without repentance, as Dives; or in this life (as
Judas did) does plunge himself in the gulf of desperation. This is that
Hardening which is here meant of Pharao.

This Hardening is not all on a sudden: Non ruimus primo impetu vt Deo
reluctemur, Calw.
no man is Hardened at the first. Nemo fit repent miser. Hebr. 3.13. Take
heed least any of you be Hardened through the deceitefulnesse of sin.

The deceitfulness of sin, The Aquin.
it creeps like a canker worm, it gathers, it steals upon us, and so under
the foreknowledge of God, men come unto Hardening by degrees. Naturalis est
ordo, vt ab imperfecto, ad perfectum quis moueatur, It is a natural course
even in evil (says the schooleman) by degrees to come unto to perfection.
Psalm. 34.7.
As they that dwellin Gods house, will bring forth more fruit, and then
appear before the God of gods in perfect beauty: so, on the contrary, the
wicked are not Hardened all at once, but as they offend more and more, so by
little and little they grow to the height of sin, and they do fall from one
mischief to an other.

Judas was first a cunning Dissembler; Mat, 26.8. Ioh. 12.5, Mat. 26.25.48.
Mat. 27.5.
secondly, he became a secret Thief; thirdly, he grew to be an impudent Liar;
fourthly, he proved a bold Traitor; lastly, a desperate Reprobate.

The diseases of the body, they do not grow at one and the selfsame time,
they do first appear but by riot and destemperature used long before so the
soul infected with unclean thoughts, and in youth accustomed to evil
actions, at length comes to the incurable disease of Hardening. Aug confess. 8
Saint Augustine in the 8. of his Confess. does open this point very plainly.

First, August.
the devil by concupiscence suggesteth evil thoughts; evil thoughts egg on
delight; delight towleth on consent; consent engendereth action; action
brings forth custom; custom grows to necessity; and necessity in sinning
is the forerunner of death. For example. First, the devil suggesteth evil
thoughts, so he did unto Eve, he wound her in by tainting her thought, by
telling her, she should have all knowledge, and be as GOD: this evil thought
egged on delight; for as appears in the sixth verse, the Apple grew pleasant
in her eyes; this delight towled on consent, for then she took of the fruit,
lastly of consent came the action, for she did eat and gave it to her husband.

Now, when the action of sin is committed, there does not presently follow
Hardening: for, if the heart do melt and thaw, if the soul do give and
resolve into tears of repentance for the same, then there is no Hardening.
But, if from one action committed, we come unto another, and so to the custom
and continuance in sin, then are we snared with the cords of our own
iniquity, and fettered with this chain against the general day of Gods
Judgment. To make this plain, I will show you by seven degrees, as it were by
seven stayres, how men do descend into this pit of Hardening.

The first step is importable: Sin at the first, Importabile.
One that has been religiously brought up, has been accustomed to a mild
and honest conversation, and has been fearful to offend; at length, if
through bad company, through his own weakness, and the allurements of Satan,
he falls into any foul sin; at the first it is importable, it does strike
such an horror into him, that he is in a woeful taking and greiuously
tormented. This we may see by David, who having always a tender conscience,
loath to offend, yet after over taken by committing murder and adultery,
as soon as he saw what he had done, he was mightily troubled, whersoeuer he
became, his offense so stuck in his thought, that in the 51 Psalm: 3. he cries
out, my sin is ever before me, it is continually in my sight.

The second stayer is Grave, heavy: for sin being committed twice or thrice,
Grave.
it is not as it was at the first importable, but it is heavy. He sorrows,
and is grieved, but he is nothing so troubled in mind, nor afflicted in
conscience as he was before.

The third stayer is Leave; light: For he that has used himself more often to
sin: that which at the first was importable, and afterward heavy, at
length becomes light. This appears by the unchaste woman spoken off in the
Proverbs, who having had some practice in sin, she makes no more matter of
it, but lightly passes it over with wiping her mouth, Pro. 30-20.
and says she has not sinned.

The fourth stayer is insensibile, past feeling, for after that sinnne be made
light of, Ensensibile.
and that there be no remorse nor grief for sin, then they grow past
feeling: such were the Israelites of whom the Prophet Jeremy speaks in his
5. chapter and 3. verse: Thou have smitten them, but they have not sorrowed,
for they have made their faces harder then a stone, that is, they have sinned
so long, that now they are past feeling.

The fifth staire is Delectabile. Solomon says) They rejoice in doing evil and
delight in wickedness. Delectabile.
Hereof Saint Augustine says. Pro. 2.14.
Tumest consummata infoelicitas, vbiturpia non solum committuntur, sedetiam
delectant: Then is the estate of condemnation certain, when soul sins are
not only committed,

The sixth stayre is Desiderabile, Desiderabile.
when (through delight) men grow to such a custom, that they inwardly desire
to sin, so that as Saint Gregory said: Si nunquam moreretur, nunquam
vellepcecare desineret: such a man, if he should never die, he would never
cease to sin, for though he did not commit it in action, yet still he would
desire it in thought.

The seventh stayre is defensibile. When he has gotten a forehead of brass.
Esaias. 48.4. Psalmist says) when the tyrant does boast that he can do
mischief, when he sits in the seat of the scorner, Defensibile. Psai. 1.1.
when he does not only by habyt desire to sin, and delight in it, but now he
will take upon him to defend it. Peccatum porta mortis, defensio est limen
inferni, Sin is the high way to death, Origin.
but the defense of sin is the very next step into hell, at this point were
the Jews, who being reproved for idolatry, the Scripture says, they said
desperately, we have loved strange gods, and them will we follow again; they
refused to hearken and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their cares,
Zacha. 7 ^1.
and made their hearts as an Adamant stone. Ier. 2.25. Pro. 18.3.
Impius cum venerit in profundum contemnit, a dissolute liver once grown to
the height of sin, becomes desperate.

Thus sin, first it is importable, secondly Heavy, thirdly it becomes Light,
fourthly past feeling, fifthly delightful, sixthly desired, and lastly to be
defended. here is descensus auerni, these be the stayers that lead to the
chambers of death, and the steps, whereby the reprobate do descend unto final
destruction. Indeed, at the first, when sin is importable, and that we are
wonderfully grieved for committing of it, there is great hope of recovery, and
he that so feeling the wound of sin, does there stay the course of it, it is
an excellent sign of salvation: Initiune salutis notitia peccati, the first
step of repentance is the first finding out, and acknowledgement of sin. In
the second of the Acts, when they saw and knew their sin, they cried out,
Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved: this horror, this troubled
mind, it made them seek for comfort, and so brought them to repentance.

Secondly, when sin is a burden unto our souls, so that we would feign be
eased of it, there is yet good hope: we may see it by David in the 38. Psalm.
4. verse. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and are as a burden too
heavy for me to bear: the weight of this burden made David in the 18. verse
following, to confess his wickedness, and to be sorry for his sin, it made
him fly unto God for ease: O cast your burden upon the Lord, for he will not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

Thirdly, when men make light of sin, surely danger is not far off, for a
threefold cord is not easily broken, and the third letting of blood in the same
vein is exceeding dangerous: but yet still there is some hope, for though in
the hot chase of our blind and youthful desires, though then for a time we
account it a light matter, to commit this or that sin, yet God may touch our
hearts, Christ may look back upon us, as he did on S. Peter, who denied him
thrice, his word may so strike us, that we may come to know our selves, to see
in what case we are, to bewail our infirmity, and so turn unto God by prayer
and repentance: Job. 33.2^.
All these things (as Job says) will God work twice or thrice with a man. But
if we come to (insensibile) to the fourth stayre, so that we grow past feeling,
we sin daily, and have no sense of it, if there be no remorse, no grief nor
dislike of sin; woe be unto us, 2. Amos. 6. For three transgressions, and for
four, I will not turn to Israel (says the Lord), without the infinite and
extraordinary mercy of God, we are the sons of wrath, for then follows
this deadly wound of Hardening. It is a principle in Physic, grauissime is
aegrotat, qui se non sentit aegrotare, if a man be sick, and know it not, out
of question, he is very dangerously and deadly sick; he that finds in
himself no want of any thing (as the Church of La^dicea) (...) I stand not in
need of any thing. This deadness, Revel. 3.17.
this vn-feeling numnesse, it is a plain foreteller of death: for example, if
a man have taken a grievous wound in his body, if it ache, if it prick and
shoot, if it pain him, either it is healing, or else there is hope to heal
it: but (as Saint Augustine says) Quod non dolet, August.
non prosano, sed promortuo computandum, if the wound be such, that it never
causes grief, if it never ache nor smart, undoubtedly it is dead flesh, of
necessity it must be cut off.

To commit actual and presumptuous sins, when a man's own knowledge and Gods
Spirit cries in him to the contrary, these are wounds, and grievous wounds
unto the soul, and whosoever has gone on so far, that he does delight in
these sins, so often, so long, that his mind is never troubled, his
thoughts never checked, his soul never grieved, surely such a one (being
utterly past feeling) is very near to this fearful estate of Hardening.

Indeed the Scripture says, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of
his sin, from the bottom of his heart, (...) 18.21.
God will put all his wickedness out of his remembrance. Whereupon many take
their pleasure in sin, and go dissolutely on, thinking at last to make all
good by repentance. It is true, if they can repent. But they must observe what
Saint Augustine says. Qui promittit poenitenti veniam, non promittit peccanti
pa^nitentiam God who promises to every one that repents, forgiveness; does
not promise to every one that sins, repentance.

Repentance is the gift of God, and such as are Hardened (because in times past
they have despised the riches of his bounty and grace, his long suffering and
mercy which did call them to repentance) when they would, they cannot repent.
After Hardness the heart it can not repent. Romans 2.5.


The holy and blessed Sacraments now presently to be administered, they are
Pledges of Gods love, and Seals of our salvation. Romans 4.11.
By Baptism, he breaks the heads of the Dragons in the waters, Et per
Baptismu^ coeli ^anua aperitur, By Baptism eue^ the door of heaven is set
open. The Sacrament of the Lords supper, it is, canalis gratiae, and lauacrum
animae, the conduit of Grace, and the bath of the Soul. What can be more
joyful, then by receiving the sign of the cross to fight under the banner of
Christ's love, and to be knit into the mystical body of his Saints. What can
be more joyful, then to receive that pure and Princely blood, the least drop
whereof being able to redeem a thousand worlds, I may rest assured, it is a
full and perfect satisfaction for all my sins: so that, if my body has
sinned, his body has made a mendes: if my soul has sinned, his soul has
made a recompense: and therefore both soul and body are his, and so we
firmly and fully seated in a Christian joy for ever. These holy and heavenly
Sacraments, are not effectual in the obstinate: Judas, notwithstanding he was
a Disciple of our Savior, and that blessed hand which after was nailed to the
Cross, did reach unto him the bread of life, yet he was so Hardened with
secret sin, Ioh. 13.2^
and a traitorous disposition, that as soon as he received the sop, the devil
enters into him, took full possession of him, and so brought him to a most
fearful end. Oh happy is he that sins least, next he that returns
soonest, but most dreadful is the estate of him, who like Pharao is given over
unto Hardening. For he that is once come to this pass, that as Jeroboam, he
has sold himself to commit sin, his mind reprobate, his conscience seared,
and his soul frozen in the dregs of sin; then, Romans 1.2^. 1. Tim. 4.2. Zech.
1.12.
though he weep and lament with Esau; though he would restore that which he
has wrongfully gotten with Judas; though he do gird himself in sackcloth, and
walk softly as Ahab; though he do pull the men of God to comfort him, and pray
for him as Saul did; though he do mourn like a Dove, and chatter like a
crane, with the Pelican, though he do send forth shrill and fearful cries
into the air, Ier. 13.23.
yet all this will not help (woe alas) there is no recovery, Ier. 13.23. Can
the blacke-Moore change his skinn or the Leopard his spotts, then may they do
good, who have accustomed them selves to do evil. Arist. eth. 7. cap. 7. Thomas
Aquin, Wisd. 12.10. Eccus. 17.14. Hebr. 10.26. Hebr. 12.17.
OF (...) He that Hardens his heart can never be cured. Habituati in malo
sunt impaeniturt. there thoughts can never be altered there stony hearts can
not become flesh; they have denied the power of salvation, they have dispited
the spirit of grace, and though they seek the blessings with tears they can
find no place to repentance. This is a lamentable estate, this is a fearful
judgment, for man to be left unto him self, given up to satan, and to be
forsaken of God for ever, from this estate the Lord for his endless mercy
deliver us. Thus have I showed how, and after what sort men become Hardened,
not of my self, but as Saint Augustine says: Ligatus teneor non ferro alteno:
sed meaferrea voluntate, velle meum tenebat inimicus, et inde mihi funes
fecerat, et consuetudini dum non resistitur facta est necessitas. A man becomes
Hardened, he is fettered, not by any other chain, but by the cords of his
own sin, the devil by deceit gets power over the will, and so does snare
us, and because in the beginning we did not resist custom, at length it
grows to necessity. This is the very same in effect set down by Saint Paul
in the 4 to the Ephesiaus 18. where this manner of Hardening is also expressed:
first (...) the mind is darkened, they cannot rightly discern what to do,
then, (...) they become ignorant, thirdly comes in (...) when the soul (for
want of heavenly dew) begins to whither and hard, fourthly (...) past
feeling, and lastly given over to committ all sin with greedines.

To eschew this gulf, and to avoid the danger of this Hardening, either we
must cut of and stay the course of sin in the act, or else we must resist it in
the beginning, and slay it in our thoughts. It is an excellent saying of Saint
Ierom: Ibi maxim oportet obseruare pecc^tum, vbi nasci sol^t: both in sin
and also in curing the diseases of the body, it is the chiefest point, to
observe and find out where the malady first took beginning: it is plain, sin
first buddeth in the thought, and therevppon Saint Jerome calls it primo
genita Diaboli, the dmills darlinge or first begotten. Satan dare not attempt
any unto murder, treason, or any such greueous sin; unless he send an evil
thought before, to try whether he shall be welcome.

The Philistines will not venture, till Dalilah has wrought the feate: as she
with Sampson never left fawning, and creeping into his bosom till by
conse^ting unto her, he lost both his strength, and his eyes, and became a
mil-horse for the Philistines: so evil thoughts they allure and toule on so
long, till the light of the understanding being blinded, Satan that foul
Philistine sets them such a grist to grind, as they must pay the loss of
eternal life for the toule.

The Philosopher said truly (...). Philo
custom arises of very small beginnings, and though it seem a small matter to
lend the devil an evil thought, yet thewiseman says in the 13. of Wisd.
Bernard.
Evil thoughts separate from God: cogitationes malae dum ludunt illu^unt, evil
thoughts while they dally, they do deceive.

As the stream in the River Jordan does carry the fish swimming and playing,
Josephus.
till on a sudden they fall (in mare mortuum) into the dead sea; where, by
reason of brimstone they presently die: so, many suffer themselves to be carried
away so long with vicious thoughts, and wicked imaginations, that on a sudden,
the powers of the mind be grievously infected.

The eye is fenestra mentis, Iere. 9.21.
and many times, ere ever we be aware, death steals in at the window.

The ear, Job. 12.11.
Job calls it in his 12. Chapter: the taster of the soul: As the mouth
tastes meat for the belly: so the ear tastes words for the soul. He that
has a wicked eye, and an unchaste ear (as Saint Peter says of Simon Magus)
his soul will soon be brought to the gall of bitterness.

Therefore, wise men may hereby judge, how carefully, how prouidently the
education of youth (especially of the nobler sort) ought to be respected.

How flattering parasites and profane iesters ought to be warily shunned. Alas
the mind and disposition of youth, at the first, it is like a sweet and
bright ^^^er dish, you may put in it what you please, but if through vile
Atheists, and dissolute company, the affection be once led away, and the
disposition infected, woe worth that company, for the infection of sin taken
in tender years: Job says, The soul dies in youth; Job. 36.14.
as cloth stained in the wool does never lose the color, so the stayne of
sin taken in tender years will hardly or never be taken out: nay, that which
afterward discretion and years does know and judge in it self most hateful,
(...) by evil custom, Chrisost.
he is enforced to put the same in practice whether he will or no. In the 9. of
Mark 21. ve. the foul spirit which kept possession from a child, could not be
cast out by any other but only by our Savior. Job made a covenant with his
heart, and David prayed the Lord to turn away his eyes from beholding vanity:
every good man ought to labor and strive with himself to quench his desires,
to check his thoughts, to beat down and keep under his affections, that
though he do sin sometime of infirmity, yet it may never generally infect
the mind, it may never be settled in the thought.

There is no sacrifice more acceptable unto God, then the nipping of a Serpents
head: therefore as David speaks of the children of Babylon, adpetras
illidere, to dash their brains against the wall, while they are young, so the
best way to prevent Hardening, is to nip sin in the head at the first, to kill
the strength of it in our thoughts.

Now, if God do not so strengthen us to overcome sin in the thought, the
next way to shun this Hardening is to stay the course of it in the act. Psalm.
68.22.
For God will wound the hearie scalpe of such, as go on still in their
wickedness. Paruus error in principio maximus est in fine, A small escape in the
beginning many times proves a mischief in the end. Consuctudo peccandi tollit
sensum peccati. The custom of sin takes away all feeling of sin, as he
that is stung with a viper, is so deadly benumbed, that he feels the sting of
nothing else, so he that has taken a custom of offending, never feels the
infection of any sin, though it ranckle never so grievously. In the 69.
Psalm. 16. verse. David prays, O let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. To
sin is to fall into a pit, but to take a custom in sin, is to cover the pit
and dam it up, that we shall never get out again.

Consuetudinem vincere dura pugna (says Augustine). Aug^in psa: 36
It is a difficult fight to overcome custom, for in all humane things (...)
custom is the most intolerable tyrant. Horatius the Roman being to fight
with three enemies at once, did single them out, and then slew them one by one:
so the force of sin is to be cut off in every several action, least by
gathering strength it overthrow us. He that trusts his own heart, is not
wise. Pro. 28.26.
In this case, it is good for a man to suspect his own heart, to call his own
ways to remembrance, to take sometimes a survey and a view of the manner of
his life, and daily actions, and if he find in himself, that God has
suffered him so sarre to be tempted, that he is fallen into any soul offense,
which he knows is directly both against God and his own conscience, then
presently to bestirre himself, never to suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his
eyelids to slumber, til he have poured out his heart unto God, made bitter
lamentation, craved pardon with repentance, and vowed by Gods assistance never
to offend in any such sort again. Otherwise, if lightly he pass it over, and
so go on: as Mithridates accustomed his body so much to the receipt of poison,
that at length no poison would work on him, so he that has once taken in with
the custom of sin, shall at length come that to pass, that the greatest sin
that is, he shall never feel it. Aug. inser. ^. (...) adv. Dom.
Own peccatum vilescit consuetudine, and fit homini quasi nullum, the greatest
sin by custom comes to be accounted nothing. When the body is sore hurt and
wounded, there is no driving off of time, but presently it must be looked to;
so when the soul is wounded, we must not defer to turn unto the Lord, but
fly unto him, with importunate prayer, with a broken and mourning heart, for
fear, the wound do fester inwardly, and so there be no recovery. I make it
plain by example thus. If a man take in the Spring three or four plants, and
set them all together at one time, if he come by and by, or within a while
after, he may easily pull up one of them, if he stay a fortnight or a month,
he may pull up an other, but it will be somewhat harder, if he stay a year or
two, till it settle and take root, then he may pull and strain his very heart
stringes, but his labor is lost he shall never be able to pull it up. One
sin, one offense, if we labor to pull it up in time, it may be forgiven, it
may be taken away; if we let it go on to two or three; with unfeigned
repentance, with bleedinge tears, with incessant outcryes unto a gracious God,
they may be rased out and wiped away, but with greater difficulty: at length,
if a man give over himself unto sin, so that it take deep root in the
heart, and be settled in the soul, he shall never be able to pull it up, nor
to arise from the death of sin.

To draw then to an end: forasmuch then, as God desires not the death of any
sinner, but most lovingly offers his grace and means of salvation unto all:
seeing sin does proceed from our own vile concupiscence, and we never
striving to stay the course of it in our thoughts, do so secretly fall away:
seeing by degrees against their own knowledge, men do wound their souls with
many actual sins, and thereupon God does withold his grace, and so forsake
them; and this forsaking is such a forlorn estate, that as Job says. 12.14.
God shuts a man up, and he can never be loosed: O how fervent ought we to
be in prayer, thereby to kindle in us, the heat of Gods spitit, how devout in
sweet and heavenly meditations, to stir up in us the good graces of God; how
dilligent to show the fruits of our faith, ever stirring in the works and
labors of our calling; giving no advantage to our adversary: how careful when
we hear the word of God, to do it with an humble spirit, with great reverence,
thereby to keep a tender heart, a mind and cogitation that may easily be
touched with remorse, how desirous and secretly joyful at this holy time to
prepare our selves to the receiving of the blessed Sacraments, to have our
hearts stripped of worldly vanities, to call home our affections, to appease
our thoughts, and so peaceably to bath our souls a fresh in the precious blood
of our everlasting redeemer. That so feeling our selves as it were newly
created again, soul and body, heart, hand, and tongue, may never cease to
sound praises unto him, who does never cease to renew his mereies unto us. The
holy and kingly prophet: David, he is a worthy example for this royal
presence, set him before your eyes, and observe the whole course of his life:

How sweet and mild was his spirit, in forbearing to take revenge for him
self? how courageous and invincible his faith, when it stood in the quarrel of
Gods honor? how dearly affected to his people, when he said to the
destroying Angel, not these sheep, but it is I that have offended? what
melting and kind affection did he show toward Jonathan, and those whom he
loved? what a mournful and repentant heart, when he knew that he had
offended, how full of divine meditatio^s to better his thoughts? how frequent
in prayer flowing from him as a continual stream? how joyful in Gods service,
dancing before the Arc? how reverend in Gods house, kneeling and bowing in the
temple before all the people? what a thankful heart in offering to build a
glorious temple to the Lord? what an humble mind, saying, what am I, and what
was my fathers house, that thou have brought us hitherto? what a chary and
tender care of Gods glory whersoeuer he became? how abundant in praises and
thanksgiving, calling every member of himself, and all the creatures both of
heaven and earth to make one quier in setting forth, singing, and sounding the
everlasting praises of his God? but why did David thus? to what end was all this? that he might be sure still to hold fast by God, to be entirely knitt
unto him, by all means possible to retain his love; for fear, least God
having raised him to the height of renown, delivered him miracolously out of
many eminent and bloody dangers, and so set a crown of blessings upon his
head: if Deuid should have showen any unthankfulness, any contempt, or the
least neglect of his love a mighty and ielous God, he also, upon just cause
might have withdrawn his love, and laid all his honor in the dust again.

Now therefore, with all humbleness and duty I entreat you by the tender
mercyes of Christ Jesus, and in the name of the living God I challenge every
Christian which hopes for any joy in the life to come, take heed of actual
and presumptuous sins, in no case let them have dominion cuer you, do not
wound your souls (as Pharao did) with wilful offenses against your own
knowledge, try and examine all your thoughts, how and wherein they stand
affected, and above all, greiue not the blessed motions of that comfortable
spirit, which keeps the very Life and Being of the soul. To conclude, let
all slanderous mouths be stopped, and all the factious scismatiques in the
land ashamed, in beholding your Christian and princely example: continue still
to be lovingly and kindly affected one toward another: celebrate this holy
time in a true religious manner: Sanctify the joyful beginning of this new
years reign with new devotion unto God: lay all your Honors down at the
foot of the altar: Receive the holy Sacraments jointly together, and so be
faithfully knitt in love and in one head Christ Jesus: go cheerfully on,
delight still in doing good: and the Lord God of our fathers increase in you
good desires, give you zeal to perform them, confirm unto you, and to your
seed all his good promises, and unto every one of us here grant pardon for
offenses past, give us comfort and strength in temptations to come, even for
his blessed Son Christ Jesus sake: who with the Father and the holy Ghost, be
blessed and praised for ever.

Amen.

