Romans. 8.30. ver. Moreover, whom he predestined, the^ also he called: and
whom he called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he
glorified.


2, Tim, 3.6
Every scripture (says the blessed Apostle) given by inspiration, is
profitable, to instruct the man of God; and to make him perfect to good works.
Yet notwithstanding, if a man should seeks upon purpose, and line by line,
trace the whole body of the scripture over: of all others, this one short
verse, is most denine, most excellent. Hiero in cap. 9. ad Ephe,
Singuli Sermones, Sillabae, apices, puncta, in Diuina scriptura plena sunt
se^sibus. In the holy Scripture every speech and sentence, every verse,
every point and syllable, is rich in sense, and full of divine and holy
mysteries.

So is it here. For the points of doctrine, it contains the whole some of our
religion; for the manner, it consists of a sweet gradation; for the matter,
it is full of comfortable instruction; for the depth of the understanding, it
has in it, such sweet profound, and heavenly mysteries: that, as it is
written, the head of the River Nilus could never be found so the height, depth,
and spiritual knowledge, which lies couched in this whole verse, in every
point, in every word it is unsearchable, it cannot be sounded. Concerning
the Doctrine.

Surely, howsoever, men do live at case for a time in this life, and carelessly
pass on in this busy world; yet the especial, and maine point, is the
salvation of the Soul, to be assured of the life to come: and if a man might
be satisfied therein, then all were well, all were sure indeed.

Alas, this life ends, and GOD knows how soon, even this night before
tomorrow, may my soul be taken from me: and, if I could prove unto my heart,
that God had chosen me to eternal life, then I should think my self, the
most happy and blessed-creature alive. Jn this great and weighty point of
Salvation for ever, to answer a man thoroughly and soundly, to satisfy a man's
heart and soul unto the full, there is no one place in all the holy book of
God, that can, so briefly, so plainly, so sufficiently instruct us, as this one
short verse.

The ancient Fathers in the course of their writings, they do call it the
goulden Chain of our Salvation, because each one of these: Predestination,
Calling, Justification and glorifyinge, are so coupled and knitte together,
that if you hold fast one lincke, you draw unto you the whole Chain: if you
let go one, you lose all.

For the manner of my proceeding, according to the Fathers allusion: first, I
will untie this Chain, and weigh every lincke in his own proper balance, and
so handling every point, severally by it self in the end, I will knit them up,
and close them all together again. And here, before I enter any further, I
most humbly crave pardon, and favorable construction in this matter.
Predestination part of the Gospel may be preached of, discreetly and
reuerantly. Aug. De. Bono pers. cap. 14.15 20.
I know right well, I am to touch a very great and weighty point of religion,
indeed so secret and deep, that I do throw my self down at the foot of
Gods mercy-seate, beseeching him with all humbleness, to support my weakness,
to enlarge my heart, and to give me an understanding spirit, that whatsoever I
shall speak, it may be, with such truth of his word, with such zeal of his
glory, with such reverence of his Majesty, as becomes his servant, and this
holy place. De correptione and gratia, cap. 5 14, and 16 Pe. Martyr locis com,
class. 3. cap. 1. Zanchius de natura Dei, li 3. cap. 2
For Predestination, being so high a point, wherein offense may be given by
wading too far: by Gods assistance, it shall be touched so plainly, and
with such moderation, as euer-more, J will be sure to keep the rule of the
sacred word of God, for my guide.

The purpose and drift of Saint Paul, in this place, is, to prove unto the
Romans, being then in persecution, that howsoever in this life, misery and
afflictions did befall the^, yet their salvation stood sure and most certain,
because it depended upon the infallible purpose of God, which here is called
Predestination. So that, Predestination is the secret and immutable purpose of
God: whereby, he has decreed from all eternity, to call those, whom he has
loved in his Son Christ: and through faith and good works, to make them
vessels of eternal glory.

Ephe: 1, 5.
That God of his free mercy, has made choice of some to eternal life, it is
apparent in diverse places. Ephesians 1. and the 5. ver. He has Predestined
us to be adopted unto himself, through Jesus Christ: according to the good
pleasure of his own will.

2, Tim. 1.8.9.
In the 2. to Timo. 1. the 8. and 9. ver. He has saved us, and called us
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us: through Christ
Jesus, before the world was. Act, 13, 48.
So then, as the Potter has power over the clay, to make it, either a vessel
of honor, or dishonor: so God has power over the Sons of men: and of his own
free mercy, has made choice of some, to eternal life; and others has left
unto perdition. Pro 16.4.
God has created all for himself: and the wicked also for the evil day.

Now, if it be demanded, why, God has made choice of some, and not of others:
and so, thought injustice and want of compassion; that he should reject men,
before they be born, and brought into the light: and yer ever they have done
good or evil, as it is said in the 9. to the Romans the 11, and 12. ver. Yer
ever the children were borne, when they had don neither good nor evil (that
the purpose of God might remain, according to election) I have loved Jacob,
and I have hated Esau: in this case, I first answer plainly, with the Prophet
Esaiah, ^^sa. 45 9.
in his 45 chap. the 9 ver: Woe be unto him, that strives with his Maker: or,
what art thou (oman) that dare stand up, to plead against God? The clay may
not dispute with the Potter. Man that is but dust and ashes, be may nog reason
the case with his Creator. To know further, why God has made choice of some,
and not of others there is no other reason to be given, no other answer to be
made, but that Romans 9.15.
God shows mercy, Exodus 33.19.
it is his good pleasure, it is his will. Miserecordia cius causa Miserecordiae.
to whom he will show mercy: and he has compassion, upon whom, it pleases
him to have compassion. There is power, and free liberty in God, to give and
bestow his grace: both to whom, when, and how much-soeuer it pleases him. Huic
fit miserecordi^, sibi non fit iniuria (says S. Augustine) God chooses one,
he refuses another; to him he shows mercy; to thee, he does no injury.

Fatum ad necessitatem: Prouidentia ad sapientiam: Praescientia ad intellectum:
Predestinatio ad voluntatem Refertur.
Here then, we must rest: here, we must make a full point. It is Gods good
pleasure, it is his will. And this one answer, it is a bar for all deep
questions, either of Predestination, Election, Destiny, or any such like. It
is Gods good pleasure, it is his will. His will is the cause of all causes: and
further, we cannot go. Whom this answer does not content, S. Gregory does
answer directly. Gregor Mag. in cap. 9. Job.
Qui infactis Dei ratione^ non videt, infirmitatem suam considerans, cur non
videat, rationem videt. In the hidden works of GOD, he that sees Aug, 59.
Epist, ad Paulinum,
not a reason, if he see his own infirmity, he sees a sufficient reason, why
he should not see. We conclude them, with good Saint Augustine in his 59.
Epistle, ad Paulinum: occulta esse causa potest, iniusta esse no^ potest. Why,
God has made choice of some, and not of others: howsoever unto us, the cause
be hidden; yet, undoubtedly it cannot be unjust.

This Doctrine briefly set down, and thus plainly appearing: that
Predestination is the immutable purpose of God: whereby he has made choice of
some, and rejected others, according to the pleasure of his own will: It
seems at the first, when men do commit sin, they cannot avoid it; as if God
had so ordained it. He has made choice of some to life, and others he has
rejected: therefore, when they sin, and follow the course, that leads unto
death; they do it of necessity. Ecclus 15, 20,
O, God forbid, there should be unrighteousness in God, or iniquity in the
Almighty. For, God has commanded no man to do ungodly: neither has he given
any man license to sin. Before we resolve this doubt: there arises a very
notable and necessary question, which (in times past) has troubled many
wits. Jf God be not the author of sin, if he be not the cause of man's
offending; how came sin first to be? how came it in? where was the first
beginning of it? The heathen Philosophers, they roued at the matter a far-off.
The Epicures, they said, it came in by chance. Aristotle and his sect, they
said, it was the error of nature. Plato, came a little nearer: and he said, it
arose (...) out of the nature of man. Manicheus the heretic (to avoid the
former opinions) he fained two gods. Clemens li, 3, recogn,
Duos affirmauit esse Deos: alterum quidem, bonum; alterum vero, malum. One, he
auerred, to be the author, and first beginner of all good: the other, the first
cause, and author of all evil.

Niceph, eccl, hist, li. 6, cap, 3.
This opinion went current a long time, almost three hundred years, as
Nicephorus writes. and the reason was, because, men never looking into the
word of truth; by the light of nature, they could never find from whence sin
came.

That we may fully understand this point: very briefly, we will set down the
lineall descent of sin.

James. 1.1^,
Sin first arises from concupiscence. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away, by his own co^cupisence, and is enticed. All sin, all wickedness of this
life (what soever) first arises from concupisce^ce, from our own wicked
inclination. From whence then comes concupiscence? That, David shows: ex
immundo semine. Psalm, 51, 5,
We are borne in iniquity, and we are conceived in sin: as the original does
signify, we are all warmed in unclean blood. If we be all borne in sin, and by
nature corrupt; we must ascend higher to our first parents; and know, bow they
came first to sin: Adam and Eve (as appears in the 2. of Genes.) they first
sinned, by yiedling consent unto the Devil: they took it from Satan. Here
the^, comes in the maine question, how came the devil first to sin? The devil
at the first, was created in potestate standi and cadendi: he had in his first
creation, a possibility, to stand or fall: power of continuance, that he had
from God: possibility of falling, that he had from himself. For it is a ground
in Divinity: Immucabiliter bonum esse, dei proprium est. To be immutably good,
without any change or alteration, it is only proper unto God. therefore, had
he possibility to stander fall. S. Augustine also, he renders an other
reason, why, the devil (created an Angel of light) had possibility of
falling. Because (says he) at the first, he was created of nothing, therefore,
he had in him, possibility to return to nothing: if so be, he did not rely
in the goodness of his Creator, if he did not subject himself under the power
of God.

To resolve then: Satan at the first, was created an Angel of light, and had
possibility to stand or fall: but in the 14. of Isaiah. and the 14. ver.
Whereas he says there: I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will
be like the most high. Then did Satan choose rather, to be an absolute nature
in himself, to shake off his allegiance, and to abandon the goodness of God:
then (relying still in God) to be established by his power. Our Savior Christ
says; I saw Satan fall, as lightning from heaven: and the lightning we know,
is not cast down by any other: but it falls and breaks out of it self
alone. Luc. 10.18.
The devil (says S. Peter) was cast down to hell, and delivered unto chains of
darkness: 2, Pet. 2, 4
the reason is rendered in the 6. of Jude: because, when he had possibility to
stand or fall, he kept not his first estate. Non perstitit 1. Ioh. 3, 8,
in veritate: John the 8.44. He abod not in the truth. So then, to descend
again. The Devil, he is primitiuus peccator, he was the first offender:
For, he sins from the beginning. From the Devil, sin was derived unto
Adam from Adam, to all his posterity, borne of unclean seed: from the
corruption of unclean birth, it is secretly conveyed to our inclination, to
concupiscence. Thus, from the Devil, sin first boyleth up; as out of the maine
Sea: from him, when it comes to Adam, it arises, as out of a spring: from this
spring, it is reserved in nature, as in a Conduit: from nature, conveyed to
concupiscence; as by a pipe: and from thence, does issue a stream of
wickedness, to the Sea again.

Now, although it be thus manifest, that sin does proceed from the suggestion
of Satan, working with our own concupiscence: yet, evil and godless men,
they think, they are tempted of God: and when they sin, they do not stick, to
say: God has so decreed it, let him therefore work his will: for, who has
ever resisted his will. Homer that notable Heathen Poet, he answered such men
very fitly, in the person of Jupiter, speakinge in this sort.

Hom. Od, 2 page 1.
(...):

O ye foolish mortal men, ever and a non, you cry out of the immortal Gods,
imputing to them the cause of your miseries, when (indeed) your selves are the
workers of your own woe. Perditio tua ex te: O Israel, thou have fallen by
thine own iniquity. Stigias vltro quaerimus vndas. Hos: 14, 2,
Like the Ostrige, we do prick our selves with our own feathers; and we our
selves do cause the Ship to leake, where we sail. Only (lo) this have I
found, that God has made man righteous, but they have sought out many
inuentio^s. Quare peccas, quia nescis? etc. Eccles, 7, 31.
How comes it to pass says S. Aug. that thou do sin, because thou art
ignorant? it is not so: why do thou sin? because thou art compelled? there is
no such matter: why do thou sin? because it pleases, it delights thy
wicked, and corrupted nature. Pro. 29.6.
In the transgression of a man, is his snare. Of our own accord, we run
wilfully into the dead-fall of sin: so is it in the 9. Psalm. and 16, ver. The
ungodly is trapped, how? not by God, but by the works of his own hands. The
Lord our God is good, holy, and only holy: so holy, that (as Job says) the
Angels are unclean in his sight: so pure, that his Ministers, the Cherubins
are of fire most clear: and yet, the Cherubins, and Ceraphins do cover their
faces with their wings, as not able to behold the perfect brightness of his
most pure, and undefiled Majesty. Isa. 6.2,
Therefore, although no action can be done without God, and that his power is
so in all things: that we cannot so much, as lift up our finger without him.
For in him we live, and move, and have all our being: Yet is not God the cause
of any sin: Act. 17.28. Gre, Naz,
(...) We cannot fasten the least touch of any evil upon God. But so it stands.
Vna eademque actio tribuitur and causae principali, and instrumentali. In one,
and the selfsame action, there is a double cause. First, the isntrumental
cause moving: then God separated from the instrument; yet, giving power of
motion to the same. Through this double cause of moving, there is a double
work, which unto us seems to be but one. For example: God (as appears in
the 2. of the Acts, and the 23. ver.) by his determinate counsel, and fore
knowledge, delivered up our Savior Christ, as the principal cause; Judas as
the isntrumental cause: yet, neither is God to be drawn in, as a party in
Judas fault; nor Judas to be excused as furthering the work of God: For, God
never commanded Judas to deliver up Christ: nor Judas in delivering him, had
any such intention, as to do God service in the execution of his will. Deus ag
it per malos, non in malis. The wicked are the instruments of God; Yet, not God
the cause of their wickedness. God is the cause of the action, but not of the
evil, or quality in the action. For example: A man trauaileth his horse by
the way, he is the cause of his going: but, if his horse halt, or have an ill
pace, he is not the cause of his ill going.

A cunning man strikes an instrument with his fingers; he is the cause of the
sound, but if the Instrument be bad, or the strings not well chosen, he is not
the cause of the ill sound.

The Iron rusteth, thou will not wite it upon the Smith. Wine sowreth, the
fault is not in the vintner. In the heavens, there is a double motion (...):
Aristoxenus in lib de foram ni bus tibiarum.
The fixed Stars, and the whole Globe of all, is carried about with one
Sphere, and with one motion; yet the Planets in themselves, have a wandering and
uncertain course. The like, we may usually behold in every clock: The
greatest and highest wheel moves, and carries about all the rest; yet, in
this motion, some wheels turn to the right hand, others to the left, and that
by a contrary course.

So then, it fares thus with the wicked. As he that has an evil and
corrupted stomach, if he do eat honey, it turns into gall: or, as if a man's
hand be out of ioynte, when he would move it one way, it turns an other: so
wicked and godless men; whereas the light of nature, Gods Spirit, and his word
leads them one way; their own vile inclination, their own concupiscence
leads them an other.

Now then, what shall we lay? is there unrighteousness with God? does he cause
us to commit sin? No, God forbid, wickedness should be in God, or iniquity in
the Almighty. Job 34 10.
But as it is said before: Every man is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is entised: lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin, and sin,
when it is finished, brings forth death. Iam. 1, 14


Having hitherto freed God from all imputation of evil, by showing from whence
sin comes, and that God is not the Author of it: We do here meet with the
Pelagian Heretic (who not able to untie this knotte) affirms that the wicked
are rejected, for the sins which God foresaw, they would commit: and so
contrariwise, the godly preventing the grace of God by their merits, are
predestined, and chosen through faith, and good works, which God fore-sawe,
they should do: Making Gods eternal election to depend upon our faith, and
upon our works; whereas (clean contrary) our faith, our good works: and all
the good, that is in us, does wholly depend upon Gods free election.

Ephe. 14
Saint Paul says directly. God has chosen us in his son Christ, before the
foundation of the world was. If in Christ? Assuredly it appears, we were
unworthy in our selves, and so Gods election is the cause of our good works.
Et causa non est posterior suo effectu: the cause, it does never follow the
effect.

Pet, Lomb,
The learned Schoole-man, makes it plain: Non ideo electus est quis, quia talis
futurus erat, sed ex tali electione talis est factus: No man was ever chosen
through faith and good works, which God foresaw that he should do: but the
faith and good works, which we now do, proceed from the eternal election,
which went before.

2, Tim, 1, 9,
This does the Apostle very plainly set down. God has saved us, and called
us, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given to us; through Jesus Christ, before the World was:

Calling.
Moreover whom he Predestined, them also he Called.
AS from the maine Sea, we do strike into some channel or river: So, from
Predestination (the great depth of Gods Counsel) the Apostle comes unto
Calling. For, whereas it has been showed, in opening the first point, that
God of his free mercy did choose some to life: and others has left unto
Perdition. In this case, if God should never Call men; if he should never offer
them grace: it might seem prejudicial to his mercy: and though we did sin,
yet it might be thought, our selves could not redress it. For this cause, the
Apostle comes from Predestination to Calling; that is, from Gods determinate
counsel, to the means, which he has appointed for our salvation.

Plut, de tranqui animi.
This Calling, is two-fould, either outward, or inward. The outward and general
Calling, is, by the works of God, and by his word. First by his works. This
world, it is an University, or a College: wherein there are two Lectures,
whereof every man living, must be a hearer, and a learner. The first, is the
Philosophy lecture, concerning Gods works, in the heavens, and all his
creatures: by the which we are taught, and daily Called to know God.

This, is a plain, and easy Lecture, written in great Capital Letters, that
every simple, and ignorant man, may read it running. The other is the
Divinity Lecture, when we are exe^pted from the first, and led on further to
know God in his word. Both these Lectures; they are expressed together in the
19. Ps. From the 1. ve. to the 7. is contained the Philosophy Lecture. Psalm.
19 1.
The Heavens declare the glory of god: and the firmament shows his handie
work. Day unto day utters the same, and Night unto night teaches knowledge:
there is no speech nor language, where their voice is not hard. There sound is
gone forth through all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.
In them, has he set a Tabernacle for the sun, which comes forth as a
bridegroom, out of his Chamber; and rejoices like a mighty man, to run his
race. His going out, is from the end of the heaven: and his compass is unto
the ends of the same, and none is hid from the heat thereof.

The Divinity lecture begins at the seventh verse, and continues to the 11.
verse.

The Law of the Lord, is an vnderfiled Law, converting the soul; the
testimony of the Lord is suer: and gives wisdom unto the simple. The
statutes of the Lord are right: and rejoice the heart. The commandment of the
Lord is pure: and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean:
and endures for ever. The judgments of the Lord are truth, and righteous
altogether. More to be desired then gould; yea, then much fine gould: sweeter
also then honey, and the honey comb: Moreover by the^, is thy servant taught,
and in keeping of them, there is great reward.

Touching the Philosophy lecture: that we are all first Called, to know God by
his works; it is most apparent. For (...) est Diuinitatis symbolum: the world
is the glass of Gods Divinity. The heathen philosopher says: Deus tangitur
in operibus. Iamblicus. De misteriis.
God is even touched in his works. He iumpeth with S Paul, Act. 17.27, The
heathen by groping, might have found him: for doubtless, he is not far from
every one of us. Act. 17 17.
In the 143. Psalm, and the 5. verse, the holy Prophet says thus. Psalm. 143.5.
I will muse upon all thy works, and exercise my self in the works of thy
hands. Jf a man will profit by this philosophy lecture, he must use
meditation. For indeed, if a man do rightly consider of the Ebbing, and
Flowing of the Sea, whereof no reason can be rendered: of the certain course,
and chang of the Moon, with the secret influence of the same: the nature of
the wind, no man knowing, whence it comes, nor whether it goes: the
hugeness of the swelling Sea, girt in by Gods commandment, that it does not
ouerflow the banckes: the raging Thunder, which makes all the Beasts of the
feilde to tremble: the fearful Lightning, which in the twinkling of an eye,
passes from East to West; how all things keep their appointed course,
wherein they were created. As we walk abroad in the feilds, if we do behold,
and view the glory of the Sun, and Moon: the beauty of the Stars: the
sweet Dew: distilling Showers: green Pastures; pleasant Meddowes; clear
Springs; thick Woods: gushing Fountains: the wonderful increase of Corn,
Cattle, and such like. Who is he (behoulding these things, and seriously
meditating upon this Philosophy lecture) but, he must needs confess, that
God does Call him, being so manifestly taught to know him in his works?

And, as God is thus seen, and taught unto all the heathen people by his
works, in (...) in the frame and composition of this great World: so likewise
God does Call us, by his works in (...) in the little World of man. Homo est
caelisimulachrum, and interpres naturae. Man, he is the picture of the Heavens,
and the interpreter of Nature. Concerning God, we acknowledge him to be a
spirit; concerning the World, we have found it to be a body: in Man, we have
an abridgme^t of both; namely, of God, in regard of his spirit; of the World,
in the composition of the body; as though the Creator (upon purpose, to set
forth a mirror of his works) intended to bring into this one little compass
of Man, both the infiniteness of his own Nature, and the hugeness of the
whole World together.

As in the World, so in the body of Man, there is a wonderful mixture of the
four Elements. The Heart, placed in the midest, as the Earth our center: the
Liver, like the Sea, from whence the lively springs of blood do flow: the
Veins (like rivers) spredding themselves abroad unto the uttermost members:
the Brain, which gives light and understanding, placed a loft like the Sun:
the Senses set round about, like stars for ornament: the Countenance of man,
full of grace, and Majesty, striking a terror into all Creatures. Such and so
wonderful is God in his power, that he is seen in the workmanship of the
body.

But if man (as it were out of himself) could behold this body, receiving
life, and entering into the use of all his motions: Ioints, moving so actiuely:
Sinews, stirring so nimbly: Senses, uttering their force so sharply: The
inward Powers, so excellent: the Spirit, supernatural. Reason, so Divine: the
Mind and Cogitation, so quick and infinite: the Understanding, so Angelike:
and the Soul (above all) Dei(...). the engraven Jmage of the immortal God. If
man could enter into himself, and consider rightly of this, he must needs be
driven to confess, that God has Called him, by those works, which are most
apparent in himself.

Therefore, as Saint Paul soundly reasons, in the 1. to the Romans, and the
20. verse. No man can excuse himself. Neither the Turks, who acknowledge.
Mahomet their great Prophet: nor the Indians, that worship the Sun: Nor the
Egiptians, who offer sacrifice to all manner of beasts: Neither they, nor any
other remote, and barberous people, that do worship strange Idols of their own
invention: none of these can excuse himself, and say, he is not Called:
because the invisible things of God (his eternal power and Godhead) are seen
by the creation of the World, being considered in his works: to the intent, all
men might be without excuse. Thus we see, by this Philosophy lecture, all
people (whatsoever) are instructed to know God. But to his own people, God
reads Divinity lecture: he Calls, and teaches them by his word. Jn the 146.
Psalm. and the two last verses. God has given his word unto Jacob, his
statutes, and his ordinances unto Israel. Psalm. 146 19.20.
He has not dealt so with every Nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of
his Laws. So then, as in the 1. of King. 6.28. verse. there is mention made of
three Courts of the Temple, at Jerusalem; wherein God was worshipped: so here
are three Courts,.

First, we behold God in the frame, and composition of the Heaven, and the
Earth, as the great and outtermost Court: then we see God in our selves, in the
workmanship of the body, in the powers of the mind, and soul, there is the
inner Court. Lastly, with the high pressed, we enter into Sanctum Sanctorum: that
is, we behold God, and learn to know him, in his sacred and Heavenly Word.
All the Prophets, and Apostles, all the Ministers of God, they are Divinity
Lecturers, and all Nations, people, and kindred, to whom they have, and do
preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus; all these have their outward Calling: and
unto all these, grace mercy, and salvation in Christ Jesus, has been
offered. And hereof is that place understood in the 20. of Math. 16. verse.
Many are Called, but few are chosen (i) by the outward Calling, both of the
works of God, and of his word, many are Called (for this outward Calling is
common both to good and bad) but by the inward Calling, effectually working in
them a lively faith, apprehending Christ: so, very few are Called. Here in
this place of Saint Paul, is meant a more special, powerful, and inward
Calling, which is wrought by Gods spirit, and joined with faith: so does Saint
August. expound it, in his book de Predestinatione sanctorum. Non quacunque,
sed qua vocatione fit credens. Whomsoever God has chosen to life, him he has
also Called by that Calling, whereby he is made and becomes faithful. Acts the
16. and 14. A certain woman named Lidia heard us. Acts. 16, 14. Ephe. 1.13.
There is the outward Calling: and the Lord opened her heart, she attended to
the things, which Paul spoke, and she was baptized: there is the inward
Calling. This then is the sound, and plain meaning of these words: Whom he
has Predestined, those he has Called; that is, those, whom he has chosen
to eternal life, he has also ordained to use the means of salvation, which
is an effectual Calling by his Word, and Spirit.

Having discussed this second point, whereby it appears, how all men living
are Called, both by the works of God, and by his word: we may here see, how
the dissolute livers, and profane Atheistes of these our times deceive
themselves. It is a common conceit fostred in the bosom of many; yea, vile
and sensual men, they will not stick to say: If I be saved, I am saved: If I
be chosen to life, I am sure of salvation: If other wise, I cannot avoid it.
Assuredly, such men, they do speak as peruersly, and as senslesly, as if a man
should say, that he would gladly be at York; and yet will use, neither horse,
foot, nor Wagon, but will fly thither. For the determinate counsel of God,
it does not take away the nature and property of secondarie causes, it does not
take away the means of Salvation: but rather, Gods secret counsel, it does
set those causes in order, and does dispose of those means to their appointed
end.

Gods purpose, his eternal decree is not to be sought out in his bottomless
counsel. For then we must all cry out with Sa. Paul.(...). Romans 11.33.
O the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.

But, Gods purpose, his eternal decree is to be sought out in the means, and
in the manifestation, appointed for the same.

The course and order of man's Salvation, is like a Golden Cheine; And this ver.
may fitly be called Jacobs Ladder, whereupon the Angels and Saints of the
Church, do descend, and ascend unto God. Jacob wrestled with the Angel, at the
foot of the Ladder: we must not be so hardy, as to wrestle with God at the
top of the Ladder. We see here, God has set down, not only Predestination,
as though we should stay there: but Justification and Calling, as middle-steps
and degrees, whereby we must ascend unto God. We must not pull down the
Ladder, and think to iumpe into Heaven. To say, Mat. 4.6.
If I be saved, I am saved: it is the Devils Divinity. When our Savior was
upon the Pinnacle, he bad him cast himself down headlonge, for (says he)
God has given his Angels charge over thee, least at any time, thou dash thy
foot against a stone. He left out the chief point (in all his ways) it was
not the right way from the pinnacle, to cast himself down headlong.

No more is it here the way, to stand upon this high point and dangerous
pinnacle of Predestination, to cast a man's self down headlong, desperately,
saying: If I be saved, I am saved. Jn the 2. of Oze. 11. ve. The Lord there
promising temporal blessings, sets down an order and a course, how they
hang together. Oze. 2.11:
I (says the Lord) will hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the
earth, and the carth shall hear the Corn, and Wine and oil, and the Corn
and Wine and oil shall hear Israel. So likewise, in the spiritual blessings
of the Soul, there are means, and an order, how we come unto the same. God by
his son Christ: Christ by his Word: his Word works by his Spirit: his
Spirit does certify our hearts: our hearts stand fast by faith: Faith catches
hold upon Christ: and so back again, Christ presents us unto God.

Here likewise in this Scripture: God has chosen us from everlasting; there is
Predestination: he does not there leave us, but then, he does teach us by his
word; there is Calling: this word (through his spirit) engenders faith; there
is Justifying: this justifying faith lifts us up unto God; there is Glorifying.

Arist Rhet. li: 1. cap, 7.
Common sense and reason does teach us. (...). In every action, the end, and
the means of the end must go together. The end which every one of us does
desire, and aim at, it is eternal glory: we must be sure then to lay hold
upon Calling and Justifying, as the means ordained to come unto this end. For
this is a certain, and sure ground in Divinity, and Religion: Whom-soeuer God
has appointed to eternal life, he has also appointed that man, to use the
means whereby he may come unto the same.

To make this more plain, let it please you, to vouchsafe the hearing of an
accident, which fell out, very fitly to this purpose.

One Ludouicus, a learned man of Italy, yet wanting the direction of Gods good
spirit, and so never considering advisedly, of the means of our Salvation; he
grew at last to this resolution. Si saluabor, saluabor. It boots not what J
do, nor how J live: For if I be saved, I am saved. Thus Ludouicus, bewitched
with this desperate opinion, continued a long time; till at length, he grew
very dangerously sick, whereupon he sent for a cunning and learned Physician,
and earnestly requested his hespe: The Physician beforehand, made acquainted
with his former lewd assertion, how in his health he would usually say: Jf I be
saved, I am saved; he likewise directed his speech to the same purpose, and
said: Surely, it shall be needless to use any means for your recovery,
neither do J purpose to minister unto you: for if the time of your death be not
come, you have no cause to fear, you shall live, and do well enough without
Physic: and if the time of your death be now come, it is impossible to
avoid it. Ludouicus, musing in his bed of the matter, and considering
advisedly of the Physicians speech: finding by reason, that as means were to
be used, for the health of the body: so God also had ordained means for the
Salvation of the Soul: upon further conference (with shame and grief) he
recanted his former opinion, took Physic, and so was happily cured, both of
Soul and body at one time.

By this Doctrine of Gods love so manifestly Calling us: we directly learn,
that if a man do thirst after his Salvation: if a man would be thoroughly
assured in his heart and conscience, that God has chosen him to eternal life,
he must not rush presently into Predestination, into Gods secret Counsel: but
he must enter into himself, to try, and examine, whether he be rightly
Called: For as the surest way to come unto the Sea, is first to find out a
river: so concerning our Salvation, the plainest and surest way, to find out
the depth of Gods counsel, is first to come unto Calling, unto Justifying,
which are as sweet and lively springs flowing from the same.

We know, and see daily by experience, we are not able to discern, we cannot
pearce with the eye, to see what matter the sun is of: but we can plainly
see, and manifestly perceive, both beams, and heat, and light proceeding from
the same. So here (concerning this first point of Predestination alone) we
cannot conceive it, we are not able to pierce it, for it is the way, which the
Eagles eye has not seen: but Calling and Justifying, which are as heat and
light proceeding from the same: those we may as comsortably perceive, as we do
sensibly feel the heat and operation of the Sun. Here then, is the duty of
a true Christian, here is the part of a religious and good man indeed, not to
venture his Salvation upon a bare speech, and presumption of Predestination: but
to use all means possible, which God has ordained.

That he may truly be Called, to hear the word of God, and to joy in hearing
of it, with love, and with a desire to profit: that he may be Justified (when
he has heard) to be fervent in prayer, zealous of well doing, and abundant in
all good works of charity: that he may be Glorified in the life to come, to
consecrate both soul and body, and all the whole course of his life unto God,
that so growing up from faith to faith, from virtue to virtue, from hearing to
belecuing, from Calling to Justifying; at length, Gods spirit may certify our
spirits, that we are his, our bodies his, our souls his, and we settled, and
sealed up in a Christian joy for ever.

Wherefore, J beseech you all, by the mercies of God, and J entreat you, as
you hope to stand with comfort, before God and his Angels at the last day:
every man lay hold upon his soul betimes: do not esteem the love of any
thing in this World, more then the love of God, purchased in his Son Christ
Jesus. Take heed, and beware of this profane speech: If I be saved, I am
saved; utter it not in word, think it not in heart, away with it: For GOD is
not the cause of our condemnation, it is our selves (Woe unto us wretches) we
our selves are the Wisd 1, 13.
workers of our own destruction. Wisdom. 1.13. O seek not death in the error of
the soul, and destroy not your selves, with the works of your own hands. Bis
interimitur, qui suis armis interimiter. Every man catch hold upon this
Chain, work and make sure his Salvation, and strive to walk before the Lord
in truth, and with a perfect heart. On the one side, let no man pass on, in a
secure and careless course of life: nor on the other side, curiously pry into
the hidden Counsel of the Lord; but every good Christian, with an humble
spirit, with an honest mind, with a cheere-full and good heart, seek to
apprehend those means, which God has appointed for his Salvation.

Justification.
The third Lincke of this Cheine is Justification. Whom he has Called, those
he has Justified.
IT is a principle in reason. Actio perfecta non recipitur, nisi imperfecte
primo: An habit is not gotten at the very first, the work of our regeneration
is not wrought on a sudden. But as the Psalmist says: Psalm 84.7.
The godly grow from strength to strength: and the wiseman shows how: Prou.
56 418.
The light of the righteous shines more and more, to the perfect day: So here,
the Apostle (foot by foot) leads us from one degree unto another, till at
length, we may come to make our election sure. This Justification, it goes a
step farther the^ Calling. For Calling, is an enlightening the mind with
spiritual knowledge: Justifying, an establishing the heart with a grounded
persuasion: Calling, is the beginning of conversion, but Justifying is a full
clearing of the heart: Calling, is the first change of one that is regenerate,
but Justifying, is the full persuasion of the Soul, when the spirit of grace
refleth in us, and we settled and truly sanctified in an holy and Christian
course of life.

So then, when we have not only sorrowed for sins past, which is the first
step of our Calling: but further, when we are renewed in spirit, and so
changed in our life, that for the most part, our thoughts, words, and works,
are guided by the good spirit of God, for (as many as are led by the spirit of
God, those are the sons of God) then we may assure our selves, that we are
Justified. Romans 8 14.
Howsoever we be chosen from the beginning by Gods love, and after Called by his
word, yet there is never assurance unto us, until the Holy Ghost has sealed
it up in our hearts, which sealing is our Justification.

Thus to assure us of our Justification, it is not enough to be Called to the
knowledge Pro, 27 19.
of Salvation in Christ by his word; but after this knowledge, to lay hold upon
Christ by a working faith, and so to hold on, and continue still, an holy,
Christian, and sincere course of life, that at length, as Solomon says: In
water, face answers face: so in this work of Justification, our spirit may
answer unto Gods spirit, that we are his. Even as the pure and Crystal
Glass, does lively represent the image, which is set before it: so the heart
once Justified by a lively faith in Christ, in some good measure does express
the image of God, and strives to come unto this mark, which is here
propounded, namely our Glorification.

Glorifying.
THe fourth Lincke of this Cheine is Glorifying. Which Glorifying, is the
highest step of Solomon's Throne: it is that exceeding great reward, which God
promised unto Abraham: it is that eternal weight of Glory, whererof, J
neither know, how to begin, nor how to make an end of speaking. Aug. de sinib.
lib, 3.
In vita aeterna, facilius possumus dicere quid ibi no^ sit, quam quid ibi sit.
In describing the glory of the world to come, it is easier to express what is
not there, then what is there. For there is no coffeehouse, nor grief, no
faintnes, nor infirmity, no mourning, nor misery, no corruption, nor death;
but joy, and fulness of joy for ever: such joy, as if we had once tasted, we
would despise the pleasures of a thousand worlds in hope of assurance to enjoy
it. For, after we have waded through the miseries of this life, at length (in
the twinkling of an eye, in a moment, with the sound of a Trumpet) we shall
be carried into the heavenly Paradise, into Abraham's bosom: thousand thousands
of Angels and Saints, shall receive us with joy and singing: Our meat shall be
that bread of life, and that Heavenly Manna, which will taste like whatsoever
thing we desire: our drink shall be the water of life; which, if we have once
tasted, we shall never thirst again; our mirth and music, shall be the song
of the Saints: Reud. 5.13.
Alleluia, honor and praise, and glory be unto him, that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb for euer-more.

There shall we rejoice continually in the presence of the holy ONE, We shall
be his Saints, and he shall be our God: neither shall we fear death any more,
neither sorrow, nor crying, nor feel any want again.

The Lord of Hosts, who is the King of glory, he will take us by the right
hand, and lead us to the garden of comfort, to the fountain of joy, where all
our garments shall be washed pure, in the blood of the Lamb, and all tears
shall be washed from our eyes. There, shall we see the Courts of the Lord of
Hosts, new Jerusalem, the City of the great King: Where there is no night,
nor any candle, nor yet the light of the Sun: for, the Lord himself shall be
our light, and with him, we shall shine as the stars in Heaven. Here shall we
be clothed with white robes, the innocence of Saints; we shall have Palms in
our hands in token of victory; We shall be crowned with a diadem of pure
gould, which is immortality: and serving God a while in this short life, there
shall we have riches, without measure; life, without death; liberty, without
thraldom; solace, without ceasing; and joy, without ending. O, blessed are
they (Lord) that dwell in thy house, where the Son of God in glory, is light
unto their eyes, music unto their ears, sweetness unto their taste, and full
contentment unto their hearts: where, in seeing, they shall know him; and in
knowing, they shall possess him; and in possessing, shall love him; and in
loving, shall receive eternal blessedness* that blessed eternity, the
Garland we run for, and the Crown we fight for. Jn a word. Here we shall come
unto the end of all our desires, for what else is our end, but to come to that
ende-lesse glory which has no end.

1. King. 10, 6,
The Queen of Sheba, when she had seen the riches and royalty of Solomon's
Court, she said unto the King: It was a true word, which J heard in mine own
Land, of thy prosperity and happiness, but now I have seen it with mine eyes,
lo, the one half is not told me: so concerning the glorious fruition of
eternity, in the life to come, whatsoever may possibly he delivered by the
tongues of men, yet undoubtedly the one half cannot be told us.

By this place of Scripture (thus rising by degrees) the Katharistes, the
family of love, and the Puritanes of our times, would gather this conclusion.
For as-much, as here are certain degrees set down, whereupon GODS Church is
builded, and whereby, the members of the same do grow up in Religion:
therefore, now in this life by a godly reformation, we may attain unto
perfection.

This self conceited and headstrong opinion of theirs, has been the first
cause, and ground of all the trouble some co^tentions, which long since have
been raised, and now (at this day) are continued in our Church. For diverse
men, while they take themselves (as Job says) the Onely-wise-men, and pure in
their own eyes, dreaming still of a certain imagined perfection, they never
cease to be clamorous to the Christian Prince, troublesome to the the quiet
state, and diverse of them, very dangerous people, to the whole Church of God.
Jn this verse of our text, there is an end propounded, there is a mark set
up, whereunto, every Christian must labor to attain, and strive by all good
endeavor to come. But (alas) who can say that his heart is clean; and man that
is borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity, while he is clothed with
sinful flesh, how can he attain perfection?

That the Militant Church of Christ, has had imperfectio^s in all ages, it is
a plain and an undoubted truth. For, if every member be imperfect, how can
there be perfection in the whole? Perfectio nostra magis constat remissione
peccatorum, quam perfectione virtutum. Our perfection consiseth (rather) in the
forgiveness of our sins, then in the perfection of our virtues.

In truth, thus stands the estate of a Christian man's life in this world.

As a man traueiling a long journey to a far city, he does not continually
go, but he rests here, and stays there, he baiteth in one place, and
loggeth all night in an other, yet still he is going forward, and houldeth on
his journey: so in this life we are pilgrims, we are traueilers, and howsoever
we do seek an other country, and strive to come unto the city of rest, yet
in this journey we wander often out of the way, we take many falls, we have
many impediments; neither is it possible, the light of our faith should still
hold out, and never be darkened in this pilgrimage, till in the life to come,
we be made Citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem, which is above.

We conclude then with the sweet and modest saying of good Saint Augustine.
Haec est perfectio christianorum, vt agnoscant se nunquam esse perfectos.
Herein stands the perfection of a Christian, to acknowledge himself, never to
be perfect.

The Conclusion.
Now it remains (as was promised in the beginning) to show the mutual
coherence of these words, and to knitte up again the Linckes of this Cheine
together.
HEre in four words, are contained the four causes of our Salvation.

Jn Predestination, there is the efficient cause, which is Gods love: Jn
Calling, there is the material cause, which is Christ's death, opened in his
word: in Justifying, there is the formal cause, a lively faith: in Glorifying,
there is the final cause, which is everlasting life.

Thus, in Predestination, we behold God the Father chosing of his love: in
Calling, we hear God the Son teaching by his word: in Justifying, we feel
the comfort of God the holy Ghost, sealing by his spirit. The fruit of all
which: of Gods love, chosing; of Christ's word, Calling; of God the Holy Ghost,
comforting; the effect of all these is our Glorification.

So that, as we do see far with our bodily eye, yet reach farther with
reason, which is the eye of the mind; but Faith (which is the eye of the soul)
out strippeth both: So, Calling enlighteneth the mind with spiritual
knowledge: Justifying goes further, and seals up the heart with heavenly
comfort: Glorifying out-strippeth all, and does ravish the soul with
immortality.

Bernard.
Every one of us, after this life, we desire, and hope to enjoy eternal
Glory. Behold: Conceditur in Predestinatione, promittitur in vocatione,
ostenditur in Iustificatione, percipitur in Glorificatione. Jn Predestination,
there is the first grant: in Calling, it is directly promised: in Justifying,
it is plainly showed: in Glorifying, there is liuerie and season, the full
possession of all.

Jn Predestination, GOD bestows upon us his love: in Calling, he grants
the blessing of his word: in Justifying, he yeeldes the fruit of his spirit:
in Glorifying, he does wholly give unto us, himself.

Here, are the sweet springes, issuing out of Nilus, the head whereof cannot
be found: here, are the four pleasant rivers, which water Paradise, which
run through the Soul, with a Divine virtue, and comfortably cool all our
spiritual heat. John 1, 16.
Here, is the holy and precious oil; powered upon the head of Aron, the
exceeding love, and fullness of grace, powered upon our head Christ Jesus, and
running down to the skirtes of his clothing, to every particular, and penitent
member of his Church: Of his fullness have all we received.


Genesis 1.
Here, we may see the spiritual regeneration of the Soul, shadowed out in the
first creation of the World. Predestination, there is the huge and vast deep;
the dark form whereof could not be discerned: Calling, the separating of
light, from darkness; of knowledge, Justifying, the Sun is created, the
bright beams of his grace shine in our hearts: in Glorifying, Adam, framed
after the Jmage of God, and placed in the paradise of immortal joy.

Observe here (if you please) the kindness of a loving Father, who having many
sons, bears secret affection to some one, there is Predestination: this
affection in his good time he declares, by making his will known, and his
love manifest, there is Calling: after this Calling, he causes him to take up
his inheritance in Court, and gives him earnest, in token of assurance, there
is Justifying: lastly, he enters into his Fathers joy, and is made heir of
all, there is Glorifying.

Again, in Predestination, the Heavenly husbandman choseth out a plotte of
ground at his own pleasure: in Calling, he sows it with the seed of his
word: in Justifying, he waters, and cherishes it with his spirit: in
Glorifiinge, he reapes and carries into the barn.

Genesis 45* 5.
Lastly, behold apparently in Predestination, how Joseph long before was
sold into Egypt, by the determinate Counsel of GOD: Gen 41.14,
by Calling, how he was loosed out of prison, and delivered from the bondage
of sin: Psalm, 105.19,
by Iustifyinge, how his cause was made known, and so acquitted innocent:
Gen: 41, 42.
in Glorifyinge, how he was clothed in Purple, placed in the Kings Chariote,
and made the chief of his Kingdom.

Now then, as Saint Paul says to the Romans. What shall we say to these
things? in like sort, what shall we say to these, so excellent, so sweet, so
Divine mysteries? to these so comfortable testimonies of Gods love? to this
Ladder of Jacobs, whereupon none but Angels do ascend? to this inward working
of the Spirit, which blows where it lists? to this Divine and hidden
purpose, which cannot be deceived? to this in-effable glory of the Sons of
God, which they do expect and look for? what shall we say more effectual,
and more comfortable?

Can any thing be set down, more plainly, or knitte up more breifely? can
any demonstration be concluded more foundly? Whom the Lord has
Predestined, before all time, those does he Call in time: whom he Calls,
those he does Justify: and whom he Justifies, those will he Glorify.

Thus then, may every true Christian conclude, for the comfort of his Soul,
and the assurance of his Salvation for ever.

J am Justified truly, by a lively, and working Faith, therefore J am Called:
J am Called effectually by his word, therefore, J am Predestinate: J am
Predestinate, and choosen of his free love, from eternity, and therefore J
shall be Glorified unto all eternity again.

O settled comfort, O sweet conceived hope of joy: That joy, which strength of
Hels ten th^usand, can never take away. Wherefore should we fear? whereof
shall we be afraid? No, no force so mighty, so puissant, able to overthrow
us. No terror of sin; no plagues of death, no rage of the World, no power of
the Devil himself. Jn all these, we are more then Conquerers. For, all
things shall turn to the best, to to them, that are settled in GODS fear.

That wicked, and most dangerous conspiracy, plotted against the Lords
anointed, when it came to the very pinch, when it was brought to the very
height, was not all turned topsie-turuie, and utterly disappointed? This day
we do acknowledge it, with thankful remembrance; this day, wherein, we
are all met together, in a most happy, and blessed peace; this day does
plainly witness, that he had the deliverance, we feel the comfort, the
Church has an endelesse blessinge, and GOD has his everlasting praises.

O, behold what it is to be knit unto God. For whom he does love, who is
able to wrong them? whom he has chosen, how can they be rejected? whom he
does Call, how shall they be shut out? Whom he does Justify, who dare
accuse them? Whom God will Glorify, how can they be forsaken?

Seeing my Soul is lincked to that Cheine, which can never be unloosed, my
soul grounded upon that foundation, which can never be shaken, what shall make
us to despair? nay, what is it, shall make us to waver, or doubt, of the
singular love of God, which he bears toward us, in his son Christ Jesus?
What shall separate us, from the hope of immortality, in the life to come?
shall the wearisomnesse of this trouble some life? shall the discontentmentes
of this transitory World? shall a little sickness, shaking this brittle house
of clay? No, all the afflictions of this life, which are but for a moment, they
are not to be accounted worthy that exceeding, surpassing, eternal weight of
glory.

For God has chosen us before the World: he has Called us out of the World:
he has Justified us in the World, and he will Glorify us in the World to come.

God has Chosen us not being: he has Called us, being enemies: he has
Justified us, being sinners: and he will Glorify us, being mortal wretches.
Therefore we may cheerfully singe with David. Miserecordia Domini, ab aeterno
in aeternum. The mercy of the Lord, is from everlasting, to everlasting: From
everlasting Predestination, to euerlacting Glory, the one having no ending,
the other having no beginning.

This blessed fruition of glory, and immortality, that we may feel the
comfort of it, in our hearts and consciences, now in this life, and hereafter
enjoy in the life to come, the Lord grant, even for his blessed son Christ
Jesus sake: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one
everliving God, be ascribed all power, glory, praise and thanksgiving, for
ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

