THE FATAL DOVVRY: A TRAGEDY.

As it has been often Acted at the Private House in Blackefryers, by his
Majesty's Servants.

Written by P. M. and N. F.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for FRANCIS CONSTABLE, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Crane, in Paul's Churchyard. 1632.

Charalois. Romont. Charmi. Nouall Sen. Liladam. Du Croy. Rochfort. Baum^nt.
Pontalier. Mal^tin. Beaumelle. Florimel. Bellapert. Aymer^ Nouall Iun.
Advocates. Creditors 3. Officers, Priest. Tailor. Barber. Perfumer.
First Song.
FIe, cease to wonder,
Though you hear Orpheus with his Iuory Lute,
Move Trees and Rocks,
Charm Bulls, Bears, and men more savage to be mute,
Weak foolish singer, here is one,
Would have transformed thy self, to stone.
Second Song. A Dialogue between Nouall, and Beaumelle.
Man.
SEt Phoebus, set, a fayrer sun does rise,
From the bright Radience of my Mrs. eyes then ever thou begat's^^
I dare not look, each hair a golden line,
Each word a hook,
The more I strive, the more still I am took.
Wom^
Fair servant, come, the day these eyes do lend
To warm thy blood, thou do so vainly spend.
Come strangled breath.
Man.
What noate so sweet as this,
That calls the spirits to a further bliss?
Wom.
Yet this out-sauours wine, and this Perfume^
Man.
Let Us die, I languish, I consume,
Citizens Song of the Courtier.
COurtier, if thou needs wilt wiue,
From this lesson lear^e to thrive.
If thou match a Lady, that passes thee in birth and state,
Let her curious garments be
Twice above thine own degree;
This will draw great eyes upon her,
Get her servants and thee honor.
Courtiers Song of the Citizen.
Poor Citizen, if thou will be
A happy husband, learn of me;
To set thy wife first in thy shop,
A fair wife, a kind wife, a sweet wife, sets a poor man up.
What though thy shelues be never so bare:
A woman still is current ware:
Each man will cheapen, foe, and friend,
But whilst thou art at the other end,
What ere thou see, or what do hear,
Fool, 'haue no eye to, nor an ear;
And after supper for her sake,
When thou have fed, snort, though thou wake:
What though the Gallants call thee mome?
Yet with thy lantern light her home:
Then look into the town and tell,
If no such Tradesmen there do dwell.
The Fatal Dowry: A Tragedy.
Act. primus. Scaena prima.
Enter Charaloyes with a paper, Romont, Charmi. Charmi. SIR, I may move the
Court to serve your will^
But therein shall both wrong you and my self.

Romans Why think you so sir?

Charmi. 'Cause I am familiar
With what will be their answer: they will say,
It Is against law, and argue me of Ignorance
For offering them the motion.

Romans You know not, Sir^
How in this cause they may dispense with Law,
And therefore frame not you their answer for them,
But do your parts.

Charmi. I love the cause so well,
As I could run, the hazard of a check for it.

Romans From whom?

Charmi. Some of the bench, that watch to give it,
More then to do the office that they sit for:
But give me (sir) my fee.

Romans Now you are Noble.

Charmi. I shall deserve this better yet, in giving
My Lord some counsel, (if he please to hear it)
Then I shall do with pleading.

Romans What may it be, sir?

Charmi. That it would please his Lordship, as the Presidents,
And Counsaylors of Court come by, to stand
Here, and but show your self, and to some one
Or two, make his request: there is a minute
When a man's presence speaks in his own cause,
More then the tongues of twenty advocates.

Romans I have urged that.

Enter Rochfort: Du Croye. Charmi. Their Lordships here are coming,
I must go get me a place, you will find me in Court,
And at your service. Exit Charmi,

Romans Now put on your Spirits.

Du Croy. The ease that you prepare your self, my Lord,
In giving up the place you hold in Court,
Will prove (I fear) a trouble in the State,
And that no slight one.

Roch. Pray you sir, no more.

Romans Now sir, lose not this offered means: their looks
Fixed on you, with a pitying earnestness,
Inuit you to demand their furtherance
To your good purpose. -- This such a du^nesse
So foolish and untimely as --

Du. Croy. You know him.

Roch. I do, and much lament the sudden fall
Of his brave house, It is young Charloyes.
Son to the Ma^shall, from whom he inherits
His ^ame and virtues only.

Romans Ha, hey name you.

Du Croye. His father died in prison two days since.

Roch. Yes, to the shame of this ungrateful State^
That such a Master in the art of war,
So noble, and so highly meriting,
From this forgetful Country, should, for want
Of means to satisfy his creditors,
The sums he took up for the general good,
Meet with an end so infamous.

Romans Dare you ever hope for like opportunity?

Du Croye. My good Lord!

Roch. My wish bring comfort to you.

Du Croye. The time calls us.

Roch. Good morrow Colonel.

Exeunt Roch. Du Cr^y^. Romans This obstinate spleen,
You think becomes your sorrow, and sorts well
With your black suits: but grant me wit, or judgment,
And by the freedom of an honest man,
And a true friend to boot, I swear it is shameful.
And therefore flatter not your self with hope,
Your sable habit, with the hat and cloak,
No though the ribons help, have power to worke'em
To what you would: for those that had no eyes,
To see the great acts of your father, will not,
From any fashion sorrow can put on,
Be taught to know their duties.

Char. If they will not,
They are too old to learn, and I too young
To give them counsel, since if they partake
The understanding, and the hearts of men,
They will prevent my words and tears: if not,
What can persuasion, though made eloquent
With grief, work upon such as have changed natures
With the most savage beast? Blessed, blessed be ever
The memory of that happy age, when justice
Had no gards to keep off wronged innocence,
From flying to her succors, and in that
Assurance of redress: where now ( Roment)
The damnd, with more ease may as^end from Hell,
Th^n we ariue at her. One Cerberus there
Forbids the passage, in our Courts a thousand,
As loud, and fertyle headed, and the Client
That wants the sops, to fill their ravenous throats,
Must hope for no access: why should I then
Attempt impossibilities: you friend, being
Too well acquainted with my dearth of means
To make my entrance that way?

Romans Would I were not.
But Sir, you have a cause, a cause so just,
Of such necessity, not to be deferd,
As would compel a maid, whose foot was never
Set ore her fathers threshold, nor within
The house where she was borne, ever spoke word,
Which was not vshered with pure virgin blushes,
To drown the tempest of a pleaders tongue,
And force corruption to give back the hire
It took against her: let examples move you.
You see great men in birth, esteem and fortune,
Rather then lose a scruple of their right,
Fawn basely upon such, whose gowns put off,
They would disdain for Servants.

Char. And to these can I become a suytor?

Romans Without loss,
Would you consider, that to gain their favors,
O^r chast^st dames put off their modesties,
Soldiers forget their hono^s, usurers
Make sacrifice of Gold, poets of wit,
And men religious, part with fame, and goodness?
Be therefore won to use the means, that may
Advance your pious ends.

Char. You shall overcome.

Romans And you receive the glory, pray you now practice.
It Is well. Enter Old Nouall, Liladam, and 3 Creditors.

Char. No^ look on me!

Romans You ^ust have patience -- Offer't again.

Char. And be again contemned?

Nou. I know what is to be done.

1 Cred. And that your Lordship
Will please to do your knowledge, we offer, first
Our thankful hearts here, as a bounteous earnest
To what we will add

Nou. One word more of this
I am your enemy. Am I a man
Your bribes can work on? ha?

Lilad. Friends, you mistake
The way to win my Lord, he must not hear this,
But I, as one in favor, in his sigh^,
May harken to you for my profit. Sir,
I pray hear em.

Nou. It Is well.

Lilad. Observe him now.

Nou. Your cause being good, and your proceedings so,
Without corruption; I am your friend,
Speak your desires.

2 Cred. Oh, they are charitable,
The Ma^shall stood engaged unto us three,
Two hundred thousand crowns, which by his death
We are defeated of. For which great loss
We aim at nothing but his rotten flesh,
Nor is that cruelty.

1 Cred. I have a son,
That talks of nothing but of Gunnes and Armors,
And swears he will be a soldier, it is an humor
I would divert him from, and I am told
That if I minister to him in his drink
Powder, made of this banquerou^ Marshalls bones,
Provided that the carcass rot above ground,
'T will cure his foolish frenzy.

Nou. You show in it
A fathers care. I have a son my self,
A fashionable Gentleman and a peaceful:
And but I am assured he is not so given,
He should take of it too. Sir, what are you?

Char. A Gentleman.

Nou. So are many that rake dunghills.
If you have any suit, move it in Court.
I take no papers in corners.

Romans Yes as the matter may be carried, and h^reby
To manage the conuayance -- Follow him.

Lil. You are rude. I say, he shall not pass. Exit Nouall. Char: and Advocates.

Romans You say so.
O^ what assurance?
For the well cutting of his Lordships corns,
Picking his toes, or any office else
Nearer to baseness!

Lil. Look upon me better,
Are these the ensigns of so coorse a fellow?
Be well advised.

Romans Out, rogue, do not I know, ( Kicks him)
These glorious weeds spring from the sordid dunghill
Of thy os^icious baseness? were thou worthy
Of any thing from me, but my contempt,
I would do more then this, more, you Court-spider.

Lil. But that this man is lawless; he should find that I am valiant.

1 Cred. If your ears are fast,
It Is nothing. What Is a blow or two? as much --

2 Cred. These chastisements, as useful are as frequent
To such as would grow rich.

Romans Are they so Rascals? I will be-friend you then.

1 Cred. Bear witness, Sirs.

Lil. Truth, I have borne my part already, friends.
In the Court you shall have more. Exit.

Romans I know you for
The worst of spirits, that st^iue to rob the tombs
Of what is their inheritance, from the dead.
For vs^re^s, bred by a ^^otous peace:
That hold the Charter o^ you^ we^l^h and freedom,
By being Knaves and Cuckolds that ne^re prayed,
But when you fear the rich heirs will grow wise,
To keep their Lands out of your parchment toils;
And then, the Devil your fathe^'s cal^ upon,
To invent some ways of Luxury never thought on.
Be gone, and quickly, or I Will leave no room
Upon your forhead for your horns to sprowt on,
Without a murmr, or I will undo you;
For I will beat you honest.

1 Cred. Thrift forbid.
We will bear this, rather then hazard that. Ex: Creditor.

Enter Charloyes. Romans I am somewhat eased in this yet.

Char (Only friend)
To what vain purpose do I make my sorrow,
Wait on the triumph of their cruelty?
Or teach their pride from my humility,
To think it has ^recome? They are determined
What they will do: and it may well become me,
To rob them of the glory they expect
From my submisse entreaties.

Romans Think not so, Sir,
The di^ficulties that you encounter with,
Will crown the undertaking -- Heaven! you weep:
And I could do so too, but that I know,
There Is more expected from the son and friend
Of him, whose fatal loss now shakes our natures.
Then sighs, or tears, (in which a village nurse
Or cunning strumpet, when her knave is hanged,
May overcome us.) We are men (young Lord)
Let us not do like women. To the Co^^t,
And there speak^ like your birth: wake sleeping justice,
Or dare the A^e. This is a way will sort
With what you are. I call you not to that
I will shrink from my self, I will deserne
Your thanks, or suffer with you -- O how bravely
That sudden fire of anger shows in you^
^
^ Exeunt.

(...) (...) (...) ^^^^ship's seated. May this meeting prove
(...) us, and to the general good of Burgundy.

(...) (...) to the poyn^.

(...) (...) is,
(...) hon^^ur to disp^se the place and power
Or primier President, which this reverent man
Grave Rochsort, (whom for honors sake I name)
Is purposed to resign a place, my Lords,
In which he has with such integrity,
Performed the first and best parts of a Judge,
That as his life transcends all fair examples
Of such as were before him in Dijon,
So it remains to thos^ that shall succeed him,
A President they may imitate, but not equal.

Roch. I may not sit to hear this.

Du Croy. Let the love
And ^hankfulnes we are bound to pay to goodness,
In this overcome your modesty.

Roch. My thanks
For this great favor shall prevent your trouble.
The honorable trust that was imposed
Upon my weakness, since you witness for me,
It was not ill discharged, I will not mention,
N^r now, if age had not deprived me of
The little strength I had to gouer^e well,
The Province that I under took, forsake it.

Nou. That we could lend you of our years.

Du Croy. Or strength.

N^u. O^ as you are, persuade you to continue
The nobl^ exercise of your knowing judgment.

Roch. That may not be, nor can your Lordships goodness,
Since your employments have conse^'d upon me
Su^^icient wealth, deny the use of it,
And though old age, when one ^oot's in the grave.
In many, when all humo^s else are spent
Feeds no affection in them, but desire
To add height to the mount^ine of their riches:
In me it is not so, I rest content
With the honors, and estate I now possess,
And that I may have liberty to use,
What Heaven still bl^ssing my poor industry,
Has made me Master of: I pray the Court
To ease me of my burden, that I may
Employ the small remainder of my life,
In living well, and learning how to dye so,

Enter Romont, and Charalois. Romans See sir, our Advocate.

Du Croy. The Court entreats,
Your Lordship will be pleased to name the man,
Which you would have your successor, and in me,
All promise to confirm it.

Roch. I embrace it,
As an assurance of their favor to me,
And name my Lord Nouall.

Du Croy. The Court allows it.

Roch. But there are suitors wait here, and their ^^uses
May be of more necessity to be heard,
And therefore wish that mine may be deferred,
And theirs have hearing.

Du Croy. If your Lordship please
To take the place, we will proceed.

Charm. The cause
We come to offer to your Lordships censure,
Is in it ^el^e so noble, that it needs not
Or Rhetor^que in me that plead, or favor
From your grave Lordsh^ps, to determine of it^
Since to ^he praise of your impartial justice
(Which guilty, nay condemned men, dare not scandal)
^t will erect a trophy of your mercy
With married to that Justice.

Nou. Se. Speak to the cause.

Charm. I will, my Lord: to say, the late dead Marshall
The father of this young Lord here, my Clyent,
Has done his Country great and faithful service,
Might task me of impertinence to repeat,
What your grave Lordships cannot but remember,
He in his life, become indebted to
These thriftie men, I will not wrong their credits,
By giving them the attributes they now merit,
And failing by the fortune of the wars,
Of means to free himself, from his engagements,
He was arrested, and for want of bail
Imprisond at their suite, and not long after
With loss of liberty ended his life.
And though it be a Maxim in our Laws,
All suites dye with the person, these men's malice
In death find matter for their hate to work on,
Denying him the decent Rytes of burial,
Which the sworn enemies of the Christian faith
Grant freely to their slaves: may it therefore please
Your Lordships, so to fashion your decree,
That what their cruelty does forbid, your pity
May give allowance to.

Nou. Se. How long have you Sir practiced in Court?

Charmi. Some twenty years, my Lord.

Nou. Se. By your gross ignorance it should appear,
Not twenty days.

Charmi. I hope I have given no cause in this, my Lord --

Nou. Se. How dare you move the Court,
To the dispensing with an Act confirmd
By Parl^ment, to the terror of all banquerouts?
Go home, and with more care peruse the Statutes:
Or the next motion savoring of this bo^ldnesse,
May force you to leap (against your will)
Over the place you plead at.

Carmi. I foresaw this.

Romans Why does your Lordship think, the moving of
A cause more honest then this Court had ever
The honor to determine, can deserve
A check like this?

Nou. Se. Strange boldness!

Romans It Is fit freedom:
Or do you conclude, an advocate cannot hold
His credit with the Judge, unless he study
His face more then the cause for which he pleades?

Charmi. Forbear.

Romans Or cannot you, that have the power
To qualify the rigor of the Laws
When you are pleased, take a little from
The strictness of your sour decrees, enacted
In favor of the greedy creditors
Against the orethrowne debt^r?

Nou. Se. Sir, you that prate
Thus sawcily, what are you?

Romans Why I Will tell you,
Thou purple-colour'd man, I am one to whom
Thou owe the means thou have of sitting there
A corrupt Elder.

Charmi. Forbear.

Romans The nose thou wear^st, is my gift, and those eyes,
That meet no object so base as their Master,
Had bin, long since^ torn from that guilty head,
And thou thy self slave to some needy Swisse,
Had I not worn a sword, and used it better
Then in thy praye^s thou ere did thy tongue.

Nou. Se. Shall such an Insolence pass unpunished?

Charmi. Hear me.

Romans Yet I, that in my service done my Country,
Disdain to be put in the scale with thee,
Confess my self unworthy to be valued
With the least part, nay hair of the dead Marshall,
Of whose so many glorious undertakings,
Make choice of any one, and that the meanest
Performd against the subtle Fox of France,
The politic Lewis, or the more desperate Swi^se,
And 'twyl^ outwaygh all the good purpose,
Though put in act, that ^uer Gowneman practizd.

Nou. Se. Away with him to prison.

Romans ^f that curses,
Urged ^us^ly, and breathed forth so, ever fell
On those that did deserve them; let not mine
Be spent in vain now, that thou from this instant
May in thy fear that they will fall upon thee,
Be sensible of the plagues they shall bring with them.
And for denying of a little earth,
To cover what remaynes of our great soldyer:
May all your wives prove whores, your factors thieves,
And while you live, your ^yotous heirs undo you^
And thou, the patron of their cruelty,
Of all thy Lordships live not to be owner
Of so much dung as will conceal a Dog,
Or what is worse, thy self in. And thy years,
To the end thou may be wretched, I wish many,
And as thou have denied the dead a grave,
May misery in thy life make thee desire one,
Which men and all the Elements keep from thee:
I have begun well, imitate, exceed.

Roch. Good counsel were it, a praise worthy deed. Ex. Officers with Romans

Du. Croye. Remember what we are.

Chara. Thus low my duty
Answers your Lordships counsel. I will use
In the f^w words (with which I am to trouble
Your Lordships ears) the temper that you wish me,
Not that I fear to speak my thoughts as loud,
And with a liberty beyond Romont:
But that I know, for me that am made up
Of all that is wretched, so to ^^ste my end,
Would seem to most, rather a willing^esse
To q^it the burden of a hopeless life,
Then scorn of death, or duty to the dead.
I therefore bring the tribute of my praise
To your severity, and commend the Justice,
That will not for the many services
That any man has done the Common wealth,
Wink at his least of ills: what though my father
Writ man before he was so, and confirmd it,
By n^mbring that day, no part of his life,
In which he did not service to his Country;
Was he to be free therefore from the Laws,
And ceremonious form in your decrees?
Or else because he did as much as man
In those three memorable overthrows
A^ Granson, Morat, Nancy, where his Master,
The warlike Charloyes (with whose misfortunes
I bear his name) lost treasure, men and life,
To be excused, from paym^nt of those sums
Which (his own patrimony spent) his zeal,
To serve his Country, forced him to take up?

Nou. Se. The president were ill.

Chara. And yet, my Lord, this much
I know youll grant; After those great defeatures,
Which in their dreadfu^l ruin^s buried quick, Enter officers.
Courage and hope, in all men but himself,
He forced the proud foe, in his height of conquest,
To yield unto an honorable peace.
And in it saved an hundred thousand lives,
To end his own, that was sure proof against
The scalding Summers heat, and Winters frost,
Ill airs, the Cannon, and the enemies sword,
In a most loathsome prison.

Du Croy. It Was his fault to be so prodigal.

Nou. S^. He had from the state sufficient entertainment for the Army.

Char. Su^ficent? My Lord, you sit at home,
And though your fees are boundless at the bar:
Are thriftie i^ the charges of the war,
But your wills be obeyed. To these I turn,
To th^se soft-hearted men, that wisely know
They are only good men, that pay what they owe^

2 Cred. And so they are.

1 Cred. It Is the City Doctrine,
We stand bound to maintain it.

Char. Be constant in it,
And since you are as merciless in your natures,
As base, and mercenary in your means
By which you get your wealth, I will not urge
The Court to take away one scruple from
The right of their laws, or one good thought
In you to mend your disposition with.
I know there is no music to your ears
So pleasing as the groans of men in prison,
And that the tears of widows, and the cries
Of famished Orphants, are the feasts that take you.
That to be in your danger, with more care
Should be ^uoyded, then infectious air,
The loathed embraces of diseased women,
A flatterers poison, or the loss of honor.
Yet rather then my fathers reverent dust
Shall want a place in that fair monument,
In which our noble Ancestors lie entombed,
Before the Court I offer up my self
A priso^er for it; load me with those yrons
That have worn out his life, in my best strength
^e run to the encounter of cold hunger,
And choose my dwelling where no Sun dares enter,
So ^e may be released.

1 Cred. What mean you sir?

2 A^uo. Only your fee againe^ther's so much said
Already in this cause, and said so well,
That should I only offer to speak in it,
I should not be heard, or laughed at for it.

1 Cred. It Is the first money advocate ere gave back,
Though he said nothing.

Roch. Be advised, young Lord,
And well con^iderate, you throw away
Your liberty, and joys of life together:
Your bounty is imployd upon a subject
That is not sensible of it, with which, wise man
Never abused his goodness; the great virtues
Of your dead father vindicate themselves,
From these men's malice, and break open the prison,
Though it contain his body.

Nou. Se. Let him alone,
If he love Lords, a Gods name let him wear 'em,
Provided these consent.

Char. I hope they are not
So ignorant in any way of profit,
As to neglect ^ possibility
To get their own, by seeking it from that
Which can return them nothing, but ill fame,
And curses for their barbarous cruelties.

3 Cred. What think you of the offer?

2 Cred. Very well.

1 Cred. Accept it by all m^^^es: let us shut him up,
He is well-shaped and has a villainous tongue,
And should he study that way of renenge,
As I dare almost swear he loves a wench,
We have no wives, nor never shall get daughter^
That will hold out against him.

Du Croy. What Is your answer?

2 Cred. Speak you for all.

1 Cred^ Why, let our executions
That lie upon the father, be returned
Upon the son, and we release the body.

Nou. Se. The Court must grant you that.

Char. I thank your Lordships,
They have in it confirmed on me such glory,
As no time can take from me: I am ready,
Come lead me where you please: captivity
That comes with honor, is true liberty.

Exit Charmi, Cred^ and Officers. Nou. Se. Strange rashness.

Roch. A brave resolution rather,
Worthy a better fortune, but howeuer
It is not now to be disputed, therefore
To my own cause. Already I have found
Your Lordships bountiful in your favors to me,
And that should teach my modesty to end here
And press your loves no further.

Du Croy. There is nothing
The Court can grant, but with assurance you
May ask it, and obtain it.

Roch. You encourage a bold Petitioner, and it is not fit
Your favors should be lost. Beside^, ^^as been
A custom many years, at the surrendering
The place I now give up, to grant the President
One boon, that parted with it. And to confirm
Your grace toward me, against all such as may
Detract my actions, and life hereafter,
I now prefer it to you.

Du Croy. Speak it f^eely.

Roch. I then desire the liberty of R^mont,
And that my Lord Nouall whose private wrong
Was equal to the injury that was done
To the dignity of the Court, will pardon it,
And now sign his enlargement.

Nou. Se. Pray you demand
The moiety of my estate, or any thing
Within my power, but this.

Roch. Am I denied then -- my first and last request^

Du Croy. It must not be.

2. Pre. I have a voice to give in it.

3. Pre. And I.
And if persuasion will not work him to it,
We will make known our power.

No^ Se. You are too violent,
You shall have my consent -- But wo^ld you had
Made trial of my love in any thing
But this, you should have found then -- But it skills not^
You have what you desire.

Roch. I thank your Lordships.

Du Croy. The court is up, make way. Ex. omnes, prate^ Roch. and Baumont.

Roch. I follow you -- Baumont.

Baum. My Lord.

Roch. You are a scholar, Baumont,
And can search deeper into the intents of men,
Then those that are less knowing -- How appeared
The piety and brave behavior of
Young Charloyes to you?

Baum. It is my wonder,
Since I want language to express it fully;
And sure the Collonell --

Roch. Fie! he was faulty -- what present money have I?

Baum. There is no want
Of any sum a private man has use for.

Roch. It Is well^
I am strangely taken with this Charaloyes;
Methinkes, from his example, the whole age
Should learn to be good, and continue so.
Virtue works strangely with us: and his goodness
Rising above his fortune, seems to me
Princelike, to will, not ask a courtesy. Exeunt.

Act. secundus. Scaena prima:
Enter Pontalier, Malotin, Baumont. Mal. It Is strange.


Baum. Me thinks so,


Pont. In a man, but young,
Yet old in judgment, theorique, and practicke,
In all humanity (and to increase the wonder)
Religious, yet a Soldier, that he should
Yield his free living youth a captive, for
The ^reedome of his aged fathers Corpse,
And rather choose to want life^ necessaries,
Liberty, hope of fortune, then it should
In death be kept from Christian ceremony.

Malo. Come, It Is a gold^n president in a Son,
To let strong nature have the better hand,
(In such a case) of all affected reason.
What years sits on this Char^lois?

Baum. Twenty eight, for ^ince the clock did strike him 17 old
Under his fathers wing, this Son has fought,
Served and commanded, and so aptly both,
That sometimes he appeared his fathers father,
And never less then is son; the old man's virtues
So recent in him, as the world may swear,
Naught but a fair tree, could such fair fruit bear.

Pont. But wherefore lets he such a barbarous law,
And men more barbarous to execute it,
Prevail on his soft disposition,
That he had rather dye alive for debt
Of the old man in prison, then he should
Rob him of Sepulture, considering
These moneys borrowed bought the lenders peace,
And all their means they enjoy, nor was diffused
In any impious or licencious path?

Bau. True: for my part, were it my fathers trunk,
The tyrannous Ram-heads, with their horns should gore it,
Or, cast it to their curres (than they) le^se curr^sh,
Ere prey on me so, with their Lion-law,
B^ing in my free will (as in his) to shun it.

Pont. Alas! he knows himself (in poverty) lost:
For in this parciall auaricious age
What price bears Honor? Virtue? Long ago
It was but praised, and freez'd, but now a days
It Is colder far, and has, nor love, nor praise,
Very praise now freezeth too: for nature
Did make the heathen, f^r ^ore Christian then,
Then knowledge us (less he^thenish) Christian.

Malo. This morning is the funeral.


Pont. Certainly!
And from this prison 'twas the sons request
That his dear father might in^erment have. Recorders Mus^que.
See, the young sonn^ i^^erd^ lively gr^^e.

Baum. They come, observe their order.


Enter Funeral. Body b^rne by 4. Captains and Soldiers. Mour^ers.
Scutchions, and very good order. Char^lois, and R^mont meet i^ Char. speaks.
Romans weeping, solemn Music, 3 Creditors. Char. How like a silent stream
shaded with night,
And gliding softly with our windy sighe^;
Moves the whole frame of this solemnity!
Tears, sighs and blackes, filling the fimily,
Whilst I the only murmur in this grove
Of death, thus hollowly break forth^ Vouchfafe
To stay a while, rest, rest in peace, dear earth,
Thou that brought rest to their unthankful lyues^
Whose cruelty denied thee rest in death:
Here stands thy poor Executor thy son,
That makes his life prisoner, to bale thy death;
Who gladlier puts on this captivity,
Then Virgins long in love, their wedding weeds:
Of all that ever thou have done good to,
These only have good memories, for they
Remember best, forget not gratitude.
I thank you for this last and friendly love.
And tho this Country, like a viperous mother,
Not only has eat up vngrate^ully
All means of thee her son, but last thy self,
Leaving thy heir so bare and indigent,
He c^nnot raise thee a poor Monument,
Such as a flatterer, or a usurer has.
Thy worth, in every honest br^st buylder one,
Making their friendly hearts ^hy funeral stone.

Pont. Sir.


Char. Peace, O peace, this scene is wholly mine.
What weep ye, soldiers? Blanch not, Romont weeps.
Ha. let me see, my miracle is eased,
The iaylors and the creditors do weep;
Even they that make us weep, do weep themselves.
Be these thy bodies balm: these and thy virtue
Keep thy fame ever odoriferous,
Whilst the great, proud, rich, undeserving man,
Alive stinkes in his vices, and being vanished,
The golden calfe that was an Idol dect
With Marble pillars Iet, and Porphyrie,
Shall quickly both in bone and name consume,
Though wrapped in lead, spice, Searecloth and perfume

1 Cred. Sir.


Char. What! Away for shame: you profane rogues
Must not be mingled with these holy relics:
This is a Sacrifice, our shower shall crown
His sepulcher with Olive, Myrrh and Bays
The plants of peace, of sorrow, victory,
Your tears would spring but weeds.

1 Cred. Would they not so?
VVee'll keep them to stop bottles then:

Romans No; keep 'em for your own sins, you Rogues,
Till you repent: you will dye else and be damned.

2 Cred. Damned, ha! ha, ha.


Romans Laugh ye?


3 Cred. Yes faith. Sir, weel'd be very glad
To please you ^yther way.

1 Cred. You Are never content,
Crying not laughing.

Romans Both with a birth she rogues.


2 Cred. Our wives, Sir, taught us.


Romans Look, look you slau^s, your thanklesse c^uelty
And sau^ge manners, of unkind Dijon,
Exhaust these floods, and not his fathers death.

1 Cred. Slid, Sir, what would ye, ye'are so choleric?


2 Cred. Most soldiers are so y faith, let him alone:
They have little else to live on, we have not had
A penny of him, have we?

3 Cred, 'Slight, would you have our hearts?


1 Cred. We have nothing but his body here in durance
For all our money.

Priest. On.


Char. One moment more,
But to bestow a few poor legacyes,
All I have left in my dead fathers rights,
And I have done. Captain, wear thou these spurs
That yet never made his horse run from a foe.
Lieutenant, thou, this Scarf, and may it tie
Thy valor, and thy honesty together:
For so it did in him. Ensign, this Curace
Your Generals necklace once. You gentle Bearers,
Divide this purse of gold, this other, strew
Among the poor: it is all I have. Romont,
(Wear thou this medall of himself) that like
A hearty Oak, grew'st close to this tall Pine,
Even in the wildest wilderness of war,
VVhereon foes broke their swords, and tired themselves;
VVounded and hacked ye were, but never felled.
For me, my portion provide in Heaven:
My root is carth'd, and I a desolate branch
Left scattered in the high way of the world,
Trod under foot, that might have bin a Column,
Mainely supporting our demolished house,
This would I wear as my inheritance.
And what hope can arise to me from it,
When I and it are both here prisoners?
Only may this, if ever we be free,
Keep, or redeem me from all infamy. Song. Mus^cke.

1 Cred. No farther, look to 'em at your own peril.


2 Cred. No, as they please: their Master's a good man.
I would they were the Burmudas.

Saylor. You must no further.
The prison limits you, and the Creditors
Exact the strictness.

Romans Out you wooluish mungrells!
Whose brains should be knocked out, like dogs in July,
Lest your infection poison a whole town.

Char. They grudge our sorrow: your ill wills perforce
Turns now to Charity: they would not have us
Walk too far mourning, usurers relief
Grieves, if the Debtors have too much of grief. Exeunt.

Enter Beaumelle: Florimell: Bellapert. Beau. I prithee tell me, Florimell, why
do women marry?


Flor. Why truly Madam, I think, to lie with their husbands.


Bella. You are a fool; She lies, Madam, women marry husbands,
To lie with other men.

Flor. Faith, eene such a woman will thou make. By thi^ light, Madam, this
wagtaile will spoil you, if you take delight in her license.


Beau. It Is true, Florimell: and thou will make me too good for a young Lady.
What an electuary found my father out for his daughter, when he compounded you
two my women? for thou, Florimell, art e^ne a grain too heavy, simply for a
waiting Gentlewoman.


Flor. And thou Bellapert, a grain too light.


Bella. Well, go thy ways goodly wisdom, whom no body regards. I wonder,
whether be elder thou or thy hood^ you think, because you serve my Ladies
mother, are 32 years old which is a peep cut, you know.


Flor. Well said, wherligig.


Bella. You are deceyu'd: I want a peg in the middle. Out of these Prerogatives!
you think to be mother of the maids here, and mortify em with proverbs:
go, go, govern the sweet meats, and weigh the Sugar, that the wenches steal
none: say your prayers twice a day, and as I take it, you have performd your
function.


Flor. I may be even with you.


B^ll. Hark, the Court's broke up. Go help my old Lord out of his Caroch,
and scratch his head till dinner time^


Flor. Well. Exit.


Bell. Fie Madam, how you walk! By my mayden-head you look 7 years older then
you did this morning: why, there can be nothing under the Sun valuable, to
make you thus a minute.


Beau. Ah my sweet Bellapert thou Cabinet
To all my counsels, thou do know the cause
That makes thy Lady wither thus in youth.

Bell. Vd'd-light, enjoy your wishes: whilst I live,
One way or other you shall crown your will.
Would you have him your husband that you love,
And cannot not be? he is your servant though,
And may perform the office of a husband.

Beau. But there is honor, wench.

Bell. Such a disease
There is in deed, for which ere I would die. --

B^au. Prithee, distinguish me a maid and wife.

Bell. Faith, Madam, one may bear any man's children,
The Other must bear no man's.

Beau. What is a husband?


Bell. Physic, that tumbling in your belly, will make you sick in the
stomach: the only distinction betwixt a husband and a servant is: the first
will lie with you, when he please; the last shall lie with you when you
please. Pray tell me, Lady, do you love, to marry after, or would you marry, to
love after?


Beau. I would meet love and marriage both at once.


Bell. Why then you are out of the fashion, and will be contemned: for (I Will
assu^e you) there are few women in the world, but either they have married first,
and love after, or love first, and married after: you must do as you may, not
as you would: your fathers will is the Goal you must fly to^ if a husband
approach you, you would have further off, is he your love? the less near you.
A husband in these days is but a cloak to be oftener laid upon your bed,
then in your bed.


Baum. Humpe.


Bell. Sometimes you may wear him on your shoulder, now and then under your
arm: but seldom or never let him cover you: for it is not the fashion.


Enter y. Nouall, Pontalier, Malotin, Lilladam, Aymer. Nou. Best day to natures
curiosity,
Star of Dijum, the luster of all France,
Perpetual ^pring dwell on thy rosy cheeks,
Whose breath is perfume to our Continent,
See Flora turned in her varieties.

Bell. Oh di^ine Lord!


Nou. No autumn, nor no age ever approach
This heavenly piece, which nature having wrought,
She lost her needle and did then despair,
Ever to work so lively and so fair.

Lilad. Vds light, my Lord, one of the purles of your band is (without all
discipline fallen) out of his rank.


Nou. How? I would not for a 1000 crowns she had seen't.
Dear Liladam, reform it.

Bell. Oh Lord: Per se, Lord, quintessence of honor, she walks not under a
weed that could deny thee any thing.


Baum. Prethy peace, wench, thou do but blow the fire, that flames too much
already. Lilad. Aim. trim Nouall, whilst Bell her Lady.


Aim. By gad, my Lord, you have the diuinest Tailor of Christendom; he has
made you look like an Angel in your cloth of Tissue doublet.


Pont. This is a three-leg'd Lord, there is a fresh assault, oh that men should
spend time thus!

See see, how her blood drives to her heart, and straight vaults to her cheeks
again.


Malo. What are these?


Pont. One of 'em there the lower is a good, foolish, kn^uish, sociable
gallimaufry of a man, and has much taught my Lord with singing, he is master
of a music house: the other is his dressing block, upon whom my Lord lays
all his clothes, and fashions, ere he vouchsafes 'em his own person; you
shall see him in the morning in the Gally-foyst, at noone in the Bullion, in the
evening in Quirpo, and all night in --


Malo. A Bawdyhouse.


Pont. If my Lord deny, they deny, if he affirm, they affirm: they skip into
my Lords cast skins some twice a year, and thus they live to eat, eat to
live, and live to praise my Lord.


Malo. Good sir, tell me one thing.


Pont. What Is that?


Malo. Dare th^se men ever fight, on any cause?


Pont. Oh no, 't would spoil their clothes, and put their bands out of order.


Nou. Mrs, you hear the news: your father has resigned his Presidentship to my
Lord my father.


Malo. And Lord Charolois undone forever.

Pon^. T^oth, it is pity, sir.
A brauer hope of so assured a father
Did never comfort France.

Lila. A good dumb mourner.

Aim A silent black.

Nou. O^ fi^ upon him, how he wears his clothes!
As i^ he had come this Christmas from St. Omers,
To see his friends, and returned after Twelfetyde.

Lilad. His Colonel looks fienely like a drouer,

Nou. That had a winter ly'n perdieu in the rain.

Aim. What, he that wears a clout about his neck,
His cuffes in's pocket, and his heart in's mouth?

Nou. Now out upon him!


Beau. S^r^ant, tie my hand.
How your lips blush, in scorn that they should pay
Tri^^t^ to hands, when lips are in the way!

Nou. I thus recant, yet now your hand looks white,
Because your lips robbed it of such a right.

M^^n^^eur Aymour, I prethy sing the song
Devoted to my M^^. Cant. Music.

After the Song, Enter Rochfort, and Baumont. Baum. Rom^nt will come, sir,
straight.

Roch. It Is well.

Bean. My Father.

Nouall. My honorable Lord.

Roch. My Lord Nouall, this is a virtue in you,
So early up and ready before noone,
That are the map of dressing through all France.

Nou. I rise to say my prayers, sir, he^re's my Saint.

Roch. It Is well and courtly; you must give me leave,
I have some private conference with my daughter,
Pray use my garden, you shall dine with me.

Lilad. We Will wait on you.

Nou. Good morn unto your Lordship,
Remember what you have vowed -- to his Mrs. Exe^nt omnes, prater Roch. Daug.

Beau. Perform I must.

Roch. Why how now Beaumelle, thou look not well.
Thou Art sad of late, come cheer thee, I have found
A wholesome remedy for these maiden fits,
A goodly Oak whereon to twist my vine,
Till her fair branches grow up to the stars.
Be near at hand, success crown my intent,
My business fills my little time so full,
I cannon stand to talk: I know, thy duty
Is handmayd to my will, especially
When it presents nothing but good and fit.

Beau. Sir, I am yours. Oh if my tears prove true, Exit Daug
Fate has wronged love, and will destroy me too.

Ent^r Romont keeper. Romans Sent you for me, sir?

Roch. Yes.

Romans Your Lordships pleasure?

R^ch. Keeper, this prisoner I will see forth coming
Upon my word -- Sit down good Colonel. Exit keeper.
Why I did wish you hither, noble sir,
Is to advise you from this iron carriage,
Which, so affected, Romont, you wear,
To pity and to c^un^ell ye submit
With expedition to the great Nouall:
Recant your stern contempt, and slight neglect
Of the whole Court, and him, and opportunity,
Or you will undergo a heavy censure
In public very shortly.

Romans Hum hum: reverend sir,
I have observed you, and do know you well,
And am now more afraid you know not me,
By wishing my submission to Nouall,
Then I can be of all the bellowing mouths
That wait upon him to pronounce the censure^
Could it determine me torments, and shame.
Submit, and crave forgiveness of a beast^
It Is true, this bile of state wears purple Tissue,
Is high fed, proud^ so is his Lordships horse,
And bears as rich Caparisons. I know,
This Elephant carries on his back not only
Towers, Castles, but the ponderous republique,
And never stoops for it, with h^s strong breath trunk
S^uffes others titles, Lordships, Offices,
Wealth, bribes and lives, under his ravenous jaws,
What Is this unto my freedom? I dare dye;
And therefore ask this Cammell, if these blessings
(For so they would be understood by a man)
But mollify one rudeness in his nature,
Sweet^n the eager relish of the law,
At whose great helm he sits: helps he the poor
In a just business? nay, does he not cross
Every deserved soldier and scholar,
As if when nature made him, she had made
The general Antipathy of all virtue?
How sauagely, and blasphemo^fly he spoke
Touching the General, the grave General dead,
I must weep when I think on it.

Roch. Sir.

Romans My Lord, I am not stubborn, I can melt, you see,
And prize a virtue better then my life^
For though I be not learnd, I ever loved
That ho^y Mother of all issues, good,
Whose white hand (for a Scepter) holds a File
To pollish roughest customs, and in you
She has her right: see, I am calm as sleep,
But when I think of the gross injuries,
The godless wrong done, to my General dead,
I rave indeed, and could eat this Nouall
A soule-lesse Dromodary.

Roch. Oh be temperate,
Sir, though I would persuade, I Will not constraine^
Each man's opinion freely is his own,
Concerning any thing or any body,
Be it right or wrong, it is at the Judges peril.

Enter Baumond. Bau. These men, Sir, wait without, my Lord is come too.

Roch. Pay'em those sums upon the table, take
Their full releases: stay, I want a witness:
Let me entreat you Colonel, to walk in,
And stand but by, to see this money paid,
It does concern you and your friends, it was
The better cause you were sen^ for, though said otherwise.
The deed shall make this my request more plain.

Romans I shall obey your pleasure Sir, though ignorant
To what is tends? Exit Seruant^ Romont.

Roch. Worthiest Sir, Enter Charol^is.
You are most welcome: fie, no more of this:
You have o^t-wept a woman, noble C^arolois.
No man but has, or must bury a father.

Char. Grave Sir, I buried sorrow, for his death,
In the grave with him. I did never think
He was immorrall, though I vow I grieve,
And see no reason why the vicious,
Virtuous, valiant and unworthy men
Should dye alike.

Roch. They do not.

Char. In the manner
Of dying, Sir, they do not, but all dye,
And therein d^ffer not: but I have done.
I spied the lively picture of my father,
Passing your gallery, and that cast this water
I^to mi^e eyes: see, foolish that I am,
To let it do so.

Roch. Sweet and gentle nature,
How silk^n is this well comparatively
To other men! I have a suite to you Sir,

Ch^r. Take it, it is granted.

Roch. What?

Char. Nothing, my Lord.

Roch. Nothing is q^ickly granted.

C^ara. Faith, my Lord,
That nothing granted, is eu^n all I have,
For (al^ know) I have nothing left to grant.

Roch. Sir, have you any suite to me? Ill grant
You some thing, any thing.

Char. Nay surely, I that can
Give nothing, will but sue for that again.
No man will grant me any thing I ^ue for.
But begging nothing, every man will giue't.

Roch. Sir, the love I bore your father, and the worth
I see in you, so much resembling his,
Made me t^u^ send for you. And tender here Draws a ^^rtayne^
What ^uer you will take, gold, Jewels, both,
All, to supply your wants, and free your self.
Where heavenly virtue in high blouded veins
Is lodged, and ca^ agree, men should kne^le down,
Adore, and sacrifice all that they hau^;
And well they may, it is so seldom seen.
Put off your wonder, and here freely take
Or send your servants. Nor, Sir, shall you use
In ought of this, a poor man's fee, or bribe,
Unjustly taken of the rich, but what is
Directly go^ten, and yet by the Law.

Char. How ill, Sir, it becomes those hairs to mock?

Roch. Mock? thunder strike me then.

Char. You do amaze me:
But you shall wonder too, I will not take
One single piece of this great heap: why should I
Borrow, that have not means to pay, nay am
A very bankerupt, even in flattering hope
Of ever raising any. All my begging,
Is Romonts liberty. Enter Romont, Creditors laden with money. Baumont.

Roch. Here is your friend,
Enfranchist ere you spoke. I give him you,
And Charalois. I give you to your friend
As free a man as he; your fathers debts
Are taken off.

Char. How?

Romans Sir, it is most true.
I am the witness.

1 Cred. Yes faith, we are paid.

2 Cred. Heaven bless his Lordship, I did think him wiser

3 Cred. He a statesman, he an ass Pay other men's debts?

1 Cred. That he was never bound for.

Romans One more such would save the rest of pleaders

Char. Honored Rochfort.
Lie still my tongue and bushes, called my cheeks,
That offter thanks in words, for such great deeds.

Roch. Call in my daughter: still I have a suit to you.
Would you requite me. Baum. Exit.

Romans With his life, assure you.

Roch. Nay, would you make me now your debtor, Sir.
This is my only child: what she appears, Enter Baum
Your Lordship well may see her education, Beau.
Fo^lowes not any: for her mind, I know it
To be far fayrer then her shape, and hope
It will continue so: if now her birth
Be not too mean for Charolois, take her
This virgin by the hand, and call her wife,
Indowd with all my fortunes: bless me so.
Requite me thus, and make me happier,
In joining my poor empty name to yours,
Then if my state were multiplied ten fold.

Char. Is this the payment, Sir, that you expect?
Why, you participate me more in debt^
That nothing but my life can ever pay,
This beauty being your daughter, in which yours
I must conceive necessity of her virtue
Without ^ll dowry is a Princes aim,
Then, as she is, for poor and worthless I,
How much too worthy! Waken me, Romont,
That I may know I dreamed, and find this vanished

Romans Sure, I sleep not.

Ro^h. Your sentence life or death.

Char. Fair Beaumeile, can you love me?

Beau. Yes, my Lord. Enter No^all, P^^ta^

Char. You need not question me, if I can you. Malotine, Lilad, Aymer. All
salute.
You are the fairest virgin in Dig^m^
And Rochfort is your father.

Nou. What Is this change?

Roch. You met my wishes, Gentlemen.

Romans What make
These dogs in doublets he ere!

Beau. A Visitation, Sir.

Char. Then t^us, Fair B^aumell^, I write my says
Thus seal it in the sight of Heaven and men.
Your fingers tie my heart strings with this touch
In true-loue knots, which naught but death shall loose.
And yet these ears (an Emblem of our loves)
Like Cristall rivers indiuidu^lly
Flow into one another, make one source,
Which never man distinguish, less divide:
Breath, marry, breath, and kisses, mingle souls
Two hearts, and bodies, here incorporate:
And though with little wooing I have won,
My future life shall be a wooing time.
And ^uery day, new as the bridal one,
Oh Sir, I groan under your courtesies,
More then my fathers bones under his wrongs,
You Curtius-like, have thrown into the gulf,
Of this his Countries foul ingratitude,
Your life and fortunes, to redeem their shames.

Roch. No more, my glory, come, let us in and hasten
This celebration.
Romans Mal. Pont. Ba^. All fair bliss upon it.

Exeunt Roch. Char. Romans Bau. Mal. Nou. Mistress.

Beau. Oh servant, virtue strengthen me.
Thy presence^ blows round my affections vane:
You will undo me, if you speak again. Exit Beaum.

Lilad. Aim. Here will be sport for you. This works.

Exeunt Lilad. Aim. Nou. Peace, peace.

Pon^. One word, my Lord Nouall.

Nou. What, thou would money; there.

Pont. No, I Will none, I Will not be bought a slave,
A Pander, or a Parasite, for all
Your fathers worth, though you have saved my life,
Rescued me often from my wants, I must not
Wink at your follyes: that will ruin you.
You know my blunt way, and my love to truth:
Fors^ke the p^rsuit of this Ladies honor,
Now you do see her made another man's,
And such a man's, so good, so popular,
Or you will pluck a thousand mischiefs on you,
The benefits you have done me, are not lost,
Nor cast away, they are purs'd here in my heart,
But let me pay you, sir, a fayrer way
Then to defend ^our vices, or to sooth'em.

Nou. Ha, ha, ha, what are my courses unto thee?
Good Cou^in Pontalier, meddle with that
That shall concern thy self. Exit Nonall.

Pont. No more but scorn?
Move on then, stars, work your pernicious will.
Only the wise rule, and prevent your ill. Exit. Hoboyes.

Here a passage over the Stage, while the Act is playing for the Marriage of
Charalois with Beaumelle, etc. Actus tertius, Scaena prima^
Enter Nouall Junior, Bellapert. Nou. In. Fly not to these excuses: thou have
bin
False in thy promise, and when I have said
Ungrateful, all is spoke.

Bell. Good my Lord, but hear me only.

Nou. To what purpose, trif^er?
Can any thing that thou can say, make void
The marriage? or those pleasures but a dream,
Which Charaloyes (oh Venus) has enjoyed?

Bell. I yet could say that you receive advantage,
In what you think a loss, would you vouchsafe me
That you were never in the way till now
With safety to arrive at your desires,
That pleasure makes love to you vnattended
By danger or repentance?

Nou. That I could.
But apprehend one reason how this might be,
Hope would not then forsake me.

Bell. The enjoying
Of what you most desire, I say the enjoying
Shall, in the full possession of your wishes,
Confirm^ that I am faithful.

Nou. Give some relish
How this may appear possible.

Bell. I will
Relish, and taste, and make the banquet easy:
You say my Lady's married. I confess it,
That C^aralois has inioyed her, it is most true
That with her, he is already Master of
The best p^rt of my old Lords state. Still better,
But that the first, or last, should be your hindrance,
I utterly deny; for but observe me:
While she went for, and was, I swear, a Virgin,
What courtesy could she with her honor give
Or you receive with safety -- take me with you,
When I say courtesy, do not think I mean
A kiss, the tying of her shoo or garter,
An hour of private conference: those are trifles.
In this word courtesy, we that are gamesters point at
The sport direct, where not alone the lover
Brings his Artillery, but uses it.
Which word expounded to you, such a courtesy
Do you expect, and sudden.

Nou. But he tasted the first sweetes, Bellapert.

Bell. He wronged you shrewdly,
He toiled to climb up to the Pheonix nest,
And in his prints leaves your ascent more easy.
I do not know, you that are perfect Crittiques
In women's books, may talk of may denheads.

Nou. But for her marriage.

Bell. It Is a fair protection
Against all arrests of fear, or shame for ever.
Such as are fair, and yet not foolish, study
To have one at thirteen; but they are mad
That stay till twenty. Then sir, for the pleasure,
To say Adu^terie's sweeter, that is stale.
This only is not the contentment more,
To say, This is my Cuckold, then my Rival.
More I could say -- but briefly, she doates on you,
I^ it prou^ oth^rwise, spare not, poison me
With next gold you give me. Enter Beaumely.

Beau. Hows this servant, courting my woman?

B^ll. As an e^trance to
The favor of the mistress: you are together
And I am perfect in my qu.

Beau. Stay Bellapert.

Bell. In this, I must not with your leave obey you.
Y^u^ Tailor and your Tire-woman wait without
A^^ stay my counsel, and direction for
Your next days dressing. I have much to do,
Nor will your Ladyship know, time is precious,
Continue idle: this choice Lord will find
So fit employment for you. Exit Bellap.

Beau. I shall grow angry.

N^u. Not so, you have a jewel in her, Madam.

Bell. I had forgot to tell your Ladyship Enter again.
The clo^et is p^iua^e and yo^^ couch ready;
And if you please that I shall loose the key,
But say so, and it is done. Exit Bellap.

Baum. You come to chide me, se^uant, and bring with yo^
Su^ficient warrant, you will say and t^uely,
My father found too much obedience in me,
By being won too soon: yet if you please
B^t to remember, all my hopes and fortunes
Had re^erence to this likening: you will grant
That though I did not well toward you, I yet
Did wisely for my self.

Nou. Wi^h too much feruor
I have so long l^u'd and still love you, Mistress,
To esteem that an injury to me
Which was to you convenient: that is past
My help, is past my cure. You yet may, Lady,
In recompense of all my dutious service,
(Provided that your will answer your power)
Become my Creditresse.

Beau. I understand you,
And ^or assurance, the request you make
Shall not he long unanswered. Pray you sit,
And by what you shall hear, you will easily find,
My passions are much fitter to desire,
Th^n to be sued to. Enter Romont and Florimell.

Fl^r. Sir, it is not envy
At the start my fellow has got of me in
My L^dies good opinion, that's the motive
Of ^his di^couery; but due payment
O^ what I owe her Honor.

Romans So I conceive it.

Flo. I have observed too much, nor shall my silence
Prevent the remedy -- yonder they are,
I dare not be seen with you. You may do
What you think fit, which will be, I presume,
The o^fice of a faithful and tried friend
To my young Lord. Exit Flori.

Romans This is no vision: ha!

Nou. With the next opportunity.

Beau. By this kiss, and this, and this.

Nou. That you would ever swear thus.

Romans If I seem rude, your pardon, Lady; yours
I do not ask: come, do not dare to show me
A face of anger, or the least dislike,
Put on, and suddaily a milder look,
I shall grow rough else.

Nou. What have I done, Sir,
To draw this har^h unsavory language from you?

Romans Done, Popinjay? why, do thou think that if
I ere had dreamt that thou had done me wrong,
Thou should outliue it?

Beau. This is something more
Then my Lords friendship gives commission for.

Nou. Your presence and the place, makes him presum^
Upon my patience.

Romans As if thou ere were angry
But with thy Tailor, and yet that poor shred
Can bring more to the making up of a man,
Then can be hoped from thee: thou art his crea^ure,
And did he not each morning new create
Thou would stink and be forgotten. I Will not change
On syllable more with thee, until thou bring
Some testimony under good men's hands,
Thou art a Christian. I suspect thee strongly,
And will be satisfied: till which time, keep from me.
The entertaiment of your visitation
Has made what I intended on a business.

Nou. So we shall meet -- Madam.

Romans Use that leg again, and I Will cut off the other.

Nou. Very good. Exit Nouall.

Romans What a perfume the Muske-cat lea^es behind him!
Do you admit him for a property,
To save you charges, Lady.

Beau. It Is not vselesse,
Now you are to succeed him.

Romans So I respect you,
Not for your self, but in remembrance of,
Who is your father, and whose wife you now are,
That I choose rather not to understand
Your nasty scoff then, --

Beau. What, you will not beat me,
If I expound it to you. Here Is a Tyrant
Spares neither man nor woman.

Romans My intents
Madam, deserve not this; nor do I stay
To be the whetstone of your wit: preserve it
To spend on such, as know how to admire
Such colored stuff. In me there is now speaks to yo^
As true a friend and servant to your Honor,
And one that will with as much hazard guard it,
As ever man did goodness. -- But then Lady,
You must endeavor not alone to be,
But to appear worthy such love and service.

Beau. To what tends this?

Romans Why, to this purpose, Lady,
I do desire you should prove such a wife
To Charaloys (and such a one he merits)
A^ Caesar, did he live, could not except at,
Not only innocent from crime, but free
From all taynt and suspicion.

Beau. They are base that judge me otherwise.

Romans But yet be careful.
Detraction's a bold monster, and fears not
To wound the ^ame of Princes, if it find
But any blemish in their lives to work on.
But I Will be plainer with you^ had the people
Bin learnd to speak, but what even now I saw,
Their malice out of that would raise an engine
To overthrow your honor. In my sight
(With yonder pointed fool I frighted from you)
You used familiarity beyond
A modest entertaynment: you embraced him
With too much ardor for a stranger, and
Met him with kisses neyth^r chaste nor comely^
But learn you to forget him, as I will
Your bounties to him, you will find it saf^r
Rather to be vncourtly, then immodest.

Beau. This p^ety rag about your neck shows well,
And being coorse and little worth, it speaks you,
As terrible as thrifty.

Romans Madam.

Beau. Yes.
And this strong belt in which you hang your honor
Will out-last twenty scarfs.

Romans What mean you, Lady?

Beau. And all else about you Cap a pe,
So uniform in spite of handsomnesse,
Shows such a bold contempt of comeliness,
That it is not strange your Laundresse in the League,
Grew mad with love of you.

Romans Is my free counsel.
Answered with this ridiculous scorn?

Beau. These objects
Stole very much of my attention from me,
Yet something I remember, to speak truth,
Deceived gravely, but to little purpose,
That almost would have made me swear, some Curate
Had stolen into the person of Romont,
And in the praise of good wife honesty,
Had read an homely.

Romans By thy hand.

Beau. And sword,
I will make up your oath, twill want weight else.
You are angry with me, and poor I laugh at it.
Do you come from the Camp, which affords only
The conversation of cast suburb whores,
To set down to a Lady of my rank,
Lymits of entertainmmen^?

Romans Sure a Legion has possessed this woman.

Beau. One stamp more would do well: yet I desire not
You should grow horne-mad, till you have a wife.
You are come to warm meat, and perhaps clean linnen^
Feed, wear it, and be thankful. For me, know,
That though a thousand watches were set on me,
And you the Master-spy, I yet would use,
The liberty that best likes me. I will revel,
Feast, kiss, imbreace, perhaps grant larger favors:
Yet such as live upon my means, shall know
They must not murmur at it. If my Lord
Be now grown yellow, and has chose out you
To serve his Iealouzy that way, tell him this,
You have something to inform him. Exit B^au.

Romans And I will.
Believe it wicked one I will. Hear, Heaven,
But hearing pardon me: if these fruts grow
Upon the tree of marriage, let m^ shun it,
As a forbidden sweet. An heir and rich,
Young, beautiful, yet add to this a wife,
And I will rather choose a Spittle sinner
Car^ed an age before, though three parts rotten,
And take it for a blessing, rather then
Be fettered to the hellish slavery
Of such an impudence.

Enter Baumont with writings. Bau. Collon^^l, good fo^t^ne
To meet you thus: you look sad, but I Will tell you
Something that shall remove it. Oh how happy
Is my Lord Charaloys in his fair bride!

Romans A happy man indeed! -- pray you in what?

Bau. I dare swear, you would think so good a Lady,
A dower suf^icient.

Romans No doubt. But on.

Bau. So fair, so chaste, so virtuous: so indeed
All that is excellent.

Romans Women have no cunning to gull the world.

Bau. Yet to all these, my Lord
Her father gives the full addition of
All he does now possess in Burgundy:
These writings to confirm it, are new sealed
And I most fortunate to present him with them,
I must go seek him out, can you direct me?

Romans You Will find him breaking a young horse.

Bau. I thank you. Exit Baumont.

Romans I must do something worthy Charaloys friendship.
If she were well inclined to keep her so,
Deserved not thanks: and yet to stay a woman
Spurred headlong by hot lust, to her own ruin,
Is harder then to prop a falling tower
With a deceiving reed. E^ter Rochfort.

Roch. Some one seek for me,
As soon as he returns.

Romans Her father! ha?
How if I break this to him? sure it cannot
Meet with an ill construction. His wisdom
Made powerful by the authority of a father,
Will warrant and give privilege to his counsels.
It shall be so -- my Lord.

Roch. Your friend Romont: would you ought with me?

Romans I stand so engaged
To your so many favors, that I hold it
A breach in thankfulness, should I not discover,
Though with some imputation to my self,
All doubts tha^ may concern you.

Roch. The performance
Will make this protestation worth my thanks.

Romans Then with your patience lend me your attention
For what I must deliver, whispered only
You will with too much grief receive.

Enter Beaumelle, Bellapert. Beau. See wench!
Upon my life as I forespake, he is now
Preferring his complaint: but be thou perfect,
And we will fit him.

Bell. Fear not me, pox on him:
A Captain turn Informer against kissing?
Would he were hanged up in his rusty Armor:
But if our fresh wits cannot turn the plots
Of such a moldy murrion on it self;
Rich clothes, choice fare, and a true friend at a call,
With all the pleasures the night yields, forsake us.

Roch. This in my daughter? do not wrong her.

Bell. Now begin.
The games afoor, and we in distance.

Beau. T^s thy fault, fool^sh girl, pin on my veil,
I will not wear those jewels. Am I not
Already matched beyond my hopes? yet still
You prune and set me forth, as if I were
Again to please a suyter.

Bell. It Is the course
That our great Ladies take.

Romans A weak excuse.

Beau. Those that are better seen, in what concern^^
A Ladies honor and fair fame, condemn it.
You wait well, in your absence, my Lords friend
The understanding, grave and wise Romont.

Romans Must I be still her sport^

Beau. Reprove me for it.
And he has traueld to bring home a judgment
Not to be contradicted. You will say
My father, that owes more to years then he,
Has brought me up to music, language, Courtship,
And I must use them. True, but not to offend,
O^ render me suspected.

Roch. Does your fine story begin from this?

Beau. I thought a parting kiss
From young Nouall, would have displeasd no more
Then heretofore it has done; but I find
I must restrain such favors now; look therefore
As you are careful to continue mine,
That I no more be visi^ed. I Will endure
The strictest course of life that jealousy
Can think secure enough, ere my behavior
Shall call my fame in question.

Romans Ten dissemblers
Are in this subtle devil. You believe this?

Roch. So far that if you trouble me again
With a report like this, I shall not only
Judge you malicious in your disposition,
But study to repent what I have done
To such a nature.

Romans Why, it is exceeding well.

Roch. And for you, daughter, off with this, off with it:
I have that confidence in your goodness, I,
That I will not consent to have you live
Like to a Recluse in a cloister: go
Call in the gallants, let them make you merry,
Use all fit liberty.

Bell. Blessing on you.
If this new preacher with the sword and feather
Could prove his doctrine for Canonical,
We should have a fine world. Exit Bellapert.

Roch. Sir, if you please
To bear your self as fits a Gentleman,
The house is at your service: but i^ not,
Though you seek company else where, your absenc^
Will not be much lamented -- Exit Rochfort,

Romans If this be
The recompense of striving to preserve
A wanton gigglet honest, very shortly
'Twill make all mankind Panders -- Do you smile,
Good Lady Loosenes? your whole sex is like you^
And that man's mad that seeks to better any:
What new change have you next?

Beau. Oh, fear not you, sir,
I Will shift into a thousand, but I will
Convert your heresy.

Romans What heresy? Speak.

Beau. Of keeping a Lady that is married,
From entertayning servants. -- Enter Nouall I^. Malatine, Liladam, Aymer,
Pontalier.
O, you are welcome.
Use any means to vex him,
And then with welcome follow me. Exit B^au^

Nou. You are tired
With your grave exhortations, Collonell.

Lilad. How is it? Faith, your Lordship may do well,
To help him to some Church-preferment^'tis
Now the fashion, for men of all conditions,
How ever they have lived, to end that way.

Aim. That face would do well in a surplesse.

Romans Rogues, be silent -- or --

Pont. S' death will you suffer this?

Romans And you, the master Rogue, the coward rascal,
I shall be with you suddenly.

Nou. Pontallier,
If I should strike him, I know I shall kill him:
And therefore I would have thee beat him, for
He Is good for nothing else.

Lilad. His back
Appears to me, as it would tire a B^adl^,
And then he has a knotted brow, would bruise
A court like hand to touch it.

Aim. He looks like
A Curryer when his hides grown dear.

Pont. Take heed he curry not some of you.

Nou. Gods me, he is angry.

Romans I break no Ie^ts, but I can break my sword
About your pates. Enter Charaloyes and Baumont.

Lila. Here Is more.

Aim. Come let us be gone.
We are beleaguerd.

Nou. Look they bring up their troops.

Pont. Will you sit down with this disgrace?
You are abused most grosely.

Lila. I grant you, Sir, we are, and you would have us
Stay and be more abused.

Nou. My Lord, I am sorry,
Your house is so inhospitable, we must quit it. Exeunt. Manent Char. Romans

Cha. Prithee Romont, what caused this uproar?

Romans Nothing.
They laughed and used their scuruy wits upon me.

Char. Come, it is thy Jealous nature: but I wonder
That you which are an honest man and worthy,
Should foster this suspicion: no man laughes;
No one can whisper, but thou apprehend'st
His conference and his scorn reflects on thee:
For my part they should scoff their thin wits out,
So I not heard 'em, beat me, not being there.
Leave, leave these fits, to conscious men, to such
As are obnoxious, to those foolish things
As they can gibe at.

Romans Well, Sir.

Char. Thou art known
Valiant without detect, right defined,
Which is (as fearing to do injury,
As tender to endure it) not a brabbler,
A swearer.

Romans Pish, pish, what needs this my Lord?
If I be known none such, how vainly, you
Do cast away good counsel? I have loved you,
And yet must freely speak: so young a ^utor,
Fits not so old a Soldier as I am.
And I must tell you, it was in your behalf
I grew enraged thus, yet had rather dye,
Then open the great cause a syllable further.

Cha. In my behalf? wherein has Charalois
Unfitly so deme^n'd himself, to give
The least occasion to the loosest tongue,
To throw aspersions on him, or so weakly
Protected his own honor, as it should
Need a defense from any but himself?
They are fools that judge me by my outward seeming,
Why should my gentleness beget abuse?
The Lion is not angry that does sleep,
Nor every man a Coward that can weep.
For Gods sake speak the cause.

Romans Not for the world.
Oh it will strike disease into your bones
Beyond the cure of physic, drink your blood,
Rob you of all your rest, contract your sight,
Leave you no eyes but to see misery,
And of your own, nor speech but to wish thus
Would I had perished in the prisons jaws:
From whence I was redeem'd^ twill wear you old,
Before you have experience in that Art,
That causes your affliction.

Cha. Thou do strike
A deathfull coldness to my hearts high heat,
And shrinkst my liver like the Cal^nture.
Declare this foe of mine, and life's, that like
A man I may encounter and subdue it,
It shall not have one such effect in me,
As thou denouncest: with a Soldiers arme^
If it be strength^ I Will meet it: if a fault
Belonging to my mind, I Will cut it off
With mine own reason, as a Scholar should
Speak, though it make me monstrous.

Romans I Will dye first.
Farewell, continue merry, and high Heaven
Keep your wife chaste.

Char. Hump, stay and take this wolf
Out of my bre^t, that thou have lodged there, or
For ever lose me.

Romans Lose not, Sir, your self.
And I will venture -- So the door is fast. Lock the door.
Now noble Charaloys, collect your self,
Summon your spirits, muster all you strength
That can belong to man, sift passion,
From every vein, and whatsoever ensues,
Vpbraid not me hereafter, as the cause of
Iealousy, discontent, slaughter and ruin:
Make me not parent to sin: you will know
This secret that I burn with.

Char. Devil on it,
What should it be? Romont, I hear^ you wish
My wifes continuance of Chastity.

Romans There was no hurt in that.

Cha. Why? do you know a likelihood or possibility
Unto the contrary?

Romans I know it not, but doubt it, these the ground^
The servant of your wife now young Nouall,
The son unto your fathers Enemy
(Which aggrauates my presumption the more)
I have bin war^d of, touching her, nay, seen them
Tie heart to heart, one in another arme^,
Multiplying kisses, as if they meant
To pose Arithmeticke, or whose eyes would
Be^ first burnt out, with gazing on the others^
I saw their mouths engender, and their palms
Glew'd, a^ if Love had locked them, their words flow
And melt each others, like two circling flames,
Where chastity, like a Phoenix (me thought) burned,
But left the world nor ashes, nor an heir.
Why stand you silent thus? what cold dull phlegm,
As if you had no drop of choler mixed
In your whole constitution, thus preuailes,
To fix you now, thus ^tupid hearing thi^?

Cha. You did ^ot see 'em on my Couch within,
Like George a horseback, on her, nor a bed?

Romans Noe.

Cha. Ha, ha.

Romans Laugh ye? ^ene so did your wife,
Ahd ^^r indulgent father.

Cha. They were wise.
Would ha me be a fool?

Romans No, but a man.

Cha. There is no dram of manhood to suspect,
On such thi^ ayrie circumstance as this
Mere complement and courtship. Was this tale
The hydeous monster which you so concealed?
Away, thou curious impertinent
And idle searcher of such lean nice toys.
Go, thou sedicious sower of debate:
Fly to such matches, where the bridegroom doubts:
He holds not worth enough to counteruaile
The virtue and the beauty of his wi^e.
Thou buzzing drone that 'bout my ears do hum,
To strike thy rankling sting into my heart,
Whose venom, time, nor medicine could assuage.
Thus do I put thee off, and confident
In mine own innocence, and desert,
Dare not conceive her so unreasonable,
To put Nouall in balance against me,
An vpstart cran'd up to the height he has.
Hence busiebody, thou 'rt no friend to me^
That must be kept to a wives injury,

Romans Is It possible? farewell, fine, honest man,
Sweet tempered Lord adie^^ what Apopl^xy
Has knit sense up? Is this Romonts reward?
Bear witness the great spirit of my father,
With what a healthful hope I administer
This potion that has wrought so virulently.
I not accuse thy wife of act, but would
Prevent her Praecipuce, to thy dishonor,
Which now thy tardy sluggishnesse will admit.
Would I had seen thee grau'd with thy great Sire,
Ere live to have men's marginall fingers point
At Charaloys, as a lamented story.
An Emperor put away his wife for touching
Another man, but thou would have thine tasted
And keep her (I think.) Puff. I am a fire
To warm a dead man, that waste out my self.
Bleed -- what a plague, a vengeance ^'st to me,
If you will be a Cuckold? here I show
A swords point to thee, this side you may shun,
Or that^ the perrill, if you will run on,
I cannot help it.

Cha. Did thou n^uer see me
Angry, Romont?

Romans Yes, and pursue ^ foe
Like lightening.

Char. Prithee see me so no more.
I can be so again. Put up thy sword,
And take thy self away, lest I draw mine^

Romans Come fright your foes with this: sir, I am your friend,
And dare stand by you thus.

Char. Thou art not my friend,
Or being so, thou art mad, I must not buy
Thy friendship at this rate; had I just cause,
Thou know I durst pursue such injury
Through fire, air, water, earth, nay, were they all
Shuffled again to Chaos, but there is none.
Thy skill, Romont, consists in camps, not courts.
Farewell, uncivil man, let us meet no more.
Here our long web of friendship I untwist.
Shall I go whine, walk pale, and lock my wife
For nothing, from her births free liberty,
That opened mine to me? yes; if I do
The name of cuckold then, dog me with scorn.
I am a Frenchman, no Italian borne. Exit.

Rom, A dull Dutch rather: fall and cool (my blood)
Boil not in zeal of thy friends hurt, so high,
That is so low, and cold himself in it. Woman,
How strong art thou, how easily beguild?
How thou do rack us by the very horns?
Now wealth I see change manners and the man:
Something I must do mine own wrath to assuage,
And note my friendship to an after-age. Exit.

Ac^us quartus. Scaena prima.
Enter Nouall Junior, as newly dressed, a Tailor, Barber, Perfumer, Liladam,
Aymour, Page. Nou. MEnd this a little^ pox! thou have burnt me. oh fie upon it,
O Lard, he has made me smell (for all the world) like a flax, or a red headed
woman's chamber: powder, powder, powder.


Perf. Oh sweet Lord! Nouall sits in a chair,


Page. That Is his Perfumer. Baerber orders his hair,


Tail. Oh dear Lord, Perfumer gives powder,


Page. That Is his Tailor. Tailor sets his clothes^.


Nou. Monsieur Liladam, Aymour, how allow you the model of these clothes?


Aim. Admirably, admirably, oh sweet Lord! assuredly it is pity the worms
should eat thee.


Page. Here Is a fine Cell; a Lord, a Tailor, a Perfumer, a Barber, and a pair
of Mounsieurs: 3 to 3, as little will in the one, as honesty in the other.
S'foote i will into the country ag^^ne, learn to speak truth, drink Ale, and
converse with my fathers Tenants; here I hear nothing all day, but upon my
soul as I am a Gentleman, and an honest man.


Aim. I vow and affirm, your Tailor must needs be an expert Geometrician, he
has the Longitude, Latitude, Altitude, Profundity, every Demension of your
body, so exquisitely, here is a lace laid as directly, as if truth were a Tailor.


Page. That were a miracle.


Lila. With a hair breadth's error, there is a shoulder piece cut, and the base
of a pick^dille in puncto.


Aim. You are right, Mounsieur his vestaments sit: as if they grew upon him, or
art had wrought 'em on the same loome, as nature framed his Lordship as if your
Tailor were deeply read in Astrology, and had taken measure of your honorable
body, with a Jacobs staff, an Ephimerides.


Tail. I am bound to you Gentlemen.


Page. You are deceived, they will be bound to you, you must remember to trust 'em
none.


Nou. Nay, faith, thou art a reasonable near Artificer, give the devil his due.


Page. I, if he would but cut the coat according to the cloth still.


Nou. I now want only my misters approbation, who is indeed, the most polite
punctual Queen of dressing in all Burgundy^ Pah, and makes all other young
Ladies appear, as if they came from board last week out of the country, Is It
not true, Liladam?


Lila. True my Lord, as if any thing your Lordship could say, could be
otherwise then true.


Nou. Nay, ^ my soul, it is so, what fouler object in the world, then to see a
young fair, handsome beauty, unhandsomely dighted and incongruently accou^red;
or a hopeful Cheualier, vnmethodically appointed, in the external ornaments
of nature? For even as the Index tells us the contents of stories, and directs
to the particular Chapters, even s^ does the outward habit and superficial
order of garments (in man (...) ^oman) give us a taste of the spirit, and
demonstratiuely point (as it were a manual note from the margin) all the
intern^ll quality, and habiliment of the soul, and there cannot be a more
evident, palpable, gros^e manifestation of poor degenerate dunghilly blood,
and breeding, then rude, vnpolish'd, disordered and slo^enly outside.


Page. An admirable lecture. Oh all you gallants, that hope to be saved by your
clothes, edify, edify.


Aim. By the Lard, sweet Lard, thou deseru'st a pension of the St^te.


Page. Oth' Tailors, two such Lords were able to spre^d Tailors ore the face of
a whole kingdom.


Nou. Pox a this gla^se lit flatters, I could find in my heart to break it.


Page. O save the gla^se my Lord, and break their heads, they are the greater
flatterers I assure you.


Aim. Flatters, detracts, impayres, yet put it by,
Lest thou dear Lord ( Narcissus-like) should doat
Upon thy self, and dye^ and rob the world
Of natures copy, that she works form by.

Lila. Oh that I were the Infanta Queen of Europe,
Who (but thy self sweet Lord) should marry me.

Nou. I marry? we^e there a Q^eene oth' world, not I.
Wedlock? no padlooke, horslocke, I wear spurrs H^ capers.
To keep it off my heels; yet my Aymour,
Like a free wanton iennet in the meddows,
I look about, and neigh, take hedge and ditch,
Feed in my ne^ghbours pastures, pick my choice
Of all their faire-maind mares: but married once,
A man i^ staked, or pown'd, and cannot graze
Beyond his own hedge.

Enter Pontallier, and Malotin. Pont. I have waited, sir,
Three hours to speak w'ee, and not take it well,
Such magpies, are admitted, whilst I d^unce
Attendance.

L^la. Magpies? what do you take me for?


Pont. A long thing with a most vnpromising face.


Aim. I Will never ask him, what he takes me for^


Mal. Do not, sir,
For he will go near to tell you.

Pont. Art not thou a Barber Surgeon?

Barb. Yes sira why?

Pont. My Lord is sorely troubled with two scabs^

Lila. Aim. Humph --

Pont. I prithee cure him of 'em.

Nou. Pish: no more,
Thy gall sure's overthrown; these are my Council,
And we were now in serious discourse.

Pont. Of perfume and apparel, can you rise
And spend 5 hours in dr^ssing talk, with these?

Nou. Thou 'ldst have me be a dog: up, stretch and shake,
And ready for all day.

Pont. Sir, would you be
More curious in preserving of your honor.
Trim, 'twere more manly. I am come to wake
Your reputation, from this lethargy
You let it sleep in, to persuade, importune,
Nay, to provoke you, sir, to call to account
This Collonell Romont, for the foul wrong
Which like a bu^then, he has laid on you,
And like a d^unken porter, you sleep under.
It Is all the town t^lkes, and believe, sir,
If your tough sense persist thus, you are undone,
Utterly lost, you will be scornd and ba^fled
By every Lacquay; season now your youth,
With one brave thing, and it shall keep the odor
Even to your death, beyond, and on your Tomb,
Sent like sweet oils and Frankincense; sir, this life
Which once you saved, I never since counted mine,
I borrowed it of you; and now will pay it;
I tender you the ser^ice of my sword
To bear your challenge, if you will write, your fate:
I Will make mine own: what ere betide you, I
That have lived by you, by your side will dye.

Nou. Ha, ha, would have me challenge poor Romont?
Fight with close breeches, thou may think I dare not.
Do not mistake me (cooze) I am very valiant,
But valor shall not make me such an Ass.
What use is there of valor (now a days?)
It Is sure, or to be killed, or to be hanged.
Fight thou as thy mind moves thee, it is thy trade,
Thou have nothing else to do; fight with Romont?
No, i will not fight under a Lord.

Pont. Farewell, sir, I pity you.
Such loving Lords walk their dead honors graves,
For no companions fit, but fools and knaves.
Come Malotin. Exeunt Pont. Mal.

Enter Romont. Lila. 'Sfoot, Colbran, the low giant.


Aim. He has brought a battle in his face, let us go.


Page. Colbran do you call him? he will make some of you smoke, I believe.


Romans By your leave, sirs.


Aim. Are you a Consort?


Romans Do You take me for
A fiddler? ya're deceived: look. I Will pay you. Kickes 'em.

Page. It seems he knows you one, he bumfiddles you so^


Lila^ Was there ever so base a fellow?


Aim. A rascal?


Lila. A most uncivil Groom?


Aim. Offer to kick a Gentleman, in a Noblemans chamber? A pox of your manners^


Lila. Let him alone, let him alone, thou shall lose t^y arm, fellow: if we
stir against thee, hang us.


Page. S'foote, I think they have the better on him^ though they be kickd,
they talk so.


Lila. Let Us leave the mad Ape.


Nou. Gentlemen.


Lilad. Nay, my Lord, we will not offer to dishonor you so much as to stay by
you, since he is alone.


Nou. Hark you.


Aim. We doubt the cause, and will not disparage you, so much as to take your
Lordships quarrel in hand. Plague on him, how he has crumpled our band^.


Page. ^le eene away with 'em, for this soldier beats man, woman, and child.
Exeunt, Ma^ent No^. Romans


Nou. What mean you, sir? My people.


Romans You^ boye's gone, Locks the door.
And doore's locked, yet for no hurt to you,
But priuacy: call up your blood again, sir^ be not afraid, I do
B^seech you, sir, (and therefore come) without^ more circumstance
Tell me how far the passages have gone
'Twixt you, and your fair Mistress Beaumelle.
Tell me the truth, and by my hope of Heaven
It never shall go further.

Nou. Tell you why sir?
Are you my confessor?

Romans I will be your confounder, if you do not. Draws a pock^t dag.
Stir not, nor spend your voice.

Nou. What will you do?

Romans Nothing but line your brayne-pan, sir, with lead,
If you not satisfy me suddenly,
I am desperate of my life, and command yours.

Nou. Hold, hold, i will speak. I vow to heaven and you,
She Is yet untouched, more then her face and hands:
^ cannot call her innocent; for I yield
On my sollicitous wrongs she consented
Where time and place met opportunity
To grant me all requests.

Romans But may I build on this assurance?

Nou. As upon your faith. Draws Inkehorne and paper.

Romans Write this, sir, nay you must.

Nou. Pox of this Gunne.

Romans Withal, sir, you must swear, and put your oath
Under your hand, (shake not) never to frequent
This Ladies company, nor ever send
Token, or message, or letter, to incline
This (too much prone already) yielding Lady.

Nou. It Is done, sir.

Romans Let me see, this first is right,
And h^re you wish a sudden death may light
Upon your body, and hell take your soul,
If ever more you see her, but by chance,
Much less allure her. Now, my Lord, your hand.

Nou. My hand to this?

Romans Your heart else I assure you.

Nou. Nay, there it is.

Romans So keep this last article
Of your faith given, and stead of threatenings sir,
The service of my sword and life is yours:
But not a word of it, it is Fairies treasure;
Which but revealed, brings on the blabb^rs, ruin.
Use your youth better, and this excellent form
Heaven has bestowed upon you. So good morrow to your Lordship.

Nou. Good devil to your rogueship. No man's safe^
I Will have a Cannon planted in my chamber, Exit.
Against such roaring roagues.

Enter Bellapert. Bell. My Lord away
The Coach stays: now have your wish, and judge,
If I have b^ene forgetful.

Nou. Ha?

Bell. Do You stand
Humming and hawing now? E^it.

Nou. Sweet wench, I come.
Hence fear,
I swore, that is all one, my next oath 'ile keep
That I did mean to break, and then it is quit.
No pain is due to lovers perjury.
If love himself l^ugh at it, so will I. Exit Nouall,

Sc^na 2. Enter Charaloys, Baum^nt. Bau. I grieve for the distaste, though I
have manners,
No^ ^o inquire the cause, f^l^e out between
Your Lordship and Romont.

Cha. I love a friend,
So ^ong as he continues in the bounds
Pr^scrib'd by friendship, but when he usurps
Too ^arre on what is proper to my self,
And puts the habit of a Governor on,
I must and will pres^rue my liberty.
But sp^ake of something, else this is a theme
I take no pleasure in: what is this Aym^ire,
Whose voice for Song, and exc^ll^nt knowledge in
The chiefest parts of Musiqu^, you bestow
Such praises on?

Bau. He is a Gentleman,
(For so his quality speaks him) well received
Among our greatest Gallants; but yet holds
His maine dependence from the young Lord Nouall:
Some tricks and crotchets he has in his head,
As all Musicians have, and more of him
I dare not author: but when you have heard him,
I may presume, your Lordship so will like him,
That you will hereafter be a friend to Music.

Cha. I never was an enemy to it, Baumont,
Nor yet do I subscribe to the opinion
Of those old Captains, that thought nothing musical,
But cries of yielding enemies, neighing of horses,
Clashing of armor, loud shouts, drums, and trumpets:
Nor on the other side in favor of it,
Affirm the world was made by musical discord,
Or that the happiness of our life consists
In a well varied note upon the Lute:
I love it to the worth of it, and no further.
But le^ us see this wonder.

Bau. He preuents my calling of him.

Aim. Let the Coach be brought Enter Aymiere.
To the back gate, and serve the banquet up:
My good Lord Charalo^s, I think my house
Much honored in your presence.

Cha. To have means,
To know you better, sir, has brought me hi^her
A willing vilitant, and you will crown my welcome
In making me a witness to your skill,
Which crediting from others I admire.

Aim. Had I been one hour sooner made acquainted
With your intent my Lord, you should have found me
Better provided: now such as it is,
Pray you grace with your acceptance.

Bau. You are modest.

Aim. Begin the last new air.^

Cha. Shall we not see them?

Aim. This little distance from the instruments
Will to your ears convey the harmony
With more delight.

Cha. I Will not consent.

Aim. You Are tedious,
By this means shall I with one banquet please
Two companies, those within and these Guls here.

Song above. Music and a Song, Beaumelle within -- ha, ha, ha. Cha. How Is
this? It is my Ladies laugh ^ most certain
When I first pleased her, in this merry language,
She gave me thanks.

Bau. How like you this?

Cha. It Is rare,
Yet I may be deceived, and should be sorry
Upon uncertain suppositions, rashly
To write my self in the black list of those
I have declaym'd against, and to Romont.

Aim. I would he were well of -- perhaps your Lordship
Likes not these sad tunes, I have a new Song
Set to a lighter note, may please you better;
It Is called The happy husband.

Cha. Pray sing it.

Song below. At the end of the Song, Bea^melle within. Beau. Ha, ha, it is such
a groom.

Ca. Do I hear this, and yet stand doubtful? Exit Chara^

Aim. Stay him I am undone,
And they discovered.

Bau. What Is the matter?

Aim. Ah!
That wo^en, when they are well pleased, cannot hold,
But must laugh out. Enter Nouall lu. Charaloys, Beaumely, Bellap^rt.

Nou. Help, ^aue me, murder, murder.

Be^^. Undone forever.

Cha. Oh, my heart!
Hold yet a little -- do not hope to escape
By flight, it is impossible: though I might
On all advantage take thy life, and justly;
This sword, my fathers sword, that nere was drawn,
But to a noble purpose, shall not now
Do the office of a hangman, I reserve it
To right mine honor, not for a revenge
So poor, that though with thee, it should cut off
Thy family, with all that are allied
To thee in lust, or baseness, 'twere still short of
All terms of satisfaction. Draw.

Nou. I dare not,
I have already done you too much wrong,
To fight in such a cause.

Cha. Why, dare thou neither
Be honest, coward, nor yet valiant, knave?
In such a cause come do not shame thy selfe^
Such whose bloods wrongs, or wrong done to themselves
Could never heat, are yet in the defense
Of their whores, daring look on her again.
You thought her worth the hazard of your soul,
And yet stand doubtful in her quarrel, to
Venture your body.

Bau. No, he fears his clothes, more then his flesh

Cha. Keep from me^ guard thy life,
Or as thou have lived like a goat, thou shall
Dye like a sheep.

Nou. Since there is no remedy They fight, Nouall is slain.
Despair o^ safety now in me prove courage.

Cha. How soon weak wrong's or^th^ owne^ lend me your hand,
Bear this to the Caroach -- come, you have taught me
To say you must and shall: I wrong you not,
You Are but to keep him company you love.
Is It done? it is well. Raise officers, and take care,
All you can apprehend within the house
May be forth coming. Do I appear much moved?

Bau. No^ sir.

Cha. My griefs are now, Thus to be borne
Hereafter i^e find time and place to mourn.

Exeunt. Scaena 3. Enter Romont, Pontalier. Pont. I was bound to seek you, sir.

Romans And had you found me
In any place, but in the street, I should
Have done, -- not talked to you. A^e you the Captain?
The hopeful Pontalier? whom I have seen
Do in the fi^lo such se^uic^, as then made you
Their envy that commanded, here at home
To play the parasite to a gilded knave,
And it may be the Pander.

Pont. Without this
I come to call y^u to account, for what
Is past already. I by your example
Of thankfulness to the dead General
By whom you were raised, have practiced to be so^
To my good Lord Nouall, by whom I live;
Whose least disgrace that is, or may be offered,
With all the hazard of my life and fortunes,
I will make good on you, or any man,
That has a hand in it; and since you allow me
A Gentl^man and a soldier, there is no doubt
You will except against me. You shall meet
With a fair enemy, you understand
The right I look for, and must have.

Romans I do,
And with the next days sun you shall hear from me.

Exeun^. Scaena 4. Enter Charalois with a casket, Beaumelle, Baumont. Cha. Pray
bear this to my father, at his leisure
He may pe^use it: but with your best language
Entreat his instant presence: you have sworn
Not to reveal what I have done.

Bau. Nor will I -- but --

Cha. Doubt me not, by Heaven, I will do nothing
But what may stand with honor: Pray you leave me
To my own thoughts. If this be to me, rise;
I am not worthy the looking on, but only
To feed contempt and scorn, and that from you
Who with the loss of your fair name have caused it,
Were too much cruelty.

Beau. I dare not move you
To hear me speake^ I know my fault is far
Beyond qualification, or excuse^
That it is not fit for me to hope, or you
To think of mercy; only I presume
To entreat, you would be pleased to look upon
My sorrow for it, and believe, these tears
Are the true children of my grief and not
A woman's cunning.

Cha. Can you Beaumelle,
Having deceived so great a trust as mine,
Though I were all credulity, hope again
To get belief? no, no, if you look on me
With pity or dare practice any means
To make my sufferings less, or give just cause
To all the world, to think what I must do,
Was called upon by you, use other ways,
Deny what I have seen, or justify
What you have done, and as you desperately
Made shipwreck of your faith to be a whore,
Use the arms of such a one, and such defense,
And multiply the sin, with impudence,
Stand boldly up, and tell me to my teeth,
You have done but what is warranted,
By great examples, in all places, where
Women inhabit, urge your own deserts,
Or want of me in merit; tell me how,
Your dowre from the low gulf of poverty,
Weighd up my fortunes, to what now they are^
That I was purchased by your choice, and practice
To shelter you from shame: that you might sin
As boldly as securely, that poor men
Are married to those wives that bring them wealth,
One day their husbands, but obseruers ever:
That when by this proved usage you have blown
The fire of my just vengeance to the height.
I then may kill you: and yet say 'twas done
In heat of blood, and after die my self,
To witness my repentance.

Beau. O my fate,
That never would consent that I should see,
How worthy thou were both of love and duty
Before I lost you; and my misery made
The glass, in which I now behold your virtue:
While I was good, I was a part of you,
And of two^ by the virtuous harmony
Of our fair minds, made one: but since I wandered
In the forbidden Labyrinth of lust,
What was inseparable, is by me divided.
With justice therefore you may cut me off,
And from your memory, wash the remembrance
That ere I was like to some vicious purpose
Within your better judgment, you repent of
And study to forget.

Cha. O Beaumelle,
That yo^ can speak so well, and do so ill!
But you had bin too great a blessing, if
You had continued chaste: see how you force me
To this, because mine honor will not yield
That I again should love you.

Beau. In this life
It is not fit you should: yet you shall find,
Though I was bold enough to be a strumpet,
I dare not yet live one: let those famed matrones
That are canonized worthy of our sex,
Transcend me in their sanctity of life,
I yet will ^quall them in dying nobly,
Ambitious of no honor after life,
B^^ that when I am dead, you will forgive me.

C^a. How pity steals upon me! should I hear her
^^^en words more, I were lost -- one knocks, go in. Knock within. Exit
Beau^elle.
(...) to be merciful should be a sin.
(...), sir, most welcome. Let me take your cloak, Exit Beaumelle. Enter
Roc^fort.
(...) not be denied -- here are your robes,
(...) you love justice once more put them on:
^^ere is a cause to be determind of
That does requi^e such an integrity,
As you have ever used -- i will put you to
The ^ryall of your constancy, and goodness:
And look that you that have been Eagle-eyd
In other men's affairs, prove not a Mole
In what concerns your self. T^ke you your seate^
I will be for you presently. Exit.

Roch. Angels guard me,
To what strange Tragedy does this destruction
Serve for a Prologue? Enter Charalois, with Nouals body. Beaumelle, Baumont.

Cha. So, set it down before
The judgment seat, and stand you at the bar:
For me? I am the accuser. Roch. Nouall slain,
And Beaumelle my daughter in the place
O^ one to be arraig'd.

Cha. O, are you touched?
^finde that I must take an other course,
^eare nothing. I will only blind your eyes,
^or Justice should do so, when it is to meet
^n object that may sway her equal doom
From what it should be aimed at. -- Good my Lord,
A day of hearing.

Roch. It is granted, speak -- you shall have justice.

Cha. I then here accuse,
Most equal Judge, the prisoner your fair Daughter.
For whom I owed so much to you: your daughter,
So worthy in her own parts: and that worth
S^t forth by yours, to whose so rare perfections,
Truth witness with me, in the place of service
I ^^most paid Idolatrous sacrifice
To be a ^alse advltresse.

Roch. With whom?

Cha. With this Nouall here dead.

Roch Be well advised
And ere you say adultresse again,
Her fame depending on it, be most sure
That she is one.

Cha. I took them in the act.
I know no proof beyond it.

Roch. O my heart.

Cha. A Judge should feel no passions.

Roch. Yet remember
He is a man, and cannot put off nature.
What answer makes the prisoner?

Beau. I confess
The fact I am charged with, and yield my self
Most miserably guilty.

Roch. Heaven take mercy
Upon your soul them it must leave your body.
Now free mine eyes, I dare unmoved look on her.
And fortify my sentence, with strong reasons.
Since that the politic law prouides that servants,
To whose care we commit our goods shall die,
If they abuse o^r trust: what can you look for,
To whose charge this most hopeful Lord gave up
All he received from his brave Ancestors,
Or he could leave to his posterity?
His Honor, wicked woman, in whose safety
All this life's joys, and comforts were locked up,
With thy lust, a thief has now stolen from him,
And therefore --

Cha. Stay, just Judge, may not what is lost
By her own fault, (for I am charitable,
And charge her not with many) be forgotten
In her fair life hereafter?

Roch. Never, Sir.
The wrong that is done to the chaste married bed,
Repentant tears can never expiate,
And be assured, to pardon such a sin,
^s an offense as great as to commit it.

Cha. I may not then forgive her.

Roch. Nor she hope it.
Nor can she wish to live no sun shall rise,
But ere it set, shall show her ugly lust
In a new shape, and every on more horrid:
Nay, even those prayers, which with such humble feruor
She seems to send up yonder, are beat back,
And all suites, which her penitence can proffer,
As soon as made, are with contempt thrown
Off all the courts of mercy. He kills her.

Cha. Let her die then.
Better prepared I am. Sure I could not take her,
Nor she accuse her father, as a Judge
Partial against her.

Beau. I approve his sentence,
And kiss the executioner: my lust
Is now run from me in that blood in which
It was begot and nourished.

Roch. Is she dead then?

Cha. Yes, sir, this is her heart blood, is it not?
I think it be.

Roch. And you have killed her?

Cha. True, and did it by your doom

Roch. But I pronounced it
As a Judge only, and friend to justice,
And z^alous in defense of your wronged honor,
Broke all the ties of nature^ and cast off
The love and soft affection of a father.
I in your cause, put on a Sca^let robe
Of red died cruelty, but in return,
You have advanced for me no flag of mercy:
I looked on you, as a wronged husband, but
You closed your eyes against me, as a father.
O Beaumelle, my daughter.

Cha. This is madness.

Roch. Keep from me -- could not one good thought rise up,
To tell you that she was my ages comfort,
Begot by a weak man, and borne a woman,
And could not therefore, but partake of frailety?
Or wherefore did not thankfulness step forth,
To urge my many merits, which I may
Object unto you, since you prove ungrateful,
Flinty-hearted Charaloys?

Cha. Nature does prevail above your virtue.

Roch. No: it gives me eyes,
To pierce the heart of design against me.
^ find it now, it was may state was aimed at,
A nobler match was sought for, and the hours
I lived, grew teadious to you: my compassion
Toward you has rendered me most miserable,
And foolish charity undone my self:
But there is a Heaven above, from whose just wreake
No mists of policy can hide offenders. Enter Nouall s^. with Officers.

Nou. se Force open the doors -- O monster, caniball,
Lay hold on him, my son, my son. -- O Rochfort,
'Twas you gave liberty to this bloody wolf
To worry all our comforts, -- But this is
No time to quarrel; now give your assistance
For the revenge.

Roch. Call it^ a fitter name -- Justice for innocent blood.

Cha. Though all conspire
Against that life which I am weary of,
A little longer yet i will strive to keep it,
To show in spit^ of malice, and their laws,
His pl^a must speed that has an honest cause. Exeunt.

Actus quintus. Scaena prima^
Enter Liladam, Tailor, Officers. Lila. Why it is both most unconscionable, and
untimely
TO arrest a gallant for his clothes, before
He has worn them out: besides you said you asked
My name in my Lords bond but for me only,
And now you will lay me up for it. Do not think
The taking measure of a customer
By a brace of varlets^ though I rather wait
Never so patiently, will prove a fashion
Which any Courtier or ^^nes of court man
Would follow willingly.

Tail. There I believe you.
But sir, I must have present moneys, or
Assurance to secure me, when I shall. --
Or I will see to your coming forth.

Lila. Plague on'^,
You have provided for my entrance in:
That coming forth you talk of, concerns me.
What shall I do? you have done me a disgrace
In the arrest, but more in gi^ing cause
To all the street, to think I cannot stand
Without these two supporters for my arms:
Pray you let them loose me: for their satisfaction
I will not run away.

Tail. For theirs you will not,
But for your own you would; look to them f^llows.

Lila. Why do you call them fellows? do not wrong
Your reputation so, as you are merely
A Tailor, faithful, apt to believe in Gallants
You are a companion at a ten crown supper
For cloth of bodkin, and may with one Lark
Eat up three manchets, and no man observe you,
Or call your trade in question for it. But when
You study your debt-booke, and hold correspondence
With officers of the hanger, and leave swordmen,
The learned conclude, the Tailor and Sergeant
In the expression of a knave are these
To be Synonima. Look therefore to it,
And let us part in peace, I would be loath
You should undo y^^r ^e^^e.

Tail. To let you go Enter old Nouall, and Pontalier.
Were the next way.
But see! heeres your old Lord,
Let him bu^ give his word I shall be paid,
And you are free.

Lila. S' lid, I will put him to it:
I can be but denied: or what say you?
His Lordship owing me three times your debt,
If you arrest him at my suite, and let me
Go run before to see the action entered.
'Twould be a witty jest.

Tail. I must have ernest:
I cannot pay my debts so.

Pont. Can your Lordship
Imagine, while I live and wear a sword,
Your sons death shall be revenged?

Nou^ se. I know not
One reason why you should not do like others:
I am sure, of all the herd that fed upon him,
I cannot see in any, now he is gone,
In pity or in thankfulness one true sign
Of sorrow for him.

Pont. All his bounties yet
Fell not in such unthankful ground: it is true
He had weaknesses, but such as few are free from,
And though none soothed them less then I: for now
To say that I foresaw the dangers that
Would rise from cherishing them, were but untimely.
I yet could wish the justice that you seek for
In the revenge, had bin trusted to me,
And not the uncertain issue of the laws:
'Tas robbed me of a noble testimony
Of what I durst do for him: but howeuer,
My forfait life redeemed by him though dead,
Shall do him service.

Nou. se. As far as my grief
Will give me leave, I thank you.

Lila. Oh my Lord,
Oh my good Lord, deliver me from these furies.

Pont. Arrested? This is one of them whose base
And object flattery helped to dig his grave:
He is not worth your pity, nor my anger.
Go to the basket and repent.

Nou. se. Away I only know now to hate thee deadly:
I will do nothing for thee.

Lila. Nor you, Captain.

Pont. No, to your trade again, put off this case,
It may be the discovering what you were,
When your unfortunate master took you up,
May move compassion in your creditor.
Confes^e the truth. Exit Nouall se. Pont.

Lila. And now I think on it better,
I will, brother, your hand, your hand, sweet brother.
I am of your sect, and my gallantry but a dream,
Out of which these two fearful apparitions
Against my will have waked me. This rich sword
Grew suddenly out of a tailors bodkin;
^hese hangers from my vailes and fees in Hell:
And where as now this beauer sits, full often
A thrifty cape composed of broad cloth lists,
Here kin unto the cushion where I sat
Crosse-leg'd, and yet vngartred, has been seen,
Our breakefasts famous for the buttred loaves,
I have with joy bin often acquainted with,
And therefore use a conscience, though it be
Forbidden in our hall toward other men,
To me that as I have been, will again
Be of the brotherhood.

Offi. I know him now:
He was a prentice to Le Robe at Orleance.

Lila. And from thence brought by my young Lord, now dead,
Unto Dijon, and with him till this hour
Has bin received here for a complete Mounsieur.
Nor wonder at it: for but tithe our gallants,
Even those of the first rank, and you will find
In every ten, one: peradventure two,
That smell rank of the dancing school, or fiddle,
The pantofle or pressing yro^: but hereafter
We Will talk of this. I will surrender up
My suites again: there cannot be much loss,
It Is but the t^rning of the lace, with ones
Additions more you know of, and what want^
I will work out.

Tail. Then here our quarrel ends.
The gallant is turned Tailor, and all friends. Exeunt.

Scaena 2. Enter Romont, Baumont. Romans You have them ready.

Bau. Yes, and they will sp^ake
Their knowledge in this cause, when thou think fit
To have them called upon.

Romans It Is well, and something
I can add to their evidence, to prove
This brave revenge, which they would have called murder,
A noble Justice.

Bau. In this you express
(The breach by my Lords want of you, new made up)
A faithful friend.

Romans That friendship's raised on sand,
Which every sudden gust of discontent,
Or flowing of our passions can change,
As if it nere had bin: but do you know
Who are to sit on him?

Bau. Mounsieur Du Croy
Assisted by Charmi.

Romans The Advocate
That pleaded for the Marshalls ^un^rall,
And was checked for it by Nouall.

Bau. The same.

Romans How fortunes that?

Bau. Why, sir, my Lord Nouall
Being the accuser, cannot be the Judge,
Nor would grieve Roshfort, but Lord Charaloys
(How-euer he might wrong him by his power,)
Should have an equal hearing.

Romans By my hopes.
Of Charaloys acquitall, I lament
That reverent old man's fortune.

Bau. Had you seen him,
As to my grief I have now promised patience,
And ere it was believed, though spoke by him
That never brake his word, enraged again
So far as to make war upon those heirs,
Which not a barbarous Scythian durst presume
To touch, but with a superstitious fear,
As something sacred, and then curse his daughter,
But with more frequent violence himself,
As if he had bin guilty of her fault,
By being incredulous of your report,
You would not only judge him worrhy pity,
But suffer with him. Enter Charalois, with Officers.
But here comes the prisoner,
I dare not stay to do my duty to him,
Yet rest assured, all possible means in me
To do him service, keeps you company. Exit Bau.

Romans It is not doubted.

Cha. Why, yet as I came hither,
The people apt to mock calamity,
And tread on the oppressed, made no hormes at me,
Though they are too familiar: I deserve them.
And knowing what blood my sword has drunk
In wreake of that disgrace, they yet forbear
To shake their heads, or to revile me for
A murderer, they rather all put on
(As for great losses the old Romans used)
A general face of sorrow, waighted on
By a sad murmur breaking through their silence,
And no eye but was readier with a tear
To witness 'twas shed for me, then I could
Discern a f^ce made up with scorn against me.
Why should I then, though for unusual wrongs
I chose unusual means to right those wrongs,
Condemn my self, as ouer-partiall
In my own cause Romont?

Romans Best friend, well met,
By my hearts lou^ to you, and join to that,
My thankfulness that still lives to the dead,
I look upon you now with more true joy,
Then when I saw you married.

Cha. You have reason
To give you warrant for it; my falling off
From such a friendship with the scorn that answered
Your too propheticke counsel, may well move you
To think, your meeting me going to my death,
A fit encounter for that hate which justly
I have deser^'d from you.

Romans Shall I still then
Speak truth, and be ill understood?

Cha. You are not.
I am conscious, I have wronged you, and allow me
Only a moral man to look on you,
Whom foolishly I have abused and injured,
Must of necessity be more terrible to me,
^hen any death the Judges can pronounce
From the tribunal which I am to plead at.

Romans Passion transports you.

Cha. For what I have done
To my false Lady, or Nouall, I can
Give some apparent cause: but touching you,
In my defense, childlike, I can say nothing,
But I am sorry for it, a poor satisfaction:
And yet mistake me not: for it is more
Then I will speak, to have my pardon signed
For all I stand accused of.

Romans You much weaken the strength of your good cause,
Should you but think
A man for doing well could entertain
A pardon, were it offered, you have given
To blind and slow-paced justice, wings, and eyes
To see and overtake impieties,
Which from a cold proceeding had received
I^dulgence or protection.

Cha. Think you so?

Romans Upon my soul nor should the blood you challenge
And took to cure your honor, breed more scruple
In your soft conscience, then if your sword
Had bin sheathed in a Tygre, or she Bear,
That in their bowels would have made your tomb
To iniure innocence is more then murder:
But when inhumane lusts transform us, then
As beasts we are to suffer, not like men
To be lamented. Nor did Charalois ever
Perform^ an act so worthy the applause^
Of a full theater of perfect men,
As he has done in this: the glory got
By overthrowing outward enemies,
Since strength and fortune are maine sharers in it,
We cannot but by pieces call our own^:
But when we conquer our intestine foes,
Our passions breed within us, and of those
The most reb^llious tyrant powerful love,
Our reason s^ffering us to like no longer
T^en the fair object being good deserves it,
T^a^'s true victory, which, were great men
Ambitious to a^chi^ue, by your example
Setting no price upon the breach of faith,
B^t l^ss^ of ^ife, 'twould fright adultery
Ou^ of their families, and make lust appear
As loathsome to us in the first consen^,
As when it is waited on by punishment.

Cha. You have confirmed me. Who would love a woman
That might enjoy in such a man, a friend?
You have made me know the justice of my cause,
An^ marked me out the way, how to defend it.

Romans Continue to that resolution constant,
And you shall, in contempt of their worst malice,
Come off with honor. Here they come.

Cha. I am ready.

Scana 3. Enter Du C^oy, Charmi, Rochfort, Nouall se^ P^n^alur, Baumont. Nou.
se. See, equal Judges, with what confidence
The cruel murderer stands, as if he would
Outface the Court and ^ustic^l

Roch. But look on him,
And you shall find, for still methinks I do,
Though guilt has did him black, something good in him,
That may perhaps work with a wiser man
Then I have been, again to set him free
And give him all he has.

Charmi. This is not well.
I would you had lived so, my Lord that I,
Might rather have continued your poor servant.
Then sit here as your Judge.

Du Croy. I am sorry for you.

Roch. In no act of my life I have de^ern'd
This injury from the court, that any here
Should ^hus uncivilly usurp on what
Is proper to me only.

Du Cr. What di^taste
R^cei^es my Lord?

R^ch. You say you are sorry for him:
A grief in which I must not have a partner^
It Is I alone am sorry, that I raised
The building of my life for seventy years
Upon so sure a ground, that all the vices
P^actis'd to ruin man, though brought against me,
Could n^u^r undermine, and no way left
To send these gray hairs to the grave with sorrow.
Virtue tha^ was my patroness, betrayed me:
For entering, nay, possessing this young man,
It lent him such a powerful Majesty
To grace what ere he undertook, that freely
I gave my self up with my liberty,
To be at his disposing; had his person,
Lo^ely I must confess, or far feigned valor,
Or any other seeming good, that yet
Holds a near neyghbour-hood, with ill wrought on me,
I might have borne it better: but when goodness
And piety it self in her best figure
Were bribed to my destruction, can you blame me,
Though I forget to suffer like a man,
Or rather act a woman?

Bau. Good my Lord.

Nou. se. You hinder our proceeding.

Charmi. And forget
The parts of an accuser.

Bau. Pray you remember
To use the temper which to me you promised;

Roch. Angels themselves must break Baumont, that promise
Beyond the strength and patience of Angels.
But I have done, my good Lord, pardon me
A weak old man, and pray add to that
A miserable father, yet be careful
That your compassion of my age, nor his,
Move you to any thing, that may dis-become
The pl^ce on which you fit

Charmi. Read the Indictment.

Cha. It shall be needelesse, I my self, my Lords,
Will be my own accuser, and confess
All they can charge me with, or will I spare
To aggrauate that guilt with circumstance
They seek to load me with: only I pray,
That as for them you will vouchsafe me hearing:
I may not be denide it for my self,
When I shall urge by what unanswerable reasons
I was compelled to what I did, which yet
Till you have taught me better, I repent not.

Roch. The motion honest.

Charmi. And it is freely granted.

Cha. Then I confess my Lords, that I stood bound,
When with my friends, even hope it self had left me
To this man's charity for my liberty,
Nor did his bounty end there, but began:
For after my enlargment, cherishing
The good he did, he made me master of
His only daughter, and his whole estate:
Great ties of thankfulness I must acknowledge,
Could any one freed by you, press this furthe^?
But yet consider, my most honored Lords,
If to receive a favor, make a servant,
And benefits are bonds to tie the taker
To the imperious will of him that gives,
There Is none but slaves will receive courtesy.
Since they must fetter us to our dishonours.
Can it be called magnificence in a Prince,
To power down riches, with a liberal hand,
Upon a poor man's wants, if that must bind him
To play the soothing parasite to his vices?
Or any man, because he saved my hand,
Pr^sume my head and heart are at his service?
Or did ^ stand engaged to buy my freedom
(When my captivity was honorable)
By making my self here and fame hereafter,
(...) to men's scorn and calumnious tongues?
H^^ hi^ fair da^ghters mind bin like her feature,
Or for some little blem^sh I had sought
For my content elsewhe^^, wasting on others
My bod^ and her dowry; my forh^ad then
Deserved the brand of base ingratitude:
But if obsequ^ou^ usage, and fair warning
To keep her worth my love, could preserve her
From being a whore, and yet no cunning one,
So to offend, and yet the fault kept from me?
What should I do? let any freeborne spirit
Determine truly, if that thankfulness,
Choice form with the whole world given for a dowry^
Could streng^hen so an honest man with patience,
As with a willing neck to undergo
The insupportable yoke of slave or wit toll.

Charm^. What proof have you she did play false, besides your oath?

Cha. Her own confession to her father.
I ask him for a witness.

Roch. It Is most true.
I would not willing^y blend my last words
With an untruth.

Cha. And then ^o clear my self,
That his great wealth was not the mark I shot at,
But that I h^ld it, when fair Beaumelle
Fell from her virtue, like the fatal gold
Which Brennu^ took from Delphos, whose possession
B^o^ght with it ruin to himself and Army.
H^er's one in Cou^r, Baumont, by whom I sent
All graunts and writings back, which made it mine,
Before his daughter died by his own sentence,
As freely a^ vnask'd he gave i^ to me.

Ba^. They are here to be seene^

Charmi. Open the casket.
Peruse that deed of gift.

Romans Half of the danger
Already is discharged: the other part
As bravely, and you are not only free,
But crowned with praise for ever.

Du Croy. It Is apparent.

Charmi. Your state, my Lord, again is yours.

Roch. Not mine,
I am not of the world, if it can prosper,
(And yet being justly got, I Will not examine
Why it should be so fatal) do you bestow it
On pious uses. I Will go seek a grave.
And yet for proof, I die in peace, your pardon
I ask, and as you grant it me, may Heaven
Your conscience, and these Judges free you from Exit Roch.
What you are charged with. So farewell for ever. --

Nouall se. I Will be mine own guide. Passion, nor example
Shall be my leaders. I have lost a son,
A son, grave Judges, I require his blood
From his accursed homicide.

Charmi. What reply you
In your defense for this?

Cha. I but attended
Your Lordships pleasure. For the fact, as of
The former, I confess it, but with what
Base wrongs I was unwillingly drawn to it,
To my few words there are some other proofs
To witness this for truth, when I was married:
For there I must begin. The slain Nouall
Was to my wife, in way of our French courtship,
A most devoted servant, but yet aimed at
Nothing but means to quench his wanton heat,
His heart being n^uer warmed by lawful fires
As mine was (Lords:) and though on these presumptions,
Joined to the hate between his house and mine,
I might with opportunity and ease
Have found a way for my revenge, I did not;
But still he had the freedom as before
When all was mine, and told that he abused it
With some unseemly license, by my friend
My appou'd friend Romont. I gave no credit
To the reporter, but reprou'd him for it,
As one vncourtly and malicious to him.
What could I more, my Lords? yet after this
He did continue in his first pursu^e
Hoter then ever, and at length obt^ind it;
But how it came to my most certain kowledge,
For the dignity of the court and my own honor
I dare not say.

Nou^ se. If all may be believed
A passionate prisoner speaks, who is so foolish
That durst be wicked, that will appear guilty?
No, my grave Lords: in his impunity
But give example unto jealous men
To cut the throats they hate, and they will never
Want matter or pretense for their bad ends.

Charmi. You must find other proofs to strengthen these
But mere presumptions.

Du Croy. Or we shall hardly
Allow your innocence.

Cha. All your attempts
Shall fall on me, like brittle sha^ts on armor,
That break themselves; or like waves against a rock^,
That leave no sign of their ridiculous fury
But foame and splinters, my innocence like these
Shall stand triumphant, and your malice serve
But for a trumpet to proclaim my conquest;
Nor shall you, though you do the worst fate can,
How ere condemn, affright an honest man.

Romans May it please the Court, I may be heard.

Nou. se. You come not
To rail again? but do, you shall not find
Anoth^r Rochfort.

Romans In Nouall I cannot.
But I come furnished with what will stop
The mouth of his conspiracy against the life
O^ innocen^ Charaloys. Do you know this Character?

Nou. se. Yes, it is my sons.

Romans May it please your Lordships, read it,
And you shall find there, with what vehemence
He did solicit Beaumelle, how he had got
A promise from her to enjoy his wishes,
How after he abiur'd her company,
And yet, but that it is fit I spare the dead,
Like a damnd villain, as soon as recorded,
He brake that oath, to make this manifest.
Produce his bands and hers.

Enter Aymer, Florimell, Bellap^rt. Charmi^ Have they took their oa^hes?

Romans They haue^ and rather then endure the rack,
Confess the time, the meeting, nay the act;
What would you more? only this matron made
A free discovery to a good end;
And therefore ^ sue to the Court, she may not
Be placed in the black list of the delinquents.

Pont. I see by this, Nouals revenge needs me,
And I shall do.

Charmi. It Is evident.

Nou. se. That I
Till now was never wretched, here is no place
To curse him or my stars. Exit Nouall senior.

Charmi. Lord Charalois,
The injuries you have sustained, appear
So worthy of the mercy of the Court,
That notwithstanding you have gone beyond
The letter of the Law, they yet acquit you.

Pont. But in Nouall, I do condemn him thus^

Cha. I am slain.

Romans Can I look on? Oh murderous wretch,
Thy challenge now I answer^^ ^o die with him,

Charmi. A guard: disarme him.

R^m. I ye^l^ up my sword
Vnforc'd. Oh Ch^raloys.

Cha. For shame R^mont,
Mourn^ not for him that dies as he has lived,
Still constant and unmoved: what is fallen upon me,
Is by Heavens will, because I made my self
A judge in my own cause without their warrant:
But he that lets me know thus much in death,
With all good men forgive me.

Pont. I receive the vengeance, which my love
Not built on virtue, ha^ made me worthy, worthy of.

Charmi. We are taught
By this sad president, how just soever
Our reasons are to remedy our wrongs,
W^ are yet to leave them to their will and power,
That to that purpose have ^u^hority.
For you, Romont, although in your excuse
You may plead, what you did, was in revenge
Of the dishonor done unto the Court:
Yet since from us you had not warrant for it,
We banish you the State: for these, they shall,
As they are found guilty, or innocent,
Be set free, or suffer punishment. Ex^^^t (...).

FINIS.

