A MIRROVR FOR MERCHANTS.

WITH ^N EXACT TABLE, To discover the excessive taking of Usury, against the
Laws manifested in this Treatise of REASONS ACADEMY.

Set forth by R. MASON of Lincolnes Inn Gent.

Vitet censura furorem.

LONDON Printed for John Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetestreete. 1609.

To the Reader.
Understand me loving Reader, as well for my purpose, as my pains. In the
one, I mean not to confront great School men, but leave both themselves, and
their worthy Sciences, to happy success; and the other I freely bestow on
such, as shall be content to give the same perusal. As in the whole, I
presume there is nothing hurtful; so in some parts I hope there may be some
thing available. Herein one principal Mark I aim at, is, to discover the
abuse of Use, or rather the abused use of Usury, so entertained in this
Kingdom, that according to Seneca his speech, Caepit licitum esse, quia
publicum est. In late ages, Divines have defied it, unmasked her foul visage,
and brought her to arraignement and conviction, for her unclean, unhallowed
and unlawful products, the Laws of this Kingdom, ever este^med and adjudged
it damnable; and the holy ^ooke of God, set an eternal Curse there^n. The
Jews in this Kingdom, carried then marks of separation, from civil, and
honest company, and the Usurers generall^ forbidden Christian Burial; and
d^sabled* to dispose by their Will, of thing so wickedly gotten. Sed tempore
mutantur, but observe the mutation of time. In this our Age (when God is most
taught, and should be most obeyed) the old Serpent has not only persuaded the
tasting, but surfeiting on this forbidden fruit: The Takers have lost their
estates, and broken their hearts with penury; and the Lenders filled their
bags, and through cruelty brought their souls to perdition: This viperous
poison has infected the Court, and the Country, the Laity and Ciuilians, the
Church and the Chancell, the Priests and the people, in so much, that Usury is
set up as an universal Trade* This is the cause, that Charity grows cold
loving affection between friends and alies, turned into hatred, hospitality
decayed, and the service of God despised: Hinc illae lachrymae; This is the
cause, that the alms to the poor are neglected, the dish of neighbourly
hospitality not provided, the ordinary and necessary servants turned off, and
the gate of pity and compassion fast locked and sealed up.

One thing I must explain in this place concerning the four first Sections*
and the Table herein placed.

The Sections I have wri^ten, to express the care power, and providence of
God, who has left nothing unmade needful for the use of man, and for the
preservation and increase of all things, has ordained and appointed a certain
number of things to be ingendered: a time when, and a place where, they should
be produced, and has limited each of these to their certain bounds, quas
vltra, citraque nequit consist^re rectum: but the policy of man has past the
limits of them all, by inuenting a new kind of production, that money, being
taken out of the bowels of the earth her natural place, in a certain time
limited at their pleasure, should produce the increase of money, by delivering
the same upon Usury, and so abuse both number, time, and place, against the
Law of God, Nature, and Nations.

The Table discovers, that the general taking of money, being for less time
then a whole year, is within the compass, both of the prohibiting, and Penal
law of this Kingdom, because it exceeds the rate often for an hundredth, for
one whole year: and for the understanding thereof, I have explayned in what
sort the ignorant Arithmeticians have abused their Art, by mistaking the
Divident and Divisor. Use taken according to the rate of the first Table, is
subject to the penal Law: Use taken according to the second Table, is free
from such punishment, though the taking it self be not approved by any Law of
God, or man. All which I leave to thy considerate perusal, and thy self to
the favor of God.

Robert Mason.

REASONS Academie.
Of Number.
AS I purpose not to discourse of all the deep points thereof, for that would
require a large treatise; yet because it is a needful part to be known in the
understanding of Reasons exercise, I will make bold briefly to touch the same.

Number does consist of diverse things, either of one, or several
denominations: and without number there can be no true definition,
demonstration, manifestation, nor understanding of any thing: for if all things
were but one, then were there no number or order: wherefore one is said to be
no number, Sed scala de vni^^te, the beginning of number. In the Godhead,
being before all time, the maker of time, and all things that increase in time,
there is number: The Trinity of persons and unity of Godhead do declare as
much. For although god be a most singular Divine essence in himself, yet has
he proportioned number in himself, unseperably united in his Godhead: which
the divines call the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. And the ancient Philosophers
call three inbeings, The Father, the active, or inworking virtue, power and
nature: The Son, they call the word, speech, or reason.

The holy Ghost, Love. These Philosophers have striued wonderfully in this
labor, wherein they have waded exceeding deep. Amelius the disciple of Plotin, is
said to name the trinity, three things, or three understandings. The Beer, the
Hauer, and the Seer. The Trinity is expressed in these words, Power,
understanding, and will: which Trinity makes a full number of things belonging
to a mind: Plotin. En. 5. Lib. 1.
which the Philosophers esteem to be the Godhead. But to leave off this kind
of description, I conclude with Plotinus; There are says he, three chief
Inbeings: The one, or the God. 2. The understanding or wit. 3. The soul of the
world. And of these three, says he, it is not for any man to speak, without
praying unto god: And without settling his mind before unto quietness. And if it
be demanded (says he) how one of them begets an other; it is to be
considered, that we speak of everlasting things: and therefore we must not
imagine any temporal begetting: for this begetting which we speak of, says
he, betokens but only cause and order.

This Trinity and first, and everlasting number, has proportioned and
appointed, other numbers, and in them a miraculous order. If any ask a reason
hereof, I answer: It was the power, the wisdom, understanding, and will of
God, to express himself in this complete number of persons, in one unity of
godhead. By this number three, was the whole world created, and al things
innumerable: whose mouers are only known to the creator himself. In that number
three, is expressed the wonder of ye world: ye taking up of Henock and Elias:
and the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jonas three days in the Whales
belly, and Christ three days in the grave: So that in the number of three, is
manifested the eternal Trinity of the Godhead: the creation of the world,
and of man: the life, the death, and the resurection. There consented to the
destruction of man, The Serpent, the woman, and the man. There have repaired
that downfall; The Father, the giver: the Son the gift, and the holy Ghost the
comforter. In the number- of three, is a perfect conclusion of all things. Much
may be said of the number and orders made by this trinity; As fire, water,
air, and earth: to make the world, the Spring, Somer, Autum, Winter: to make
the year, East, West, North, South: to quarter the world Creatures, going,
creeping, flying, swung, with infinite milio^s of celestial and terestial
bodies, which he keeps, preserves, boundeth in, and holds within this
Trinity. And briefly to wind up this point concerning number, I hold it the
original and most worthy part of the three. I mean, that number is of higher
consideration the^ place or time: for God himself yt can by no mea^es stoop to
be known to the capacity of man, neither can be contained within any place, nor
limited to any time, in respect of his ompotent greatness, and eternal
essence, before and without respect of time, yet has he vouchsafed to bring
himself within the compass of number: And therein, and by the power thereof,
to create man in a blessed and happy estate.

Thus having in some measure discovered the nature and worthiness of original
number: desir^ng by all means to avoid tediousnes, I leave to be considered,
that these and diverse other ancient writers, that have left behind them
learned works, had no other means to understand any thing of the duty and
eternity of the Godhead, or immortality of the soul, but the use and help of
Reason, only proper and peculiar to man. And so I proceed to the rest.

Of place.
IN respect of God, before the creation of the world, and beginning of time,
All was Place. And yet in respect of his greatness, there was no place: for he
cannot be contained in any thing, (...) in (...) of God
but in himself. If any be curious to demand how spacious, large, or ample
this place was, let him take his answer with Cato of Vtica: who would needs
know of God why Caesar overcame Pompey. It is as if the meanest vassal in a
kingdom should require ye king to give a reason for all things he does, or
commands. Porpherius being much encumbred with understanding of supernatural
causes, breaks out into these words: Seeing that God did by skill, dispose
and ouerrule all things, and orders them by incomparable propriete of virtue:
And on the contrary part, man's reason being very small, is ignorant of most
things, how skillful soever it seem to be of the truth* Surely we may the^ call
it (meaning Reason) wise, when it is not curious in searching such doubtful
and hard matters, as are matched with danger of blasphemy, but rather
grants, that the things which are done, are very well as they be: for says
he, what can our weak reason find fault with, or reprove in that great Reason
(meaning of the deity) As if he should have said, The ways, the works, and the
place of God, and Eternity, are not to be searched nor enquired after by any
creature whatsoever. If we descend but to the diversity of the condtion and
nature of Creatures confined unto place: and their understanding of matters,
not designed, nor provided for their estates and conditions, we shall have
sufficient cause to say, that Place was such, and so much as it pleased the
purpose, providence, power, and wisdom of God.

Before there was a creation of things, and a beginning of time, Place was
infinite and indefinit: in deuisible, without space or distance: without being
repaired unto, or departed from: neither containing nor contained, without
Center, Circo^ferie^ce, rule, or diameter, consisting neither of matter,
substance, nor whatsoever stuff. Every thing has his point, his Center, his
place, and beginning. Only ye divine esce^ce, place and nature of god has
none: as every man that will seriously look into his own self, shall be
enforced to confess. In nature, the greater, can never be comprehended by ye
lesser. But God in his nature, place, and essence, is greater then man.
Therefore cannot God his incomprehensible place and nature, be comprehended by
the reason or understanding of man: nature is a thing wrought by God: Now, no
work how great soever, can perfectly express the cause or worker thereof.
Therefore nature cannot understand the divine essence, place, and nature of
God. The reasonable soul, is the admirable nature of man: Now, whosoever shall
come to know his own soul, and the place thereof, merely by the power and
work of itself, shall confess himself to be absolutely ignorant thereof.
Therefore if nature and reason, with the powers and affects of the soul and
reason, comes short to know it self; much more must it come short, to
discover or understand the incircumscriptible nature, essence and place of the
holy Trinity. We see in the course of the greatness of God, as well terestrial,
as celestial, continual mouings from place to place, and all those moved by
their Creator, the first mouer, which argues subjection and obedience in the
creatures to the Creator: and out of a cessarie consequent of the contrary, it
discovers that God the mouer, is neither moved, nor does move; top, or from
any place. For to say, he is here, or there, it is all one, for he is every
where: as it is authentically proved: If I clime up to heaven, thou art there:
If I go down to hell, thou art there also. If I take the wings of the
morning, and remain in the utmost part of the sea, even there also shall thy
hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me: for the heaven is his seat,
and the earth is his foote-stole. To conclude this point, we see and confess,
that God made, and knows all things: and has appointed their natures,
beings, times, and places. Now, if he had in him the nature of any of his
creatures, that is, to be limited unto one, contained in place, or consisting
of any material substance, the same would incomber his divine essence: for he
does not come within the compass of their limited nature, place, nor number:
for by that means, we should derogate from his holy and divine Deity, and
essence of a Creator, Seeing therefore, that God is not compounded of material
substance, he can not be a body. And seeing he is not a body, he can not be
contained in place, neither wholly, nor in part; whereof it may properly be
said, that he is no where: namely, that no part of him is limited within any
place to be pointed at, or described. For like as he made all things by the
power of his being; So does the same power enter into al things: fill all
things: and contain all things. And for so much as the same being and power is
indivisible, it is whole in all, and whole in every part. So likewise, is he
himself whole throughout, in whom all things have their being: howbeit, he is
not definitely, nor determinatly in any thing, nor in any particular place.
Upon which reason Aristotle made this definition of the soul of man: which
comes nearest to the nature of God. Anima (says he) est totum in toto, and
totum in qualibit part. The nearest beholding of this, is in our own minds.
By the powers and working of the mind, we contemplate, behold, discern,
understand, and judge of things that are far remote from us, and yet over
selves never move. The mind in this case does not entermingle truth, nor
participate with the nature, substance, nor condition of the the things it
enters into. Judge but of the reason thereof, which is briefly thus: These
things are of less condition, nature, and quality, the^ the reasonable souls
that possess these minds. God is said by the Philosophers to be immovable,
unchangeable, beginning less, endless, bodilesse, infinite, incomprehensible,
etc. Al which declare not what God is, but yt he is not as his creatures are,
local: nor his creatures mixed, or intermingled with him: nor with his power,
or essence. For by these negatiues all other things are discovered, to have
beginning, to be made, to determine, to be changeable, weak, material*
corruptible: And to depend upon an other being then themselves. And that God
only has his being and place, in, and by himself. And the the more deeply
any man will enter into consideration of these things, the more infinite and
inscrutable shall he find the^. For when he shall have taken all the pains he
can possible, he will confess he has learned no more, the^ to be ignorant of
the want of his own knowledge in ye behalf.

Thus holding it necessary, to discover that there is no place in respect of
God, as the most readiest way to explane what place is in respect of his
creatures, and the worthiness thereof; I proceed, desiring to be understood,
that my meaning is, for opening the point of my maine argument, (...) in (...)
of the ^atures. ^^^ernatural ^^^urall. ^^naturall.
by the way as I go, to discover, How supernatural, natural, and unnatural
things, have their operations and workings: and the monstrous products that
some things against nature are enforced to bring forth.

There is nothing created, but has his special use: be it material, or
immaterial, number serves to make known to man his own weakness: that those
things that are most certainly known by number to the Creator, are
notwithstanding, innumerable, to the capacity, reason, and understanding of
men: yea, much more, then the fantasy, conceit, or imagination of men, can by
any means come near unto, or conceive. All these thus made of nothing, makes
the more wonderful the power of the maker, and the order and worthiness of
number, within which condition every creature is contained. To every, and to
the very least of these innumerable creatures, there is appointed a several,
distinct, particular, and local place; divided, severed, and sundered from the
rest: which shows what congruence there is, between number and place: that
number being never so infinite, yet nothing wants his place. And place being
never so spacious and large, yet there is Nullum vacum, no void place: which
declares, how the works of God do depend one of an other, in an admirable
propotion and order, one in true use, serving the turn of another. For how
could the creatures be, if they wanted place? Or, to what purpose served place,
if there were not creatures to supply them? This shows that God made nothing
in vain: and therefore his works ought not to be lightly esteemed, much less
abused.

The first Creation we read of, is of Angels: They were made in number: Place
diui^ed.
They attended their Maker in Heaven: There was their place: and although they
were spirits and incorporall, yea standing under the law, obedience, and
command of their Maker: they had such several places as befitted creatures of
such worthiness: and under such conditions as they were enjoined unto. Their
disobedience, and fall, and thrusting and remoouing out of that blessed place,
to another place of accursednesse, show that there were seueuerall places, even
for the spirits themselves: as likewise several numbers appointed for these
places. So hitherto number and place go together, as necessary attendants on
the providence, purpose, and will of God. But if any shall ask either number
or place, of the blessed, or damned spirits, the time of their creation, or
fall, or the reason why it is not discovered unto men: Let those men know, that
they neither be within the number, creation, nor place of any those angels or
spirits, but in another rank of Gods creatures, a little inferior to the
Angels. And therefore they must ^aue them, their creation, number and place, to
their Maker: as matters inscrutable and forbidden, that men should have to
meddle withal. The next creation is of the world: which consists of things,
in number and place: The earth, the water, the Elements, the Sun, the Moon, the
stars, the beasts, birds, fishes; and lastly man: as is said in holy Writ, Male
and female, made he the^. In all these there is number: in respect of these
diverse creatures that were made, there is number in the reasonable creatures,
male and female. Place in worthiness and dignity* and the several and diverse
places, their several bodies were contained in, or did supply. Besides, what
the divine spirit of God has revealed, to holy men of the old ages, concerning
these places: reason has searched out diverse divisions, and subdiuisions of
places; done, conceived, and understood by number, and distance: which always
go together in what action soever: As relatiues, that depend one upon another
being. The Mathematitians, in respect of the height of the Heavens from the
earth, have divided this great spacious place, into ten Heavens: which, who so
is skilled in their described Spheres, may easily and readily understand.

This is done, in respect of the large vaught and scope, that is between
heaven and earth: and the creatures therein placed. They conceive above these
ten Heavens, to be the place, and seat of God the Creator, and that all the
creatures (except the holy Angels) are bound down by this Primum mobile, under
their Maker, not to approach his admirable presence. Here is still number and
place: In their division, they have appointed seven several Planets: whereof we
have warrant to speak of the Sun and Moon, by holy writ. And of the other
Stars there is great experience: and very profitable learning, has bin
collected and drawn from them. Under the lowest of these, being the Moon, is
affirmed to be a fiery Region, keeping all other Creatures under, that they
may not mount above, nor exceed their bounds. The like fiery Region, is
conceived to be above the tenth Heaven, to keep down the creatures in that
mighty scope and compass. So here goes still together, number and place.
Under the moons Orb, they place the air to exist, which may not mount above
the fiery Region. With this air, we have mere familiar acquaintance then with
the rest, because it partaketh with our nature. And under the air, the earth
and water. And so of fire, water, air, and earth, they hold the bodies of man
to be composed: wherein still number and place, partake together in all
occasions. If I should speak at large of the infinite numbers of joints,
sinews, arteries, muscles, veins, organs, instruments, matter, and things,
whereof a perfect man does consist: beside his immortal soul, it would be as
admirable, as the whole frame and host of heaven and earth, and all wherewith
they are replenished. But if I should discourse of the reasonable and immortal
soul, and mind of man, the qualities, affects, effects, condition, state,
attribute, and faculties of the soul and mind. It would far surmount all
the creatures that ever God made: and all in number, place, and time, which is
the next point to be handled.

Then gentle friend, I leave thee a spectacle in thy self, to behold all these
3. excellent things; number, place, and time: with ye stuff, substance,
matter, and essence, whereof thou art composed; much exceeding all the rest, if
they were all compared with thee: Abuse neither of them, least time turn thee,
in stead of a better place, from the number of the blessed, to a place of
damnation, among the number of the damned spirits. So that whether thou seek
heaven, earth, or hell, thou shall find all things to consist of number, and
place: therefore make account of them, as of their worthiness.

Much might be said, of the number and place of the fixed, and moving Stars;
Of the number of Monarkes, Kings, Emperors, and their Countries: the vegitatiue
and sensitive creatures, and of the things that have only being, without sense
or growing. But because I am to speak in the next place of Time, and of the
use thereof, I cease further to enlarge this point: with this conclusion, that
the exercise of reason, even amongst the heathen and profane men, has waded
far into this matter.

Of Time.
IN this discourse of Time, there is an other way to discover the truth
thereof, then is used in handling the former. For in number and place, there is
neither prioritie nor posterity: For though in the Deity there be three
distinct persons in number, yet in reputation of place, greatness, or number,
none is greater or less then another: and in respect of Time, none is before
or after an other: But the whole three persons are coequall together, and
coeternall.

The Philosophers of ancient time, found in the reason of their souls, that
there was a certain nature and essence, in which they allege to be three
in-beings as is aforesaid. And that this great and eternal nature and essence,
do make the beginning of all other natures, which are contained in Time.

And besides among many opinions, There were of these Philosophers, that did
maintain, and uphold two beginnings, which in all likelihood they were
induced unto, out of the two several dispositions and inclinations of the same
in men; one to virtue, the other to vice. To these beginnings they give
several names. The one good, which they call Oram^ses. ^^utarche in (...) life
of (...) and ^^is.
The other evil, and that they call Arimarius. This opinion is furthered by
some, to have his beginning from Zoroastres, the grand child of Noa: and from
him, by tradition to the Persians: and from the Persians, to the Manachies.
Their meaning and understanding, in this behalf is, that the Elements, the
Plants, the herbs, the trees, beasts, men, and Spirits, were divided between
these two Gods, holding one to be Creator of the good, and the other, of the
evil. To the one, they allotted light: to the other darkness: to the one,
Summer: to the other winter, etc. The sins, the wickedness, and corruptions
which they saw in the natures of men, differing from the perfection of a
righteous Creator, drew them into these absurd opinions, because they held
their corruptions and evils in time and quality, to be in the creation of
those evil creatures. Which opinion, has come near to some in these Ages:
who entering into consideration of the evil things will not stick, if not to
affirm, (...) least to demand, whether God be the author of evil?

These opinions may be answered thus. That making, or creating, are referred to
natures and substances: and that all original natures and substances are good;
And therefore that God, who is al good, is the Creator, and maker of them. Now
evil, is neither a nature, nor a substance: but an income, which is fallen
into natures, and substances: And therefore not in the time of creation, but is
come in since, by a colaterall means. Evil, is a breathing, or diminishing of
the four good qualities and effects: which natures and substances ought
naturally to have.

Hereby we see, that even in time it self, good was before evil: and in
place shall be far preferred above it.

I conclude therefore, that Evil, being neither nature nor substance, has
not, nor can have, any being in it self, but in the thing, that of his
original nature, or stuff is good. Evil, is not an effect, but a default; ^
not a production, but a corruption. Plato, and Plotin, hold opinion, that
evil is not a thing of it self, nor can be imagined, but in the absence of
goodness; as a deprivation of the good, which ought to be naturally in every
thing. And that evil is a certain kind of nothing; having no abiding, but in
the the good: whereof it is a fault, or diminishing of perfection. By which
they conceive, that these things which have their being, nature, and substance,
only temporary, and are finite with time, tending to the matter whereof they
were first created: that is, to an vnbeing of that it formerly was: or to not
being at all, as were the things whereof they were created: and unto which,
creatures have still a certain inclination, whereby they may fall from their
goodness. By these and many other reasons, may be concluded, that there was
not two beginnings, but one beginning of creatures and time. But the evil is
crept in since, in the default, decay, or absence of the good, which in the
original creation, was in the same natures and substances, that are now become
evil.

Many supposals, imaginations, and opinions, have been holden of
euerlastingnesse, eternity, and of the world, and of Time, by old writers;
that had no other means to reach unto the same, but the scope of their own
weak reasons. But omitting the rest, I will come shortly to the point.
Plotinus in his book of Eternity, and of Time, says; Plotinus Enead. 3. Lib.
2. Cha 1.
That Eternity and Time differ in this respect; That Eternity is verified,
only of the everlasting nature: (meaning the Creator:) But Time, is to be
verified of the things that are created. So as Eternity is, and abides in God
alone: which he calls the world; that is, to be conceived but in mind and
understanding. And Time, he intends to abide in the world; that is, subject
to the senses. Adding further, that the world was not made in Time, but
together with Time. Which opinion the Divines themselves do hold.

The same Author, having taken wonderful pains in that point, and having
searched out the definitions of time, made by the former Philosophers, knitting
up the knot of his whole learning thus. We must needs (says he) come back to
the first nature; which I affirmed to be in Eternity: I mean, the immovable
nature, which is wholly all at once, the infinite and endless life; and which
consists wholly in one, and tends unto one. But as yet says he, there was
no time at all* or at least wise, it was not among the natures that consist in
understanding: but was to come afterward, by a certain kind of posterioritie.
Out of which he concludes, that, before such time as fore-nesse issued out,
and had need of after^nesse: Time, which as then was not, rested in God, with
the residue of all things that now are. But (says he) a certain nature bent
to many doings, that is to wit, the soul of the world, being desirous to have
more then the present, began to move it self. And so from thence issued time
which passes on continually, and is never the self same.

By these conclusions, It is manifest, that the wisdom and providence of God,
for special purposes and occasions, has made and ordained these three
numbers, time, and place: not that they are any things, natures, nor
sustena^ces, in respect of them selves; but in regard of the use and employment
thereof: for the numbering, placing, and conueying of things according to their
qualities, natures, and effects. And for the beginning, disposing, and
furnishing thereof.

Time properly of it self, is neither active nor passive: It is neither
escence nor substance, and scarcely can be said to have existence. And albeit
time pass faster then imagination, yet of it self, has it no power to move
at all. And the best description thereof is, ye Time is a certain measure of
moving, or progression from one point to an other: of things corruptible,
finishing, ending* and ceasing to be, as time it self is: And is exercised
altogether and alone in respect of corruptible things. In this appears the
reason wherefore the worthy understanding of number, place, and time, is only
known to man, and not to the other Creatures, is by the spiritual,
immateriall, and mortal essence and understanding of the reasonable soul,
which being created to endure when time shall be finished, has power and
faculty to discern between things co^mencing* and transitory things,
mortal, and immortal: and so out of a greater worthiness then time, or any
corruptible substance, contained within the measure of time, to discern, the
use, scope, end, and purpose of al these les worthy and meaner things. And out
of an infallible reason, to conclude, that the true understanding of number,
place, and time, 'their mixtures, divisions, purposes, and ends, are known to
men: And the use thereof belongs only unto them. And that in this number,
place, and time, the Creator has made sufficient substance, stuff and matter,
to nourish, defend, and preserve the whole race of mankind, without any other
artificial or unnatural workings. And upon that ground, let this suffice for
a conclusion, that whosoever goes about by policy, art, or unnatural means,
to erect, set up, or maintain any course or way, by proportioning of time,
place, or number, for the benefit, relief, or sustentation of mandinde; then
God himself has set down and provided, in the making and preserving of his
creatures: goes about as much as in him lies, to reprove his creator for some
defect or want: and to become himself in the nature of a God, to supply,
succor, and make good that want, or defect. Wherefore I advise, great warines
to be taken, how men presume too much of their own wisdoms: and to co^taine
themselves within al humble obedience, to take what God has provided; and not
to erect, maintain, or depend upon unnatural, false and misconceiued
supployments: All which I choose, to manifest by examples, that have proceeded
from heathen men, which they only found out by reason: desiring christians that
have all the blessings of God revealed unto them, to exceed, or at least, not
to come short of the reasons of these profane men.

The knitting together of number place, and time: and their necessary uses,
which cannot be wanting.
IT may seem to some understandings, that in these discourses, I make much
ado about little: or that I am tedious, and use many preambles, circumstances,
and illusions. Let me answer in a word, and give some reason of my doing, and
of my fear and carfulness: not rashly or suddenly to conclude so weighty a
cause, First, I find the way I am to take in this matters (how easy soever it
seem to others) to be full of briers, brambles, cragged rocks, ambushes,
uneven ground, pits, and many incombrances thrown in by the invention of many:
which must be cut down, made plain, or removed* beside the mark and scope I
aim at can be made apparent. To descend therefore to the point, there is
discovered by learning, A double life in man.
to be in man, a double life. The one in this world, in respect of his mere
sensitive parts: the second, in another world, in regard of his reasonable
soul. The first dying, finishing, and ceasing to be: The second immortal, and
never finishing, nor ending. And in respect of these two laws* man has two
several sorts of provision. For the sensitive life, the use and benefit of
the transitory things of this corruptible world. For the reasonable soul, a
provision in an endless world like to mortality it self. In the creation, God
made sundry creatures: in the general number whereof, man is.

Among the number of things, that have either being, sense, or moving, man is.
But besides this, man has a certain Genus, or kind specular alone by himself:
and so is among the number of the reasonable creatures. A kind and number,
peculiar and alone proper unto his nature and kind. And out of that reason,
issues two other conclusions, place, and time, in this world, amongst the
other creatures, so long as the sensitive parts remain in life. And after
that, place and endless continuing in an other world. And in respect of
immortality, man is either in number, place, and time, amongst the elect: or,
number, place, and time, among the reprobates. Now, for that I so generally
find, that reasonable and immortal part, to be so universally carried away,
seduced, and ouer-ruled by the mere sensitive powers, entertaining the evil
and forbidden things, and refusing the good, allowable and lawful: I have made
thus bold to distinguish between these two times, and to give this cauiat to
the possessers thereof, that they strive not overmuch, to possess or
entertain the number, place, and time, of these transitory and corruptible
blessings, as that thereby they loose, and fail to be of the number, place,
and time, of the elect: and be cast amongst the number of the damned, into the
place of utter perdition. For assuredly, whosoever prefers the pleasures of
this world, before, or equal with the other; abuses both his Creator, and
creatures; All the shifts, policies, arts and devices, that are used to cross
the ordinance and order of God, to erect, establish, or set up any other way,
or course of happiness, either terene, or immortal, more, or other, then God
himself, has provided, ordained, and appoined, are no less dangerous, then
the eating of the forbidden fruit. These notes I thought fit to let drop by the
way, in regard that I shall after in an other place, treat of a use generally
exercised, which I take, does neither proceed from God, nor nature. Into this
disease, I fear many thousands are fallen, so unrecoverably sick, that with
the sick man at the point of death, they fall to bite the sheets, and pull
the threeds of the couerlet, not knowing that they are sick at all, feeling no
pain of their infection. And so much the more dangerous is the sickness.

To come nearer to this point. It is plain by sundry places of the holy Bible,
that God alone, numbreth, weighs, and divides: he measures times, places,
and seasons: Therefore let him stand for the numberer, placer, disposer, and
appointer of all creatures, their places, times, seasons, their beginings,
continuings, finishings, chaungings, or ordainings. And let all his creatures
be then numbered, placed, and limited, according to their creations, nature,
qualities, and estates, not striving against the purpose of his divine
providence, or adding, or diminishing, too, or from, what he has appoindted
or created.

To discover this, I must distinguish between man and the other creatures, and
the causes and marks they tend too, and aim at: together, with the admirable
blessing of reason: and to what measure the capacity of man thereby extends,
for the searching out the natures, qualities, times, seasons, places, and uses
of the other creatures, which could not be, but out of a kind of immortal
Nature, above all other creatures.

It cannot be denied, but that God has created all things, first for his own
glory and honor, wherein he appoints several uses and services: And within
the compass of this duty, are all creatures, as well men and Angels, as the
other inferior things. And on this behalf, God is satisfied with the service
he has appointed to himself; so his ordinance and will be obeyed.

From thence, let us come to things that are next unto the service of God, and
provided to serve the use of men: And therein will appear what an excellent
creature man is, in respect of his original nature and reason. And what
wonderful, admirable, and abundant blessings and stores, are provided to
serve his turn for both his lives; The true consideration whereof, may
satisfy any tempered spirit to be contented with his Creators own works; and
not to ^oyst in, or endeavor any other means of augmenting his happiness. And
to this purpose, let us survey in order the Creatures which serve for the use
and preservation of the life of man, and take them by degrees from the meanest
to the greatest: And it will make any man wonder at the admirable greatness,
plenty, and waightinesse thereof: Let us consider them by degrees: The lowest
and the meanest which is the earth, therein behold the stuff or matter
wherewith this huge bale is filled, to make her swelling sides stiff, strong,
and full stuffed, that it shrink not. Let us consider the metals, mines and
store of gold, silver, and other mineralls, enclosed in her womb. The
miraculous hanging thereof in the air, without support: The veins, conducts,
fountains, springs, and rivers of water, that pass through her intralls: The
herbs plants, trees, grass, and fruit of sundry sorts, that proceed and
grow out of the richness and fatness thereof. The rain and deawes that water
and moisten the same: The waters and deepes severed from the earth, bounded and
limited within a compass, upon the superficies of some part of the same
earth, as it were in a great vessel, by the side of this great garden, ready
at all times to be taken up for the watering thereof, as pleases the master
Gardener: small rivers and brooks that issue from fountains innumerably,
serving the turns of men, beasts, fishes, and fowls of the air. ^hen I say
(...)* I mean ^^^ording to (...) capacity (...).
Then behold the sensitive creatures, their sundry kinds, and their unknown
multitudes. The beasts of the field, and the variety of their natures,
employments and uses: together with multitudes of fishes, and their exceeding
many sorts. Consider all these well, and we shall find their creation was not
to serve their own turns, but only and alone for the use of man, whose they
are to be disposed of by the direct bounty and gift of the Creator. But how?
To be used as he has appointed and limited for the preservation and benefit
of all mankind* not to the destruction of any. These things, neither know
themselves, nor the ends wherefore they were made, and yet they unknown to
themselves, serve the use and benefit of man. The lean and barren hastening
their own deaths, by how much they take pleasure to make themselves more
speedily fat. If there were no more but this, is not here a wonderful blessing,
and is not here sufficient and plentiful provision for all the race of mankind,
dispearsed upon ye whole face of the earth? In which is not to be forgotten,
that these creatures cease not in any instant of time, to yield increase for
this provision. But let us proeede a little further, and behold the other two
Elements, Fire and Air: The one warming the sensitive parts, and the other
maintaining the spirit that keeps life: neither of these know what they are,
nor the end they were made for. The very Air it self, sustaineth, and in a
sort, preserves ye flying fowls, in her concaue and hollow Region. Let us go
further; these four Elements, though there be contrariety in their several
natures, yet there is a Simpathy and a joint working together by the
appointment of the chief work-master; for the making, growing, cherishing, and
maintaining of the life of man: as well by their incorparation in the body of
man, as by the use and fruition of these other Creatures. Will you not think
these sufficient, yea admirable blessings? The earth to bring forth fruit, and
herbs, so universally, and continually; some for the food of man, and others
for the food of beasts, to perpare them to be man's meat. The sheep to bring
both lamb for meat, and fleece for clothing: the beast, to bring the calfe,
milk, butter, cheese, to be eaten and to be worn: the foul, to bring first
eggs, then chickens: and lastly, feathers for easy lodging: the fishes first
spawn, and then fry. The trees to erect houses, and make the fire. The earth
that produces grass, serves for tile to cover the houses: The straw that
yields the corn, serves other purposes* The timber that builds at land,
serves for navigations at sea: Out of the line or flax that makes the great
Cable, to be drawn, the threeds that make the fine and curious linen: from
the savage wild beasts, their warm furs: from the herbs and plants, rich and
estimable virtues* and from the poor silke-worme, the costly apparel, of
silks and vellets. It were a world to recite the several benefits that are
drawn from these creatures: And I am persuaded, no creature can reduce the^ to
a Catalogue: Excellent wines, oils, grapes, spices, perfumes, gummes, pearl,
Balmes, elixors, spirits, virtues, and quintessence. Out of the earth, are
drawn metals, of gold, silver, copper, brass, tin, lead, iron, steel, and
such like. Behold how one benefit follows and hasteneth in the neck of an
other: the several course of trying these mettalls, and the use thereof, which
themselves know not: Are not these inf^^^^ blessings, sufficient for men to
content themselves with all? but they must needs go further. Over all these,
man, and only man, has a power and dominion: the command and use but limited,
not to be abused, or exercised to other purposes then the Creator ordained.
Behold, what an insearchable reason is this one thing in the nature of man, by
fire to try out these metals, and to season and apply them to their several,
necessary, and commodious uses. But take heed of the abuse. Among many other
hand uses of metals; Of iron and steel, they make knives to cut meat: but it
is not intended to cut men's throats: they make sickles and sithes to cut down
corn and grass, without intent to cut men's legs. The like may be concluded of
the other metals, and the use of them. Wherefore to finish that point, gold
and silver being the finest metals of the rest, are searched out, refined, and
propotioned to pass between men at a value and rate, for the providing of
victual, apparel, and other necessaries to defend the body, from heat,
cold, and hunger: not that of themselves, simply by themselves, they are
either diet, apparel, or prouisiont to defend winters cold, or summers
heat, but rather an incomberment, then comfort, if men be enforced to wear or
use them next their naked bodies, or to feed of their solid substances. It
shall be necessary therefore, that we do not dispose or employ the same, to
general creatures bege: or bring forth any new creature, contrary and against
his own nature: or to make it valuable with the least human and reasonable
Creature that ever was, or shall be borne.

Let us look further, and see whether we can find any other benefits, if these
be not sufficient to satisfy us. And as we began at the lowest, so let us
ascend upwards. Above the Ayrie Region, The Moon which lighteneth the night,
governs the sea, tempereth the heat, and comfortteth the vital powers, made
by the providence and command of the creator, has her several world or Orb,
wherein she moves. The like is holden of the other moving stars, ye fixed
stars, the very Cope of heaven, wherein they are placed. The glorious Sun it
self, placed in the midst of the heavens. Behold and look upon them, their
innumerable company, their admirable beauty, their several employments,
courses and virtues: They all are ignorant of their own natures, virtues,
vigors* places, beauties, stateliness, and disposes. They are the admirable
works of God, showing forth his glory unto men. Al these also serve only to
the benefit and use of men, and none other. The Sun to visit and comfort all
the corners of the earth, in one year: never ceasing nor standing still,
unless it were to make the work admirable, and the workmaster and co^mander
more wonderful, it stood still in the time of Joshua.

They move once in thirty days, making her reuolutio^, and al ye rest of
those celestial creatures, in their times, order, numbers, and places, moving
with such harmony, consent, and agreement, to divide the year into Somer, and
Winter, Spring and fall: as well to chasten the earth to make it fruitful, as
to comfort the herbs and grass, to make them grow: as well to ripen and
gather the fruits of the earth, as to sow seeds, and set plants: to divide
the day and the night, and to proportion the times and season. They all keeping
their own natures in their certain number, their motions within the limits of
an appointed place: And their courses and reuolutions, just at their appointed
time. So that in all this whole host of heaven, there is no manner of stirring,
staggering, moving, or disordering, to the point of a pin, in respect of place;
nor to the least instant, in regard of Time: after they were once placed, and
set to take their spacious iournies.

By the comfort and virtue of these, are all the inferior bodies, comforted,
cherished, relieved, succored, and made able to perform their several
duties. All these benefits has God made to supply and serve the turn, and use
of man. Behold, and look upon them with admiration! consider whether they be
not above the conceit of all capacity. Will any man affirm, that these are
not enough and sufficient, to nourish, feed, succor, and preserve all the race
of mankind: yea every one, as well the meanest as the greatest.

Surely none, neither can nor will deny this to be true: And yet we see daily
many thousands want, famish, and pine to death, for want of these earthly
necessaries. ^^ason 2. (...).
There must needs be a fault in distribution and disposing of these benefits,
or else none should not want: for God in his divine wisdom, in the creation,
has not appointed any such place of scarcity, nor any number so to perish:
no^ any time when any such misery should befall. This Extremities must needs
then proceed of some wrong course, order, or disposition amongst men, in the
distribution of his benefits: for all the rest of his creatures have not
departed one jot from the worthiness of their first creation.

Well, to proceed, there is a greater benefit then all these; and that is the
reason, understanding, and wit of man; whereby he knows all these things,
their virtues and effects: and thereby of his own propriety and right, he
commands, disposes, orders, and enjoys, these lower creatures, as it
serves best for his turn and use.

What is it to be of never so great prower, value, vigor, or worthiness, to
such a subject, as neither understands what it is of it self, nor what
virtue is in it self: nor to what turn it serves? laboring still for
others, and taking no pleasure therein it self.

This is the condition of the Sun, the Moon, the Firmament, and all the
whole garnished and rich decked skies, with infinite numbers of Stars. And of
all the creatures in this Sphere of Elements, they are: and yet they know not,
neither what, nor whereof, nor to what purpose they are: what then avails
this glorious richness unto themselves? Surely nothing.

This does wonderfully exalt the creation, worthiness, and estimation of man,
and of his reasonable soul: yea, of the meanest of all the race of man, above
all these creatures, either Celestial or terestriall; in that he:
understands them all, and enjoys the use, benefit, and profit of them
all. May not this serve for for a conclusion, and move the hearts of men to be
very careful, how they either use, or abuse the blessings and benefits of God?
least in gathering too much, it turn to worms, as Manna did in the
wilderness: or to Quayles, and it become the destruction of the eaters
thereof, in stead of nourishment.

These benefits God has bestowed on Man, principally and chiefly to serve
his turn, and to instruct and teach him, in this first life, which shall
finish and end. Behold, there are further matters, and benefits bestowed and
provided for Man besides these; (...) second
the meanest, far exceeding the greatest of these: They are such, as I dare
not define or treat of; and therefore with reverence leave them to the Readers
consideration, with such descriptions as they are left to me. They are such, As
the eye has not seen, the ear heard, nor the heart of man can conceive.

Oh, inestimable riches, peace, plenty, joy, fulnesses, which God has
provided for this immortal, reasonable soul, if it vary not from the
direction of the Creator. And are not these yet sufficient? but man must needs
be meddling with himself, patching, and playing the tinker, or botcher, upon
some imagination of his own, and so mar all: which the the ancient
Philosophers hold to be the reason, that man was cast out of the company of the
Gods, into this lower, base, and corruptible Sphere of the Elements.

This is not all, I say, that God has done for man: for beside his creation,
he does still by his holy hand, uphold and support him, he has received him to
favor, being abiected for using the creatures of God contrary to his
ordinance: he has set his holy Angels so preserve and defend him: his only Son
to loose his life to redeem him: his most gracious holy spirit to be his
comfort and consolation. A fullness of all benefits in this life: and eternal
joys in heaven etc.

Provided always, that we do not use his creatures, to unnatural, unlawful,
or forbidden uses, or employments. This is the happy estate of reasonable man,
if he contain himself within his bounds: All the world will confess no
benefit or blessing can be added unto it.

Let us not therefore secke to alter, change, charge, or incomber, the course
and way, the Almighty power has appointed in these things: least it turn to
our utter confusion. Let us not wrong our reasonable souls, therefore: but
school and instruct them, in such rudiments as may preserve their worthiness.

Reason is the Founder of Arts.
BY the precedent Circumstances, it appears, that among all the creatures
under Heaven, (man only excepted) nothing is seen to be made for it self:
nor man only for himself, but for the service of God. The Sun shines and
heateth, but not for it self. The Earth bears, and yet has no benefit
thereby. The Winds blow, and yet they sail not. The Fire burns, and yet
feels not his own force. The Water bears the ships, and yet knows not
the weight thereof. Al these serve only to the glory of God, and benefit of
man. Behold therefore, how near God has placed man unto himself: nay, what
plentiful provision he has made for sustentation of this sensitive life, and
the necessary use thereof. The Sun warmeth the earth* the earth nourishes
the Plants: the Plants seed the beasts, and the beasts serve man. So that the
noblest creatures have need of the basest, and the basest are served by the
most noble* And all these by the divine providence of God: wherein as there can
be nothing wanting, so thereunto there may be nothing added.

Now for the better discovery of what dignity, honor, advancement, benefit,
and supply this sensitive life has, by the use and employment of Reason, which
is an inseparable quality of the immortal Soul, let us descend a little into
the Arts, whereby Reason does supply the defects and miseries, which otherwise
this life must abide^which in reason should move the hearts of men to use these
temporal blessings, in such a temporal measure, as they might supply and
serve the turns and uses of all the race of Mankind. As I mean not to every
one a like, so it is no equal sharing, that some should have all, and others
want. If we consider but this one thing, that by the admirable reason of man
in his first creation, he did suddenly give all the creatures of God several
names, and still retained the memory of them when he had never seen them
before, here began the Art, Memoratiue, and all other Arts, which afterward
had almost perished, and been confounded.

Hermes taking consideration of these things, says; The Sunbeams of God ar^
his actions: the Sunbeams of the world are the natures of things: And the
Sunbeams of man, are his arts and sciences. Whence should he learn, teach,
or understand this, but out of that reason which then remained, though
imperfect and impaired. By which reason, he was led to acknowledge the divinity
and omnipotency of God, being more then many men will at this day acknowledge.
But to proceed to the Arts, albeit they are well known, yet let me recite
some particulars. By Reason, first the general knowledge is attained. Then
Reason has proportioned things into diverse parts: First, in consideration of
their natures, and worthiness: secondly, in consideration of their numbers and
places: thirdly, in regard of their uses and employments. So has Reason left
nothing vnproportioned which she has set down, and concluded by Arts and
Sciences. By Gra^mer, ye course of true speaking: by Retoricke the ma^ne^ of
persuasion: by Logic, the true proportion of reasoning: by Music, true
consent of Harmony: by Arithmaticke, the proportion of numbering, adding,
diminishing, augmenting, and dividing. By Geometry, the manner of even and
infalible proportioning: all these come of Reason. The petty, nay rather the
great helps toward the effecting of these things. The inuenting, the making,
and fashioning, of the tools, instruments, and preparations that serve to
these uses. The making of pen, ink, paper, letters, sillables, words,
edge-tooles, notes of music, flat, etc. cards, wheels, loomes, milles, the
mecanicall Arts, of Weauers, Tuckers, Spinsters, Tailors, Smiths, carpe^ters,
sawyers, ioyners, with diverse other of ye like quality. All these and many
others, have been drawn, taken out, and proportio^ed by ye noble and famous
arts of arithmatike, and geometry: which are neither so highly esteemed nor
understood, as they deserve: for the more nearer reason (with a reverend care
of ye creator) searches into these causes, the more nearer does it bring the
soul of man to the principal Artifex and maker of them. Let us proceed a
little further: By the motion of the Sun, which surroundeth the world in 24
hours, they have proportioned the circumference of the world, to be 360.
degrees: they divide every degree, into 60. miles: with many other such
diuisio^s, which I omit. By these Arts, they have found that the sun in the
whole year, makes her furthest point, both toward the North, and South pole:
and thereupon they have divided that time into xii. months. To every of these
twelve months, they proportion an appointed number of days; to every day, 24
hours: to every hour 60. minutes. And so reducing these learnings to one point
or head, they proportion as well Latitude and Longitude of place, as motion and
passage of time: together with the influence and aspects of the planets and
stars; in such sort, as if this mystery were unknown in any man's
understanding, it were impossible to be found out. And because the sun passes
always from the East, to the West, and never fully reaches to ye point of the
North, or South, they have determined, and divided the world into 5. several
zones. The 2. remote parts of North, and South, they call the cold parts: ye
middle, they call the hot or burning zone: the other two, are the temperate
parts. To this they have likewise added a girdle, that goes overthwart the hot
and two temperat zones: dividing the same into 12. equal parts, ascribing a
several Lord, or Governor of these houses: limiting the sun 30. days travel,
to pass through every of these same: with many other admirable and necessary
lernings And out of these Arts, it is well known, they have truly set down
the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, the revolution of the Stars, stabilitie
of the North, and South poles, and the motion of the others: by which, all
navigations is maintained: the compass, card, and needle, proportioned: nay
the ship it self, and all other buildings, both of land and sea, devised,
framed, and fashioned: Al countries known and severed, and every man's
possession divided, one from an other: Astronomy, and Astrology, have taken
their foundation there. And how much the Physicians knowledges are increased
thereby, or what defects they would find by the want thereof, let themselves
judge. But to be short: These Arts are the only and true directors of the
whole course of men's lives, as well in government, as obedience: in
distribution, as well as in receiving: for there being diversity of honors,
places, dignities, and worthiness, so ought there to be a measure and
indifferency, in proportioning their contributions: Many thousands of admirable
blessings would follow Reason, if measure and proportion were truly kept. For
then should the King have the supreme place: The magistrates, their due honor.
The subjects true and equal justice: and every man his own right, without
controversy, check, or controlment. But Original reason is so weakened and
impaired, that these things are not to be looked for: men's natures are
preuaricated, and intemperate disires so bent to disorder; that poor Queen
Reason has little place, and her proportions little esteemed, and less used.
Reason of it self discerns, and concludes, that the heavens are imbowed
like a vault about the lower parts. And the lower parts, circumualated and
encompassed within the heavens conuexitie. The earth, as the flower or planckes
to go upon, and retain the massy bodies of men, and the mighty inuolued
numbers of Creatures, there on residing: And the heavens as the wide drawn,
and large extended Canopie, to cover all these, with many included essences and
beings: all serving to exercise Reason withal: the more fully to apprehend the
incomprehensible greatness, goodness, and bounty of the Creator, and the
worthiness of man's original Creation. But as is before discovered, this
perfection of Reason, and innocence is lost: corruption is crept in, and taken
up right and true Reasons room: and had so much impaired, blemished, darkened,
and obscured, Reasons faculties, that even the arts themselves, were almost
forgotten, and put to oblivion: and great labor has been used to revive,
recontinue, and uphold, or make known these former Arts and Sciences.

Concerning this point: Let us take a short view of the beginnings of
creatures. All things had a kind of perfection, yet subject to imperfectio^s.
As creatures, to a Creators command. Then the first declination and laps, after
the Creation, which has overthrown the sincere pureness of Reason The fear
of punishment, for that offense, has exercised man's reason with many
incomberments, and caused a kind of decisting, to continue the rememberance of
such parts of reason as then remained not utterly overthrown. Unto which, I
add two other decaies: the overthrow of ye world by the flood, and
accursednesse of the earth at that time. And the confusion of languages at the
overthrow of the Tower of Babel, being in manner Arts destruction. For after
this time in many parts of the world, Arts and Sciences were almost utterly
unknown: and there dequired a new time, first to learn and understand languages
before Arts could be taught: and few remained in life, that had the Science of
teaching: or at the least, for the dispercing of arts, for that there was then
no such common use of letters, as of later time, for that reason had not then
discovered the Art of printing: besides, the amazednes of that co^fusio^ of
tongues, caused the inahbitants of the earth to dispose themselves into
countries unfurnished, with other fruits, then such as ye earth of her own
accursed nature did produce ( none such as were in the original Creation) and
so men had enough to do to provide themselves food and apparel for many
hundredth years: so as besides the forgetting of the use of Arts, there scarce
remained so much, as the use of tillage and manuring of the earth, to succor
and defend men's lives: by which means Arts remained raked up, as fire under
ashes, not clean extinct, yet seeming not to be: In so much as it is reported
of those parts of the world, wherein as well the Greeks and other nations
live, that Philosophy was first discovered by Pithagoras: long after whose
time the Romans are holden to be ignorant thereof. Seneca says, Philosophy
was not found out above one thousand years before his time. Socrates is said
to be the first, that brought it from study to practice: which is not much
above two thousand years since: for which he is so holden in admiration, as he
is said to have brought it from heaven to earth: and thereby to have taught men
how to govern themselves, ^^^tarch in (...) and Osiris (...). 1.
and others: yet these learnings had their Originalls before, though they
attributed the^ to Pithagoras, as the beginner thereof: arguing their own
ignorance: for Pithagoras learned his skill from Gonchedie, and of the Jews:
Plato of Sechnuphis: Endoxus, of Conuphis: and al these of the disciples of
Trismegestus: who out of his own books manifests, that he learned it of
Moses. Learcus i^ the life of Thales. Thales in his epistle Phorecid^*
Thales is said to be the first that taught in Astronomy to the Greeks: It
appears as well by his own as other men's works, that it was taught him by the
Egyptians: and to the Egyptia^s, by the Caldeans. And if Belus as Plini
reports, were the finder out thereof, yet he has the same from Abraham, in
whose time he lived: wherein I observe, that many contentions have been about
the beginning thereof, to advance the honor of their own Countries. But
howsoever, it is most true, that the perfection of those Sciences and Arts were
lost, and in manner put to absolute obscurity and oblivion. For it is said
that Clearchus, who lived a thousand years after Moses, did visibly and with
his eyes, see the Jew of who^ Aristotle learned his Philosophy. And it is
reported, Phythagoras and Plato had their learning from Mercuries Pillars. So
that the knowledge of these Arts, Sciencies, and learnings, have been long
disco^tinued in the world, ^. lib. 2. (...) in life of (...). 2.
before they were received: and specially to these latter parts of the world:
for it is said, that for the observation of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
Anaxxagoras was put in prison, and Protagoras was banished Athens. Nay, it was
so obscured, that Thales is said to be the first that observed the North
star: and that Phythagoras, first discovered the morning and evening star
to be all one: and the describing of the Zodiac to go a skew. And that Solon,
first found out the Moons revolution to be within xxx. days: and that
Archimedes out of many observations, made the first description of the Spheres:
and that the observation of the Planets, was not discovered in many years
after. In so much that it is said, that the very account of the year was
uncertain and confused, in those parts where he reigned and was Emperor: which
is well known to be over the most part of Christendom. And it is absolutely
resolved, that within much less then two thousand years, none of these parts
of the world had any Quadrant dyal: or distinction of hours, times, or places;
upon any method of learning: all which may very sufficiently show, that the
understanding and Arts, were in manner forgotten and left in oblivion: and yet
notwithstanding always remaining in it self, though blemished and obscured.
And for the Arts of Arithmaticke and Geometry, they are fathered upon
Pythagoras, Endoxus, and Euclides: who wrote but in late time, in respect of
Moses or Tresmegistes: but yet the same learning will conclude, yt though the
arts were obscured, yet they remained from ancient times, long before: and
even from the first Creation. And as for Rome, with his great antiquity, they
had no knowledge in Physic, until the Co^sulship of Lucius Aemilius, and
Marcus Liuius. At which time, Archagatus the Grecian, was made free of the
City of Rome. Which shows that these barbarous parts of the world, had not
till that time recontinued or revived the worthy knowledge of honorable Arts.
About^ years b^^fore (...)
But endeavoring to reduce my purpose, to as short a conclusion as I may, I
will omit further to dilate, concerning the original worthiness of arts, and
sciences, and their necessary uses and emploiments; and have to the next point,
that offers it self to be handled: holding this opinion, that the reason,
depth, and necessary knowledge of these arts, are known to few in these
parts of our world. And that many have an appearance of knowledge, and yet fail
of the substance which has seduced and misled many men, and sundry matters, to
the great wrong of right and true reason. Therefore give me leave to
distinguish between things above nature, things natural, and things against
nature, which will give great light to the point of this argument: and desire
that me^ will not attribute to themselves, that knowledge of arts, whereof they
are ignorant: And that the ignorant will not condemn the Arts which they know
not: for it is truly said; Scientia non habet, inimicum nisi Ignorantium.

Things above Nature, and natural.
BEsides the former reasons, that it was long before this part of the world had
the understanding and use of Arts, which are the contriuers of civil
government and order, as reason has composed, and disposed them. Caesar, in
his Commentaries says, That in his time Germany was continually a Forest,
wherein a man might have gone fifty days journey, before he could see any end
of it: and that the people thereof were savage and beastly, offering their
children in sacrifice to their imagined Gods. Which caused that the Romans in
many years after, durst not adventure far over into that Countery: Whereupon
it is conceived, that all the ancient Towns and Cities, which stood upon the
River of Rheine and Danowe, toward France and Italy, were erected and built
for defense against the Germans. For even in the time of Tacitus, living in
the time of Nero, and sithe^s the Germans were a rude, ignorant, and
ungoverned people. As these parts of the world were unskillful of the Arts, so
such as traveled to understand them, and were able to teach them, lived so
far as France, Italy, Spain, Germany: And these North parts were scarcely
known to them, as appears by Ephorus, the most diligent Historiographer of
those Ages. For he speaking of Spain, or Iberia, writes thereof, but as if it
were one Town: which argues he had slender knowledge thereof. It is written,
that Orpheus drew the Greeks out of their Forests and Fiens, ^eucidides ^.
1. ^^pheus in (...).
about the time Troy was besieged. This worthy and famous service did Orpheus
perform, by the arts, sciences, and skill he learned amongst the Egyptians:
whereby first he laid aside his own savageness, and after undertook to
direct and govern others: which does much advance the estimation of these
noble Arts. It would require a long discourse, to set down the diverse
opinions of the dispearcing of Arts, Sciences, and governments.

Some affirm, Abraham first taught Letters or Characters. Others, father it
upon Moses, or at least, that he first taught the Gra^mer. If it were
discovered, to what perfection these things grew, or how young or green they
were, in the time of Zoroastres, Scyonians, Ogyges, Ninus, Amoses,
Callisthenes, Ptolomie, the Hebrews, the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Assirians,
Medes, Persians, and Phenicians; It would not much serve to excuse the
Countries, in those arts and sciences. For they not knowing our parts of ye
world, could hardly inform them in their learnings, by reason of their
unknown and remote parts.

Besides, it seems they were but in the beginning of the discovery of these
Arts: they vnraked the ashes, and opened the fire, and by the light which they
took, many have since lighted their candles. For it seems, their means of
spreading abroad their learnings, was very hard, in that they were enforced to
write their minds by Characters: made upon leaves, barks, ryndes of Trees, and
Stones: In so much, as it is written; That in Babylon certain observations of
stars, were written in Tiles or Bricks. By these it seems, that Reason
deprived of her ornaments, has striued to set up, and erect Schools and
Universities, for the reviving, and recontinuing of these lost, or obscured
sciences, and worthy knowledges: for the well ordering of men, families,
kingdoms, countries, and nations, which in time by travel, has been brought
amongst us, from the Center or first place, where they were taught, being by
conjecture of the learned, in Mesopotamia, the Mount Taure, or in the
Wilderness of Semar, where the Arc first rested, and Noah first landed, and
inhabited.

It is said by Viues, that Politian, did spend his whole life, part in
scanning whether he should pronounce Vergilius, or Virgilius: Carthaginences,
or Carthaginiences. Primus, or Preimus. And despising all worthy sciences, and
orderly course of government or rudime^ts, he spent the rest of his time, in
making filthy Epigrams. I fear there is much time bestowed in this age, in as
vain and idle courses, which might be bestowed to the learning of better arts
and sciences, more commendable for themselves, and more profitable for the
common wealth. For if it be well observed, what honorable exployts and famous
Acts have been brought to pass in the order of wars, in the government of
countries, and civil courses of life, Cicero in his first book of Invention,
and in his first book of Oratory
appeasing of controversies by these estimable Sciences and Arts, which the
most wise have ever had in admiration, as Tully concludes. That man says he,
that first gathered together dispersed men, was surely a great personage. So
was he (says Pythagoras) which first gave names to things, and which
compounded within a certain number of letters, the sounds of men's voices,
which seemed to be infinite; and which marked the courses and proceedings of the
wandering stars: and which first found out corn, cloth, buildings, defenses
against wild beasts, and the rest of the things that make our lives the more
civil. These things may be attributed to the nature of man's reason, and reason
of man's nature. things a^oue the ^a^ure o^ ^eason o^ ^an.
But to make and Create of nothing, so worthy a Creature as man is above
nature: which Cicero considered, when he said: There was a certain might or
power, which had a care of mankind, and which would not have begotten him, to
fall into the mischief of endless death, after he has outworne the great and
innumerable adversities and toils of the world: For, says he, We be not
created by hazard. Which shows directly, that Cicero did reach into an
understanding; that there was a greater blessing and perfection in the
creation, then remained in the nature of man: for he co^ceiueth, that neither
misery in this world, nor the mischief of an endless death, were the ends unto
which such worthy Creatures were first made. His Reason could extend to
understand a Creating Nature above nature. For he that makes, cannot be the
same thing he makes: nor of the same quality: Things na^urall.
but of a far more worthy. And so will I leave to speak of this
supernatural cause, as the maker of the rest: and step lower to the next
point, of things natural.

To be brief in this point, because the natures of things are in some sort
before discovered; I will only touch some few points.

This great worke-master and Creator of things and natures, has appointed
their kinds, natures, conditions, and effects: their increases, generations,
and propagations; for having set the Heavens in motion, they continually move
without ceasing: but in this, there is noe increase, nor generation.

There is still but one Sun, and one Moon: notwithstanding all the
conjunctions since the worlds beginning.

There are no more Stars then were made at one instant.

And so these bodies were ordained to continue their first numbers, places, and
motions, wto^^ increase: according to their true natures. And these motions
proceed of nature it self. The earth brings forth the vegitatiue things, but
not by generation. The sensitive things increase by generation, all co^mencing
from a beginning of things of their own natures: which shows the worthiness
of this Creation, and the admirable work that so infinite numbers of things
should be made of nothing: and so admirably composed, and put in order by a
worke-master, that had neither matter, stuff, instrument, model, nor pattern
for the doing thereof.

Things against nature.
^^ings a^^inst nature
I Mind not to speak of the miracles that have been done in the times of the
Patriarks and Prophets. The incarnation of Christ, his fasting, and other the
works of God, in the old and new Testament, which are above our nature. But to
touch these things that Reason may descend into; It were against the nature of
the Sun, to leave his motion, or loose his light: or of the Moon, to bring
forth sons or daughters: The earth cannot be metamorphosed, or turned into an
incorporiall substance, neither is it her nature to produce or bring forth
beasts or men: for creation has appointed every kinds a several manner of
increase. The Fowls of the Air do not bring forth swine, nor the Tiger
engender Doves, nor men beget Bears or Lion: men cannot be Gods. It is
impossible for the soul of man to cease or give off his being, and to be of
the same nature. The Hynd cannot bring forth eggs, nor the Ostridge be the Dam
of the Roe Bucke. Every thing has his appointed nature, which it can neither
change nor leave. And because we have spoken before, of number, place, and
time, let us in this place consider what they are, or at least what they are
not. The better to discover their employments, they are not as is before
recited, any matters, substances, natures, nor essences, in respect of
themselves: neither have they power to procreate or bring forth any thing. They
are only the vessels, engines, mouldes, frames or organs, wherein things are
cast, fashioned, placed, sorted, and ordered.

Out of these, in respect of nature, can proceed nothing: no not so much as
themselves, issue not, nor come not of themselves: but are respected, according
to the motions, course, order, or number of creatures, that pass in, by and
through them. If a man shall offer to bring up the Fox whelpe, among the
sheep, even from the first time of his littering: It is neither the placing him
among these creatures, nor the use of time, will qualify his greedy nature of
devouring his fellows. The like may be said of all other Creatures, and
their kinds and natures.

It is against nature, for Creatures of one kind, to destroy one an other:
which is a great argument of preuarication of the nature and reason of man: in
that they cease not continually and against nature, to work one an others
confusion. Let us proceed a little further: and set these three, number, place,
and time, to work simply of themselves: they neither engender, nor bring forth
any things: albeit, in them, and by them, that is, in their moulds, infinite
numbers are generated and brought forth. Let us sprinckle a few holy
considera^ions in these causes, to make them the more sauery; least striving to
set our corrupt reason over high, we cast it to the dust. As in the first
Creation, it was against nature, that there should be any imperfection, or
foul matter, or defect, created in man's nature: So now, nature being
corrupted, and altogether polluted by disobedience, It is both against, and
above this corrupt nature, that any perfection should remain in man: Albeit,
there are that maintain a spark or remnant of perfection, of the first
original nature, to remain: whereby it may again work his former
perfection. This is against corrupt nature: as much as to sunder and take apart
wine from water, after it is once mingled: for no polluted thing entered into
the substance, can afterward be cleansed from this polutio^: as ye dye will
never be taken clean out of the white cloth. It is to be observed, that
Christ in ministering the Sacrament of his blessed body and blood; First he
brake the bread, and they eat it: and then he gave the cup, and all was
done, whilst he was really and personally amongst them.

It is unnaturally holden, that they did really and naturally eat his very
flesh, and drink his very blood: This is against nature.

First, it is against the nature of a Sacrament, to be the thing which it
represents: or for the thing signified, to be the signifier, or betokener of
that which is signified. Then it is against nature, that Christ as he was very
man, being present and personally among them, performing this office himself,
should at one instant be, and not be. For, as he was man, so was he local. Now
to deliver himself, and to be eaten, and yet remain in the same substance, of
and by himself, at the same instant, is against nature. Besides, that he
should so exhaust or draw his most precious blood, that when the bread (which
they inte^d to be his real and ma^ly body) was eaten, there should be therein
no part of his blood: and more, that himself should be at one instant
absolute man, and at the same instant, see himself visibly eaten with the
teeth of men, in distinct and several places. This is against the nature of
the manhood, and so against both. For Sacraments are not miracles, nor natures
to be changed. Besides, in miracles, things did not at one, and the same
instant, contain two several natures: nor one nature in two several places:
as in the miracle at the marriage: as long as the water remained water, it was
not wine: and after it became wine, it was no longer water: neither was it wine
and water, all at one instant, though turned in less then a moment: neither
was it water in two several places, nor wine in two places, otherwise then by
dividing it into several cupps or vessels. I make bold to give a touch of
this mystery, which I hold to be of deeper consideretion then man's reason can
reach into: which being a matter of spirit, cannot be apprehended but by the
eye of the same spirit, having regard to the second life before spoken of.
Herein I observe, if men be so bold to rack and strain these great matters,
what is it that they will leave vntempted in the less and meaner causes? In
the cases of Alchemy there is some reason (though the opinion thereof has
overthrown many men) for that they propone some matter to work, ^^hemy.
and some course of natures for incorporating and increasing. But such as will
graffe on a dead stock, long separated from the earth, a quick graffe or
impe, and expect that the same shall prove a tree, is deceived, for it is
against nature. Likewise, If any man will sow eggs in the ground, or set
corn under a hen, he will hardly find either Chickens, or harvest. In such
sort are the natures of things tied to their particular sorts, and means of
increase, that necessity will enforce nature to use her own means, and
manner of increase or generation.

An example of an unnatural product.
Let us proceed to an example. There is an opinion, that the earth would in
time, bring forth all the metals that are in her bowels, fully refined and
pure, without Phesies or dross: But either the curse has so weakened her
natural heat, or else she is not permitted her time of bringing forth her
brood, which has caused Arts to try conclusions. If this be admitted, what
will follow of the next question? In this case, though time be not agent, nor
the passive part thereof, yet you must give this great bellied Lump, time to
work to perfection, and bring forth her great litter, brood, or spawne. But it
will be answered, that Reason and Art, has found a means, how to help Nature
in this cause, and to supply the defect of heat by fire, for separating of the
purer metal from the dross. Admit this, yet it must be yielded, that these
Mines were substa^tially in the bowels of the earth: who in time as is
affirmed, would have brought the^ forth: so as Reason and Art, had to work upon.
And in this case, you must likewise give Art and Reason, time to work their
effect, and that by degrees and means: so that Reason nor Art cannot work,
but upon substances, and by means, which in the ensuing example is not
allowed. There is great difference between the Theoricke and Practicke part of
any thing: or between matter of bare imagination and conceit, and matters of
substance and truth: between words and actions: for a man by contemplation may
behold many thousand places in a moment, and set down a thousand proportions in
his mind in short time: conceive a journey of ten thousand miles by Sea, with
all the bowings and turnings: But come to action, and you shall find another
work and labor to perform it. A man may by conceit and in figures, set down
ten thousand millio^s, to be divided between a hundredth thousand men: but he
that shall come to action, must have money in his purse; words will buy no meat
in the market: neither will fantasy build Churches, although it set down the
proportion and model. Contemplation, conceit, and art, may plot and set down,
how or what to do: but substance, matter and art, must perform the action.
These words, A thousand pounds written, will not pay one penny: although Art
has found a way by letters to signify or demonstrate such or any other sum:
Art has found out by bills, bonds and specialties, to give assurance for
money: but when it comes to payment, there must be materiallie money, or
valuable matter, to make satisfaction. It belongs to Art only, to
proportion, but essential money must make satisfaction. By these it appears,
that God has provided substantial matters to pass from man to man, or to be
used by man. And Reason has found out Arts, to proportion and rate the same.
Besides this: by the observations before remembered, there are sufficient things
created to serve the turn of men, in such liberal and plentiful sort, as they
shall not need any new invention, to create or raise benefit by fantasy,
imagination, or any new sought devise, which will deceive like dreams: they are
like witchcrafts and enchantments, seeming good, and yet in truth abominable.
Let us in this point, consider one maine and principal usage, which nature nor
Art, can make to cohere with Reason. ^his is the ^ine point ^^ainst Name.

^ow money should pro^^ce money.


And that is, that money should produce and increase money: I would in this
case willingly know, the father and mother of this new increase. First, let us
go to the nature of the metal, be it either silver, or gold, and draw from
thence, what reasons we may.

After that the metal is taken out of the earths belly, it can be no longer
her child, neither can she nourish or make it grow. And being once ripened,
purified, and brought to perfection by Art, that is, by fire: It can then never
come again, to be nourished by the earth: for that the mother, which is the
Sulphere, is drawn from it: And if you would put it again into the earth, you
cannot give it such a mixture of Elements, as to make it grow.

If the Alchimist can do any thing with it, let him take the benefit for his
labor: But I would not have ignorant men troubled therewith. It is an Art
unfit for them, and me to deal with all.

But to come nearer to the point: there is a devise that Time should cause
money to yield increase: wherein they are driven to use the help and labor of
man.

This will not serve the turn, Usury.
that also it is unnatural: for albeit, the labor of man may obtain benefit:
yet* Revera, there is no increase of the quality, quantity, or nature of the
gold or silver: But the use that a man has thereof, must make something
deerer, and of more value, then nature or Art has made it. For though Art
has refined it, yet cannot Art increase it: but here is the fallacy, a man is
driven thereby to purchase his own labor, a very unnatural thing.

For by Natu^^ and Reason, every man's travel sho^^ be employed, for the
serving of his own necessary turn.

This is one of the cases I spoke of before: that men not contented with the
things of Gods creation, according to their own values, will set God to
learn, as if he knew not what he had done: and willl add further provisions
and means then ever was ordained of God. Out of these reasons, it may be
concluded, that the raising of increase upon bare money, is unnatural: and the
means used to raise benefit thereby, is an other course then was originally
appointed by God, and so directly against nature. The consideration whereof,
ought not to be slightly regarded, because God has left nothing unprovided
that is requisite for the use of man.

But there are, that spare not to lay a very reproachful ignomie on this
kingdom, ^ Law ^nged
of the use of employing, and disposing of money, to benefit and great increase,
above the principal, by the way of usury. And that the laws of this
kingdom, either alone, or at the least tolarate such taking of usury. See how
reason and truth is wronged. In whose defense I am occasioned a little to
digress, and borrow leave for a few words, touching that point. Caesar
forbad* that an Usurer should be accounted a good or honest man. This
understanding in all likelihood continued a thousand years after that. For
Glanuile, chief Justice of England, one of the ancienst Writers we have, in
the time of king Henry the second, censured the goods of an Usurer, at the time
of his death, to be confistcate to the King: the name has been so odious,
that they were not admitted civil society or Christian burial.

I mean not to insist much upon this point, and therefore I refer the Reader
for his satisfaction, Statut. de Iu^da^smo. 37. H. 8.9. 13. Eliza. 8. 35.
Eliza. 7.
to peruse the margined Statutes: wherein he shall find the trade, to be
holden accursed and damnable. The Trader is odious, and the use thereof utterly
forbidden, by all the laws that ever were made in this Kingdom, concerning
that matter. And whosoever will enter into true understanding of the reason,
whether it does benefit or annoy, shall be driven to confess, a great
devasting of the subjects estate thereby: which in this place I mean not to
handle. Yet seeing it is so repugnant unto nature and reason, let me crave
pardon to go a little further in this matter: and under reformation, to
express such reasons for confutation of an error, which I hold to be
maintained in this point, and furthered, and succored under the shadow of a
clause in the law: In which behalf, because demonstrations are very fit
courses to discover the reasons, as well of actual, as intellectual things; I
have composed 2. Tables: The first, discovering the fallasie: and the second
the truth: Which course I take, for that I find falsehood will ever vanish,
when truth comes in place. The point is this. It is holden that the Lender
upon Usury, may take at one months end his principal, and a twelfth part for
the use, being the highest rate he might have taken, ^he like for ^.6. or 9.
Months, ^pportio^ing the use, (...) if those (...) per^ect times to ^iuide by.
if he had forborne his princiall and use money a whole year: and so for more
or less time; so he take not his use before the principal: and his contract
be not to continue after the taking of his use. As the point is hard to be
discovered, so can I hardly admit my self to meddle therewith: whereby to open
the way into this seeming Labyrinth, which notwtsta^ding I hold to be plain.
Before I come to the Table, let me set down the words that they build upon.
^7. He^. 8 7.
No man shall take above 10. for the forbearance of 100. for one whole year,
and so after the rate and not above: of, or for a more or less sum, or for
longer or shorter time: And no more greater gain or sum thereupon to be
had. Although I mean not to handle this cause by the course of a Law argument,
yet let me crave leave, to see how Reason and Art will conclude in one truth.
The law being to take construction most strongly and straightly for repressing
or Usury.

The law it self is a prohibiting law, in no jot giving liberty, but
repressing. So are the words Negative, and forbidding. And upon that reason,
none of these words can be stained to make any tolleration. These words in the
close of the sentence: And no more greater gain, or sum thereupon to be had;
Do sufficiently explain, that by no means 100. li. by any course to be put
out, may yield above the gain of 10. li. for a whole year: But 100. li. put
out for 3.6.9. months, and the money and use taken at that time, being within
the year, may and does yield a greater gain then the rate of 10. li. for a
whole year.

The Reason is, the Lender may again dispose the same principal and use, for
more gain within the same year: and so not saved by the words nor meaning of
the Law.

Let us see how Reason can bring the former words to this conclusion. And so
after that rate and not above: of, or for a more or less sum: or for shorter
or longer time. These words being in body of the clause, have refere^ce to a
rate: which rate is before expressed; that the forbearing of 100. shall not
raise above 10. pounds, for one whole year.

In this behalf, the borrower is not respected, but the Lender: for the words
are; No man shall take above 10 pounds etc. Whereby appears, that as the Law
is made only against the t^ker, so is there no liberty for him to take any
thing, that may exceed ye rate of 10. for a whole year. Otherwise, this
mischief wou^d ensue: the Lender would depart with his money, for one, two, or
three months, to one man, and then receive his money and use, and deliver the
same to an other debtor: and so monthly, or quarterly, or at his pleasure,
raise his benifite upon the use of his use money within the year, contrary to
the meaning of the Law: by often receiving and placing it within one year:
which under correction, can by no means be construed to be saved by the words
of the Law.

A word or two, concerning the rate which I take to be double. A rate of money,
and a rate of time. These two, are specially to be considered: for seeing
Nature cannot work this matter, you must permit Time to do what office it is
enjoined to perform. To this purpose the^, whether there be one, or more
takers, at one or more times, within the year, is not material: but ye respect
is, seeing they have nothing to raise this rate of money, but their industry,
employment, and labor, with a limitation of a rated time for the use thereof:
that they may have the fullness of all these without abatements. For the eye of
Reason in this behalf, does not regard how often the money be letten within the
year, nor to how many or few persons: but that the forbearing of 100. li. for
a whole year, shall yield the Lender no more or greater gain 10. li. And in
this behalf, is specially to be observed, the several offices of the Lender
and Borrower. The Lender departs with his money upon time, to raise his
benefit: the Borrower, bestows his labor by merchandising the money, with
diligence, in time to raise the increase upon the use of the money: If the
Lender will take away any part of the time, limited in the statute, he does
not then allow the Borrower his full rate of time: and therefore of a
consequent, he ought to abate it out of the rate of his use money: for in this
cause, those two, that is, the rate of time, for which the use of time is
forborne, and the rate of money taken for use, must ever iumpe, to make the
reckoning even. And common and ordinary reason yields, that no man will give
so much for any thing to be paid at the end of one month, as he would, if
his payment were forborne a whole year. Such is the plain case, as it is now
commonly understood: that the Lender, for one Month will take as much at the
Months end, as if he had forborne his use a whole year. But I take it, this
error has grown out of a fallasie or mistaking in Art, by some Arithmatitian,
Art ab^. ^
that has calculated this proportion by a wrong rule: not fully fitting; this
purpose. for I conceive, it has proceeded only by the rule of division: when
it should have been wrought, partly by division, and partly by addition: as
the true consideration of the Tables will manifestly express.

Wherefore, in a word or two, let me remember again the difference between
contemplation and action. Any that works barely by conceit, may practice by
conceit: but he that will perform any act indeed, must have matter and
stuff: figures and ciphers, make no sums of money. Therefore if the Lender
will have consideration, he must dispose of his money and time: that he, who
will have money and time, may the better give consideration. In this cause
therefore, the matter of Art, and the point from whence I conceive ye error to
arise, is to be looked into. It seems the Arithmatitia^s has wrought only by
division. In the first part of division, there are two requisite things, a
Diuidende, and Deuisor, which in this case must be essenciall and substa^ciall,
and not by conceit and imagination. Let us see, money must needs be the
Dividend, and time the Deuisor. Put the case a man le^deth a 100* li. for one
month, what may the Lender take? The Arithmatition says, a whole year will
yield 10. li. then he divides time, by time: One year into 12. parts: so that
here time is both the Dividend and Deuisor: then he divides money by time: that
is 10. li. by 12 months, and he finds the 12. part of 10. li. to be 16. s. 8.
d. which he allotteth to one month. The rule is true, but not to be used in
this case: for Reason the founder of Art, will show, that he has no warrant to
measure by this rule: in that he has no essential Deuisor: for if you mark
it, he wants 11. months of his year, ^^ason and (...) with (...).
at the time of his division. And so he works a substantial Dividend, of 10.
li. by an imagined Deuisor, of 12. months, when there is but one occurred: but
his course should be, as in the case of contribution: the shorter time of
forbearance of the use, should not have so large allowance as the longer.

And on this point, does Reason and Art conclude, which are more plainly
expressed in these ensuing Tables: the false being reproved by the excess, and
the true, raised from less to more, as the rate of time, and use of the money
gives occasion.

I have drawn these Tables, as patterns or Modells to show and discover, the
truth from the false, and to manifest how truth and Art still draw to one
Period. I the more insist upon this for my sole example, because it is a
matter so directly against nature: and sophistically brought into the danger
and overthrow of men's estate: for all the world must confess, that in this
case, as having regard to matter of substance, nothing is enforced to produce
some thing. And though I meant not to fill this place with law arguments, yet
let me borrow a word for further explanation of my meaning. Let us see what the
lender must do, to raise ten of his hundredth, he must contribute toward the
raising thereof, a proportion of money, and a proportion of time. Of money a
hundredth to raise ten: ^^ntributi^^
of time, one whole year. In this case as I said before, there is no respect
of the borrower: well, then the lender is tied to both these contributions: so
still the rate of his gain must not exceed ten for the rate of a whole year
of time. In this case the lender is tied to his certainty. Then it follows,
he can have no election, Election.
differing from that rate of time which is the maine point. Let us see what the
borrower is to receive and perform. In which is to be observed, such a
proportion of money and time as may perform a ratable allowance: that the use
money may not exceed ten for a hundredth for a whole year: which performed, he
is to render back the money borrowed: and as for use, the law allows non. Let
us examine this by the rule of reason* In all natural causes, time must be
abidde^, for ye working and perfecting of al increase and growing: the beasts
by nature knows the time of bringing forth their young: the birds keep their
eggs under their feathers, til an appointed time to produce chicke^s; the trees
and herbs according to their sorts, require, time for ye ripening of their
fruits. The Sun in the sphere of heaven, laboreth a whole year to bring
himself to his revolution. If all these, with many thousands of other things,
stay their time by their natural course, why should not the lender premit the
full occurrency of time, for the raising of his benefit upon a barren,
fruitless, and unnatural subject. Though many things offer themselves, (...)
sold (...) want (...) value (...) be.
yet I strive to be brief. Observe therefore these resemblances. In all manner
of eateable flesh, The tender lamb will not yield so much as the well grown
sheep: the young veale, not so much as the full grown ox. The young chick,
late out of the shel, not so much as the hen or capon: and so of many other
things that time causes to increase, both in growth and price. Now if the
owner will sell any of these in their tenderness, he must be contented to
abate of that he would require, if the same things were grown to more
greatness. If this be so, then in reason there is more cause the lender should
forbear his whole time before he receive his consideration, howsoever he
does his principal.

Let us touch a little the exceeding reason and use the Law has, in some
particular causes of time. Estates for years, must have a certain beginning
and ending. Inheritances have commencements upon time: and limited to the
end of time. So the first estates, determine in time: and the second being
real estates, only with time: and not before the ending of time. Approbations
and elections are concluded in time: things voideable, rely only upon time.
All conditions are tied unto time. In the cases of Cui in vita dum fuit infra
etatem, dum non fuit compos mentis; special respect is of the time. All cases
of entries upon dissisors, to take away entries, are tied unto time. The cases
that require continual claim, are bound unto time, with many others. But
among the rest, let me conclude with one or two, to discover what time, joined
with some other matter, does both enable and disable: I mean not to vouch any
case. It is not unknown that one attainted by act of Parliament, part of his
lands sold: time and the act of Parliament made the sale good. But this
attainder being taken off by another act of Parliament, and the former act
made void; Time and the act of Parliament, did restore both the blood and
lands of the attainted: and made their estates void, which formerly were not.
The law has clean taken away the time that was in the Feoffe; and put the
same wholly into ceste q. use: and so wrought upon instants, that there is now
no instant at all in the Feoff, which before had the whole estate. Such a
servant is time; unto the law, and so assured is the law unto time; That what
contract soever it makes therewith, shall be assuredly performed. In the case
of inrolments, there is special provision of time: wherein I make this short
observation; that time does work, and vnworke, one and the same thing in
nature according as time is employed. The Kings tenant acknowledges a bargain
and sale of land, held in capi^e to an other and his heirs: before the deed
be enrolled, the bargainer dies, his son within age. In this case, the son
of this bargainor is ward. But the barganie also dies within the six months,
etc. his son within age, and within the 6. months the bargain and sale is
enrolled. In this case, the son of the bargainer shall be out of ward, and the
son of the barganie shall be in ward, by relation to time. I put these cases,
only to make known how flexible time does turn and wind according to the
employment it serves, and how stout and stiff it is in some other cases, as
the rules of law does govern and direct it: and though this resemble not the
case in all points, yet it shows, that in this behalf, time is not to be
disposed at ye election or choice of any, but according to the true
constructio^, scope and meaning of the law: which in this case is to be
co^strued most strongly against the lender.

A word or two concerning this division of the money and time. As I said before,
in actual things there must be a substantial, natural, and present Dividend
and Divisor, Numerator, and Denominator, as in these examples are apparent. A
piece of timber is to be made into boords: In this case the timber is the
Dividend, and the Saw is the Deuisor. And of necessity it follows, that
there must be actually and essencially, timber, and a Saw, or else there can be
no boords.

There is a garment to be made, In that case, the cloth is the Dividend, and
the sheeres the Deuisor. But for the performing of the work, there must
essencially be both cloth and sheers. There is a great piece of meat to be
divided between many men; the meat is the Dividend, the knife is the
instrument dividing. There is a necessity, both these should be present,
though I know there be other Diuisors in these cases: yet I make these
resemblances, to make plain my demonstration of the necessity of an
essenciall Dividend and Divisor, at the time of the division. To resemble this;
The Lender at the end of one, 3.6. or 9. months, has not an essensial Divisor
of twelve months, to warrant his division: And so dividing substantial money
by imaginary time, does err in the ground of his Art: and so has
proportioned a rate that is not warranted, either by Nature, Reason, Law, nor
Art.

Reason shows, this life is but an apprentiship.
THere are many other vsages whereof there can be no account given, that they
should proceed either of nature or uncorrupted reason. God is Truth, and he
has made all things in, and by Truth: and appointed them to continue in truth,
according to their Creation: All the Creatures saving man, continue this
original perfection. Reason does discern and know, though it cannot correct
the euasions and errors in the course of men's lives, different from truth:
which men's consciences not void of reason cannot deny. Caine though he would
not deny the killing of his brother Abel, yet he had learned to shift it and
put it off, by asking whether he were keeper of his brother: his reason was
corrupt, and his conscience did accuse him. Such as were sent with Joshua and
Caleb, against their own knowledges, did find fault with the country which
they sought; dissuading their companions to enterprise the obtaining thereof.

The whole number of the Israelites felt the punishment of their
credulousnesse, in following these false persuasions. Against false witnesses
and corrupt judgment, the story of Susanna has left sufficient testimony.
Against hypocrisy, the text of Ananias and Saphira. Against Perjury and
Subornation, The story of Iesabell, Achab and Naboth. Against treason, the
story of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. Against rewards and bribes, the story of
Gehasie. Against fained excuses, the denial of Peter. Against presumption, the
story of the Tempter. Against despair, the example of Judas* Against
witchcraft, the story of Saul; concerning the vision of Samuel. Against
incest, the example of one of the Patriarchs. Against rigor, and violence, the
story of Nimrod. Against deceit, the story of the unjust steward. Against
mercilesnesse, the text of the wounded man, and the Samariain. Against
covetousness, the state of Dives and Lazarus. Against Inchantme^ts, Simon
Magus. Against undutifulness to parents, the curse of Cain, for discovering
his fathers nakedness. Against mistrust, or fearfulness, the story of Lots
wife. Against disobedience to God, the four first commandments. Against
usury, and unnatural raising of money and increase, by the way of lone, more
then a hundredth express places of commandment forbidding it in the holy
Bible: accu^sing the users thereof: and blessing those that forbear and eschew
it. And as for Whore-mongers, and Adulterers, the text is plain; God will
judge them. The oppressors of the poor and uncharitable, are not left out of
the number of those that shall receive punishment. Moses, the prophets, and ye
Decalogue have left sufficient testimony what is like to become of these kind
of people. And as for the unbelievers, if they escape unpunished, let the text
it self discover. The hypocrites, I am sure shall have their reward among the
unjust. Why should I particular any more? we are all contained under sin; And
iniquity has gotten the upper hand. Why should we by inue^tion, raise a new
kind of supply, more tha^ God or nature has ordained, thereby to reprove his
divine providence or imperfection. Now then, to draw to an end of this work,
let us compare the beginning with the end.

Reason I said, is an essenciall part of the soul: The soul is immortal.
Therefore Reason will have continuance after this sensitive life shall finish;
and is one of the principal parts that will discover, take knowledge, and
participate either of beatitude or misery: of hell, or heaven: of salvation, or
perdition. Is it not high time then, that Reason, which is in every man's soul,
and that every soul being endued with Reason: seeing such huge corruptions in
the world, as are in manner unspeakable, should now begin to look about to
prevent these mischiefs, and imminent miseries, that daily and hourly are
like to work his destruction.

Is it not time she should erect a school, get Schoolmasters, and Hushers,
to teach the danger these creatures partakers of reason are run into; and
under which they are like to perish? Has she not good cause to discover the
difference between the sensitive life; and the immortal reasonable soul? the
shortness of these pleasures, and the everlasting joys of heaven? The
differences of the Creatures, having reason, and those wanting? And the uses of
them all: which no creature void of reason can look into. Is it not time she
should go about to subdue and keep under, all the sensitiues powers, passions,
affections, perturbations, inventions, fantasies, and counterfeite seeming
pleasures of these her subjects, to make them know themselves? lest by their
stubbornness, she be pulled out of her better kingdom, whereof she is heir
apparent: appointed to reign with her elder brother, even the Son of God,
Christ Jesus himself: the only possessor and owner, of true, perfect, and
vncorrupt Reason.

What a world is this, to make more account of the journey and travel, then of
the mansion and dwelling house? Well, give Queen Reason leave to conclude,
with the solution of this one question.

A young man is at his choice, whether he will be bound to serve certain
years, and then to be free: or else to be f^ee for certain years, and ever
after to be a bondsman, and in thraldom and misery. I know this question will
readily be answered: It is better to smart once, then ache ever: and as long as
there is hope of amendment, so long the pains are not very bitter: But when
hope is past, then the heart is broken.

Such is the state of man: And such does divine Reason discover, to be the
state of every man, in respect of his double life: man has but a kind of
servitude or apprentiship in this temporal, or sensitive life; tied to
covenants, services, precepts, conditions, and commandments. Which if he be
careful to observe and keep, he shall do more then marry his masters
daughter: according to the phrase, and best preferment of merchants. For he
shall be then joint inheritor with his Masters son: and have the fullness of
freedom, felicity and happiness in a haven, and harbor where no custom is
to be paid: no imposition, no giving nor taking of money upon credit: no bad
n^r desperate debts: no assurance for money, nor fraught of Ships: no casting
into prison, chains, and yrons, disquietnesse, nor coffeehouse.

But on the contrary side, if this present life be spent, in vain, dishonest,
lewd, and ungodly execises; practices, employments, without respect of
performance of covenants, commandments, and bonds: Then surely, as the
immortal life is much more precious, then the mortal, or more sensitive: so
are the punishments more grievous then the other: And so much ye more grievous,
because Reason understands there is a felicity, otherwise the torments of
hell were nothing.

And for these causes, does Queen Reason persuade and entreat every reasonable
soul, to enter into the closet of his own conscience and heart, to school,
inform, and instruct himself, concerning his own good, and to be so
charitable as to inform others thereof: which she holds to be an office of
charitable duty. And so to conclude, if every man will be his own
Schoole-maister and instructor, which she desires, her Academie will be
wonderful large: But principally, she advises the learning and instruction
of her Creator, to be taught, followed, and put in practice: for thereby the
number of Gods Saints will be increased, his glory adaunced, and his
Triumphant kingdom replenished, with the company of holy and reasonable
souls, after the sensitive life ended, which God grant, for his mercy.

Reasons moan.
WHen I peruse heavens ancient written story,
part left in books, and part in contemplation*
I find Creation tended to Gods glory:
but when I look upon the foul evasion,
Lo then I cry, I howl* I weep, I moan,
and seek for truth, but truth alas is gone.
Whilom of old before the earth was founded,
or hearhs, or trees, or plants, or beasts, had being,
Or that the mighty Canopie of heaven surrounded
these lower Creatures, ere that the eye had seeing
Then reason was within the mind of love,
embracing only, amity and love.
The blessed Angels forms and admirable natures,
their happy states, their lives, and high perfectio^s:
Immortal essence, and unmeasured statures,
the more make known their falls and low directio^s.
These things when Reason does peruse,
She finds her errors, which she would excuse.
But out alas, she sees strife is all in vain,
It boots not to contend, or stand in this defense:
death, sorrow, grief, hell and torments, are her gain,
And endless burning fire, becomes our recompense.
Oh heavy moan! Oh endless sorrows anguish,
Never to cease, but ever still to languish.
When I peruse the state of prime, Created man,
His wealth, his dignity, and reason:
His power, his pleasure, his greatness when I scan*
I do admire, and wonder, that in so short a season,
These noble parts, should have so short conclusion:
and man himself, be brought to such confusion.
In seeking countries far beyond the seas, I find,
Even where fair Edens pleasant garden stood:
And all the Coasts unto the same confinde,
Gall to cruel wars, men's hands embru'd in blood,
In cutting throats, and murders, men delight,
So from these places, Reason's banished quite.
O Jerusalem, that thou should now turn Turk,
And Sions hill, where holy Rites of yore were used,
Oh, that within that Holy place should lurk
Such sacrilege: whereby Jove's name's abusde.
What famous Greece, farewell: thou can not bost
thy great renown: thy wit, thy learning's lost.
The further search I make, the worse effect I find,
All Asia swarms with huge impiety:
All Affrick's bent unto a bloody mind:
All Treachers against Jove, and his great deity.
Let us return to famous Brittons King,
whose worthy praise; let all the world go sing.
Great Tetragramaton out of thy bountious love,
Let all the world and Nations truly know,
That he plants peace, and quarrel does remove:
Let him be great'st on all the earth below.
Long may he live, and all the world admire,
that peace is wrought, as they themselves desire.
What Union he has brought to late perfection,
Twixt Nations that has so long contended:
Their wars, and enuies by him receive correction,
And in his royal Person all their iars are ended.
And so in brief conclude, ought all that live,
give thanks to him for joy, that Peace does give.
By power and will of this our mighty King,
Reason does show it, that God wrought a wonder:
Countries distract he does to Union bring,
And ioynes together States* which others sunder.
God grant him life till Shiloes coming be,
In heavens high seat, he may enthronized be.
FINIS.

