A SERMON MADE IN THE Cathedral church of saint Paul at London, the XXVII.
day of June, Anno. 1535. by Simon Matthewe.

SERMON MADE BY Simon Matthew.
HVMILIAMINI igitur sub potenti manu'dei, ut uos exaltet in tempore
uisitationis. etc. Priori epistola Petri Capit. ultimo. It may right well be
verified of saint Peter, that the famous prince Solomon writes in the.ix.
chapter of his Proverbs, Scie^tia sanstorum prudentia, that is to say, The
counnynge and knowledge of perfect good men is Prudency, not in gyuynge them
self to knowledge only of worldely matters, remembringe things paste, and
prouidyng for things to come, but also using the same, to the profit of other
in spiritual things: neither hyding their talentis ne precious treasure of
their master committed to them, more superfluously, or indiscreetly expendynge
the same: but as they se occasion and have time, diligently labor fruitefully
to bestow them. For sometime the wise man must exhort, and sometime dissuade,
sometime praise, sometime disprayse, sometime intrete, and sometime rebuke, as his
causes shall require: sometime he must assuage the proud courage of an high
stomach, and courage and comfort them that are weak and comfortles: and these
propreties shall ye se in this blessed apostoll, if ye reverently read his
epistoll, and observe every part of the same. For he, consyderinge in his time
the great persecution, that was done against the christians, and how they were
fled into diverse parties and scattered about for fear of the same, sent like
a good Pastor loving letters to them, commendyng, comfortyng, exhorting them.

First he most hyghly extolleth, preyseth, and blesses god, for his
inestimable mercy showed, to regenerate and repare us by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from death to immortality and life everlasting, putting them
in comfort to be part-takers and inheritours of the same glory, not by their
merytes, but by the operation of the holy ghost, which by feythe preserved
them worthy such reward: wylling them for this cause to rejoice in their
persecutions and other tribulations, which shall prove and declare their
unfeigned and true feyth to their praise, and glory of god. And for that he will
not them to have a countrefet faith, or a faith of their own imagination,
inverted by some sensual divise: he wylleth and commands them to live
accordyngly to their profession. For it is not enough to be christened, and
with outward deeds or countenances to profess Christ, and so to have the
title of a Christian, except they will declare them to be such in deed by
innocencye of living, which they must especially regard, thereby
representynge Christ: and also remembringe with how greatte a treasure they
are redeemed. And these persuaded to them in the first chapitre, and part of
the second, he wylleth them, that they shall not under the prerexte of
Christianity, to think them self at liberte to disobey their superiors, but
rather every one to do his duty to them, although they were infidels and
tyrauntis: for herin consysteth the perfection of a christen man, if he
wyllyngely suffer injuries and deserve them not. For if a man suffer loss of
goods, imprisonment, outlawry, ye death, and deserve the same, it shall
nothing be rewarded of god: so that the punyshement makes not a martyr but the
cause, as saynct Peter affyrmeth in the second chapitre. Therefore he will all
christians to suffer as innocents, taking example of Christ.

In the third chapitre he techeth, how the woman shall use her self to her
husband, and what conversation she ought to be of, the manner of her tyringe
and of her apparel, expressing the chastity of her mind, he also there
teaches, how the man shall use him self to his wife. Then he generally
exhorts all to faith and to unity in the same, and to compassion fraternal,
love, ge^tylnes, mekenes, patience, not hasty to be revenged, repayinge one
injury for an other, or one ylle word for an another, but gentylle in word
and deed: and thus living innocently to fear no persection, for no man can
hurt them, but much blessed are they that suffer for virtue.

He wylleth also the Christianes to be perfectly instruct in feyth and hope,
that if any demand any thing of them, they may be in a redynes to answer
them, and with wisdom and example to allure them to the Religion of Christ
and like paciency, if they should suffer. like persecution for their
innocence. For thus Christ most innocent and void of all syn suffered for us
sinners, having great care to save us, as he also in the time of Noe would have
saved the people if they had converted and done penance in time. Wherefore for
as much as Christ by afflictions and many tribulations is now ascended into
heaven, it shall become his disciples to be of his co^dicions and mind, and
prepare them first to be indewed with virtues, and than to be in redynes to
suffer for the same. This no less thanne thryse he inculketh into them,
aduertysynge them to be in redynes to suffer, but not as malefactors, but to
have a good and a just cause to suffer for. And for yt he will not the flock
of Christ to be destytute and lack knowledge, insta^tly he desires the
senyours, that are assigned to have the ouersyghte, to feed them diligentely,
and that gladdely and wyllyngly, lokynge for reward of god. Also the iuniours
to be obedient to their elders: and generally all to show humility to each
other. For god withdraws his grace from the proud, and gives the same to
them that are meke. Humble you, submytte and meke your selfs therefore under
the mighty hand of god. Committee your selfs, that is to say fully and holly
to his protection, that he may promote and exalte you in the time of his
visitation. Commytte to him all your busynes: for he has great care for you.
Be you sobre and circumspecte: for your adversary the dyuell, like a rorynge
lion wandereth about sekyng whom he may devour: him resyste you strong in
feyth, considering like persecution to be done to al your christen brother
heed. The god of all grace, which has called us into his everlasting glory
by Christ Jesus, shall his own self after you have suffered a little
affliction, make you perfect, shall settyll and strength you. To him be
glory and dominion for ever, and while the world endures. Amen. This is the
english of the Epistle, that we read this present sunday: that I may have
grace to declare ye same more largely to the glory and honor of god, I shall
desire you to call to god for the assiste^ce of his grace: and in your prayer
to commend to him the catholic church of Christe^dom, in especial this
church of England, our sovereign lord the king supreme heed under god of this
church, our most gracious queen, queen Anne, my lady Elisabeth princess and
laufull heir to them both. etc. And all though the last sunday the preacher
could not find in his conscience to pray for the souls departed, saying, that
he thought his prayer should nothing avail them: yet I will desire you to
pray for them, trusting that you have in remembrance, how in times paste I
have proved by auctorities of Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, and Chrysostom, and
also by scriptures, as saint Augustine understands them, that we should so
do: for they are in such case, that they may be reliued by our prayer. etc.

All though in considering the sensible creatures of god, many times I am
constrained greattely to meruaylle at the divine power: yet nothing so greatly
moves me, as when I remember all the regions of Christendom, which before
the coming of Christ, were spiritually dead, and now by his mercy have
life given to them, so knyt and joined to him as one principal heed by unity
of feythe, that now they are one mystical body, having diverse members
deputed to diverse offices, and every one ministrynge for other in Christ. And
this is well worthy to be meruayled at, if we will consider the great
multitude of the people, and the diversity of the same, which setting all
customs apart, all humayn laws, all learning, all pleasures, al vices (wherein
they had al their life times accustomed them selfs before) most humbly
received the feythe of Christ, from the which neither loss of goods, nor
imprysonement, nor death could ever dissuade them.

And surely great meruaylle it is, how that so many noble men, so many
princis, so many kings, so many emperors, ye of so great power and stomach,
would give credence to such simple, unknown, abiecte and vile persons as the
Apostols were, after the worldly estimation: which preched things incredible,
as Christ god and man to be borne of a virgin, which crucified and put to
death, rise again the third day by his own power from death to life, and
soon after ascended to heaven. Which preched for delicacie of living,
abstinency: for voluptuousnes, chastity: for daliance, lamentation and
continual moonynge: for riches, poverty, the spirit of god so workynge, that
many nations unlike in conditions, unlike in langage, and being in great
distance, did agree, and yet do agree in professinge Christ Jesus and his
religion, one spirit workyng and gyuyng vital operation to them all. For as in
the natural body of man the soul gives life and mouynge to every joint, so
that no man can move any part of his body, but by the spirit vitalle extended
to the same: no more can any manne move him self to any point of virtue and
goodness, but by the virtue of the holy gooste excitinge and mouyng him to the
same. And as the body is one, and has many members, and yet all the members
make one bodi, though they be many in them selfs: so is Christ with all
christians one. For all we are christened in one spirit, for that we should be
one body in Christ. This body was sometime in Christ and his apostols and
disciples, and by them it was nouryshed and increced, some trauaylynge into one
country, and some into an other: and as they did profyt in them, so did they
become pertis of Christis mystical body, that is to sey of ye church, so that
the diversity of regions and countries makes not the diversity of churches
but the unity of feyth makes all regions one church, all though the same
regions were unknown to us and we to them. As if saint Andrew, Philip, Thomas,
and other of the apostols preached in strange countries, and converted them,
spekinge nothing of each other, nor of Peter, but only of Christ and his
benefytis: yet for their feyth should they be of the same church that Peter
was of, al though they never hard of Peter, nor Peter of them. As sayncte
Paul after his conversion, unknown to Peter and other apostols, preched in
Arabie and Damasco.iii. years, Jesus, that he is the son of god: and many by
his preaching received the feyth, which neither knew Peter nor other of the
apostols, but Jesus Christ, and the same crucified for our redemption: and yet
for this feythe, were they made one in Christ, and of his church. So that it
was of no necessytie for them to know Peter, as many have rekened in the
bishop of Rome, that except we knew him and his holy college, we could not
be of Christis church. But I am right sure, that many thousands are saved,
which never hard of Peter, nor yet of the bishop of Rome: so that the unity
of Christis church consists not in the knowledge of any erthely creature: but
in the knowledge of Christ and true believe in him. And for this labored the
apostolles, and yet labor their true successors, whose continual study must
be to maynteyn the same, taking example of sayncte Paul, which regarding
much this unity, says in the.xiiii. chapter to the Romans, Quae pacis
sunt, sectemur, et quae aedifi^^tionis sunt, inuicem custodiamus, Where he
reprouynge unfruitful disputations, wyllethe us to follow those things that
may make for unity, and for the edifienge of our brothern and us. And in
likewise in the first chapitre to the Corinthians, in the first epistle he
says, Obsecro uos fratres per nomen domini nostri Jesus Christi, vt idipsum
dicatis omnes, et non sint in vobis schismata. sitis autem perfecti in eodem
sensu et in eadem sententia, I instauntly desire you (says he to the
Corinthians) in the name of our lord Jesus Christ, that you agree both in word
and mind in one, and let there be no schism nor division among you. And in
the xiiii. chapitre I read of him, Non est dissensionis deus, sed pacis, sicut
et in omnibus ecclesiis sanctoru^ do ceo, where the holy apostoll wylleth,
that if any man reken him self to have the spirit of god, he shall the rather
regard unity: for that the spirit of god is author of unity, and not of
discord. Even so writing to the Ephesians, he says, Soliciti seruare
unitatem spiritus, Ephesians* 4.
wyllyng al hautenes to be set apart, and every man with gentylnes to do his
diligente endeuer to maynteyne unity. And saint Paul rekeneth, that he
shall sone opteyne his desire, for that they have one body and one spirit, and
one trust and hope of the enheritance of heaven, that is promised them by their
vocation. Furthermore they had one lord, one feythe, one baptime, which by
the meritis of the passion of Christ was of like effect to them all. Also they
have one god, which is father of them all, and has the most high regency,
gouernynge all thing, and by his divine spirit is present in us al. And in
his epistle ad Hebreos, in the.xii. chapitre, he says: Pacem sequim ini cum
omnibus et sanctimoniam, fine qua nemo deum uidebit, contemplantes ne quis
desit gratiae dei, ne qua radix amaritudinis sursum germinans impediat, et per
illam inquinentur multi, Do your endeuer to have peace and quietness with all
folks, and to have purity and clenlynes of lyuynnge, without the which no
man shall se god, neither now by feyth, nor hereafter by fruition: do I say
your endeuer, considering not only for your selfs, but also for other that
they fall not from grace: And take heed, lest any ill rote of infidelity
spring up, whereby other may be corrupt. And thus saint Paul was ever wont
to preach, knowinge right well, that al though diverse and many things
perteyne to the life of a christian, yet nothing more then peace and unite, our
savior Christ saying, Joan. xiij. In hoc cognoscent omnes, quia mei estis
discipuli, si dilectionem habueritis adinuicem, By this cognisaunce all the
world shall know you for my disciples, if ye have unite among you, unity I
say of feith and spirit, fixed and set steadfastly in god, and not in any
mortal creature, as many have thought necessary, that if a man should be of
the church of Christ, he must be of the holy church of Rome, and take the
holy father thereof for the supreme heed, and for the vicare of Christ, yea for
Christ him self: and to be diuyded from him, were even to be divided from
Christ. Such da^pnable techynges have there be^, which have caused me^ to
leave the co^mandementes of god undone for the humayne traditions: but what so
ever has been done by ignorance, let us reform it, and not be ashamed to
profess truth: which is, that next unto god the prince ought to be
honored, and that the bishop of Rome has no more power by the laws of god in
this realm, than any other foreyn bishop, and this will I plainly prove:
and all though I can not do it eloquentely, yet I shall do it feythfully, and
that for truthessake. And for that I will not be tedious in rehersyng the
kings in the law of nature and laws written till the coming of Christ, I
shall speak that the gospelle, the very word of god provoke me to.

First the act of saynct John^ Baptist much moves me, ^uc 3.
which being the elect and chosen prophet of god, and sent from him, to whom no
other creature borne after the common course of nature might be compared,
living in such great integrity and innocencye, preaching verity, and
maynteynynge the same to death, demanded of the most notable offenders in
Jury, what they should do, commanded them, reverently to observe the ordinances
and laws of their emperor: which he would not have done, if that obedience
had not ben due by the laws of god. He did not counsel them to run into a
solitude, and leave their duties vudone: nor he did bydde them to lay aparte
their armours, but that accordingly as god wylled, serve their emperor, doing
no violence to any person, nor falsely accuse any man, but to be content with
such wages as their emperor gave them, to resyst his enmyes, and to preserve
the common welthe. And Christ him self not only with other did write his
name, knowledginge his obedience, but he also paid the heed penny, as a token
of the same, perswadinge the jews, which had coniured to rebel against their
emperor, that without inurmour or grudge they should do their duty, and
conform them selfs to their princis pleasure, saying: Give to Caesar, (...).
that is dew to Caesar, and give to god, that is dew to god. (...). 5.
And even so when the Jews would have forsaken their prince, and have chosen
Christ to their king, he withdrewe him self, and that to avoid occasyon of
rebellion and disobediency. Also teaching his disciples humility, and not to
be ambitious, when they stryued, which of them should be taken for the
better, (...)
he said: who so estemeth him self better, let him use him self as an
inferior, menyng, that the gretter gracis that a man or woman receives of
god, the more shall they humble them selfs, in disposyng the same, and not to
desire no high estate, nor to be the more statelye or proud for them, but
evermore to reken them selfs most unworthy. And for a token hereof before his
passion, in all his.v. examynations, he never grudged at Cesars laws, nor at
the commandments of his commisioners.

Now good Christians, if there were no other scriptures to teache us to do our
duties to our sovereign: yet it seems to me, that these few examples should
sufficiently move us, if we did love and dread god. For if saynct John^ and
Christ show such obedience to princis being infidels and tirantis: how much
more shall we be bound to do the same to our christen prince? And if they never
went about to diminish the royalty of their Emperor, what good christian can
with good conscience attempt the contrary? Saynct Peter, which never
challenged so high honor or dignity, as many have given to him, all proud
prelacy set aparte writes not to one country or city, but universally on
this wise: (...)
Humble your selfs unto all manner ordinance of man for goddis sake, whether it
be to the king as most excellent, or to his co^missaries sent from him, for the
punyshme^t of iuel doers, and the laud of them that do well. Mark here, yt the
prince is called most excellent: which if he so be, than none in his realm
shall excel him. And he says also: Fear god and honor the king. Se here
how that he puts no mean person betwixt god and the prince: but
immediately after god, the king must be honored. (...)
Thus taught sayncte Paul the Romans, that every man and woman should be
obedient unto the authority of the higher power: for there is no power but of
god, the powers that are, ar ordained of god. who so ever therefore resists
power, resists the ordinance of god: And they that resist, shall receive to
them selfs damnation. For rulers are not to be feared for good works, but for
iuell. will you be without fere of the power? do well than, and so shall thou be
praised of the same. For he is the ministre of god for thy welthe. But and if
thou do yuell, tha^ fear: for he bears not the sword for naught, but is
the ministre of god, to take vengeance of them that do evil. Wherefore you
must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only, but also because of
conscience. And even for this cause pay you tribute: for they are goddis
mynisters, serving for the same purpose. O good lord, what majesty is in
these words? how ernestly should every christen man and woman have this in
mind. For if such power be of god (as in deed it is) and the resister thereof,
resists the ordinance of god, if god have given the sword to punisshe and
slaye the deniers hereof, if eternal damnation remains for them, that
disobeye this godly ordinance: what damnation are they in, which contempnyng
truth, shall study to procure their own death, and so cause other to fall in
like damnable error with them? I can not nor dare judge them, but the word of
god judges them, which oppugnen verite. God of his infinite mercy pardon the
ignorant, not of this realm only, but of all christen realms, and grant
them light to se his truth, and open their hearts, with pure conscience to
receive the same.

How erneste this holy apostolle was for this verity, it may right well
appear in his epostol sent to his disciple Titus, whom he had assigned to be
bishop of Crete, gyuynge him among all other things in commandment, to
warn the people in his sermons, that they submytte them selfs to princis and
powers, and redily to obey their commandments, as he him self in all
things obeyed them: and made refuge to them, as wha^ he apeled to Caesar in a
cause of heresy, gyuing example of his obedience. When I read this first, I
meruayled much, that Paul, in a mattier concerning the health of his soul,
would appele to Caesar and not to Peter, if Peter had been the chief prelate
ordained of god. But full well he knew, that good Peter neither had nor would
have any high estate, or imperial power, although Christ had used him
familiarly. Nor good Paul him self challenged any more authority, all though
Christ called him his elect and chosen vessel.(...) Emperor, what good
christian can with good conscience attempt the contrary? Saynct Peter, which
never challenged so high honor or dignity, as many have given to him, all
proud prelacy set aparte writes not to one country or city, but universally
on this wise: Humble your selfs unto all manner ordinance of man for goddis
sake, whether it be to the king as most excellent, or to his co^missaries sent
from him, for the punyshme^t of iuel doers, and the laud of them that do well.
Mark here, yt the prince is called most excellent: which if he so be, than
none in his realm shall excel him. And he says also: Fear god and honor
the king. Se here how that he puts no mean person betwixt god and the
prince: but immediately after god, the king must be honored. Thus taught
sayncte Paul the Romans, that every man and woman should be obedient unto the
authority of the higher power: for there is no power but of god, the powers
that are, ar ordained of god. who so ever therefore resists power, resists
the ordinance of god: And they that resist, shall receive to them selfs
damnation. For rulers are not to be feared for good works, but for iuell. will
you be without fere of the power? do well than, and so shall thou be praised of
the same. For he is the ministre of god for thy welthe. But and if thou do
yuell, tha^ fear: for he bears not the sword for naught, but is the
ministre of god, to take vengeance of them that do evil. Wherefore you must
needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only, but also because of conscience.
And even for this cause pay you tribute: for they are goodis mynisters,
serving for the same purpose. O good lord, what majesty is in these words?
how ernestly should every christen man and woman have this in mind. For if
such power be of god (as in deed it is) and the resister thereof, resists the
ordinance of god, if god have given the sword to punisshe and slaye the
deniers hereof, if eternal damnation remains for them, that disobeye this
godly ordinance: what damnation are they in, which contempnyng truth, shall
study to procure their own death, and so cause other to fall in like damnable
error with them? I can not nor dare judge them, but the word of god judges
them, which oppugnen verite. God of his infinite mercy pardon the ignorant,
not of this realm only, but of all christen realms, and grant them light to
se his truth, and open their hearts, with pure conscience to receive the same.

How erneste this holy apostolle was for this verity, it may right well
appear in his epostol sent to his disciple Titus, whom he had assigned to be by
shop of Crete, gyuynge him among all other things in commandment, to warn
the people in his sermons, that they submytte them selfs to princis and
powers, and redily to obey their commandments, as he him self in all
things obedience. When I read this first, I meruayled much, that Paul, in
a mattier conceruynge the health of his soul, would appele to Caesar and not to
Peter, if Peter had been the chief prelate ordained of god. But full well he
knew, that good Peter neither had nor would have any high estate, or imperial
power, although Christ had used him familiarly. Nor good Paul him self
challenged any more authority, all though Christ called him his elect and
chosen vesselle. And I dare boldly say, that none of the apostols, what
partis so ever they preched in, desired ever any jurisdiction, but only
desired the high powers to use their authorities in seruyng god, as before
times they had in seruinge the world: consideringe that it is two things, to
be a prince and a christen prince, ^^^ce of ^^ace.
whose office is to procure peace for his people, to se the liberties of his
commonwealth maynteined, to se that the pore people famishe not for lack of
sustenaunce, some having to much, and excessiuely expending the same, and
other some having nothing at all, to se who be called to offices, to be of
his counseylours, to se the sedicious and other malefactors punished,
remembringe that god has not given him his sword for naught. And therefore
sayncte Augustyne says, that al though he were ones of this opinion, that
malefactors, as heretykes, should only be resysted with scriptures: yet he
perceiving many incommodities to rise thereupon, changed his mind, and
thought the argumentis of scripture not sufficient, onelesse the temporal
power would assiste and give aid to them. And he says that these words of
the prophet, Et nunc reges intelligite, erudimini qui iudicatis terram, Psal^
Seruite domino in timore, were spoken sometime in prophecy now to be put in
effect of every christian prince, that they shall now learn to know god, of
whom they have their kingdoms, and meking them selfs under the mighty hand
of god, shall learn true and wholesome doctrine, to judge the people and serve
god with due fere and reverence, diuisinge laws to repress errors and other
vices repugnaunt to the pleasure and will of god: and that their subjects may
learn to prefer truth to man's inventions and imaginations. And therefore he
preyseth the laws made by emperors against the pagans, saying: Quis eni^
nostru^, quis uestru^ no^ laudat leges ab imperatoribus datas ad uersus
sacrificia paganoru^? And in ye same epistol he says, that such sharp and
penalle laws have caused many to leave their errors, and afterward have given
most hearty thanks to their princes, which by such means have called them
from their errors. For like as a man being in a phrenesye may not be suffered
to have his wylful liberty, but must be bound with chains lest he destroy
him self: and as they that be diseased with a deedly sleep, in latin called
Morbus lethargicus, may not be suffered to have their appetite, but must be
kept wakyng, orels they shall sleep to death: so must malefactors be looked
upon with fearful laws and peynes, lest they both distroy them selfs and
other: and in so doing the princis do their due service to god, or else not.
For as saynct Augustine says in an another place, Quomodo reges seruiu^t domino
in timore, Ep^* la. 5^
nisi ea, quae co^tra domini iussa sunt, religiosa seueritate prohibe^do atque
plecte^do? Our lord Jesus put this in the heedes and hartis of princis, to
know their powers given of god, and to execute them in his service: thanne
shall we nothing need to run to Rome, but every man in his realm shall say
and report by his prince, as Tertuliane did by his emperor, which in a
litell treatise made ad Scapulam, says, Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum
imperatoris, quem sciens a deo suo constitui, necesse est ut et ipsum diligat,
et reuereatur, et honoret, et saluum uelit, cum toto Romano imperio, quousque
saeculum stabit. tam diu enim stabit. Colimus ergo et imperatorem sic, quomodo
et nobis licet, et ipsi expedit, ut hominem a deo secundum, et quicquid est, a
deo consecutum, solo deo minorem, A christen man is no man's ennemie, much
less is he the emperors enemy, whom he knowing to be ordained of god, of
necessite must love him, reverence him, and honor him, and desire him to
prospere with all his empire of Rome even to the worlds end. For so long
shall it stand. We therefore honor our emperor, as much as is lauful for us,
and convenient for him. We honor him as a man next to god, having what so
ever he has of god, inferior to god only.

Here is a wonderful saying and a notable, and to many incredible: but to
confirm this, hark what John^ and Paul the holy martyrs said to Iulyan, when
he thretned them with these words: Si contemptus fuero a uobis, necesse mihi
erit agere, ut contempni non possim. Ioannes et Paulus dixerunt, Non
praeponimus tibi personam qualemcunque, deum tibi praeponimus, You shall
understand, that this Iuliam had given in commandment, that all his
subjects should make sacrifice to idols, and that all professinge Christ
should be banished: none so hardy to mayntein or receive into his house any of
that sort: but John and Paul, not withstanding this commandment cherished
the christianes. Wherefore the emperor being discontented, said to them: If
you contempne me, hit shall be necessary for me so to do, that I be not
contempned. The holy men John and Paul made answer on this wise: we prefer
no person, no creature, what degree so ever he be of, unto you, god we
prefer. How fortuned this, that these holy men forgotte here the bishop
of Rome? why did they not prefer him: as their supreme heed next unto god?
Except you will be blind still, these few authorities may suffice to show unto
you, that next to god we shall honor our prince.

Now let us se how it may be proved, that the bishop of Rome has no
more authority, then an other foreyn bishop: but first let us see what
scriptures the papists rest most upon, which if we can pulle away from
them, their matter is like to fall. They say, that this text makes much
for them, uc 9.
Tues Petrus, et super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam, Thou art Peter,
and upon this stone I will build my church, ergo Peter was the heed of the
church. Truly this argument is framed much like their matter: For if the
church had been stably shed upon Peter, than when Peter dyed, all should have
fallen with him, both church and chancell: but saint Augustyne techeth us an
other manner of lesson, Episto la. 165
which is, that these words, Thou art Peter, and upon this stone I will
build my church, were spoken to Peter, not as to a private person but to
Peter representynge the holle nombre of the apostols, and the universal
church. And this agreethe well with the gospel, where Christ asked his
disciples, whom the people said that he was, and they answered and said: John^
Baptiste, some say Helias, and some say one of the old prophets is risen
again: He said unto them: who say ye that I am? Peter answered and said, Thou
art the Christ of god. And he warned and commanded them, that they should
tell no man that thing. Of this hit may appear, both in as king the question,
and also of Christis commandment, that Peter made answer in all their names.
For the question was not purposed to him, but to them al: and therefore making
answer, he made answer for them all. And this commandment, that they
should not speak this thing to any person, was given not to Peter only, but
to them all: which proves, that the revelation was made as well to other as
to Peter. And the same authority, that he gave to Peter in the name of them
all, to bind and to loose: the same he gave to every one of them, saying,
Sicut misit me Pater, ego mitto uos, As my father sent me, I send you, and
every one of you with the same authority both to preche the glory of god,
and also to remyt sin. Now if Peter would challenge more authority than his
fellows: than he must have such authority above Christ: For such authority
as Christ had, he gave to al his apostols. Also when Christ said, A ccipite
spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, et quorum
retinueritis, retenta sunt, Rehersynge this text, saint John^ says, that he
brethed upon them, and n^o more upon Peter, then Andrew or John^: nor he spoke
these words more to Peter than to the rest, but said, Take the holy gooste:
whose offencis or sins you remytte or forgive, they shall be forgyuen, and
whose sins you do not forgive, they shall not be forgyuen. And likewise when
he sent them into all the world to preche, he placed none of them all, but
bade them go to the broad world, and preach the gospel to every man and
womanne: And therefore no more honor to Peter, than to other of his fellows.
And this the holy apostoll Peter teaches him self, in his first epistol
saying: The elders, which are among you I exhort, which am also an elder,
and a witness of the afflictions and tribulations of Christ, and also a part
taker of the glory that shall be opened: Se that you feed Christis flock,
which is among you, taking the oversight of them: not as though ye were
compelled thereto, but wyllyngely: not for the desire of fylthy lucre, but of a
good mind: not as though ye were lords over your parysheners, but that ye be
an example to the flock. Here saint Peter does not only knowledge him self
to be equal with other: but he also shows that he desires no royal
regiment: and so does he exhort other to be of the same mind with him. They
there fore, which extolle so much the jurisdiction of Peter, sclaunder him.
And I am sure, he is not contented to be so reported against the verity.
Therefore when so ever you shall have any scripture, that sounds for Peter's
authority, understand the same spoken to all the apostols, represented in
Peter. And this is saint Augustynes mind, as I have said before. And even so
saint Hierome in his first book ageynste Iouinian, although he may be seen to
some reder, that he speaks utterly for the prelacy of Peter, yet he says
even there, that all the apostols received the keys of the kingedome of heaven,
and that the substance of the church was equally builded upon them all. So that
saint Hierome mente not, that Peter had more authority than the other, but
that he was chosen as one to be preloquutour and speaker for his fellows, and
that to avoid confusion, which should have been, if all should speak to
gether. And yet this pueth him not to have more authorite tha^ an other. As
although my lord Mayre, the aldermen, with other, should send master
Recorder in message to the king for some common matter of the city: master
Recorder is not now a private person, but a common person: and what so ever
he speaks, during his commission, the holle city speaks it: and what
answer so ever is made to him is made to the hole cite. And yet this proves
not master Recordar to be of more authorite the^ my lord maire and the
aldermen. And truly onles we should thus understand sayncte Hierome, he should
be contrary to him self. For in his epistoll sent to Euagrius, he makes all
bishops of al places equal, these are his words: The church of Rome is not
to be thought to be divided from other churches in the world, both France,
Britayne, Africa, Persis, Oriens, and India, and all other strange nations
honor Christ, and keep one rule of truth. If authority be asked therefore,
the world is bygger then one city. Where so ever the bishop shall be,
either at Rome, or else at a poor city in Italy called Eugubiu^, or at
Co^stantinoble, in Macedonie, or in Rhegio, a city in Greece, or in Alexandria
and Tanis cities in Egipte: he is of like merit, and of like prelacy. The
abundance of riches, and the humility of poverty auseth not a bishop to be
more or less in authority, but all indifferently ar the successors of the
apostols.

What can be more plainly spoken for equality of bishops? Read it, and read
it again, and imprint it in your hartis, and muse upon it: and then judge
saynct Hieromes mind. you shall well perceive, that he means all bishops to
be of like authority in their own diocese: and that none shall challenge by
the laws of god any prelacye above an another. Saint Cyprian in like manner,
what so ever he seems to say in other places, yet in his epistolle ad
Cornelium, whom he calls brother, he says, that it is decreed to him and
all bishops, that every one shall have the oversight and gouerna^ce of their
own diocesans, for whom they shall make account to god. And in his book called
De simplicitate praelatoru^, he says: that all the apostols were like in
honor and power. And if they so were, what is then become of Peter's prelacye?
I think if in this matter he were reverently handeled, he should be
understood as saint Jerome was: which commending the authority of byshoppis
did never derogate the royalty of princis, but would every bishop to have
the governance of his flock, maynteyninge always the auctorytie of princes. And
in good feythe I can not read the contrary in them: but often I do read, how
they submytted them selfs and called upon temporal power for help and
maintenance of truth, not presuming to call any general Councels, but upon
their favors: As the councelle of Nicene, which was celebrate by the
commandment of Constantine the emperor, to repress heresies: In the which
council it was determined thus, Mos antiquus perduret in Aegypto, uel Lybia,
et Pentapoli, ut Alexandrinus episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quoniam
quidem et Romano episcopo parilis mos est. Similiter autem et apud Antiochiam,
ceterasque prouincias honor suus unicuique seruetur ecclesiae, We will that
the old custom and manner shall continue in Egipte, Libie, and Pentapoli,
which is that the bishop of Alexandria shall have governance and rule over
al these: for that there is a like custom for the bishop of Rome. In like
manner we will, that at Antiochie, and other prouincis, every one shall have
their due honor. This most honorable council, which was kept in the.iii.
hundred and.xxiiii. year after Christ, then being present.iii. hundred
and.xviii. bishops and holy fathers, determined that ye bishop of Alexandria
should have as much authority in his parties, as the bishop of Rome shall
have in Italy and other places in the weste, and says, that so it has been of
a long custom, approving the same. Now if that custom were good, and well
allowed of such holy fathers, how can it be thought: that Peter's successor
should by the laws of god have more jurisdiction then any other bishop?
saying that these holy fathers judged than and decreed the contrary, which
being so nigh the apostels time not only approved the custom, but also made a
decrre thereupon, which they would never have done, except it might have sto^d
with the laws of god.

Also in the council of Constantinoble it was ordained, that bishops should not
be troubled ought from their dioceses, nor one should meddle with an others
jurisdiction: but the bishops of Alexandria should have the governance of the
oriental parties, the honor of primacy reseruid to the church of Antiochie,
as it was ordained in the Nicene council. And even so the bysshoppes of Asie
shall ouersee Asie, and order all things perteynynge to Asie. Like myse the
bishop of Ponte shall govern the diocese of Ponte. And the bishops of
Thrace, their dioceses: so that this counsel also denies prelacy to Rome, and
to the bishop thereof, reserving every diocese to his own bishop.

And of this we also read in an epistoll, sent from the council of Affrike to
Celestine bishop of Rome: which according to other councelles, and also to
the mind of saint Cypriane, concludes, that no foreign bishop should meddell
out of his own diocese.

Likewise in the council Mileuitane it was provided, that al causes
concerning one province should be determined in the same. Wherefore as you have
hard, I trust hit be plainly proved, that the bishop of Rome shall never
prove by scriptures such pre-eminence to be due to him, as he challenges: but
he defraudeth temporal princis of the honor that god gave them: and causes
their subiectis dampnably to disobeye the ordinance of god, as of late you
have had experien ceof some, whom neither friends nor kynsfolkes, neither the
judgment of both universities, Cambridge and Oxforde, nor the universal
consent of all the clergy of this realm, nor the laws of the parlyament,
nor their most natural and louinge prince, could by any gentylle ways,
revoke from their disobediency, but would needs persist therein, giving
pernicious occasion to the multitude to murmour and grudge at the kings laws:
saying that they were men of estimation, and would be seen wyser then all the
realm, and of better conscience then other, iustifienge them selfs, and
condemnynge all the realm beside: which being condemned, and the kings
prisoners, yet ceased not to conceive ill of our sovereign, refusing his
laws, but also in prison write to their mutualle comfort in their damnable
opinions, I mean doctor Fysshare and sire Thomas More, whom I am as sorry to
name as any man here is to here them named: Sorry, for that they being sometime
men of worship and honor, men of famous learning, and many excellent gracis,
and so tenderly sometime beloved of their prince, should thus unkindly,
unnaturally, and traiteroufly use them selfs, our lord give them grace to be
repentaunt: Let neither their fame, lernyng, nor honor move you loving
subjects to your prince, but regard you the truth, as I have here before to
you rehearsed, and for that this is the will of god, and he commands the same,
humble your hartis thereunto: and commytte your selfs holly to god, that when
he shall come to judge the world, he may exalte you into eternal glory. And
if the bishop of Rome will thrette you with interdictions or
excommunications, or any other person or persons with warris or other
displeasures, refer all to god: for he has much regard of you. For what
need you regard the bishops curse at Rome, when Christ blesses you at whom?
saying Matthei.v. Beati estis cum maledixerint uohis homines, et persequuti uos
fuerint, et dixerint omne malum aduersum uos, mentientes propterme, Blessed are your, when men will course you and persequute you, and say all that ylle is
against you for my sake lyenge upon you. As long as you be cursed for saying
truth, never fear: for defendyng that, you defend god, which is Truth. But
let him do his charity and course, I am sure that saynct Paul curses him
for oppugnyng the treuth, and not him only, but also all other, what sort so
ever they be of, either apostols or aungelles in heaven, that teaches contrary
to the truth of scriptures, ye and Christ courseth him in the gospelle of
Matthew, M 23
Ve uobis scribe et phariseihypocritae, quiae clauditis regnum celorum ante
homines. uos enim non intratis, nec introeuntes sinitis intrare, Cutsed be you,
which profess truth, and so have the keys to open heaven gatis, and yet ye
neither enter in to them your selfs, nor suffer other to enter.

It follows in the epistoll, Sobrij estote, et uigilate, Be sobre in your
diet, and of a sobre conversation both in word and deed. Here, If I might be
hard, I would exhort such as are of my sort, and use preachinge, so to
tempre their words, that they be not noted to speak of stomach, and rather
to prate then to preach: Nor I would have the defenders of the kings matters
to rage nor rail, nor to skolde, as many are thought to do, calling the
bishop of Rome the harlotte of Babylon, or the beast of Rome, with many
such other: for a wise auditorie woll rather judge such prechers (and I have
hard some say so) to be meter to prech at Paulis wharfe then at Paulis cross:
And such manner of preaching blemyssheth and defacethe good mattiers, and
causith them many times to lose their graces. Let preachers read the second
chapter of the second epistolle to Timothe, and they shall learn an another
manner of form of preaching, then many have used of late. It is not
commended in westmynster halle, that adversaries shall stand rayllynge and
brawling and skoldynge, but there they would bydde them show their
evidences, and they shall try the matter betwyxte them. So we intrea^^^ge our
princis cause, let us see what evidence he has: and if his evidence be
better then the bishops of Rome then let the right be given there as the
right is.

And as for the bishop of Rome god be with him, and make him his servant.
Therefore I say to my brethren, with sayncte Peter: Sobre your selfs in your
words, and be circumspecte, for your aduersarye the dyuell, raungethe about
in every corner, seekynge whom he may devour: whom resyst you strong in
feyth remembryng that in Christ you may do all thing and overcome all your
spiritual enemies. And think not that the dyuelle and his mynysters
persecute you only: for all good. Christyanes are malygned and persecuted;
and shall be to the worlds end. The lord of all grace, which has called
you to eternalle glory, by the mean of his son Jesus Christ, for your
lyttelle sufferaunce, shall perform and stablysshe you in virtue by grace: to
him be chefely glory and gouerna^ce imperial for ever: and secondarily next
after him to our prince be honor, and quietness to his subjects, here by grace
in earth, and afterward in eternalle glory: which grant unto us, that has
redeemed us with his precious bloudde, our Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.
Printed at London in Fletestrete in the house of Thomas Berthelet, nere to the
Cundite, at the sign of Lucrece, the year of our lord. M.D.XXXV. the.xxx. day
of July.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


