CHRISTIAN HVMILIATION, OR, A TREATISE OF FASTING: Declaring the Nature,
Kinds, Ends, Uses, and Properties of a Religious FAST: Together with a brief
Discourse concerning the Fast of LENT.

By Henry Mason, Pastor of Saint Andrews-Vndershaft London.

LONDON: Printed by G.P. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Corne-hill. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mr. Henry King, Archdeacon of Colchester,
Canon-Residentiary of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, and eldest Son to
the worthy Prelate Dr. KING, late Bishop of London.
Reverend SIR,
Having upon occasion hertofore looked somewhat into the nature and properties
of a religious Fast, I found it so pleasing to God and so profitable for men,
that I was thereupon induced not only to make use of it in mine own practice,
but to commend it also in the exercise of my Ministry, to my Hearers and
Parishioners. And for the same reason, I have now adventured to offer my
Meditations on this subject to the view of the world abroad; hoping that some
may be occasioned hereby to make a better use of this holy discipline, then of
late years men have bin accustomed to do. For howsoever I have incurred some
men's censures already, by speaking mine opinion, and shall now in all
likelihood, by printing it, incur the censures of other more, especially of
such forward spirits, as use to condemn before they consider; yet I hope I
shall be able to approve my Conclusions to the moderate and judicious Readers.
For (if I do not much mistake my self; and if I err, I desire to be
directed better:) I have on my side first of all the holy and blessed
Scripture, the supreme Judge of Controversies, against whose sentence there can
lie no exception or appeal. Secondly, I have also the constant and uniform
consent of learned Fathers, and of the Primitive and ancient Church, whose
unanimous judgment all sober men will so far respect, as not to swerve from
it, unless they can clearly prove that it swarueth from Gods Word. And
lastly, I have also the approbation of this present Church of England; whom her
own children may not lightly esteem, without contempt offered to their
heavenly Father: and I for my part, do so much respect and reverence, that
besides the Observance, which is due to her as my Mother, I am also persuaded
in my soul, that she is the purest and best reformed Church in Europe; and do
bless God upon my knees, that has appointed her to be my Mother, and my self
to be bred and brought up in her lapp. In which persuasion, beside the maine
reasons or grounds of my belief, not now to be insisted upon, I am the rather
confirmed also, because I know it was the constant opinion and profession of
your worthy Father, my much reverenced Lord: whose judgment I do highly and
deservedly esteem; and whose memory I shall ever desire to honor with all
dutiful and thankful respect. And were he now alive, I should not seek a
Patron for this little Book elsewhere. But since that GOD has translated him
from us into the company of the glorified Saints; as I could not divert my
thoughts altogether from him, but should rather have offered this poor service
to his Ashes, then not to have mentioned my respective duty to his name: so I
could not find any better resemblance of him upon earth, in which I might see
him pourtrayed and in some sort made present to me, then in your self, who
being his firstborn, do bear a lively image both of his person and virtues.
In regard of all which, my humble request is, that you will accept of this
small Treatise in stead of him who is gone, and suffer it under your shadow to
bear your Fathers name. And so, with my best prayers for your happiness, I
leave you to Gods blessing.

Your most affectionate friend, HENRY MASON.

CHRISTIAN HVMILIATION: OR, A TREATISE OF FASTING: Declaring the Nature,
Kinds, Ends, Uses, and Properties of a Religious FAST.
THere are but two ways to please God, and by pleasing him, to come to
eternal life; either perfect obedience to Gods Law, or unfeigned repentance
for our sins. By the first way, Adam in his innocence might have obtained
happiness: but since Adams fall, there is no way left but the second. For all
have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. And now the Scriptures do
press Repentance the forerunner of pardon, as that without which we cannot be
either freed from sin, or received to Gods favor. And this is the cause,
that Gods children have so usually accustomed themselves to all means of
humiliation, by which they might either increase or express their repentance
and godly sorrow. Amongst which means they found none more effectual (and
therefore amongst them we find none to have been more usual) then abstinence
and fasting. The consideration whereof, together with the condition of our
times, has provoked me to look into the nature of this thing, which either
was too much used in former times, or else is a great deal too much neglected
in ours. And that I might have some directions to rule my meditations by, I
thought it convenient to take for my groundworke, the words of the Evangelist,
where he says of our blessed Savior; Matthew. 4.2.
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered. In which words there are three things specified: first, what our
Savior did, he fasted: secondly, how long he continued herein, forty days,
and forty nights: thirdly, what befell him in the end, he was afterward an
hungered. And within the compass of these three things, I shall (God willing)
bound and comprize my following meditations. In handling whereof, I think it
not amiss to prescribe to my self this method. First, to speak of fasting in
general, and as it is considered by it self. Secondly, to consider it as it
was here practiced by our Savior. And lastly, to add a few words of our
Saviors hungring, which is the consequent of his abstinence and fasting.

And first, for fasting in general, there are these things to be considered:

1 What fasting is, and what this word does import.

2 What sorts of fasting are commended to us in Scriptures for our use.

3 How and wherein it may further us for holy duties, and works of Gods
service.

4 What conditions are required in our fasting, that it may be accepted.

5 In what cases, and for what purposes it may serve us to obtain help and
favor from the Lord.

Secondly, for fasting, as it was exercised by our Savior, we have these
points to consider of:

1 Why our Lord did fast at all.

2 Why he fasted forty days, and forty nights.

3 When, or at what times, men may or ought to fast.

4 How long a Christian should continue his fast.

5 What we are to think of that forty days fast of Christians, commonly
called Ieiunium Quadragesimale, or Lent-Fast.

These, with a brief touch of Christ's hungring, which is the third general
point, are the subject and matter of the Discourse following.

CHAP. I. What Fasting is.
THe most usual description of Fasting is, that it is an Abstinence from meat
and drink. And this description is very agreeable to the manner of speech,
used by the Scriptures; which when they speak of fasting, do many times
mention, and always intend an abstayning from food. As Ester 4.16. Go (says
Ester) gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye
for me. But how shall this be done? It follows; And neither eat nor drink
three days, night or day: I also and my Maids will fast likewise. And so
Jonas 3.7. Let neither Man nor Beast, etc. taste any thing. Let them not feed,
nor drink water. And Luke 5.33. Why do the Disciples of John fast often, etc.
but thine eat and drink? Which speech Mar. 2.18. Mat. 9.14.
other Evangelists do express in these words: Why do the Disciples of John,
and of the Pharisees fast, but thy Disciples fast not? Where we may note, first
that Saint Luke makes an opposition between fasting, and eating or drinking.
Secondly, That that which Saint Luke calls eating and drinking, the other
Evangelists call not fasting. And by both these we may gather, that fasting
includes an abstinence from meat and drink. But thus far the point is
clear. Only a further question may be asked, what kind of abstinence this
is; whether total and entier, from all meat and drink, and from tasting of
any thing, as the men of Nineueh and Ester seem to speak: or whether a
partial kind of abstinence; which is a forbearing of nourishing and pleasant
meat only, may not sometimes suffice, as that place of Daniel seems to
import, where the Prophet speaking of his fasting, says, I Dan. 10.3.
ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, etc. till
three whole weeks were fulfilled.

For answer hereto, it must first of all be noted, that abstinence used in a
fast may be considered two ways. First, in respect of one only act or time of
abstinence, continued without any interruption; as when it is said, that the
Israelites Judge. 20.26.
wept and fasted that day, until even; and that the Jews should Ester 4.16.
fast, and not eat nor drink three days, day or night; and that our Savior
Matthew. 4.2.
fasted forty days and forty nights: there is meant one continued act or space
of abstinence, without any intermission or interruption of the abstinence then
used. Secondly, It may be considered in respect of many multiplied acts, or
distinct times of abstinence, one immediately following after another. As for
example, when it is said of the men of Iabesh, that they fasted 1 Samuel 31. vla.
etc. 1 Chronao. 12
seaen days, the meaning is not, that they fasted so long, by one continued
and uninterrupted act of abstinence, but that they fasted every one of those 7.
days, eating nothing all the day long, and at evening making a spare and
course meal, as was agreeable to a time of mourning. Thus not only Osiand. in
1. Chro. 10.12.
Osiander among the Protestants, but among the Papists Erat iflud ieiunium
secundu morem Hebraeorum, scilicet, quod non comederent tota die al quid vsque
ad Solis occasum. Tostat. in 1. Regum, cap. 31. ad finem quaest. 18. page 327.
A.
Tostatus does interpret that place; and adds withal, that this fast of
theirs was according to the custom of the Jews, which was, that they did not
eat any thing all the day long, till the Sunset, but then did eat. And in
the like sense, they of the Roman Church do say, that themselves fast all
Lent, when notwithstanding, they do not without interruption observe that
kind of abstinence, which themselves require in a Fast: for on Sundays at
least, all Lent long, they intermit their abstinence, and fast not, no not
after their own manner of fasting. Sometimes then a man may be said to fast
such a space of time, because all that time he uses such abstinence, as is
required in one uninterrupted act or time of fasting; and sometimes again he
may be said to fast so long or for such a time, because he uses sundry such
multiplied acts or times of abstinence, or because he uses many such
Fastingdayes together, one after another.

This being first noted for a ground, my answer to the doubt is:

Answ. 1. If we speak of a fast, as it consists of one only single act,
without interruption of the abstinence required, then it is unheard of, in
Scriptures, that there is any use of meat or drink, or tasting of food, while
that fast lasts. But if we speak of a fast as consisting of many such acts,
multiplied and added together, then it is necessary, that some refreshing be
had between those several acts or distinct times: and usual it is, that such
refection then used, should be sparing for the quantity of meat, and homely for
the quality of it. And such a fast as this was that of Daniels, when he says:
I was mourning three full weeks, I ate no pleasant bread, etc. For the meaning
is, that he fasted every day for three weeks space, without eating or
drinking or tasting any food all the day long: but when the day was ended, he
brake off his abstinence, by a slender supper. And so this place proves not,
but that a Fast does include a total abstinence from all meat. And this to be
the meaning of the place, I am induced to think, because the words do import
so much, and the custom of the Jews in their fasting does require this
construction. For the learned do agree, that this was the custom of the
Jews, that when they fasted, they did eat nothing all day, till the evening;
that by reason of this custom, when men are said to fast many days, it may
reasonably be understood, that they fasted all the day, and at night are
something: and that for this cause Saint Matthew did say that Christ did fast
forty days, and forty nights, adding the mention of nights, lest men should
think that he fasted those forty days according to the custom of the Jews,
eating at night, after he had abstayned from food all the day. To this purpose
Tostatus Tam diebus, quam noctibus ieiunabat [Christus.] Hoc autem dicitur
propter duo: primo propter consuetudinem Ieiunij Judaeoru^. Nam Iudaei, quando
ieiunant, per totam diem nihil comedunt, nisi post occasum Solis, cum incipiunt
apparere Astra, per noctem comedunt, etc. Si ergo diceretur, quod Christus
ieiunauit quadraginla diebus, intelligeretur, quod per noctes comedebat, sicut
Indaeis solitum erat. Tostat. in 4. Matt. q. 11. page 372. B.
says, that Christ is said to fast as well the nights as the days, for two
reasons: first, because of the custom of the Jews. For they, when they fast,
do eat nothing all the day, till after Sunsetting, and at night, when Stars
appear, then they eat. And therefore, if it were said (says he) that Christ
fasted forty days, it would be understood, that at nights he did eat, as the
Jews were wont to do. And Maldonat, Autideo diebus Euangelista noctes
adiecit: vt indicaret eum non Iudcorum more ieiunasse, qui per diem nihil cibi
potusve sumentes, noctu vesceba^tur. Mal. in Matt. 4.2.
The Evangelist (says he) added the mention of nights, that he might show that
Christ did not fast after the manner of the Jews; who taking no meat nor
drink all the day, did eat at night. And Lucas Brugensis; Noctium additur
mentio, ne putes Ieiunium fuisse, quale Iudaeorum iuxta legem, qui interdiu
ieiunare iussi, vesperi noctuque edere poterant. Luc. Brugens. in Mat. 4.2.
There is mention added of nights, lest a man should think, that this Fast of
our Savior, was such as the Fast of the Jews was, according to the Law; who
being commanded to fast by day, might eat in the evening. And in like sort
Iansenius; Noctium etiam fit mentio, quemadmodum and in Ieiunie Mosis, ad
distinctionem Ieiunij Christi a Ieiunijs Iudaeoru^, qui tota die ieiunantes, in
vespera and nocte cibum sumpserunt. Ians. harm. Cap. 15. page 124. col. 2.
There is mention also of nights (says he) as there is likewise in the Fast of
Moses, to distinguish Christ's fasting from the fasting of the Jews, who
fasting all day, at night did take meat. And if this was the custom of
fasting at those times, and this the use of speech among that people, That if
men were said to fast some days, without express mention of nights, it would
be understood, that he did not eat nor drink any thing all the day, but did
eat at night: then, in all reason of the world, we must so understand these
words of the Prophet Daniel, as learned Kemnitius Harm. Euangel. ca. 51.
Pericop. 6. page 817. and Exam. Council. Trident. part. 4. de Ieiun. nu. 25, 26.
page 89. col. 2.
also does.

Answ. 2. Secondly, I answer, That a Fast is either properly so called, or
improperly, and by an imperfect kind of partaking with it. Perpetua S.
Scripturae phrasis et sanctorum omnium in V. and N. T. praxis aperie docent eos
demu^ vere ieiunare, qui prersus ab omni cibo abstine^t, sieve per vnu^, sieve
per plures aliquot dies. Improprie tamen Ieiuniu^ dici potest, cum quis parce
vel tenuuer viuit, veletiam a prandio aut coenae abstinet. Idem iudicium esto
de Ieiunio in quo adbibetur ciborum delectus. Alsted. Theol. Polem. part. 4. de
Ieiun. Contr. 1. pa. 506.
Properly he is only said to fast, that abstaineth from all food, whether meat
or drink. And improperly or imperfectly a man may (perhaps) be said to fast,
when he forbeareth pleasant and nourishing meat, and contenteth himself with
course feeding. And in this sense, if any man do abstain from Flesh and Wine,
and other such strong nourishment, that he may express a holy and religious
sorrow, I will not gainsay him, if he call it a Fast; but I must add withal,
that it is an improper and imperfect kind of Fast, and such as I no where find
so called in the Scriptures; nor, as I think, is it to be found in the ancient
Fathers and Writers of the Church.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, I answer, That this partial and imperfect abstinence, may
not go, no not so much as for an improper or imperfect Fast, unless the meat
that is then used, be sparing and course; and such, as that it may in part
afflict Nature, while it does in some sort refresh it, Dan. 10:12. Sunt qui
vinum no^ bibunt, vt aliorum expressione pomoru^ alios sibi liquores, no^
salutis causa, sed iucunditatis exquirant, tanquam non sit Quadrage simae piae
humilitatis obseruatio, sed nouae voluptatis occasio. August de diverse. sermon.
74. ca. 9. pa. 499. H.
such as Daniels was, when he ate no pleasant bread, nor drank no Wine; and by
using of which in place of his ordinary food, he is said to chasten himself.
For else, if there be a forbearing of one meat, that we may glut or fill our
selves with other; or an abstinence from one kind of food, that we may feed on
another no less strengthening, and such as does content Nature as well; this
is no fasting at all, but a changing of pasture rather; nor is it an abstaining
from meat, but an using of variety of Cates.

And out of this I deduce two conclusions:

1. That they who think themselves warranted by Daniels example in this place,
to^ eat their dinner when they keep a Fast, do greatly deceive themselves,
and much mistake the Prophets meaning.

2. That they who think that Daniels practice does justify their choice of
meats, in their time of fasting, when they forbear flesh only, and feed on
all sorts of fish, and eat cherishing roots, and drink the strongest Wines,
are much mistaken, and build upon a sandy ground. For Daniel did neither dine,
nor drink Wine, nor eat any pleasant meat.

CHAP. II. What sorts or kinds of fasting are commended to us in Scriptures.
IN the Scriptures we find diverse kinds of fasting mentioned; some whereof
are commended for religious uses; and others are passed over, as no way
concerning the spiritual state of our souls. For differencing whereof, we may
note these distinctions following.

1. Did. Some Fasts are necessary and by constraint, when men are compelled to
fast, because they have not either stomach or meat. Such was the fast of the
Egyptian, 1 Samuel 30.12.
who was forsaken by his company, and being left sick in the Fields, was
almost dead for want of victuals. And some Fasts again, are voluntary,
vndertake^ of a man's own accord, and by his own free choice; of which kind
there are many examples in the Scriptures. The former of these is rather a
hungring then a fasting: for, Ieiunium voluntatis est, fames necessitatis;
Fasting is an act of the will, but hunger is of necessity, and whether a man
will or no; as Saint Austin Aug. in Psalm. 42. page 138. F.
speaks. And therefore this can be no act of virtue, because it is not
voluntary, but necessary. And consequently, it is not that Fast that is
commended for Religion sake. And therefore the voluntary Fast only, is it
which belongs to this place, and is for our purpose.

2. Did. Voluntary Fasts are of two sorts. They are either worldly and
profane, or religious and holy.

Worldly and profane I call those, whose end is for some worldly use, or for
some respect belonging to this life. And these are diverse. For sometimes men may
fast for effecting of some worldly business with better speed; as Saul and
his soldiers did, when the people tasted no food, because the King had adjured
them, saying; 1 Samuel 14.24.
Cursed be the man that eats any food until Evening, that I may be avenged
on mine enemies. Where we see the reason of this fast was, because the King
would not allow them any time of eating, for that they might bestow all the
time in pursuing of the Enemy. And so in like sort a man may fast for his
health, that he may co^coct his undigested humors; and for his gain, that he
may spare his purse; and for the public good, that he may preserve the breed
of Cattle: Non laudatur in illo ieiunium, qui ad luxuriosa^ coena^ seruat
ventrem suum. Aug. in Psalm. 43. page 142. E. Ieiunant quida^, (ait Augustine.)
ne ventrem vilia praeoccupent, and non possent intrare pretiosa. Daneus Isagog.
p. 3. de vita hominis. Ca. 32.
yea, and for very luxury, and of a gluttonous disposition, that he may keep
his stomach for better cheer. When men fast for these or any such like other
ends, their Fasts are worldly and profane, and therefore have no place among
religious exercises.

The second sort are holy and religious Fasts. And so I call those, which are
intended and do serve for some special use, which concerns Gods glory, and
the good of a man's soul. To this purpose is that, which we read in the
Prophet, where GOD speaks thus to the people; Zach. 7.5, 6.
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those
seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? And when ye did eat,
and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your selves, and drink for your
selves? In which words we may note, how God does reject the Fasts of this
people, because they were not undertaken for GOD and his service, but for
themselves, and to serve their own turns. And this shows, that the Fasts
which please God, must be such as may serve for his glory. And therefore these
Fasts do only belong to this place. And consequently, we may fitly define a
religious Fast, as a learned man has done; Ieiunium religiosum est voluntaria
abstinentia a cibo and potu religionis causa. Fest. Hommius Disput. 69. nu. 2.
page 467.
That it is a voluntary abstinence from meat and drink for Religion sake.

But here a question may be asked, which it will be requisite to resolve
before I go on. For it may be demanded, If the end of our fasting be that
which makes the difference between religious and profane Fasts; what if both
these ends do concur and meet together in one and the same act of fasting?
As for example, I may fast for my bodily health, and for preventing of some
distemper, that fullness would breed; and yet at the same time, and by the same
act, I my beat down my body, and make it more serviceable to the soul, and I
may withal prevent pride and wantonness, which full-feeding might procure. Or
(which is all to one purpose) I may fast to tame the pride of the flesh, and to
humble my self for my sins; and withal, by the same means, I may both save
my purse, and further my health, and prevent sickness in my body. And when
both these ends do in this manner concur, what a Fast shall I call this? Is
it a worldly Fast, because it has a worldly use? or is it a religious Fast,
because it has a religious use? or is it both, because it has both ends?

Ans. Either the one of these ends is directly intended, and the other does
accidentally follow, besides the man's intendment and purpose: or else both of
them are intended by him that keeps the fast. If the one only be intended,
then as the rule is, Denominatio sequitur praestantiorem partem; The
denomination follows the prevailing side: so we must say, that the end which
is intended, gives the denomination to the fast, and not that which
accidentally concurreth. As for example, if a man only aim at a spiritual
end, though another use follow upon it, yet the fast is religious still. And if
he have only a worldly purpose, though a spiritual use do accompany it
befides his intention, yet the fast is worldly and profane notwithstanding.
But if his intention be mixed, and he at once, and in the same fast do propose
to himself both a worldly and a spiritual use together; then concerning such
a fast I say three things:

First, That so far forth it partaketh of either kind, as either of the uses
are intended, that is, the Fast is so far forth to be called Religious, as a
religious use is intended in it, and so far forth worldly, as the end is
worldly.

Secondly, That so much as is mixed of the one end, is diminished of the other.
As for example, if a man fast, partly that he may humble himself by sorrow
for his sin, and partly that by concocting raw humors he may gain the
better health, this latter respect does so much diminish of the worth of the
former, as it self is herein intended. And the reason is, because the
intentions of a man's mind cannot entirely and perfectly be employed upon two
contrary or diverse objects at once. And therefore, so much of his intention as
a man bestows upon himself, so much he takes away from God.

Thirdly, It is not safe to mingle a worldly and spiritual respect together in
one and the same Fast, if we may with conueniency separate and divide them. My
reason is, because we (such is our corruption) are apt to flatter our selves,
and think better of our works than they do deserve: and if one action may
both make for Gods honor, and our own profit, we are ready to think we do
all for God, when the greatest part is for our selves. And therefore the safest
way will be to sever and disioyne thesevses, if with conueniency we may do
it, that so while we fast for God, we may not have any worldly respect that may
move us unto it at the same time. And because the especial respects of the
world that do most usually intermingle themselves with our holy Fasts, are one
of the two, either respect of gain, by saving the charges of diet, or
preserving of health, by concocting of raw humors: We may for direction in
these cases, take these two Rules.

1. Rule, That if fasting be necessary for our health, we first use it so long
and so much as is needful for that purpose, and then at other times undertake
our religious Fasts, that so we may aim only at a spiritual use.

2. Rule, That when by fasting we save charges, we then give away our sauings
to the poor, without diminishing any other part of our alms. And so doing,
we shall not only free our religious Fasts from the tincture of worldly
thrift, but shall also exercise another holy duty of mercifulness and
charity. A thing which the ancient Fathers have thought most necessary at the
times of our fasting: and therefore have been used to gresse this duty with
much earnestness in their Sermons to the people. Cui dabis quod tibi
abstulisti? Ita ieiuna, vt alio manducante prandisse te gaudeas. August. in
Psalm. 42. in fine.
To whom will thou give that which by fasting thou have spa^*d from thy self?
says Saint Augustine. So fast, that by another eating thou may be glad
that thou have dyned. And again, Ieiunia nostra vt plena sint and suffarta,
misericordiae pinguedine sage^^ntur, demus surientibus prandium nostrum. De
Temp. Sermon. 65. page 232. C.
That our Fasts may be full, let them be fatted with Almes-deedes. Let us give
our dinner to them that be hungry: And again, Praecipue sane pauperum
mementote; vt quod vobis parcius viuendo suberahitis; in coelosti Thesauro
reponatis. Accipiat esuriens Christus quod leiunans minus accipit Christianus.
Castigatio volentis fiat sustentatio non habentis, etc. Augustine. de diverse.
Sermon. 74. cap. 10. Page 500. A.
Especially (says he) be mindful of the poor, that what you subtract from
your selves, ye may lay it up in the Treasury of Heaven. Let hungring Christ
receive that which the fasting Christian does abate, etc. And so Leo; Jeiunijs
nostris egentium refectio suffragetur. Leo Sermon. 10. de Quadrages.
Let the feeding of the poor give testimony to our fasting. And, Quod suis
quisque delicijs subtrahit, debilibus impendat and egenis. Leo de Quadrages.
Sermon. 11.
That which a man does withdraw from his dainty fare, let him bestow upon the
impotent and needy. And to like purpose speak others also.

Did. 3. Religious fasts are of two sorts; they are either public or private
fasts. Public I call those, when a whole company, as when a City, Town, or
Parish do by public order join together in this service. Such a fast was
that of the Nineuites in the third Chapter of Jonas, and that which was
prescribed to the Jews in the fourth of Ester.

Secondly, the private fast is, when men out of their own devotions, and by
their own direction do in their private houses use abstinence in a religious
manner. Such a fast was that of Daniel, mentioned in his tenth Chapter: and
that of Nehemiah in the first Chapter of his Book. And both these kinds, both
the private and public fasts, have their approbation in Scriptures, and are
commendable if they be used aright, as appears by the examples alleged
already, and will more fully appear afterward in the process of this
discourse.

Did. 4. Religious fasts, whether private or public, may again be divided
into two sorts; For some are extraordinary, and others are ordinary. The
extraordinary are such, as are kept upon some special and extraordinary
occasion, as either for removing of some special judgment, then either felt
or feared, or for obtaining of some benefit or blessing, whereof then there is
especial need and exigence. Such was the fast of the Nineuites, which they
undertook upon the fear of destruction threatened by the Prophet. And such was
the fast of David, which he undertook upon occasion of his Childs sickness,
and danger of death in him. The ordinary fasts are such as are kept for an
usual exercise of the soul, without any other cause than such as may befall
every one of us at all times. Now for the former of these kinds of fasting, it
is generally agreed, that they are both lawful and useful: but concerning the
later, that is the ordinary, there has a question been made by some later
Divines, who dispute and determine against the use of them. But (as I take it)
the case is clear enough to the contrary. And my reasons are: first, because
this kind of fast has approbation in the Scriptures: and secondly, because it
has the profitable uses for our souls, for which religious fasts were
ordained.

First, Reason first from Scriptures.
because it has approbation from Scriptures. For I read, that God himself
commanded an ordinary fast to be observed by the Jews every year. Leuit.
16.29.
This (says he) shall be a Statute for ever unto you, that in the seventh
month, in the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, etc.
Where that the afflicting spoken of was partly by inward sorrow for their
sins, and partly by outward abstinence from meat and other contentments of
nature, is agreed upon by all sides. And that this abstinence and humiliation
was an ordinary exercise of piety, cannot be doubted, if we consider that it
was appointed every year, and in the same month, and upon the same day. For
it is not to be imagined, that extraordinary occasions of humiliation should
happen every year unto the same people, and at the same time, and upon the
same day. And if Almighty God himself saw it to be so useful for the Jews
to humble themselves by an ordinary fast, for their ordinary sins, and in the
ordinary course of their lives; why should it be thought sinful in Christians
to humble themselves in the same manner, and upon the same occasion? Secondly,
we find in Scriptures, that the Matt. 9.14.
Pharisees fasted often, and for example sake, that they Luke 18.12.
fasted twice in the week; and that concerning those fasts of theirs, our Lord
gave his Disciples this warning, Matt. 6.16.
When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance, for they
disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say
unto you, they have their reward.

Out of which passages we may gather two things. First, that these fasts of
the Pharisees were ordinary fasts, and observed by them in their ordinary course
of life, and for an ordinary exercise of religion. For that these men should so
often have extraordinary occasions, especially that every week twice, is a
thing that cannot be conceived with any probability or reason. Secondly, that
these fasts, such as they were, were not unlawful in themselves. That I prove,
first, because our Savior, where he purposely taxes their vices, reproves
them for their purpose, not for their practice of fasting; or not because they
did fast, but because they did fast to gain praise of men for it. Now had they
offended in both, out of doubt our Lord would have reproved them for both, and
have forewarned his Disciples to beware of both. Secondly, because in saying
of the Pharisees, that they fasting for vain glory had their reward, he meant
that they might not expect any reward from God, seeing they did it for the
applause of men: and he implies by necessary consequence, that if they had
not marred this good work with so ill an end, they might have had a reward
from God for it. And if God reward ordinary fasts, what man will dare to
condemn them? Luke 2.37.
Thirdly, we read again of Anna the Prophetess, that she departed not from
the Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. In which
sentence we may consider two things for this purpose: first, that this holy
woman made a daily practice of fasting; she served God in this manner night
and day: which shows, that she fasted ordinarily, and for an ordinary
exercise of devotion. Secondly, That by this kind of fasting she served God.
And if she served God by her fasting, we need not fear, lest we dishonor
him by the like practice.

Reason second from the uses.
Secondly, That ordinary fasts are lawful and useful, may be proved, because
ordinary fasts may and do serve for those profitable uses, for which religious
fasts were ordained. For those uses are, to testify and help forward our
humiliation and repentance, to sharpen and whet on our attention in holy
duties, and to subdue and tame the unruly pride of the flesh, and such like:
the respect whereof is the only thing that makes fasting so much commended to
us in the Scriptures. But all these holy ends and uses may be attained or
furthered no less by ordinary than by extraordinary fasts. For not only our
fastings, when we keep them for some special and extraordinary occasion, but
even those also which we use in an ordinary and usual course of Christianity,
may tame the flesh by subtracting its food, may eleuate the mind toward God,
by estranging it from the sense of worldly things, and may both show and beget
our humiliation and sorrow by chastening the body for the sins of our souls,
as is apparent in common reason: nor is it needless in an ordinary course of
life to use such either helps or signs of humiliation, devotion, and
mortification. For our infirmities in all these kinds are many and great, and
had need of help every day: and our sins and transgressions happen daily,
nay hourly, and do require every day humiliation and sorrow: and hence it
follows, that this ordinary course of fasting upon the common and usual
occasions of our life, are neither needless nor fruitless.

Thus in conclusion it appears, that all religious Fasts, be they private or
public, and whether for ordinary or extraordinary occasions, have allowance
from God, and are of good use in the life of a Christian.

CHAP. III. What holy use there is of Fasting, and how it may further us for
holy duties, and works of GODS service.
THese religious Fasts, as they have good proof from Gods Word, so they have
great use in the life of a Christian. More particularly and especially they may
serve for these uses.

I. They may serve as outward acts to declare our reverence toward God and his
sacred ordinances. For as at all times we should use reverence toward God in
our hearts, which is nothing else, but an acknowledging of his excellency, for
which he is to be hououred: so it is very requisite, that when we come into
his presence, or have any more then ordinary intercourse with him, we should
by some fitting behavior declare it. For which purpose, Exodus 3.5.
God commanded Moses, and the Josh. 5.15.
Angel commanded Joshua; Put off thy shoes from off thy feet; for the place
whereon thou stand, is holy ground. The meaning of which ceremony was for
this end, that thereby they might show reverence in the place, where God did
manifest his presence. And the like use there may be of fasting also; and that
in two respects. 1. Because, we do by such demeanor humble our selves before
the Divine Majesty, as unworthy not only to enjoy his presence, but to make
use of any of his creatures. Which is a testimony as of our own baseness, so
of Gods excellency and greatness. 2. We may by our abstinence show reverence
to God, because by forbearing our meat when we are about his works, we
declare that we prefer his service before the serving of our own turns: as
deeming it most just, that his service should have the first place in all our
thoughts. This use of fasting Hooker Eccles. polit. l. 5. nu. 72. pa. 207.
some think it is not unlikely that the Jews made, in fasting on holy days
till the public Service was ended; and that their complaint against Christ's
Disciples, Luke. 6.1, 2.
for rubbing the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, does imply so much. For
their meaning was (say they) to find fault with them meaning was (say they) to
find fault with them for breaking not the rest, but the fast of the Sabbath;
Hebraeorum illa fuit a maioribus tradita, and vsu recipta, ac tanquam lege
probata consuetudo, vt von siceret diebus festis cuiqua^ ante sexta^ bora^
prandere. Baron. to^. 1. ann. 34. nu. 243. page 250.
which by their custom was to be observed till dinner time, or after the
Divine Service. And for this interpretation there may be given this reason,
that the rubbing of corn for staying of hunger, was so small a work, that in
reason it cannot be thought to offend any, no not a Pharisee; it being less
labor then every man does use at his ordinary meal on the Sabbath day. For
the furnishing of the Table, the dishing out of the meat, the drawing of
drink, and caruing that which is necessary for every man's use, which no
Pharisee would reprove on the Sabbath day, will require as much both time and
labor, as that which the Disciples here did bestow. But let this go for a
conjecture, (as I will not urge it for any point of faith) thus much is
certain, that the Christian Church has still bin accustomed to forbear all
food, when they were to receive the holy Communion, till the whole work and
service of God were ended: whereof Aug. Epist. 118. c. 6. page 191. B.
Saint Augustine, and Isidor. de Offic. l. 1. ca 8.
others after him do give us this reason; vt in honorem tanti Sacramenti, in
os Christiani prius Dominicum corpus intraret, quam caeteri cibi: that for the
honor of that great Sacrament, our Lords body should first be received,
before all other food. And so we may say, that it is for reverence to GOD, and
for the honor of his Ordinance; if we first perform those holy duties,
before we partake our necessary food. And sure it was respect unto his Master,
that made Abraham's servant say, Genes. 24.33.
I will not eat, till I have told mine errand. And respect it was to his
heavenly Father, that made our Savior to Ioh. 4.34.
refuse his own meat, till he had done his Fathers will, and finished his
Work. And so it was respect unto God, that 1 Samuel 16.11
Samuel would not sit down, till David was sent for, that he might anoint
him, as God had appointed. For otherwise the services which they did do before
meat, might, for any thing that does appear by the text, have bin as
conveniently performed after it. And so we shall declare our respect to God,
and reverence to his holy Ordinances, if out of devotion, we first say our
prayers in the morning, before we eat our breakefast, and first come and hear
Gods Word before we take our common food, and first come to receive Christ's
body at the Lords Table, before we relish any worldly nourishment. For in so
doing, as Job professed in his words, Job. 23.12.
I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food: so we
shall testify by our deeds that we do, and shall put our selves in mind that
we ought to esteem the service of God, and the doing of his will, and the
partaking of the blessed Sacrament, more then the necessary refreshing of our
own bodies. And this may show, what respect we have of our God, and what
reverence we bear to his Ordinances.

II. A second holy use of a religious Fast may be for mortification, and to
take down the pride of the flesh. And when I say the pride of the flesh, I do
not mean unclean lusts and unchaste desires only; but I mean also all
unruly and rebellious thoughts, as pride, selfe-willednes, refractarines, and
all disobedience that opposes it self against God and his holy Word. For
fulness of bread, and pampering of the flesh, as they do more immediately and
directly breed matter for unchaste and fleshly lusts: so they do consequently
prepare a way, and dispose a man to all other sins, which his own pleasure
and self-will do lead him unto, and from which the awe of Gods Word and the
regard of his Judgments should withdraw him. Of the former, that is, of
unchaste lusts bred by full diet, the Lord speaks by the Prophets mouth; Ier.
5.7, 8.
When I fed them to the full, then they committed adultery, and assembled by
troops in the harlots houses. They were as fed horses in the morning: every
one neighed after his neighbors wife. And of the latter sort of sins, that
is, of other unruly and rebellious passions, bred by full feeding, Moses gives
proof, when he says; Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Ieshurun waxed fat and kicked. Thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick,
thou art covered with fatness. Then he for fooke God that made him, and
lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation. Here we have a grievous, but
just complaint against this rebellious people; wherein we may note, First, who
they were that thus he complains against; Ieshurun, says the Text. The word
signifies as much as upright, and it is the surname of Israel; because that
people should be the most upright of all people in the world. These were the
men, that were thus faulty, and were thus complained against. Secondly, what
the occasion was, that drew them into this disorder, and that is this; They
were waxen fat, grown thick, covered with fatnes. By which phrases, as we may
understand all worldly prosperity in general, so more especially we must
understand plentiful diet and full feeding; as it is more plainly declared,
verse 13, 14. Thirdly, what the sin was that they fell into, and by which they
occasioned so grievous a complaint against them; and that is thus expressed,
They kicked, they forsook God, they lightly esteemed the Rock of their
salvation. In which words, Moses uses the same metaphore that Jeremy did in
the place alleged; but he extends the application of it further. For it is,
as if he should say; This people are as like to fed horses as may be. For as
horses which prouender and high keeping do make proud, do kick, and strike,
and throw down their Rider; so this people, being pampered and fed to the
full, grow stubborn against God, and contemn his Word and Ministers, and cast
away his Yoke from them. Now lay all this together, and it yields us this
conclusion, That full feeding is apt to puff up the best men, and to make them
kick and spurn against God and all good admonitions. Which conclusion Moses
expresses yet more plainly in the precedent Chapter, where he brings in
God thus foretelling the peoples manners: Deuteronomy. 31.20.
When (says he) I shall have brought them into the Land, which I swear unto
their Fathers, that flows with milk and honey, and they shall have eaten and
filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn unto other gods and
serve them, and provoke me, and break my Covenant. Where we may observe, that
fulness and plenty is said to be the cause of idolatry, and rebellion against
God. But on the contrary side, fasting, and pinching of the body, and putting
it to hardness, they are means to cool the blood, and tame the spirits, and
pull down the pride of the flesh. A plain proof hereof we have in Saint
Paul, who was well acquainted with Christian discipline and means of
mortification, 1 Cor. 9. vlt.
I (says he) keep under my body and bring it into subjection; lest that by
any means when I have preached unto others, I my self should be a castaway.
This place is well worth the noting, and that we may be directed to make the
better use of it, two things may be considered in it. 1. The discipline and
practice of mortification, which the Apostle used toward himself: and of that
he says two things. 1. I keep under my body, or, as others read and render
the place, (...), contundo, I beat down my body. The meaning is, he used
severe discipline toward himself, fastings, and watchings, and hard lodging,
and rough clothing, etc. by which he did afflict and macerate the flesh; much
unlike to nice and tender folks now a days, who cannot endure fasting,
because (forsooth) it breeds wind in the body, and will make them faintish.
2. He says of himself, I bring my body into subjection; that is, by this
kind of Discipline that I use, I make my flesh gentle and pliable, and ready
to hearken and submit to the instructions of Gods Word, and the motions of the
Spirit. And his meaning in more words is this, that the flesh, if it be pampered
and fed to the full, nay if it be not straightly bridled, and strictly kept in,
it will grow unruly, and look to command: but by fasting, and course
clothing, and hard laboring, he taught it obedience and subjection. And to
like purpose, Hilarion, a religious young man, when after much abstinence and
course feeding, (for barleybread and water, with some roots, was his usual
food) he felt some pricking lusts in his flesh still, Iratus itaque sibi, and
pectus pugnis verberans, quasi cogitationes posset coode manus excludere, Ego,
inquit, aselle facia^ vt non calcitres; nec le hordeo alam, sed paleis: fame te
conficia^ and siti, graui onerabo pondere, per aestus indagabo et frigora, vt
cibum potius quam lasciuiam cogites. Hieron. to. 1. de vita Hilarionis, page
319. B.
he was angry with himself, and knocking his fist upon his breast, Thou beast,
quoth he, I will make thee leave kicking; nor will I feed thee with barley,
but with chafe: I will pull thee down with hunger and thirst; I will lade
thee with heavy weight, and hunt thee through heat and cold, that thou may
mind meat rather then lust. This or such like was the Discipline that Saint
Paul used, which is the first thing that I noted in his words. The second thing
considerable in his speech, is the reason why, or the end for which he
undertook so hard a course, and (as one of us would think) was so unmerciful
and cruel toward himself; and that was, Lest (says he) when I have preached
to others, my self should be a castaway. But what? Is there such danger in a
pampered body? such peril in delicate diet? such necessity of beating and
keeping under the body, that without such straitnes, the soul is in danger to
be lost? Yes surely, or else the blessed Apostle did speak and do, he knew
not what, nor wherefore. The consideration whereof may yield us two good
meditations for our use.

1. That the world is surely much awrie now a days; men be so cross to the
Apostles course. For we may see men and women feeking the markets for the best
Cates, and the Vintners cellars for the best Wine, and the Confectioners shops
for the best banketting-stuffe: (a thing not unlawful, if it be done
moderately, and in season) but amidst all this care for pampering of the flesh;
where is he or she that once thinks of beating down the body, or taming of
the flesh, or using any discipline of mortificatio^? Nay, would God there were
not some among them who would be esteemed religious Christians, who conceit all
such austerity to be Monkish, and superstitious and ungodly.

2. That all, even the best of us, if we do not think our selves more
spiritual than Saint Paul, must confess and resolve, that we have need to
pull down by deeds of humiliation, the luxuriant pride of the flesh; and that
it is a rule, derived from the nature of man, that Men's repleta, spinas
germinat libidinum, a full fed soul sprouts forth weeds of unlawful lusts.
Nor will this seem any wonder, if we weigh things well. For the best ground
abroad, if it have nothing but warm showers, and fair Sunshine all the year
long; if there be no frost, no snow, no winter-stormes that may kill the vermin,
and keep down the weeds: nay, if besides, there be not a Plough to cut up
the furrows, and an harrow to break the clods; all men know there will be
small hope of a good harvest. Of such a piece of ground, we may say as Solomon
does of Prou. 24.31.
the field of the sluggard, It was all grown over with thorns, and nettles
had covered the face of it. Sicut redditum vberiorem capit. qui frequentius
vexando exercet campum; ita maiorem gratiam percipit, qui exercet corporis sui
campum saepius ieiunando. Ambros. tom. 5. Sermon. 40. in feria 3. post Domin. 2.
Quadrag. page 57. C. and in the same Sermon after; Germinat mihi terra mea
spinas, si me corporalia libidinis titillatione compungit. Generat mihi
tribulos, quum me diuitiarum secularium cupiditate discruciat, etc. His ergo
nisi. vigilando and ieiunando carere non possumus.
And so we may say of the heart and soul of man, the ground where the good
seed should grow, that if it have nothing but feeding, and pampering, and ease
all the week, and all the year, and all the life long; no frost nor storm of
affliction, no plough nor harrow of mortification, that may by discipline and
hardness tame and subdue it; it will bring forth but a little good fruit of
true piety and obedience: but thorns, and briers, and vermin, and weeds of
unruly lusts; these will spring, and grow apace, till they have covered the
whole face of it. Let Paul's practice then be every Christians pattern. If we
would be freed from fear of being castawayes, we must keep under the body,
and bring it into subjection, and by wholesome discipline teach it due
obedience.

III. A third use of fasting may be, that it will serve for cleuation of the
mind, and to make a man more attentive about holy duties. And this it will
do for diverse reasons and in diverse respects.

1. Because it clears the brain of vapors, and the body of humors, and
sets the spirits at liberty for voluntary employments, and the use of
contemplation. For reason tells us, that bodily food sends fumes into the
head, and finds work for the spirits, and imployeth them about the work of
nature, that they are not so free for meditation and study. And Scholars do
find it true in experience, that times after dinner and supper are not so fit
for invention and study: and others may observe, that in the afternoon
themselves are not so fit to hear, or read, or pray, as in the morning, when
they are fasting. And consequently, in most men, especially in such as are
still at a full table, fasting may serve for elevation, and to carry the
thoughts upward toward heaven.

2. Fasting may help to eleuate the mind, because by afflicting the body, it
brings a man to the sense and feeling of his wants: and the sense of his
wants will spur him forward to the means that may relieve them. And so it
will make men more attentive to Gods Word, when he teaches and admonishes
them, and more attentive to their own words, when they pray unto him, and
praise him: and ever and anon to sigh toward heaven in the midst of their
other cares. To give some proof of this; first, Elihu in the Book of Job,
speaking of the afflictions, which God lays on his Children: If righteous
men, (says he) be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction; then
God shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have
exceeded. He opens also their ear to discipline. Job 36.8, 9, 10. and v.
15. He delivers the poor in his affliction, and opens their ears in
oppression. It is, as if he should say; In time of prosperity and peace men
stop their ears against wholesome admonitions, and are heavy spirited: as
the Prophet speaks of Jerusalem, Zachar. 7.7, 11, 12.
When it was inhabited, and was in prosperity, they refused to hearken, and
pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear:
yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the
Law. But when the rod of God is upon them, then by the smart which they feel,
God does unstop their ears, and makes them attend to every word that may
concern them for their ease. And so, if we chasten our selves with our own
rod, with fasting and hard discipline, by which we amerce our selves for our
sins, the sense of this smart will open our ears to listen, and enlarge our
hearts to attend to every word, that may help to discharge us of this burden of
sin. Let who will mark and observe it, and he shall find, that at such a time
when affliction lies upon him, whether inflicted by God, or imposed by
himself for his sin, that then he hears more willingly, and understands
more clearly, and applies more closely to his conscience, every word that he
hears or reads, than at other times he was wont to do. And this shows,
that the sense of smart for our sins makes us attentive to Gods Word, and
gracious admonitions. Secondly, we read again that the Lord himself by the
Prophet says of his people, Hos. 5.15.
In their affliction they will seek me early. Before he had said, I will
go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my
face. But some might say, Till they acknowledge their offense, and seek thy
face? Why? When (Lord) will that be? Will this people, that have forsaken
thee, and made themselves Idols, and do despise thy Prophets, will these men
ever seek thee? Yes, says God, that they will: even these men, in their
affliction, and when the rod is upon them, these will seek me, and that
early too: that is, it will be the first and the chiefest of their cares. And
so, when for our sins our own hand is upon us, it will make us run unto
God, and to seek his favor before all the world; to get remission of those
sins, which, our selves being Judges, do deserve so great correction. And
this shows, that the sense of smart for sin, will make us attentive to our
prayers, and devout in all holy duties.

Thirdly, Fasting may serve for elevation of mind, because it abridgeth us of
worldly delights and comforts. For when we are most estranged from these, then
are we most ready to seek comfort in God. For worldly pleasures, especially
if there be a continual enjoying of them, they do estrange our minds from
heavenly meditations; and that partly because they take up the time, that
should be bestowed on such thoughts; but especially because there is such an
opposition between worldly delights and spiritual comforts, that he who is
filled with the one, cannot relish the other. And this it may seem the Apostle
meant: but sure something he saw, why worldly delights, though lawful in
themselves, do yet notwithstanding hinder holy meditations, when 1 Cor. 7.5.
he gives this counsel to religious couples, that they should forbear the
company of each other, that they might give themselves to fasting and prayer,
implying withal, that men and women are most devoted to heavenly thoughts,
when they are most estranged from worldly delights.

Fourthly, Fasting may help to eleuate the mind to heavenly meditations,
because it does temper and qualify our natural joys and worldly reioycings,
and teaches us how to refer them to their right ends. For joys and delights
of nature, if a man still give himself to the enjoying of them, do not only
press down the soul for the present, as has been said; but they do
besides so possess the mind, and habituate (as it were) the soul of a man
with their relish, that when he has done using of them, yet he has not done
thinking on them. And this made Quintil. instit. l. 12. cap. vlt. page 753.
Quintilian to say, that Students, who are given to sports and tender care of
their bodies, will never prove learned men, partly, because they mis-spend much
time in these vanities, and partly because, ne ea quidem tempora idonea quae
supersunt, the time which is remaining is not fit for studies. And so it is in
respect of the exercises of religion. If we give our selves still to worldly,
though lawful pleasures, they do so drown a man's soul, that when he
cease from them, yet he is not fit either to pray with devotion, or to hear
with attention, or to do any other holy work with minding of what he is
about. But now this holy discipline of fasting, if it be holily used, it will
help to moderate our pleasures, that we exceed not in them, and to season and
qualify and temper them for an holy use: so that the same worldly delights,
which make another man to wax wanton against Christ, will make this man more
cheerful in Gods service, and with David to dance, when he brings home the
Ark of God. And as 2 King. 3.15.
Elisha, by hearing a Minstrell play, was fitted to receive heavenly
revelations, and then fell on prophesying: so, if by a seasonable practice of
humiliation, we have made our way to Gods favor, then if we feast and hear
music, and use honest recreations, even these worldly delights will fit us
for heavenly inspirations, and lift up our hearts to praise God with alacrity
and cheerfulness of mind. And this we may well suppose was the reason, why
the Christian Church has set fasting days before festival days, and
appointed abstinence to be an Usher to our feasting, that our sorrow for sin
on the former day, might turn our mirth the day following into an holy
rejoicing in Gods mercies.

Thus, in diverse respects, fasting may help to elcuate the soul, and kindle
the fire of zeal and devotion. And for these, or some such respects as these,
Bassl. de Ieiun. Homil. 1. page 327.
Saint Basil, and after him Aug. in Psalm. 42. in fine.
Saint Augustine, do compare fasting to the wing of a Foul; because as worldly
delights like bird-lime do entangle the soul, and depresse her thoughts unto
this earth; so abstinence like the birds wings does make the soul to soar
aloft, and carries her prayers into heaven. And Ambros. de Elia and ieiun.
cap. 3. pa. 527.
Saint Ambrose, speaking of Elias his Fast, says of it, Hoc gradu Elias
ascendit, antequam curru, Elias went up into heaven by this ladder of fasting,
before he ascended thither in the chariot of fire. And the learned of this
age, such as I have had occasion to peruse, do generally agree upon this note,
that fasting and prayer are often and usually joined together in Scriptures,
because they go together in our practice, abstinence ever adding life to our
prayers. But if any man will please to make trial in himself, his own
experience will be a better proof than all sayings of other men, and all
arguments that wit and reason can devise. And I wish that cyther this or any
other consideration might move religious minds to make trial of this
practice; that so they might be able to judge of it out of their feeling, and
not by hearsay. And if after trial made in religious manner, they find not
their attention more quick, their devotion more fiery, their prayers more
fervent, their meditations more spiritual, and themselves, as it were, turned
into other men: then they may suspect that the ancient Fathers of the Church,
and the learned Writers and Preachers of our own time, yea and the Prophets
and Apostles themselves, have with fair words persuaded men to unnecessary
pains. But if any shall seriously bend himself to make trial of this
counsel, he will find the like event, I doubt not, that the men of Samaria
did by coming to hear Christ. When the woman told them what strange things
she had found in Christ, and exhorted them, Ioh. 4.29.
Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did. Is not this the
Christ? They, giving some credence to the woman's word, went to make trial
themselves; and after trial made, then they said to the woman, verse. 42.
Non me beleene, not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves,
and do know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world. So, if
any well-minded Christian, upon the word of so many learned Fathers and
Writers, will but in due manner begin the work, I doubt not but after trial
he will say, Now I believe the spiritual virtues that this exercise has, not
because Basil, or Chrysostom, or Ambrose, or Augustine, or any other, either
Father, or Doctor, or Preacher says so, but because my self by experience
find and feel it to be so.

IIII. A fourth and last use of fasting is, that it serves for an act or help
of Repentance: and that two ways. For first it is an act, that follows and
flows from repentance. And secondly it is an act, that breeds or increases
our repentance. And in both these respects, it may well be esteemed as a
necessary companion that goes along with repentance. For in the one respect it
is as a follower, that comes after and waits upon it. And in the other, it
is as an usher, that goes before and makes way for it.

1. First, it is a necessary companion to follow after and wait upon
repentance: and thus it is necessary in two respects. 1. That our sorrow may be
answerable to our sin. For we sin, not in inward desires only, but in
outward both speehes and actions: or we sin in thought, word and deed. And
reason requires, that the plaster should be as large as the sore; and so,
that repentance should spread it self as far as the offense has done. This
the Nineuites observed in their repentance. They put on haire-cloth, and
fasted, and sat down in ashes. By which behavior of theirs, they seemed to
intend thus much, (says a Reverend and learned Writer) D. King on Jonas,
Lecture 36. page 489.
We acknowledge before thy Majesty (Lord of Hosts) we the unworthiest
creatures that ever thy hands have formed, viler then the sackcloth we wear
(for if there had been baser stuff in the world, we would not have refused
it,) and fouler then the ashes we are besprent with: We acknowledge that thou
art a righteous God, and we an unrighteous Nation, not worthy our meat,
drink, clothing, or any other benefits, etc. And in acknowledgement thereof,
as guilty within our selves, Whatsoever thou have given us to enjoy for
comfort, for pleasure, for service, or any other use, either in our families at
home, or in our foulds and stalls abroad, we resign it into thy hands, as
having no right unto it; we lay it down at the feet of thy justice, and only
for thine own sake beseech thee to show mercy. In this manner their repentance,
as it first sprung in the heart, so it sprouted and showed it self in the
gestures of the body. And so must ours do; or else the plaster will be too
little for the wound. Secondly, fasting is necessary, as a follower of our
repentance, that our outward humiliation may prove the truth of our inward
sorrow. For the heart is used to express his inward affections by outward
actions; as it expresses his unclean thoughts by wanton looks and unchaste
gestures, and unsavory speeches; and his joy and inward reioyceing, by
singing and dancing, and a cheerful countenance. And this made Solomon to
say, Prou. 15.13.
A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance: And our Savior to say, Math.
12.34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And I may add by the
like reason, Yea, and the eye looks, and the ear hears, and the feet
walk, and the hands work. And hence it follows, that if sorrow and
repentance be in the heart, they will appear and show themselves by the body:
and the acts and behavior of the body, by which repentance and sorrow are
showed, are weeping and mourning, and fasting, and forbearing of the comforts
of nature, and the delights of the world. This we find true in daily
experience, that sorrow, whatsoever the cause be, if it be great, it will not
let a man eat; and if it be but moderate, yet it chooses not to eat. Thus
Ahab, when he was denied Naboths Vineyard, 1. King. 21.4.
laid him down upon his bed, and would eat no bread. And Hannah, when she
was vpbraided by her adversary, 1. Sam. 1.7.
she wept, and did not eat. And Saul, when he had ill news prophesied unto
him, of his own death, and the death of his Sons, together with the
overthrow of the people; though they entreated him, yet he put it off, and
said, 1. Sam. 28.23.
I will not eat. And Plutarch says of Caesar, that being told of violating of
the Law which himself had made, Adeo pounituit, vt illo die coenam recusaret.
Plut. apoph. in August. Caes.
it so repented him, that he refused his supper. Thus sorrow for worldly
respects enioyneth abstinence from food. And so it does when it is for sin.
David says of himself, Psalm. 102.4.
My heart is sinitten and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my
bread. The meaning is, that sorrow so possessed his heart, that he had no mind
of his meat. And Iocl. 2.12.
the Prophet taught the people to show their repentance, by fasting, and
weeping, and mourning. And nature taught the Jonas 3.5, 6, 7.
Nineuites to do the like. And from hence Saint Basil says, (...). Basil. de.
Ieiun. Hom. 1. page 323. A.
Repentance without fasting is idle. The meaning is, that as S. James says;
Faith without works is dead,.i. it is no true faith, if it bring forth no
fruits: so if repentance do not bring forth fruits of repentance, fasting and
mourning and humiliation, it may be feared, lest it be a dead and fruitless
repentance. And this made our Lord to say of Tire and Sidon, that they would
have Luke 10.13.
repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes: meaning that they would have
repented seriously and unfeignedly. And sure no man among us would think that
that woman did truly sorrow for her husbands death, that would think it too
much to wear a mourning gown and a black pair of gloves at his funeral.
And as great reason there is, to think that he does not greatly sorrow for
sin, that will never fast and chasten himself for sin.

And if this be so, how great cause have we to be sorry, that we have showed
so little sorrow; and to repent that we have expressed so little repentance
hitherto? Surely, if we must try the tree by its fruit, and judge of our
repenting by our fasting; we shall find but little store of this virtue in
the world: so that we may justly complain, D. King on Jonas, Lecture 36. page
491.
as sometime an eloquent and learned Preacher did: Where is the Repentance of
our times? Whither is it fled? Where has it hid her self? etc. It is not for
the Angels to repent, because they sin not. Nor for the Devils of hell; for
their judgment is sealed. It is only for the sons of men, and we only
know it not. The people of Nineuch sinned, and would not eat; sinned, and
would not drink; sinned, and would not be clothed; nay, sinned, and would not
give leave to their beasts to feed: we sin, and yet we eat; nay, we sin
in eating, etc. we sin, and yet we drink; nay, we sin in drinking, etc.
and we sin, and cloth our selves; or rather we cloth our selves, and sin
by clothing us, etc. But if any man notwithstanding all this, can persuade
himself that he may repent well enough within in his heart, though he show it
not without by deeds of the body; I will only reply upon him, as Saint James
did in a like case. Show me thy faith by thy works, says he. And so say I,
Show me thy repentance by thy works: or if thou can not show it, I am not
bound to believe it. And this shall suffice to show how fasting does follow and
flow from Repentance.

2. Secondly, fasting is necessary to repentance, as an Usher that goes before
it, and makes way for it; I mean, because it is a means to beget and
increase it. And surely, the less use we have made of it in the former
respect, as a fruit springing out of our repentance; the more need we have of
it in this latter, that it may be a helper to forward our repentance. And that
it may do two ways, or for two causes.

1. Because the outward acts and behavior of the body, as they come first from
the heart, Orantes, de mebris sui corporis faciunt, quod supplicantibus
congruit, quum genua figunt, quum extendum manus, etc. Aug. com. 4. de cura pro
mort. cap 5. page 257. A.
so they reflect upon the heart again, and there they do increase and
confirm that affection, from which they sprang. This Saint Augustine observed
long ago in the outward gestures of prayer. When a man prays (says he) and
kneeleth him down upon his knees, and spreads his hands toward heaven; be
uses that gesture of body, which becomes a suppliant to use in his prayers.
And he adds, I know not how, but so it is, that these motions of the body,
as they had their first being from the affection of the soul, so they do
again stir up the affection that bred them; ac per hoc cordis affectus, qui
vt fierent ista praecessit, quia facta sunt, crescit; and hereby the affection
of the heart that caused them, is afterward increased by them. For devotion in
the heart does cast down the body on the earth, and lifts up the hands and
eyes toward heaven: and this prostration of the body, and elevation of the
hands and eyes, do blow the coals of devotion, and makes them burn the
more brightly. And so, it is repentance in the heart, that makes men to
exercise discipline upon the body: but this outward discipline in fasting, and
watching, and hard lodging, they confirm and increase the repentance from
whence they came. For if the mind should relent, and begin to forget what it
is about, (as Quintilian. Instit. l. 6. c. 1. page 345.
nihil facilius inarescit quam lachrymae; sorrow for sin does soon begin to
cease) yet these visible signs will ever and anon be calling it back again,
and bring to remembrance the former thoughts. Add hereto, that every virtue or
habit of the soul, the more it exercises it self by outward deeds, the
stronger it grows: for confirmed habits are bred by often iterated actions.

2. Fasting may breed or increase repentance, because it is a penal
chastisement, which the penitent does inflict on himself, and by which he does
chasten, and, as it were, amerce himself for his folly: for the use of
corrections and punishments is this, Hooker. Eccles. Polit. l. 5. nu. 72. pa.
213.
that as all offenses do use to seduce by pleasing; so all punishments
endeavor by vexing to reform transgressions. And for this cause it is, that
when God would reclaim men, he lays his rod upon them, and so brings them
back by weeping Cross. Proofs are many, but take one instance for all. When
Jonas was sent to Nineueh, he turned his back, and fled to Tarshish a
contrary way; and so long as wind and tide served him, he went on with full
sail: but when God had sent his messenger to apprehend him, a tempestuous
storm, and a raging sea, and by this means had cast him into the deep, and
clozed him in a Fishes belly, as in a prisonhouse; then Jonas relented, and
amended, and prayed for mercy, and went the right way whither he was sent.
Upon which passage Ep. 25. page 203. C.
St. Hierom speaking in Gods person, gives us this note; Fugerat animosus
Propheta, sed in profundo maris meus fuit: The stomachfull Prophet, like a
fugiuiue servant, ran away from me; but in the bottom of the sea I caught him,
and he became a good servant ever after. And as GOD by making men to smart,
does also make them to repent: so if we by fasting and other penal
inflictions, do amerce and chasten our selves for our sins, this correction
also may serve to reform us. Nay in some sense I may say, that the
chastiseme^ts which we inflict upon our selves, are most times more effectual
then those which God does lay upon us, partly because our selves do know more
distinctly why and wherefore we suffer, and especially because we are by our
own thoughts aforehand, prepared to receive the correction before we feel
it: which helps in Gods corrections are most times wanting unto us. And from
hence Saint Basil commends fasting, as being De Ieiun. Hom. 1. pa. 321.
(...), a medicine that takes away the malady of sin. Which point he yet
declares further by a most lively similitude. Quemadmodu^ vermes, qui in
puerorum intestinis germinant, pharmacis quibusda^ acribus et amaris
excutiuntur: ita peccatum, etc. ibid.
As worms (says he) which are bred in childrens entralls, are expelled by
worme-wood, and bitter medicines: so if sin be engendered in a man's soul,
there is no speedier way to expel it, then by letting down this bitter potion
of fasting and humiliation. And to like purpose Saint Ambrose, Dulcis voluptas
videtur, amarum ieiuniu^. Hoc. umaio illud dulce tollatur, etc. Ambros. de Elia
and Ieiun. ca. 11. page 533.
Delicate fare and pampering of the body, (says he) is pleasing to nature,
and fasting is as unpleasing: but things which are most pleasant to the taste,
are not always most profitable for health. Nay, Corpora dulcibus frequenter
inflantur; sweet things do puff up the body: and melle iecur tenditur; and
the eating of honey makes the liver to swell: but bitter things do bring it
to its temper again. And so it is in the government of the soul. Pleasant
meats and full feeding puff up and swell the slesh; but abstinence takes it
down, and brings it to a right disposition and temper. In regard of all
which, as also out of the experience that my self have had, I dare be bold to
say, that whosoever shall make trial of this course, shall find the like
effect, when he humbles himself by fasting, that David did, when God humbled
him by his correction. David says of himself, Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes. Upon which words, Saint Augustine commenteth in this manner, August.
in Psalm. 42. page 139. C.
Didicera^ elatus iniquitates meas, discam humiliatus iustificationes tuas:
When I was lifted up in prosperity, I learned to obey mine own lusts, but now
being once humbled, I shall learn to obey thy Laws. And so the contrite
soul, that has chastened himself by this discipline, may have just occasion,
I am persuaded, to say after trial; It is good for me that I have been thus
afflicted for my sins. For by this holy revenge upon my self, I shall learn
to serve my God better.

Thus I have declared the holy uses of this discipline, such as I could think
on for the present. Others, that are not strangers from this exercise, may
peradventure either add mo, or enlarge these. In the mean time, it will not
be unseasonable to advertise the Reader of two things concerning the premises.

1. If any man have need of these, or any of these helps and uses, then he
may not say or think that an holy Fast is superfluous and needless for him.
For example, if he find that he has any disordered lusts or fleshly
thoughts that are not wholly subdued and tamed; but that either they provoke
him to evil, or hinder him from that which is good: then he may make use of
fasting, because it will serve him to beat down his body, and to bring it into
subjection, that he may serve God the more freely. Or, if he find that his
prayers and meditations, and other divine exercises be not wholly spiritual,
without all mixture or fainting; then he may make use of fasting, because it
will serve to eleuate his thoughts, and to carry his prayers with full wing
into heaven. And lastly, if he find that he have any sins not fully
sorrowed for, and wholly done away, but that he has need of some more
repentance; then he may make use of fasting, hecause it will serve him to
humble his soul, and to increase godly sorrow, that he may obtain pardon.
But if any man be so spiritual, and so perfect, and so past all frailty of
mankind, that he neither needs any more mortifying of his flesh, nor any
more sharpning of his devotion, nor any more repentance for his sin: I will
not say that such a man has any further need of fasting. No, nor can I say,
that he has any more need of Christ, or his death and bloodshed. For he
that is so perfect, what more need has he of a Savior? But one thing I dare
and will say, that God does accept, and Jesus Christ does acknowledge, and the
holy Angels do rejoice more for one sinner, that by fasting and mourning does
repent for his sins, than ninety and nine of the most perfect men in the
world, that think they have no need of repentance.

2. If any man shall please to make trial of this exercise, and after his
fasting do not find these holy uses of it; then he should examine himself
how he carried and demeaned himself in the performance of this service:
whether he have not erred in the manner, or swarued from the right end, or
neglected some necessary and substantial condition, that is required for this
purpose. And if after due examination it do appear, that he have not
miscarried in some weighty and material point, I will not say nay, but he may
condemn me for being too lavish in commending the virtues of this work. But
if it do appear, that he have so erred, then let him blame himself that it
has succeeded no better. For the Pharisees fasted to an ill end, and lost their
reward: and the Jews fasted in an ill manner, and were reproved for their
labor. And so if any Christian err in the same or the like sort, he may not
think by such a fast to obtain Gods favor, or to purchase the blessings
already spoken of. Now if any shall ask, as perhaps some will, what those
necessary conditions be, that by fulfilling of them, he may attain the
promises annexed to them; this question I shall labor, God willing, to
satisfy, in the next ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IIII. What conditions are required of us in our fasting, that it may be
accepted with God.
FAsting has many good uses in Religion, as has been already said. But it is
not every Fast that has these virtues, nor every Fast that can commend us to
God. For, as I began to say, we read of some men's Fasts that have been like
themselves, and both of them abominable. Ieiunauerunt Nineuitae, and Dei
misericordia^ clicuerunt: ieiunauerunt and Iudaei and nihil profecorunt, sed
culpati abierunt. Igitur ieiunij leges discamus, ne in incertum curramus, etc.
Chrysostom. Homil. 3. ad pop. Ancioch. page 49.
The Nineuites fasted, and obtained mercy, says Saint Chrysostom, but the
Jews fasted, and gained reproof for their pains. Therefore that we may
learn how to fast, that so we may please God, and not both punish our bodies,
and not profit our souls; it will be necessary in the next place, to consider
what things are required of us, when we do fast, that we may profit by it.

I. First then it is required in our fasting, that it be a moderate afflicting
of our selves. I say two things. 1. That there must be a kind of affliction
and chastening in it. 2. That this chastening must be moderate, and within
compass.

1. That there must be a kind of afflicting in our fasting. And so the
Scriptures say. For the Lord himself speaking of the yearly fast which he had
appointed, says of it, Leuit. 16.9, 31.
In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your
souls by a statute for ever, and Leuit. 23.29.
whatsoever soul it be, that shall not be afflicted that day, he shall be cut
off from among this people. And the Angel says of Daniels fast; Dan. 10.12.
When thou did set thy heart to chasten thy self before thy God. And David
says of his own fasting, Psalm. 35.13.
I humbled [or afflicted] my soul with fasting. And the people of the Jews,
Is. 58.3.
Wherefore, say they, have we fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? But most plain to this
purpose is that of Ezrah; Esr. 8.21.
I proclaimed a Fast, says he, that we might afflict our selves before our
God. Where we may note, that the afflicting of our selves is the very end of
our fasting. Thus, in the language of the holy Ghost, fasting does imply a
kind of afflicting. And indeed if it be rightly used, it may be said to
afflict a man for three respects. First, because it does naturally breed a
kind of pain to the body. For, when nature wants her ordinary nourishment,
she feeds upon the body it self, and sucketh and draws from it its
natural moisture, and consumes the juice of it. Which action of nature upon
it self, if it be long and great, does breed insufferable pains, which makes
men to eat their own flesh, rather than endure it: and if it be but moderate,
yet if it be continued above the ordinary and fit time of refreshing, it will
more or less breed some sense of pain. Secondly, fasting may be said to
afflict, because it depriueth a man of his usual and accustomed refreshing and
comfort. And that without any real and positive pain, is a kind of
affliction to nature. For if a man that has been in place of authority and
respect, be only deprived of this honor and dignity, that privation alone
will be a corrasiue to his soul. And if a man that has been accustomed to
live at his liberty, be commanded to keep his house, though he lodge as soft,
and fare as well, and be attended as carefully as ever he was wont; yet this
restraint in his own house will be a punishment unto him, because it is an
abridging of his wonted liberty. And so abstinence from meat at the usual
time, is an affliction to nature, because she misseth her wonted comfort and
refreshing. Thirdly, fasting may further be said to afflict, because it is a
memorial, that represents unto us the just causes of the greatest sorrow.
For as when a wife wears mourning weeds for her Husbands death, if any other
occasion should draw her to sporting and mirth; yet the sight of her own
clothes would re-call her, because they are testimonies that put her in mind
of her husbands decease, and her own widdow-hood: so out fasting, being
undertaken for humiliation and repentance, is an outward token that calls our
sins to remembrance, that tells us how unworthy we are of the least of Gods
mercies, and how obnoxious to damnation, if by repentance we do not obtain
pardon. In which case, though we should otherwise forget our selves, yet the
very want of our wonted food will cause a sight, and breed a sense of our
woeful estate. And this is thought to be one reason, why the Nineuites caused
their children and cattle to fast from all food, who notwithstanding were
neither guilty of the sin, nor capable of repentance; because the ruefull sight
of their miseries, and the mourning sound of their cry, might serve to increase
the Nineuites sorrow, whose sins had been the cause of all. Thus fasting is
in diverse respects a kind of affliction, and in the religious use of it, was
intended by Almighty God for that purpose.

2. The second thing is, that this chastening must be moderate, and not exceed
the proportion of every man's strength and ability. And then it exceeds this
proportion, when it either destroys nature, or disableth a man for Gods
service, and the duties of his calling. And thus far if a man go, he goes
beyond the rule of a religious fast. The reasons are: First, God does not
desire the hurt of his creature, while he is about his service: nay, he will
rather forbear some part of his service, than an Ox or an Ass shall want
necessary food, as is evident by our Saviors own words related by the
Evangelist Luke 13.15. and 14.5.
. And if he will not have a beast to want food, much less would he have a man
to endanger his life or health for such an exercise, though tending to his
service. And therefore if any deny necessary refreshing to the body, when need
does require, that they may use the more austerity against the flesh, Audiant
qui ea, quae necessaria sunt corpori, subtrahu^t, illud quod per Prophetam
Dominus loquitur; Ego Dominus odio habens rapinam holocaustoru^. De rapina vero
holocaustum offert, qui temporalium bonorum sieve ciborum nimia egestate, vel
manducandi, vel somni penuria corpus suum immoderate affligit. De Consecrat.
distinct. 5. cap. 24. Non mediocriter.
Let them hear (says the Canon Law) what God says by the Prophet Isa. 61.8.
: I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering. Now he
offers God an offering of robbery, says the Canon, that defraudeth his body
of necessary food for religions sake. And let such a one take with him also,
the rule of Saint Ambrose, [ Ambros. ser. 31. p. 44. G.
Satis diu ieiunat, qui cum Christi voluntate se resicit;] He fasteth long
enough, that breaks Fast with Christ's liking and approbation. Secondly,
Fasting is appointed of God for an help, that may enable us to serve God the
better, as to make the flesh serviceable to the soul, to lift up the mind in
holy and heavenly meditations, and to further our repentance and obedience, as
has been formerly declared. But when it exceeds the proportion of a man's
strength, as it casts down the body, so it disableth the soul also. For
Epist. 7. ad Laetam. page 59. F.
experience tells us, says Saint Hierome, [Asellum in via, quum lassus
fuerit, diuerticula quaerere;] that a beast when it is ouer-laden, and wearied,
will turn a side at every corner, and ever and anon seeks how to lie down
under the burden. And so if the body be ouer-burdened and enfeebled with
too-much abstinence, it cannot be serviceable to the soul, nor afford her,
strength and spirits for holy exercises, but will ever be ready to sleep, or
rest, or faint: so that the soul at such times cannot hear, nor read, not
pray, nor meditate, as at other times she is used to do. And for this cause
the Apostle gives Timothy this rule, 1 Timothy 5.23.
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine
often infirmities. And Saint Hierome gives the like counsel to a religious
friend of his; Sic debes iciunare, vt non palpites, and respirare vix possis,
and comitum tuarum vel porteris, vel traharis manibus: sed vt fracto corporis
appetitu, nec in lectione, nec in Psalmis, nec in vigilijs solito quid mimis
facias. Ieiuniu^ non perfecta virtus, sed caeterarum virtutum fundamentu^ est,
etc. Hieron. ad Demetriad. Ep. 8. page 72. C
You should so fast, (says he) that you do not faint, and breathe short, and
have need of some body to bear you up for falling: but that subduing the
bodily appetite, you do not diminish spiritual exercises, nor read or sing,
or watch or pray less then you are wont. For Fasting is not a perfect virtue,
to be desired for it self; but an help and ground of other virtues. The want
of this moderation Ionatha^ did rightly reprove in Saul his father, who by
enioyning too strait abstinence, did hinder the people in the pursuit of the
enemies. 1. Sam. 14.29.
My Father has troubled the Land. See I pray you, how mine eyes have bin
enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey: How much more, if the
people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies, which they
found? For had there not bin now a much greater slaughter among the
Philistines? And so by the same reason, if any man do exceed measure in his
religious abstinence, we may say of him, He troubles his soul, and hinders
the work of Religion, and makes himself unable to do good duties. But this
Caveat was necessary in times past; now a days few men offend that way. And
therefore I will press this point no further. Only out of the former part of
this Note, where I showed that fasting is an Afflicting, I will draw some short
conclusions for our further use.

1. Concl. If a true Fast be a chastening of the body, then Papists have
little cause for their great outcryes, and much boasting of their Fasts. For as
the Pharisees said to Christ, Mark. 2.1^. Luke 5.33.
Why do the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast often, but thine eat
and drink? so the Pharisees of our time say, that they and their disciples fast
often; but Protestants and their Scholars eat and drink, and feast. But all
this loud cry is but an empty sound. For say, they fast often, as they call
fasting; yet what is it that they call a Fast, and which they enjoin their
disciples to use? Why? it is (forsooth) that at dinner they eat no flesh, and
that at supper they make not a set and standing meal. But at dinner they may
take their fill of the best fish, and the strongest wines, and the daintiest
iunkets, and what they will beside of roots and white-meats, or any such like.
And at night, they may have a drinking, and eat something beside, more or
less, according to the custom of the place and people. And they may drink at
any time of the day, and any drink they list. Yea, and (which is abominable to
conceive) if a man drink intemperately, and be drunk on their fasting day,
yet if he observe the former rules, Contra temperantiam peccatu^ erit, contra
ieiunium non item. Azor. par. 1. l. 7. ca. 10. q. 7.
he offends not against the Law of their Fast. This is the scrictnes and
hard discipline that the Church of Rome does lay upon her children in their
frequent and meritorious Fasts. Nor may we think, that the practice can be
much better then their precepts are. Sure I read, that Polyc. Lyserus praefat.
praefixa Hassenmull. de ieiunio Jesuit.
the Princes of Germany at the times of their public meetings in the Empire,
were wont to observe the known fasting-dayes of the Church, and then they
would go dyne with the Bishops. For (as they used to say) they never had
greater variety of good cheer, nor more dainties, then at such times. But some
perhaps may say, that he that reports this, was an adversary to their Church.
Be it so: yet that is no reason to discredit the report of a thing so openly
known. And though Lyserus, who reports this from the Princes mouths, were
an adversary, yet Lindanus was their friend, and he says no less of their
loose fastings. Ieiunia nostra quae et vini copia natant, abundantiaque
redundant, et piscium varietate carnium superant delitias, adeoque cum Deo
ludere videntur, dum pro intercepto, qui ex ouis oritur calore, olei flammas,
vini aestum, omnisque aromatu^ generis ignes, helluoni infarciunt stomacho;
veteribus Christianis omnino fuisse non modo incognita, sed et intolerabilia
atque adeo abominanda, pijs omnibus vetera cogitantibus arbitramur notius, quam
vt ea de re, vlla sint verba profund e^da. Lindan. Panop. lib. 3. cap. 11 pa.
89.
That our Fasts (says he) which swim with store of wine; and abound with
superfluities, and outstrip the delicates of flesh, with variety of fish;
(insomuch that they may seem to dally with God; while for cutting off the
warmth that is caused by eggs, they cramme into their gluttonous stomach the
flames of oil, the burning heat of wine, and the fire of all kind of spices)
were not only unknown to the ancient Christians, but were intolerable and
abominable, is a thing more evident to them that consider the ancient customs,
then that we should waste words about it. And in the margin he adds this
note; Ietunium Catholicoru^ passim Epicurea.
The Fasts of Catholics all abroad like the feeding of Epicures. And this may
serve to show what sore penance our popish people do undergo, by their often
fasting. But if a true Fast be an afflicting of the body, as I have proved, and
themselves will not deny; then though they have many Fasts in name, yet they
have few or none in deed. Let them then look homeward, and reform these
mock-fasts of their own Church, and then let them complain of the rare Fasts
in ours.

2. Concl. They make but a frivolous excuse, who to free themselves from
fasting, allege that they find hurt by it; meaning that it is some pain to
endure two or three hours hunger, and some trouble to pass over the usual
time of refection. Some pain, and some trouble? Why? that is the very cause
why we should fast, that by chastening the body we may cherish the soul. Nor
is it so great a matter now and then to endure such a pain. For we read that
Esau was so long in hunting, that he fainted, and was ready to dye for hunger,
Genesis 25.29, 30, 32.
as himself complained. And we may see it now among men, that if it be for
pleasure to follow our sports, or for profit to increase our wealth, or for
preferment to advance our estates; there is no man but would find himself
able enough to forbear a meals meat. And if the saving of our souls be as
dear unto us, as these worldly vanities, we will not repine at so small a
labor in so necessary a case.

3. Concl. They be poor fasters, who glut themselves aforehand, that so they
may fast with full stomachs. Saint Basil met with some such in his days, whom
he warns and threatens for it. Praua est cogitatio, etc. It is a graceless
thought, (says he) to say with our selves, Hom. 2. de Ieiun. page 336. A.
Now the fasting days are bidden, (...): Let us therefore now drown our
selves in swilling and excess. For will any man (says he) when he is to marry
a chaste Matrone, make an introduction to such a marriage, by bringing
Strumpets into his house? And in the places of Popish ignorance, it is a most
usual practice, Conamur per crapulam and lasciuiam, vlcisci die^^etunij,
quasique de ieiunioa enturo sumere poe^as. ^^lesa. de Qua^^^. cap. 12. (...).
70.
to make way for Lent Fast, by surfeting at Shrouetide. But a religious
Christian should consider, that if he mean to fast rightly, he must make his
abstinence to be a chastening to nature, which cannot be, if his fasting be but
a forbearing of meat, till his former gluttony be concocted.

II. Secondly, there is required in a true Fast, that our other carriage and
behavior be suitable to this of our fasting. My meaning is, that as we
chasten and afflict the body by abstinence from meat, so we should do by
refraining from the other delights and comforts of nature. For else the other
pleasure would undo that, which by fasting we seek to effect; because they
will hinder our humiliation and repentance. Nor is it seemly to join gay
clothes, and sweet perfumes, and pleasant music, and frolike behavior with
this exercise of humiliation and sorrow, no more then it is for him that
wears a mourning gown for his friends death, to flaunt it in a white hat,
and a gay feather, and a colored suite at the same time. And for this cause it
is, that in Scriptures, where fasting is spoken of, there is mention also of
sackcloth and ashes, and hard lodging, and forbearing of perfumes. As for
example, Dan. 10.3.
Daniel forbore sweet ointments. And 2. Sam. 12.16.
David lay all night upon the earth. And Ester 4.1.
Mordecai put on sackcloth, and besprent himself with ashes: And the Jonas 3.6.
King of Nineueh laid off his robe, and covered himself with sackcloth, and
sat in ashes. And Joel 2.16.
Joel requires, Let the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride
out of her Closet. And our Mar. 2.19. Luke 5.34.
Lord says, The children of the Bride-chamber cannot fast, while the
Bridegroom is with them. The meaning is, that Marriage-mirth is unseasonable
in a time of fasting. And therefore if a Fast must be kept, let the Bridegroom
go forth of his wedding Chamber; as Joel speaks: or if Marriage-mirth be
necessary, let the humiliation of fasting be deferred till an other time; as
our Savior implies. And because of this disproportion between mirth and
fasting, God rejects the Fast of the Jews for this cause among others,
because in the day of their Fast they found pleasure. And from the
consideration of these things it is, that the Hebrews were wont in their Fasts
Ainsw. on Leu. 16.29.
to abstain from four things, that import mirth and rejoicing; from washing
themselves, from anointing, from fine apparel, and from the use of the
marriage bed. And so, when we fast, all our behavior must be such as beseem
mourning, and the condition of a dejected suppliant. An putatis illu^ ieiunare,
qui primo diluculo non ad Ecclesiam vigilat, sed surgens congregat seruulos,
disponit retia, canes producit, saltus syluasque per lustrat? Ambros. to. 5.
ser. 4^. page 58. v. Aug. de Diverse. Ser. 74. cap. 8.
At least thus much is necessary, that we abstain from all delights of the
world, that be disproportionable to the state of a mournful penitent.

III. Thirdly, there is required in a true Fast, that the inward affection of
the heart be answerable to the outward behavior of the body: that is, that as
by abstaining from the comforts of this life, we chasten the body, so by a
godly sorrow and unfeigned repentance, we humble our souls for our sins. And
because true repentance includes or implies amendment of life, and an hearty
practice of all good duties; therefore it is to be understood, that with a true
Fast there is necessarily required an holy life. And the reason hereof is
plain, because God does not care for the opus operatum, the bare work done:
nor does fasting please him, because it is an abstinence from meat; but because
it is a sign of repentance, and an help to true devotion and an holy life. To
this purpose we find God speaking to the Jews: Zach. 7.5.
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and in the seventh month, did ye at
all fast unto me? even to me? As if he should say, Ye did it not for my sake,
and I owe you no thanks for it, nor do I take it as a part of my service. But
why was it not done for Gods sake, and to his service? The reason is intimated
in the words following, verse. 9, 10.11, 12.
The Lord said, Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion, every
man to his brother, and oppress not the widow, etc. But they refused to
hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, etc. And to like purpose, but more
plainly, in another place: Isa. 58.4.
Ye fast (says God) for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard
on high. Is it such a Fast, that I have chosen? Will thou call this a Fast, and
an acceptable day to the Lord? He means that they fasted, as if they
repented for their sin, and meant to serve God; but they, while they kept
their Fast, continued in their sins: and that this was not a true Fast, that
God ever did require, or would accept. But if this be not the true Fast, what
then is? Why? It follows in the next words, verse. 6, 7.
Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the hands of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out, to thy house? When thou see the naked, that thou
cover him, etc? The sum and intent of which words is, that a true Fast, such
as God does require, and will requite, is to be joined with the practice of
good works. For the manner of speech is like to that of Saint James where he
says, James 2.27.
that pure religion and undefiled is this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and keep himself unspotted of the world. Where
he means not that religion, which is a duty toward GOD, does formally
consist in these good works, the doing of which is a duty toward man: but
that true and sound Religion is necessarily and by consequence joined with
these works. And so when God says, that the Fast which he requires, is to
loose bands of wickedness, etc. and to deal bread to the hungry, etc. He
means not, that a true Fast does essentially and formally consist in these
works, but that it is ever joined with them. And the good works which God
requires to accompany a religious Fast, are of two sorts: some are works of
justice, which are to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, etc. that is, to surcease and leave off their oppressing, and wronging
of their brethren. And some again, are works of mercy, which are to deal
ones bread to the hungry, to cloathe the naked, etc. By all which it does
appear, that God makes no account of fasting, if it be not joined with
charity toward the poor, and just dealing toward all men. The ancient
Fathers, agreeably to Scriptures, are eloquent and plentiful in this argument.
Saint Ambrose, Illi qui ieiunant a cibo, and non se abstinent a malo, similes
sunt diabolo, qui non manducat, and tamen a malo non cessat. Ambros. Sermon. 43.
p. 61.
He that fasteth from meat, and abstaineth not from sin, is like the Devil,
who does not eat, and yet cease not from sin. And again the same Father;
Qui abstinemus, prandia nostra pauperibus praerogemus. Sie tu pro delictia tuis
ieiunus Dominum roges, and ille pro te satiatus exoret: vtrumque tibi
proficiens, and tua fames, and saturitas mendicorum. Sermon. 41. page 59.
We that fast (says he) let us give our dinners to the poor. So thou fasting
shall ask God pardon for thy sins, and he being filled shall obtain it
for thee, and both of them shall be for thy good, both thy fasting, and the
poor man's eating. To the same purpose speaks Saint Augustine, Tum gratae sunt
Deo nostrae ieiunia, si illi, qui necessitate ieiunant, reficiantur a nobis.
August. de Temp. Ser. 64. page 231. G.
Then are our fasts accepted with God, (says he) if they which fast because
they want meat, be relieved by us. And again, the same Father, and in the same
Sermon, Dum a licitit abstinemus, magis ac magis admonemur illicita vitare. Qui
enim abstinemus nos a carnibus, quibus alijs diebus vti licet, etc. imprimis
peccata fugiamas, quae omnino nunqua^ licent. Itaque si volumus been ieiunare a
cibis, ante omnia ieiunemus and a vitijs. Augustine. de Temp. Sermon. 64. Dominic.
1. Quadrages. p. 231. E.
While we abstain from lawful things, we are admonished more and more to
eschew vnlanifull things. For we that abstain from flesh, which at other
times we may use, ought especially to avoid sins, which may never be used.
And therefore if woe will fast rightly from meat, we must above all fast from
sin.

But Saint Basil most fully and fitly to this purpose; Cave ne ieinnij
vtilitatem sola escarum abstinentia metiaris. Verum enim ieiunium est, ab
omnibus vitijs esse alienum, etc. Bafil. de Ieiunio. Homil. 1. page 331.
Do not place (says he) the good of fasting in the abstinence of meat: for
true fasting consists in abstayning from sin. For, eatest thou not flesh?
but thou deuourest thy brother. Forbearest thou to drink wine? but thou
forbearest not to offer wrong to thy brother. And thou stayest till night
before thou break thy fast; but thou spendest all the day in Law-suites, and
quarrelling. And do thou think to please God with such a godless fast? No,
no, Woe to them that are drunk, and not with wine. And who be they? They are
all such (says he) as are overcome and haled away with unruly lusts of sin,
as of anger, and envy, and revenge, and ambition, and carnal pleasures. For
all such unmortified lusts are as so many kinds of drunkenness. For he that
is led and possessed with these, he is not his own man: he cannot see and
discern the way of reason, much less of religion, no more than a drunken man
can find his way in the street. And if a man do abstain from wine, and yet be
drunk with these vices; or if a man forbear the flesh of beasts, and feed on
the blood of his brother, this is no truer a fast in Gods sight, than if he
should abstain from a weaker wine, and ouerwhelme himself with a stronger; or
should fast from swines flesh, and glut himself with Partridge and Pheasant.
The sum of all is, A true Fast cannot be separated from an holy life.

IIII. Fourthly, it is required that the soul do consider of, and put in
practice such holy duties, as a Fast does by the outward behavior make
profession of.

Some do require that every Fasting-day be kept as an Holy Day, without doing
of any worldly work, and with performing of such religious works as belong to
a Sabbath day. And their reason for this is, because God does command the
Jews, that on their day of expiation, in which they were to afflict themselves
with fasting, they should do no work; but that they should keep it for a
Sabbath of rest. But this I take to be an error, at least, I dare not charge
it as a necessary duty in any man's conscience, because I know no reason to
enforce it. For to mine understanding, the only place of Scripture, which
seems to incline this way, and upon which they only rest, does make nothing
for it at all. The place is in the sixteenth of Leuiticus, but especially in
the three and twentieth of the same Book, where the same words are repeated,
and the point more fully declared. And therefore I will set down the words
there recorded, that the Christian Reader may the better consider of the
meaning, and the more clearly see what to judge of the reason. The words then
are these, Leuitic. 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
On the tenth day of this month there shall be a day of Atonement; it shall be
an holy convocation unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an
offering made by fire unto the Lord. And ye shall do no work in that same
day: for it is a day of Atonement, to make an atonement for you before the Lord
your God, etc. For better conceiving of this Text, we must note, first, that
the sum and intention of this Chapter is, to set down the Feasts and the
Holy Days of the Jews, which are here reckoned up to be, the weekly
Sabbath, the Passover, the Offering of the first fruits, Pentecost, the Feast
of the Trumpets, the day of Expiation, and the feast of Tabernacles. And
concerning these, it is said by way of preface in the beginning, Verse. 2.
Say unto the children of Israel, Concerning the feasts of the Lord, which ye
shall proclaim to be holy Conuocations, Even these are my Feasts. And after
the enumeration of them, it is said, Verse. 37.
These are the Feasts of the Lord, which he shall proclaim to be holy
Conuocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord, etc. And in the
end of the Chapter after all it is added, And Moses declared unto the children
of Israel the Feasts of the Lord. And from hence it may be gathered, that this
day of expiation, which is placed among these holy days, is intended as a
festiual day, rather than as a fasting day. And therefore the fast or
humiliation here commanded, is an appurtenance of the feast, and a service
required on that holy day; and this day was appointed to be kept for an holy
day, not because it was a fasting day. Secondly, we may note in the
description of this day, that the chief thing for which this day was intended,
was for expiation and atonement. Thirdly, that the means by which this might
be wrought, and the things which God requires for the celebration of this day,
were an holy rest, a public meeting, an affliction of the soul, and an
offering made by fire. And hence we may gather, that an holy day and a fasting
day are here joined, as two things, both of which respect one end. And
therefore it follows not, The people are here commanded to keep an holy rest
upon this fasting day: and therefore it is necessary that every fasting day
should be kept holy: no more than this argument would follow from the same
place; Here the people are commanded to keep this holy day with fasting, and
humiliation, and therefore every holy day must be a fasting day. Fourthly, We
may note, that the reason why God appointed this day to be kept holy, is said
in the Text to be this, because it is a day of atonement for them before the
Lord: but it is not said that it was to be kept holy, because it was a fasting
day. And hence I may conclude, that the Text does give no warrant that every
fasting day must be kept holy day. Now let the Reader lay these notes and
collections from the Text together; and compare them with the reason brought to
prove the contrary, and he will easily see how weak the argument is. For the
only reason that ever I read or heard of from this Text for proof of this
conclusion, is this; God here commanded this fasting day to be kept holy, and
therefore every fasting day must be so kept. Which being nothing but an
inference of an universal from a singular, does hereby appear to be weak
and frivolous; besides the reasons now alleged from the Text to the contrary.
And now after all, seeing that this is the only place, on which this former
conclusion is grounded, and it has so little reason in it, as has been
showed: it remains, that to say every fasting day of necessity must be an
holy day, is an error without all ground of probability.

The thing then that I mean, when I say, that it is required that on the day
of our fast, the soul should practice such duties, as a Fasting-day by the
outward behavior does include, is; that as by fasting we profess our sorrow
for sin, with a purpose to serve God better; and do abstain from fleshly
comforts, that we may more freely enjoy the comforts of the Spirit: so a
Christian should use serious meditation and consideration of things requisite
for this purpose. As for example, he should examine his conscience, search out
the state of his soul, settle in himself a purpose of amendment, confess his
sins that make him unworthy to taste any of Gods creatures, and pray for
grace to live better. And that these and such like holy thoughts and desires
are requisite upon our fasting days, I am induced to think; partly, because
in public Fasts, Judge. 20.26. 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 4. Ezrah. 8.23. Ier. 36.6, 9,
10. Dan. 9.3. Joel 1.14. v. Kemnit. Exam. part. 4. de causa finali ieiun. nu.
47. page 94. and Serar. in Judith. 8. q. 7. page 320.
the Church has been accustomed to spend part of the day in public
meetings, and in religious exercises; and partly, because that outward
abstinence cannot of it self work those gracious effects, whereof I have
spoke before, unless the soul by consideration and holy thoughts do apply
and make use of his outward humiliation to this purpose. For fasting is not
like physic, which works while a man sleeps: but then only affects the
soul, and pleases God, when the heart makes use of it. A plain proof
whereof may be this; Fasting has this special use, among others, that as the
chastisements which GOD does inflict upon us, do serve to humble us, and bring
us home by repentance; so these chastisements voluntarily imposed upon our
selves, may serve for like purpose; as has been fully declared already. But
no outward chastisement, whether of Gods inflicting or our own, can work this
effect, unless the man do lay them to his heart, and apply them to himself.
Hence it is, that the Prophet complayneth of the people of Israel in this
manner; Hos. 7.9.
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: yea, gray hairs
are here and there upon him, yet he knows not. In which words we may note two
things: first, the corrections that were laid upon them; and they were, that
the Enemies had wasted and consumed them, and these and other miseries had
brought gray hairs upon them, and made them old before the time. Secondly, the
want of feeling in the people, They know it not: and again, Yet they know not,
says the Text. But what? Consumed by the Enemy, and not know that they were
stricken? pined, and become old with sorrow, and not feel their misery? No,
that is not the meaning; they felt their misery, no doubt. But the Prophet
means, that they did not take notice, nor think and consider that it was
Gods hand that inflicted this judgment, and their own sins that deserved it:
and therefore they were never the better for all this chastisement. And
therefore another Prophet complaining to like purpose, says, Isal 42.25.
God powered upon Israel the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and
it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet
he laid it not to heart. Which words imply, that no plagues move men to
repentance, if they do not lay them to heart, and consider of the causes, and
the conditions and events of such things. And as Gods chastisements, for want
of laying them to heart, are without their fruit for which they are intended:
so we may not expect that our own chastisements should prove better. No: for
we see that Genesis 25.
Esau fasted, and his hunger made him sell away his birthright: and Matt. 6.
the Pharisees fasted, and their fasts made them swell with pride and
vaineglory. And so we may fast by outward abstine^ce, and receive no good, but
hurt by it. And therefore for preventing of this evil, we must do in our
humiliations, as God requires us to do when he corrects us, that is, 1
King. 8.47.
bethink our selves, and Ezekiel. 18.28. Hagg. 1.5, 7.
consider our ways, and Isa. 42.25. and 57.1.
lay them to heart. And for this purpose, that our fasting may profit us in its
season, it will be requisite upon our fasting-dayes to set apart some time for
holy thoughts and good meditations, and other exercises suitable to a time of
humiliation and repentance. And if more may not be spared, by reason of other
occasions, yet so much time I presume every man may allot to this work, as he
spares from his dinner, and the refreshing of his body. And the more any man
is scanted of time, to be wholly employed on this work, the more he should
strive to fasten his heart on these holy thoughts, even while he is about his
worldly occasions. And if men do seriously and unfeignedly bend their minds
this way, I nothing doubt but they will find so much liberty for this work,
as may make their fasting to bring good affections unto their souls. These be
the conditions, which, as I conceive, are requisite in an holy East: make use of
them, and doubt not of the success.

CHAP. V. In what cases and for what purposes Fasting serves to obtain help
and favor from God.
FAsting rightly used, and with the conditions already mentioned, is very
available and of great use in the life of a Christian. For beside the
spiritual helps that we may have from it for furthering our devotion, whereof
I spoke before, it is also a powerful means to obtain help and mercy from
God in diverse necessary cases, or rather upon every occasion, wherein we do
stand in need of Gods special favor and assistance. For

I. First and in general, it is available to obtain Gods favor and goodwill
toward us; and consequently to incline and move him to help and protect us,
and to provide for us all good things, and to grant us all our just and lawful
desires. And this it does for diverse causes, or in diverse respects.

1. Because Fasting is an exercise of humiliation and subjection, whereby we
do submit and cast our selves down before Gods feet, as unworthy, in respect
of our many sins, to use any the least of his creatures. And humiliation is a
ready way to obtain favor. By it 1 King, 20, 31, etc.
Benhadad won the heart of the King of Israel, not only to spare his life, but
to entreat him with all kindness: though he had found much hard measure from
him immediately before. And by it, sinful men, who have offended God by their
sins, may find ready favor at Gods hands. For Iam. 4.6.
he resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. And if men 1 Pet. 5.6.
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, he will exalt them in due
time. And, Isa. 66.2.
All these things has mine hand made, says the Lord; but to this man will I
look, even to him, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at
my words. Which is, as if he should say, The heavens and the earth, and the
seas, and all things within them, all of them be mine, for I made them, and I
preserve them, and I may command them, and make use of them at my pleasure; but
among them all, my delight is, and I make choice to dwell and reside with him,
that humbles himself before me. It follows; And if humiliation be so
welcome to God, fasting must needs obtain his favor, when it is rightly used.

2. Because Fasting is an exercise of Repentance, and a means to work
reformation and amendment of life. And Repentance and amendment is the ready
way to obtain mercy and favor. For Ioh. 9.31.
We know (says the blind man now restored to his sight) that God hears not
sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he
hears. In which sentence there are two things considerable. 1. The sentence
it self: God hears not sinners, that is, God does not respect the prayer of
sinners, which persist in any sin, without repenting and reforming
themselves; nor is it reason that he should care to fulfill their desires, who
have no care to fulfill his Laws. But if any man be a worshipper of God, and
does his will, etc. That is, if any man endeavor to serve God, by forsaking
sin, and performing good duties, GOD hears that man's prayer, and will not
deny him any request, that may be for his good. Secondly, we may consider in
this saying, the certainty and undoubted truth of it: We know, (says he:) he
says not, we think, or we hope, or we are persuaded of it; but we know it, as
a thing that is clear and out of question. Again, We know; he does not say,
I know, or you know, or the learned Doctors know; but We, I, and you, and all
do agree in this principle, That God rejects the prayers of sinners, but
Psalm. 34.13.
his ears are open to the cry of the righteous: and, Ps. 145.19.
he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry and will save them. And if amendment of life and practice of righteousness
be so powerful with God, then fasting rightly used, cannot want his effect.

3. Because fasting rightly used, is a means to eleuate the mind, and to
inflame a zeal and devotion, and to set an edge on our prayers, as was
formerly declared. But Iam. 5.10.
the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, says the
Apostle. And consequently, fasting is a good means to impetrate grace and
favor.

In these and such like respects, fasting may steed us with God, to incline him
to our prayers. And therefore God himself reproving the ill-gouern'd Fasts of
the Jews, Isa. 58.4.
Ye shall not (says he) fast, as ye do this day, to make your voice to be
heard on high. Where he signifies, that their ill handling of their Fasts, was
the cause that their prayers were not heard; and implies withal, that a right
and well-ordered Fast would have pierced the clouds, and obtained audience in
heaven.

II. Secondly and more particularly, it may serve us to obtain favor and
mercy in these and such like special cases.

1. If a man stand guilty of sin, and liable to Gods anger, fasting may
serve to appease Gods anger, and to obtain pardon of the sin. This end Ezrah
had of his fasting. For when the people had sinned in taking strange wives,
first he confessed the sin, Ezra 9.15. and 10.1.
Behold, O Lord God of Israel, we are before thee in our trespasses: for we
cannot stand before thee because of this. And secondly, he betook himself to
abstinence and fasting. Ezra 10.6.
He did cate no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the
transgression of them that had been carried away. And lastly, verse. 19.
he took order that they did both put away their wives, and being guilty, did
offer a Ram of the flock for their trespass. In which practice of this holy
man, it appears, that fasting was one means, by which he sought pardon for
the sin. And to like purpose, the Lord himself appointed the Jews, to join
fasting with repentance. Joel 2.12.
Turn ye unto me with all your heart, (says he) and with fasting, and with
weeping and with mourning, and rent your hearts, etc. For he is gracious, and
merciful, etc. And for this cause, some of the Learned say, that Act. 9.
Paul did fast and pray for three days space, that he might obtain pardon for
his former sins committed before his conversion.

2. If a man be liable to Gods Judgments, and either be under the sense of
some present cross, or in fear of some future evil; fasting is a good means
to prevent the one, and to remove the other. Examples hereof we have in
Scriptures. For of the Nineuites we read, that when GOD had threatened; Ion.
3.4.
Yet forty days, and Nineueh shall be over thrown: they believed God, and
proclaimed a Fast, and put on sackcloth, and so they verse. vlt.
prevented the judgment. And Ichosaphat, when he and his people were in great
danger by reason of a great Army of Moabites and Ammonites that came against
them; 2 Chro. 20.2, 3.
he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and he proclaimed a Fast
throughout all Judah: and by this means v. 15, 22, etc
he escaped the danger. And David, when his child was sick and in danger of
death, 2 Samuel 12.16.
he fasted, and prayed for his life. And though God saw it not good at that
time to spare the child's life: yet by this it appears, that David knew
fasting and prayer to be an ordinary and effectual means to auert Judgments,
or else he would not have used it. Yea, and so powerful is fasting for this
purpose, that 1. King. 21.27, 29.
Ahab by his, though no sound fasting, did prevent a worldly judgment. And our
Savior tells us, Mat. 17.21.
that there are some such devils as cannot be cast out of the possessed, but by
prayer and fasting: assuring us hereby, that when no other means can, yet
prayer and fasting may prevail.

3. If a man have need of some special blessing or merey from God, fasting is
a good means to obtain it. This may be declared by the example of Ezrah. For
he and his Countrymen, the men of Judah, were to go up to Jerusalem from
Babylon the place of their captivity, and many lets they found in the way, and
little help for so great a journey: and hereupon, Ezra. 8.21.
I proclaimed a Fast, (says he) that we might afflict our selves before our
God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all
our substance. Where we may note, that the thing which he desired, was, that
God would direct them and lead them in a right way in safety and without
danger: and the means that he used to obtain this, was fasting. The success
whereof what it was, is declared afterward, where Ezrah says, verse. 23.
So we fasted, and besought our God for this, and he was entreated by us. And
to like purpose it is, that the Church of Antioch, when they were to send Paul
and Barnabas about the work of the Ministry and preaching of the Gospel,
Act. 13.3.
they fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them; and so sent them about
the work. Yea and our Mar. 4.2.
Lord himself, being to enter upon his Prophetical office, began with
fasting, and thereby prepared himself for that glorious work, as may appear
hereafter more fully in the proper place. By all which we may see what
commodities and benefits we may reap by this exercise, not only for our
souls and our spiritual profit, but for our bodies also, and our welfare in
the world. And hence, for conclusion of this point, I deduce and infer three
Aduertisements for our further use.

1. We may hence observe one special reason, why we are many times afflicted,
and after long grief find little ease: and it may be, because we do not
repent of our sins before we beg mercy; or if we use some kind of
repentance, yet it is not with that sorrow, and such chastening of our selves,
as God does expect, and the case does require. For in Scriptures we find that
Gods people, if either they felt any present scourge, or feared any future
danger, then they betook themselves presently to their prayers, and fasting,
and sackcloth: and by this means they have gotten victory over enemies, and
relief in time of dearth, and freedom from intended mischiefs, and case and
comfort in all cases of distress. And if we should use the same means, why
might we not expect the same success? For the Apostle speaking of Abraham's
faith, Romans 4.23, 24.
that it was imputed to him for righteousness, adds, that it was not written
for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also, to whom it
shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead. And elsewhere he says of the many examples of Gods Judgments upon
sinners, that 1 Cor. 10.6, 11.
these things happened to them for examples, and are written for our
admonition, that we should not lust after evil things, as they lusted. And so,
seeing such things are recorded in Scriptures concerning Fasting; we may and
must conclude, that these things were not written for those ancient servants of
God only, that they by this means obtained such great blessings; but for our
sakes also, and to admonish us, that if we use the same means, we shall
attain the same end. And therefore, if any of us have been long afflicted,
and yet are not delivered; let us consider whether we have not been defective
in this duty, and for want of humiliation have missed of the blessing. Surely,
if we find not ease, either we have not humbled our selves as we should, or the
thing that we desire, is no such blessing to us, as we do imagine.

2. We may from hence learn, how to make our prayers powerful with God. For
God has appointed us to ask, and has tied himself to give, but it is upon
condition, that we 1. Ioh. 5.14.
ask according to his will, and in such sort as we ought to ask. For Iam. 4.3.
ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, says the Apostle. But what
is that condition that God requires in our prayers? And how may we ask, that
we miss not of our requests? Why? surely, one means that may make all our
prayers the more effectual, is, if they be fervent and with feeling: and one
condition, on which God does grant some petitions, is, if they proceed from a
soul humbled with fasting. For as our Lord says, that there is a kind of
Devils that cannot be driven out but by prayer and fasting: so I may say, that
some sins may be pardoned, and some judgments auerted, and some blessings
obtained by prayer joined with ordinary humiliation and repentance: (for it
cannot be expected that we should fast so often as we may and ought to pray)
yet some sins there may be of so deep a dye, that ordinary sorrow may not be
admitted for their expiation: and some blessings there may be of that worth,
and of that importance, that they may seem too lightly esteemed, if they were
too easily obtained. And of such I may say, these kinds of sins are not
pardoned, and these kinds of blessings are not obtained but by prayer and
fasting. And if the pardon of greater sins, and the purchase of greater gifts
be to be sought for by prayer and fasting: then in the lesser of them we shall
speed the sooner, if we come in the same manner. If then we desire to make
our prayers powerful, and to pierce the heavens; we must help to list them up
with this wing of fasting, as the Fathers call it.

3. We may hence gather, how necessary fasting is for all sorts, and at all
times; and in special for our selves in these days. For, to say nothing of
the spiritual helps that it has for increase of grace and devotion, (which
alone consideration should move any Christian, if not to be in love with it,
yet at least to give way to it) and to insist only in the further blessings now
mentioned: who is there, that is not privy to himself of some sin, which
without pardon may be his ruin? And who is there, that either does not now
suffer, or may not justly fear some judgment hereafter, which he would
gladly prevent or avoid? And again, who is there that does not want and desire
some blessing and gift of God, that may greatly concern his body, or his
soul, or his estate? But if any man be so happy, as to have need of none of
these mercies; or rather so unhappy, as not to feel and know that he has need
of them all, or at least many of them: yet if we look abroad upon the face of
the Christian world, we may see many of our brethren that serve the same Lord,
robbed of their goods, deprived of their liberty, and butchered in their own
dwellings: yea and many houses burned down, Towns laid waste, fields left
untilled, and streets and highways swimming in blood, and enduring al other
miseries, which the cruelty of bloody wars, and insolency of proud Conquerers
do use to bring with them. And beside all this, who can tell whose turn is
next, and at whose door the Trumpet may blow? Quis talia fando temperet a
lachrymis? A compassionate Christian cannot think on this, without watery eyes
and a bleeding heart. And therefore if we should have no present cause of our
own; yet, if there be any bowels within us, we have great cause to weep, and
wish with Jeremy, that our eyes were a fountain of tears, to bemone the
miseries of our brethren, and the distress of Gods Church. And how much
greater cause then have we, with Ezrah and Nehemiah and Daniel, to humble our
selves before our God, and with fasting and weeping and sorrow, to entreat
Gods favor for his Church, that he will be gracious to his people, and will
spare his own inheritance, and will at length turn again the captivity of
his Zion; that we may rejoice in his salvation, and give him thanks in the
great Congregation? Surely, if in such cases any man can think that there is
no need of fasting; I must needs say, I cannot but think that he has no
feeling.

CHAP. VI. Why Christ fasted at this time.
HItherto I have spoken of Fasting in abstracto, as it may be considered in and
by it self: It follows now to say something of it in subiecto, as it was
used: by our Savior. And hereof the Evangelist says; He fasted forty days
and forty nights: which words being joined with that which is said in the first
verse, that then he was led into the wilderness, and fasted, meaning, after
he was baptized, and as it were now consecrated for his public ministry,
do give us occasion to enquire into, and to consider of these five points: 1.
Why Christ fasted at this time. 2. Why he fasted so long. 3. When we should
or may lawfully fast. 4. How long we should continue our fasts. 5. What we
are to think of the forty days Fast, commonly called Lent-fast.


And first, Why our Lord did fast at this time, I find nothing expressly said
in the Text: but by considering the circumstances of Christ's fast, and by
comparing other Scriptures with this Text, we may conceive diverse reasons of
his so doing, which will be profitable for us to take notice of: which so far
as I do now apprehend, may be these

I. First, we may well think that he fasted, that hereby he might perform a
part of that humiliation and those sufferings which he voluntarily undertook
for our sakes. For our Lord being equal with God, and far above the
infirmities of our nature, Philip. 2.6, 7, 8.
took upon him the form of a servant, and humbled himself even unto death.
In which his humiliation, there be diverse steps and degrees. For the last and
greatest, and that which is the perfection of all, was his death and passion
upon the Cross: and yet his mean birth, his poor estate, his reproaches in
the world, his want of things necessary, his debilities of nature, and other
such infirmities and wants, were all of them as preparatiues to his death, and
parts of those sufferings which he sustained for our sins. For which cause
it is, that the Apostle does not only say, that Romans 5.8.
he dyed for us; but says also that 2 Cor. 8.9.
he being rich, became poor for our sakes. And so by the same reason, we
may say that he being God, became man for our sakes; and being strong, became
weak for our sakes; and being glorious, became contemptible for our sakes; and
being Lord of all, became destitute of all things for our sakes: And so in
like sort, he sweat, and feared, and fasted, and thirsted, and hungered; and
all for our sakes. And therefore of his fasting (the thing that is proper to
this place) the Church speaks thus in her prayers: Collect on the first
Sunday in Lent.
O Lord, which for our sakes did fast forty days and forty nights. This then
I take to be one reason; He therefore fasted in this manner, and the rather
perhaps at this time, when he was in more special manner to go about the
work of our salvation; because it was a part of those sufferings, which he
did undergo for our sakes.

Where, by the way, we may reflect upon our selves, and tell our own souls;
that if our Lord did do all these things for our sakes, we should not think
much to do a little for his sake: but more especially, seeing he fasted so
many days and nights for us; we should not grudge to fast a little now and
then for him. But how for him? For I suppose, all men will be ready to say,
that if they knew they should fast for Christ's sake, as he fasted for ours;
that then they would do it with a good will, or else it were pity of their
lives. To such men, if any shall make such demand, my answer is; We may truly
be said to fast for Christ's sake many ways. As first, if we fast, that we may
with more reverence, and better attention, and greater fervor perform holy
duties unto him. In which kind they fast for Christ, who when they come to
Church, to hear, and pray, and praise God, and to partake of the blessed
Sacrament of Christ's body, do forbear their meat, that they may be more
fresh to attend to those holy duties, and because they do prefer Gods
service before their own necessity, and do love the Word and the Sacrament
more than their necessary food. Secondly, we may be said to fast for Christ,
if we fast, that we may subdue those sins that nailed Christ to his Cross;
and which if we commit them, do Heb. 6.6.
crucify again the Son of God, and make a mock of him. And in this kind
they fast for Christ, who forbear their meat, that they may sorrow for their
sins, and may arm themselves against temptations, and bring under their
body, that their flesh do not wax wanton against Christ. Thirdly, we may fast
for Christ's sake, if we forbear to feed our selves, that we may have
wherewith to relieve others, who being the poor members of Christ, have need
of our supply. For what is done to any one of those little ones, is esteemed as
done to Christ himself. And sure, if Christ did fast so long, that he might
supply us; it were both sin and shame, not to forbear a meal, if need
require, that we may cherish Christ in his members.

In this manner, and by these means, we may be said to fast for Christ. Let
us make use of them in our practice, and we shall hereby show our love to our
Savior, as he by fasting forty days for us, showed his great love unto us.

II. A second cause why our Lord fasted at this time, may be that he might by
this means provoke Satan to begin his assault. The declaration and proof of
this assertion depends upon two things: first, that his fasting was a fit
occasion, that might provoke the Devil to the onset: secondly, that Christ
was willing to give him such an occasion.

And first, that this was a fit occasion, appears by 2. things. 1. Because
when men are in distress, then is the Devils opportunity to tempt them, either
to distrust God, because he leaves them without relief; or to use unlawful
means, that they may relieve themselves. 2. Because the event shows that
Christ's hunger caused by his fasting, was the occasion that Satan took to
assault him. For when he saw him fainting for want of bread, then he thought
it a fit time to say, If thou be the Son of God, command that this stone be
made bread. And what the event did make manifest afterward, that our Lord knew
very well beforehand.

Secondly, That our Lord was willing to give the Devil such an occasion to
provoke him to the combat, may appear by two things also. 1. Because it was
Gods will to have it so; as is evident by this, that the Spirit of God led him
into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil: and Christ's will was ever
agreeable to the will of his Father. 2. Because Christ did so thirst after our
salvation, that he refused no pains, nor no danger, to procure it. He left
heaven, that he might become man for us; he took our base nature, that he
might bear our infirmities; and he went up to Jerusalem, that he might be
crucified; and he came into the world, that he might save the world by his
sufferings. And so, seeing the temptations of Satan, by which he assaulted
our Savior, might be profitable for us, and available for our salvation; (for
so Satan might be overcome at his own weapon, and we armed against his
assaults afterward:) we need not doubt, but as the Spirit led Christ into the
wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; so our Lord himself would fast and
hunger, that the Devil might assault him.

And here again by the way, a Christian may have a good meditation from his
Masters practice: that seeing Christ was ready to fight against the Devil for
our sakes; we should not fear to stand out against men for his sake. But if
Religion be a cause, that we are questioned by Enemies, or disgraced by
worldlings, or kept from preferment by great Ones; we must bear oppositions
of men, for love to Christ; as he bore these temptations of the Devil, for
love unto us.

III. A third cause may be, that by this exercise of fasting, he might prepare
and fit himself for the great work that he was about. For he was now to
enter upon his Prophetical Office, and to begin the public function of his
Ministry. And in this, and such like cases as this, Gods servants have used to
make preparation by fasting and prayers, as may be seen in the example of
Act. 13.3.
Paul and Barnabas, and Act. 14.23.
other Presbyters of diverse Churches. And therefore seeing our Lord here fasted
for a long space, and that at such a time as he was to enter upon the ministry
of the Gospel; we may well think that this is one reason of his fasting, that
he might prepare himself for this great service. Only the doubt may be; But
what needed our Lord any such preparation? For 1. he was not defective in any
grace. For God Ioh. 3.34.
gave not the spirit to him by measure: but he was Ioha. 14.
full of grace and truth. 2. Our Lord was an innocent 1 Pet. 1.19.
Lamb, without blemish and without spot. And what needed he such preparatiue
helps, that had all grace, and no sin?

I answer, there be three reasons hereof. First, that he might stir up, and
inflame, and (as ye would say) actuate the grace which he had already. To this
purpose it is, that when he was to pray, he Mat. 14.23.
went into a mountain, or some other private place alone, [ ardentioris
orationis causa,] that he might pray the more fervently, say the Learned. And
so again, when he was to raise up La Zarus, Ioh. 11.33.
he groaned, and was troubled. (...), he troubled himself, that is, he stirred
up his sorrow, and moved his bowels unto compassion and pity. Secondly, that
he might confirm and radicate, and, I think I may say, that he might in some
fort increase the graces that he had. For the Scriptures say, that he took
upon him our infirmities, Heb. 2.17.18
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest: and that Heb. 5.8.
he learned obedience by that which he suffered: and that Heb. 12.2.
he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, for the joy that was set before
him: and that in his greatest sorrow, Luke 22.43.
an Angel came to strengthen him. By which speeches we may gather, that his
feeling of our wants, and his bearing of afflictions, and his consideration of
future joys, and the prefence and conference of an Angel, did increase or
confirm his compassion toward us, and his obedience to his Father, and his
patience, and his courage in his conflicts: or else I know not what they mean,
and whereto they serve. And if they intend thus much, then by the same reason
we may say, that his praying and fasting and meditating might serve to increase
or confirm or preserve the graces of the spirit, which did enable him for his
office. Thirdly, he used this preparation, that he might obtain a blessing
upon his labors, that they might become profitable to the Hearers. For so we
read, that he still used to commend businesses to Gods blessing. When he fed
the people, Mat. 14.19.
he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake, and gave them, etc. that is,
He prayed for a blessing upon the meat: and so, when he consecrated the
Sacrament, Mat. 26.26.
he blessed it. And when he was to leave the world, and to send his Disciples
to supply his place of preaching, Ioh. 17.20.
he prayed not only for the Preachers, but for them also that should believe
through their word. And so, it is reasonable also to think, that Christ did
now fast and pray for a blessing upon the word, that he was to preach, and
upon the people to whom he was to preach. Thus in diverse good respects, our
Lord might use his fasting for a preparation, to fit him for his public
office: and because we cannot conceive that our Lord would omit an exercise so
good and so proper for his present occasion; we may well suppose that one cause
of his fasting was, to prepare himself for this great service of his Ministry.

IIII. A fourth and last cause why Christ fasted here, may be, that he might
give us an example by his own practice. For as a wise and careful Physician
will sometime just the Physic which he prescribes, that he may encourage
his patient to take it: so our Lord upon occasion did many things for our
example. So the Apostle says, Christ 1. Pet. 2.21.
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. And
when our Lord had washed his Disciples feet, himself tells them his reason;
Ioh. 13.15.
I have given you an example (says he) that ye should do, as I have done unto
you. And so seeing he used fasting here, before the entrance of his public
service and calling, he might do it for this reason among others; that he
might leave us an example, upon the like occasion to use the like practice.

And from hence we have two conclusions, that may further commend the holy use
of a religious Fast.

1. That an holy Fast is a good exercise to begin our Callings and all
important businesses withal. For not only Moses, when he was to receive the
Law; and Elias, when he was to restore the Law; but Jesus Christ himself, when
he was to perfect the Law, did fast and pray, before they undertook the work;
and so if any of us be to enter upon a calling, or to undergo some great
service; if for example, we be called to be Magistrates, or are to enter upon
the state of marriage, or to begin a trade or profession in the world, or to
undertake any weighty matter; it is a good rule (and we have good authority for
it) to consecrate our entrance by an holy Fast. And sure I am persuaded, it is
one great cause, that we have oftentimes so little comfort in the execution of
our places, because we use so little Religion in our entrance into them. But if
we would follow Christ's steps, we might hope for his blessing to direct us.

2. That an holy Fast has a proper use in the consecrating and ordayning of
Ministers for the service of the Church. Our Lord used it here, when he was
consecrated and appointed for his Ministry; and the Apostolical Church by his
example used it, when Paul and Barnabas and other Elders, were to be sent
abroad for preaching of the Gospel: and the Christian Church afterward, by
example of Christ and his Apostles, have appointed the four solemn times of
fasting to be the set and solemn times for giving of Orders, and for sending of
Ministers into the Church. And their warrant is Christ's example, and the
practice of the Apostles and the Apostolical Church. The common neglect of
which times, and this holy exercise to be used at those times and for this
purpose, may be one reason, why the Church is not better provided of Teachers,
and the people are not more profited by their labors. For redress whereof, it
were to be wished, that public Authority would appoint some public meetings
at those times, that by fasting and prayer we might commend that great work to
Gods blessing with one consent of heart. But because it is not in the power of
private men, to make public orders; every Christian shall do well in his
devotions at home, by fasting and Prayer to beg a blessing on that sacred
work: that God would direct the Fathers of our Church, to admit fit men to
that sacred function, and would enable the then ordained Ministers, to profit
the Church by their labors, and would sanctify all, to make use of his Word,
and the public Ministry, while we have it, and do enjoy it.

CHAP. VII. Why Christ fasted forty days and forty nights.
IN relating of our Saviors Fast, the Evangelist sets down the continuance
of the time. He fasted forty days and forty nights, says he. In which
words we have two things to consider of. 1. Why the Evangelist mentions
nights as well as days. 2. Why our Lord made choice of this number of days,
to determine his Fast by.

I. And for the former question, Why the Evangelist mentions nights as well
as days; the answer is, he did it, lest any man should think, that though he
fasted by day, yet he did eat at night. For it is true indeed, that the name
of days does many times include the nights also; especially if the condition
of the things spoken of, be such, as what is said of the^ for the day time, is
left to be understood of the night time too. As when it is said, Luke 1.74, 75.
that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve God
without fear all the days of our life; the name of days includes the whole
space till the end of the time mentioned, because the service of God is such as
may not be neglected either by night or day. And so, when it is said of
Lazarus, Ioh. 11.39.
that he had been dead four days, the meaning is, that he was dead all that
while, both by night and day; because men that are dead by day, do not use to
live by night, and then dye the next day again. And so again, when it is said
of Saul, that he was three days without sight, the meaning is, that he was
blind for so many days and so many nights. And the reason is the same,
because if a man be blind for so many days, it cannot be conceived that he had
his sight in the night time. In these and such like cases, the condition of the
things is such, that what is said of the^ for the day, must be taken for the
night too. And in such cases, there is no need to mention the nights. But yet
sometimes, as when the speech is of such things, which though they happen in
the day, yet are used to be intermitted in the night, then the name of the
days does not include the night also: As when it is said of Laban, that he
pursued after Jacob Genesis 31.23.
seven days journey: the meaning is, he followed so far, as a man may, or
does use to go in the space of seven days, not counting the nights, because
men that travel by day, are supposed to take up their lodging, and rest in the
night time. And so, if a man should hire an ordinary day-labourer to work with
him for two or three days, all men would understand the bargain to be made of
working in the day, and not in the night time: but if a Mariner should be
hired to labor in a ship by sea, or a nurse to attend a sick party for the
same number of days, every man would construe that both of day and night;
because such labors and pains as the mariner and nurse do take in such cases,
are to be continued as well by night as by day. Now when the speech is of such
things, as being done in the day, may be intermitted, or use to be intermitted
by night, then the name of days does not include or comprize the nights also.
And so it falls out in this matter of fasting. For when the Jews were to
fast for many days together, their manner was to abstain from meat all the
day, Chap. 1. p. 7, 8.
but at night to eat a sparing meal; as I have declared in another place
already. And hereupon the Learned do observe, that the Jews, when they speak
of many days Fast, without mentioning the nights, they understand it commonly
of fasting only in the day time, till evening: and that when they mean that a
Fast is continued for diverse days, without eating any thing at night, then for
distinction sake, and that their meaning may be plain, they add the nights
too; as when Ester says to the Jews, Ester 4.16.
Fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day. And so
in this place, Saint Matthew says, that Christ fasted forty days and forty
nights, lest any man should conceive, that he abstained all day for that
space, but did refresh himself in the evening.

II. The second question is, Why our Lord made choice of this number of forty,
to determine his fasting by. This question may admit two constructions, and so
receive two answers accordingly. For first it may be understood of the precise
number of forty, why just so many days, without missing, either under or
over. Or secondly, it may be meant of an extraordinary number of days, and
space of time, that is, why he fasted so many days and nights, as it
exceeds man's strength to endure without eating.

1. If we take it in the former sense, then I think I may safely say, as many
of the Learned do, that our Lord did make choice of this number of days, that
he might therein conform himself to the two great Prophets of the Old
Testament, Moses and Elias. For Moses was the giver of the Law, and Elias was
the restorer of the Law; and both were in their kind, the most excellent
Prophets that the old Church had: and both of them, for the confirmation of
their calling, and to gain credit to their places, did fast forty days and
forty nights, when they were to speak with God in the Mount, as it is recorded
of Moses, Exodus 34.28. Deuteronomy. 9.9. and of Elias, 1 King. 19.8. Quadragesima same
ieiuniorum habet autoritate^, and in veteribus librie ex ieiunio Mosi and
Heliae; et ex Eua^gelio, quia totide^ diobus Dominus ieiunauit, demonstrans
Euangelium no^ dissentire a Loge and Prophetis. In persona quippe Mosi, Lex; in
persona Heliae, Prophetae accipiuntur: inter quos et in mo^te gloriosus
apparuit, vt euidentius emineret, quod de illo dicit Apostolus, testimonium
habens a Lege and Prophetis. August. Epist. 119. ad Ianuar. cap. 15. page 195.
f.
Now our Lord, to show that he was not inferior to either of these great
Prophets, and that they did consent and agree with him, thought good to begin
his Ministry, as they did theirs, with a miraculous Fast of forty days. To
which purpose we likewise read, that when our Lord was transfigured in the
Mount, Matt. 17.3. and Luke 9.30.31.
Moses and Elias appeared unto him, and talked with him, and spoke of his death
and passion. And this did serve for a clear confirmation of Christ's calling
and authority, that these two special and principal Prophets did both
concur to bear witness of him: and hereby it appeared, that the Gospel had
witness of the Law and the Prophets, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3.21.

But then the question may be further, Why did Moses fast forty days and forty
nights, and that at two several times, when he was with God in the Mount? And
hereto I answer, that many both ancient and modern Writers, especially those
that be in the Church of Rome, do say that there was a mystery in this number;
and that that was the reason why both Moses, and Elias, and our Savior also
did fast that space of time: but either they say not what that mystery was, or
else they prove not what they say: nay, themselves cannot agree what to say.
For some interpret the mystery one way, and some another, as every man's
several fancy does lead him: the relation of which sundry conceits, would be
more tedious than profitable. But to the point it self, for my part I have
only two things to say. 1. That though I will not peremptorily condemn their
opinion who conceive a mystery in the number; In annorum numero [Act. 9.33.]
Beda and Glossa Ordinaria mysterium venantur, etc. In alterius numero, [Ioh.
5.5.] Augustinus candem ferme rationem mysticam excogitauit. Veneror, vt debeo,
sanctos, Patres: sed subtiliores numeroru^ perscrutationes (vt verum falear)
nunquam valde probaui, etc. Lorin. in Act. 9.33.
for the reverence that I bear to those ancient and learned Fathers, which
incline that way: yet I never could read in any, nor can I conceive any
probable reason, why (if so it had pleased God) some other number near to
forty, as say 39, or 41 might not have fitted this occasion as well.

Secondly, that it is not unlikely, but that without further mystery, God only
intended Moses and Elias and Christ to fast so long, as being above the
strength of man, it might appear that they were sustained by the power of God,
and that therefore their calling and office was from heaven. Now for this
purpose, the wisdom of God did see such a continuance of time, as about forty
days, to be both sufficient and convenient: and because forty is the round
number, and as fit as any other, did make choice of that, to determine this
abstinence by. This I take to be probable; but I presume not to affirm any
thing: nor will I be curious to enquire into that, which God has not revealed.
And so I leave the first sense of the question.

2. If we take it in the latter, as importing only a long abstinence which
exceeds the power of nature, then the question is, Why our Savior would fast
so long, and in such a miraculous manner.

Ans. Hereof there may be given two plain and apparent reasons.

1. The first reason may be, that by his miraculous Fast he might prove his
calling, and the truth of his doctrine. For seeing he fasted above the strength
of nature, it must needs follow that he did it by the power of God. And God
would not assist him with a miraculous power in the entrance of his Office,
unless himself did approve and allow of his calling. The further declaration
of which reason may be seen in a like example of Moses. For when Moses made
scruple of going to the Israelites with Gods message, because he feared lest
they would not believe that God had sent him: God armeth him with a power of
doing miracles, that hereby he might convince and persuade them. And Exodus 4.8.
If (says God) they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the voice of the
first sign; yet they will believe the voice of the later sign. Where we may
note two things. First, that the end of these miracles was to credit Moses his
Ministry, and to make the people believe him. Secondly, that these miraculous
works have a voice, whereby they speak unto men; If (says he) they will not
hearken to the voice of the first sign. But what voice is that? and how do
these dumb signs speak? Sure, they say and speak, or rather proclaim it
with an audible voice, that he who does these works, has the assistance of
Gods Spirit to work them. For Ioh. 3.2.
no man (as says Nicodemus) can do these miracles that thou do, except GOD
be with him. And, Ioh. 9.33.
If this man were not of God (says the blind man now converted) he could do
nothing; that is, he could do nothing in this miraculous manner. These
miracles then of Moses were as so many shrill voices or lowd-sounding cries
from heaven, which proclaimed in the ears of all men, This man is of God, and
the Lord is with him. And so upon the same ground, our Lord proves his calling
by his miracles. Ioh. 10.37, 38.
If (says he) I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if I
do, though ye believe not me, believe the works. And if Christ and Moses
did prove their callings to be from God, by the miraculous works that God
wrought by them: what should let us to think, but seeing Christ in the very
entrance of his Office did use a miraculous Fast, that he therefore did it to
prove that he was sent from God, and did preach that truth that God had taught
him?

2. A second reason of this long fasting in our Savior, may be, because before
so extraordinary a work as he was then to enter upon, he thought fit to use
an extraordinary preparation, such as this long fasting might serve for. For
that he now fasted to prepare himself for his public Office, I have declared
already in the last Chapter: and that extraordinary occasions do require
extraordinary preparations, may appear by observation of Scriptures. For we
read, that when the people were to serve God at ordinary times of devotion, an
ordinary preparation sufficed, such as that which Solomon speaks of, Eccles.
5.1.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God, and be more ready to
hear than to give the sacrifice of fools: and that which our Savior
requires, Luke 8.18.
Take heed how ye hear. But when they were to receive the Law from Gods own
mouth, and to hear him speaking in Majesty, with thundering and lightning and
trumpets; then God appoynteth that they should be prepared Exodus 19.10, 15.
for two whole days together, and commands that they wash their clothes, and
abstain from their wives. And when they were to eat the Passover, they were
to Exodus 12.3, 6.
prepare the Lamb, and to fit themselves for it four days before. And when
Moses was to go up to God into the Mount, Exodus 24.16, 18.
he stayed six days in the side of the Mount, before he was admitted to
speak with God: and he stayed forty days in all, before he could receive
the two Tables, and bring the Law to the people. All which time, we cannot
imagine either that he was idle, or busied about impertinent affairs that
concerned not that occasion: yea, and Scriptures do say, that for that time, he
Deuteronomy. 9.9, 18.
exercised himself in prayer and fasting. And so in like sort, seeing our Lord
was to enter upon the greatest work and office that ever man went about; the
preaching of the Gospel to all the world, the opposing of the Devil and evil
men, and the redeeming of mankind by his own blood: it is not unreasonable to
think that he would make his preparation answerable to his work, and extend
his fasting beyond an ordinary and usual time. And because God did enable him
with a miraculous power to hold out for forty days, he was willing to undergo
it all the while, though in the mean time he defrauded nature of her usual
comfort and refreshing.

And hence we have this note for our further direction in this exercise, that
as fasting serves for many good uses in Religion; so longer time of abstinence
and more strict fasting and greater humiliation is requisite, when there is any
more than ordinary or usual occasion. And so the old people of God were wont
to do. For upon ordinary occasions, they used to fast one day from morning
till night: but upon extraordinary for a longer space. Thus Ester, when a
weighty business was in hand that concerned her life, and the lives of her
people; she appointed a Fast for three days and three nights. And the men of
Iabesh Gilead, when they had a great cause of heaviness by the death of Saul,
and the overthrow of the Army, they fasted for seven days space. And Daniel,
when the Church was distressed, and in great calamity, he fasted for three
weeks together. And so we should extend our fast, and keep it with more
strict observation, and set more time apart for holy exercises; when either we
are about some weighty business, or be in some great danger, or have fallen
into some heinous sin, or have a special cause to remember and celebrate the
pangs and passion of our Savior, or happen upon some other occasion of more
than ordinary sorrow. Thus, what-euer our occasions be, fasting is still of use
in the life of a Christian: if the occasion be ordinary, ordinary fasting is a
fitting exercise either to auert evil, or procure good; and if the occasion be
extraordinary, then as the other exercises of Religion, so this among the rest,
is to be used in a more than ordinary measure.

CHAP. VIII. When a Christian may or should fast.
COncerning the Fast of our Savior it is recorded, that he then fasted, when
he was to encounter with Satan, and go about his public Ministry, and to
begin the great work of our Redemption: and upon such urgent occasions, and
when there is such extraordinary cause offered; all men grant that then we
also may and ought to fast for the speedier procuring of Gods favor. But this
example of Christ, ministers just occasion to enquire further, whether, beside
times of such unusual accidents, a Christian also may not lawfully and
profitably observe set times of fasting. And this is a question doubted of by
some in our Church, and disputed with arguments and reasons on both sides. For
clearing which doubt, we are first of all to declare the meaning of the
question; and that may appear by these two notes.

1. That some there be which commend fasting for a religious exercise, if it
be used only then, when men shall upon several occasions see it to be
convenient; but any standing days, whether appointed by public authority,
or undertaken by a man's own private devotion, these they utterly condemn as
superstitious and Monkish. For example, When Jonas prophesied of judgment
against Nineueh, Ion. 3.6, 7.
the King proclaimed a fast, and the people observed it. And this they approve
of, and allow our Magistrates upon such an occasion to do the like. Again,
when Nehem. 1.3, 4.
Nehemiah heard that the Jews were in great affliction and reproach; and that
the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire:
he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted. And this they
approve of, and allow every private Christian by his example, upon such
occasions as these, to fast out of his own devotion. But now further, the
ancient Christian Church, in remembrance of Christ's death on that day, did
appoint every Friday to be kept fasting-day; and for the same and some other
reasons, they appointed the time of Lent, as often as it should happen, to be
observed with abstinence and fasting. And these and such like standing and
set-times they allow not.

Secondly, We must note that the observing and appoynting of these days may
be meant and understood two ways; either with opinion of necessity or
sanctity in those times, more than in other. And this is not here questioned;
nor do we doubt but the Church, as it appointed the Friday, so if it had
pleased, might have appointed any other day for this exercise: nor do we think
that there is any peculiar sanctity in that day more than in others. Or else
the question may be understood of the lawfulness and conueniency of
appoynting such set days and times, for order sake, and for the more constant
performance of this work. And this is it, which we mean in this question.

The question then is, Whether it be lawful for Authority to prescribe, or for
private men to undertake set and standing days for fasting; that it may be
observed the more ordetly and the more constantly? And mine answer is, That it
is both lawful and expedient for Governors to enjoin their Inferiors, and
for private men to prescribe unto themselves such standing times, so often as
they shall fall, either weekly, or monthly, or yearly, as they see it
expedient. And my proofs are, some from Scriptures, some from examples, and
some from reason grounded on Scripture.

I. From Scriptures. And thence I allege two places for this purpose.

1. The first is Leuit. 16. For there God appoints the tenth day of the
seventh month to be kept for a fasting day; and says moreover, Leu. 16.29, 34
This shall be a statute for ever unto you: and again, This shall be an
everlasting statute unto you, to make atonement once a year. Here we see,
that God appointed unto the Jews a set fasting day, to be kept every year as
often as it should happen. And hence I argue thus; Almighty God himself did
appoint, and thought it a profitable course for his people of the Jews, to
observe a set and standing day for a Fast every year. And therefore a set time
of fasting may be observed without superstition and sin.

Some answer, that this was a Legal precept of Moses, which is now abolished
by Christ. And I reply; It is true that this precept in respect of that
particular time, was Legal, and had its end in Christ's death: but it is no
less true also, that God in making and appointing that Legal precept, did not
command them any thing, which in it self is superstitious and sinful. And
therefore, because God prescribed them a set time for that Fast, it follows,
that the appointing of a set time of fasting, is not in it self superstitious
and sinful.

2. The second place that may serve for proof of this point, is out of the
Prophecy of Zachary; Zach. 8.19.
where we find mention of four several fasting days, observed every year
by the Jews in their known and appointed months. Concerning which Fast thus
much is first of al to be noted, that they were Hieron. in Zach. 8.18, 19. page
486. Buxd. Synag. Iudaic. c. 25. Genebrar. Calend. Hebr. Sept. 3. Dec. 10. Iun.
17, and Iulij 9.
occasioned by the calamities that befell the Jews about the time, when they
were carried captives into Babylon, or before that time; and were appointed, as
some think, by some Prophet from heaven; or as others, by the authority or
consent of the present Church; and (as the Learned generally do confess) were
allowed of and approved by almighty God himself. And hence I reason thus; The
Jews did lawfully observe four several set days every year, for days of
fasting. And therefore it is not always superstitious and sinful to observe
set fasting days.

Some again answer, that these Fasts were appointed upon occasion of their
present calamities in Babylon, and ceased at their deliverance. My reply is,
that I see no proof, that these Fasts did cease to be observed after the Jews
were delivered out of captivity. The contrary may seem more probable, because
in the Calendan Hebraeorum edito a Genebrardo, and praefixo Comment. in Psalmos.
Calendar of the Jews, wherein their Feasts and Fasts are noted, these four
days remain still, as being in use among the Jews. And Haec sunt festa
quatuor ista communissima, quibus Iudaei tempore Prophetae Zachariae
ieiunaru^t, and adhuc annis singulis ordinary summarieque ieiunant. Buxd.
Synagog. Iudaic. cap. 25.
Buxdorfius, a man well acquainted with the manners and customs of the Jews,
tells us, that the Jews to this day do keep those fasting days, which are
there mentioned by the Prophet. But say, that they ceased upon the peoples
deliverance, yet it is not true, that they were appointed upon occasion of
their present miseries in Babylon; for other days might have been as fit for
that purpose, and perhaps more convenient then these: but as the learned
observe, by occasion of some miserable accidents, which befalling them but
once, did move them to fast the same days that those accidents happened, for
many years after. And if those Fasts did last no longer then the time of their
captivity, because all that while they had just cause to humble themselves in
remembrance of these evils: yet thus much will follow from thence, that
therefore upon occasion of a sorrowful accident which has once befalne us, we
may for ever after fast that set day, so long as we have cause to be humbled in
remembrance of it. And hence again it will follow, that therefore Good Friday
may every year constantly be kept for a fasting day, because it was occasioned
by the death of Christ for our sins, and we shall never want just cause to
be humbled in remembrance hereof, so long as the world lasts; because,
besides our old sins, we do every year commit many more new ones, which
helped to nail our Savior to the Cross. The like might be said of some other
the like days. And therefore, there is warrant in Scriptures for set and
standing times of fasting.

II. My second proof is from approved examples of Gods Church, both in the
time of the Law, and in the time of the Gospel. For in the time of the Law,
the Jewish Church kept their set days of abstinence, as besides the Fasts now
mentioned out of the Prophet, may further appear by the words of the Gospel.
For there it is said, that the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees did fast
often, and more particularly of the Pharisees, that they fasted twice a week.
Now as Calvin. in Dan. 6.10.
Calvin concludes, that Daniel had his set and prefixed hours of praying,
because it is said that he prayed three times a day: So may I hence infer,
that the Pharisees kept set days of fasting, because it is said of them, that
they fasted twice every week. And Exa^. part. 4. de Tempore Ieiun. nu. 54. pa.
95.1.
Kemnitius gathers from the ninth of Saint Matthew, that both the Pharisees and
the Disciples of John had [certa and stata tempora ieiuniorum] set and standing
times for their Fasts. Now that this practice of theirs is an approved example
for us, appears, first because our Lord, when he reproves their errors in
their Fast, yet finds no fault with this. And secondly, because he excused
his Disciples for not fasting as the Pharisees and John's Disciples did, from the
vnseasonablenes of the time, and promised, that after-ward, when the time was
fitting, they should then fast. And this shows, that our Lord was so far
from condemning the Pharisees and John's Disciples, that he excuses his
Disciples for not doing the like. Again in the time of the Gospel, the
Christian Church has still had her standing and set days for fasting, as the
time of Lent every year, and the Friday every week, and some others; as is so
apparent, that it cannot be denied, nor needs not to be proved. And these set
times have been commended by many holy and learned Fathers of the Church, but
were never disliked by any of them, that ever I could find. And so in
conclusion, in the judgment of Gods Church, both before and since Christ's
appearing in the flesh (which herein was never blamed by Christ, or his
Apostles, or the learned Fathers) it is no sin to keep set days of fasting.

III. The third proof is taken from reason grounded on the authority of
Scriptures. And my reasons in that kind shall be these two.

1. Nothing is sinful, but that which is forbidden by Gods Law: for 1 Ioh. 3.4.
Sin is the transgression of the Law, as the Apostle defines it. But to keep
set days of fasting, is no where forbidden by any Law of God. It follows;
And therefore to keep such days is no sin.

Against this Argument nothing can be excepted, unless some Text of Gods Law
can be showed, which condemns or forbids the observation of such standing
times. And for that purpose, some object the place of Saint Paul, Gal. 4.10.
Ye observe days and months and times and years. I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed on you labor in vain. But to this the reply is easy; and may
be borrowed out of Beza: for he expounding a like place in Saint Paul, One man
esteems one day above another; another esteems every day alike; the Apostle
here (says this learned man) Agit non do quouis dierum discrimine, sed de eo
demum quod in Lege Mosis pracipitur; vt apparet ex eo, quod scriptum e^^
Coloss. 2.16. Beza in Romans 14.6.
does not speak of every difference of days, but of that only, which is
prescribed in Moses his Law, as is apparent by that which is written, [ Coloss.
2.16.] Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy
day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days: which are a shadow of
things to come, etc. And so I say, The Apostle in the place alleged, does not
speak of every observing of days and times, but such only as was prescribed
by Moses, and is abolished by Christ. And this exposition of this place is as
directly proved by that other to the Colossians, as that whereof Beza
speaks. The place then alleged, does not prove that standing times of
fasting are forbidden by Gods Law.

Arg. 2. The keeping of set times for the doing of holy duties, is a thing
found to be profitable and useful in the life of a Christian: because it may
serve for the more constant performance of them. This I declare thus. David in
the Psalms says, Psalm. 55.17.
Evening, and morning, and at noone will I pray and cry alond. And Calvin
commenting on that place, gives us this note, We may gather from hence (says
he) [statas fuisse pijs horas ad precandum istis temporibus;] that the godly
had their set hours for prayer at those times: Exodus 29.38.
which they observed the rather in their private devotions, because God had
appointed them to be observed in the public service of the Temple. For a
morning and evening every day, the Priests offered the daily sacrifice: and the
midday, as that learned Writer notes, was allotted for other sacrifices. And
the reason hereof (says he) is this; Quia sumus aequo tardiores ad orandum;
nisi quisque seipsum sollicitet and vrgeat, praecipuum hoc. pietatis officium
apud nos frigebit, adeoque obrepet peccandi obliuio, nisi nos freno aliquo
retineamus. Deus ergo certas boras praefigens, infirmitati nostrae mederi
voluit: quae eadem ratio transferri debet ad priuatas preces, sicut patet ex
hoc loco, cui etiam respondet Danielis exemplum. Calvin. in Psa. 55.18.
Because we are dull, and backward in prayer; unless we be spurred on, this
worthy service would soon decay, and we would quickly forget it, unless we
had some bridle to keep us in. He adds, And therefore God to help our
infirmity, has set us certain hours to remember us of our duty. And the same
reason may as instly be applied to our private prayers at home. Again, where
it is said of Daniel, that he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed and gave thanks, as he did aforetime: the same learned Writer
commenteth thus upon that place, [Hoc quoque obseruatu dignum est,] this also
is worth the noting, that Daniel prayed three times a day; Quia nisi quisque
nostrum praefigat sibi certas horas ad precandum, facile nobis excidet memoria.
Daniel ergo qua^quam assiduus erat in precibus fundendis, tamen solennem bune
ritum sibi iniunxit, vt ter quotidie sose prosterneret coram Deo. Calvin. in
Da^. 6.10.
because unless every one of us do prescribe himself set hours for prayer,
we shall easily forget it. And therefore Daniel, though he were frequent in
pouring out his prayers, yet did impose upon himself this solemn task, that
he would prostrate himself before God three times every day.

In which discourses of this learned and judicious Interpreter, I note two
things. 1. That as God did prescribe certain and set hours for his public
service, so in imitation hereof, good men did do the like in their private and
domesticke prayers. 2. That the reason of both was, because if men be left to
their liberty, they quickly forget their duty, and neglect the performance of
that at all times, which they think they may do as well at any other time.
The like is noted by Pola^us also. For first he moves a doubt concerning
Daniels practice; Aanon superstitiosum fuerit, quod Daniel preces suas certis
horis quasi alliga uit, pe^nde ac si Deus non exaudiret quocunque tempore
inuocantes. Resp. Certum est tam sanciu^ Prophetam nunquam non de Deo s^o
cogitasse, etia quu^ negotia Regat tractauit; destinauit tamen sibi certa ad
precandum tempora, quae a politicis negotijs vacua esse poterant and solebant,
vt citra vlla impedimentacoram Deo suo s^se sisteret, alsque vlla opimone vel
sanctitatis a^^uius quae temporibus illis inesset, vel cultus vel meriti, vel
necessitatis, quasi ebseruatio stricta trium illorum temporum prae^aliis Deo
grata esset, and aliquid mercretur, and neressaria esset. Polan. in Dan 6.11
page 277.
Whether it were not superstitious that Daniel did thus (as it were) tie his
prayers to certain hours, as if God would not hear men at what time soever
they called upon him: And then he answeteth, that the holy Prophet, though he
minded God at all times, yet set apart to himself certain hours for prayer,
(most free for this business) without any opinion of sanctity, or merit, or
necessity in those times, as if the strict observation of those three times
were more acceptable to God then other times, or had merit and necessity in
it. In which answer he defends Daniel from all tincture of superstition,
because though he prescribed himself set times, yet he had no opinion of
sanctity or necessity in those times more then in other: and by consequence
does allow us to use set times for holy duties, so we place not holiness or
necessity in those precise times. And again not long after, Adoratio Dei
assidua quidem esse debet, etc. Sed tamen, quis nostra infirmitas sit ingens,
and ad pr^^andam obliuio nimia, dum huius vitae negotia curamus; vt infirmitati
nostrae and memoriae consulatur, necessarium est vt quisque nostrum certa sibi
tempora destinet precibus concipiendis, etc. Polan. in Dan. 6.11. loco de
Adorat. aphoris. 6. page 284.
Prayer unto God, says he, should be continual, and without intermission: but
yet seeing our infirmity is great, and our forgetfulness to pray is too too
much, for helping of our infirmity and memory, it is necessary that every one
of us, should destinate unto himself certain times for making of his prayers.

Now out of these observations of theirs concerning prayer, I infer three
conclusions concerning fasting. 1. If it be lawful and religious to prescribe
set hours for prayer; then it cannot be sinful and superstitious to observe
set days for fasting. For the fault in these set days, if there be any, is
not because they are days or hours, but because they are set and standing
times. And that exception is as just against hours as days. Nor is the
exception against fasting only, but against feasting too, and all other such
exercises, if they be tied to fixed times. If set hours then be allowed for
praying, set days cannot be condemned in fasting. 2. If set times for prayer
be so helpefull for the due performing of that work; then set times of
humiliation cannot be so hurtful, as to mar and corrupt that good work. 3.
If to be left at liberty for the times of our praying, be so dangerous to
breed an utter neglect of it: then to leave times of fasting to each man's
present choice, will not be so safe, nor without fear of neglecting this
necessary duty. For there is much more fear of neglect in fasting, than in
praying; because it is more painful to the flesh, and therefore men will be
more ready to shift it off upon every slight and idle occasion. Which would
God it were but a surmise of mine, and that experience had not proved it to be
most true. For we all confess that there is great use of fasting, when either
sins do abound, or judgments are to be feared; or blessings are to be
sought for: and none of us can think or will say, but that in all these
respects, there has been of late years, and is at this day too great
occasion offered for such humiliation. And yet now that every man is left to
himself to fast when he will; who almost is there, even among them that are
counted religious, who find themselves willing to use any fasting at all? And
hence I infer, that arbitrary times of fasting are as like to breed a neglect
of this duty, as arbitrary times of praying to make that duty forgotten.
Fourthly, If Daniels set hours were free from superstition, because he used
them [ absque vlla opinione sanctitatis,] without any opinion of holiness in
that time: then the Church of England cannot be charged with superstition, for
her set days of fasting; because she uses these without placing sanctity in
those times. And now out of all these considerations I may boldly conclude the
point, that set times of fasting are not only lawful, but very expedient for
the constant and religious practice of humiliation. And indeed experience
shows, that exercises which stand in a continued practice and often
reiterating of them, are then performed with most diligence, and greatest
fruit, when they have their fixed and set times allotted unto them. My self,
when I lived in the University among Scholars, did observe that it was held for
a note of a good Student, that allowing himself fit time for sleep and
recreation, and such like necessary works, the rest of his hours remaining,
he did destinate and assign for several exercises and studies us such hours
for Logic or Philosophy, and such for Oratory or Poetry; and such for History
or Geography, etc. By which fixed order, and constant observing of their
appointed times, such Students gained great furtherance for their Studies,
which others wanted. For first, they took order that no seasonable time should
be misspent without making profit: but taking a view of their whole time, they
allotted every hour to some use. Secondly, when their hour was come for such
or such a business, the very striking of the Clock did admonish them to break
off company, and presently to betake themselves to their task: whereas others,
who had no such set hours, would go beyond the time, and in chatting and
idleness trifle away many a good hour without taking account of it. Thirdly,
when they were come to their studies, they knew what they had to do, and
without further deliberation went on with their work: whereas some others,
when they came to their studies, were scarce resolved what book fitted their
turn; and so for want of orderly proceeding, they lost the fruit of that
little time and small pains which they took. And fourthly, if at any time,
either occasion of friends, or occurrence of some business did intercept their
time, and beguile them of their hours, they were sensible of that loss, and
did watch all opportunities to re-gaine it. And by this set course of study,
such Students in short time gained much knowledge, and far exceeded their
fellows. And as this has been found in experience to be the readiest way for
a Scholar to profit in his learning: so for my part, I know no better way of
thriuing and profiting in Christ's School, then if we observe the same rule,
and set our selves convenient times for doing of religious duties: as such a
time to pray with our household, and such a time to read Scriptures and other
books of Religion, and such a time to examine our consciences and see what we
have done, and such a time to fast and use humiliation for our sins. For it
may be feated, if we appoint our selves no set times for good duties, we
will spend but a little time about them.

The consideration of all which makes me to think, that the observation of
set times for our Fasting-dayes, is so far from corrupting our Fasts with
superstition, as that it does much further us to a constant and religious
practice of them.

CHAP. IX. How long we should continue our Fast.
Our Lord continued his Fast for forty days and forty nights: but that was
miraculous and above the power of nature in him, and therefore is not to be
imitated by us in the same manner. Yet just occasion is offered to enquire how
long our Fasts ought to be continued. For distinct answer whereto, we must
note a difference between Fasts of ordinary or usual continuance, and of
extraordinary and unusual.

And to begin first with the later; unusual and extraordinary I call that,
which is for longer time and space, than is commonly used, or is ordinarily
expedient. In this kind Paul Act. 9.9.
fasted three days in Damascus; and Mordecai and the Jews fasted for Ester
Ester 4.16, 17.
three days and three nights. And for the continuance of such Fasts, I cannot
precisely say, for how many days and hours they are to be observed; only
these two things I can say in the general. 1. That they must be no longer
than the strength and power of man's nature may bear; as I have showed already.
2. That the space of their continuance is to be measured by the occasion that
requires them, and by the devotion and discretion of them that keep them.

2. Secondly, the usual continuance of a Fast I call it, when the abstinence
is observed so long as is usual among Gods servants in their ordinary course
of life, and is commonly practiced by them in their religious Fasts. And for
determining the space of such a Fast, some say that a religious Fast must be
continued for four and twenty hours: and the reason is, because on the day of
Expiation, God does enjoin abstinence from evening to evening. But of this
place I have told my opinion before, and now again I say under correction,
first, that this place requires that space of time for the celebrating of a
Sabbath or Festival day; but says not the like of a Fasting-day. Secondly, If
the Fast there mentioned, be meant to continue for four and twenty hours, as
I will not deny but it may be so taken; yet that is required in this Fast, as
it was a service belonging to an holy day, not as it was an abstinence required
on a Fasting-day. And therefore it was enjoined in this Fast, but is not so in
all Fasts. He speaks more resonably as I take it, that says, Verum and
bonum ielunium est abstinentia spontane^ sieve prandij vsque ad vesperam, sine
coenae vsque ad sequentis diei prandium, sieve vtriusque simul prandij et
coenae, etc. Springl. de Hodier. Haereticis, part. 1. l. 3. cap. 2. page 842.
A true Fast is an abstinence or forbearing either of dinner until evening, or
of supper until dinner time the next day; or else, of both of them together.
But yet for more distinct conceiving of the point, I will set down mine
opinion, with submission to better judgments, in three several propositions.

1. The precise time and distinct hours how long a Fast must be continued, is
not any where that I know of, peremptorily defined or commanded, either in the
holy Scriptures, or in any Writings of the Ancients. For as for the Scriptures,
we find examples of some that have fasted for three days, and many that have
fasted till night: but where either that space or any other is commanded, for
my part, I confess, I know not. And for the ancient Church it is a clear
case, that they used to fast, sometime till evening, and many times but till
three a clock in the afternoon. Which shows, that they thought no set space
of time absolutely necessary.

2. In every religious Fast, the abstinence must be continued so long, as that
the body by wanting his ordinary food, may be in some sort chastened and
afflicted. For so the Scriptures set out a Fast unto us, as accompanied with
chastening and humiliation. Thus David speaks, Psalm. 69.10.
I wept and chastened my soul with fasting. And the Angel speaking of Daniels
Fast, Dan. 10.12.
When thou did set thine heart (says he) to understand, and to chasten thy
self before thy God. And Ezrah, Ezrah. 8.21.
I proclaimed a Fast, that we might afflict our selves before God. By all
which and other more sayings to like purpose, it is apparent, that in every true
Fast there is an afflicting of the body. Which how it is to be understood, I
have declared Cap. 4. pa. 49, etc.
elsewhere.

3. The longer our abstinence is, (so it be with moderation and regard to a
man's strength; such as heretofore I described) the more perfect the Fast is,
and the more available for the good which we intend by it. My reasons are.
First, because fasting is ordained for humiliation and chastening of our selves
before God, which the more sensible it is, the more effectual it proves: but
the longer the abstinence is, the greater is the humiliation or chastening that
is wrought by it. And therefore, the longer the abstinence, the perfiter the
Fast is. Secondly, Upon extraordinary occasions, and when greater need
required; then Gods servants have been accustomed to enlarge the time of their
fasting, as I have showed before in Ester, and the men of labesh, etc. And this
shows, that the longer the abstinence is, the more powerful the Fast is.
Thirdly, The ancient Church did use longer abstinence in Lent time, than on
other Fasting-dayes; intending therein, as in all the other religious duties,
to show more piety than at other times they used. And this shows that the
longer the abstinence is, the more perfect they thought the Fast to be.
Fourthly, this conclusion is acknowledged by our Adversaries of the Romish
Church. For though they defend the looseness of their Church, which permits
them on Fasting-dayes to take their dinner at the usual time; yet they
confess, Quo quis tardius distulerit, co melius ieiunare iudicandus est.
Valor. Reginald. prax. fori poenit. l. 4. c. 13. number. 158. Quanto plus tarda
hora comeditur, melius ieiunatur. Caietan v. Ieiun. page 120. Neque ignorant
Catholici ieiunium tanto esse perfectius, quanto diutius refectio sieve Coena
differtur. Bellar. de bon. oper. in particl. l. 2. cap. 2. page 1072. B.
that by how much later the hour of our eating is, by so much our Fast is the
better, and that they know well enough, that the Fast is so much the more
perfect, by how much the refection after it, is the longer protracted.

4. The usual time of abstinence mentioned in Scriptures, in an usual and
ordinary Fast, is the space of one day from morning till night. Thus it is said
of the children of Israel, Judge. 20.26.
that they wept, and sat before the Lord, and fasted that day until even: and
of David and his men, 2. Sam. 1.12.
that they fasted until even for Saul, and for Jonathan, etc. and of David*
when he mourned for Abuer, that he would not be persuaded by the people to
eat meat, while it was yet day, but swear, saying, 2. Sam. 3.35.
So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread or ought else, till the
Sun be down. And so elsewhere. And according to this custom it is observed
of the Jews, that ever since, they have kept their Fast, Buxdorf. Synag.
Iudaic. cap. 25. page 458. Tostat. in Matthew. 4. q. 11. Azor. part. 1. l. 7.
cap. 11. q. 1. page 563. col. 2.
till the Stars appear in the Firmament. And less time of abstinence then
this, I no where find used in Scriptures.

5. In the Primitive Church I find, that in the beginning they fasted till
six of the clock in the afternoon, or till sun setting, which in common
estimation is about six of the clock. For that is the most indifferent time,
to measure the evening by, and the most proportionable to the whole year, and
most answerable to the custom of Gods people in the old Testament. For there
was not such difference between the day and the night among the Jews, as is
among us. For in Jury, the shortest day had ten hours, and the longest
night but fourteen. Whence it follows, that for the greatest part of the
year, the sun did set much what about six, either not long after, or not long
before it. And when the greatest inequality was, as in the depth of winter, it
did set at five of the clock, and in the height of summer at seven. And
therefore the most equal time to measure the end of the day or the sun
setting by for all the year, is six of the clock. And that I take to have bin
the usual time, when both the Jews and the ancient Christians did break off
their Fasts. But afterward Christians began to abridge the time of the
abstinence, and to cease their Fasts, at least many of them, about three of the
clock in the afternoon. Which Azorius Tepescente sensim vetere illo feruore,
coeptum est solui ieiunium, primo quidem antequam sol occidcret, deinde vero
etia^ paucis heris ante solis abscessum. Azo. par. 1. l. 7. c. 11. q. 1. page
563, 564.
imputes to decay of zeal even in those better times; and I will not deny but
it might be so in some part: albeit perhaps another reason may be conceived
thereof besides, namely the multitude of their Fasts, which at that time were
frequent, especially among the religious sort who gave themselves to devotion.
For they, saving Sundays and festival times, were used to fast every day; and
it might seem perhaps too much strictnes, in such continual sort, to endure
so long abstinence: and therefore though in Lent time, and upon other days of
more strait discipline, they used to fast till night, yet ordinarily they
broke off their Fasts three hours sooner. But if it were decay of zeal in
those former Christians, that they ceased their Fasts before night, then it
must needs be an extinction of zeal in the Roman Church, who breaks her
Fast at the usual time of eating: or rather does not keep any Fast so long.

And now out of all this, we have in the general this clear and manifest
conclusion, That though no precise time for continuance is prescribed in Gods
Word; yet the continuance of a Fast, without eating or drinking till evening,
(which by common estimation is held to be about six of the clock) is approved
of in Scriptures, and was practiced by the ancient Christians, and commended of
all: and that the shortening of this time, was from decay of devotion. And
therefore if we would take a safe way, and that which is best approved of all,
we must continue our abstinence on our fasting days, till night; without
eating or drinking till about evening, unless infirmity or some other
necessary cause do require refreshing sooner. But more particularly, we may
from the former discourse gather and observe these things following.

1. We may see, that the Fast of Protestants, which is continued in perfect
abstinence from all meat and drink till the evening, is more agreeable to the
custom of Gods people in former ages, and is in it self, a better and more
perfect Fast, then the Fast of Papists is, even our Enemies being Judges. For
they praise it for a better Fast, which has the longer abstinence: and we fast
till night, whereas they do not so much as forbear eating till midday.

2. We may see, with how little God is contented at our hands, in respect of
that which Christ performed for our sakes. For abstinence for the space of one
day is accepted of God, for a good duty of humiliation; but Christ our Lord
fasted forty days and forty nights for the furthering of our salvation. And
yet whereas Christ performed all this for our sakes, we think it too much to
do this little for his sake. Nay, as the Jews were weary of the Sabbath day,
and times of Gods service, and said, Amos 8.5.
When will the new-moone be gone, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
wheat? And again, Mal. 1.13.
Behold what a weariness is it? say they. And ye have snuffed at it, says the
Lord of Hosts. So we may find men, that when they come to hear a Sermon, are
weary of hearing, and wish that the Sermon were ended before the time: and when
they come to Church-Seruice, are weary of praying, and wish that the Service
were ended before the time: but especially if they undertake an holy Fast, are
sooner weary of the Abstinence, and wish that the fasting day were ended
before the time. But a good Christian for discovering of his own corruption,
should take notice of this inequality between Christ's sufferings for our sakes,
and our suffering for his sake. And if the flesh grow weary of hearing or
reading or praying or fasting for a convenient and requisite time; he should
check himself with the example of his Savior, and say to himself: But my
Lord and Master preached all day, and prayed all night, and fasted many days
and nights together for my sake; and shall I grudge to spend one hour, or one
day in his service, and for his Names sake? The religious soul that shall thus
now and then check his own dullness, will by the meditation hereof gain
more fervor in Gods service.

CHAP. X. What we are to think of the Fast of Lent.
THe Church from the beginning has been accustomed to keep an annual Fast
every year, commonly called [Ieiunium Quadragesimale,] the forty days Fast;
because it was continued about that number of days, and was occasioned by this
forty days Fast of our Savior. Concerning which Quadragesimal or forty days
Fast, known among us by the name of Lent, or Lent Fast, have bin diverse
opinions of late years, as there were diverse customs in keeping of it in
former times. For some have magnified it too superstitiously, placing Religion
in outward things only; wherein the power of godliness could not consist: and
others have scrupulously condemned all use of it, thinking that it could never
be well used, which they had seen so much abused. In respect of which
difference of opinions, as also and especially, because it is so proper to the
argument in hand, and has such reference to the words of the Evangelist, which
I took for my ground; I thought it not unfit in the last place to enquire into
the nature and condiof this Lent Fast, that amidst different opinions, we might
know what to think. For which purpose I have proposed to my self these 5
things to be more particularly considered of.

1. Who was the Author of it, and from whence the institution of it came. 2.
How and in what sort it was kept in the ancient Church. 3. What good uses it
then had, or now may have among us. 4. Why choice was made of this season of
the year for this Fast. 5. What relation and what dependence this forty days
Fast of Lent has on Christ's Fast of forty days in the Wilderness.
I. The first thing is, Who was the Author of it, etc. Answ. I find three
special opinions concerning this point.

1. The first opinion is, that the Fast of Lent is of Divine institution,
either appointed immediately by Christ himself, or else ordained by the
Apostles with authority and by the commandment of their Lord and Master.
Dominus noster sanctis suis Apost olis per Spiritu^ S. id etiam inspirauit, vt
disertis verbis huius abstinentiae praeceptum populo Christiano proponere^t.
Pisan. de Absti. cap. 9. pa. 138. v. Filesa. de Quadrag. ca. 1. Ant. Liturg.
tom. 2. Sabb. post Cineres, page 117. etc. and Azor. p. 1. lib. 7. cap. 12. q.
1.
Of this opinion are many Popish Writers: and to this purpose some of the
Fathers speeches are alleged, but their meaning is not that, which at first
sight it may seem to be.

2. The second opinion is, that it is of Apostolical but not Divine
institution. They mean that the Apostles did ordain Lent-Fast, as being in
their judgments a wholesome and most convenient order, but not as being any
commandment received from God or from Jesus Christ. And of Non fuit datu^
subsequentibus te^poribus, sed ab ipsis Apostolis initio nascentis Ecclesiae,
etc. Val. Reginal. Prax. fori poenit. l. 4. ca. 12. nu. 129. p. 148. v. et Vas.
to. 3. in 3. Disp. 213. nu. 4. page 444.2. Ioh. Medina Cod. de Ieiun. quaest.
2. pa. 328. Less. de Iustit. and Iure. l. 4. c. 2. Dubitat. 5. number. 29. and
seqq. pa. 722.2. Filliuc. Tract. 27. part. 2. ca. 5. nu. 77, 78. and nu. 95.
Bell. de bo. oper. in partle. l. 2. cap. 14. Stapl. prompt. Cathol. Domin. 1.
Quadrag. p. 84, 85. Tossed. Mat. 4. q. 18. Barrad. to. a. l. 2. c. 2. pa 61.
Beerlyn. promp. pare. 3. in festo Cineru^, Text. 3. Azor. part. 1. l. 7, c. 12.
this opinion are not a few of the latter Popish Doctors.

3. The third opinion is, that it is an ancient Ecclesiastical Order, begun in
the Church after the Apostles time, and consequently, that it may not be called
either Divine or Apostolical; unless we will call it Apostolical, because it
is a very ancient Order, whose beginning and institution is unknown: as such
like orders are many times called Apostolical, and referred to their
institution. Of this opinion is Collat. 21. c. 30.
Cassianus, an ancient Writer, and Fest. Hom. Disp. 69. nu. 4. p. 469. Kem.
Exa^. par. 4. de Ieiu. tit quomodo vetus Eccl. Ieiun. etc. page 125. Nicol.
Vedel. Exer. 10. in Ignat. epist. ad Phil. c. 3. nu. 11. page 60. and nu. 19.
page 67.
diverse learned men in the reformed Churches.

That which I conceive most probable, I will set down in three distinct and
several assertions: but with submission to better indgement.

1. Pro. It is certain that the observation of Lent was very ancient and
received throughout the whole Christian Church. For whosoever shall peruse the
writings of the Fathers, shall find mention of it, in men of all countries,
and even as near to the Apostles times, as any Monuments or Records of the
Church do reach.

2. Propos. It is not certain that it was either appointed or observed by the
Apostles of Christ, as any Rule or Order agreed upon by them for the use of the
Church. My reasons are.

(1.) Because no man, who lived in their time, or within that age, does say it,
nor can any other tell, which of them, or in what manner, or with what
instructions they either ordained or observed it. And to say, that therefore it
is of the Apostles institution, because no other Author is known, is a
conjecture that may fail us.

(2.) V. Filesac. de Quadrag. c. 2. and seqq. v. etia^ Vedel. Exerc. 10. in
Ignat. ep. ad Philip. cap. 3. nu. 11. and seqq.
Because the Fast of Lent was anciently observed in diverse Churches and
Countries after a very diverse and different manner. For first, there was a
difference in the number of weeks appointed for this use: some observing eight
weeks, some seven, some six, and some, as we now do, six weeks and four
days. Secondly, there was difference in the fasting days of Lent; for in some
places, they fasted every day, save Sunday; in some other, every day, except
Saturday and Sunday; in some other, every second day; and in some, but every
other week only. For on those other days in Lent, though they abstained from
some meats, yet they did eat their dinner; and then the Ancients thought it to
be no fasting day. Now if there had been any set order agreed upon by the
Apostles for the practice of the Church, in all likely hood, there could not
have been such variety in so short a time. It may be, I deny not, that the
Apostles, who were frequent in fastings, (as Saint Paul speaks of himself, 2
Cor. 11.27.) did use it at this time more frequently and for longer time, then
at other times of the year; because they were now occasioned to remember the
sufferings of their Master, and anon after to celebrate his Resurection. And
this practice might perhaps give occasion to the Churches abroad, to take
example by them, and to celebrate a more solemn and longer Fast at that
season; but with such different observations and facions, as usually falls
out among sundry nations and companies; when all agree in one end or maine
work, but have not the same Rules to proceed by, prescribed unto them. But if
this be supposed, yet still I say, that it is not certain, that the Apostles
did either institute or observe a Lent Fast of forty days, such as is now used
in the Christian Church.

3. Propos. There is no reason to imagine, that the Fast of Lent was any
precept of Christ's, either delivered by his own mouth, or given to the Apostles
by inspiration or otherwise. And for this my reasons are two.

1. My first reason shall be the same with that which Saint Augustine used in
the very like case. He disputing of the Saturdayes Fast, against one who urged
the necessity of it, concludes or reasons in this manner: Ego in
Euangelicis and Apostolicis literis, totoque inslrumento, quod appellatur
Testamentum nouum, animo id reuoluens, video praeceptum esse ieiunium. Quibus
autem diebus non operteat ieiunare, and quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini vel
Apostolorum non inuenio definitum. As per hoc senlio, etc. Augustine. Ep. 86. ad
Casulan. page 132. C.
I (says he) having in my mind reuolued the New Testament, do find that
Fasting is commanded in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles; but on
what days men ought not to fast, and on what they ought, I no where find it
determined, by any commandment of Christ, or of his Apostles. [Atque per hoc
sentio, etc.] And for this cause I think that there is no such necessity in
the Saturdaies fast; otherwise than as the orders and custom of every Church
do require. In which dispute of that learned Father, I consider two things for
my purpose. 1. I note his Assertion; It is not found to be appointed or
commanded in the Writings of the New Testament. Secondly, I note his
conclusion, which he infers hereupon; [Atque per hoc sentio, etc.] And
therefore I think it no precept of Christ. And so I may reason in this case;
Let a man read all the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, and he shall
no where find, that the Fast of Lent was appointed by the commandment either
of GOD, or of Christ, or of his Apostles. [Atque per hoc sentio,] And therefore
I am of opinion that it is no commandment of Christ.

2. My second reason is, because there is no proof that may persuade us, that
this institution was Christ's precept. For all the reason that is brought for
this purpose, so far as I can learn or observe, is only this, because some
of the Ancients say, that it was appointed by Christ, or by Almighty God. But
they who speak thus, do not mean that which these men would have who allege
them. For Quamuis Ambrosius, Hieronymus, and Augustimus intelligant,
Quadragesunam a Domino indista^ non verbo, sed exemplo, etc. Bellarm. de bonis
oper. l. 2. c. 14.. Add quod non.
Bellarmine confesses of three of the chief of them, namely, Saint Hierome,
Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austin, that they are to be understood of Christ's Fact
and example, because he fasted forty days; and not of any precept of his, as
if he had commanded it. And other Azor. Instit. l. 7. cap. 12. q. 1. pa. 566,
567. Less. de Iustit. and Iure, l. 4. c. 2. Dubit. 5. nu. 31. pa. 723. Filliuc.
Moral. quaest. Tract. 27. part. 2. cap. 5. nu. 78. page 285.
Writers of the Roman Church say the like of other Fathers, and conclude, that
their sayings do not prove this to be any Divine precept: but that when they
say that Lent-Fast was of Gods appoynting, we must understand their words
thus, that they meant to say, that it had some ground in Scriptures, in that
Moses and Elias and Christ did fast forty days, or to like purpose. And if
this be all, then the Fathers do not say that Lent was of Christ's institution,
or was appointed by any command of his. And, other proof than this, there is
none that I know of, so much as tendered unto us.

The conclusion then of all is, that this Fast of Lent is of very ancient
observation, but not of Divine or Apostolical institution: for ought that yet
has been proved.

II. The second particular to be inquired into, is, How and in what sort Lent
was kept in the ancient Church. And for answer hereto, my meaning is not,
neither is it necessary, to enquire into all the several customs and orders
that were used among them, which were an endless and needless piece of work:
but only to note the extraordinary zeal and devotion, which they used at this
time more than at other. And that may be seen in four things especially.

1. In the length and continuance of their Fasts. For whereas at other times in
the year they fasted one or two or three days in one week, and seldom
oftener or more; in the time of Lent, for the most part, they used to fast
either six or five days together, and that for diverse weeks one after
another, without intermission. Antiquit. Liturg. to. 2. in seriam 6. post
Cineres. p. 104.
And secondly, those which at other times did break off their Fast at three of
the Clock after noone, in the time of Lent continued their abstinence till
evening or Sunne-set.

2. In the hardness or meandness of their fare, when they did eat. For on
those days, v. Antiqu. Liturg. to. 2. in feriam 6. post Cineres. p. 106.
when they did not fast, as on Sundays and Saturdayes, they did take both
their dinner and supper; and on their fasting-dayes, after abstinence all day,
they refreshed themselves at night: but still their diet was both sparing and
course; such as Daniel used in his Fast of three weeks. For as he says of
that time, Dan. 10.3.
I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, etc. So
these ancient Christians during the time of Lent, did forbear flesh and wine
and strong drinks, and all nourishing and pleasant food. Yea, sometimes they
contented themselves with a dry feeding of bread and salt, and some few herbs
or dried roots.

3. In Solenne tempus aduenit, quod amplius quam per anni caetera spatia, nos
orationibus atque ieiunijs animam humiliare, and corpus castigare commoneat.
Aug. de diverse. Sermon. 74. cap. 1. pa 498. B. and cap. 6. Exhortor ut
quotidianis ieiunijs, largioribus eleemosynis, feruentioribus orationibus Deum
propitietis.
the strictness of discipline, and severity of punishment which then they
exercised for correcting of sin. Antiq. Lit^^ to. 2. in feria 4. Cineru^. p.
49. and seqq. Filesac. de Quadr. cap. 12. and 15. Book of Common Prayer, in
the beginning of the Commination.
For if a man had fallen into some foul crimes, they used on the first day of
Lent, (which they called [Caput ieiunij] the beginning of the Fast) to enjoin
him public penance, such as the fault did seem to require: and then, after
his penance ended, their manner was, upon the humiliation and submission of the
penitent, on Maundy-Thursday to receive him into the peace and communion of the
Church again. And as for other Christians, whose life was not spotted with any
noted and open sin, yet they also exercised themselves in the practice of
strict discipline, as in examining their consciences, and amercing themselves
for their sins, and refraining their usual delights and recreations; and all
with more strictness and severity than at other times they were accustomed to
use.

4. In the exactnes and plenty of all good duties, either of piety toward God,
or of mercy toward the poor, or of charity toward all men. They were now
more frequent in prayer, and more abundant in Almes-deedes, and more diligent
in hearing and reading of Gods Word, and more plentiful in all good exercises
that might profit their souls, or help forward their saluations: Omne vitae
nostrae tempus stadium quoddam debemus putare virtutum, and ad coeleste brauium
tota virtute contendere. Sed hoc praecipue in Quadragesimae diebus implendum
est, qui abstiuentiae et ieiunijs dedicati, tantum nobis ad virtutem animi
conferunt, quantum and de corpore voluptatem decerpunt. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 64.
Dom. 1. Quad. pa. 231. D.
so that at once, while they famished the body, they fatted the soul; and
while they estranged themselves from earthly pleasures, they solaced their
souls with heavenly delights and spirtituall joy. And hereupon Leo said, that
Parum religiosus alio tempore demonstratur, qui in his diebus religiosior non
inuenitur. Leo Ser. 2. de Quadr. p. 82. and Ser. 3. in princ.
he showed himself to have little religion at other times, that in these
days was not found to be more religious than was or dinary.

This was their manner of spending their Lenttime. The proof of which
particulars, out of the ancient Writers, I have forborne to set down at large,
because I thought it would but trouble the ordinary Reader: and if any list to
see the several testimonies for confirmation hereof, I have in the margin
poynted him to such Authors, as have gathered them to his hand, and where the
learned Reader may find them, if he please. In the mean while, we may take
notice of the holy use that the Ancients made of this time of humiliation:
which practice of theirs, if it had bin continued among them, who boast
themselves of Abraham to be their Father, and make claim to be the children
of the Catholic Church, they had not brought such a scandal upon this holy
discipline, as in these latter days they have.

III. The third thing to be enquired concerning Lent-Fast is, What good uses it
had among those Ancients, and might have among us, if we did follow their
example. And heereto mine answer is, that the general use of this institution
was, that the people of God might have a solemn and special time of the
year, wherein they might in a more special and more exact and deuouter manner
take account of their lives, and reckon with their souls for the year past,
and amend whatsoever defects they had incurred, and perform all such services
as might both correct the errors of the year past, and fit them for all holy
duties for the year to come. And this practice might be of great use for all
those that should use it accordingly; and that in diverse respects.

1. Because there may be some public offenses committed by the body of the
Church, either in the omission of some common duty, or in their neglect of
government and discipline, or in the mis-ordering of the public State. And for
such sins as these, it is very reasonable, that as the whole body has
sinned, so the whole body should sorrow and repent, and by their joint
humiliation and submission seek reconciliation and pardon. For which purpose
we may read, that God did not only appoint the Priest and the Prince and the
people to bring sinne-offerings for their errors; but enjoined also an
Oblation for the Community or body of the Church. Leu. 4.13, 14. etc.
If (says he) the whole Congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and
the thing be hid from the eyes of the Assembly, etc. When the sin which they
have sinned, is known, then the Congregation shall offer a young bullock for
the sin. In which passage we may note two things. 1. That besides the sins
of particular men, there might be some sins of the whole Community: sins
which were properly neither the sins of the Priest, nor of the Prince, nor of
the people alone, (for of all these he had spoken before, and had appointed
them their several sacrifices and oblations for their atonement;) but sins
they were of the whole Congregation. As for example, says Tostatus, when some
Ceremony or duty was neglected by all, and not noted or questioned by any. Or
2. when the body representative, they in who^ the chief government rested, did
commit some error against Gods Law, either in making, or in executing, or in
neglecting of public Laws, or in any other miscarriage about the public
state. And such slips as these may easily be committed by the Congregation or
Community of the Church at this day. Secondly note, that when such offense was
committed, God appointed, that as the whole Congregation was guilty, so the
whole should join in the sinne-offering. And so it is requisite, that for the
common sins, which escape the body of the Church, the whole body should join
together in one, and have some appointed time, in which by their joint
repentance they may obtain common forgiveness. For which purpose the time of
Lent might serve most conveniently: it being the time in which the whole
Christian Church in all countries, did use public humiliation; and in which
Kings and Nobles and people did join in exercises of fasting and sorrow. Which
course of humiliation if Christian States and people did use accordingly, then
I doubt not, but many Churches and Commonwealths might have stood firm and in
a flourishing estate, which now are ruinated, or possessed by the Enemy;
because they did not prevent Gods Justice by their open and public repentance.

Secondly, there might be good use of this institution of Lent for the former
purpose, because in the compass of a year, there may happen many faults and
distempers in our souls, which are not discernable in the space of a day or a
week or a month. Every man finds by experience in his houses and dwellings,
that if he view them at the days or weeks end, he shall many times perceive
but small difference; but after a year or more he will spy some defects, which
at the beginning of the year they had not. And so in his clothes, and the
vessel of his house, after so much space of time, he may see decay in the one,
and rust in the other, though he could not observe any such change in the
evening from that which they were in the morning, or at the end of the week
from that which they were at the beginning. And so even religious minds, though
they fall not into some notorious sin, which shows it self at the first
view, yet they may decay in the fervor of their zeal, Quia dum carnis
fragilitate austerior obseruantia relaxatur, dumque per varias actiones vitae
huius sollicitudo distenditur; necesse est de mundano puluere etiam religiosa
corda sordescere: magna Diuinae institutionis salubritate prouisum est, vt ad
reparandam mentium puritatem quadraginta nobis dierum exercitatio mederetur,
etc. Leo Ser. 4. de Quadrag. p. 87.
or gather some soil or filth of worldlines, or fleshly delights, or such like
distemper, which is not to be discerned till after some space of time. And for
amending of such insensible decay of holiness, this time would be fit, if it
were used with that observance of discipline, which in ancient time was usual.

3. There may be use also, because in a matter of so great importance as is
salvation and eternal happiness, besides the ordinary care, for which a
Christian has opportunity and liberty every day, some more special time, to
be employed with more exact diligence, may be very convenient at the least, if
not altogether necessary. For thus we see in trading and housekeeping, men
think it not enough, to book up their expenses and receipts every day, nor to
take account of their success at the weeks end; but besides that ordinary
care, they use once in the year to cast up their shops, and compare their
books, and take a general view of all that has past before in the year:
that so they may correct their errors, and supply their defects, and better
their whole course of living for the time to come. And the like care
schoolemasters take with their scholars: for besides their daily and weekly
exercises and examinations; once in the year they do lightly exact of their
scholars an entire repetition of all their Grammar rules, that by disuse they
do not decay in the grounds of their learning. And thus in matters of the
soul, Leu. 16.29, 34.
God appointed the Jews one special day, or (as some think) two days in the
year, wherein (over and above their ordinary exercises of Religion, used at
other times) they should wholly intend the sifting of their souls, and should
in a more exact manner exercise the works of repentance and humiliation, and
chastisement for their sins. And so the Christian Church, beside all their
other instructions and exercises for that purpose, which happen every day in
one kind or other, has moreover appointed a set and solemn time in the
year, to celebrate the memory of Christ's birth, and circumcision, and of his
death, and resurrection, and ascension into heaven, and such like other
mysteries of salvation. And so in like manner, it will be a very profitable
course for Christians, if they have a set and solemn time of the year, for
the more exact and perfect examination of their consciences, and afflicting of
their souls for sin, and the quickening of their zeal for Gods service. And
for this purpose the institution of Lent, as it was used by the ancient Church,
is most proper and most profitable.

Now out of these two last points laid together, we may learn not to esteem
and think of the ancient institution and use of Lent, according to the new
observation of it in the Church of Rome. For if we look upon it according to
the intention and practice of the old Christian Church, we cannot choose but
think it to be a chief time of devotion, and such a practice of holy
discipline, as may season men's minds for all the year after. But if we look
upon it according to the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church, we may then
justly think it a superstitious foppery; as many of the Worthies and learned
Writers of the reformed Churches have spoken and written of it. Which speeches
of theirs, because they may seem sometimes to inuolue the ancient Fathers and
the novel Doctors of the Roman Church in the same condemnation; and have
therefore given occasion to the Romanists to declame against our Churches, as
if they condemned all the Ancient Fathers of superstition in their allowance of
this Lent-fast: it will not be impertinent, if in this place, I add a few
words more for the defense of our Churches Doctrine. Whereas therefore our
Adversaries say, and that with great and loud ourcries, that we and our
Churches do not only condemn all fasting, and in particular this Fast of
Lent; but that we do withal accuse all the old and purer Churches of Christ,
as being superstitious in their use of these Fasts; mine answer is as
follows.

First, For foreign Churches beyond the Seas, which have abolished the use of
Lent-Fast, I say, they may have as just or reasonable a defense for their
doing, as the Church of Rome has for her doings about some other Fasts. For it
is acknowledged by her own children, that Ieiuniu^ quaertae and sextae feriae
iam inde ab Apostolerum temporibus in praecepto positum, constat consuetudine
abrogatum esse, and arbitrio nostro relictum. Reginald. Prax. fori Poenit. l.
4. cap. 12. Sect. 3. p. 148. number. 133.
the fast of Wednesday and Friday every week, was commanded from the very
times of the Apostles, and yet is now abrogated in the Church of Rome, by a
contrary custom, and is left at men's free choice and liberty. And if it be
lawful for them to abrogate that old Law of Fasting on Wednesday and Friday,
used from the Apostles time, only because custom growing out of negligence
and decay of zeal, has brought a disuse of it: then it cannot be judged
sinful and inexcusable in these Churches, which out of consideration to avoid
Popish superstition, did abrogate those Laws of Lent-Fast, which Antiquity had
formerly observed.

Secondly, for our own Church at home, she in her public Liturgy Book of
Common Prayer in the beginning of the Commination.
has allowed the old discipline of Lent, and does wish the restoring of it.
And diverse learned Writers Field of the Church l. 3. cap. 19. Hooker Polit. l.
5. nu. 72. Morton Appeal, l. ^. cap. 24. Boys on the Epistle for the first
Sunday in Lent. Sir Edw. Sands Relation nu. 10. fol. 6. page 2.
in our Church, of good note and great learning, have defended the holy use of
it in their writings. And if any private men among us have condemned all use of
Lent-Fast, it is their private opinion, not approved by our Church. And
therefore as themselves will not answer for every incommodious speech, that
has fallen from the lips or pens of any of their Writers; no more ought
they to charge our Church with every such saying that any private Doctor of her
profession has uttered.

Thirdly, If any Divines in the reformed Churches have uttered any thing to the
prejudice either of fasting in general, or of this Fast of Lent in particular;
they looked upon it, as they then saw it practiced: and finding it full of
superstition in the Church of Rome, they could not conceive much better use of
it, than they found among them, who magnified it so much. And therefore we may
thank the Church of Rome for the contempt or dislike that Lent has of late
grown into.

Fourthly, The speeches which these learned men have let fall against these
Fasts, were uttered amidst their contentions and controversies with the Roman
Church, and while they were justly offended with her superstitions. And in such
a case, it is not strange, if men bending themselves against the present
errors, do sometimes at unawares run too far the contrary way. To this
purpose we read in the Ecclesiastical History, that Fere enim impietatis
istius, quae tantopere nunc celebratur, eam dico, quae (...) sieve de
inaequalitate est, quantum ego scio, ipse primus seminarium praebuit: non ille
quidem improbitate mentis and sententia, sed quod vebementius acriusque
oppugnare Sabelliu^ voluerit. Quem ego comparare solitus sum insitori, qui quum
incuruum tenella arboris statum sedulo corrigere studeat, deinde immodica
attractione peccet, and medo excidat, plantamque ipsam in contrariam
diuersamque deducat formam, etc. Nicephor. l. 6. c. 25. ex Epist. Basil. M. ad
Maxim. Philos. quae extat. tom. 2. edit. Paris. Graecolat. page 802. and est
Epist. 41. inter opera S. Basil.
Dionysius Alexandrinus, an Orthodox Father, striving too eagerly against
Sabellius, did unwittingly sow the seeds of Arianisme, and gave the first
occasion to that heresy. And in this sort they of the Church of Rome do
sometimes excuse the ancient Fathers for their harsh speeches. Maxim
distinguenda sunt ea, quae dogmatice and assertiue in Tractatu positiuo docent,
ab ijs quae contentiose and in certamine contra Aduersarium disputando, etiam
in materia fidei pronunciant. Ab bocenim posteriori genere dictorum nulla
testimonia sumenda sunt, quia facile contingit in talibus modum excedere, and
veritatis lineam transgredi: vt de Origin notat Athanasius, and de Gregorio
notauit Basiliue. Stapl. Contr. Relect. 6. q. 4. in Explicat. page 633.
Stapleton says, that we must put a difference between those sayings of the
Fathers, which they did deliver positiuely and assertiuely in a composed
Treatise, and those things which they wrote in their disputations against some
adversary. For in such case, (says he) it is easy to exceed measure, and to
go beyond the bounds of truth. And Ardebant veteres illi tanto sincere
pietatis and Catholicae defensionis ardore, vt dum vnum errorem omni virium
conatu destruere annituntur, saepe in alterum oppositum errorem vel deciderint,
vel quodammode decidisse videantur, agricolaru^ more, etc. Sixth. Sen. Bibl. l.
5. in praefat. page 328, 329.
Sixtus Senensis notes, that the ancient Fathers were so zealous in defending
the Catholic faith, that while they labored with all their might to
overthrow one error, they many times fell into the contrary, or might seem to
fall into it; even as Husbandmen in streightening a crooked sprigge, do many
times bend it too far the contrary way. And thus (says he) St. Austin
writing against the Pelagians, did go so far in defense of Gods grace, that
he seems to do some wrong to man's free will. And on the contrary fide,
Saint Chrysostom defending freewill against the Manichees, did extol it too
far with some wrong to Gods grace. And so it is no unpardonable error, if
some learned men among us, or in our Churches, have in hatred to the
superstitions of Rome, spoken too harshly of the devotions of elder times. And
this shall suffice for answer to this accusation or calumny rather of the
Romish Doctors.

IIII. The fourth question concerning this time of Lent, is, Why this time of
the year was made choice of for this purpose.

Answ. I find many reasons given by diverse men. But of those many, the greater
part may seem to have been invented after the institution of Lent, to show
the congruity and fitness of it. The true reasons, which I think did move the
Church at the beginning to ordain this time of humiliation, were only but two
of them.

Of the former sort were these and such like.

1. The first is a politic reason: and it is, because this time of the year
is a time of breed, and of the increase of creatures; and the sparing of the
increase by abstinence and slender diet, might cause plenty and store in the
Commonwealth for all the year after.

2. The second is a physical reason, which is, because Filliuc. Tractat. 27.
cap. 5. part. 2. q. 8. number. 97. page 287.
at this time of the year there is most increase of blood in a man's body, and
the heat thereof might breed Fevers and hot diseases; but spare diet,
especially consisting of fish, and herbs and roots, etc. will serve to
qualify the blood, and to bring it to a right temper.

3. The third is a reason of allusion to the season of the year. For Ha^c
Quadragesimam largitue est nobis Do^mnus, vt buius temporis spatio in morem
totius creaturae nunc concipiamus virtutu^ germina. -- Terra, indicta
Quadragesima, asperitate^ deponit hiemis; ego indicta Quadragesima, asperitatem
reijcio delictorum. Illa terra aratris scinditur, vt mundanis sit co^grua
frugibus; mea terra ieiunijs exaratur, vt coelestibus sit apta seminibus. Herba
segetum reuiuiscit in messem, surculus arboris conatur in fruticem, palms
vineae pubescit in gemmam, etc. Ambros. Sermon. 40. in feria 3. post Dominic. 2.
Quadrag. page 57. C.F.
now fields and gardens, trees and herbs, and all vegetables do sprowt and
flourish and grow: and so with the season of the year, Christians should have
their spring of grace, and be now more plentiful in all good duties and
offices of Religion. Again, now is the seed-time of the world: Men plow and
harrow and break the clods of the ground, that it may be fit to receive seed,
and to bring forth a plentiful increase: and so men being admonished by the
course of nature, should now take occasion to ransack their consciences, and
humble their souls, and chasten the whole man, that they may be the more fit
to receive the seeds of grace, and to bring forth the fruits of righteousness.

4. The fourth is a reason drawn from the necessity of mortification at this
time. For now blood does most increase, and is most hot and stirring, Iansen.
in Concord. cap. 15. page 124. col 2. E. Filliuc. Tractat. 27. cap. 5. part. 2.
q. 8. number, 97. Aliique.
and the heat of nature is apt to produce increase of lust. And therefore as
men in the springtime do abstain from Wine and strong drinks, lest they
should breed Fevers and hot distempers in the body: so it is requisite that
they should forbear nourishing meats, and use abstinence, lest full feeding
should breed youthful lusts and distempers in the soul.

These and such like are the reasons of congruitie, which (under correction) I
think men did afterward invent, to show the reasonableness and fitness of
this constitution: but now the proper reasons, which did (as I take it) induce
the Church to appoint this Fast, were these two.

1. Because the time going before Easter, was the time of Christ's sufferings
and passion and death. In those days it was, that he was betrayed by his
Disciple, and sweat blood in the Garden, and was accused and condemned and
crucified and buried for our sins: which sufferings of Christ are still to be
remembered with thankfulness by every Christian. And because the most express
remembrance of things past, is at the same time when they were done: therefore
this time of the year, in which Christ did undergo his sufferings, was
thought the fittest season in which Christians should celebrate the memory of
them. For to this purpose it is, that God himself, speaking of the day in
which he destroyed the Egyptians, and passed by the Israelites houses without
hurt, says of it, Exodus 12.14.
This day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep it a Feast
unto the Lord throughout your generations. And a little after, Verse. 17.
Ye shall observe the Feast of unleavened bread: for in this selfsame day
have I brought your armies out of the Land of Egypt. Therefore shall ye
observe this day in your generations by an Ordinance for ever. And again,
Exodus 13.3, ^, 9, 10.
Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of
bondage, etc. And when the Lord shall bring thee into the Land of the
Canaanites, etc. thou shall keep this service in this month, etc. And it
shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between
thine eyes, that the Lords Law may be in thy mouth. Thou shall therefore keep
this Ordinance in his season from year to year. Where we may note what God
requires, and why he requires it. First, What: and that is, that they should
keep this day of that month from year to year, for a Festival day unto the
Lord. Secondly, Why they should do this at this time: and that is, because at
this time God did deliver them, and the keeping of this time would be for a
sign of remembrance, and for a memorial of that mercy. And for like purpose,
Ester 9.21, 22.
Ester and Mordecai commanded the same days to be celebrated every year, in
which God had delivered them from their danger. And so the Church of Christ
has ever thought it fit, that the Acts and works of our Savior, which tend
to our Redemption; such as were his Conception, Birth, Resurrection, Ascension
into heaven, etc. should be celebrated among Christians about the same time of
the year, in which he performed them. And so no less fit is it, that his
sufferings and death and passion, should be celebrated with all thankfulness
about the same season, in which he endured them. Ieiunandum and orandum est. Et
quando potius, quando instantius, quam propinquante Dominicae passionis
solennitate, quae celebritate anniuersaria quoda^modo nobis eiusde^ noctis
memoria resculpitur, ne obliuione deleatur. Aug. de Diuer. Sermon. 74. c. 5. page
499. B.
And the manner in which such sufferings of his may be most lively represented
and remembered by us, is, if we pass those days in humiliation and sorrow,
whereby we may be made conformable to his passion and death: and by which we
may in a good sense be said to fulfill that which Christ did foretell, when he
said, Luke 5.35
. The days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them; then
shall they fast in those days. And sure, God himself, by so obscuring the
sun, that contrary to the course of nature it was darkened all the time that
Christ was on the Cross, does teach us, with what behavior we should pass
the time of his Sons sufferings and death. And from hence I may conclude, in
St. Augustines words; c In qua part anni congruentius obseruatio Quadragesimae
constitueretur, nisi confini atque continua Dominicae passloni? Aug. epist.
119. ad Ianuar. cap. 15. pa. 195. f.
In what part of the year could Lent have bin more fitly placed, then in that
which is joined to our Lords passion and death.

Secondly, because the Feast of Easter was now at hand, and that was the day in
which our Lord rose again from his grave; in which new Conuerts were baptized
in great number, and in which all sorts of men did come in flocks to the
receiving of the Lords Supper. And therefore as the Evangelist says of the
Jews Easter, Ioh. 19.31.
that that was an high day: so it may much more be said of the Christians
Easter, that it is an high day, and to be kept with all celebrity, and in the
most deuoutest manner. And in respect hereof, the Ancients were wont to keep
this Feast, not for one day only, or for three days space, as we now do,
but for a whole week together. Yea, and some festiuity and remembrance of it,
they kept for six weeks more, even till Whitsontide, or the day of Pentecost.
Now that the great celebrity of this high day might be performed with better
devotion, and more religious rejoicing, the ancient Fathers thought it
necessary, that men should be prepared aforehand for the performance of so
weighty a service. And therefore as the Jews 2 Chronicles. 35.6. and Ioh. 11.55
had their days of preparation before the Passover; and as Christians have
their fasting eues to go before their festival days, that by their former
days repentance they may be prepared for an holy rejoicing the next day after:
so the Christian Church did think it necessary, before this great Feast of
Christ's Resurrection, to appoint some large and solemn time for humiliation
and conversion, that men being prepared by a serious practice of al good
duties, they might be the more fit to pray for the new Conuerts, and to receive
the blessed Sacrament, and to praise God for his Sons Resurrection, and to
pass this holy day with an holy and heavenly rejoicing. And these, I take it,
were the true reasons.

V. The fifth and last question concerning Lent, is, What relation this Fast of
forty days in the Church, has to that of our Savior, when he fasted forty
days in the Wilderness.

Answ. To this question there be three answers.

1. That our Lord, as himself fasted forty days in the manner declared, so
he appointed and ordained, that his Disciples and the whole Church after him
should follow his example, and fast once in the year so many days as he had
done before in the wilderness. This seems to be the opinion of Enchitid.
lo. de Ieiun. page 563. in solutione sextae oblectionis.
Coster, and de Quadr. cap. 1. page 392. and seqq.
Filesacus, and the To. 2. Sabbatho post Cineres. page 117, 118.
Author of the Book called Antiquitates Liturgicae.

Answ. 2. The second answer is, that though Christ did not in words give any
such Law, or appoint any such order, yet his bare example does tie Christians
to the like observation and practice. Of this opinion some later Divines in the
Roman Church may seem to be, who (as Quidam iuniores consent esse iure Diuino
sancitum; and id probant, quia aliqui veteres Ecclesia Patres videntur
decuisse, illud esse iuris Diuini, quonia^ Christus quadraginla diebus and
quadra ginta noctibus iejunium seruauit. Azor. Instit. part. 1. l. 7. cap. 12.
q. 1. pa. 566. col. t.
Azorius says of them) did think that Dent-Fast was by Divine Law, because
some of the Fathers seem to say that it was of Gods appoynting; for that
Christ did fast forty days and forty nights. But these two answers have small
show of probability, and no ground of certainety at all. For all the reason
that they allege, is (so far as I know) only the authorities of some
Fathers; which have not that meaning, as Doctors of their own Chruch have
endeavored to declare.

Answ. 3. The third answer is, that neither Christ's precept nor practice does
force or require Christians to keep a Fast of forty days, or this which we
call our Lent-Fast: but yet the Church did appoint and does observe this number
of days in their Lent-Fast, with respect and reference to the like number of
days that Christ fasted in the wilderness. To this purpose Tostatus seems
to speak, when he says, that Dicendu^, quod hoc non prouenit ex alique
mandato Christi, sed ex solo Ecclesiae statuto. Habuit tamen illud causas
pendentes ex hoc facto. Tostat. in Mat. 4. q. 18.
our forty days Fast does not proceed from any precept of Christ, but only
from the constitution of the Church: yet it had (says he) reasons drawn from
this Fast of Christ. And Stapleton, Ieiunat igitur Ecclesia 40. diebus ad
exemplum Christi, non quide simpliciter. quia Christus sic fecit, sed quia eius
exemplo sic faciendum esse, and in hac part eius vesligia sequenda esse,
Ecclesia ab Apostoloru^ tempore docuit. Stap. Prompt. Cathol. Dominic. 1.
Quadr. text. 1. page 78.
The Church (says he) does fast forty days after the example of Christ, not
simply because Christ did so, but because the Church has taught us by his
example to do so. Which words may again seem to carry the like meaning.

But it mattereth not what they mean. D. Field of the Church. l. 3. cap. 19.
page 105, 106.
A reverend and learned Writer in our own Church, has delivered the point in
much more distinct manner. He says three things. 1. That it is very fit, there
be a solemn time, at least once in the year, wherein men may call themselves
to an account for all their negligences, repent them of all their evil doings,
and with Prayers, fastings and mournings turn unto the Lord. 2. That this time
of the year was chosen as fittest, both because that herein we remember the
sufferings of Christ for our sins, as also for that after this meditation of
Christ's sufferings, his joyful Resurrection does immediately present it self
unto us in the days following, etc. 3. That for the limitation of the number
of days, men had an eye to Christ's Fast of forty days, as to a convenient
direction. His meaning is, that the Church upon the former grounds being to
appoint a number of days for this solemn service and work of humiliation,
did make choice of forty days, the rather because Christ had fasted forty
days for our sakes. Neither is this without good ground and reason. For first,
the very number of the same days might serve for a more lively expression and
remembrance of Christ's Fast for oursakes. To which purpose God himself says
in a like case, unto the rebellious Jews: Number. 14.34.
After the number of the days, in which ye searched the Land, even forty days
(each day for a year) shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years. In
which passage we may note three things. 1. That GOD did proportion the
punishment to the sin, that it might carry the more lively representation of
it. This I gather hence, because he says, After the number, etc. for that
implies, that God did regulate the punishment by the offense. 2. That this
proportion between the sin and the punishment, consisted in the paritie or
equality of the same number observed in them both. 3. That though there was
this proportion and likeness of the number, yet there was a disproportion and
unlikeness in the matter of that number. For their sin was acted in forty
days, but their punishment was to be suffered for forty years: and yet
notwithstanding this dissimilitude in the things numbered, the likeness in the
very number it self, did serve to keep a fresh remembrance of the fact. And
so in our Lent-Fast, there is a great difference between the manner of Christ's
Fast, and of ours; because he fasted altogether without tasting any thing,
which we can no way reach unto; but do come as far short of it, as forty
days are short of forty years: yet in as much as we keep the same number of
days in our Fast, that he kept in his; this very agreement in the number, may
serve to represent unto us, and to keep a remembrance of that Fast of our
Savior.

And this may be one reason, why the Church might well make choice of the same
number of days for their yearly and solemn Fast, which our Lord had used
before in his Fast in the Wilderness.

Secondly, the Church might justly make choice of the same number of days that
Christ fasted, because the using of the same number might serve as a means to
express our affection and love to our Savior. For even among men, children
that desire to honor the memory of their Fathers, will sometimes say, I will
do this thing, or I will observe that order, because my Father or Grandfather
was wont to do so before me. And a kind man after the death of his friend or
benefactor, whom he does reverence and respect, will keep some customs, and
use some courses, the rather because it was the manner of that man, whom he
does honor, to does so. And finally, all of us use to say of them that be in
love, or do tenderly affect one another; that they love the very ground on
which each of them does tread. And all this shows, that where there is love
and respect, there men do desire to conform themselves in every manner they
may, to the actions and behavior of those, whom they do affect and love. And
so in this case, the Church might show love and respect to her Redeemer, by
making choice of that number of days for her Fast, which he had used in his.
I may then, I hope, not without ground, say, that the Church did appoint forty
days for Lent-Fast, with an eye to the forty days Fast of our Savior; as
willing, and that for good reason, to keep the same number of days, that he
had done.

Now out of all this, we have three Corollaries, which I will add for the
conclusion of this whole point.

1. Coroll. That our Church has great reason to wish, as she does; that the
old Discipline of Lent might be restored again. For the thing in it self is
very effectual to purge sin, and work amendment of life: and the time is
very fitly chosen, to conform us to the sufferings of Christ, and to fit us
for the celebrity of his Resurrection: because having purged out the old leven
of sin, we may then keep the feast with the unleavened bread of syncerity and
truth: yea and the very number of days, allotted for this service, is not
without some good use to keep the fresher remembrance of our Lords tentations
and fastings.

2. Coroll. That they ouershoote themselves in a mis-gouerned zeal, who to
cross the superstitions of Rome, do make these ancient fasting days the usual
times of their feasting. For in so doing, they do not only show themselves
unlike to the ancient Christians, whose example it is our glory to follow in
their lawful courses; but they do also without cause obliterate a good
memorial of their Saviors mercies. I like their zeal in purging out of
Popish superstition: but I should like it better, if it were joined with
moderation and wisdom: such for example sake, as Ezekiah and the Priests did
use in purging of the Temple. And that was this, 2 Chro. 29.16.
They brought out all the uncleanness, that they found in the Temple of the
Lord, into the Court of the House of the Lord: and the Levites took it, to
carry it out abroad into the brook Kidron. And when they had thus cleansed all
the House of the Lord, then Verse. 21. etc.
they brought bullocks, and rams and Lambs and he goats, and offered
sacrifices, and performed the wonted service to the Lord in his Temple. Where
we see, they did not pull down the Temple because of the superstitions or
abominations rather, with which Ahaz and the Idolaters of that time had defiled
it: but they purged out the superstition, and kept the Temple still for its
wonted holy uses. And so it were a commendable zeal, if men would purge the
ancient fasting days of the Church, and carry out the superstitions with
which Popery has defiled them, and cast them into some river, or rather into
some sea, that they may never apeare any more in the Chrian world. But as it
had been too much violence then, to pull down the Temple for the uncleanness
sake that was in it; so it is too much violence now, to abolish all times of
fasting and humiliation for the superstition that some men have placed in them.

3. Coroll. That while there is no public order for restoring the old
Discipline, men should do well each one for himself apart, to renew so much
of it, as he may conveniently in his private practice. And if any man's either
great infirmities or just occasions do let him from so doing; (For infirmities
of body, and occasions of necessary duties have ever been dispensed with:)
yet then he should in desire follow after that, which indeed he cannot aspire
unto; and by his inward humiliation and repentance, labor to recompense what
is wanting in his outward fasting and abstinence. And thus I have done with
this point of Lent; and consequently have by Gods mercy now finished that which
in the second place I proposed concerning our Saviors fasting, and other
things of our practice, occasioned thereby.

CHAP. XI. Of Christ's hungring.
Having hitherto spoken of our Saviors fasting; it remains to add a word or
two of the consequent thereof, which is his hungring, and thereof the
Evangelist says, He was afterward an hungered; which words may have two senses.

The first is this, He was afterward an hungered; that is, he now first began
to feel the want of meat, and nature began to crave some supply. And this
interpretation implies, that for the whole space of forty days, he had no
hunger, nor felt no want of meat, or no affliction of body for lack of it:
but that during that whole space, the Deity did support the humane nature,
that his natural heat did not work upon the nourishment, according to natures
course, as the Dan. 3.25.
fire of the Furnace did not work upon the three men that were cast into the
midst of it.

Secondly, the words may be expounded thus, He was afterward an hungered; that
is, he was now pinched with hunger, and being not well able to endure any
longer, did manifest his hunger by seeking after meat. And this interpretation
implies, that in the time of his forty days Fast, he felt some hunger, though
not such as afterward he did, nor such but that he might endure it, and expect
a longer time, before need made him to break off his purpose of fasting. And
this I take to be the fitter and more probable exposition of the words.

But which way soever we take it, yet thus much is apparent by the Text, that
at the end of forty days, Christ through long abstinence was in some distress
for want of something to refresh nature, and yet had not so much as a piece of
bread to satisfy his hunger, or to allay the craving appetite of his stomach.
For that our Lords hunger in this place, was not ordinary, such as a man when
he has fasted beyond his time may have, and yet continue without any notable
offense unto nature: but rather that it was a pinching and a biting hunger, and
such as bred grieuance and molestation to nature, in a greater measure than is
usual; may appear by two things. First, because the Devil took occasion by
this hunger, to tempt him with turning stones into bread: which had been too
silly a device for the old Serpent to use against our Savior, if he had not
seen him to be in some extremity for want of food. Secondly, because when the
Devil had done his tentation (for which Christ did make way by his hunger;)
GOD sent Angels from heaven to Matt. 4.11.
minister unto him; that is, to bring him meat for his refreshing. Which kind
of providence God does not use to show, but in cases of extremity, and when
ordinary means do fail us. The sum of all is, that Christ by his long
abstinence did endure extreme hunger, by which his body was afflicted, and
nature was molested.

And hence we have this note, that our Lord did for our sakes submit himself
to the afflictions and miseries of this life. The Prophet calls him Is. 53.3.
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. And the Evangelists do show,
how his whole life was a Tragedy of many sufferings. He was persecuted from
his cradle to his Cross, and afflicted from the womb to the grave: but that
which in this place we are to take especial notice of, is, the pinching
hunger which he willingly endured, because it tended to the working of our
Redemption, and the furthering of our salvation. To which purpose Saint John
does further note, that our Lord Ioh. 4.6.
being wearied with his journey, sat thus on Jacobs Well: And gives us
withal to understand, that he was both hungry and thirsty, when he tells
us, that Verse. 8.
his Disciples were gone away unto the City, to buy meat; and that himself
did Verse. 7, 9.
ask water of the woman to drink. And yet notwithstanding his present want of
food at this time, he refused to eat when it was brought him, because he had
a more necessary work in hand, which he preferred before it; that is, Verse. 34.
to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his work; implying in
that speech, the preaching of the Gospel, and his laboring to save the souls
of men. And in this place, the extreme hunger that he suffered, was for the
preparing of himself for his office, and for the finishing of the work of our
Redemption. Thus our Lord was contented to endure hunger and thirst, and any
thing, for the redeeming and saving of our souls; so that as he sometimes said
of the Jews, after he had used all good means to work grace in them, Isai.
5.4.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
so, considering his mean birth, and poor life, and bitter death, etc. he may
as truly say, What could I have suffered more for my Church, which I have not
suffered for her? And now if any man perish, it is his own fault, who refuses
so great salvation wrought by his Savior: and if any man be saved, it is
Christ's merits, who has purchased so great Redemption for him, when he had
deserved damnation and death.

And this may afford us diverse good lessons, at which I will only point in
this place.

1. It teaches us, what a thankful remembrance we should keep of our
Saviors pains for us at all times. But especially at this time of Lent,
ordained of purpose for a memorial of Christ's sufferings, we should often
meditate on our Saviors great love unto us, and consider from point to point,
how being Lord of all, he made himself the basest of all, borne in a stable,
lodged in a Manger, pinched with hunger, followed with contempt; accused,
condemned, crucified and entombed in the earth for our sakes.

2. It yields us comfort in all distresses. For the poor soul, when he is
pinched with famine, may thus think with himself; My case is poor and
miserable; but so was my Lord and Saviors before me: he suffered greater
hunger than this, and yet he had no bread to refresh him; nor no eye of man to
pity him: but the only company and comfort that he had for the time, was the
yelling of wild beasts about him, and the tentations and batteries of the
Devil against him. And the like meditation of comfort may be drawn from other
parts of Christ's sufferings, to cheer all them that be in like distress. For
if Christ suffered such great things without grudging, a Christian may be
content to endure lesser things with patience and comfort.

3. It cries shame upon our niceness and tenderness, who repine to endure
any pains, either for Christ's sake, or our own. For if he fasted so long,
and hungered so much for us; is it not much more reason, that when occasion
serves, we should fast for our selves? And yet see the difference. He fasted
forty days and forty nights; and we think it too much to fast one day,
without adding any night unto it: he fasted, till he fainted; and we think
it too much to fast till we have concocted the crudities of the former meal:
he fasted, when hunger pinched his body, and molested nature, and yet would
endure it still, till he had finished the work, which he intended in his
Fast; and we think it too much, to endure the least pain, though the
mortifying of our sins do require a great deal more. Nay Christ was
betrayed and apprehended and condemned and crucified for our sins; and we
think it too much to pass these days of his sufferings, in a sad and
mournful remembrance of them. But we should learn to check our dullness,
by comparing it with our Saviors forwardness and zeal. And hereunto we may
further add, that if the Physician do taste of the potion which he
prescribes, the Patient may be sure that there is no poison in it: and so,
seeing our Lord, the Physician of our souls, has drunk so deep of this Cup
of humiliation, we may be sure it is no way hurtful to our souls. And
therefore if we cannot equal him in fasting forty days; at least let us not
repine to follow him in fasting at convenient times: and as he passed not for
a pinching hunger, that he might work our Redemption; so let not us stick at
a little hunger, that we may attain the salvation that he has purchased for
us.

The Conclusion, touching the physical use of Fasting.
HItherto I have exhorted men to Fasting out of the grounds of Divinity; and I
hope my labors will not altogether want effect in religious minds: but yet it
may be, that some who are well affected toward this exercise for the spiritual
good that they hear to be in it, may be deterred from the practice of it by
reason of some corporal hurt which they fear to receive from it. For my self
have met with some, who say that fasting breeds wind in the stomach, griping
in the bowels, giddiness in the head, and faintness through the whole body:
and by reason hereof, they think themselves privileged and exempted from this
task of abstinence. And true indeed it is, that some such infirmities there
may be, as cannot bear this want of food, without manifest hurt or
inconvenience; in which cases God dispenses with them, whom himself has not
made able to endure it. But it is no less true, that most times men except
against fasting, as an hinderance to their health, when it would be the only
help either to recover or preserve it. Surely, for mine own part, I can
truly say, that though before trial I feared hurt, by reason of my sickly and
weak temper: yet after trial I have found the quite contrary; my body more at
ease, my spirits more free, and all my senses more fresh and lively. And
Tractat. de vitae sobriae commodis.
Cornarus, an Italian Gentleman, reports of himself, that he recovered
himself out of a desperate sickness, and preserved himself in perfect health
long after, only by the help of a thin and spare diet. And In his book
entitled, Hygiasticon, or Vera ratio conseruandae valetudinis. number. 35. and
seqq.
Lessius has gathered many examples of former time, by which it may appear
that fasting has lengthened men's lives beyond the usual time. To all which
experiments he joins both reasons of his own, and testimonies of sundry
learned Physicians; and it were easy, if that were requisite, to add more. But
because this is a thing beside my profession, I am not willing to wade too
far in it: Only, for conclusion, and to give some satisfaction to such as
conceit hurt without cause, I have thought good to acquaint the Reader with the
judgment of Eernelius, a most learned and renowned Physician, who has exactly
set down his mind concerning the physical use of fasting, in the words
following:

Method. medendi l. 2. cap. 20.
EOrum quae per summa corpus exhauriu^t vacuantque, alia sudores co^spicue
cient, alia halitum tenuemque substantiam perspiratu digerunt. Hoc genere
continentur inedia, vnctio et frictio: illo exercitatio, balneum, laconicum.
Phlebotomiae vires proxime imitatur Inedia; sensim ac pedetentim sanguinem
absumens, quem semel ac repent phlebotomia vacuat: praeterea vero crudos
humores aliosque complures dissipat, omnisque generis excreme^ta propellit.
Etenim natura libera nec impedita, salutaria quaeque nobis continenter
procurat. Quu^ igitur consuetus corpori cibus aut subducitur, aut ex toto
circumciditur, huiusque penuria inest; insitus nobis calor omnium naturalium
functionum author, per omnia diffusus ac insertus, noui cibi copia minime
implicatus, vbique vim suam exerens, inualescit. Ac primum quidem vtilem succum
and sanguinem in corporis partiumque substantia^ mutat absumitque nutritione:
tenues vero humores ac superuacuos in halitum digerit ac sine sensu dissipat:
crudos concoquit, mutatque in sanguinem alendo corpori idoneum: ex superuacuis
autem crassos attenuat, lentosque detergit: ac proinde strenue expedit
obstructiones. Adhaec, quicquid concoquere non potest, id saltem praeparat;
viasque omnes corporis, quibus excludatur, patentiores expeditioresque facit.
Tum etiam expultrix facultas quaecu^que praeparata fuerint, in expurgationis
vias adducit expellitque for as. Hinc plerumque aluus sponte soluitur,
vomitiones erumpunt, vrina profunditur vberior, cerebri excrementa defluunt;
and quae a purgationis via longius absunt, perspiratione dissipantur. His
corpus vniuersum sublato quasi onere leuatur, respiratio libera fit ac facilis,
men's sensusque omnes expeditiores alacrioresque euadunt. Haec dum confert
Inedia, impuro quidem corpori plerumque ventriculum vitiosis implet humoribus,
vnde stomachi erosiones, vigiliae, corporis perturbationes and vertigines; quod
scilicet insitus calor perinde ac medicamentum noxios humores exagitet in
alimenti penuria. At vero perturbatos ea demum subigit, domat atque depellit:
vnde magna sequitur tranquillitas, and morborum multorumque symptomatum
sedatio, superstite quidem etiamnum and integro naturali calore. Haec sane
moderata efficit Inedia, vt quae acres humores exacuit, incendit, calfacitque
corpus. Immoderata vero, quoniam pabulo atque etiam superuacuo humore assumpto,
ipsam quoque partium substantiam dissipat, quae caloris est seeds; corpus
tandem refrigerat, viresque comminuit and obterit. Salubris est tempestiua
abstinentia, and apprime vtilis quae per Inediam fit enacuatio. Etenim blande
nullaque violenta aut corporis aut humorum impulsione, nullaque aliena
qualitate in corpus inducta, sensim ac lent progreditur. Acutis porro
vrgentibusque morbis, sola inedia vix tuto succuri potest: sed aut venae
sectione, aut pharmaco expedite vacuandus est corruptus and putridus humor, qui
de sua bonitate plurimum decessit; and quem insitus calor neque amplius in
benignum reducere, neque derepente exturbare potest. At leaves morbos ex
cruditate futuros arcet cibi parsimonia: eosdem recens genitos facile persanat
Inedia: inueteratos quoque eos plurimum coctione lenit, tandemque profligat. Ea
ipsa ex plenitudine futuros conuenienter inhibet, quod sensim ac tempore
onerantem copiam eximat. Qui vero iam praesentes ex copia saeuiunt, eos non
Inedia sed venae sectio expedite tollit. Sed and in crudioribus morbis materiae
situs aestimandus. Nam quum venis aut summis partibus vt capiti, vel plenitudo,
vel cruditas, vel pituita grauis molestaque est, cibus parcus siccusque
confert; ea moderatione, vt praecordia primasque parts ne collabantur alat,
non autem ad corporis summa ipse pertingat. Quum vero aut in ventriculo aut in
prima coporis regione vitium inhaerescit, multo parcior sicciorque victus
imperandus. Inedia appellatur modo abstinentia, modo parsimonia non cibi
duntaxat, sed and potus, qui magis promptiusque quam cibus tum viscera tum
venas implet, ijsque negotium facessit. Quos igitur morbos Inedia non sustulit,
medicatione curato.

The same in English.
OF those things which dreine and euacuate the body through the upper parts,
some do apparently provoke sweates, others digest vapors and thin substance
by breathing through the pores of the skin. In this kind are contained
Fasting, Anointing, Rubbing: in that, Exercise, Bath, and Hot-houses.

Fasting comes nearest to blood-letting in force and virtue: wasting the blood
by little and little, which blood-letting sends forth at once and on a sudden.
Besides that, it scatters and spends the raw and many other humors, and drives
forth all kind of excrements. For, nature being free and not hindered, does
forthwith procure us all things that are healthful. Therefore, when the wonted
meat is either in part or in whole withdrawn from the body, so that there is
want of it; then our inbred heat (the author of all our natural functions)
which is diffused and spread throughout all parts, being not encumbred by the
abundance of new meat, every where exercising its own force, grows strong.
And first of all it changes the profitable juice and blood into the substance
of the body and the parts thereof, and consumes it, by turning it into
nourishment: but the thin humors and the superfluous it digests into
vapors, and wastes them insensibly: the raw humors it concocts, and changes
into blood fit for nourishing the body: and of the superfluous humors, the
thick ones it makes thin, and scoureth away the slimy: and therefore it
strongly riddeth obstructions. Moreover, whatsoever it cannot concoct, that it
prepares at least; and it makes all the passages of the body, by which it
should be thrust out, more open and ready. Then also the expulsive faculty
carries away whatsoever was prepared, into the passages of purging, and expels
it out. Hereupon most commonly the belly is loosened of its own accord,
vomitings burst out, urine is made in more abundance, excrements of the brain
flow down: and that which is further off from the passages of purging, is
consumed by breathing through the pores of the skin. By these means, the whole
body is eased, being disburdened as it were of its load, the breathing is made
free and easy, the mind and all the senses become more ready and cheerful.

Fasting, while it works these things in a corrupt body, most commonly it fills
the belly with ill humors: whence come gnawings of the stomach, watchings,
disturbances of the body, and giddines or swimmings in the head: namely,
because the natural heat does in the want of nourishment exagitate the
noxious humors, as Physic does. But those disturbed humors at last it
subdues, tames, and drives out: whereupon follows great tranquillity, and
asswaging of diseases and many symptoms, natural heat hitherto remaining in
his integrity and strength.

These things indeed does moderate fasting effect, in that it whets the sharp
humors, enflames, and heates the body. But immoderate fasting, because both
the nourishment and the superfluous humor being spent, it wastes also the very
substance of the parts, which is the seat of heat; at length it cooles the
body, and diminishes and impaires the strength. Seasonable abstinence is
wholesome; and most profitable is that euacuation which is made by fasting. For
it works gently, and without any violent forcing either of the body or the
humors, and without bringing into the body any unnatural quality, it proceeds
softly and by degrees.

Furthermore, sharp and violent diseases can scarce safely be helped by fasting
alone: but the corrupt and putrified humor, which has much degenerated from
the natural goodness, and which the inbred heat can neither any more reduce to
its goodness, nor suddenly drive it out, must be presently euacuated either by
blood-letting, or purging. But light diseases, that would rise of crudities,
sparing diet preuents: the same being newly bred, fasting easily cures: and
when they become inueterate and old, it does mitigate them by concoction, and
at last drives them away. The same fasting does conveniently stop the diseases
that would come of fulness: because, by degrees and in process of time, it
takes away the abundance that burdens nature. But those diseases which now for
the present do rage by reason of fulness, not fasting but blood-letting does
readily take away.

And besides, in cruder and rawer diseases, the place where the matter lies is
to be considered. For, when either fulness or crudity or phlegm is burdensome
and troublesome to the veins or the upper parts, as to the head, then sparing
and dry diet is good: with that moderation, that it may nourish the numbles and
chief parts that they waste not, and yet reach not so far as to the upper
parts of the body. But when the fault sticks either in the ventricle or in the
first region of the body, a much more sparing and dry diet must be enjoined.

Fasting is called sometimes Abstinence, sometime a sparing not of meat only,
but also of drink, which does more and sooner then meat fill both the bowels
and veins, and finds them work. Therefore do thou cure by Physic, those
diseases, which fasting has not taken away.

FINIS.

