THE PRACTICE OF REPENTANCE.

OR A Sermon preached at PAVLS CROSS, the fifteenth of September last passed,

By RADFORD MAVERICKE, Preacher of Gods Word in DEVON.

IER. 17. 21. Thus says the Lord, Take heed to your souls.



LONDON Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable THOMAS, Lord RIDGEWAY, Baron of GALTEN-RIDGEWAY: And to
the right Virtuous and Religious LADY his WIFE, all grace and happiness in
Earth, accompanied with all glory and renown in Heaven.
HONORABLE PERSONAGES,
MAy it please you to peruse these printed Papers, containing the sum of a
Sermon preached at the Cross, not long sithence, the Printer persuading it
onward with this reason, for that a Sermon touching Repentance, being preached
at the same place now twenty years gone, he thought it not meet that this
present Sermon, persuading unto the practice of Repentance, and being so near
of Kin to the other, both in respect of the Author and Subject, should sleep
in the grave of silence or oblivion, but rather taking her elder Sister by the
hand, should seek their fortunes in the wide Wilderness of this World, where
happily some godly disposed will either for pity, or pieties sake, give them
intertaynement.

And for mine own part, this benefit I hope may redound by the printing of it,
that as it may be with far greater ease read and perused of them that heard
it, then at that time it could well be attended unto, by reason the wind was
somewhat high and hard at the publishing thereof, so such as were not present
may by this means be made partaker of the same both for their profit and
comfort: the main point therein handled, being a doctrine so necessary and
general, that it concerns all persons and people whosoever, that either long
for, or desire their eternal salvation.

And now (Honorables) I will not spend many words to yield reasons or causes
of this my Dedication to your honored selves; you are not ignorant that my
ancient and long acquaintance, with you, (with reverence I speak it) here in
your own Country, and the certain knowledge I took of your zealous and pious
courses you ever held in the right path of Religion, (which happily has
prepared you for these greater Honors and Places) were motives enough to
persuade me to suffer these lines (if they had been written with gold) to
pass under your godly protections, to speak nothing of the many favors I
have received from you and your worthy Ancesters, which as I may never forget,
so I take pleasure with all thankfulness often to remember them. One thing
more I must add, and so I end; at my being in London when this Sermon was
preached, some few days before I promised your brother and verily intended to
show my duty unto you at Lambeth, when my pains had been ended about the
same; but I was hindered only by sickness and weakness, which made me to
return home speedily, where I thank God, I have now (after a long sickness)
reasonably well recovered my health and strength again, and am not altogether
without hope, but that I may see you once more before I go hence and be no
more seen. Mean while and for ever, I will not cease to pray for your Honors
prosperity, both in your honored selves and worthy Progeny, that as God of
his goodness has advanced you to these earthly Honors, which you know are but
fading, so you may seek by all means possible, to advance Gods glory in the
Gospel of his Son, and the true Professors thereof, which shall be the
Churches good, and your glory for ever. AMEN.

From my poor house at ILSINGTON in DEVON, the sixth of AUGUST. 1617. Your
Honors ever in the Lord to be commanded, RADFORD MAVERICKE.

THE PRACTICE OF REPENTANCE.
IEREM. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved; how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?
Exordium.
SEeing this my Text seems to be but an abrupt speech of our Prophet, I shall
the less need to be curious in observing the Coherence of the same. Coherence.
Yet being well observed, we shall find that it has good dependency upon the
former part of this Chapter, where the Prophet bids Israel to return to the
Lord, and now shows them how they should return, by willing them to wash
their hearts from wickedness, saying, O Jerusalem, wash thine heart, etc.

Diuisio.
In which words, we may observe two general parts:

An Exhortation to Repentance.

The Reprehension, for that they linger so long their Repentance.

The Exhortation in these words, O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved.

The Reprehension in these words, How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain
within thee?

In the exhortation I observe four circumstances. Jeremy. Jerusalem.


First then we are to consider in the exhortation who exhorts, namely
Jeremy, one of the Lords Prophet, Excelsus Domino, one very highly beloved of
the Lord, known unto God before he was formed in the womb, sanctified in his
Mothers belly, and ordained to be a Prophet unto Nations. For so it is read in
the Text:

Then the Word of the Lord came unto me (says Jeremy) Ierem. 1.5.
saying, Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee, and before thou came
out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto
Nations.

Jeremy is appointed and ordained to be a Prophet unto Nations, specially unto
Jerusalem, before he was borne, We are to observe therein, the care that the
Lord has for the good of his Church and Children, long before, in providing
for them, Pastors and Teachers, likewise Kings, Queens, Captains, and
Governors, who are nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers, as well to Church as
Commonweal.

Moses and Aaron provided, and miraculously preserved, for the deliverance of
the Israelites of Egypt. Exodus 2.


So was Joseph before that, for the preservation of that whole Family, which
grew afterward into so great a Nation. Genesis 41.


So was Queen Hester and Mordecay preserved from the conspiracy of that wicked
Haman, for the great good of the Jews, who were adjudged to the slaughter.
Hest. 6.


So was King David preserved first from the Lion and the Bear, and afterward
from Goliath and Saul, that he might feed the children of Israel prudently with
all his power. 1. Sam. 17.37.


So was Josias, Hezechias, and other godly Kings: so was Samuel and the rest of
the Prophets: so was Paul and the rest of the Apostles, all prepared and
provided for the good of Gods Church as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews.

So was that good and great King Constantine ordained of God, to give some
breathing time to the persecuted Christians, after their so many and cruel
persecutions.

So likewise we may say, was John Husse, Hierome of Prage, Martin Luther, and
other godly Preachers, stirred up and preserved by Gods own power, to oppose
themselves against the Pope, and to bring a new light, as it were, unto the
World.

So were many godly Bishops and Preachers saved and preserved in Queen Mary's
reign, from the rage of that bloody Bonner, and other cruel persecuters.

So was our renowned Queen Elizabeth (worthy of lasting memory, very strangely
and miraculously saved and preserved at that time, when she had often written
her own Epitaph, Tanquam Ouis, with her own hand.

And to conclude (for of such examples there is no end) who does not see, and
with all thankfulness acknowledge, the blessed providence of a gracious God,
in preserving King James, our most gracious Sovereign, from danger of death,
even before he was borne (as his Majesty confesses in his speech to the
Parliament) from the point of the Dagger, before he was our King, and from many
most vile Treasons and Treacheries sithence God gave him unto us? (Not to name
the Gunne-powder Treason for the horror thereof) and all this (doubtless) if
God make us thankful, for the everlasting good of those Churches and
Kingdoms, over whom Gods only providence has placed him; whose grace guide
him in all the paths of piety, and whose right hand shield him from all
malignitie either of foreign or domestical foes.

we must know and acknowledge, that God has advanced each one to this or that
place, that dignity or this honor, only or chiefly for the glory of his own
name, and for the special good of his Church and Children.



This point is not unnecessary to be urged in these days: but I cannot stand
to insist upon it. Only this may be remembered in particular, that because our
Prophet Jeremy was specially and extraordinarily chosen and ordained of God to
so great and hard a task, as to be opposite to the whole world, as it were,
therefore God did extraordinarily comfort and encourage him, as he did the rest
of his Prophets and Apostles; The same God, no doubt, it is, that to this day
does, and for ever will help and strengthen the poor endeavors of all
faithful and painful Pastors, that labor in the work and Ministry of his
Word, for the increase of your faith, the end whereof is the salvation of our
souls.

And so much for the first circumstance, who exhorts, namely, Jeremy, a
great Prophet of God, yet a man subject to many sorrows, and sundry
infirmities, as the best of Gods servants ever have been, and ever shall be in
this world.

The second circumstance.
The second circumstance is, Who they are that are exhorted. And I say, the
people of Jerusalem, all the inhabitants thereof, both King, Priest, and
People, none excepted. But the Prophet Jeremy says, O Jerusalem! I answer,
it is a figurative speech, usual in the Scripture, Continens pro contento,
naming the City for the Citizens therein contained. In the Gospel it is said,
that all Jerusalem went out into the wilderness, unto John Baptist, that is,
the people of Jerusalem. And Christ says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee.

Now we know, it was not the City, but the Governors of the City, the Kings,
the Priests, and the People, that killed the Prophets, and after that CHRIST
JESUS the Prince of Prophets. Therefore by Jerusalem is meant the people of
Jerusalem, like as by the world is meant the things and people of the world.

So then, it is the people of Jerusalem that are here exhorted to Repentance,
notwithstanding they were the peculiar people of God, and dwelt in the most
famous City of the World.

Jerusalem sinned, and grievously sinned, they should not have needed
exhortation to Repentance, nor reprehension for not repenting.

Adam sinned in Paradise, the Jews sinned at Jerusalem, the Pope sins at
Rome, the Hermites in the Wilderness, no change of place, but the gift of
grace stays the course of sin: all men have sinned at all times, and in all
places.

Pelagians and Semipelagians the Papists, which dream I know not of what
perfection, as though they had been borne above the Moon, and had had no
touch or taste of Adams sin and contagion: but this heresy though it be
ancient, needs no other confutation, then the common experience of all the
world.







A fifth use we might here insert, that seeing Jerusalem it self, nor any
other Church or Kingdom in the world, is free from sin, and the purest
Churches that ever were, had their many imperfections; therefore none should
separate Papists for Rome and Rhemes. Brownists for Amsterdam.
themselves from the society of the faithful in any Church, State, or
Kingdom, where Christ his Gospel is purely preached, his Sacraments rightly
administered, and good discipline established, for the punishment of sin. And
this doctrine will fall hard upon the consciences of Recusant Papists, that
run to Rome or Rhemes, as also upon our Brownists or Separatists whosoever,
that like Amsterdam better then England, happily because it is better and fitter
for their purposes.

And so much for the second circumstance.
The third Circumstance.
The third circumstance, and which is most material, and therefore has need
most to be stood upon, is, The matter or thing whereunto they are exhorted, and
that is (doubtless) unto Repentance, a point very much urged, but coldly
practiced.

John Baptist began with this doctrine, and Christ the Son of God did second
him, saying, Repent: for the Kingdom of beauen is at hand: repent and believe
the Gospel. This we know was always the manner of the Prophets before that
time, to call people to Repentance. And it was the first and chiefest point of
doctrine, which the Apostles of Christ were commanded by our Savior to urge
after his Resurrection, That Repentance and Remission of sins should be
preached in the name of JESUS, beginning at Jerusalem: Luke 2.
Where our Prophet Jeremy prophesied long time before.

Ieremies mind and purpose were to exhort the Jews unto Repentance, why does
he not use plain words to persuade thereunto?

Repent, he uses such words, whereby they are both exhorted to Repentance,
and also taught how to repent. We will therefore consider the words in
particular, and take them both for an exhortation, and as a direction to
Repentance: Only this one thing I would crave by the way of entreaty, that
hereafter, in all this Sermon, you would not take these words of our Prophet
any more as spoken to the Jews, but directed unto us: for whatsoever is
written, you know, it is written for our learning. And as Jerusalem, to whom
this was first spoken, was a type and figure of the Church of God, so does this
exhortation, Wash thine heart from wickedness, belong to all Churches and
Kingdoms, Cities and Countries, Nations and People, to all (I say) in
general, and to every one in particular; every one has need to have his
heart washed and cleansed from wickedness.

So that now in this third circumstance we must speak of three things. Three
things.



And first, of washing or clensing.
1. Note, Washing.
This Metaphor of washing, as it is very significant, so it is very usual
among the Prophets.

The Prophet Esaias, when he had most sharply reproved the same Nation of the
Jews, calling the Princes thereof, the Princes of Sodom, and the People
thereof, the People of Gomorrah, vpbrayding them that they were a finnefull
Nation, a People laden with iniquity, and corrupt children, telling them
plainly and peremptorily, that the whole head was sick, and the whole heart
was heavy, that from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there
was no whole part, but vvounds and swellings and sores of sin, full of
corruption; and so proceeds on with such terrible menacings and threatenings,
as though the Lord had utterly rejected them, and would never receive Prayer or
Oblation more at their hands; for it was a burden unto him. Yet on a sudden,
the Prophet changes his speech, and exhorts them to Repentance, with these
like words of our Text, Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of
your works from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well,
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and defend the
widow.

Leuiticall Law.
for such indeed is the nature of sin, before it be truly repented of, that
it makes man more ugly in the sight of God, then the foulest Leper in the
world can be in the sight of man.

And indeed, to speak all in a word, sin is a spiritual Leprosy; and
therefore if Naaman the Syrian had need to vvash himself seven times in the
flood of Jordan, which signifies the River of Judgment, before the could be
cleansed from his bodily Leprosy, how many times above seventy times seven
times have we need to be washed and cleansed from our spiritual Leprosy,
which has so taynted and soyled our bodies and souls; that all the water in
Jordan is not able to cleanse one soul from this disease of sin; but only the
blessed blood of our sweet Savior that was baptized in Jordan is it, that must
cleanse us from all sin!

For this cause Christ the true Physician of our souls, did of his gracious
goodness cure and cleanse many Lepers from the filth of their bodies, that
thereby he might make known to the world, that it is he only which was
appointed by God to be to the purgator and clenser of our souls, as Saint
John says: The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1. John. 1.7.
And the same Apostle, in the Revelation, signifies unto the seven Churches,
that it is Jesus Christ which loved us and washed us from our sins in his
blood. Revel. 1.5.
This cleansing and washing of our sins in the blood of Christ, was prefigured
in that blood of the Paschall Lamb, wherewith the Door posts of the children
of Israel were stricken; Exodus 12.7.
And also in the blood of those sacrifices, which Aaron was to offer, part of
the blood whereof was to be put upon the horns of the Altar, with his finger,
and the rest of the blood to be powered on the foot of the Altar. Exodus 19.12.


Many such Ceremonies, and prefigurations are every where to be read in the old
Testament, the truth and substance whereof was accomplished in the new.
Therefore Saint Austen said well, The new Testament was wrapped up in the
old, and the old unfolded in the new: Nouum in veteri obuolutum, vetus in
none explicatum.
All which are more plainly opened unto us by the Apostle in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, where he shows, that all things almost were by the Law purged
by blood, and without sheading of blood was no remission. Hebr. 9.22.23.
And he adds further, that it was necessary that the similitude of heavenly
things should be purified by such things, but that the heavenly things
themselves are purified with better sacrifices then these.

Moreover, Isaac.
Isaac, who was ready to be sacrificed, was a true figure of Christ, which
was the substance that was sacrificed for us, being both Priest and sacrifice,
who offered himself for our sins upon the Altar of the cross, his holy
body, being the night before he suffered, washed all over with his own most
precious blood, like as the high Priest was used to be washed the night before
he came into Sancta Sanctorum. And his sacred side, when he hung upon the
Cross, to the very piercing of his harmless heart, was opened with a spear
or lance. Vt pateant viscera per vulnera (says Saint Austen sweetly) and vt
per foramina Corporis, pateant arcana cordis. Augustine.
That the bowels of Christ's love might appear in his wounds, and that the
secret sweetness of his heart toward us might be showed forth through the
windows or holes of his body.

Hence issued, says the Scripture, both blood and water: John. 19.34.
blood, because without shedding of blood there was no remission; water, to
signify the continual washing of our sins in the blood of Christ. 1. John.
2. 5. This is that Jesus Christ, says Saint John, that came by water and
blood: not by water only, but by water and blood, and it is the Spirit that
bears witness; for the Spirit is truth.



And there are three which bear record in the earth: The Spirit, and Water,
and Blood; and these three agree in one.

If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this is
the witness of God which he testified of his Son:

He that believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself, He that
believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record
which God witnessed of his Son.

And this is the record, that God has given unto us eternal life, and this
life is in his Son.

He that has the Son of God, has life, and he that has not the Soune of
God, has not life.



Here (beloved) is life, here is water of life offered unto us. Ho, every one
that is athirst, come, says the Euangelical Prophet, come buy without silver
(that will not the Pope do, he will not sell his pardons without silver:) but
the Prophet says, Come buy without money, without penny or pennie-worth. Esaias.
55.1.


Therefore it was that our Savior himself cried out in the last and great day
of the feast, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; John. 7.37.
And likewise says unto the woman of Samaria, John. 4.10.
If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me
drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee water of
life. And in the last of the Revelation, The Spirit and the Bride say, Come:
and let him that hears, say, Come: and let him that is athirst come; and
whosoever will, let him take of the water of Life freely. Revel. 22.17.


Eunuch says unto Philip in the eight of the Acts; See, says he, here is
water: What should let me to be baptized? Philip answered, If thou beleeuest
with all thine heart, thou may. Act. 8.


So may you all say unto me, beloved; Here you propose unto us Water, and here
you propose unto us water of Life: What should let, that we should not be
saved?

I answer you all in general, and every one in particular, out of my Text, If
thou wash thine heart from wickedness, thou may be saved.

Thou art a Christian, and the badge of a Christian is Baptism: As Water does
serve to wash away the filth of thy body; so, the effect of Baptism is to wash
away the filth of thy soul.

Thou art buried by Baptism, into the death of Christ, that like as Christ was
raised up by the glory of the Father. so thou should walk in newness of
life. Romans 6.3.
1. Pet. 3.18. For Christ (as St. Peter says) has once suffered for our
sins, the just, for the unjust, to bring us unto God, and was put to death*
as concerning the flesh, but was quickened in the Spirit. JESUS CHRIST from the
dead.



Allusion. Genesis 7.
By which allusion of the Apostle, it is nothing obscure to be collected, that
the water wherein Noah was saved, the Red Sea, Exodus 14.
and after, the River Jordan, wherethrough the children of Israel passed, Josh.
3.
together with the two Prophets Elias and Elisha, 2. King. 2 5.
whom St. Cyprian compares to Christ and Christians, Elias to Christ, Elisha
to Christians. Also the Cloud which passed over the Israelites in the
Wilderness. Exodus 17.
The washing of Naaman the Assyrian, the Poole of Bethesda in Jerusalem, Ioh. 5.
these, all of them were types and figures of our Baptism, like as our
Baptism is, and should be unto us, a badge or token of our new Birth or
Regeneration, that so, in the water of true Repentance, we should daily wash
our hearts from wickedness.

The which mystery the Apostle Paul does make more plain unto us, in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians and tenth Chapter, where speaking of the
Fathers living under the old Law, he says, That they were all baptized unto
Moses in the cloud and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink (meaning with us
Christians:) For they drank (says he) of the spiritual Rock which followed
them, and that Rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.


But as in many of these Jews, God had no delight, so with many of us
Christians that are baptized only, with the outward Water of Baptism, God is
not pleased, because together with the sign of Baptism, we do not care for
the thing signified, that is, to wash our hearts from wickedness.

Saint Paul tells us, that Circumcision unto the Jews, was nothing: but the
keeping of the Commandments of God; S. Paul. Rom 7.19.
What then can Baptism be unto us Christians, but the washing away of our
sins in the blood of Christ? Which thing we shall do, if we truly repent,
and believe the Gospel, and bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance; daily and
hourly laboring to wash our hearts from wickedness; As David washed his
Couch with weepings, and as Mary Magdalen washed the feet of Christ with her
tears; which was a true token of her unfeigned repentance.

And thus much have I spoken concerning washing or cleansing.
Cor pro anima and sensu, acceptum. As the Prophet Joel says, Rent your
hearts, and not your garments:

So says Jeremy here; Wash your hearts and not your clothes.

And a little before in this Chapter, he says, Break up the fallow ground,
and sow not among thorns, be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the
foreskin of your hearts. Jerem. ^.4.


The heart of Man, as some think, is the seat of the soul. And true
Repentance indeed must be from the heart and soul; therefore God craves that
chiefly, My son, give me thine heart. Proverb.


But whether the heart or the brain of man be the seat of the soul, we will
not dispute; sure I am, now the heart of man is the sink of sin, as our
Savior says, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries,
Fornications, Murder, and the rest. And God himself who is the true (...) and
only searcher of the heart, pronounces, that the heart of man is evil
continually. And our Prophet in another place affirms, that the heart of man
is deceitful of all other things: who can find it out? Ierem. 17.9.
there are so many concauities and hollow places in the heart, so many hidings,
and so many turnings, that it has need of a great deal of skill and care to
cleanse and wash the same, and much filth is left behind in secret foldings,
which we know not of: Insomuch that he must be a very wise, careful, and
diligent Man, that can find out but even the corruption of his own heart.

Hence is it that there are so many Hypocrites in the world, that hiding many
foul and secret sins in their hearts, can yet make show to the world, that
they are very holy and religious. Many men there are that desire to be taken
for godly and faithful men; yet the question may still be demanded, Where
shall one find a faithful man? such a one as Nathaniel was: even a true
Israelite, in whom there is no guile.

Jeremy is commanded in the next Chapter to our Text, to run too and fro by
the streets of Jerusalem, and to enquire in the open places of the same, if he
can find a man that executes judgment, and speaks the truth from his
heart, that God might spare that City to punish it. Ierem. 5.1.


And in the two and twentieth Chapter of Ezechiel, God complayneth, that he
sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap betwixt him and the Land, that he might not destroy the same, but could
find none. Therefore, says the Lord, have I powered out mine indignation upon
them, and consumed them with the fire of my wrath, their own ways have I
rendered upon their own pates, says the Lord. Ezech. 22.30.


And it is greatly to be feared, how we should fare, if the Lord should look
down from heaven upon us, that live in this last age of the world, as he did
upon the old world a little before he destroyed it, to see the greatness of
the wickedness of men upon the earth, and that all the imaginations of man's
heart are evil continually.

And who knows whether the Lord be ready to come out from heaven, or to send
his Angels (because the sins of our Land are exceeding grievous, and the cry
thereof very great) to inquire whether we have done altogether according to the
cry that is even ascended to the heavens, or no?

Let us therefore (beloved) if we will have any care to prevent the fierce
wrath of the Lord, which is ready to fall upon us, return speedily unto the
Lord by true and unfeigned Repentance; or to use the words of our Text, Let us
wash our hearts from wickedness, that we may be saved.

Christ says unto Peter, He that is washed, needs not save to wash his
feet. Ioh. 13. 10.


to wash our feet, and with Jeremy, to wash our hearts from wickedness, is
all one.

The Jews, about the time our Prophet preached this, and afterward, were very
ceremonious and superstitious too in their washings; they thought and persuaded
themselves, if they did or could observe the outward rites or customs of their
Fathers, touching their eternal cleansings and washings, it was well enough,
nay rather very well. But Jeremy here wishes them to wash their hearts,
because they drew near unto God with their mouths, but their hearts were
far from him. Esaias 29.13.


Our Savior himself reproves these Jews very sharply, Matthew. 23.
as we read in the Gospel, for this their hypocrisy, for that they were
ouer-carefull to make clean the vtter-side of the cup and platter, but their
hearts were full of all ravening and wickedness. Therefore wisdom wills us
to consecrate our hearts unto God. Not that God will not have the hand as well as
the heart, the work as well as the will, the body as well as the soul, and
all the members and faculties both of body and soul sanctified unto his
service: As St. Paul exhorts, to give our bodies a lively sacrifice unto God:
but because the heart is the chiefest part, and the fountain from whence all
our thoughts, words, and works do arise: therefore the heart must first be
washed and cleansed, purified by faith in a good conscience, to serve the
living God: For if the fountain be foul, the waters that issue from it,
cannot be clean. And as St. Austen says well, Deus magis cordis intentionem,
quam actum operationis intendit: God does more respect the intention of the
heart, then the operation of the work whatsoever. Man judges according to the
outward appearance, but God sees the heart. For he is the only searcher of the
hearts and reins. All things are naked before him. Can any hide himself in
secret places, Ierem. 23.24.
says the Lord? He understands all thy paths, yea even thy privy paths of
pride, of dissimulation, of disdayning thy brother, of fornication, of
covetousness, of briberie, theft, extortion, and the like, though acted by
thee never so secretly. God saw and discovered Achans wedge of gold, though
hid in his Tent; God saw Achab sick at the heart for Naboths Vineyard: God saw
Gehesies heart, and made Elisha to see him also, Did not my heart go with thee,
says the Prophet? that is, did not I see thee, when thou rannest after Naaman
for a bribe?

God grant we have not among us too many Achans, too may Achabs, too many
Gehesies, that cover many foul sins, under their gowns or cloakes of
hypocrisy, that make a goodly show to the world that they are godly, but their
hearts are full of wickedness; that wash their hands clean every day, but
their hearts scarce once in the year, scarce once by their lives, with the
water of true repentance: yet still my text says, Wash thine heart from
wickedness, Wash thine heart. If Pilate had washed his heart, as clean as he
washed his hands, he would never have condemned an Innocent to death, for
fear of the people. The fear of man chased away the fear of God, as the
Wiseman says: contrary wise, As the face of the King chaseth away evil from
his Throne, so the fear of God drives out wickedness from the heart of man.
Prou.


Joseph, How shall I commit this wickedness, and so sin against God?
Therefore the Scripture says, Blessed is he that fears always. The wicked,
all their care is to hide their sin from man; but the godly desire always to
have a good conscience before God. I will conclude therefore this point with a
singular sentence of Saint Austen, fitting for this purpose: Austen.
Quum hoc diligeuter considero, Domine Deus meus, terribilis and fortis: When I
consider this matter well, (namely how God looks into the inmost intention of
our hearts) O Lord God (says he) fearful and terrible, Timore pariter, and
ingentirubore confundor: I am (says he) with fear and shame confounded,
quoniam nobis magna est indita necessitas just recteque viuendi: because there
is so great necessity laid upon us to live rightly and justly, quia cuncta
facimus ante oculos Iudicis cuncta cernentis: seeing whatsoever we do, or
intend to do, we do the same before the eyes of our Judge which sees all
things.

And so much also for the second circumstance: the washing of the heart.
The third Circumstance.
The third follows to be considered; From what we must wash or cleanse the
heart, namely, from Wickedness. I trust I shall not need to enlarge my speech
very much upon this point, seeing all our speech hitherunto has aimed at this,
to teach us to wash our hearts from Wickedness.

By wickedness is meant in this place all sin and ungodliness whatsoever,
that lies lurking in the heart of man. The Word which our Prophet uses, is
Ragnah, (...)
which may signify malum, malitia, or ira; Wrath, malice, or any wickedness
whatsoever, and so it is diversely translated. Montanus says, Laua: (...) id
est, a malitia cor tuum: Wash thine heart from malice. Hierome and others say,
Laua a malo cor tuum; that is, Wash thine heart from evil. And agreeable to
both is our translation, Wash thine heart from Wickedness, from malice:
Whereby the Fathers are wont to mean the malignitie or poison of sin;
howbeit, as I said before, it may be taken for all sin and iniquity
whatsoever; yet because nothing does poison the heart of man more then malice
and envy, therefore Saint Paul says, But now put you away all these things,
wrath, anger, crying and evil speaking far from you, with all
maliciousness. Ephesians. 4.25. Colos. 3.38.
And Saint Peter likewise exhorts to lay aside all maliciousness, and all
guile, and all dissimulation, and all envy, and all evil speaking, and as newborn babes, to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we might grow
thereby unto everlasting life. 1. Pet. 2.1.


all sin, as David says, I have turned my feet from every evil way, and all
false ways I utterly abhor. Psalm. 119.
Dissimulatio peccatum, to dissemble with man is a sin: to equivocate, as
Papists do in matters of Religion, is a double sin; but there is no mocking
with God: Non bonu^ nec tutum est ludere cum Sanctis: there is no dallying with
Saints. Yet herein the most part of common Christians deceive themselves,
thinking that God is well pleased with them, yea and beholding to them too, if
they can contain themselves within the lists or compass of common Christians.

Some are of opinion, that if they frequent public prayers, hear Sermons now
and then, when they can attend them, receive the Sacrament once or twice a
year at the most, though otherwise they be given to many foul vices, as
Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, Railing, and the like; that then they may be taken
indeed for good Christians; notwithstanding they are as far from the purity
of the Gospel, as Popish Recusants are from coming to the Church.

Others are of opinion, that if they can give themselves but leisure, either
from their profits or pleasures, to hear Sermons (if at least the Preacher
please them) though they never come to Prayers, they can cover their
covetousness, and many other sins under that mantle.

To be short, I fear there be few living, which have not some Darling sin or
other, which they both cover and cocker: wherein they flatter themselves, even
to the beguiling of their own souls. Let every one therefore examine well his
own heart, as the Apostle exhorts, and be a severe officer in his own
house, leaving no corner unsearched, and so labor by all means possible, to
wash and cleanse his own heart from Wickedness.

Ier. 10.23.
So is it not in man, to vvash or cleanse his own heart from wickedness,
though he wash himself with Nytre, and take unto himself much soap, to use
the words of the Prophet, in the second Chapter of this prophecy. Ier. 2.22.


I answer by a distinction, that man must be considered either as he is
regenerate, or not regenerate; as he is unregenerate, he can do nothing in
the work of grace; but indeed as he is Regenerate, he is not altogether
passive in the works of grace, as mortification, sanctification, and the like;
but active also and working together with Gods grace, who having renewed our
wills, does will us and command us to repent, to convert, to turn, to work
out our salvation, to wash our hearts from wickedness, and the like; and yet
this doctrine is so far from Popery, as Popery is from purity or verity
it self; howbeit we must know, that even this our working with God, is a
special work of Gods Spirit working with us and in us, the great work of our
Regeneration. Therefore let Prayer and Repentance ever go together; by true
Repentance we must turn to the Lord, by Prayer we must crave grace to return.

For this cause therefore, though our Prophet in the beginning of this fourth
chapter exhort Israel to return unto the Lord, yet after, he betaketh
himself unto prayer, saying, Turn thou us, good Lord, and we shall be
turned; convert thou us, good Lord, and we shall be converted. Therefore godly
David purposing true repentance, betaketh himself to earnest prayer, saying,
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according to the
multitude of thy compassion, put away mine iniquity. Wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me with Hysope, and I
shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. 51.1.


Here beloved, is a perfect pattern for all poor Penitents, that sobbe and
sigh for their sins: to exhort them to often zealous and faithful Prayer,
which preuayleth even with God, also to teach us to whom we must direct our
Prayers, namely, to the Lord only, and not to Saint or Angel, as Popery
teaches, but true Religion teaches, but true Religion teaches us otherwise
to pray to God, as David did, to wash us thoroughly from our iniquities, and to
cleanse us from all our sins: To purge us with hyssope, with which the blood
of the Paschal Lamb was sprinkled, Exodus 12.22.
which must put us in mind of the blood of Christ, which cleanses us from all
sin. Then shall we hear of Joy and gladness, when our hearts are bruised
and broken for our sins; for a broken and a contrite heart God does not
despise.

Therefore let us seek the Lord by faith and unfeigned Repentance, whiles he
may be found; let us call upon him by instant and hearty prayer, while he is
near; Esaias 55.6.
let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon us, and to our God; for
he is very ready to forgive. Out of which Text I persuaded unto Repentance out
of this place twenty years sithence, and now praise God with all my heart,
that has yet lent us so long a time of Repentance, praying further his
Majesty together with the space, now to give us the grace truly to repent.
David.
In a word; let us all pray the Lord to wash our hearts from wickedness, that
we may be saved.

And here I might very well end this part also, saving that there is one Maine
point of doctrine more to be considered, which is, that as it is not sufficient
for a man to cease from evil, as Esaias speaks, but he must also do good: so
it is not sufficient for us to pray the Lord to wash our hearts from
wickedness, but also we must pray the Lord to fill our hearts again with
grace and goodness: for that nullum vacuum in Philosophy does hold also in
this point of Divinity: new wine must be put into new vessels, they must not
be left empty.

Therefore when David has prayed GOD to create a new heart within him, he also
prays to be renewed, that is, that his heart may be filled with a right
spirit, that the spirit of sin and wickedness being expelled, his heart may
be filled with grace and goodness; For the spirit of wickedness may depart
from a man for a time, but if the heart be not presently supplied with the
good Spirit of grace, the wicked spirit will quickly turn back again Luke
11.26.
(as our Savior teaches us) and enter into that man with seven worse spirits
then himself, and so the end of that man shall be worse then the beginning.

Therefore I say, this point must diligently be observed: we must not think
our selves sure, when we have but begun to leave wickedness, though, I
confess, that is a good beginning of goodness. And dimidium facti, qui been
caepit, habet: He is half the way, who has well begun. But we must also
apply our hearts, our souls, and our minds unto goodness, and pray the Lord
to replenish our hearts with faith and grace: for it is a good thing, says the
Apostle, that the heart be stablished with grace: With saving grace for sins
passed, With preventing grace for sins present, With preserving grace for
time to come. This was that, good St. Austen prayed for, when he said,
Sanctifica cor meum, vas tuum, euacua a malitia, imple de gratia: O Lord, says
he, sanctific thy vessel of my heart, but first empty the same from all
malicious wickedness, and then presently fill it with all grace and
goodness. And the same S. Austen has a brief and fine discourse of the
filling and fast binding of this vessel of man's heart, alluding to the Parable
of our Savior, of new and old vessels, saying, Quando vinum nouum in vtres
nouas ponitur, cauendum est primum, vt corda mundarentur, ne infusum
pollueretur, and postea vt ligarentur, ne infusum amitteretur. In which words
that holy Father does warn and admonish us of two things; The first, agreeing
with our Text, that we have care to vvash and cleanse the vessels of our
hearts, before the new Wine of Gods grace be powered into them; and yields the
reason, ne infusum pollueretur, lest that which be powered in, be polluted:
Afterward gives like counsel, that when the new Wine of Gods grace is
infused into the vessels of our cleansed hearts, that then we take care for
the safe keeping and preserving of the same; and yields likewise the reason
thereof, ne infusum amitteretur, lest those graces should be lost again; and
presently shows the use both of this cleansing, and fast binding up of these
vessels of our hearts, vt mundarentur a gaudio iniquitatis, that they may be
freed from that sin of rejoicing in iniquity, and vt ligarentur a gaudio
vanitatis, and that they may be preserved from the delights of vanity. And
making this difference between rejoicing in iniquity, and delighting in
vanity says, that gaudium iniquitatis polluit, and gaudium vanitatis
effundit: the joy of iniquity does defile and pollute that good liquor which
is in the vessel of the heart, but the joy of vanity does make it run over.
Again, he says, that gaudium iniquitatis reddit vas sordidum, and gaudium
vanitatis facit rimosum: The joy of iniquity does soil the vessels of our
hearts with sin, and the joy of vanity does make them crany or chinkey,
ready and capable to be soyled with sin.

Last of all, this good Father shows the natural property both of the one,
and the other, when he says, that gaudium iniquitatis est, cum peccatum
diligitur, and gaudium vanitatis est, cum transitoria amantur: That is joy of
iniquity, when we rejoice in sin, and that is joy of vanity, when we set
our hearts upon things vain and transitory that soon fade away.

Therefore the conclusion may be, Quae transitoria sunt, proculdubio amanda non
sunt: Things vain and transitory are never to be beloved. For which cause S.
John says, Love not this world, nor the things of this world, for whosoever
loves this world, the love of the Father is not in him.

And indeed hinc lachrymae: here is the woe of all: many can be content to
renounce the joy of iniquity, but few there are living upon earth, which take
not pleasure in vanity more then is fitting; one in one kind of vanity,
another in another kind of vanity; so vain a thing is man, so vain is every
man; so full of vanity is every thing, that it made Solomon the wisest of all
men to cry out, Vanitas vanitatum, Vanity of Vanity, all mere vanity, and
vexation of spirit. Ecclesiastes 1.2. (...)


Our honors, our riches, our sports or pleasures, that are not well seasoned
with the salt of Gods grace, are all but vanity and vexation of mind; from
these little pollutions (as we think) the best of us all have great need to
have our hearts washed, cleansed and purged, together cum magna comitante
caterua, with an innumerable company of our secret sins, which never come
within the compass of our knowledge to be repented of.

And if every one have need to pray with David, that the Lord would forgive us
our secret sins, Psalm. 19.12.
how much more need have we to pray the Lord of Lords to wash our hearts, our
tongues, our hands, our thoughts, our words, our works, being so grossly
polluted and defiled with all manner of sin and pollutions! And thus much for
the Exhortation, Wash thine heart from wickedness: wherein if any shall think
I have been too long and tedious, let him know, if so long time need to be
spent only in exhorting to such a business; how much time had we need to spend
to act and perform the same rightly and religiously as we ought to do!

The fourth circumstance.
The reason.
Now come we to the reason, why we should wash our hearts from wickedness?
Which is in a word, that we may be saved. A reason of all reasons to be
regarded: for what should it gain us to win the whole world, etc? And that we
may the better consider of it, let us observe from thence these three points.
Three things.



Of these three particulars as briefly as I may, and as the Lord shall enable
me with his grace.

Touching the first, To what thing else may we ascribe this so long forbearance
of punishment, for our so manifold transgressions, but to the long patience and
mere mercy of our so good and gracious a God? for the earth is weary to bear
the burden of our sins, the heavens are ashamed of them, and the Angels of
glory blush to behold them: Only God in his mercy, and for his Sons sake,
turns the face or edge of his justice from them, that so we might repent and
be saved.

But sinful man, which either cannot or will not repent, heapeth sin upon
sin, to his own destruction. Whereof S. Paul gives good warning, in the
second to the Romans, Romans 2.4,5.
aduising that we should not despise the riches of Gods bountifulness, and
patience, and long sufferance (using so many words to express Gods Jove
toward us) adding that this bountifulness of God should lead us to
repentance.

But thou, says the Apostle (speaking to such despisers of Gods mercies) after
the hardness and heart which cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and declaration of the just Judgment of God. And S.
Peter says likewise, That the Lord is not slack concerning his promise 2.
Pet. 3.9.
of coming to Judgment: but is patient toward us, and would have no man to
perish, but would have all men to come unto repentance: for it is not man's
merit, but of Gods mercy, that we are not daily consumed in our sins, and as
Esaias says, Except the Lord of Hosts, had reserved a remnant, Esaias 1.9.
we should have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah. Whereby we are also
taught, that the wicked are oftentimes spared from punishment for the Godlies
sake; for Sodom it self should not have been destroyed, if there could have
been but ten godly persons found in it. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy is
willed, as we heard before, to run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem,
and to inquire in the open places thereof, if he could find a man. Ier. 5.1.
And God himself complayneth in Ezechiel, that he could not find a man.
Ezech. 22.30.
Wherein appears the infinite patience and mercy of God toward us, in
expecting our repentance, and staying his hand from punishing, as long as
possible may be. The use of this point may be,



Aaron and Moses may prevail more in the Lords wars with fervent prayers,
then the people with all their Pikes. Therefore Esaias complained not without
cause, That good men perished, though he knew they were taken away from the
evil to come.

Yea, David himself cried out for help to God, when godly men were diminished
from the earth; Psalm. 12.1,
therefore I say still, if thou can not thy self attain to be so godly as
thou desire, yet pray heartily, and praise God continually for them that are
godly; for God harkeneth, and is attentive to their prayers, as Malachy
speaks. Malach. ^
And we know that S. James says, The prayer of one righteous man avails
much, if it be fervent.

Conscius sibi, best known to himself: therefore following the counsel of S.
Paul, Let every one examine himself for his own sins, and let him do this
business thoroughly as he ought to do, and he shall find little leisure to
pry into other men's faults, which is the fault of all the World.

O dear Christians! if this course of examination might be presently put in
practice without favor or affection to our selves, what a crying of
consciences would there be among us, seeing they are privy to all our faults?
yea, our own souls would exclaim against our own bodies, and against every
member and faculty thereof. One would cry out, Oh my head, for craftiness;
another, O my heart, for covetousness; another, Oh my throat, for
drunkenness; another, Oh my belly, for beastliness; another, Oh my tongue,
for blasphemy; another, Oh mine eyes, for adultery; another, Oh my hands, for
briberie; another, Oh what shall become of my poor soul, for usury: To
speak nothing of Envy, Malice, Pride, Theft, Murder, and Treachery, with an
innumerable multitude of all sins, which, like a great flood, have
ouer-flowne all our Country, of all which sins we may, I fear me, too too
truly say, as the young man did in the Gospel, though in another sense, All
these sins have we committed from our youth: and it is only of Gods mercy that
we have not been consumed in them and for them long sithence. Therefore if
there be any spark of grace left within us, if there be any fear of Gods
judgments, if any dread of hell torments, let us now turn unto the Lord by
true and unfeigned repentance, for the quieting of our consciences in this life,
and for the saving of our poor souls in the life to come.

And so much for the first point I observed, That it is of Gods infinite
patience and mercy toward us, that he has so long expected our Repentance,
that we might be saved.

The second point.
The second point I observed, was, The care that all good Prophets and Pastors
have, to exhort us to Repentance for the salvation of our souls. But upon this
point there is no need to stand long. Noah and all the Patriarks, Samuel and
all the Prophets, CHRIST JESUS and all his Apostles, all their whole care and
travail was, to call people to Repentance. John Baptist began with this
doctrine, Repent, and believe the Gospel. CHRIST JESUS the Son of God did
the same; Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. And after Christ his
resurrection, he commanded his Apostles, and all good Preachers, to publish the
virtue of his Death and Resurrection, to this end, as Luke reports it, That
Repentance and remission of sins Luke 24.
should be preached in his name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem; even
the same Jerusalem, though not the same people, which our Prophet Jeremy
exhorts here to wash their hearts from wickedness, that they may be saved:
And elsewhere he says, Be instructed, O Jerusalem, etc. Ier. 6.8.






The third point.
And so come we now to the third point lately proposed; that is, Though there
be never so much preaching of Repentance, except we repent with it, and by it,
we cannot be saved.

The saying of our Savior is right well known, Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish. Luke 13.


Noah preached a long time to the old World, and (no doubt) earnestly persuaded
people to Repentance; but it was not Noah's preaching, that could save the world
from drowning, because they repented not.

The like may be said of Sodom and Gomorrah, where Lot doubtless gave many
good lessons of Repentance; but that did not prevail with them: therefore were
they fearfully destroyed with fire from heaven.

Now as it was in the days of Noah, so is it come to pass in this last Age of
the world (as Christ foretold) there is now much preaching and calling of
people to Repentance, but the not practicing thereof is still the cause, that
so few are saved; for except we repent, we cannot be saved.

It was the preaching of Saint Peter, that pricked the peoples hearts in the
second of the Acts, and made them to cry out, What shall we do, Acts 2.
meaning, what shall we do to be saved?

Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins; for without repentance
there is no remission of sins, and without remission of sins there is no
salvation.

Further, this must be noted by the way, that when we urge Repentance, as
chiefly necessary to salvation, we exclude not faith and good works; for true
Repentance is the Child of Faith; and good Works are both the fruits of Faith,
and the true tokens of Repentance. Therefore John Baptist preaching Repentance
to the people, did bid them to bring forth the fruits of Repentance, because
each tree is known by his fruit.

And when the Iaylor demanded of Paul and Sylas, What he should do to be
saved? They said unto him, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved
and thy household. Acts 16.31.


Now, that faith of his brought forth Repentance, with the fruits thereof;
otherwise he could not have been saved: For albeit it be true, as our Church
rightly teaches, that we are freely justified before God by faith, yet our
Repentance and good Works must testify our faith to the world, that it is no
dead faith, as S. James speaks, but such a faith as works by love, as S.
Paul exhorts: Gal. 5.6.
whereby it is manifest, that the doctrine of S. Paul and S. James, do not
differ touching our free Justification by faith, as many Papists pretend: for
that which S. James calls a dead faith, Iam. 2.20.
is the same faith which S. Paul means, that works not by love.

And howsoever our Adversaries the Papists slander us; Heaven and Earth, Men
and Angels can witness with us; that we urge good works in our Sermons as
much as they, and to better purpose then they; by good works we mean bona
opera been operata: such works as are true tokens of our conversion and fruits
of our faith in Christ, by whom only we are saved. And we affirm with Saint
Austen, that bona opera non praecedunt iustificandos, sed sequuntur
iustificatos: Good works go not before them that are to be justified, but
follow them being justified: for first, the person must be accepted with God,
before any thing that proceeds from man, be pleasing to his Majesty: And
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

We say also with S. Bernard, Bernard.
that bona opera sunt viae ad regnum, non causae regnandi: Good works
accompany us toward heaven, but are not the causes of our coming thither.

And to conclude this point, which by way of digression I have pursued thus
far, we all say with Saint Paul, By grace we are saved through faith, not of
our selves, it is the gift of God, not of works lest any man should beast:
Ephesians. 2.8.
but yet so as follows in the same Text, that God has ordained good works,
for every good Christian to walk in. And therefore let every one that
believes in Christ, be careful to bring forth good works, to testify his
Faith and Repentance, without which he cannot be saved.

they are in danger of death; and if they dye without Repentance, they cannot
be saved.



Jeremy himself prays, Convert thou us, good Lord, and we shall be
converted: turn thou us, good Lord, and we shall be turned. Let us know, that
this is a business that of necessity must be done, whatsoever be left undone,
if we will be saved; and the sooner it is done, the easier it is to be done,
and the better accepted: put not off thy Repentance therefore any longer, lest
Gods wrath fall upon thee to thine everlasting destruction. Think upon the end
of thy Creation, think upon the price of thy Redemption; it was to this end,
that thou may be saved; for this end was Prayer, Preaching, and Sacraments
commanded and ordained, that thou may be saved. In a word, this is the end
of thy faith, as S. Peter says, The salvation of thy soul. Therefore not
without great cause is it, that our Text says, Wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved.

And so much for the Exhortation, being the first general part of our Text.

Wherein we have observed, first, Who exhorts? Jeremy: secondly, Who is
exhorted? Jerusalem: thirdly, Whereunto? to Repentance: fourthly, For what end?
That they may be saved.

Second part.
Now come we to the second and last part of our Text, which is the
Reprehension, in these words: How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within
thee!

The Prophet having so lovingly exhorted us to Repentance, by willing us to
wash our hearts from wickedness; he falls now to reproving us for lingering
so long our Repentance, saying, How long shall your wicked thoughts remain
within you! Wherein we may observe things worthy of observation, both in the
manner and in the matter of this reproof.

The manner.
In the manner, I observe the duty of a good Pastor, and Teacher, who must
oftentimes join with Doctrine and Exhortation, Reproof and Reprehension, as
also the Apostle S. Paul exhorts, when he says, Improve, rebuke, exhort. 2.
Tim. 4.2.


Examples of this kind of teaching, we have store in all the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles, which being so well known to all, I shall not need
to relate any of them: but in stead thereof will take up a reproof, which I
think every one of us must be content to bear, of what estate or calling
soever we are of, either in the Church or Commonweal, that is, That every
one, almost, can be contented to hear the Preacher patiently, so long as he is
in his general doctrine, and exhortation; or if sometime he reprove sin, in
some general sort: for that which seems to be spoken to all, is taken many
times as spoken to none. But if the Preacher once begin to fall unto more
particular reprehension: As happily when there is great cause to reprove the
Magistrate and Governors, of some remissness in their duties, that they
suffer sin and sinners, as Idolaters, Adulterers, Drunkards, Swearers,
Prophaners of the Sabbaths, and the like, to go unpunished, yea, uncontrolled,
and that not in corners, but in public places, to the great offense of
Almighty God, and to the scandal of our holy profession: Or when sometimes
many zealous Preachers tax others of their own profession, for neglecting of
their callings; or reprove Merchants, and men of Trades, for their several
deceits, or Landlords for inhansing their Rents, or Lawyers for delaying of
their Clyents, or mighty Men for oppressing the poor, or Noble men, and
Gentlemen for sacrilege, or Rich men for usury, or Gentlewomen for their
excessive pride in their apparel, or women of lower degree, for following of
the fashion, or any one of these, or the like, for their several sins
whatsoever: Oh, then that Preacher is either too precise or peremptory; he
leaves his Text, and falls to railing, as some think: Notwithstanding, like
a paynefull Silke-worke, he draws his reprehension out of the very bowels of
his Text, and does no more then God commands him, To show the people their
sins, and the house of Jacob, their transgressions. Esaias 58.1.
O beloved, if this gentle kind of preaching used in our days, be so hard to
be digested, how would you take it, if Preachers should take liberty by the
example of the Prophets, to reprove sin and sinners in such playnenesse and
boldness, that they single them out by name, as Esaias, Amos, Jeremy, John
Baptist have done, though it cost them full dear for their labor? But they
knew their reward was with the Lord, and their labor with the Almighty.

How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you? Text.
for it is a reproof with a certain kind of indignation, striking to the
very heart of them whom he reproves; such force does the Majesty of Gods Word
carry with it. When it is preached with authority, and in the zeal of Gods
Spirit, It is then lively, and mighty in operation Heb. 4.12.
(as the Apostle speaks) and sharper then any two-edged sword, and enters
through even to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the
joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of
the heart.

How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you?

Amalekites, to take courage unto themselves, and like Samuel the Lords
Prophet, in pieces, To cut and hew Agag 1. Sam. 15.33.
with the sword of Gods Spirit, and not to be so faint-hearted as Iether
Gideons youngest son was, who feared to slay Zebah and Zalmunnah the Lords
enemies, Judge. 8.20.
though his father commanded him so to do.

The wounds of a friend are better then the kisses of a foe. And who more foe
to man, then they that soothe us in our sins, and sow pillowes under our
elbowes, that sinners may sleep the more soundly in their sins, as the false
prophets in old time were wont to do?



And thus much now, for the manner of Reproof, being done with a vehement
interrogation: How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you?

Matter.
Now come we to the matter of reproof, which consists of two parts. Two
things.
How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you?


Jeremy plays too much the Cinicke, and deals somewhat too austerely in
his reprehensions.

What? Had it not been enough if he had only reproved actual sins, whether
in word or work (though I know wicked thoughts consented unto, be actual sins
of the mind) such sins as might happily have come within the compass of his
own knowledge; or such sins whereof the World might take notice of; but must
he come to such secret sins, as never came within the compass of men's
knowledge, except they that commit them? for no man knows the heart of man,
but the spirit of man that is within him, no not the Devils themselves, The
Devils know not our thoughts.
but by signs, except it be such thoughts as the Devils themselves suggest.

I answer for the Prophet, that he does herein perform the part of a good
Teacher, and like a skillful Surgeon or Physician, does not content himself to
take away only outward Ulcers, or cool the heat of a Fever, with outward
coolings, but looks unto the inward causes of all these mischiefs, and so
does labor to take away the cause, that the effect may follow.

Now who knows not that the seed of all sins, and the Wellspring of all
wickedness rises from the heart of man? as our Savior right well teaches,
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries, Thefts, Murders, Matthew.
15.19.
and the like. Therefore as the heart must be washed from all wickedness, so
from all wicked thoughts, which are the originalls of all unrighteousness: for
the imaginations of men's hearts are evil continually, and no man can say his
heart is clean; nay, I think, every one will confess, that the wicked
thoughts of his heart are worse then his works, because either fear or shame,
want of occasion, or one thing or other does hinder the wicked work, when the
heart does burn or boil in wickedness; as in lust, fury, malice, enuic, or
the like, which are the maladies of the mind: And little does man know how
much he is bound to the goodness of God, that the Devil does not know our
wicked thoughts, farther then we bewray our selves unto him, or by gessing at
our complexions wherein he is not unskilled.

I shall not need to relate the opinion of the Schoolmen concerning the
thoughts of men, even in wicked things: Aquinas says, Cogitatio de opere
illicito, non est semper peccatum: The thought of an unlawful thing is not
always sin: his reason, because, says he, Tales cogitationes dupliciter
considerandae: Such thoughts are to be considered in a double sense, Aliquando
sunt cum aliqua affectione concupiscentiae, aliquando horroris: Sometimes they
are accompanied with affection of Concupiscence, and then they are sin;
sometimes with a thought of horror and detestation, and then it is no sin.
Also some wicked thoughts are cast into our minds by Satan, whereunto we never
yield any consent; these are not our wicked thoughts. But it is not against
these latter thoughts, that our Prophet speaks; for such thoughts, to think
upon the ouglinesse and foulness of sin, come too little into our minds:
but it is against wicked thoughts, which either proceed of our own corrupted
nature, or suggested into our minds by the malice of Satan, whereunto we give
consent and liking, or the allurements of the World, which we cherish and
delight in, that our Prophet does here reprove, withthis vehemency of an
interrogation; when he says, How long shall your wicked thoughts remain
within you? Such wicked thoughts whereof Saint James speaks, When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings
forth death. Iam. 1.15.
These wicked thoughts of ours are the Cockatrice eggs; which in short time
break forth into sinful Serpents, and must be killed in cold Winter, when
they seem to be dead; otherwise; if we heat them long in our breasts and
bosoms, they will bite and sting us as bad as Scorpions: Which is one good use
that we must make of this doctrine.

He that lusts after a Woman, has committed adultery already in his heart:
and S. John says, He that hatesh his brother in his heart, is a Murderer. And
the same God that says, Thou shall not steal, says also, Thou shall not
covet thy Neighbors goods. Therefore, our Prophet, when he exhorts to
Repentance, he wills us to wash our hearts from wickedness. And Christ
condemned the filthy Pharisees, for that they would wash the vtterside of the
cup and platter, but leave the inside foul and filthy: Matthew. 23.25.
comparing them to rotten Sepulchers, which were garnished with an outward show
of holiness, but were within full of all wickedness whatsoever. Therefore
when the Prophet Esaias does exhort the people to Repentance, and bids them to
seek the Lord whiles he may be found, and to call upon him whiles he is near,
he does not only command the wicked to leave their wicked works, but also the
unrighteous their own evil imaginations, and so to turn unto the Lord; for
that indeed is true and sound conversion, when the mind is rectified, and the
body mortified to serve the Lord. Therefore is it, that the Apostle prays for
the Thessalonians, that their whole spirit, soul and body may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.



The (...) part
The second part of the Reprehension is for harboring and retayning such evil
thoughts too long in our hearts: How long shall your wicked thoughts remain
within you? Not that it is lawful to give consent unto any evil thoughts, or
to harbor them in our hearts, no not a moment of time. But as it is said of
Covetousness, Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. So it may be
said of evil thoughts, Crescit amor peccati; Sin it self does grow and
increase, so long as any evil thought is cherished within us.

Simile.
The seed must be cast into the ground, and take rooting, before it grow upward
to any blade, and the blade must grow to a stem, and Ear too, before it blow
or bring forth any fruit; so the seeds of sin are first sown in the heart
of man, and there takes root, before it break out and bring forth fruit; but
if these seeds of sin be weeded and taken away, before the root have taken
fast holding, then they rot and die, and bring no more detriment to the ground.
Therefore good Christians must be skillful in this spiritual husbandry,
namely, oftentimes to tear up their fallow grounds, as the Prophet speaks,
with the Share and Culter of true Repentance, lest those seeds and weeds of
sin, which do continually spring up in the furrows of our hearts, do
ouertop and ouer-grow that little grace and goodness which we seem to have.

Therefore if it cannot be avoided, but that evil thoughts must arise in our
hearts, by reason of our native corruption: Simile.
(for as the earth does bring forth weeds without sowing, briars without
planting; so the heart of man does yield forth the seeds of sin without
dressing) It should be our chief care even in the spring of our years, to
weed out, as much as possibly we may, these sinful weeds of wicked thoughts,
out of the Garden of our hearts, that the seed of Gods Word may grow in the
same, being indeed the immortal seed whereby we must grow up into
everlasting life. And this is one good use that we should make of this
reprehension. How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you?

Now as this first use does serve to instruct the younger sort of Christians, to
timely Repentance, before sin have taken too deep roots in them: So the
second use Therefore is the Axe (says John Baptist) put to the root of the
Tree; and the fall of such a tree must needs be fearful: for there is no
hope of any recovery again. To this sort of people it is especially that our
Prophet speaks, How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you?

How long? a year, or two, or ten, or twenty? Oh that were too long; but what
say you then to thirty, forty, fifty? Oh fearful! But what if they hold
out till sixty, seventy, eighty? O God be merciful unto them.

O dear Christians, let us fear to grow old in sin. David prays God to
forgive him the sins of his youth, and to cleanse his heart from secret
sins, which were many of them his evil thoughts. But we are not afraid of
the sins of our age, which were begun in our youth, and continued in our
strength, and now dragge after us even to our grave. So unwilling is Satan to
lose any one of his old Soldiers; he knows, they are cunning, skillful,
crafty, full of hypocrisy, able to deceive the world, themselves and their
own souls, but cannot deceive God, which sees their hearts, and daily cries
out unto them, How long shall your wicked thoughts remain within you?

O dear Christians, how strange a thing is it, that we can never be weary of
wickedness! that the elder many grow, the worser they grow, verifying the
saying of a Heathen, Raro senes Deos timent: which indeed may seem to be a
mere Paradox; and therefore I will not English it: for old men should be
examples to the younger sort, to serve God, to love Religion, to bring up their
Families and Children in the fear of the Lord, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
together with the rest of the Patriarchs and the faithful ones of all ages
have done.

Last of all, we must not think or imagine, that evil thoughts rest only in
old age, and that this reproof of our Prophet does not reach to every one of
us, to old, to young, to rich, to poor, to men, to women; for every one may
accuse himself of this sin, that he has suffered his evil thoughts too
long to continue within him.

Wherefore, to conclude, let us labor betimes to suppress those sinful
seeds of sin, which have filled this Land of ours full of wickedness, from
the Court to the Country, as Amos basket was full of Summer fruit; Amos 8.1.
let us dash out the brains of these Babylonish Babes and Brats, before they
breed us to greater mischiefs; for of sinful thoughts come all our
sinful words, all our wicked works, all our Treasons and Trecheries, all
our privy plots and conspiracies, all our poysonings and villainies whatsoever
they be: Therefore the wiseman gives counsel not so much as to speak or
think evil, no not in thy privy chamber: and what is more privy then the
chamber of our hearts, where all evil thoughts are hatched?

The Prophets of God complain of such as lie musing of wickedness upon their
beds by night, and in the day time they put the same in practice If needs evil
thoughts, like so many Soldiers, must muster through the Country of our
hearts, let them only pass as strangers, give them nor bread nor water for
intertaynement, then they will not care greatly to come again; but as the
brute beast (and every man is a beast in his own knowledge) will willingly
come again after once he has been well intertayned, so these beastly
thoughts and affections, if they be any thing comforted or cherished, will
never tarry long away; they are the harbingers of Satan, and like unto their
Master; for though he go away for a time, if he find the house swept and
garnished, that is, provided for him, he will surely come again with seven
spirits worse then himself, and so the end of that man shall be worse then the
beginning.

Pe^^ratio.
Now God of his mercy make us all wary and wise unto salvation, strengthen us
with grace against all wicked thoughts and sinful temptations; pardon us for
our passed transgressions, finish soon these days of sin, and bring us to
his everlasting peace and rest, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD; to whom, with
the FATHER and the holy GHOST, three persons in most glorious TRINITY, but one
GOD in essential UNITY, be rendered and ascribed of all Saints and Angels in
heaven and in earth, all honor, glory, praise, power, and thanksgiving, from
this time forth, and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Laus Deo trin-vno, in aeternum, Amen.

