SAINT PETER'S WATCH WORD.

The end of all things is at hand.

Digested into eight Chapters, and published by R.M. Minister.

Perused and allowed.

Revel. 22.7. Behold I come shortly. Ver. 20. Surely I come quickly. LONDON
Printed by I.W. dwelling at Powles Wharfe, at the sign of the Crossekeyes.
1603.

The Contents of every several Chapter in this Book.
IN the first Chapter, The Watchword it self is explained. In the second, the
day of Judgment that it shall be, is proved. In the third, the names and
titles of that day are noted. In the fourth, the signs and tokens of that day
are remembered. In the fifth, who shall be the supreme Judge at that day is
showed. In the sixth, the glorious coming of Christ unto Judgment is
deciphered, In the seventh, the order and manner of the judgment is described.
In the eight, an exhortation unto prayer, sobriety and watchfulness is added,
with a necessary prayer annexed thereunto.
TO THE VERY Worshipful, virtuous, and religious Gentlewoman, Mistress
Elizabeth Foord, wife unto the worshipful master Th. Foord of Ilsington in
Devonshire Esquire: R.M. daily prays the rich blessings of God, to be powered
down upon them, their kindred and posterity, to their comforts in this life,
and to their eternal salvation in the life to come.
THe days of man, being compared with eternity, may be likened unto one sand
on the Sea shore, unto one grass upon the ground, or to one star in the
firmament, matched with all the rest: for if a man could live, as some almost
have lived, a thousand years, yet all those years, are but as one day with
God. The ignorance whereof, has made men imagine, that it is a very long
while agone since God created man; and that seeing the world has continued so
many thousand years; therefore that it shall never have an end: yea the
worser sort do think, that either God has not at all determined to destroy
this world; or, if he have determined and promised so to do, that then he has
forgotten his promise. And therefore say many times to themselves, Where is the
promise of Christ his coming, become? And wherefore does he make so long delay?

Whereunto our Savior himself does answer, if we would vouchsafe to hear
him; and swears because we should believe him: Behold I come shortly: And,
surely I come quickly, tarying for no man's pleasure, one minute of an hour
longer, then is determined and appointed, which appointed time, though no man
may curiously inquire of; yet every good Christian will daily think of it, and
thank God, for any good thing that may put them in remembrance of the same.

Among which number of true hearted Christians, because I know your worship to
be one, and such a one whereof in my charge, I take great comfort, as well
for your godliness, as for your kindness extended unto me; I therefore offer
unto your meek Meditation, by way of dedication, these my poor labors
(howsoever imperfect, or unpolished) which at times of leisure, I have
collected since my first coming unto you; through the favor and presentment
of your kind husband, and my very worshipful and loving Patron. Publishing
the same in this sort, for the benefit of all, but (through their own fault)
for the comfort only of all such, as either do, or hereafter shall unfeignedly
love and look for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ to their immortality.

Beseeching the divine majesty, to give us grace and patience, cheerfully to
pass over this our pilgrimage in his fear, and in some discharge of our duty
in a good conscience, to Gods glory, and to some good of Gods children;
howsoever the world, and the children thereof, shall esteem of us or of any
thing we do: that so at last to our endless joy, we may hear that sweet
sentence of our savior pronounced unto us, Euge bone serve and fidelis: Well
done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in few things, I
will make thee ruler over much, enter thou into the joy of thy Master: Which
God of his mercy grant, through the merit of his son, by the assistance of
Gods holy spirit; who seal the assurance thereof in our hearts: to which holy
and blessed Trinity, be ascribed all praise, power and majesty, for ever,
Amen.

Your Worships as much bounden under God, as his life is worth; and in the Lord
ever to be commanded. Radford Mauericke.

To each Christian Reader, all health and eternal happiness wished and
desired.
BEing more then one year passed (right courteous and Christian Reader)
sithence I was entreated to peruse Saint Peter's Chain, for setting it on unto
a second Edition; I thereupon (by Gods help together with that labor) took
occasion and courage to contriue this little work called Saint Peter's
watchworde; which may either pass alone by it self, or be joined to that
Chain, according as it shall be fitting and expedient: the metal both of
the one and the other, being finest gold of the truest touch; first hammered
upon the Anuill in Saint Peter's forge, by that Apostle himself, and whatsoever
is added unto it, and howsoever unpolished, yet you shall find it weighed, I
trust, in the upright balance of the Lords Sanctuary.

Which Watchworde of the Apostle if it waken them that are sound a sleep in
sin; and warn them that are already waking, to stand upon their guard more
warily then heretofore: it is the only mark that I aim at, and the very
blessing of God upon these poor and unlabored labors of mine, which I
heartily desire.

And because (as all men know) it is a very unpleasant thing, any whit to
trouble them that are asleep: and even brevity it self to them that are
napping, is counted tediousness: I have therefore not only endeavored, to be
as brief as conveniently I might throughout this whole Treatise, that so I
might not offend them that are best disposed: but have also cut or divided
this discourse into diverse parts or Chapters; that so even they that are
drowsy, may at least wise take a taste thereof, in reading a Chapter betwixt
every nappe, and so happily may be thereby encouraged to proceed with the rest
as appetite and good desire shall increase upon them.

Most humbly praying the holy spirit of God, who first moved Saint Peter to
give this watchword, and inspired and confirmed my mind thus to explain it,
and to publish the same for the good I trust of others; to bless this little
labor of mine, and to make it fruitful, with the dew of his grace, as well in
the heart of the sower, as in the minds of those that shall reap any profit
thereby. And so gentle Reader I wish thee well to fare, as thy soul fares:
and in thy prayers I pray thee, remember him that prays daily for thee, and
for all them that look for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, to their
immortality. Veni cito domine Jesus.

SAINT PETER'S Watchword.
The end of all things is at hand. 1. Pet. 4.7.
The first Chapter.
THe almighty Creator, being without beginning, or ending, Alpha, Revel. 1.2
and Omega, the first and the last, has made this world for a time, and
appointed an end thereunto to cut off all time.

Man Microcosmos, In the creation of man the beauty of the world is to be seen.
who contains as also the Philosophers could say, a similitude of the whole
world in a very little continent or body, is first an infant, the^ a child,
then a young man, after that comes middle age, a short time more, then doting
old age, then ( finis dissolutionis properans) look for the ending of this
life.

The world likewise has had an infancy from the beginning to Noah's flood, The
ages of the world.
then childhoode from Noah's flood to Abraham, then youthful age, from Abraham
to David, then middle age unto the captivity of Babylon, a short time more,
then came our Savior Christ in the beginning of old age, which is also called
the last age: then high time to consider of the ending or dissoluing of all
mortal things. For how great folly should it be in any mortal man (though
never so strong by constitution of nature) having once passed over, not only
his young and youthful age, but his middle and strong age, and entered into old
age, if then he should not be mindful of his end, how fast it steals on?

What marvel then, that Saint Peter knowing so many ages of the world passed
and the last age of the world well entered in if in a due consideration thereof
he break out into this most Christian-like exclamation or forewarning, which
may very well be called his Watchword, Finis omnium imminet: The end of all
things is at hand.

Now if Saint Peter, who lived but in the beginning or entry of this last age,
were so careful and regardfull to give this Watchworde or fore warning of some
great danger ensuing, how careful and regardfull ought we to be, that live as
it were in the last point of this last age, so to receive and consider of the
same forewarning, A good Meditation
as may be most pleasing to the spirit of God, and most profitable for the
health of our souls?

For this cause only was I encouraged, to undertake this little labor at
times of leisure, and to leave this Watchword with the Centinell of our English
camp, that every Christian soldier hereby may be warned to keep himself
within the compass of his guard or watch, and that at no time he be found
either idle, sleepie, or ill occupied.

And that this thing may be the better effected, the Watchword it self, The
end of all things is at hand, ought thoroughly to be weighed and considered.

Our English translations says, The weight of S. Peter's words.
Now the end of all things is at hand: every word carrying his weight: Now the
end is at hand.

The Apostle does not forewarne, of danger long after to be looked for, neither
does he give warning that the world shall have an end one thousand or two
thousand years after: The meaning of the Apostles words.
but speaking in the presentence says, Now the end is at hand: as if he
should say: now it is time for every one to wait for the coming of his
Master, now it is high time for every one to have a care of his business,
and to make up his reckoning and account perfect. The end of all things: Saint
Peter does not say the end of some thing, or the end of many things, nor the
end of most things, but the end of althings, the end of all things (that are
finite, and to be destroyed) is at hand. So then there is a double doctrine to
be drawn out of the very bowels of the Text. A double doctrine.


First, that there is no time of security left unto us Christians in this
world.

Secondly, that there is nothing in this world that can secure us.

For the first, Genesis 6.3.
though the old world had one hundred and twenty years warning, before the
flood came upon them: though the Cananites and Ammonites, spent many hundred
years in wickedness before their sin was at the full: Though the Ninevites
had forty days given them for repentance, Jonah. 3.4
yet fithence the coming of Christ in the flesh, it is not read, that ever
there was any year, or day, No time given to live securely in, in this world.
Math. 4.17 Cap. ^.10. Christ and his Apostles preachers o^ repentance. Rom 13.12
or hour or minute, given to any man, to live secure in, or to defer his
repentance.

Christ himself says: Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

John Baptist his foretunner says, Repent, for the axe is laid to the root of
the tree.

Saint Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, he notes unto us the reason of the
time saying: It is now time, that we should arise from the sleep of sin:
The night is past, the day is now come, let us cast away the works of
darkness, etc. Therefore is it that saint Peter is bold to say, Now the end is
at hand, it is high time to be sober and watching in prayer.

Neither does saint Peter only urge this argument to keep us from security,
but saint Paul likewise urges the same when he says to the Corinthians, 1.
Cor. 10 11.
These things are written for example unto us, upon whom the ends of the world
are come. Iam 3.8.
And saint James says, The coming of the Lord draws near. And the Judge
himself, Behold I come shortly, Reu. 22.7.20.
And surely I come quickly.

Out alack then upon the security of our days, Duines in heavenly things.
and the dulnes of our understanding in heavenly things! we are very pregnant
to do evil, but to do well we have no knowledge: we are very skillful to
distinguish the seasons of the year, but have no skill to know the time of our
visitation.

The Apostles of Christ said, and have put their sayings in writing long agone,
that the coming of Christ is at hand. The Atheists never cried out faster then
at this day, 2. Pet. 3.4. Reu. 21.20.
Where is the promise of his coming? Christ himself says, Surely I come
quickly, The unrighteous Steward every were says, Mat. 24.48.
Surely my Master will defer his coming.

Now whom must we believe, the Apostles, or the Atheist: the false Steward, or
Christ Jesus the Author of all truth?

The Scripture has already decided this question, Romans 3.4.
when it says, Let God be true and every man a lier: and if every man be a
lier, no marvel that the Atheists and deceitful Stewards of this world,
deceive themselves with lies and errors. The error of the Atheist.


The error of the Atheist saint Peter sets down to be their ignorance in
the knowledge of God, and his word, measuring Gods eternity, according to
their own capacity: And so like unto them that deceive themselves, thus they
reason: It is long sithence (say they) many hundred years gone, that some have
spoken and written of the end of the world: and they that then spoke or wrote
of it, made show as though it had been even at hand: but now we plainly see
there is no such matter, they are mere deceivers, that have told us these
things. For every thing continues a little from the beginning of the creation,
and since our fathers died, the Sun, Moon, and planets in the Firmament, the
trees and Plants in the field, men and beasts upon the earth, fishes in the
water, fowls flying in the skies, the sea ebbing and flowing, times and
seasons continuing, cold and heat, Summer and Winter, seedtime and harvest,
every thing as it was from the beginning of the creation, therefore we will
set our hearts at rest, we will take our pleasures in this world, Preaching to
the^ that perish foolish babbling.
we will not believe the babbling of preachers, that cry upon us still of the
end of the world, we will eat and drink, and rise up to play, we will quaffe,
and carrowse lustily, we will drink healths until we be sick, ^aggering
^earers.
we will swagger and swear by the eternal Jesus, and will leave no sin
vmought for, no not the sin of S^dome.

But stay there thon swaggerer, by saying as thou say, and doing as thou
do, the prophesies both of Peter and Paul are accomplished, and the godly
more assured then ever before, that the end of all things is at hand.

Saint Paul he plainly painteth out these persons, and points out the time
when they should come, ^. Tim. 3.7.
saying: This know, that in the last days, that is in the latter times of this
last age, shall come perilous times, for men shall be lovers of their own
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, These ma^ers agree with our ^imes.
intemperat, fierce, no lovers at al of them that are good, traitors, headie,
high minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, having a show of
godliness, but have denied the power thereof.

Saint Peter more precisely notes these Atheists of whom we speak, saying: ^.
Pet. 3.3.
this first understand, that there shall come in the last days mockers, which
will walk after their lusts, and say, where is the promise of his coming? for
sinc the fathers died, all things continued alike from the beginning of the
creation.

Now seeing all these things fore-spoken of both, by Peter and Paul, are in our
days most truly accomplished, we may thereupon certainly conclude with saint
Peter, that The end of al things is at hand. Yea very near at hand, and may
therefore boldly say with saint Paul, the end, even the last end of the
world, are come upon us

But before we end this point, we must note the answer of saint Peter to
these Atheists, Saint Pe^ answer Atheists.
that measure the infiniteness of Gods eternity, with their only conceyt of
time, which time if it be any thing, it is the least of all things with God.

Therefore saint Peter says and borrows it out of the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.
that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day, which is a full answer to this their question, Where is the promise
of his coming?

Now does God promise and not perform? God forbid. God alw^^ as goo^ his wo^^


But (say they) it was promised long sithence fifteen hundred years gone,
that Christ would come very shortly unto judgment, and yet to this day he is
not come, nay to our seeming he is as far of now, as he was then: therefore
it is most likely he will not come at all. Saint Peter though he were no
sophister, presently finds out this fallacy, and shows whence they deceive
themselves: namely, because they think that time passes away as fast with
God, as it does with man, which is nothing so, a thousand years with man, is a
long time, with God, but as one day: why then was it promised fifteen hundred
years gone, that the world should shortly have an end? All that time is with
God but as one day, and ahalfe day: stay but one half day more, and thou shall
be sure to see the accomplishment thereof.

So then they which judge or weigh Gods everlasting eternity, in the balance
of their temporal vanity, show plainly that they know not what eternity and
euerlastingnesse is, ^ongtime ^^th man ^^asured Gods ^^^itie is ^^y shor^.
for in eternity there is neither length nor shortness of time, with God there
is no time past, neither any to come, all things are with God in the present
tense, or time, and in eternity there is neither length nor shortness of time.
Only of this fond conceit that Gods everlasting providence, is subject to
casualtie of time, has spru^g these gross errors, and has caused the
curiosity of man to move these and such like questions of vanity, Curious
question^
as how comes it to pass that God forbore so long time before he made this
world! what did God before he made this world, and the like?

To which latter question one answers very pithely, that before God made this
world for man to live in, he made hell for such curious questionists to dwell
in, after this world is ended.

Again, they that demand why God forbore so long time before he made this
world, might as well ask why it plea sed God to make this world or any time at
all? And the terming of any time long, is in respect of the continuance of
time, to them only that live in time, and not in respect of God that made
time. Put the cause that the world had lasted one hundred thousand years, or
if ye will ten hundred thousand years, what shall ye gain by that: you will
then say, that the world had been of the greater antiquity, but I demand in
respect of who^? of God, or of thy self? of eternity, or of time? truly only
in respect of thy self, and of time, but not in respect of God, or of
eternity: one hundred thousand thousand years past with God is nothing, and
ten hundred thousand thousand years to come with God is nothing, in respect of
eternity or euerlastingnesse: and these distinctions of time and place, were
created and brought forth together at one instant with the world, so as they
be neither without it, nor before it: ^^e that is (...) thout ^^^e made ^^e.
he that is without time, and without place, made both time and place, and if
he had been subject to time and place, (as thou Atheist imaginest) he could
not have made either time or place. So then be fatisfied with this reply of
the Apostle, a thousand years with God is as one day, and one day as a
thousand years: Never demand this question more, Where is the promise of
Christ's coming? for coming he will come, ^^b. 10.37.
and will not tarry.

Assure thy self, the Lord is not slack in ^omming as thou countest
slackenes, but tarrieth patiently yet a very little while, and expects thy
repentance, take heed therefore that thou do not according to the hardness of
thine heart which cannot repent, heap unto thy self wrath, Romans 2.5.
against this great day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God.

So much briefly touching the error of the open Atheist, and saint Peter's reply
thereunto.

Now the error of the secure or unrighteous steward, The security of the
unrighteous Stewards.
though it be very dangerous, yet it is not altogether so impious. One says,
that there shall be no judgment, the other says, My master will defer his
coming unto judgment, for so says the unjust steward, Surely my master will
defer his coming, and thereupon he gives himself license to sin, and to
live securely in this world.

So then the cause of so great security as is now in the world, even of such
as voluntarily confess and acknowledge Jesus Christ to be their master, even
in those whom he has reposed great trust, and committed many talents unto
their credit and governance, yea many such as he has made ruler over his
wholehouse, not only to keep good rule themselves, but also to keep many other
in good order. I say, the cause of all this security in the^, is noted in this
one word, surely my Master will defer his coming: against which sin of
security, our savior himself does inueigh most sharply saying: Math. 24.15.
Who is a faithful servant, and wise, whom his Master has made ruler over
his household, to give them meat in season? Blessed is that servant whom his
master when he comes: shall find so doing, verily I say unto you, he spall
make him ruler over all his goods. But if that evil servant, shall say in his
heart, my master does defer his coming, and begin to smite his fellows,
and to eat, and to drink with the drunken: that servants master will come in a
day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and
will cut him of, and give him his portion with hypocrites, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Upon these words then of our savior Christ, I may well conclude this
general affertion, that there is no security in this world, and that they who
other they be that live securely, live most dangerously, and without speedy
repentance, are like to be onertaken in their sins, and hereafter to be
punished eternally.

The second general observation is, that as there is no time of security in
this world, by reason we are to expect the end thereof every day, so is there
nothing in this world that can secure us, No earthly thing that can secure us.
because every thing shall have an end as the Apostle says. The end of all
things is at hand. No trust then or confidence to be set then in any worldly
thing. Sampsons strength, Croesus riches, Solomon's glory, Absolons beauty,
all must vanish away, friends though never so mighty, wise men though never
so politic, valiant men though never so frolic, cannot secure us, no not a
moment of time.

Oh, that in time then we would learn to be wise, and put no confidence in
transitory things! Ier. 9.23.24.
that we would follow the counsel of the Prophet Jeremy: Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the
rich man glory in their riches, but let him that glories, glory in this,
that he understands and know me says the Lord, for I am he that shows
mercy, judgment and righteousness in the earth.

Hence is it that saint Paul concludes: 1. Cor. 1.31.
Let him that glories glory in the Lord: and he that puts his trust in the
Lord, shall never be confounded.

Therefore the Psalmist truly says, Psalm. 118.
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in man: it is
better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in Princes. He that
^rusteth in God has ^ sure refuge.
And, if the Lord be angry, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.

On the contrary, the scripture says of the wicked that live and die in their
sins, or else shall live wickedly till the day of judgment come upon them,
that they shall say to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, Revel. 6.16.
and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

So that this is the brief conclusion of the second observation, that nothing
in this life, or in this world, may or can secure or keep us from the danger
of that great day, of which saint Peter forewarneth us, but only our trust and
confidence in God, which the faithful have in him by the means of Christ. See
then how much we are beholding to saint Peter, for giving us this Watchword,
The end of all things is at hand. No time of daliance in this world.
Whereby we are taught that there is no time of daliance, nor any place left
us to be secure in this world, always we must watch and pray, because we
know not what hour the son of man will come, Math. 24.36.
as Christ himself says: Of that day and hour knows no man no not the
Angels of heaven, but as the days of Noah were, so likewise shall the coming
of the son of man be: for as in the days before the flood, they did eat
and drink, marry, and gave in marriage unto the days that Noah entered into
thee Arc, and knew nothing until the flood came and took them all away: so
shall also the coming of the son of man be.

Watch therefore, says our Savior Christ, for ye know not what hour your
master will come. Of this be sure, if the good man of the cause knew at what
watch the thief would come, he would surely watch, (...) therefo^^ we mu^^
look for him every day. Luke. 21.34.
and not suffer his house to be dug through. Therefore be ye also ready,
for in the hour ye think not, will the son of man come.

For the same cause is it that Christ gives us this great caveat: Take heed
to your selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least that day come upon you at
unawares. For as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell on the face of
the whole earth: watch therefore and pray continually, that ye may be counted
worthy to escape all these things, that shall come to pass, and that ye may
stand before the son of man.

But oh good God, how is this caveat of Christ forgotten in this age of ours?
When the care of this life, and the desire of gain have almost choked all
godliness, or rather when belly-cheere and drunkenness, is more in use among
us that are named Christians, then ever among those heathen people, which only
served their God Bacchus. O beastly drunkards, what mean you to run into
this excess riot of drunkenness, without all mean or measure as now you do?
endeavoring to excel the drunkards and tossepots of all ages.

In old time it was said, They that are drunken, are drunken in the night, for
then they were ashamed to be seen dru^ken in the day. But now it seems our
drunkards are ashamed of themselves, if they be not drunken once with the least
every day: Drunkards delight to make more drunkards.
nay they content not themselves with their own drunkenness, but take great
pleasure and delight to make other drunk also, as is too apparent by their
carrowsing and quaffing health to him, and health to her, and yet no health nor
wealth to any of them present or absent.

Saint Paul tells thee how thou should use thy needye brother, though
thine enemy: If he be hungry (says he) feed him, if he be a thirst, Romans
12.20.
give (...) drink: but thou will make thy friend ^rinke before he be thirsty,
and of a ^riend make him many time before he ^epart thy mortal foe: for how
many ^ayes and fightings do we see daily to rise of these vnhealthful
quaffings? then that belching of blasphemies, and vn^aturall murders follow
after, and in a word, what sin is there that does not ^ccompanie
drunkenness? This sin^ull custom of quaffing by measure, or ^ather above
measure, was not allowed ^n the Court of that great king Ahashueosh, no not in
the time of his feasting, Hester. 1.^^
out rather a law by the kings own mouth made against it: would God some ^aw
or other were made to restrain this ^o great licenciousnesse, or beastliness,
Unlawful drinking forbidden.
or hereby men are made worse then beasts: bring a horse to water, and he will
drink no more then pleases him, ^or is sufficient: but if a drunkarde once
come where there is either Ale or Wine, ^e is never satisfied, nay he will
enforce others to do as he does, so long as ey^her of them can stand in the
place.

It is reported that Diogines fell in comanie once with such toslepot
companions: and when he was quaffed unto in wine, he cast it on the ground,
saying, better one, then two, meaning the wine perish alone, then he should
have perished with it.

Now let the Drunkards hear what judgment the Prophet Habakkuk pronounces
against them, when he says: Woe unto thee that give thy neighbor drink
(meaning in the manner aforesaid) and make him drunken also, Habac. 2.15.16.
that thou may see hi^ priuities. Thou shall be filled with shame for glory,
drink thou also and be made naked, the cup of the Lords right hand shall be
turned vnt^ thee, and shameful spuings shall be for the glory.

Again. Pro. 23.29.
To whom is woe, (says the Wife dome of God?) To whom is sorrow? T^ whom is
strife? To whom is murmuring? T^ whom are wounds without cause? The fruit of
drunkenness.
Even to the^ that tarry long at the wine and to them that see mixed wine:
Therefore gives withal thi^ counsel: Look not thou upon the wine ho^
pleasant it is: In the end thereof it will bite like (...) Serpent, and hurt
like a Cockatrice. Then shows the feate of drunkenness, Thi^ eyes shall
look upon strange women, and thi^ heart shall speak lewd things.

Therefore it is not without great cause that our Savior forewarning us of the
end of the world counsels us above all things, to take heed of surfeiting
and drunkenness: and in another place noting the disorders of the unfaithful
servant at his coming to judgment, says, Math. 24.49.
That he will eat and drink with the drunken.

For which cause I verily suppose that this unmeasurable drunkenness of our
age, is a manifest token that the end of the world is at hand.

And it is to be noted, that saint Peter takes the occasion of giving this
watch word. The end of all things is at hand. Upon this that he had said, 1.
Pet. 4.^.
It is sufficient that we have spent the time past of our life after the laws
of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony,
and drinkings, doubling as we see this word drunkenness: then by and by
notes, that if it seems strange to these wicked drunkards, and ungodly
persons, if any be drawn by the preaching of the Gospel, from running into
the same excess of riot with the^. But that the godly might not be
discouraged, he says, that these drunkards and ungodly persons, shall one day
give account, Verse 5.
to him that is ready to judge quick and dead, of which judge and judgment we
will now God willing proceed to speak of more particularly in the Chapters
following, first proving that there shall be such a day of judgment, and a
final end of all mortal things.

The second Chapter.
FOr the confirmation of this point (being a chief Article of the Christian
faith) true Christians, I know defer the plain and evident testimonies of
Scripture, howsoever the Atheists and Epicures deride all scripture. Let us
therefore begin our proof with that ancient prophecy of holy Enoch, noch gave
testimony of the end of the world.
who lived before the flond, and is reported of to have pleased God, and
therefore God took him away unto him self, as it were in the midst of his
days, in respect of them that lived before and after him, when he had lived
three hundred sixty and five years.

This Enoch the seventh from Adam (says saint Jude the Apostle) prophesied
saying: Jude. 14.
Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to give judgment
against all men, and to rebuke all their ungodly among them, of all the wicked
deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their cruel speaking
which wicked sinners have spoken against him.

This plain and evident testimony of the day of judgment, revealed unto so
holy a Prophet and Patriarch as Henoch was, in the first age of the world, and
before the flood, God would not have to be buried in forgetfulness, though
many other of Enochs prophesies (as it is thought) be lost. Some of Enochs
writings lost.
Therefore by his holy spirit, inspired the mind of Jude the Apostle, to
record the same in holy writ, and the same has been taken and accounted in
the Church of God, for most authentical and Canonical Scripture, and shall so
continue in credit among all the faithful, until the end of the world.

Besides, this same prophecy of Enoch, the Patriarch, is strongly confirmed
unto us by the Prophets, Apostles, and by Christ himself, so that no man may
doubt the certainty thereof without great impiety.

How fitly does that saying of Solomon in the last of Ecclesiastes, Eccle.
1^.^3.
agree with the former prophesies, as well almost in word as in sense? Hear the
end of all, fear God, and keep his commandments, which is the whole duty
of man, for God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secreate
thing whether it be good or bad: that is, to the end the good and godly may
be approved, and rewarded, the wicked and ungodly reproved and condemned.

Saint Paul the great Doctor of us Gentiles, 2. Cor. 5.10
uses almost the same words: saying: None shall escape Gods judgment.
We must all appear before the tribunal or judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things that are done in this life, whether it be good
or evil.

And in an other place, reproving the hasty and rash judgment of some, he
says: Romans 14.10.
Why do thou judge thy brother? Meaning rashly, or before the time, or why
do thou despise thy brother? Meaning in doing things that are indifferent,
presently he adds: We shall all appear shortly, before the judgment seat
of Christ where every one shall receive a righteous iudge-ment.

And he also confirms his testimony out of the prophecy of Esaias, where it is
written: Esaias. 45.23.
I live, says the Lord, and every knee shall bow to me. Meaning when he
comes unto judgment, for now many knees bow unto Baal, and many other
Idols, and all tongues, even the wicked shall confess, that is shall
acknowledge Gods righteous judgments. And then the Apostle concludes, that
every one of us, shall give account of himself to God.

And seeing the Apostle does allege this former testimony of the Prophet
Esaias, to prove the judgment to come, we may here add another proof out of
the same Prophet, where it is said: Esaias. 6
Behold the Lord will come with fire, and with Chariots like a whirlewinde,
that he may recompense his anger with wrath, and his indignation with flames of
fire.

Hereunto agrees that evident place of Saint Peter, where purposely he
speaks and entreats at large of this general judgment saying: The day of
the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, 2. Pet.
in the which day the heavens shall pass away with a noise, the element shall
melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt
up.

And a little before the same Apostle says: The Lord knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished.

The Prophet Joel also speaks of this great and fearful judgment, (...).
31.
when he says: The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come.

The Prophet Malachy likewise, as all the rest of the Prophets do, (...). 4.1.
which would be tedious to rehearse, speaks of this great and fearful day of
the Lord. Behold (says he) the day comes that shall burn like an Oven, and
all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble: and that day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts.

And the Prophet David every where makes mention of this judgment, (...) 1.
The God of Gods even the Lord has spoken: Then he says: Our God shall come,
and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and a mighty
tempest shall be moved round about him, he shall call the heaven above, and
the earth to judge his people.

Again, Say among the Nations the Lord reigns, he shall judge the people in
righteousness, Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad before the
Lord, for he comes to judge the earth, he will judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with his truth.

And not only have the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles remembered unto us
this great and dreadful day of judgment, but even Christ Jesus the judge
himself has been most careful to forewarne us of this day, knowing how
careless and retchlesse the world would be in this last and doting age of the
world, insomuch that when the Sun of man comes he shall scarce find faith
on the earth, iniquity shall be increased, and the love that should be
between man and man waxing cold. In the four and twentieth, and five and
twentieth of Matthew, Math. 2^ and 25.
in the thirteenth of Mark, in the seventeenth, and one and twentieth of Luke,
and in diverse other places in the Gospel, do the evangelists record unto us
the speeches and admonitions which our savior uses touching his second
coming unto judgment, unto which places for breuities sake I refer the
Readers for this time: the rather for that I shall have occasion hereafter to
note the chiefest of them when I shall speak of the manner of this judgment,
and of the preparation which the faithful ought to make against that day.

These few testimonies already alleged are abundant proose unto the faithful
and godly. And therefore I may here say unto any one that shall read this
chapter, (...) rest^^^ (...) the (...) of (...)
as a good writer says, speaking of the beginning of the world, and the
creation thereof.

Si credis, satis tibi dictum est, si non credis, nihil tibi satis faciet: If
thou be a faithful believer, there is enough spoken to satisfy thee, if thou
be an Infidel, or an Atheist, nothing will satisfy or content thee: yet that
the vngodliest Athiest may be the more inexcusable, if he shall happen to
read this Book, it shall not grieve me to add some oher authorities and
reasons fitting this matter we have in hand: not that any thing that can be
spoken can add any weight to the proofs already alleged out of the
Scriptures: but only to fight with the wicked, ^^^ing ^dde ^o^itie (...)
scrip^^^^
and to wound them as it were with their own weapons, who every where build
up their fortresses of reason, and despise or neglect he word of God, which is
able to throw down the strongest holds, and ought to bring into captivity all
the thoughts and imaginations of man.

Wherefore if the wandering thoughts of the wicked Athiests will not yield
con^^nt unto this truth, what reason have ^^^y to gainsay it? Surely none
other but bare denials, and because they would willingly not have any
judgment, though their consciences summon the^ to judgment every day,
therefore they willingly cheerish and maintain this opinion, that there shall
be none at all. And why marvel we at this, seeing they stick not to deny
that there is a God, that the soul is immortal, that there shall be any
resurrection from the dead, and therefore no judgment to be looked for; that
the world had any beginning, and therefore shall never have ending. This
proceeds well enough, for indeed to deny one, One absu^ditie dra^^ on anot^^^
is to deny all, as to grant one, is to grant all: grant the first, that
their is no God, and all the rest follow of necessity.

And why I beseech you do they not as well deny that there is a sun in the
firmament, in beholding whereof they cannot if there minds were not more then
blindfolded, but behold the glory of God? Psalm. 19
The heavens declare the glory of God and the firmament, his handie work.

Or why do they not deny that man has any soul at all, in which soul of
man there is painted forth as it were in a table unto us, though covered with
the veil of sin, not only an Image of the Godhead, but even a lively
representation of the glorious Trinity.

Again, if the world had no beginning whence silly worms as they are, had
they their originals, who made them, or whereof were they made? will they say
the world made them? Why they themselves are more excellent the^ the world: and
the creature cannot be better then the Creator: will they say that they had an
everlasting beginning with the world? why then do they die, and return to
dust? and so an end as they say, and yet will by no means yield that the world
shall have an end.

Thus when their wits have wandered the world throughout, they shall be
brought into this strait will they nill they, either to confess that there is
a God, and so the rest to follow in order, or else they shall fall into so many
absurdities, as the wit of man can devise to ask them questions. For as they
themselves, I mean the learneder sort of the^ will teach us in other learnings
a principal being denied, they are not to be disputed withal that deny the
same, their reasons will be so raw, and their conclusions so absurd.

Again, seeing Aristotle a Prince of Philosophers as they call him, when he
had read some of Moses writings concerning the Creation of the world, could in
his bording and jesting manner say of him.

Ille homo (meaning Moses) multa dicit, and nihil probat: has set down much,
but how does he prove it?

I say if they will needs crave proof of God or of his Prophets, for
confirming of truth; let it be demanded of them what proof or reasons they
bring us to maintain their dotages, lyings, and falsehoods, what proof or
reason can they allege to make any one believe, or rather to be such an
Infidel to think, that there is no God, that the world had no beginning, that
the soul is not immortal, that the world and all mortal things shall have
none end: if they will have us only to credit them denying these things,
without any proof and contrary to all reason, why do they not believe the
truth, which is agreeable to all reason, and confirmed by plain
demonstrations, which as they themselves say, is the soundest kind of proof!
or why are they so partial and injurious to the Prophets and holy men of God,
I might well say to God himself, as once to doubt of those things, which are
plainly and compendiously, yea with such harmony and consent as is wonderful,
The consent of Scripture admirable,
recorded in the Scriptures? seeing they themselves will think themselves more
then injured, if we give not credit to their writings, though many times they
be full of fables, and in known things different, and dissenting the one from
the other.

But if they will not yield God his due in obeying the truth, let us yield so
much unto them as to reprove their falsehoodes, as well by reason as by weaker
authorities then the word of God, which they had rather believe. In their own
reason, they both see and confess, that many things in this world by the
reason of the alteration of times, and corruptions of men, are in a sort as it
were shuffled together very confusedly, the fool is exalted, the wise man
despised, the virtuous punished, the vicious praised: what other thing should
this teach us in common reason, but that there is a time to be expected when
all this shall be redressed, all these corruptions purged, and a perfection of
all things restored again.

This much the Heathen themselves have confessed. The Heathen held that there
should be a burning of al things.
That after a certain time there should be an universal burning of the world,
which we Christians call Domesday, and that immediately after, all things shall
be set in there perfect state again, as they were at the first.

Now among all the records of the heathen that entreat of the judgment to
come, those sayings of Sibilla Erithrea (for there were many Sibils) are of
greatest account among the learned, which sayings or oracles, as they are
called, seeing they are extant in diverse books, both in their original, and
also translated into our tongue, I will not trouble the readers with them in
this place.

And as touching this general Judgment though it were neither recorded unto
us in the sacred Scriptures, nor by any other authorities or reasons confirmed,
yet surely Gods giving of his Law, Gods giving of the law a testimony that
there shall be a judgment.
not to theoutward but to the inner man, not to our deeds only, but also to
our thoughts, shows sufficiently without any other proof that there is
another Judge, besides the Judges and Maiestrates of this world, to judge us
and an other judgment then their judgment to be looked for, seeing there
judgment here proceed but to the outward deed, and by prooffes of witnesses,
therefore cannot in any wise pearce into the heart, to discern what is within.
For as it is the Soul that chiefly receaueth the commandment, and chifely
breaks it: it is therefore the Soul that must come to examination, which
cannot be done in this world. Again, seeing the bodies are used as the
instruments of the Soul, either to good or evil, therefore there must be a
resurrection that they may be again joined to their Souls, to receive joy or
punishment, at the general judgment.

But if these Atheists will mock and deride, as well profane, as divine
authorities, which prove unto us the judgment to come, neither will yield
unto common reason, yet there is some thing within themselves which they ever
carry about to convince them.

I mean their own consciences, Man's conscience tells him there shall be a
adgement.
which shall ever witness against them selves.

For let them tell me, what mean these fears and trouble which terrify them
night and day, if there were not a Judge and Judgment to be feared?

What made that profane Caligula to tremble even at the shaking of a leaf,
but only because his conscience told him of the Judgment to come?

When Paul preached unto Felix of the Judgment to come, Act. 24.26
then did Felix tremble and quake.

And how should not the sinful Soul of man be afraid of this fearful
judgment, seeing the devils themselves are horribly confounded with the fear
thereof, Iud, 6.
being kept in Chains unto the judgment of that great day? To draw to an end
therefore, I am rather of this mind, then otherwise, namely, that there were
never any so profane or wicked in the world.

Whatsoever they have written or spoken to the contrary, (as the Atheists and
Epicures in old time, and our Epicuriall Atheists or Machiuilians in these
latter ^aies have belched out many blasphemies against the truth in this
matter) that ^aue been without this feeling in their ^o^sciences of the day of
Judgment, only by the just judgment of God, that they might be the more
hardened in their sins, ^^ey have labored with all their might, rather to
suppress, the^ utterly to quench the same, which sting of conscience, and fire
of displeasure, burning and tormenting their souls in this life, are nothing
else indeed, but only a taste and beginning of those endelesse torments,
which their bodies and souls shall at the last day be adjudged to endure, in
the life to come for evermore, in the bottomless pit of hell. Where their
worm or sting of conscience shall never die, and the fire never be quenched.

Why then should we spend more time or words, or yield any more reasons or
authorities profane or divine, to prove unto them that there shall be a day
of Judgment, and an end of all mortal things! seeing they that would must
gain say it speak not only against all reason and authority, but even in a
sor^ against their own knowledge and consciences.

As for the godly and faithful, the confess the same daily in the Articles
(...) their faith. And if there be any other a^^ no doubt there be some, that
neithe^ with the Saduces deny the resurrection (...) the dead, nor with the
Atheists den^ that there shall be a general day (...) Judgment, but only
stand in doubt, wanering in their minds, and maruailing how these things shall
come to pass. Let them attend diligently, unto these words of Christ, who
says thus unto them, Ioh. 5.28.29.
Marvel not at this for the day and hour shall come, in the which all that
are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God. And they shall
come forth that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil unto the resurrection of Judgment or condemnation.

And so much for proof that there shall be a general Judgment, and
therewithal an end of all mortal miseries.

Now let us proceed to the Chapter following, which shows how this day of
Judgment is usually called in the Scriptures, and what profit we may reap
thereby.

The third Chapter.
TOuching that point, let us first see how the day of Judgment is noted unto
us by Saint Peter himself, whose Watchword has caused us to wade thus far
in this matter.

In the third Chapter of his second Epistle, 2. Pet. 3.12. Stay of Judgment
called the day of God
Saint Peter calls the day of Judgment, the day of God, and though it may be
said that every day is Gods day, because he made all days, yet the day of
Judgment more peculiarly then other days, may rightly be called the day of
God, and that for diverse causes: First, for that God has kept that day secret
to himself, and has not revealed the same either to men or Angels, no not to
the Son of man as he is only man, though he be head and Lord of Angels:
next, it may be called the day of God because upon that day the most mighty
power and majesty of that great God Jehovah shall be made more manifest to the
world then ever before, both in rewarding of the good, and punishing of the
wicked.

Then shall that saying of the Psalm^st be proved true in the sight of men and
Angels. Psalm. 58.11.
Verily, there is a reward for the righteous, there is a God that Judges the
earth.

Moreover, it may well be called the day of God, for when God has judged the
world by Jesus Christ, then shall Christ Jesus deliver up the kingdom to God
his Father and God shall be all in all, then shall El Elohim Jehovah, as the
Prophet David describes him in the 50. Psalm. Psalm. 50.
The God of Gods, the everlasting God, God the Father, God the Son, and God
the holy Ghost, be seen and worshipped of men and Angels, in the excellency
of their glory, the sight and knowledge of whose glory, shall be the full joy
and contentation of Gods elect, as it is said in the sixteen Psalm, Psalm. 16.
vl^
In Gods presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand there are
pleasures for evermore,

Now Saint Peter does not only call the day of Judgment the day of God, Day
of Judgment called the day of the Lord. 2. Pet 3.10
but in the same Chapter calls it also the day of the Lord, meaning no doubt
the Lord Jesus, who shall judge us all. And Saint Paul speaks of the same
matter, uses both words in the first Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
saying, The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven in flaming fire.

And in the second of the Acts, Saint Peter reports the saying of the prophet
Joel, calling the day of Judgment, Joel. 2.23.
The great and notable day of the Lord.

Now he calls that day the day of the Lord, because upon that day the Lord
Christ, shall show himself to be Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and he
calls it great and notable, both in respect of the great glory of the Judge,
as also in regard of the notable things that shall come to pass upon that day,
for then the Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall loose her light, and the
Stars shall fall from heaven, yea, heaven it self shall pass away with a
noyce (as Peter also says) the Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth
with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Then shall the sound of the
Trumpet be heard the world throughout, to waken them that are in their graves,
Then shall all they that are dead, hear the voice of the son of God.

Then shall all the great Monarchs and princes of the world, together with all
their vassals, and subjects, appear naked before the person of this great
Judge, then shall the devils and all damned spirits roar and cry, then shall
all the wicked tremble and quake for fear, and shall say to the hills and
mountains, fall upon us, and hide us from him that sits on the throne, and
from the presence of the Lamb, for that great day of his wrath is come, and
who may abide it? therefore rightly may this day be called, the great and
notable day of the Lord.

Moreover, Day of Iudgemen^ called a da^ of refreshing. Acts 3.19.
the day of judgment is called by Saint Peter in the third of the Acts, the
day or time of cooling or refreshing, because upon that day all the children
that have any way been afflicted in this life, shall be comforted and
refreshed, especially those which have been scorched with the heat of
persecution for Christ his sake, they shall be cooled and above all measure
cheared, comforted and refreshed. They shall hunger no more, Reu. 7.16.17.
neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, neither any
more heat of persecution or affliction, for the Lamb which is in the midst of
the Throne, shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the lively fountains
of waters, to cool and refresh them, and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes.

Also let us see how Saint Paul notes this day of judgment unto us, Day of
judgment called a day of wrath. Romans 2.5.
in the second to the Romans, he first calls it a day of wrath, as also it
is called in the sixth of the Revelation, the great day of wrath, because at
that time all the enemies of God shall be sure to drink of the severe cup of
Gods wrath to their eternal destruction. Psalm. 11.6.


So says David upon the wicked God shall rain snares, fire and brimstone,
storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. Also in the same
place the Apostle calls the day of judgment. ^ay of ^^dgement ^alled the ^ay
of re^ealing. ^om. 2.5.
The day of declaring or revealing, both because the judgment shall be kept in
so open a place in the view of heaven, earth, and hell, as also in respect,
that then all secrets shall be discovered and disclosed, nothing is so hid, but
it shall be made known, says our Savior, also in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 4.13.
it is said, There is no Creature, which is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are open and naked in his eyes with whom we have to do, that is in the
eyes of Jesus Christ, the Son of the eternal God, who shall judge the
secrets of all men by Jesus Christ. Thirdly, the same Apostle not contented in
that place to call the day of judgment, the day of wrath, and the day of
reueiling, but also he calls it the day of the righteous Judgment of God,
Day of judgment ^alled the ^ay of the ^ighteous judgment of God. (...) 2.5.
why is there any day wherein God executes unrighteous judgment? God forbide.
For then how should God Judge the world, if there be any unrighteousness in him
as the Apostle urges in the Chapter following? And as Abraham pleads with
God himself upon this point, saying, Shall not the Judge of all the world do
right? that is, execute righteous Judgment at all times; why therefore does
the Apostle appoint one day among all other days, for God to show righteous
judgment, calling it the day of the righteous judgment of God? Surely he does
it to some purpose, yea, for our instruction, namely because in the common
course of the world, it is usually seen and observed, and many good men as
Jeremy and David have complained of it, that the wicked are advanced, the
godly suppressed, the sinner set aloft, the servant of God abused, the meek
ones contrary (as it seems) to many express texts of scripture, constrained
to wander in wildernesses, being destitute, tormented, and afflicted, the proud
ones in the mean season to inherit the earth, The god^^ abased, the wicked
exalted.
and to suck up the fat of the Land; with a thousand like adversities, that
befall the godly in this life, whereas the godless lie drowned and drenched in
all prosperity; what thing I pray you at the first sight, can there seem to
be more contrary to the just, or as the learned term it, to the Geometrical
proportion of Gods righteous judgment.

To all which, although it might be answered, that there is a fallacy foulded
up many times in these words evil and good, prosperity and adversity,
counting and calling too, adversity evil, when it may rather be called good,
and prosperity good, when it may be called evil: these you will say be
paradoxes, yet such as Christian Scholars ought to be acquainted with. Also
that all these things do but deceive the outward senses of those, that are
troubled with those griefs of the godly, and prosperity of the wicked, not
considering, that God does this in the uprightness of his justice, and in the
depth of his wisdom, both for the great good and comfort of the godly, even
in this life, as they themselves do many times feel and confess, and also
for the greater down fall of the wicked, as David being well advised of this
matter, confesses saying.

God sets them in slipperie places, Psalm 72.18.
suddenly they are tumbled down and perish.

Although I say, this point may thus be answered, and that not amiss: yet
Saint Paul does answer the same more fully in one word, and does decide this
controversy, to the full contentation of the godly, and terror of the wicked,
by making mention of this righteous judgment of God, which is as much unto me,
as if he should say, Be it that it seems by these sundry events, that daily
fall out in the world, both to the good and bad, that God is not just, or to
make the best of it to man's seeming, Gods justice does not shine forth lightly
enough unto us; Have patience but a while, judge of nothing rashly or before
the time, a day is coming, and will not tarry, that thou will be of an other
mind, when thou shall see God to make a short account upon the earth in
righteousness, and judge the secrets of all men, according to true justice by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel or preaching, says the Apostle, Who will
reward every man according to his works. That is, to them which by continuance
in well doing (though they have had many crosses and lets) shall be glory and
honor, and peace, and eternal life, to recompense them for the slanders, and
shames, dishonors, Romans 2.
and vexations, and death it self, which they have suffered for Christ's sake
in this world. But to the wicked and contentious and to them that disobey the
truth of Christ his Gospel, and obey unrighteousness shall be indignation and
wrath to recompense them at the full for their fury and displeasure that they
have ever borne to Gods children in this world.

Moreover, upon the soul of every man that does evil says the Apostle, and
has not repented, shall be tribulation and anguish for a recompense of their
vain iolities and reioycings, which was their continual delight in this life,
agreeing with that answer of Abraham to Dives, ^^ke. 16.^.
Remember that thou in thy life time receiuest pleasure, and contrariwise,
Lazarus pain, but now he is comforted, and thou art punished?

Whereunto serve these complaints of the damned noted in the book of Wisdom,
^isedom.
we fools say the damned, thought the life's of the godly that gladly suffered
affliction in this life for Godliness sake, madness, and their end to be
without honor, but now they are counted among the children of God, and their
portion is among the Saints; contrariwise, say they to the increase of their
grief, we have weried our selves in the ways of wickedness and destruction,
and we have passed through dangerous ways, but we have not known the way of
the Lord. Last of all the remembrance of their glory in this world, does most
of all torment them, saying among themselves, what has the pride of this world
profited us, or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us, all those
things are passed away like a shadow? Then it follows, for the hope of the
ungodly is like the dust that is blown away with the wind, but the righteous
shall live for ever. And all this is according to the righteous judgment of
God, Psalm. 9.8.
Who shall Judge the world in righteousness, and minister true judgment unto
the people, as David speaks in the 9. Psalm.

Hereupon then we conclude, that God even in this world, in the uprightness of
his Justice, does defer the Judgment of the wicked at times, and also
suffers many times the godly to be most unjustly Judged and wronged, by the
ungodly, for causes left known to his wisdom; of whose wrongs, he will
surely be revenged either in this world, or in the world to come, or in both.
Neither (as a godly Father has well noted) does God cease to show continually
tokens of his Justice even in this life, lest any should think God were
altogether unjust, and had no regard how matters passed in this world. On the
contrary, he does not punish all the ungodly ones of this world, at leastwise
for all their ungodliness, for then he should leave nothing for the judgment
to come. And withal it is to be noted, that even those Judgments which God at
any time does execute upon the godless in this world, are but only beginnings
of their torments to come, to the which they shall eternally be Judged at the
last day, except they repent,

And so much for that Saint Paul calls the day of Judgment a day of wrath a
day of revealing, and a day of the righteous Judgment of God.

I will not endeavor further to enlarge this Chapter, by any curious searching
of any other attributes or names, whereby this day of Judgment is noted unto us
in the Scriptures, whereof I know there are many other both in the old and
new Testament: for as much as I seek not a multitude of examples to fill the
page, but only fit examples to confirm the godly, and to strike a terror
into the hearts of the godless for their good, if at least any thing may
terrify them. Only for the further comfort of the godly, who with great
patience must wait for the coming of their Master. Let it not be forgotten,
that our Savior himself in the Gospel, after he has noted many fearful
signs that shall go before and accompany this great judgment for the
confounding of the wicked: he adds a most comfortable exhortation to all the
godly bidding them to lift up their heads and rejoice, The day of judgment
called a day of redemption. Luke. 21.28
for that the day of their redemption is at hand, for then and upon that day,
all the faithful shall be sure to receive the effect of their former
redemption, purchased by the death of Christ, and also the end of their faith,
which is their eternal salvation, both in soul and body in the life to come.
This day thus noted unto us in the scriptures, has been and yet is usually
called of the godly, The day of doom, because then the last doom or
definitive sentence shall be given upon all flesh, never to be revoked.

It is also called commonly the day of the second coming of Christ, And the
day of Christ his coming.
which shall be in infinite glory, to counteruaile his first coming in the
flesh in so great baseness and humility.

Lastly, The day of judgment called t^^ last day.
it is rightly called by our Savior three times in one Chapter. The last day,
because all days and time it self shall end with it, for as time began when
the world began, so with the world it must needs have an end,

Therefore is it that the Angel swears so solemnly in the Revelation, I^.
6.39.44.54.
(such an other oath we shall hardly find in all the Scriptures,) Ren. 10.5.6
By him that lives for evermore, which created heaven and the things which
therein are, and the earth and the things that therein are, and the Sea and the
things which therein are, that Time shall be no more, meaning after this world
is ended.

Now God of his great mercy therefore give us grace wisely to consider of the
seasons, and to make benefit of the time wherein we live, and also to be
assured that this time or day will come how soon, he only knows, that
knows all things, though all the Epicures in the world, have sworn the
contrary.

The rather for that we are assured all of the signs fore prophesied in the
scriptures to come to pass before that day are well near accomplished and
fulfilled, whereof we are to entreat in the Chapter following.

The fourth Chapter.
THe signs and tokens that shall go before this great and general Judgment
are thus divided by some.

Into signs Physical,

In the heavens, earth, and Sea.

Signs Political, in Countries and commonwealths.

Signs Ecclesiastical, in Church and Churchmen, which division is good, and
may well be followed, howbeit, my purpose is not at this time, to enter into
any curious discourse, but only briefly and plainly to discover and lay open
such signs and tokens as the Scripture does forewarne us of that shall come
before this day, whereof many no doubt are past, and some may be yet to come,
which we will also note as we speak of them in particular.

And albeit I say there may be some fignes and tokens that are not yet fully
accomplished, No man ought to defer (...)
let no man therefore defer his repentance, or think the day of judgment to
be the further off for that, for I suppose there be tokens that shall be seen
to come before that day, no otherwise then the lightning before the thunder,
between the which there will be no time for the obstinate sinners to repent,
but even for the faithful and godly, To lift up their heads and to rejoice,
for that their redemption is so nigh.

The signs and tokens that shall go before this great and fearful day of
Judgment, has Christ the Judge himself in token of his love unto us
described and made known, howbeit somewhat darkely to the end the godly should
consider thereof the more carefully, as the wicked do pass them over
contemptuously, which signs we will briefly recite, as they are delivered us
by Christ himself, his faithful Evangelists and Apostles. Luke. 21.
Then shall be signs says Saint Luke, in the sun, and in the Moon, and in
the stars, which no doubt have been accomplished and fulfilled, and that in
this last age of the world by most strange and extraordinary eclipses of the
Sun, and of the Moon, and by fearful and unwonted comets and blasing stars
that have appeared as well to us, as in diverse other places and countries in
Christendom: all which do preach unto us, that the desolation of all things is
at hand. And it is usually observed by the godly, that even these heavenly
bodies, the Sun, Moon, and other of the planets and stars which by the God
of nature were created for the comfort of man, have of late years withheld as
it were their brightest beams, and sweetest influences from us, as blushing
and hiding their faces from beholding the sinfulnes of this latter age wherein
we live: add unto this the alteration which fall out in the times and seasons
of the year: The spring some years hoater then the summer, and the summer
more moyster and colder then part of the winter: yea, and the time of harvest
wherein fruits should be ripened and gathered for the sustinance of man, has
showed it self most unkindly to requite as it were the unkindness and
unthankfulness of man toward his God, who governs all these things according
to his good pleasure, and appointment

The stars and planets are ordained as the clock of God to give warning to
the world of that event and falling out of these inferior things, God the
governor and disposer of all things.
but God himself turns the wheels, draws up, and lets down the poyses
as it pleases him, and causes echthing to fall out according to his own
pleasure. So that we need not doubt to affirm that there have been many
estraordinary signs in the Sun, in the Moon, and in the Stars, passed
already, and yet daily are to be seen, to admonish us that the end of all
things is at hand.

Now, as these signs are usually noted by the learned in the heavens, so the
effects of the same are wars, famines, and Pestilence among men here on
earth, which are also tokens foretold by three Evangelists, that shall fall out
before the end of the world. And albeit no age in the world has been free
from these Judgments of God for sin, yet no doubt these latter wars which
have been raised by Antichrist, and waged by Christian Princes, within
Christendom for the Gospels sake, do even as it were point out with the
finger, that Christ himself is coming to stint this strife, and to stay the
fury of Antichrist the Pope, and all his adherents.

The like is to be said of all the fearful famines and Pestilences that we
have both seen and felt, and the Lord of grace only knows what is it to
come before the end of the world for our great unthankfulness, and abusing of
Gods blessing in the time of peace and plenty: for as sin does abound, so the
punishment of sin must also increase.

And that sin and sinners do so increase and abound, what does it else
prognosticate, but that as Christ also forwarneth, the end of the world posteth
on. Also that fidelitas faithfulness or faithful dealing among men is nigro
cigno similis, Love, or charity cold as ice.
rare to be found, and love or charity waxen cold as the ice, even in the
sunshine of the Gospel, it teaches us plainly, that The end of all things is
at hand: What should we speak of the most strange and vnna^urall birthes that
daily are to be seen every where, which monsters beyond all course of nature,
do plainly tell us, that the God of nature is angry with man, for those most
monstrous and unnatural sins which are daily committed: to speak nothing of
the strange and unheard of fires, and burnings, hail, thundrings and
lightnings, which are even the Harbenge^^ or forerunners, of that fearful and
violent fire, which shall shortly destroy all the adversaries of God when his
Son Christ shall come unto judgment.

Also there shall be earth quakes though not in all, yet in diverse places, and
we have lately seen and felt the same, ^uke 21.
the Sea and waters shall swell and rore, and that for all these things men's
hearts shall fail them and be astonished, which thing even surely does even now
begin to come to pass and daily shall increase toward the end of the
world, all these and many other signs and tokens we may affirm without any
fear to be already passed and gone, and thereupon we may conclude as our
Savior teaches us by the budding of the Fig tree, that the Son of
righteousness is ready to appear in the Heavens, and the everlasting summer for
all the children of God is even at hand, Signs passed.
which shall be unto them a time of joy and refreshing, but to the wicked and
ungodly a day of horror and lamentation.

So much briefly touching such signs and tokens as are already passed,
whereunto may be added that the Apostle speaks of the departing from the
faith, 2. These. 2 3
and the revealing of Antichrist that child of perdition, which the light of
the Gospel in this age has revealed, and made known to the world, and I
trust will daily more and more reueile to all such as have not received the
mark of that beast, either in their right hand, Reu. 13.16.
or in their forehead. But here it may be said, that the Scripture teaches
that the Sun shall be darkened, the Moon turned into blood, Math. 24.29.
and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, before this great and terrible day of
the Lord come: and therefore some may say we need not to doubt of the day of
Judgment before we see these great signs so to be accomplished and fulfilled.

But stay, are we assured that these great and fearful tokens have not
appeared in some place or other in this last age of the world: or if they have
not been literally fulfilled, yet may they not mistically be accomplished?
which thing by the learned is also noted, and observed, comparing the darkning
of the Sun to the Eclipsing of the Gospel, being Eclipsed and darkened under
the kingdom of Antichrist five hundred years together, the Moon turned into
blood, to the great slaughters and persecutions of the Church and children of
God, whose blood by the bloody beast of Rome has been shed and spilt as waters
in all quarters of Christendom, the falling away of many great Masters and
Doctors which sometimes shined in the Church but after declining unto Papisme
or Atheism, have they likened to the falling of the Stars from Heaven.

All these things no doubt in this sense have been fulfilled; but that this is
the meaning of our Savior, that his words shall be mistically understood, I
dare not affirm, but rather I do verily believe, that the Sun in the
firmament shall indeed be darkened, when the Son of righteousness shall
appear; that the Moon shall not then give her light, and for how can she,
when the sun is darkened, from who^ she receives all her light and
brightness, that the stars shall then fall from heaven, and no marvel,
seeing then the powers of Heaven shall be shaken, 2 Pet 3.
the Heavens or firmament it self passing away with a noyce, and the elements
melting with fervent heat: Therefore I am persuaded that these tokens shall
not be accomplished, till the end of the world. And therefore as I have said,
let no man defer his repentance till these signs be fulfilled, which are
signs and tokens that shall accompany the coming of the Judge, no otherwise
(as also I have said) then a flash of lightning before the thunder, or rather
with the thunder (though the light be seen before the thunder be heard) yet
both are said to break out of the cloud together; so assuredly as soon as
these tokens are accomplished, the Son of man shall presently appear in the
clouds with power and great glory.

This thing is plainly revealed unto us by two Evangelists, Mark and Matthew,
Mark. 13.24.
who say, In those days, that is, at the end of the world, the sun shall
wax dark, the Moon shall not give her light, the stars of Heaven shall
fall, the powers of heaven shall be shaken: And then shall they see the Son
of man coming in the clouds with power and great glory: No intermission of
time between the one and the other, scarce so much time, for the faithful to
lift up their eyes unto heaven and to receive joy into their hearts, for that
their expected redeemer is come.

Moreover, that those signs are not yet accomplished, it may be gathered out
of Luke, Luke 21.24.
who makes mention of the time of the Gentiles to be fulfilled, before he
speaks of the signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, But we see the time of
the Gentiles is not yet fulfilled, neither I hope shall be fulfilled, till the
end of the world, therefore these signs and tokens are not as yet
accomplished.

But some will yet say, that Saint Paul speaks of the restoring of the
Jews, before the general Judgment shall come. It is true indeed, Saint
Paul in the 11. of the Romans, Romans 11.
makes mention of such a secret, which curiously to entreat of, is from my
purpose; only this we may note out of that place of the Apostle, that Saint
Paul having an intent to tame the pride of the Gentiles, that they should not
boast or prefer themselves before the Jews, who were the natural branches,
affirms in the three and twentieth verse of the same Chapter, that the Jews
shall be graffed in again. For says he, God is able to graffe them in again,
if they continue not still in unbelief, which if, or exception of the Apostle,
being well noted, will stay sober minds from concluding a general restoring of
any public estate of the Jews before the coming of Christ unto judgment;
For as much as Infidelity is that great sin, which hitherunto has stickt so
fast unto that Nation. Howbeit, we doubt not many Jews sithence their
reiection, God of his mercy has called, and daily does call unto repentance,
that so all Israel may be saved, Romans 11.26.
as the Apostle says, that as all those that are Isralites indeed, and by
faith in Christ, depend only upon the free election of God, as also must the
Gentiles if they will be saved: But in the mean while, let it not hinder any
to look for the coming of our Savior, till the nations of the Jews be wholly
restored, seeing if that were the meaning of the Apostle, we know not how
soon God may bring the same to pass, for a just judgment unto us Gentiles,
neither yet how long they may continue in their unbelief, even to the last
day, if God do not show mercy upon the^.

And as for that the Apostle also in the Gospel, makes mention of the time of
the Gentiles to be fulfilled, Luke. 21
if the meaning thereof be, that for their great unthankfulness, and contempt of
Gods grace, the Gospel may be taken from them, as I hope it shall not before
the end of the world, (for then the time of the Gentiles must needs be
fulfilled) I had rather meditate upon this matter, then make any discourse
thereof at all, only let these words of the Apostle in that place, ever sound
in our ears that are Gentiles. Be ye not high minded, but fear, To (...).
for if God spared not the natural branches which were the Jews take-heede,
(which word evermore goes before danger,) That he spare not thee, being a
Gentile and a wild Olive tree.

And as for deciding of these questions, either touching the public restoring
of the Jews, or small reiection of the Gentiles, before the end of the
world, (both which questions I rather hold negatiuely) seeing they are
somewhat disputable, let us in a Christian lobriety, rather confess our
ignorance, then bewray curiosity, waying well that divine declamation of the
Apostle, wherewith he concludes that discourse. ^^rse. 33.
O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

There are yet remaining two other points of like difficulty to some, to be
briefly touched.

The one, whether the Gospel be yet preached throughout the world.

The other, whether the kingdom of Antichrist shall not in a sort continue unto
the coming of Christ unto Judgment.

Of the former, albeit I speak of it in this place, yet I am rather of
opinion, that the public preaching of the Gospel, should be reckoned in the
number of those tokens that are already passed, and that the Gospel has
already been published, yea sithence the darkness of Popery and Mahomatisme
has been discovered throughout all Nations of the world, even as Saint Paul
affirmed it was even in his time, and therefore now the end of the world to be
looked for. If any will say, why then the end should come presently? seeing
Christ says when the Gospel shall be preached, then shall the end come.

I answer, that the word then, must not only be referred to that time when
the Gospel is preached, or shall be preached, but also to that time when the
breaching of the Gospel has fully effec^ed that for which it was preached and
published: The word of God beauenly seed.
for we know the preaching ^f the Gospel, is that heavenly seed which must be
sown in the Gardens of ^arthly men's hearts, which seed must ^aue a time to be
sown, a time to grow, ^^d a time to ripen; as soon as this seed (...) fully
ripened, in the hearts of Gods ^ect, and the reprobate made inexcusa^^e, for not
receiving or for not yielding forth fruit accordingly: then presently without
delay will the harvest come, and the sickle shall be thrust in to cut the Lords
corn, to preserve it for his own Garner the kingdom of Heaven, when the
weed and every unprofitable branch, shall be burned in that fire, that never
shall be quenched.

Again, we see the day must dawne, and the day star of the Gospel must have
a time to appear, before the Son of righteousness do arise, yea the sun
in the firmament has a time to rise, a time to run his course, and a time to
set so the bright son of the Gospel began to rise as soon as the Son of
righteousness was borne, he has run his course and has spread the bright
beams of hi^ heavenly light by his Apostles and faithful preachers in all
corners of the world sometimes here, and some times there which heat of the
sun or Gospel, wh^^ it has ripened and brought forth the lively fruits of
faith, in the hearts of Go^^ children: and hardened the wicked to the^^ greater
condemnation: then shall the same sun of the Gospel begin to s^^ when the
true son of righteousness (...) appear in the heavens, with power a^^ great
glory glory: so that it is not to be doubted, but the Gospel has been
already published, among all nations, notwithstanding the preaching thereof,
shall continue I trust unto the end of the world. Now touching the other
question, whither the kingdom of Antichrist shall also continue until the end
of the world, I know it is doubtfully disputed of among many Divines, some
gathering out of the 18. of the Revelation and other places, not only that it
shall have a sudden and grievous fall, as no doubt it shall, but also are
thereby lead to think, that new Rome which is spiritually called Babylon,
(like as old Rome also was) shall be utterly rased and overthrown before the
end of ths world: whereat all the wicked great ones of the world, that
hitherunto have supported her, and rejoiced in her bravery, shall lament and
weep: and also hereupon some have moved questions and disputed upon, what
Christian Princes they are that are most likely by force of arms to give this
great and final overthrow to the kingdom of Antichrist.

All this is probably collected by some out of that place, and others of the
Revelation where is mention made of the fall of Babylon, now there is no doubt
as I have said, by the fall of Babylon, is meant the destruction of Rome, and
of Antichrist, which has his chief seat at Rome, for therein all the godly
learned agree. I will only allege the authority of Master Bullinger in his
exposition upon that place of the 18. of the Revelation, whose words are these.

He pursues says he, (meaning the Author of the Revelation) throughout all
the eighteen Chapter the destruction of old and new Rome: also of
Heathennisme and Antichristianisme, and that with a marvelous plenty and
evidence of speech, even so that you would think you sure, all things
presently accomplished. And he uses also (says he) a most godly order. For
first the Angel declares the destruction of Rome, with most apt and fit
words: Secondly, counsel is given to the godly, how to behave themselves in so
great dangers: then is added the manner of the desolation, that like as Rome
has greedily and cruelly spoiled and destroyed other Nations, even so it shall
befall unto her: also after this, a lamentation is made, wherein the Princes
and Merchants do mourn for the ruin of Rome, where they also recite the
riches and pleasures. Finally, the Apostles and Prophets rejoice of the just
Judgment of God. Again, (says he) the Angel of the Lord, casts a
millstone into the bottom of the Sea, that so the most certain and
unrecoverable and most weighty destruction of Rome might be signified,
whereunto again are annexed the causes of so greiuous evils and the same
finished with the praise and gratulation of all the heavenly dwellers, hitherto
Master Bullinger. By this therefore it appears plainly enough, that by the
fall and destruction of Babylon, is meant the fall and destruction of Rome,
together with the whole kingdom of Antichrist. But when this final fall and
utter destruction shall be, or by whom it shall be accomplished, Master
Bullinger neither many other godly and learned men do determine, rather
Bullinger as also many others are of opinion that Antichrist and his kingdom
shall in some decaying and ruinous sort continue unto the end of the world,
for so he oftentimes affirms in his book upon the revelation.

And in the end of his first sermon that he makes upon the 18. Chapter he thus
concludes, Here now says he, the judgment of God for as much as she is proud
(meaning the Sea of Rome which presently before he calls the Lady of al
realms and Churches) for as much says he as she is proud, vain glorious,
careless, and wicked: in one day shall come her plagues, by which one day, as
he notes out of Aretas, is signified a sudden destruction, and that she should
then perish when she least thought of it, and her plagues he says, Saint John
recites in order, death, mourning, famine, and fire. And Stories says he
testify, that these things were by the Gotthes fulfilled accordingly in old
Rome, whereof (says he) I have spoken before. Therefore he adds we doubt
nothing at all but that new Rome also shall by men and Gods Angels (mark his
speech) be torn a sunder and plucked up by the roots: by men and Gods Angels,
now how well the exposition of this godly man does agree with that evident
place of the Apostle in the second of the second to the Thessalonians, is not
hard to be discerned, for no sooner has the Apostle spoken of the reueiling of
Antichrist, but presently he makes mention of his destruction, for says he,
Then shall that wicked man meaning Antichrist be reueiled whom the Lord shall
consume by the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish at the brightness of
his coming.

By means of which place or contrary to the meaning of this place, I suppose
no man may determine, but that Antichrist and his tottering kingdom may
continue till the end of the world: no otherwise then a most ruinous and
decayed Castle which shall daily be battered down with the power of Gods word,
preached by men, but shall utterly be subverted and abolished by the
brightness of Christ's coming unto Judgment: by the power of his Angels,
agreeable to that saying of Bullinger, before noted, that new Rome (meaning
thereby the whole power and kingdom of Antichrist) shall by men and Gods
Angels, be torn a sunder and plucked up by the roots.

Wherefore I am also of opinion, that it is a safer way to persuade the
children of God to endure in all places with patience the tyranny of
Antichrist, though it do continue to the end of the world, the^ to cause the^
upon uncertain conjectures to expect the ending of his tyrannies and overthrow
of his kingdom, before the King of kings shall come in his glory.

And withal let us not cease to admonish and warn all Nations and people of
the world to beware if they be far of that they come not near unto his
Romish Babylon, if they be near or in her, that they fly far from her and that
speedily that they defile not themselves with the filthiness of that Romish
beast, that they receive not his mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads: if they have already been marked, that they wash it out c^eane
again by true repentance in the blood of lesus Christ: in one word, that none
be partakers of her sin, least also they are partakers of her punishment,
which in one day, that is, suddenly and speedily shall come upon her, Reu. 18.8.
For strong is the the Lord God that shall Judge her. And so much also for the
destruction of Antichrist and his kingdom, which how soon it shall come he
only knows, which knows al things. And this I hope also may suffice to be
spoken in this Chapter, touching certain signs and tokens foretold in the
Scripture to go before the end of the world, whereof as I have said, many are
passed and some of them may be yet to come. God make us thankful for these so
gracious forewarnings, and give us also grace wisely to consider of the ceasons.

And to the end that nothing may be omited as far as my slender ability is
able to reach, which may any way edify or comfort the simpler sort, let it be
further observed in this place, that as it is on the one side too much
curiosity for any mortal man to determine or paint out the time or day of
judgment when it shall be, seeing it is not revealed, but rather concealed by
God him self for our good: so on the other side, it is too much sencelesnes
and want of Christian discretion, nor to consider so much of this day or time
as may either bring profit or comfort unto us. Yea, probable conjectures how
long the world may endure to sober and godly minds I suppose cannot be
hurtful, so that they be soberly auerred only as Christian conjectures and not
for any certain or sound conclusions.

Such are these as godly and sober minded men have not refused to speak and
write, as that it is probable the world shall not continue above six thousand
years, agreeable to the six days of the Creation: and the seventh to be the
great and glorious Saboath or day of eternal rest, unto all Gods children: and
the rather is this conjecture received, for that the Scripture uses this
phrase or speech, more then once: That one day with the Lord, is as a thousand
year, and a thousand year as one day. And the prophefie of Elias which the
Rabbens have reported and those of Sibile the prophetisse known to each
scholar, do not a little confirm that conjecture; add hereunto, that if
times and seasons be well compared together, we shall find, that from the
beginning of the world unto the calling of Abraham, are near about two
thousand years: from that time till the Hebrews which came of Eber, a great
Grandfather of Abraham, were subdued by the Romans are also near or
thereabout two thousand years: sithence that time the world has continued
almost one thousand and six hundred years: so to equal the years of the
Jews with the Gentiles, there wants but a three or four hundred years,
which with God is but as a few hours, if with God a thousand years are but
as one day, and who knows how soon these hours may run out, seeing (as
many expound that place) For the elects sake these days shall be shortened.

But among all conjectures, (...) 13.^0.
for I count them but conjectures, this pleases me best and has most often
come into my mind, since God gave me a mind to think sereously on this day:
namely, that this last age shall not exceed in number the years of the first
age of the world, now the first age of the world by Computation from the
Creation to Noaths flood, were years, one thousand, six hundred, fifty and
six, and the last age sithence the coming of Christ in the flesh (which is
every where called in the Scriptures the last age) is, as we all know and
confess past the years one thousand six hundred: therefore I persuade my
self, Christ his coming unto Judgment is even at hand. This conjecture also
pleases me the better, for that this speech is so often used by our Savior
himself, when he puts us in mind of his second coming. Luke. 17.26.
As it was says he in the days of Noath, so shall it be at the coming of the
Son of man. And seeing now to our own experience, it falls out so true in
the manners of men in this last age of the world, as it did in the ending of
the first age, why may it not also fall out as true in the accomplishment of
the times?

How beit, (as I said before) so say I still, for as much as all these, or any
other of the like sort, are but conjectures, and ought only to be used and
considered not to hinder any ordinary proceeding in our callings, but only to
call upon us, that our Master is not only coming, but that his coming is
even at hand. Let this therefore be a conclusion of this point, and likewise of
this Chapter, that the day of Judgment whereof all this while we have spoken,
be not before to morrow, yet the time of our own death and so of our particular
Judgments, may be before this day be ended. Therefore let every one have a
care how he lives, for look in what case he dies so shall his judgment be.
Where the tree falls, there it must lie. And so much touching the signs
which show unto us that Christ Jesus is even ready to come unto judgment, who
only himself shall be the Judge, whereof we are to entreat in the Chapter
following.

The fifth Chapter.
AS it is an Article of our faith to believe that there shall be a general
Judgment following the resurrection of the dead, so it is not the least point
in that Article to be well noted and considered both for the comfort of the
Godly, and terror of the wicked, who he is that is appointed to be this
supreme Judge. The Article it self says, He shall come again to judge the
quick and the dead: that is, Jesus Christ the only Son of God and our lord
as we confess in the Creed. The ^^me Jesus that was conceived in the ^ombe of
a Virgin, by the Almighty ower of the holy Ghost.

The same Jesus that was made Man for and dwelt among us, he whom the ^orld
hated and persecuted from the ^^adle to his grave; he that was most
^^^acherously betrayed, most falsely ac^^sed, and most unjustly by Pontius
Pilate ^^^demned to that most (...) full death of the Cross: the same Jesus
Christ I say the Son of God and man, who then died for our sins, rose
again for our Justification, Who shall be Judge at the last day.
and ascended into the highest heavens, shall most assuredly and undoubtedly
come again at the last day to judge the quick and the dead; that is, all
those that have dyed sithence the beginning of the world, together with all
those that shall be living upon the earth at the time of his coming.

This Article is confirmed unto us byinfinite places of Scriptures, whereof we
may note a few for examples sake. First no sooner was our Savior Christ
ascending or ascended into heaven, but presently the Angels of God proclaim
hi^ descent or descending unto Judgment Saying, Acts. 1.11.
ye men of Galilee, speaking unto Christ's Apostles and Disciples. Why st^^^ ye
gazing into heaven. This Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall so
come, mean^ unto Judgment, as ye have seen him goe^ to heaven.

Saint Paul in the fourth Chapter the second Epistle unto Timothy plai^ly
affirms. 2 Timothy 4.1.
That Jesus Christ shall (...) the quick and the dead at his appearing in his
kingdom. And the same Apostle in the first of the second to the Thessalonians
says, 2. These. 7.8.
that The Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them which do not know God, and obey not
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In the Gospel every where mention is made of the coming of the son of man
unto Judgment, as in the 24. and twenty five of Matthew, the thirteen of
Mark, the seventeen of Luke, against all which it may be objected that Christ
himself says: Object Ioh. 8.1^
I came not to Judge the world, and again, I Judge no man.

But the answer is easy, Ans.
for Christ therein speaks of rash, private, and partial Judgment; whereof
he accuses the Jews. In that manner Christ judges no man, but speaking
elsewhere of this general Judgment.

He says plainly, Ioh. ^ 23.
That the Father Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment unto the
Son, yielding a reason Because all men should honor the Son as they honor
the Father.

And that none might think this Judgment to appertain unto him only as he
was the Son of God, he adds presently in the same Chapter, ^se. 27.
That God has given him power to execute Judgment even as he is the Son of
man. Again, it might be answered, that Christ says, I Judge no man, before he
was glorified when he came to be judged, and not to Judge: but after his
resurrection he plainly tells us, ^^tth. 28.
that All power in heaven and in earth is given unto him: Wherefore Saint Paul
says, in the second to the Romans, that God shall Judge the secrets of all
men but by Jesus Christ. ^^n. 2.16.
And elsewhere the Apostle says, when after Judgment Christ has brought all
things in subjection under his feet then he shall deliver up the kingdom to
God the Father. ^or. 15.


But it may be again objected that the same Saint Paul says to the
Corinthians, ^ct.
That the Saints shall judge the world and the Angels, ^^r. 6.
that is, the wicked men of this world and evil Angels, called Devils. And
Christ says his Apostles shall sit upon twelve seats Judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel.

Hereunto it may be answered that at the general day of judgment, ^ns.
when Christ shall sit upon the throne of his glory, accompanied with his holy
Angels, and all the elect by his Angels gathered unto him, then as well Saints,
as holy Angels, shall Judge, that is subscribe, and give consent unto Christ
his most righteous Judgment; which then he shall most justly pronounce,
against all the reprobate both of men and Angels: whereat all the Saints and
elect Angels shall greatly triumph and rejoice, no otherwise then it is said in
the Revelation concerning the Judgment that shall fall upon the whore of
Babylon: Romans 18.20.
Rejoice O heaven and ye holy Apostles and Prophets for God has given
judgment upon her: So at the last general Judgment the holy Saints and
Angels shall sing the song of Moses the servant of God, Reu. 15.3
and the song of the Lamb saying: Great and marvelous are thy works Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways and ^udgements King of Saints. So here
we may. ^onclude according to the truth of Gods word every where revealed in
the Scrip^utes: and agreeable with the Catholic ^rofession of the Church of
God in all ^ges: that Jesus Christ as he is both God and man, shall stand as
holy Job says, Job. 19.25.
The ^^st upon the earth, and come to give true ^^dgement at the last day.

The use of which doctrine is two fold namely, a comfort to the godly, and a
terror to the wicked: for what thing can bring more joy and comfort to the
hearts of all godly and faithful Christians, specially to those that are
afflicted in this life, either in Soul, or body, o^ in both for Christ his
sake, then t^ hear and assuredly to be persuaded that Christ Jesus their
Savior an^ brother, shall come to be their Judge That is, to pronounce them
blameless^ through his own obedience and righteousness in the sight of God
his Father: and to crown them with eternal glory, and not only those as the
Apostle teaches, that suffer persecution a the Apostle did, but all the
faithf^^ whatsoever that love his appearing. 2. Tim. 4.8.


Be therefore of good comfort dea^ Christian whosoever thou art, that gr^nest
under the burden of thy sinn^ fear not that dreadful Judgment, (...) if thou
have faith in Christ, and d^truely repent, then thou may aff^^ thy self to
be one of Gods elect. Also apply that sweet sentence of t^ Apostle unto thy
Soul, which sai^ Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is
God that justifies, Romans 8.33 34.
who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather which is risen
again, which sits at the right hand of God, to make intercession for thee,
which also it may be added for thy further comfort, shall come again at the
last day to give sentence on thy side, and to receive thee unto himself.

Contrariwise, Let the wicked Infidels, and all the ungodly ones of this world;
which either know not God, or obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shake, and
quake for fear: for even he whom they deadly hate, whose word they believe
not, whose Ministers they regard not, yea, even he whose blood they trampled
under their feet.

He that was crucified upon the cross, and had his heart blood launced out with
a Spear, shall in his own person come to be their Judge, according to that of
the Apostle Jude. Jude. (...)
And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of such, Behold, the Lord
comes with thousands of his Saints to give Judgment against all men, etc,
Re^^ (...)
And every eye shall see him even they that pierced him through and all
kindreds and people though never so pompious and glorious that have not
repented or believed in him shall wail before him. 1 Reu. 1.7.
And in the bitterness of their grief and in the anguish of their souls
forhorror and fear of that Judge shall say to the mountains, (...) and 5.16.
Fall upon us and hide us from the presence of the Lamb for that great day of
wrath is come and who may abide it, And so much briefly concerning the person
of the Judge, now let us consider the glorious manner of his coming unto
Judgment which is to be described in the Chapter following.

The sixth Chapter
IN the five and twentieth of Matthew our Savior him self does most gallantly
and gloriously describe and set forth that his coming unto judgment when he
says, (...). 25.2.
When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him:
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and all nations shall be
gathered before him, etc.

Now our Savior Christ does purposely speak of this his most maiesticall and
glorious coming unto judgment, to counteruaile his first coming in the flesh
in so great baseness and humility. The which most admirable and surpassing
glory of Christ when he shall come, to show himself in the greatness of his
majesty, we may not imagine, can be comprehended by any reason or
understanding of man: for if as Saint Paul says, No eye has seen, no ear
has heard, 1. Cor. 2.9.
neither can enter into the heart of man to conceive, the joy and glory, which
is prepared for us in Heaven: which are but the members of Christ. How great
glory must that be which is prepared for the head, who is himself Prince of
glory, yea and glorified with the same glory in respect as he is man, and our
mediator, wherewith he was glorified with the Father, in respect that he was
the Son of God, before the world was: for so prays he in the 17. of John,
Father, glorify me with the same glory, Ioh. 17.5.
which I had with thee before the world was. And whatsoever, he asked of his
Father, that did he receive as he says in the 11. of John, That God hears
him, praying that is, Ioh. 1.124.
grants his request at all times.

Therefore it is, that Saint Paul boldly affirms in the second to the
Collossians, Col. 2 9.
that in Christ Jesus (as he is man) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, or essentially. And in the first to the Ephesians, the same Apostle
also says, That God raised up Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.20.
and set him at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principalities, power, might and dominion, and every name that is named, not in
this world only, but also in that which is to come. And has made all things
subject under his feet. And above all has appointed him to be the head to the
Church, which is his body, even the fullness of him that fills all in all
things.

Now if any would demand whether the faithful shall not be made partakers of
this glory of Christ, I answer, no doubt they shall, for so Christ himself
says in the 17. of John, The glory that thou O Father gave me, Ioh 17.22.
I have given them: that is, those that have or shall hereafter believe in his
name. But here we must note, that there is a great difference between Christ
the head and giver of this glory, and his Saints and members which are made
partakers of his glory, let us a little illustrate this by some fit similitudes.

The whole body of a King, we know is glorious and very magnificent, but yet
there is a great difference between the glory of his head or face, and the
glory of his feet.

The grace and glory of Courtiers specially those that are nearest in favor
with the Prince, is very glorious: yet when they are highest in favor, not
comparable to the Prince in glory. Mordecay when he was most royally arrayed
with King Ahashuerus his own apparel set upon the Kings own horse, Hester.
6.9
the Crown royal put upon his head; and Proclamation made before him, this
shall be done to the man whom the King will honor. Yet every man did know that
there was a great difference between Mordecay who was honored of the King, and
the King who gave the glory and honor unto Mordecay.

Again, that similitude which the Apostle uses to note the difference as I
suppose of the Saints in glory, affirming one glory to be of the Sun, 1. Cor.
15.41.
and another of the Moon, and another of the Sarres, May very lively represent
unto us the difference betwixt the glory of Jesus Christ the Son of
righteousness, and the glory of his Church and Saints, who receive all the
glory from Christ, even as the Moon and Stars receive their light of the
Sun. And as the sun is yet nevertheless light and bright in himself,
notwithstanding he makes so infinite number of stars and planets to shine
through his light and brightness: so Jesus Christ our savior the son of the
eternal God, shall in a most heavenly and glorious manner, give light and glory
to all his saints and children, though they be never so innumerable, yet shall
not his glory thereby any thing be diminished, neither shall any saint or
Angel attain unto the perfection of his glory.

The which thing saint Austen me thinks by a pretty invention of words, in
the tongue which he uses, does very well note unto us: for speaking in a
certain place of the glory and joy that the saints shall hereafter this have
in heaven: says thus, Non omne gaudium intrabit in gaudentes, sed omnes
gaudentes intrabunt in gaudium: that is (as I take his meaning may be) the
faints in heaven shall not be partakers of all the joy and glory of their
master in heaven: notwithstanding all saints shall be sure to enter into their
Masters joy, into heaven: there to receive so much glory, as they are capable
of, and as each measure can contain: even as Christ says, to the good and
saithfull servant: Enterthou into the joy of thy Master. In a word, Matthew.
25.23.
Christ himself does make this matter plain enough unto us as it seems unto
me, in the 17. of John and 24. verse, Ioh. 17.
where he says, Father I will that they which thou have given me, be with me
even where I am, that they may behold my glory: that is, as I understand it,
that they may be glorified with me, and it to have their glory still
increased, in beholding that incomprehensible, and infinite glory, which I have
with thee, as I am man their Savior and Redeemer, which neither Saint or
Angel can attain unto.

This most infinite endless and incomprehensible glory, is the very same which
our Savior means, saying: Matthew. 25.
When the Son of man shall come in his glory. Now to the end, that we might
the better conceive and consider of this unspeakable glory of Christ, he adds
presently three circumstances of very great importance. Three circumstances.
The first is, that he will not come alone, but like a King of glory as he is
will come accompanied and attended on with all his holy Angels, none left
behind. Angels and Arkangels, Cherubins, and Seraphins, and all the whole
host of heaven, shall give their attendance unto this King of glory. Secondly,
he says, that he shall sit upon the throne or seat of his glory, alluding
unto the magnificence of Kings and Judges, who have their feats and thrones of
judgment erected and set upon high, that they may be seen and heard of many
people.

Therefore Christ Jesus who is Rex Regum and Iudicum Iudex: King of Kings, and
Judge of Judges: his throne shall be above in the clouds, where every eye shall
see him both in heaven, earth, and hell. So says Saint John, Reu. 1 7.
Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him.

So our Savior himself teaches us in the 21. of Luke, saying, When the
powers of heaven shall be shaken then shall ye see the son of man come in the
clouds with power and great glory. The like answer our Savior makes unto
the high Priest, who asked him whether he were Christ the son of God, thou
say it, says our Savior unto him, and hereafter shall find it to be true,
Math. 26.64
when ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of the power of
God, and come in the clouds of the heaven.

This glorious coming of Christ unto Judgment, was not obscurely revealed
unto the Prophet Daniel as he himself testifies in the seventh of his
Prophecy saying, Dan. 7.10.
I beheld till the Thrones were set up and the ancient of days did sit whose
garment was white as Snow, and the hair of his head like pure Wool, his
Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire, A fiery
stream issued, and came forth before him; thousand thousands meaning of
Angels ministered unto him, and ten thousand (a Definit for an Infinite number)
thousands, stood before him, the Judgment was set, and the Books opened.

The third circumstance that our Savior notes, is, That all Nations shall be
gathered before him. This circumstance serves also very greatly to set forth
the might, majesty, and glory of the Judge, in that he will have the people of
all Nations to come before him, Kings and Keyfers, high and low, rich and
poor, men, women, and children: none shall be priuileged, all must appear. So
says the Apostle, We must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ:
All people that then are living upon the earth, as also all those which have
dyed since the beginning of the world: howsoever they have died, or wheresoever
they have been buried: as well they that have been eaten up of beasts, and
burned unto Ashes: as they that have been drowned in the Sea, and eaten up with
fishes: all without exception, shall hear this voice. Surgite mortui, arise ye
dead and come to judgment.

This thing is revealed unto Saint John as he testifies in the Revelation,
(...) 12.
saying: I saw the dead both great and small stand before God, and the books
were opened, and another book wasopened, which is the book of life, and the
dead were Judged of those things which were written in the books according to
their works. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in her, and death, and
hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were Judged every man
according to their works.

O God of glory, what a great and glorious Sessions must this be, where all
people shall be summoned and constrained to appear! yea the Devils themselves
says Jude, Are kept in chains under darkness unto this day. O how great
must the glory be of such a Judge, that shall so come unto Judgment, attended
on with so glorious a troop of Angels? who connot be ravished with the
consideration of so glorious aspect, and most admirable sight? namely, to see
the Son of man to appear in the clouds in the glory of God his father: all
the holy Angels serving and attending on him: and all nations and people of the
world brought before him.

Truly, if it be a goodly sight to see the sun rise in the morning in his
brightness, Prepared as a Giant to run his course, If it be not a little
glorious to behold the Moon and glistring Stars in the evening, which sight
no doubt does cause the godly oftentimes to give glory unto God according as
David says, Psalm. 19
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work?

How far more glorious must it be, to see the Son of God to appear in the
brightness of his glory, with the brightness thereof the sun in the
firmament must needs be darkened. To see so many or more glorious Angels, then
there be Stars in the heavens, every Angel shining brighter then the Sun
in his strength: together with as many Saints, as have been faithful souls
in in this life with glorified bodies, shining as the stars, according to
that saying of Daniell. They that be wise, (that is, all the faithful who are
compared unto the wise Virgins) shall then shine as the brightness of the
firmament, (...) 12.3.
and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever.

And so much touching the glorious coming of Christ unto Judgment, noted by
Christ himself in these words: When the Son of man shall come in his glory,
and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
glory, and all Nations shall be gathered before him there to receive Judgment
accordingly. Of the order and manner of which Judgment we are now to entreat in
the Chapter following.

The seventh Chapter.
THis point touching the whole order of Christ his coming unto Judgment is
very copiously laid open unto us in the scripture, specially our Savior
himself does reveal the same at sundry times in the Gospel: we will begin
with that description that Christ makes in the five and twenteth of Matthew,
Math. 25.32.
who presently after he has showed the glory of his coming, proceeds
without any stop to the order and manner of his Judgment, for having said,
That all Nations shall be gathered before him, He shows what course or order
he will observe in their judgment.

Namely, how he will first of all begin with division, God does all things in
measure, weight, and number: God is a God of order, and not of confusion: when
all are gathered before him, he will separate one from the other.

This is the last work, that God will do in this world, And it is worth the
noting, how God makes his works to agree together, The beginning and the
ending, first, in the beginning, God made all things by his son, in the
ending he will judge all things by his son, for who can better judge of all,
then he that made all.

In the beginning he made light to shine out of darkness as the Apostle
witnesses, in the end he will turn light into darkness. The Sun shall be
dark, and the Moon shall not give her light. In the beginning he separated
light from darkness.

In the end, he will also separate the children of light, from the children of
darkness: For what communion has light with darkness. In the beginning he
made all things good, in the ending he will destroy all things that are naught,
seeing the evil and naughtiness that is in man, or in any other Creature, came
not unto it by creation but by corruption.

Therefore Christ says, he will separate and divide one from the other: that
is, the good from the badde: The good he compares to sheep, for their
gentleness, patience, and meekness of nature: the badde, he most fitly
compares unto Goats, ^^ech. 34.
who are a more savage and filthy kind of beasts, The metaphor seems to be
borrowed from Ezechiell, who brings in the Goats pushing and hurting of the
sheep with their horns and troubling of their waters.

These filthy pushing Goats that all their life long, desire and delight to
harm and wrong the poor sheep of Christ: will Christ himself that great
shepneard find out every one of them at the end of the world: nonne of them
shall be hid from his sight. And because these poor sheep have a very long
time with great patience endured these foul and filthy Goats, to feed and
pasture among them in the outward face of the Church, to their extreme hurt
and grief: therefore Christ Jesus their shepherd without any delay, at his
first coming to judgment, will gather and draw out his faithful flock of
sheep from that filthy heard of Goats, and to the end these Goats shall see
the care that Christ has over them, he will place them in their sight, at his
right hand of heavenly protection: the Goats contrariwise, he will set at his
left hand, to send them presently to endless destruction.

But here before we proceed any further we are to note by whom our Savior
Christ will make this separation, namely, by his holy Angels which came with
him and attend on him with all ready obedience. First, he will cause an
Arkangell to sound out the trumpet of God, in so glorious and fearful sort,
that it shall be heard the world throughout, not only they that are living,
but they that are dead in their graves, shall hear the sound of that Trumpet:
and all the wicked spirits, and Devils in hell, shall quake and tremble with the
noyce thereof. Then when all the Nations of the world are summoned and warned
by that glorious Trumpet, Christ shall send forth his Angels to separate the
Sheep from the Goats, the elect from the reprobate.

This thing our Savior Christ does reveal unto us in the Gospel, and saint
Paul does likewise report the same in one of his Epistles to the Thessaloniant.

First Christ says in the 24. of Matthew, Math. 24.31.
that He will send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall
gather together his elect from the four winds and from the one end of the
heaven unto the other.

The same does Saint Mark repeat in the 13. Chapter.

Moreover, our Savior Christ does at another time make mention of this
glorious separation as Saint Matthew reports it in the 13. Math. 13.
Chapter, for having in that place showed by diverse parables that the children
of God must not be offended to live here, for a time in this world, accompanied
and mingled with the godless, as the good seed is with the cockle, the Wheat
with the chafe: they must grow together both for the greater judgment of the
one, and trial of the other, until the harnest which is the end of the world:
at what time Christ will send forth his reapers which be the Angels, to gather
the good seed, the pure wheat, that has been well thrashed with the flaile
of affliction, and winnowed from the chafe with the Fan of Gods Judgment in
the Lords garner: but the chafe and the cockle and the Darnell shall be burnt
in fire that never shall be quenched then shall the Just shine as the Sun in
the kingdom of God their Father.

Likewise, our Savior reports this separation in the same Chapter by a
parable taken from Fishers, which when they have brought all manner of fish to
land gather the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.

So says our Savior shall it be at the end of the world, the Angels shall go
forth and sever the bad from the Just, and shall cast the badde into a furnace
of fire, there shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth.

Saint Paul likewise in the fourth Chapter, if the first Epistle to the Thess^
lonians makes a like description of these things. The Lord himself says he
shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of an Arkangell, and
with the Trumpet of God according to that which has been said already.

But the Apostle in that place like a^ he does in the first to the Corinthians,
opens a secret or two more, and he says, that he does it by the word or
commandment of the Lord.

The first is, that at the general resurrection at the day of judgment, when
Christ shall appear, then they that are dead in Christ, that is, all those
that have died in the faith of Christ since the beginning of the world, shall
rise first, that is, before the wicked, that did not die in the faith of Christ.

The second secret or mystery is, that those of the faithful, that are living
at the day of judgment of whom the same Apostle speaks in the first to the
Corinthians and 18. When he says, we shall not all die, but all shall be
changed: those I say that then are living upon the earth, shall not prevent or
go before those that are dead and turned to dust and powder in the earth: but
as those that are living shall be changed from mortal, to immortal, in the
twinkling of an eye (to use the Apostles words) so likewise shall those of the
faithful that are dead be raised up by the power of God, at the voice of the
Trumpet, and being joined to their souls, both the one and the other (says
the Apostle) shall be caught up into the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall ever remain with the Lord: which he speaks specially for
the comfort of the faithful, and therefore adds this, 1. These. 4.18.
Comfort your selves one another with these words. Thus we see how all Nations
that is, all people of all the Nations of the world, shall be gathered together
by the holy Angels, before Christ sits in judgment. The godly with all the
holy Angels, set on his right hand, the wicked, with all the damned spirits,
and devils set on the left, attending and harkning, when that final and
definatiue sentence shall be pronounced. But before we speak thereof, it shall
not be amiss to consider in a word or two, what shall be come of all other
things that are now in the world.

Saint Peter has resolved this point already: when he preaches, that there
sha^ come, and is even at hand, the end of a^ things that is of all mortal
things, but because the holy Angels are immortal, the damned spirits are
immortal, the souls of men are immortal, and the bodies of all men shall
then be made immortal according to their first Creation, for man made himself
mortal by sin and corruption, therefore to all these shall be no end: but
the ending of man's body in this world, shall be an endless being to the^ in
the world to come, either to joy or pain.

Now as saint Peter has told us, that there shall be an end of this world, so
likewise he tells us in the 3. Chapter of his second Epistle, how the end
shall be, and how all things shall be destroyed with fire.

First, he says the world perished being overflowed of water. 2. ^es. 3.
But the heavens and the earth which are now are kept in store, and reserved
unto fire against the day of judgment and of the destruction of ungodly men.
By and by he adds, that when this day of Judgment shall come, the Heavens
that are over us, shall pass away with ^noyce, and the Elements shall melt
with heat, and the earth with all the works that are therein shall be burnt
up. And not contented with once affirming this, but repeates the same again,
that we should never forget it in the end of his admonition saying.

Seeing therefore that all these things, that is, all worldly and earthly
things must be dissolved, what manner persons ought ye to be in holy
conversation and godliness, Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the
day of God, by the which the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat.

So in fine, we see none of these things which now we see with our mortal
eyes, shall remain permanent and durable, but all must be consumed and
dissolved with fire, which may teach us not to put confidence in any thing in
this world.

Notwithstanding, says the same Apostle We look for a new heaven, Esaias. 65.17
and a new earth according to Gods promise made unto us by the Prophet Esaias,
wherein dwells righteousness. But of his wonderful and heavenly renewing,
as it is not revealed unto us in the Scripture particularly: so it should be
from my purpose to make any search thereof curiously: seeing my text only
leads we to speak of the destruction, and not of the restoring of all things.

Only let the godly content themselves with that discourse, which the Apostle
Saint Paul makes in the eight to the Romans, Rom 8.19.20.
where he exhorts the faith full joyfully to endure all the afflictions of
this life which are nothing in value comparable to the glory which at that day
shall be revealed unto them. For says he, The fervent desire of the Creature
waits when the son of God shall be revealed. Because the Creature is subject
to vanity not of it own will, but by reason of him which has subdued it
under hope.

Because the Creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of ohe sons of God: for we know that every
Creature groneth also and trauelleth in pain together unto this present: and
not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the spirit,
even we do sigh in our selves waiting for the adoption even the redemption of
our body.

Thus having hitherto briefly noted how Christ shall come at the last day in
glory, attended on with all his holy Angels, how he shall sit upon the seat of
his glory, how all Nations shall be gathered before him by the voice of a
Trumper, sounded by an Arkangell, how the Angels shall separate the good from
the bad, placing the godly on his right hand, and the wicked on his left hand.
Let us last of all consider of that great doom, and irreuocable sentence,
which the Judge of heaven and earth shall then pronounce, from whom by no means
they may appeal.

The sentence that shall be given at that day is very short, it is but two
words in our tongue, Come ye, Go ye, in the Latin both words are included
in one, Venite, there is Venite, come ye, and in the end of Venite, is Ite,
Go ye.

The Lord will make a short account upon the earth says the Apostle in
righteousness. But I know it will be said, that Christ does use more words, and
a very long discourse in that 25. of Matthew, then Venite, and Ite. It is true
he does so, but I am of opinion, that he does use them rather to instruct us
while we be living, and before we come unto Judgment, then to teach us that we
shall have so long a speech with him at that time of Judgment.

Notwithstanding, seeing Christ for our sakes has vouch safed to remember the
same unto us. Let us for Christ his sake consider of them as that they may
never be forgotten of us when our Savior in that place has told, that the
son of man shall come unto Judgment, in his glory, with all his holy Angels,
and being se^ upon the seat of his glory, all Nations shall be gathered before
him, the faithful sheep on his right hand, and the sinful Goats on the left
hand, he presently adds.

Then the King shall say unto them on his right hand, Math 25. ^4.
that is, to the faithful, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit ye the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Contrariwise, the
same King shall say unto them on his left hand, that is, to the wicked and
ungodly: Go ye cursed or depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. ^er. 41.


With what words, I beseech you could our Savior more persuade us to have
regard how we live in this world then by proposing unto us these two contrary
sentences? the one so full of joy and comfort as no tongue can express. The
other so full of grief and horror as no heart can think.

That the King pronounces first the sentence of bliss, it notes his goodness
and bountifulnes inclined rather to grace and mercy, then to rigor and Justice:
if we had but so much grace and goodness, as to accept of it before it be too
late.

That he uses this singular word of comfort, Come ye, it notes the ardent
love and affection that our Savior bears to his sheep, who^ he has
purchased with his own blood: therefore he gives so great a charge unto those,
whom he has appointed Pastors over them in this life, to feed his sheep, and
to have care of them in the wilderness of this world, that none of them be
destroyed or lost, through their negligence; if they be, their blood will he
require at their shepherds hands.

That he calls them the blessed of his Father, it notes that they are
beloved of god, and before ordained unto this blessing: it highly commends
Gods free grace and favor, not man's merit or deserving.

That he bids the^ to possess^ the kingdom not any longer to expect a
kingdom, it notes the difference betwi^t the state of the faithful here and
that is to come here we enjoy all by faith and hope, their faith and hope shall
cease, when we are put in possession of that we hoped for, and have received
the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls.

Also it is a great encouragement unto the godly in this life, to wait with
patience till their pilgrimage be over past to contemn and despise all the
glory of this world, specially if the Devil offer it to esteem all things as
dung, and as dross, in respect of this glorious kingdom, which they shall be
bid to possess. That he says possess the kingdom prepared it notes that it
is a kingdom not merited or deserved by us.

That he says lastly, that it is a kingdom prepared for you before the
foundation of the world, it shows that God knew us, loved us, cared for us,
before we were, that as he made a world for us, to live in, before he made us
to live; so he ordained a heavenly kingdom for us to live in, after we are
dead before we died.

What a good God is this, how can we want any thing if we trust in him, and
call upon his name. God has given us his Son, with his Son a Kingdom,
what more can we desire.

God give us his grace to take this Cup of Salvation thankfully, as by the
Prophet we are exhorted.

Contrariwise, that Christ says to the wicked on his left hand, Depart, it
notes his hatred and detestation of sin and sinners that do not repent as
he faith in another place, I know you not, depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity.

That Christ says depart from me, it notes that they appertain not unto him,
neither are of his fold or family, nor never were; for those whom he once
loves he loves to the end. That he says ye cursed it shows the miserable
estate, of them that appertain now unto Christ, howsoever wicked men flatter
themselves in this world: they are most accursed in the sight of God and his
Angels; they are cursed while they live, cursed when they die, and cursed after
death: and therefore like cursed creatures, as they were before they come unto
Christ, they are commanded to depart from his presence, unto the place of the
damned.

That Christ sends them into everlasting fire, it notes both the horror of
the punishment, and the continuance of the pain, never to have end: in hell
there is no redemption, Lastly, that Christ says, that this endless pain and
punishment was prepared for the devil and his angels it notes not (as some
would have it) that it was not also prepared for the wicked, but rather
signifies that the wicked appertain unto the devil, whose children they are,
as says Christ, ye are of your father the devil, seeing they are adjudged to
the same place of torments with the devil when they are dead, whose servants
they are while they lived.

Thus have ^e heard the sum of both sentences, which being once pronounced, the
tongue of men and Angels, is not able to express, the wayling and weeping,
howling and crying, of these cursed creatures, that shall be judged to
condemnation, nor yet the unmeasurable joy and consolation of the faithful.

The one condemned so everlasting torments, the other received into everlasting
glory. The which entence being thus passed, that glorious Sessions will be
dissolved: the grief of the damned a thousand time in creased, in seeing and
beholding the faithful and godly whom they ever hated, to be carried by the
Angels into the endless joys of eternal bliss, the devils in the mean while
prepared, to carry those curfed Caytiues with thee^, into the botto^lesse
gulf, of their infernal confusion.

But here happily, some will say that I do not well to conceal that which our
Savior adds at the end of those sentences saying, to the faithful, I was
hungry, Math. 42.
and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me drink.

Truly, if you will give the leisure to read it, I would very gladly touch it,
with this caveat, that we do not imagine those good works to be the cause of
our salvation: seeing as has been said already, our salvation was prepared
for us, before we can work at all: much more before we could do good works:
neither will this shift of the scholeme^ ser^e the turn, to say that God did
happily foresee those good works that we would do, and therefore provided a
reward for them, before they were done: so desirous are those Merit-mongers, to
have God beholding unto them for their good works.

But why can they not as well see, if they would not close their eyes of
purpose: that God said long agone, Gen 6.
all the imaginations of men's heart are evil continually. And when that God
looked down from heaven of purpose to see the children of men, he saw none
that was good, no not one. And why can they not hear the Apostle say, ^es. 2.10
that God has created us unto good works, that we should do them. Christ
himself saying when ye have done all that ye can, (...) 17.
say ye are unprofitable servants, ye have done, but what was your duty to
do. To let pass all other places of scripture, and all the arguments of the
Apostles: which may serve as so many Rams, to beat down to the ground this
devilish doctrine of popery.

But now let us hear what Christ says to the faithful, and what reply the
faithful make unto him: Christ says, I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat:
I thristed, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye lodged me: I was
naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in prison,
and ye came unto me. The faithful answer presently they never saw him in
that case, neither ever did any such thing unto him. But Christ shows his
meaning, and says in as much as ye have done it unto the poor with you, ye
have done it to me.

Here then we are taught first the care that Christ takes of the poor,
whatsoever is done unto them if they be godly, it is done unto him.

Secondly, the cause wherefore he makes some rich, and leaves others in
poverty, whom he loves most dearly, that he may exercise the patience of the
one, and try what charity is in the other.

Thirdly, that the faithful in a holy kind of humility seem either to deny
or at least lessen and extenuate the good works they have done; we are taught
hereby, that in doing of good, specially in giving of our Alms, The right hand
must not know what the left hand does. So far must we be from boasting, that we
must even distrust and doubt in our selves, that we have not discharged our
duty in that behalf, as we ought to do as who knows the best of us all
come far to short.

Lastly, we are taught how excellent things they are, if they be done in faith,
and in the fear of God: to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked: not that all
the works of mercy and charity are here numbered, or any certain number
observed, but only these few are named, for examples sake, to show us that
mercy must be used, where man's misery does need it, and withal we must make a
difference, betwixt those duties which we do as we are men, and those that we
do, as we are Christian men: therefore what soever good we do unto gods Saints
we must do it in, and for Christ's sake: though it be but a gift of a cup of
cold water in his name, we shall not loose our reward (though not rewarded of
merit and desar^ but of mercy and grace) God of his mercy make us mindful of
those duties, to perform them as he shall enable us, otherwise we must look
for no mercy at his hands, but shall be sure to hear that which shall be
pronounced to them on the left hand, I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat:
I thirsted and ye gave me no drink: And then though we will excuse the matter
never so cunningly, and allege that we never saw Christ hungry, or a thirst,
because we would not see Christ in his poor members, being in that case,
because we would shut up our compassion from the poor, and turn our eyes from
our own flesh, because our religion was only but in outward profession, no
lively fruits of faith budding forth: because we would not visit the widow
and the fatherles in their adversity, and keep our selves vn^potted of the
world, nay because while we lived in this world: we did wrong the widow, and
the fatherless, and grind the faces of the poor: therefore as we have done,
so shall it be done unto us: the same measure that we shall measure unto others,
the same shall be measured unto us again There shall be Judgment merciless,
^am. 2.13.
to him that shows no mercy: but mercy contrariwise shall rejoice against
Judgment. Finally, our Savior repeteth the sum of both sentences again,
lest happily we have for gotten them: as too of en we do. Math 25. vlt.
And these (says Christ) shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous
into life eternal. That is, those graceless Goats, those merciless misers,
those miserable miscrea^ts, that have had no fear of God before their eyes, no
compassion on their brethren that have hated to be reproved, that have had
their whole swing in sin, and wearied themselves in vanity, they (...) all be
sent packing into everlasting pain.

But the righteous, that is, those that have apprehended the righteous^ esse of
Christ, Jesus by a true and lively faith, and have repented and endeavored to
leave sin, before sin leave them, those that have brought forth the timely
fruits of repentance, with an ardent zeal unto Gods glory, and a burning
charity unto their poor brethren these shall go presently into life
eternal: by which two words life eternal and pain everlasting is certainly
noted the perpetual and endless continuance of the joys of the godly and
torments of the damned in the world to come never to have end.

But it may be, some will say, that we post on with these two sentences to
fast, Christ will use a greater moderation before he proceed to sentence,
there is mention made in the scripture of books that must be opened.

It is true indeed, Daniell says, The Judgment was set; Dan. 7.10.
and before sentence is given, the books are opened. Saint John likewise in
the Revelation when he saw the dead both great and small stand before God,
says, that the books were opened, and an other book was opened, Reu. 20.12.
which he calls the book of life. The Book of life I take to be the hidden
and vnreueiled knowledge of God, concerning those whom he has appointed to
life and salvation. And this Book is not for me, or any mortal man to look
into: by the other books, I suppose are meant the consciences of all men in
general, and of every one in particular which shall either excuse, or accuse
us at that day. These books also are very secret books laid up in the Closet
of every man's heart. And I have no skill to read in any of them, but in mine
own. Indeed they are books of account, which every one must be careful to
keep, until this great day of reckoning come. They are also Books of record,
wherein are written all the things that we have done in this life whether they
be good or evil: and at that day shall be laid open in Facie curiae, in the
view, and open fight of men and Angels. Then shall be verified that saying of
our Savior in the Gospel: Nothing is so secret that shall not be evident,
neither any thing hid that shall not be known, and come to light. Wherefore it
behooves every one to have a special regard of these books, and to covet
evermore with the Apostle to have a clear conscience, which is as the wise Man
says, a continual feast, for if our consciences condemn us not, then have we
boldness toward God, says Saint John: contrariwise, says that Apostle, If
thy heart and conscience accuse thee, God is greater then thy heart and knows
all things. If thy conscience be against thee, it will be Mill testes, more
then a thousand witnesses.

These consciences of ours beloved, which now we think we can stretch and
streine as we please, are the books of record, which then must be opened:
either to excuse or condemn us: and thereupon sentence shall be given
accordingly.

My admonition therefore is, that all business laid aside, the next private
leisure, that ever we have, let us ouerwiew again and again, these books of
reckoning, and see that the accounts be perfect: where there is any desect, let
it be amended without delay: for God knows, how soon these books may be
called for to be opened, and then it will be too late to amend, the least blot,
or fault that is in them.

Let us follow the counsel of the Apostle to accuse and condemn our selves in
this world, that so we may be acquitted, and not condemned in that fearful
judgment. And this I hope may suffice to be spoken of this matter, concerning
the glory of Christ his coming and the manner of the Judgment

The eight Chapter wherein is entreated of Sobriety, Watchfulness, and Prayer.
IT might seem that saint Peter had very well discharged his duty in fore
warning the world of the danger to come, toward the end thereof: in saying the
end of all things is at hand. But that holy Apostle like a careful Physician
not contented to warn us, that we fall not into a dangerous disease of
security: does with all readiness and diligence prescribe unto us a marvelous
good medicine, for the^ that are already sick in that disease: and the same
may also serve as a pure preservative to keep those that are more sound, from
the infection thereof: exhorting us unto sobriety, watchfulness and prayer.
As if he should say, The end of all things is at hand, and the Judge is at the
door ready to take vengeance, of all ungodliness and intemperancie. By ye
therefore sober.

The day of his coming is altogether uncertain. Be ye therefore vigilant and
watchful. If this be to hard for frail flesh to perform, fly unto Prayer,
which makes the hardest things easy to be done.

Be ye sober, 1. Pet. 4 7.
and watch unto Prayer.

Of either of these three briefly. Sobriety, Watchfulness, and Prayer.

Of Sobriety, or Temperancie, we have heretofore spoken sufficiently I trust,
to instruct them that are godly and in love with that virtue, it is the fourth
link in Saint Peter's Chain. In this place therefore by way of digression, I
will endeavor to speak briefly of Intemperancy the very bane and cut-throate
of all Christianity, and Piety, and a most cruel enemy unto all good
government and policy.

There is a saying, Nemo laeditur nisi a se ipso, every man is the worker of
his own woe: I pray God the general Intemperancie of this land do not
viper-like eat out the bowels thereof.

The stinging of a Viper they say at the first, does yield a certain tickling
delight to all the outward senses; but as soon as the infected blood comes to
the heart, presently the body is in danger of death: what pleasing delight is
daily taken in Intemperancie by all the senses, I mean by all sorts and sexts
of people in this land, as in other places of the worlds it may better be felt
then seen: when Paul had but one viper on his hand, Acts. 28.4^
all the standers by looked that he should have fallen down dead presently.
But this country being stung with the venom of vipers, I mean all kind of
filthy vices, not in the band only, but in every part of the body, yet no man
fears the ruin or fall thereof.

Most true it is, that we which li^e in the latter end of this last age of the
world live in the time, and under the climate of all intemperancy, I hope the
end is the nearer at hand to redress all that is amiss: my mind is not, and
if my mind would serve time would not suffer me, particularly to point out all
the sins of intemperancy, that abonnd at this day every where among us.

There are four cardinal sins upon the which also the rest do hang, Pride,
Covetousness, Whooredome, Drunkenness: which for their swiftnes in running
over the world, may well be compared to the four wheels of the devils
chariot, in the which chariot, he daily carries cartloads of souls into hell.
These sins together with the other sins of Sodom, tumble in one on
another back, like the waves of the Sea: there is neither mean nor measure
kept in any of them. Only least I should slander any with the truth in
drinking, they say, they have Law as strong as the Law of the Medes, and
Persians, that every one must drink by measure: but without any mean: they
must drink off al their measure, and leave none: yea I hear, and I have only
heard of it, that our new dubd ale knights whereof we have great store in the
country, enough to ransack any city in Spain, if they were unarmed of their
Ale, and well marshalled, do in their daily drinkings to their measure of
drink, add a certain set number of words, which may be termed the tossepots
watchword, and therein not only take their delight, but many of them spend
their whole thrift at the Alehouse, leaving their wives and familise alone
vncarde for: so they may sit singing and swinging themselves in good Ale, from
morning to night, it is all that they care for: and all the good or rather evil
they desire to do except it be, also to rail at those that be good, and that
are wont to reprove them for this their ^eastlinesse. This measurable drinking
or rather unmeasurable and unreasonable quaffing, and carrowsing, whereof I
have also spoken in the first Chapter, will, nay already does, begin to breed a
great scarcity of Corn and grain in our Country. It cannot be denied, but
that there are already many good laws in force to punish those daily
drunkards: but never worse executed then at this day: and some are of good
hope, that there shall be straiter and more severe Laws provided against
drunkenness.

For I verily think, (and I wish experience prove it not to be true) that
drunkenness is more hurtful and dangerous to this Commonwealth, wherein we
live, then common theft, and therefore I pray God to put it into the hearts of
all good Commonweals men, specially those that are in high places, and
authority to use all good means for the redressing thereof: and before better
or straiter Laws be enacted to give straiter charge to all other inferior
officers, to execute with all severity, as in a matter of great necessity
appertains, the laws of our land already provided, which hitherto of a long
time have bin very much neglected at least in some quarters of this Country,
which will surely grow to a greater disease then many think off, if it be not
the sooner cured: which thing has caused me often to speak, and now to write
more against this vice of drunkenness both here, and in the first Chapter,
then many happily will think it fit and convenient to be spoken of in so small
a treatise: howbeit if my words prevail any thing to the killing of this
stinging viper drunkenness, I will confess, I have spoken enough: if nothing,
that I have written too much, except for the discharge of mine own conscience.
And as for the three other capital vices of intemperancie, Pride,
Covetousness, and Whooredome, I think they may be compared to the heads of
Hydra, for every head that is cut off by the sword of the Preachers (for other
punishment there is little or none) there spring up an hundred in the place, in
such sort that Preachers are almost weried any longer to flourish their swords
of Gods word to cut downetheir sins except it would please the godly
Magistrate to draw out of their sheathes or scabbards their sharpest swords of
Justice which in particular Sheathes, I fear are waxen rustie for want of use:
and so to join their armies and forces together to kill or at least to keep
down, those monstrous Hydras, which otherwise are like to spoil and devour
this little land.

Let it therefore be looked unto betimes, for fear we repent too late, for
there is no danger compared to that danger which is not feared.

Cities, and Countries, Towns, and Villages, do every where stink with
these filthy and beastly sins, Pride, Covetousness, Whooredome,
Drunkenness: Pride, must needs have Covetousness as a mistress to maintain
her: and Drunkenness must have Whoredom and Lechery for a handmaid to attend
on her: Sine Cerere, and Baccho friget Venus, Wine and women, make many men
runnagates: Pride, and Riot, causes many to sell their Patrimonies.
Covetousness is the root of all evil, and never deeper rooted then at this
day in the hearts of wicked worldlings: whoordome, fornication and Sodomitrie,
to speak nothing of profaning of the Saboth, blasphemies, swearing, and
perjury, are sins that daily cry unto the heavens for punishment.

These, these sins of intemperancie, have almost expeld out of our coasts
all love, faith, and fidelity: and it is greatly to be feared, except we
repent and amend our lives speedily, that the heavy wrath of God will fall
upon us shortly, in a more general manner then heretofore.

As for the particular punishments, what heart so hard is there, that cannot rue
every where to hear the most lamentable cries and pitiful mones that are
made in every part of this land for the most strong and unheard of fires and
burnings, which not casually as heretofore, but by all probabilities, and by
the confession of many, immediately sent down from the heavens upon many towns
in this Land within these few years (I may say months) burning and consuming
most strongly, not only men's houses, but also their corn, cattle, and
substance, nothing almost to be saved, where these fearful fires have once
adventured, wherein also, which is most lamentable, many men, women, and
children, have been burned into ashes, and the flames not to be quenched, until
it has utterly consumed that for which it was sent: which doubt^^^ does preach
unto us better then any tongue can utter or pen describe, that the God of
heaven is grievously offended for those sins of intemperancy, and for contempt
of his word, which now reigns every where among us. And what else may these
fearful fires persuade us unto, but that the everlasting fires are also at
hand to burn the world for sin, and after all sinful men that will not be
warned in that burning lake, that never shall be quenched.

Here also we might call to remembrance and I would to God there were some
catalogue made thereof, that we might remember them, how many and sundry ways
within these few years, God has and yet does not cease to forwarne us of his
wrath extraordinarily, and as it were from heaven.

What a peale of shot was that in the year, 1588. which did ring the land
throughout, to waken them that were a sleep in security, but rumors of wars
nor wars it self, will not warn us, not make us to beware. But this noise
(...) shot you say was but a beating of the (...) about us and could not come
near to (...) us. Well be it so, yet give God the pra^^^ that kept it from us.

But if that noye do nothing move us, because it was but round about us: what
say ye then to these terrible thunders that we have had, and heard these late
years, yea this last year, which made even the heavens as it were to crack
above us, besides many extraordinary winds and tempests?

And also what think ye of the fearful Earthquakes seen and felt in many
quarters of our Country, as else where? as if the Center of the earth would
sink under us, and as though it were over burdened with our sins of
intemperancie: yet if these things cannot move us, because the thunder you will
say was over our heads, and the Earthquake under our feet, what yet will ye
say to those hoate thunderbolts? which that angry Jehovah did cast down from
heaven, and killed many cattle in our Country: (...)
to speak nothing of people: and will you think any thing of him? that in the
midst of this last Summer, did give hail for rain, yea, such hail in
quanti^ie and bigness, as it is incredible to re^^^^, as great and as
fearful hail, I sup^^se, as ever fell in the land of Egypt. ^^^, also with
these hailes he sent flames of fire in our land, and with the force of that
hail, brake down many trees or boughs of trees, and destroyed much corn and
grain in our coasts, beating it into the ground, as dung and stubble, so that
neither corn nor straw, was to be saved where this storm did fall.

These are no fables, neither would I put them into these papers: if I knew it
not to be true, many can swear it, as I have said it.

But Pharaohs heart is still hardened: and English Egyptians will not be
warned. These things, say they, have passed, but in some places, and have done
little harm in respect of a general calamity: to make the worst of it say
some, it has hurt and spoiled but some private men's goods, and cattle, or
corn, their bodies and lives have been spared. Thank we the goodness of God
for that, and learn with all, that the devil had first his commission
granted for to destroy Jobs goods, Job. 1.6.7
cattle, and children, that pleased him not; he came for a new commission to
the King of heaven for to touch his body, he obtained it also: at length no
doubt would have come for a third, for his life, if Job had not been very holy,
full of patience and piety.

But here let us pause a while; have we had indeed no general calamities
fallen upon our country within these few years, and have our bodies always
been spared? indeed we are very forgetful, especially if it be any thing that
may be good for our souls,

What then I beseech you was that general and unusual plague and pestilence,
which in more then posthast passed thorough all this land in a very short time,
which brought news of the Portingall action? And it is thought, there was not
any city, town or parrish almost in England, which heard not the sound of
this packeds horn, albeit we have now forgotten it: you may also call to
remembrance if you please, that direful dearth of corn and grame, that
followed hard almost to the heels of this pestilentiall pest, as though the
other had not done his message sufficiently enough: such an unmerciful dearth
I think was never heard of in the memory of man to be in this land, specially
seeing the price of corn was so enhaunced on the sudden, not so much for want
of grain in many places, as for want of grace in the hearts of many hungry
helhounds, which were never satisfied with any price, until they had sucked out
the blood of their brethren. By means whereof followed so fearful a famine,
that some were compelled to make bread of straw, other to dye in the streets
for want of food, and such a heavenly hunger (for so some have called it) that
the bellies of many people were insatiable, because they wanted as I suppose
that hid treasur of Gods secret blessing upon that bread which they did eat,
without which blessing, neither bread, though it be called the staff or
strength of man, neither any food else whatsoever, is of any more force then a
stone to feed us, which when God will, he is able to turn it into bread for the
good of his children, though Christ would not do it to tempt God at the request
of the Devil. This doctrine may reach us while we live, Mat. 3.4.
not only to pray for our daily bread, but chiefly to pray for gods blessing
upon our bread and food which he gives, and to praise his Majesty for it,
when we have received it, which the godly call saying of grace, both before and
after meat, which thing the godles scoff at, and the manners of the multitude
will hardly be brought to perform it, though preachers every where persuade
the^ to it, and therefore it is to be feared they may smart for it again here
after by the like punishment of dearth, and famine, (which the Lord in his
mercy deliver us from) when God in his Justice shall call our unthankfulness
(among many other sins) in remembrance before him.

And withal, this shall not be the least comfort to the godly poor that are
often times pinched with penury: if they be well assured and persuaded that
even in their greatest wants, God will not fail to provide for them, if they be
faithful and fervent in prayer, 1. Kings 17 4. and 12.
either to command the Ravens to feed them, as he did Elias, either by
increasing the oil in the Cruse and the flower in the Pitcher, as the widow
of Sareptas was: or if at any time, as many times it falls out, they want
their daily bread, which the King of heaven has commanded his earthly
Stewards to give them: yet will God either feed them with some other pulse or
sustenance to their good content and liking, which was Daniels fare, or at
leastwise he will stay the rage of their hungry bellies, as he did the mouths
of those hungry Lions, that otherwise would have devoured that Prophet of God.
In a word, let not any of Gods children, in any distress whatsoever doubt of
the fatherly providence of our God, who happily may pinch us, but will not suffer
us to perish, who feeds the young Ravens that cry unto him, and shall he not
hear his children that trust in him and call upon him? Yes verily, let us be
assured, Psalm. 104.21.
for it is the word of truth, that says, The righteous shall never be
forsaken. Again, The Lions lack and suffer hunger, but they that fear the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good. God make us faithful and thankful, and
continue us in his fear.

Thus have we now seen, how God has not ceased oftentimes to warn us to
beware of sin, and if by those punishments already passed, we will not learn
to be wise, but walk on still in the stubbornness of our own hearts: Leui. 26.
then will God punish us yet seven times more according to our sins, and
still will add seven unto seven, as he threatens, 26. of Leuiticus, until we
be utterly consumed in our sins, or have stayed his Judgment by unfeigned
repentance.

And this I hope may serve to be spoken (as indeed I have spoken much more of
this point, then I thought of at the beginning) concerning the sins of
intemperancie, or any other sins that are contrary to so brietie, and far
unfitting those people, that truly profess Christianity, grounding my speech
upon the exhortation of S. Peter, be ye sober, and much agreeable to that
exhortation of Saint Paul, Titus. 2.11.
The grace of God has appeared, teaching us to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to line soberly, righteously, and godly, while we live in
this world: and then we shall be sure to live for evermore in the world to come.

The next point I promised to speak of in this Chapter, is of Christian
watchfulness, and vigilancie, which is so much commended unto us in the
scripture: and is by S. Peter opposed against that great sin of careless
security, in whose cradle it is to be feared, most people will be lulled a
sleep, toward the end of the world: of which point of vigilancie, I will
endeavor to speak briefly, and so hasten to the last point, which is Prayer,
whereunto watchfulnes must be joined.

And first of all, forasmuch as there is so often mention made in the Scripture
of this virtue of vigila^cy or watchfulnes, it shall not be amiss for us,
briefly to consider what it is, that is commended unto us by that word: the
word is often used by our Savior himself, specially when he is giving warning
of his second coming. In the 12. of Luke he says, Luke 12.35.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves
like unto men that wait or watch for their Master, when he will return from
the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately. Blessed are those servants who^ the Lord when he comes, shall
find waking. Verily I say unto you, he will gird himself about, and make them
to sit down at table, and will come forth and serve them.

And if he come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and shall
find them so, blessed are those servants. Now understand this also, says
Christ, that if the good man of the house had known at what hour the thief
would have come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house
to be dug through. Be ye also prepared therefore, for the Son of man will
come in an hour when ye think not. The like is said in the Revelation, Behold^
I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches. And in the 13. Mark. 13.34.
of Mark. The Son of man says Christ, is as a man going into a strange
Country, and leaves his house, and gives authority to his servants, and to
every man his work, and commands the Porters to watch: Watch therefore for
ye know not when the master of the house will come: at even or at midnight: at
the Cocke-crowing, or in the dawning, lest if he come suddenly he should find
you sleeping, By these and many other places which willingly for breuities
sake, I omit, it is very evident what it is, that is commended unto us, by this
word watch, verily nothing else but a Christian and careful heedfulnesse in
our several callings, in as much as Christ says every one has his work or
task appointed him, as (the Apostle says) Let every one wherein he is called
even so abide with God: Now, like as in Kings and Noble men's houses, there are
diverse and sundry offices, one is Controller, and another Steward, some
standing at the gate, and all other officers laboring in their several
business, waiting for the return of their Master:

So likewise the King of heaven Christ Jesus who for a time, leaving this
earthly Country, appointed his officers in this world, some as Controlers to
reprove, some as Stewards to provide for the family, some as Porters to keep
the gate, others as laborers or worke-men in their several charges, every one
has his place where he must abide, not idle or sleepie, but careful and
watching the return of their Master: blessed then shall that servant be,
whom when his Master comes, shall find waking, that is, well occupied: but
if any of these shall say in a careless and contemptuous security, surely my
Master will defer his coming, and leaving his own place or duty, shall
begin to smite his fellow servants, and to cate and drink with the drunken,
his Master shall come in a time when he is not aware, and shall hew him in
pieces, and give him his portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Here hence then we are first taught that every one in this world, as well the
highest as the lowest, is but an officer unto the king of heaven, and shall one
day give an account of his office.

Secondly we are here taught, that every officer has this peculiarly
appropriate unto him, besides his office or work, namely, to watch for the
coming of his Lord: and therefore it is, that sometime we are compared unto
porters, who must watch at the gates of our consciences, that the devil step
not in to steal away our souls: sometimes unto soldiers, who watch in the
field, waiting for the coming of the enemy: sometimes unto guests, as the
old manner was in the east country, to watch for the coming of the
Bridegroom. And that all are commanded to watch, least any should think
themselves excepted, it is proved by that conclusion of our Savior in Mark:
Mark. 13.37
And those things that I say unto you (says Christ) I say unto al me^, watch,
which watchfulnes is not opposed against natural sleep: for it is a
metaphorical speech: but against that careless security, that usually does
fall upon all men in their several callings.

Thirdly we are hereby plainly taught, that there should be none in this world
without one office or other, if they will account themselves servants to this
great king: for if they have not some office of their own, they must either be
idle, which is accompanied with many mischiefs, or they must be il occupied,
which is worse, or they must be meddling with other men's offices, and duties,
which is worst of all.

Contrariwise here are hardly taxed all those that are called unto any office,
and wait not on their office, whether in the magistracy, or in the ministry:
nay that endeavor not to do all the good they can in their offices and places;
not hiding, but making some gain of each talent committed unto them.

Secondly, all those, wheresoever they are placed, either in church or common
weal are reproved, what calling soever they are of, that sleep in security,
and watch not for the coming of their Master.

Thirdly those multitudes of people, that live idle as drones, and have no
calling, but flying from place to place, like flies that will have a taste of
every thing, or il occupied like filthy duckes, that ever live in the puddle of
sin.

Fourthly all those are not a little to be blamed, neither shall in the world
to come escape unpunished, who when they shall hear or do any goodness, are
always a sleep, or in a slumber: but to hurt or beguile their brethren, are
ever waking, who are very ready to carrouse and play, but have no skill to
watch and pray: who can most willingly spend days and weeks to win worldly
wealth, but think one hour in a week to long, and too much, to be spared for
the winning of their souls.

Last of all for a conclusion, as every one of us are commanded to stand upon
our guard, heedefully to watch the Castle of our bodies, wherein the treasure
of our souls are enclosed: so there is not any one of us, but have a secret
watch within us continually to waken us, and to give us warning, which is the
watchor Clock of our own consciences, spoken of in the Chapter before: many
are desirous to carry watches or clocks in their bosoms, to give them warning
how time passes away, let us therefore above althings have regard unto this
watch, which we carry with us, wheresoever we go, which does always run
as well by night as by day, and gives a check every minute, and does never
stand still, except it be to rustie, and altogether choked with the filth of
sin.

This watch will both warn us, and forewarne us, check us, and cherish us:
warn us for any fault passed; forwarne and advise us to avoid dangers to
come: check us, and chide us, for falling into sin: comfort and cherish us in
doing any thing that is good. These watches therefore are of more worth, then
worldlings can account of: they are these goodly Geese, which always rest in
the Capitol or market place of our minds, who with their only crying, if it be
well marked, keep the city of our souls from sacking: to these if we
hearken diligently, we shall not lightly fall into any deadly sleep of sin,
Acts. 20.^
as the young man Eutichus did, though Paul continue his preaching until
midnight: but rather shall be ready at midnight, while the godly slumber, and
the wicked sleep: and 12, 7
and when the cry is made come unto the wedding, to strike us in the side, as
the Angel did Peter in the prison, to wake us, and warn us with the wise
Virgins, to take our lamps, prepared with the oil of faith, and flaming with
the fire of love in our hands, and so to enter in with the Bridegroom, into
that great marriage of the Lamb, before it be too late, and the doors be shut:
at what time it shall be said to the foolish virgins, that had no oil in their
lamps, and unto all the rest, which would not be married betimes, by these
clockes of their conso^^ences, but would spend all their time in the sleep of
sin, and security, and had no care to watch for the coming of their
Master: to all these (I say) when they shall stand without, and knock for
mercy, when it is the time of justice, the Judge himself shall say unto them,
depart hence, I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity. Wherefore let us hearken
betimes unto this gracious watchword and forewarning of Saint Peter, Be ye
sober and watch: But because he had learned by his own experience, the
weakness and frailenes of man's nature, even those that are best minded, and
that we (as the Apostles in the Garden) are never more heavy and sleepie, then
when dangers are nearest, therefore unto Christian watchfulnes, he counsels
to add faithful prayer, saying, Be sober, and watch: unto prayer the like
counsel he gives us in another place, when he warns us of the coming of
our enemy, saying, Be ye sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil, as
a roaring Lion, seeks whom he may devour, whom resist (says he)
steadfastly in the faith, the force of which faith must appear in our prayers.

This Lesson also had Peter learned of our Savior Christ, who told him and
other the Apostles, that though the Spi^^ were sometimes willing, yet that the
flesh is always weak, and therefore wills us to watch and pray. And the
same lesson does our Savior continually teach us, specially when he tells
us, Mark. 13.
that the end of the world is at hand, saying, Take heed, watch and pray, for
ye know not when the time is. And again elsewhere he says, Watch and pray
continually, Luke 21.^.
that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things, and that ye may
stand before the Son of man.

Prayer is a chief part of that Panoplia or complet harneis, which the Apostle
Saint Paul, in the sixth to the Ephesians, Ephe. 6.^
does charge every Christian Soldier daily to put on, or, being put once on,
never to put it off any more: the reason is, because so long as we live in the
field of this world, we must a ways look our enemy in the face, and never
turn the back: Therefore also it is that the Apostle has appointed us no
harneis for our hinder parts. Again we must never unarm our selves, because
there is never no truce to be taken with our adversary, who continually
seeks to kill us, as well, or rather, by night, then by day^ as well in
Winter, as in Summer. Against because we wrestle not only with fle^^ and
blood, which are our daily and domestical enemies, and must always be kept
under as bond-slaues, which naturally seek to conspire against us: But also,
as the Apostle says, Against principallities, against powers, and against the
worldly governors, the prince of the darkness of this world, and against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places: For this cause we must
take unto our selves, the whole armor of God, that we may be able to resist
in the evil day: That is every day when we are tempted, and having many
fightes, we must still stand upon our stations or guard, With our loins
girded about with truth, and having on the brestplate of righteousness, And
our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace: Above all, we
must take the shield of faith, wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts
of the Devil: We must also take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God: And yet all this is too little, therefore the
Apostle adds, And pray always with all manner Prayer and supplication in the
Spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseueranee: So that we are taught how
we must be harnessed from top to toe (as they say) as many as are Christ's
soldiers, they must not come naked unto this fight, neither must they only
put on their armor or harnes, but they must also take weapons in their hands;
the sword of the spirit to strike at the devil, if he come near, and the pike
of prayer to keep him off, that he do not assault them: And these weapons if
the skill of them be well known, are both offensive and defensive; they will
as well stick and wound the adversary, as defend us from the force of his
blows, when he strikes toward us, yea believe it (dear christian) though
the Devil play the Lion when he is not resisted, yet if thou come toward
him, as did David toward Goliath, with these weapons in thine hand, he will
soon flee from thee, as S. James says, and be afraid of thee, and even quake
for fear, Iam 4.7.
as does the Lion at the crowing (...) a cock, for as the roaring of a Lion,
^righteth the beasts of the forest, so does the prayers of the faithful
profligat or drive to flight the devils of hell: faithful prayer therefore is
to be considered chiefly in these two respects; the one is, the great need and
necessity of it, that we may not be without it: the other is, the fruit and
profit that it brings with it, if it be daily and continually used: the
necessity whereof we see already, in that it is one of out chiefest weapons,
wherewith we must evermore be fighting; if happily at any time the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God be forgotten behind, or laid up in our
closet, as the sword of David was behind the Ephod; and the door of our
remembrance locked, and the key lost for a time, yet prayer must always be
present, and never be forgotten behind; therefore it is that we are so
oftentimes exhorted in the scriptures to pray continually, and always give
thanks for benefits received, not that we should do nothing else but pray,
but to teach us that whatsoever we do else, either at home or abroad, we must
if we please use prayer with it, either publicly or privately, either in word
or in thought, yea the very secret groninges of the godly at al times are
acceptable unto God, and to teach us also that every good thing we take in
hand shall prosper the better for prayer, yea things Adiaphora, things
indifferent, yea even our sportes and recreation, such as the wicked use
profanely, may by the godly be used holily by the benefit of prayer. 1. Tim
4.5.
All things (says the Apostle) are sanctified by the word of God and prayer:
that is, as I take it all indifferent things, such as in themselves are
neither good nor evil, are sanctified to the use of godly men, for things
that are ever good, are ever sanctified, and things that are merely evil can
never be made good, only the euilnes that is in the^, may be avoided and taken
away, and so the thing that was evil before, may in a sort be changed into
goodness; and all this is done by the word of God and prayer, through the
mighty working of the holy and sanctifying spirit of God.

Prayer therefore (I say) must be present with the children of God at all
times, and the praises of God must be in their mouths continually, for as a
soldier without weapon, so is a christian without prayer, and as water is the
life of a fish, so is prayer the life of the fou^e: As Sampson was soon
overcome by the Philistines when he once cut off his hair, wherein his
strength was: so these devilish Philistines will soon come upon us, if once
they see us to neglect or cast away prayer, wherein our spiritual strength
consists. For this cause the necessity of prayer is not only commended
unto us in scripture, by sundry precepts, (...) Psalm. 50.15 Mat. 11.28.
as Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee (says God) and
thou shall praise me. And again, come unto me all that travel and are heavy
laden with the burden of sin, I will ease ye, Mat. 7.7.
I will refresh ye^. And seek, ask, knock, which teaches us that we must
continue in prayer, and many such like precepts, but also it is most of all
commended unto us by example, which is a most forcible kind of teaching: what
means that continual course of prayer, and the spending of whole nights in
prayer by our savior, but to commend unto us the necessity of prayer?

No sooner did that good disciple, who soever he was desire our Savior to
teach his disciples to pray, as John before had taught his, but presently his
godly desire is graciously granted, Mat. 6.2.
and a most perfect pattern and right form of prayer is prescribed by Christ
himself, whereby all the prayers of the Saints must ever be squared, wherein
the Lord did not only teach us to pray, but prescribed a form evermore to be
used. The Apostles succeeding him, as all the Patriarchs and holy prophets
going before, do by their singular examples, highly commend the sweet
exercise of godly prayer unto all Gods children, till the end of the world: and
therein is not only to be considered the necessity, but also the efficacy
and fruit of prayer, which is the other point that I note.

Holy Enoch the scripture says, Genesis 5.24
He walked with God, that is, was ever conversant, and as it were talking with
God by faithful prayer, for they that pray faithfully talk with God, as they
that read the scriptures deuoutely, God talks with them: Iam. 2:23
what shall we speak of Abraham the father of the faithful, who is called The
friend of God, God did so favorably hear his prayers that he made unto him so
that he was content to feast with him at his instant entreaty. Of Isaac
praying, Gen 24.60
as says the Text, in the field, when his wife Rebecca was sent by God unto
him: Gen: 28.20
what of Jacob, whose prayer procured him a prosperous journey, and preserved
him from all dangers? What shall we speak of Moses that man of God? whose
prayers prevailed mightily with the Lord, Psa. 106.33
otherwise the Lord would have destroyed the children of Israel at once. (...)
And of Joshua, at whose prayer, the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon
in the valley Auieloth, till the Israelites were revenged of Gods enemies: So
true is that saying of Saint James: The prayer of a faithful man avails
much, Iam. 5.16.17.18.
if it be fervent And proposes Elias for an example, whose instant and
faithful prayer, did lock and unlock the heavens (as it were) wi^h a key,
that they drop ped no rain, in three years and six months, and again, at
his prayer the heavens gave rain abundantly. I should be too tedious to
recite all the examples. 1. King. 3.9
Let Solomon be remembered, who prayed for wisdom, rather then for gold, and
God gave him his desire, above all that ever were before him. Judge. 16.30
Let not Sampson be forgotten, though he once lost his strength, as al Gods
Saints do one time or other, more or less, yet as soon as he had recovered a
little strength again in a time convenient, he fell unto prayer, and presently
pulled down the house, where Gods enemies were assembled: He killed more
Philistines now says the text, with prayer and little strength, then he did
in all the time of his life before, when happily prayer was neglected, and he
too confident in worldly strength.

The story of Daniel we know is famous, who prayed three times a day to his
God, that is, the God of heaven, at that time also, when it was present death
for him so to do, and see how wonderfully God delivered him from all his
enemies, and from the jaws of the Lions.

David a man chosen after Gods own heart, and a king, though troubled with wars,
and other most serious affairs, yet forgot not to pray evening and morning,
and at noone tide, and the Lord heard his prayer: his prayers and his praises
in the psalms can never be praised nor perused sufficiently. The Apostle in
the Acts, Act. 2.46.
and the Saints of God assemble themselves together, and continue with one
accord in prayer, for prayer, whether it be public or private, must be void
of discord: public disse^tion hinders very much the public prayers in the
church: a thing greatly to be lamented in our times, and private discordes let
and hinder private persons, at home in their houses, from those sweet exercises
of prayer and praising of God, with Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs in
private families, as true Christianity requires. And as James the Apostle
exhorts, if we be in adversity, or in any grief or necessity, then to use
that part of prayer, which is called petition, if mercy and in prosperity,
then to sing Psalms, which is the other part of prayer and thanksgiving:
though I know petition is also included in the psalms, and giving of thanks,
not seldom used with out singing both in public, and in private,
nevertheless they must ever be free from discord and dissension.

Therefore S. Peter, 1. pet, 3.7
when he disswadeth married couples, to live without discord, he adds this
for a special reason, that your prayers be not hindered: for God, to whom
only we must present our prayers, by the means of Christ, not to Saints or
Angels, is a God of peace, therefore only hears the prayers of them that be
in love and peace with God and man: with God by faith and true repentance, with
men, by a christian reconciliation and godly agreement. Therefore Paul says,
Men must pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting. 1
Ti. 2, 8
Thus did the Apostles and saints of God in the primitive church pray
faithfully and zealously together in love and concord, and see the fruit and
force of their prayers. The holy Ghostfell upon them, and the places did shake
oftentimes under them, in token of joy, and to assure the^ that their prayers
were pleasing unto God. But stay, let me mark how I proceed on; I had
thought that I had eue^ run my prefixed course, and might here have cast
ancher, but looking better about, I cannot see the shore, nor the haven wherein
I would willingly harbor.

By that which has been spoken, we may a little perceive the use and
necessity of prayer, and we shall be the better persuaded thereof by daily
trying and considering of our own weakness and wants, also the daily miseries
and calamities both public and private, which hang over our heads, and the
mighty force and crafts of our adversaries, both spiritual and temporal,
against whom we must continually fight by prayers, according to the saying;
Arma ecclesiae sunt preces and lacrimae: The best armor and weapons of the
faithful, are prayers made with tears, which tears so shed are not lost, for
God will put them up in his bottle. By that I say, which has been said
before, the necessity of prayer may partly be perceived: but as for the force
and efficacy thereof, though in the forenamed examples, some thing do appear,
and the sweetness of comfort and contentation, that it daily stireth up in the
hearts of Gods children, I persuade my self they may be far better perceived,
then expressed, for what is prayer else to them that know how to pray
effectually? but even a most familiar talk of man with God, by the means of
Christ. What other thing is prayer? but an opening and unfolding of our minds
unto God, to make our mones unto him in all our miseries, even as do dear and
obedient children, unto their most loving and most merciful father, to pray
unto him for whatsoever we want necessary for soul and body, with full
assurance to be heard, if it be for his glory and our good, and to praise his
Majesty continually for all his benefits.

And if at any time our prayers seem not to be heard at first, as oftentimes
it falls out, then we are also assured, that he does either deny them for
our good, and will give us better things, when it pleases him, or else for a
time delaieth and deferreth our petition, to the end he may the better try
our obedience, prove our patience,, and confirm us in perseverance: which
three virtues being knit together, make that cable of three twistes, which
being tied fast to the anchor of faith, can never be broken. God in hearing and
granting our prayers, is like (as S. Jerome compares him) unto a faithful
Physician, that will suffer his sick patient to cry long enough, if he call
for things that are hurtful for his health, yet notwithstanding, has more care
of his good and recovery, then the patient has of himself and therefore it
is, that these sweet sentences of S. Austen are to be regarded, who says,
Deus saepe non ex^ audit ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat ad salutem, God oftentimes
does not hear us as we desire, but only as in his wisdom, he knows best
for our health, and for our good. And again, the same father says, Si non dat
ad horam, etc. if God sometimes do seem not to hear presently, it is to
exercise the petitioners, not because he dispiseth our prayers.

But what pen is able to express the profit and pleasure, the sweet comfort
and consolation in soul and mind, that the children of God do feel in this
holy exercise of prayer, if it be made with knowledge and conscience, with
faith and feeling, without wrath or doubting, free from hypocrisy, and any
popish conceit to be heard for our much babbling sake, against which vices our
Savior does most sharply inueigh in the 6. of Matthew. And the Apostle does
plainly reprove that lip-labor, and bibble babble, such as is yet used in the
Romish churches, that is made in an unknown tongue, and so without knowledge
and understanding, and therefore without fruit and profit: whereof I here give
warning, least any infected with these follies of Popery, should think
themselves also commended that spend their whole time almost in praying upon
their beads, and in mumbling of their Mattins, and our Ladies Psalter, as they
call it, which has neither any sweetness, nor any godly savor in it, but
altogether offensive unto God, and most dangerous for the health of their
souls: but leaving them that also sin of ignorance, to Gods mercy to be
recalled; and their leaders to that judgment, which is pronounced against
them, except they speedily repent. Let us return to finish our discourse,
concerning the fruit and efficacy of prayer, as well public as private, and
the rather I make mention of public prayer, because it is neglected of a
great many which otherwise think themselves good professors of Christiauity,
for I speak not here of open Recusantes, that are worthily blamed, and also
punished for their indurate obstinacy, but I speak only of those, that will
not come to public prayers, except there be preaching: how necessary it is,
that there should be preaching in every congregation, what good man sees not?
what good Christian desires it not? for it is the best external means, to
teach us how to pray, and all other good duties whatsoever: but where one
wants, must the other also be neglected? God forbid, me thinks there is no
reason to be yielded for it, except you will say, it is reason, that while a
man is fighting with his enemy, and his sword be broken off, or stricken out of
his hand, he must therefore cast away the dagger too, and so suffer himself to
be killed or stabbed presently. Have we not heard before, that prayer is that
weapon, that must ever be present with us, both at home and abroad, both in
private and in public? they therefore (for that is the common excuse) that will
pray at home, or in private, when they may and will not come unto public
prayers, are like unto some dastard^ soldiers, who while the whole Camp is
skirmishing, flourish their swords out a part by themselves, and yet think
they have played the men sufficiently. I speak not against private prayer, but
rather persuade all men unto it, but I speak only against those, that will not
come at public prayers, where many soldiers to gether may do better service
then a few alone. And also by the way, those may be noted, that all the times
of public prayer, will be busied in their private prayer, as though they were
soldiers of an other camp: and sometimes reading or pooring in a book, and
that is used of many in time of preaching also, as though public prayer and
preaching were not to be regarded: these abuses therefore, and many other which
I cannot stand to rehearse, being avoided and eschewed, the force and fruit of
faithful and zealous prayer, as well private as public, will be the better
felt and perceived of all those that shall religiously and carefully accustom
themselves unto it. Many I know have written most learnedly and excellently of
the sweet fruit and efficacy of prayer, howbeit I persuade my self, that we
may say of them, and of all others, that shall entreat thereof, as the
Samaritanes said to the woman, Io. 4.42. 1. King. 10.8.
that brought them tidings of Christ; and as the Queen of Saba said of the
domestical servants of Solomon, they do report most rare and surpassing
pleasure, fruit and commodity, to be present at hand with this most singular
and sweet exercise of prayer, yea things incredible to be reported, and
therefore not to be believed of the greater part, but unto them that have seen
Solomon in the face, and have heard the gracious words, that proceed out of his
mouth, to them the one half is not reported, that they find true by their own
experience, and cannot be expressed to others.

I wish therefore every Christian soul, not to think to find the fruit of
prayer demonstrated in paper, but to endeavor daily to feel the force thereof
in themselves, by practice: and then let them tell me, whether this thing be
not true that I have said. For what thing is there that our souls can wish or
desire, if it be good for us, but may be obtained by prayer? What case or sort
soever we be in, we may either be confirmed or comforted by prayer. What
work or labor is there, which we take in hand, whether of soul or body, how
hard soever it be, if it be agreeable to our callings, but may be achieved by
prayer? In time of peace, prayer keeps us in safety: In time of war, it
gets us the victory. In time of prosperity, it keeps us from pride: In
time of adversity, it keeps us from despair. If we be in health, we may
pray without pain: If we be sick, pray, and recover, as did Hezekiah: If
we be rich, prayer increases our store: If we be poor, prayer makes us
rich, in content and goodness: If we be in authority, we have need to Pray
for wisdom, courage, and gravity: If of the Co^monaltie, for obedience and
loi altie: If we be Pastors, our prayers prevail for the people: If we be
parishioners, we must pray and praise God, for, and with our Pastors. In a
word, prayer is a present for a Prince, and is a delight for the painful
plough-man: every man is delighted with the singing of the Nightingale, but no
Nightingales song is so sweet in the ears of man, as the faithful prayers of
the Saints, are in the ears of our God. Many commend contemplation, but prayer
is the soul of the co^templatiue life. If thou be in company, thou may
pray secretly: If alone, thou may pray sweetly: Whatsoever thou do, or
wheresoever thou go, if prayer be thy guide, thou shall be sure to prosper.
If thou begin to loathe these earthly vanities, prayer will bring into thy
sight, the truest treasures: If thou once begin to mortify thy sinful
affections, prayer perfumeth thy soul with most sweet consolation and joy in
the holy Ghost: As the hill is the way to the mountains, and the means to
ascend unto it, so prayer is the way to mortificacation: As gold, precious
stones, and marble, do make the houses of Kings, so prayer does build the
temple of Christ that he may dwell in our hearts by the holy Ghost: As fire
does scour the rust of Iron, so prayer does scowre and cleanse our souls from
the rust of sin: And as the joints of the body are bound together by nerves
and sinews, so the souls of the righteous are established by prayer. Prayer
therefore, for the force and efficacy thereof, is compared by one, to a forke,
that expels all evil things from us, and to a hook, or crook, that
pulls down from heaven, al blessings, and good things upon us. If therefore
thy foul seem at any time to be cloyed and clogged in the earthly tabernacle
of thy body: the winds of prayer will carry it above the clouds, and
conduct thee unto the palace of eternal pleasure. Pray therefore faithfully,
and pray continually, and thou shall be sure to have the presence and
assistance of the glorious Trinity. Who therefore will not be in love with
prayer, which pierces the clouds, prevails with God, prospers our
affairs, at home, and abroad, by day, and by night, makes us beloved of God
and his Angels, brings sweet rest and peace to our bodies, and eternal rest
and tranquillity to our souls: to our great comfort in this life, and to our
endless joy in the world to come, when Christ Jesus, our Judge and Savior,
shall come in the clouds, to make an end of all mortal miseries: Who bless us
all, and bring us at that day, into the sight of God his Father, that we may
see his glory which he had with him, before the ^ld was made, by the gracious
gui^e of his most holy and blessed spirit. which most holy and vndeuidable
^itie, one God of most glorious Ma^e, be rendered, of us, and all Saints and
gels, in heaven, and in earth, all power ^d impire, all praise and glory, and
thanksgiving, from this time forth, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo.

