A NEW POST: WITH Sovereign salve to cure the Worlds madness.

Expressing himself in sundry excellent Essays or witty Discourses.

A mark exceeding necessary for all men's Arrows: Whether The Great man's
Flight, Whether The Gallants Rouer. Whether The Wisemans Prickeshaft, Whether
The Poor man's Butshaft, Whether Or the Fools Birdbolt.
Quantus in Orb dolus.

By Sir I. D. Knight.

Printed for John Mariot.

A NEW POST
THE World (which is the Shop or warehouse of all evils) was never since the
beginning unfurnished of most wicked Commodities, and as Time and men's lusts
has increast the Trade, so has the Trade filled up the empty places, and left
no vaculty or vast corner in the world vnstored and filled up, even from the
bottom to the top, with mymicke and fantastic Imperfections: with sins of
all shapes, of all fashions, of al inventions; Sins of all proportions and
all measures: the great man's crea^^^^^, the meaners imitations, the Courts
ambition, the Cities surfa^^e, and the Countries folly. The first being
grounded upon Envy, the second on Pride, and the last on Weakness; so that
according to the nature of man, the old world is full of old thoughts, and
being nearest to the end is farthest from all amendment, having in it nothing
but a couctous hoarding or gathering together of those vices, whose sad
weight cannot choose but shake the body into cinders. This mortal Tympanie how
many worthy Lecthes have studiously sought to cure, but their medicines have
either not b^t^e received, or else so too carely cast up in unnatural
vomits, that the virtue has been lost for want of retention? How has
Divinity threatened, Morality condemned, Satyrs whipped, lipigrammes mocked,
and all in one jointly raised up an earthquake or thunder against the Vices and
Abuses of the times? yet still the world (as drowned in a Lethargy or dead
sleep) nussels and snorts in security, seeding vice to such a monstrous
bigness, that me^ stand in awe and dare not forsake him, and women tie him to
their wastes with above a dozen points of the strongest riban. But may not this
fear be taken from men, and this folly untied from the feminine Gender? Yes
questionless and with great ease, if they will either take the Antidote of
reason against this p^yson of nouelty, or bath themselves in the clear and
wholesome streams of moderation and discretion. It is nothing but the want of
the discourse of reason which does breed this madness in mankind, for where
it reigns there can neither be want not superfluicie; for it boundeth all
things within a mean, and governs with Justice and Judgment ^is has the
true measure of goodness, and carries so even the ball^ce which weighs
every excellence, that no grain or drop can be insufficient, but our Reason
may amend, alter or correct it. This if either modern. Philosophers, or our
living Poets had instructed the world withal, surely all vice had long since
forsaken us, much gall had been saved in their ink, less pepper and more
salt had kept virtue in season without corruption. Since then the knowledge and
use of Reason is the only salu to cure these reasonlesse iufirmities, it is
not amiss in this little dispensatorie to show the true manner of this
composition, that every man knowing the ingredients and their natural
operations, each man may be his own Physician, and cure those malladies which
make the world run mad with toys and fantasmes. It is to be understood then,
that to make this excellent balm of Reason, every man must take Number, Place,
Time, Use, Art, things Natural, above Nature, and against Nature; and mixing
them with example, distill them into a pure conscience; and the work is then
finished. Now for the nature and operation of these simples, thus in these
Essay^^ it follows.

ESSAY I.
Of Number.
NVmber does consist of diverse things, either of one, or several
denominations: and without Number there can be no true definition,
demonstration, manifestation, nor understanding of any thing: for if all things
were but one, then were there no Number or order: wherefore one is said to be
no number, Sed scala do vnitate, the beginning of number. In the Godhead, being
before all time, the maker of time, and all things that increase in time, there
is number: The Trinity of persons and unity of Godhead do declare as much.
For although God be a most singular Divine Essence in himself, yet has he
proportioned Number in himself, unseparably united in his Godhead: which the
Divines call the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And the ancient Philosophers
call three inbeings, The Father, the active, or inworking virtue, power and
nature: The Son, they call the word, speech, or reason: and the Holy Ghost,
Love. These Philosophers have striuen wonderfully in this labor, wherein they
have waded exceeding deep. Plotin (...). 5. (...).
Ae^^rlius the Disciple of Plotin, is said to name the Trinity, three things,
or three understandings. The Beer, the Hauer, and the Seer. The Trinity is
expressed in these words, Power, Understanding, and Will: which Trinity makes
a full number of things belonging to a mind: which the Philosophers est^em to
be the Godhead. But to leave off this kind of description, I conclude with
Plotinus; There are says he, three chief Inbeings: The one, or the God 2. The
understanding or wit. 3. The soul of the world. And of these three, says he,
it is not for any man to speak, without praying unto god: And without set^^ng
his mind before unto quietness. And if it be demanded (says he) how one of them
begets an other; it is to be considered, that we speak of everlasting
things: and therefore we must not imagine any temporal begotting: for this
begetting which we speak of, says be, betokens but only cause and order.

This Trinity and first, and everlasting number, has proportioned and
appointed, other numbers, and in them a miraculous order. If any ask a reason
hereof, I answer: It was the power, the wisdom, understanding, and will of
God, to express himself in this complete number of persons, in one unity of
godhead. By this number three, was the whole world created, and al things
innumerable: whose mouers are only known to the creator himself. In that number
three, is expressed the wonder of ye world: ye taking up of Henock and Elias:
and the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jonas three days in the Whales
belly, and Christ three days in the grave: So that in the number of three, it
manifested the eternal Tr^^^tte of the God head the creation of the world and
of man: the ^se, the death, and the re^uraction. There cosented to the
destruction of man, The Serpent, the woman, and the man. There have repa^ed
that downsal; The Father, the giver, the Son the gift, and the holy Ghost the
comforter. In the numof three, is a perfect condusion of all (...). Much may be
said of the ^omber (...) is made by this (...); As fire, (...) and earth (...)
the world, (...) Spring Semer Autum Winter ^o make the (...), ^ast Well. North,
south: to (...) the ^orld, (...) going ^^ee(...) swiming, with infinite (...) of
(...) and teres^al bodies, which he kee^^th, preserves, boundeth in, and
holds within this Trinity. And briefly to wind up the point concerning
number, ^hold it the original and most worthy part of the three. I mean, that
number is of higher consideration the^ place or time: for God himself ye can
by no means stoup to be known to the capacity of man, neither can be contained
within any place not limited to any time, in respect of his ompotent
greatness, and eternal essence, before and without respect of time, yet has
he vouchsafed to bring himself within the compass of number: And therein,
and by the power thereof to create man in a blessed and happy estate.

Thus having in some measure discovered the nature and worthiness of original
number; desiring by all means to avoid tediousnes, I leave to be considered,
that these and diverse other ancient writers, that have left behind them
learned works, had no other means to understand any thing of the deity and
eternity of the Godhead, or immortality of the soul, but the use and help of
Reason, only proper and peculiar to man. And so I proceed to the rest.

Of place.
IN respect of God, before the creation of the world, and beginning of time.
All was 'Place. And yet in respect of his greatness, there was no place for he
cannot be contained in any thing, Place in respect of God
but in himself. If any be curious to demand how spacious, large, or ample
this place was, let him take his answer with Cato of Vtica: who would needs
know of God why Casar overcame Pompey. It is as if the meanest vassal in a
kingdom should require ye king to give a reason for all things he does, or
commands. Perphersus being much encumbred with understanding of supernatural
causes, breaks out into these words: Seeing that God aid by skill, dispose
and ouerrule all things, and orders them by incomparable propriete of virtue:
And on the contrary part, man's reason being very small, it ignorant of most
things, how skillful soever it seem to be of the truth Surely we may the^ call
it (meaning Reason, wise, when it is not curious in searching such doubtful
and hard matters, as are matched with danger of blasphemy, but rather
grannteth, that the things which are done, are very well as they be: for says
be, what can our weak reas^ find fault with, or reprove in that great Reason
(meaning of the deity) As if he should have said. The ways, the works, and the
place of God, and Eternity, are not to be searched nor enquired after by any
creature whatsoever. If we descend but to the diversity of the conduon and
nature of Creatures confined unto place: and their understanding of matters,
not designed, nor provided for their estates and conditions, we shall have
sufficient cause to say, that Place was such, and so much as it pleased the
purpose, providence, power, and wisdom of God.

Before there was a creation of things, and a beginning of time, 'Place was
insinit and indefinit: indeuisible, without space or distance: without being
repaired unto, or departed from: neither containing nor contained, without
Center, Circo^ferie^ce, rule, or diameter, consisting neither of matter,
substance, nor whatsoever stuff. Every thing has his point, his Center, his
place, and beginning. Only ye divine esce^ce, place and nature of god has
none: as every man that will seriously look into his own self shall be enforced
to confess. In nature, the greater, can never be comprehended by ye lesser.
But God in his nature, place, and essence, is greater then man. Therefore
cannot God his incomprehensible place and nature, be comprehended by the reason
or understanding of man: Nature is a thing wrought by God: Now, no work how
great soever, can perfectly express the cause or worker thereof. Therefore
nature cannot understand the diume essence, place, and nature of God The
reasonable soul; is the admirable nature of man: Now, whosoever shall come to
know his own soul, and the place thereof, merely by the power and work of it
self, shall confess himself to be absolutely ignorant thereof Therefore if
nature and reason, with the powers and affects of the soul and reason, comes
short to know it sell; much more must it come short, to discover or understand
the incircumscriptible nature essence and place of the holy Triniue. We see in
the course of the creatures of God, as well terestrial, as celestial co^mmual
mouings from place to place, and all those moved by their Creator, the first
mouer, which argues subjection and obedience in the creatures to the Creator:
and out of a cessarie consequent of the contrary, it discovers that God the
mouer, is neither moved, nor does move; too, or from any place. For to say, he
is here, or there, it is all one, for he is every where: as it is authentically
proved: If I clime up to heaven, thou art there: If I go down to hell, thou
art there also. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the ^^t most
part of the sea, even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right haud
shall hold me: for the heaven is his seat, and the earth is his footestole. To
conclude this point, we see and confess, that God made, and knows all
things: and has appointed their natures, beings, times, and places. Now, if he
had in him the nature of any of his creatures, that is, to be limited unto one,
contained in place, or consisting of any material substance, the same would
incomber his divine essence: for he does not come within the compass of their
limited nature, place, nor number: for by that means, we should derogate from
his holy and divine Deity, and essence of a Creator. Seeing therefore, that
God is not compounded of material substance, he can not be a body. And seeing
he is not a body, he can not be contained in place, neither wholly, nor in
part: whereof it may properly be said, that he is no where: namely, that no
part of him is limited within any place to be pointed at, or described. For
like as he made all things by the power of his being; So does the same power
enter into al things: sill all things: and contain all things. And for so much
as the same being and power is indivisible, it is whole in all, and whole in
every part. So likewise, is he himself whole throughout, in whom all things
have their being: howbeit, he is not definitely, nor determinatly in any thing,
nor in any particular place. Upon which reason Aristotle made this definition
of the soul of man: which comes nearest to the nature of God. Anima (says
he) est totuu^ in toto, and totum in qualibit part. The nearest beholding of
this, is in our own minds. By the powers and working of the mind, we
contemplate, behold, disceme, understand, and judge of things that are far
remote from us, and yet over selves never move. The mind in this case does not
entermingle truth, nor participate with the nature, substance, nor condition of
the the things it enters into. Judge but of the reason thereof, which is
briefly thus: These things are of less condition, nature, and quality, the^
the reasonable souls that possess these minds. God is said by the
Philosophers, to be immovable, unchangeable, beginninglesse, endless,
bodilesse, infinite, incomprehensible, etc. Al which declare not what God is,
but yt he is not as his creatures are, local; nor his creatures mixed, or
intermingled with him: not with his power, or essence. For by these negatiues
all other things are discovered, to have beginning, to be made, to determine,
to be changeable, weak, material corruptible: And to depend upon an other
being then themselves. And that God only has his being and place, in, and by
himself. And the the more deeply any man will enter into consideration of
these things, the more infinite and inscrutable shall he find the^. For when he
shall have taken all the pains he can possible, he will confess he has
learned no more, the^ to be ignorant of the want of his own knowledge in ye
behalf.

Thus holding it necessary, to discover that there is no place in respect of
God, as the most readiest way to explane what place is, in respect of his
creatures, and the worthiness thereof; I proceed, desiring to be understood,
that my meaning is, for opening the point of my maine argument, Place in
respect of the Creatures. Supernatural Natural. Vunaturall.
by the way as I go, to discover, How supernatural, natural, and vnnatur all
things, have their operations and workings: and the monstrous products, that
some things against nature are enforced to bring forth.

There is nothing created, but has his special use: be it material, or
immaterial, number serves to make known to man his own weakness: that those
things that are most certainly known by number to the Creator, are
notwithstanding, innumerable, to the capacity, reason, and understanding of
men: yea, much more, then the fantasy, conceit, or imagination of men, can by
any means come near unto, or conceive. All these thus made of nothing, makes
the more wouderfull the power of the maker, and the order and worthiness of
number, within which condition every creature is contained. To every, and to
the very least of these innumerable creatures, there is appointed a several,
distinct, particular, and local place; divided, severed, and sundered from the
rest: which shows what congruence there is, between number and place: that
number being never so infinite, yet nothing wants his place. And place being
never so spations and large, yet there is Nullum vacum, no void place: which
declares, how the works of God do depend one of an other, in an admitable
propotion and order, one in tiue use, serving the turn of another. For how
could the creatures be, if they wanted place? Or, to what purpose served place,
if there were not creature, to supply them? This shows that God made nothing
in vain: and therefore his works ought not to be lightly esteemed, much less
abused.

The first Creation we read of, is of Angels: They were made in number: Place
divided.
They attended their Maker in Heaven: There was their place: and although they
were spirits and incorporall, yea standing under the law, obedience, and
command of their Maker: they had such several places as befitted creatures of
such worthiness: and under such conditions as they were enjoined unto. Their
disobedience, and fall, and thrusting and remooning out of that blessed place,
to another place of accursednesse, show that there were seueuerall places, even
for the spirits themselves: as likewise several numbers appointed for these
places. So hitherto number and place go together, as necessary attendants on
the p^ouidence, purpose, and will of God. But if any shall ask either number of
place, of the blessed, or damned spirits, the time of their creation, or fall,
or the reason why it is not discovered unto men: Let those men know, that they
neither be within the number, creation, nor place of any those angels or
spirits, but in another ^anke of Gods creatures, a little inferior to the
Angels. And therefore they must leave them, their creation, number and place,
to their Maker: as matters inscrutable and forbidden, that men should have to
meddle withal. The next creation is of the world: which consists of things,
in number and place: The earth, the water, the Elements, the Sun, the Moon, the
stars, the beasts, birds, fishes; and lastly man: as is said in holy Writ, Male
and female, made he the^. In all these there is number: in respect of these
diverse creatures that were made, there is number in the reasonable creatures,
male and female. Place in worthiness and dignity: and the several and diverse
places, their several bodies were contained in, or did supply. Besides, what
the divine spirit of God has revealed, to holy men of the old ages, concerning
these places: reason has searched out diverse divisions, and subdiuisions of
places; done, conceived, and vnderstoodby number, and distance: which always
go together in what action soever: As relatiues, that depend one upon another
being. The Mathematitians, in respect of the height of the Heavens from the
earth, have divided this great spacious place, into ten Heavens: which, who so
is skilled in their described Spheres, may easily and readily understand.

This is done, in respect of the large vaught and scope, that is between
heaven and earth: and the creatures therem placed. They conceive above these
ten Heavens, to be the place, and seat of God the Creator, and that all the
creatures (except the holy Angels) are bound down by this Primum mobile, under
their Maker, not to approach his admirable presence. Here is still number and
place: In then division, they have appointed seven several Planets: whereof we
have warrant to speak of the Sun and Moon, by holy writ. And of the other
Stars there is great experience: and very profitable learning, has bin
collected and drawn from them. Under the lowest of these, being the Moon, is
affitmed to be a sierie Region, keeping all other Creatures under, that they
may not mount above, nor exceed their bounds. The like sierie Region, is
concerned to be above the tenth Heaven, to keep down the creatures in that
mighty scope and compasle. So here goes still together, number and place.
Under the moons Orb, they place the air to exist, which may not mount above
the fiery Region. With this air, we have more familiar acquaintance then with
the rest, because it partaketh with our nature. And under the air, the earth
and water. And so of fi^e, water, air, and carth, they hold the bodies of man
to be composed: wherein shill number and place, partake together in all
occasions. If I should speak at large of the infinite numbers of joints,
sinews, arteries, muscles, veins, organs, instruments, matter, and things,
whereof a perfect man does consist: beside his immortal soul, it would be as
admirable, as the whole frame and host of heaven and earth, and all wherewith
they are replenished. But if I should discourse of the reasonable and immortal
soul, and mind of man, the qualities, affects, effects, condition, state,
attribute, and faculties of the soul and mind. It would fair surmount all
the creatures that ever God made: and all in number, place, and time, which is
the next point to be handled.

Then gentle friend, I leave thee a spectacle in thy self, to behold all these
3. excellent things; number, place, and time: with ye stoste substance, matter,
and essence, whereof thou art composedy; much exceeding all the rest, if they
were all compared with thee: Abuse neither of them, least time turn thee, in
stead of a better place, from the number of the blessed, to a place of
damnation, among the number of the damned spuites. So that whether thou seek
beauen, earth, or hell, thou shall find all things to consist of number, and
place: therefore make account of them, as of their worthiness.

Much might be said, of the number and place of the fixed, and moving Star^ess
Of the number of Monarkes, Kings, Emperors, and their Countries: the vegitatiue
and sensitive creatures, and of the things that have only being, without sense
or growing. But because I am to speak in the next place of Time, and of the
use thereof, I cease further to enlarge this point: with this conclusion, that
the exercise of reason, even amongst the heathen and profane men, has waded
far into this matter.

Of Time.
IN this discourse of Time, there is an other way to discover the truth
thereof, then is used in handling the former. For in number and place, there is
neither prioritie nor posterity: For though in the Deity there be three
distinct persons in number, yet in reputation of place, greatness, or number,
none is greater or less then another: and in respect of Time, none is before
or after an other: But the whole three persons are coequall together, and
coeternall.

The Philosophers of ancient time, found in the reason of their souls, that
there was a certain nature and essence, in which they allege to be three
inbeings as is aforesaid. And that this great and eternal nature and e^^ence,
dog make the beginning of all other natures, which are contained in Time.

And besides among many opinions, There were of these Ph^los^ber^, that did
(...), and uphold two beginnings, which in all likelihood they were ind^ced
unto, out of the two several dispositions and inclinations of the same in men;
one to virtue, the other to vi^e. To these beginnings they gine seaerall names.
The one good, which they call Oramases. (...) the in the (...) of (...) and Ius.
The other evil, and that they call Arimarius. This opinion is furthered by
some, to have his beginning from Lor^astres, the grand child of Noa: an I from
him, by tra^sition to the Persians: an I from the Persi^nt, to the Manachi^s.
Their meaning and understanding, in this behalf is that the I leruents, the
Plants, the herbs, the trees, beasts, men, and Spirits, were divided between
these two Gods, holding one to b^e Creator of the good, and the other, of the
cuil. To the one, they allotted light: to the other darkness: to the one, Son
me^: to the other winter. etc. The sins, the wickedness. and corruptions which
they saw in the natures of men, differing from the perfection of a righteous
Creator, drew them into these absurd opinions, because they held their
corruptions and evils in time and quality, to be in the creation of those
evil creatures. Which opinion, has come near to some in these Ages: who
entering into consideration of the evil things, will not stick, if not to
affirm, yet at least to demand, whether God be the author of evil?

These opinions may be answered thus, That making, or creating, are referred to
natures and substances: and that all ouginall nature; and substances are good;
And therefore that God, who is al good, is the Creator, and maker of them. Now
evil, is neither a nature, nor a subslance: but an income, which is fallen
into natures, and subslances: And therefore not in the time of creation, but is
come in since, by a colaterall means. Fuill, is a breathing, or diminishing of
the sour good qualities and effects: which natures and substances ought
naturally to have.

Hereby we see, that even in time it self, good was before evil: and in
place shall be far preferred above it.

I conclude therefore, that Evil, being neither nature nor substance, has
not, not can have, any being in it self, but in the thing, that of his
original nature, or stuff is good. Plat^ (...)
Evil, is not an effect, but a defaule; not a production, but a corruption.
Plato, and Plotin, hold opinion, that evil is not a thing of it self, nor can
be un agined, but in the absence of goodnesses as a deptiuation of the good,
which ought to be naturally in every thing. And that evil is a certain kind
of nothing; having no abiding, but in the the good: whereof it is a fault, or
diminishing of perfection. By which they conceive, that these things which have
their being, nature, and substance, only temporary, and are finite with time,
tending to the matter whereof they were first created: that is, to an vnbeing
of that it formerly was: or to not being at all, as were the things where of
they were created: and unto which, creatures have still a certain inclination,
whereby they may fall from their goodness. By these and many other reasons,
may be concluded, that there was not two beginnings, but one beginning of
creatures and time. But the evil is crept in since, in the default, decay, or
absence of the good, which in the original creation, was in the same natures
and substances, that are now become evil.

Many supposals, imaginations, and opinions, have been holden of
euerlastingnesse, eternity, and of the world, and of sin, by old writers;
that had no other means to reach unto the same, but the scope of their own
weak reasons. But omitting the rest. I will come shortly to the point.
Plotinus in his book of Eternity and of Time, says; Plotinus ^^^ad. 3. Lib.
2. Chap. 1.
That Eternity and Time differ in this respect; That Eternity is verisied,
only of the everlasting nature: (meaning the Creator:) But Time, is to be
verified of the things that are created. So at Eternity is, and abides in God
alone: which be calls the world that is, to be conceived but in mind and
understanding. And Time, be intends to abide in the world; that is, subject
to the senses. Adding further, that the world was not made in Time, but
together with Time. Which opinion the Divines themselves do hold.

The same Author, having taken wonderful pames in that point, and having
searched out the definitions of time, made by the former Philosophers, knitting
up the knot of his whole learning thus. We must needs (says he) come batke to
the first nature; which I affirmed to be (...) Eternity: I mean, the
immovable nature, which is wholly all at once, the infinite and endless life;
and which consists wholly us one and tends unto one. But as yet says he,
there was no time at all: or at least wise, it was not among the nature^ that
consist in understanding, but was to come afterward, by a certain kind of
postertoritie. Out of which he concludes, that, before such time as fore
nesse issued out, and had needs of after nesse: Time, which as then was not,
rested in God, with the residue of all things that now are. But (says he) a
certain nature bent to many doings, that is to wit, the soul of the world,
being desirous to have more then the present, began to move is self. And so
from thence issued time which passes on continually, and is nener the self
same.

By these conclusions, It is manifest, that the wisdom and promdence of God
for special purposes and occasions, has made and ordained these three
numbers, time, and place: not that they are any things, natures, nor
sustena^ces, in respect of them selves; but in regard of the use and employment
thereof: for the numbering, placing, and conueying of things according to their
qualities, natures, and effects. And for the beginning, disposing, and
furnishing thereof.

Time properly of it self, is neither active nor passive: It is neither
escence nor substance, and scarcely can be said to have existence. And albeit
time pass faster then imagination, yet of it self, has it no power to move
at all. And the best description thereof is, ye Time is a certain measure of
moving, or progression from one point to an other: of things corruptible,
finishing, ending, and ceasing to be, as time it self is: And is exercised
altogether and alone in respect of corruptible things. In this appears the
reason wherefore the worthy vnd erstanding of number, place, and time, is only
known to man, and not to the other Creatures, is by the spiritual,
immateriall, and mortal essence and understanding of the reasonable soul,
which being created to endure when time shall be finished, has power and
faculty to discern between things co^mencing and transitoric things, mortal,
and immortal: and so out of a greater worthinesle then time, or any corruptible
substance, contained within the measure of time, to discern, the use, scope,
end, and purpose of al these les worthy and meaner things. And out of an
infallible reason, to conclude, that the true understanding of number, place,
and time, their mixtures, divisions, purposes, and ends, are known to men: And
the use thereof belongs only unto them. And that in this number place, and
time, the Creator has made sufficient substance, stuff and matter, to
nourish, defend, and preserve the whole race of mankind without any other
artificial or unnatural workings. And upon that ground, let this suffice for
a conclusion, that whosoever goes about by policy, art, or unnatural means,
to erect, set up, or maintain any course or way, by proportioning of time,
place, or number, for the benefit, relief, or sustentation of mandinde; then
God himself has set down and provided, in the making and preserving of his
creatures: goes about as much as in him lies, to reprove his creator for some
defect or want: and to become himself in the nature of a God, to supply,
succor, and make good that want, or defect. Wherefore I advise, great warines
to be taken, how men presume too much of their own wisdoms: and to co^taine
themselves within al humble obedience, to take what God has provided; and not
to erect, maintain, or depend upon unnatural, false and misconceiued
supployments: All which I choose, to manifest by examples, that have proceeded
from heathen men, which they only found out by reason: desiring christiaus that
have all the blessings of God revealed unto them, to exceed, or at least, not
to come short of the reasons of these profane men.

The knitting together of number, place, and time and their necessary uses,
which cannot be wanting.
IT may seem to some understandings, that in these discourses, I make much
ado about little: or that I am tedious, and use many preambles, circumstances,
and illusions. Let me answer in a word, and give some reason of my doing, and
of my fear and carfulness: not ^ashly or suddenly to conclude so weighty a
cause, First, I find the way I am to take in this matters (how easy soever it
seem to others) to be full of briers, brambles, cragged rocks, ambushes,
uneven ground, pits, and many incombrances thrown in by the invention of many:
which must be cut down, made plain, or removed: beside the mark and scope I
aim at can be made apparent. To descend therefore to the point, there is
discovered by learning, A double life in man.
to be in man, a double life. The one in this world, in respect of his mere
sensitive parts: the second, in another world, in regard of his reasonable
soul. The first dying, finishing, and ceasing to be: The second immortal, and
never finishing, nor ending. And in respect of these two laws, man has two
several fortes of provision. For the sensitive life, the use and benefit of
the transitory things of this corruptible world. For the reasonable soul, a
provision in an endless world like to mortality it self. In the creation,
Gwod made sundry creatures: in the general number whereof, man is.

Among the number of things, that have either being, sense, or moving, man is.
But besides this, man has a certain Genus, or kind specular alone by himself:
and so is among the number of the reasonable creatures. A kind and number,
peculiar and alone proper unto his nature and kind. And out of that reason,
issues two other conclusions, place, and time, in this world, amongst the
other creatures, so long as the sensitive parts remain in life And after that,
place and endless continuing in an other world. And in respect of
immortality, man is either in number, place, and time, amongst the elect: or,
number, place, and time, among the reprobates. Now, for that I so generally
find, that reasonable and immortal part, to be so universally carried away,
seduced, and ouer-ruled by the mere sensitive powers, entertaining the evil
and forbidden things, and refusing the good, allowable and lawful: I have made
thus bold to distinguish between these two times, and to give this camat to
the possessers thereof, that they strive not overmuch, to possess or
entertain the number, place, and time, of these transitory and corruptible
blessings, as that thereby they loose, and fail to be of the number, place,
and time, of the elect: and be cast amongst the number of the damned, into the
place of utter perdition. For assuredly, whosoever prefers the pleasures of
this world, before, or equal with the other; abuses both his Creator, and
creatures; All the shifts, policies, art and devices, that are used to cross
the ordinance and order of God, to erect, establish, or set up any other way,
or course of happiness, either terene, or immortal, more, or other, then God
himself, has provided, ordained, and appoined, are no less dangerous, then
the eating of the forbidden fruit. These notes I thought fit to let drop by the
way, in regard that I shall after in an other place, treat of a use generally
exercised, which I take, does neither proceed from God, nor nature. Into this
disease, I fear many thousands are fallen, so unrecoverably sick, that with
the sick man at the point of death, they fall to bite the sheets, and pull
the threeds of the couerlet, not knowing that they are sick at all, feeling no
pain of their infection. And so much the more dangerous is the sickness.

To come nearer to this point. It is plain by sundry places of the holy Bible,
that God alone, numbreth, weighs, and divides: he measures times, places,
and seasons: Therefore let him stand for the numberer, placer, disposer, and
appointer of all creatures, their places, times, seasons, their beginings,
continuings, finishings, chaungings, or ordainings. And let all his creatures
be then numbered, placed, and limited, according to their creations, nature,
qualities and estates, not striving against the purpose of his divine
providence, or adding, or diminishing, too, or from, what he has appoindted
or created.

To discover this, I must distinguish between man and the other creatures, and
the causes and marks they tend too, and aim at: together, with the admirable
blessing of reason: and to what measure the capacity of man thereby extends,
for the searching out the natures, qualities, times, seasons places, and uses
of the other creatures, which could not ^ee, but out of a kind of immortal
Nature, above all other creatures.

It cannot be denied, but that God has created all things, first for his own
glory and honor, wherein he appoints several uses and services: And within
the compass of this duty, are all creatures, as well men and Angels, as the
other inferior things. And on this behalf, God is satisfied with the service
he has appointed to himself; so his ordinance and will be obeyed.

From thence, let us come to things that are next unto the service of God, and
provided to serve the use of men: And therein will appear what an excellent
creature man is, in respect of his original nature and reason. And what
wonderful, admirable, and abundant blessings and stores, are provided to
serve his turn for both his lives; The true consideration whereof, may
satisfy any tempered spirit to be contented with his Creators own works; and
not to soyst in, or endeavor any other means of augmenting his happiness. And
to this purpose, let us survey in order the Creatures which serve for the use
and preservation of the life of man, and take them by degrees from the meanest
to the greatest: And it will make any man wonder at the admirable greatness,
plenty, and waightinesse thereof: Let us consider them by degrees: The lowest
and the meanest which is the earth, therein behold the stuff or matter
wherewith this huge bale is filled to make her swelling sides stiff, strong,
and full stuffed, that it shrink not Let us consider the metals, mines and
store of gold, silver, and other mineralls, enclosed in her womb. The
miraculous hanging thereof in the air, without support: The veins, conducts,
fountains, springs, and rivers of water, that pass through her intrall: The
herbs plants, trees, grass, and fruit of sundry sorts, that proceed and
grow out of the richness and fatness thereof. The rain and deawes that water
and moisten the same: The waters and deepes severed from the earth, bounded and
limited within a compass, upon the superficies of some part of the same
earth, as it were in a great vessel, by the side of this great garden, ready
at all time, to be taken up for the watering thereof, as pleases the master
Gardener: small (...) and brooks that issue from fountains innumertably,
serving the turns of men, When I say innumertable, (...) according to the
capacity of men.
beast, fishes, and sowles or the air Then behold the sensitive creatures,
their sundry kinds, and their unknown multitudes. The beasts of the field, and
the variety of their natures, employment, and uses: together with multitudes
of fishes, and their exceeding many sorts. Consider all these well, and we
shall find their creation was not to serve their own turns, but only and alone
for the use of man, whose they are to be disposed of by the direct bounty and
gilt of the Creator. But how? To be used as he has appointed and limited for
the preservation and benefit of all mankind, not to the destruction of any.
These things, neither know themselves, nor the ends wherefore they were made,
and yet they unknown to themselves, serve the use and benefit o^ma. The lean
and batten hastening then own deaths, by how much they take pleasur: to make
themselves more spec^^ly ^at, (...) there were no more but this, is not here a
wonderful blessin^, and is not here suffcient and plentiful premsion for all the
^ace of mankind, dispeaised upon ye whole ^ace of the earth? In which is not to
be for gotten, that these creatures cease not in any instant of time, to yield
increase for this provision. But let us proceed a little further, and behold
the other two Elements, Fire and Air: The one warming the sensitive parts, and
the other maintaining the spirit that keeps life neither of these know what
they are, not the end they were made for. The very Air it self, fustaineth,
and in a sort preserves ye flying fowls, in her concaue and hollow Region. I
et us go further; these four Elements, though there be contrariety in their
sever all natures, yet there is a Simpathy and a joint working together by the
appointment of the chief work mister; for the making, growing, cherist^ng, and
(...) of the life of (...) ^ell by then incorporation in the body of man, a by
the use and fruition of these other Creatures. Will you not think these
sufficient, yea adminiable bles(...)? The earth to bring forth fruit, and
herbs, so universally and continually; some for the food of man, and others
for the food of beasts, to perpare them to be (...) meat. The sheep to
bring both (...) for meat, and flee^e for clothing: the beast, to bring the
calfe, (...), butter, cheese, to he eaten and to be worn: the foul, to bring
first (...) then chicken: and lastly, feathers for easy lodging: the fishes
first spawn, and then (...). The trees to erect houses, and make the fire. The
earth that produces grass, serves for tile to cover the houses: The straw
that yields the corn, serves other purposes The timber that builds at
land, serves for navigations at sea: Out of the line or flax that makes the
great Cable, to be drawn, the threeds that make the sine and curious linen:
from the savage wild beasts, their warm surs: from the herbs and plants, rich
and estimable virtues: and from the poor silke-worme, the costly apparel, of
silks and vellets. It were a world to recite the several benefits that are
drawn from these creatures: And I am persuaded, no creature can reduce the^ to
a Catologne: Excellent wines, oils, grapes, spices, perfumes, gummes, pearl,
Balmes, clixots, spirits, virtues, and quintessence. Out of the earth, are
drawnmetals, of gold, silver, copper, brass, tin, lead, iron, steel, and
such like. Behold how one benefit follows and hasteneth in the neeke of an
other: the several course of trying these mettalls, and the use thereof, which
themselves know not: Are not these infinite blessings, sufficient for men to
content themselves with all? but they must needs go further. Over all these,
man, and only man, has a power and dominion: the command and use but limited,
not to be abused, or exercised to other purposes then the Creator ordained.
Behold, what an (...) liable reaso^is this one thing in the nature of man, by
(...) to (...) out these metals, and to season and apply them to then
several, necessary, and comodious (...) heed of the abuse. Among many other
had uses of metals; Of iron and steel, they make (...) to out meat: but it is
not intended to out men's throats: they make sickles and sithes to out down come
and grass, without intent to out men's (...). The like may be concluded of the
other metals, and the use of them. Wherefore to finish that point, gold and
siluet being the finest metals of the rest, are searched out, refined, and
propotioned to pass between men at a value and rate, for the providing of
victual, apparel, and other necessaries to defend the be die, from heat,
cold, and hunger: not that of themselves, simply by themselves, they are
either diet, apparel, or promisiont to defend winters cold, or summers
heat, but rather an incomberment, then comfort, if men be enforced to wear or
use them next their naked bodies, or to seed of their solid substances. It
shall be necessary therefore, that we do not dispose or employ the same, to
general creatures beget of bring forth any new creature, contrary and against
his own nature: or to make it valuable with the least human and reasonable
Creature that ever was, or shall be borne.

Let us look further, and see whether we can find any other benefits, if these
be not sufficient to satisfy us. And as we began at the lowest, so let us
ascend upwards. Above the Ayrie Region, The Moon which lighteneth the night,
governs the sea, tempereth the heat, and comfortteth the vital powers, made
by the providence and command of the creator, has her sever all world or Orb,
wherm she moves. The like is holden of the other moning stars, ye sixed stars,
the very Cope of heaven, wherein they are placed. The glorious Sun it self,
placed in the midst of the heavens. Behold and look upon them, their
innumerable company, their admirable beauty, their several employments,
courses and virtues: They all are ignorant of their own natures, virtues,
vigors places, beauties, stateliness, and disposes. They are the admirable
works of God, showing forth his glory unto men. Al these also serve only to
the benefit and use of men, and none other. The Sun to visit and comfort all
the corners of the earth, in one year: never ceasing, nor standing still,
unless it were to make the work admirable, and the work master and co^mander
more wonderful, it stood still in the tune of Joshua.

They moon once in thirty days, making her reuolutio^, and al ye rest of
those eclessial creatures, in then times, order, numbers, and places, moving
with such harmony, consent, and agreement, to divide the year into Somer, and
Winter, Spring and fall: as well to chasten the earth to make it fruitful, as
to comfort the herbs and grass, to make them grow: as well to tipen and
gather the fruits of the earth, as to sow seeds, and set plants: to divide
the day and the night, and to proportion the times and season. They all keeping
their own natures in their certain number, their motions within the limits of
an appointed place: And their courses and reuolutions, just at their appointed
time. So that in all this whole host of heaven, there is no manner of stiring,
staggering, moving, or disordering, to the point of a pin, in respect of place;
nor to the least instant, in regard of Time: after they were once placed, and
set to take their spacious iournies.

By the comfort and virtue of these, are all the inferior bodies, comforted,
cherished, relieved, succored, and made able to perform their several
duties. All these benefits has God made to supply and serve the turn, and use
of man. Behold, and look upon them with admiration! consider whether they be
not above the conceit of all capacity. Will any man affirm, that these are
not enough and sufficient, to nourish, feed, succor, and preserve all the race
of mankind: yea every one, as well the meanest as the greatest.

Surely none, neither can nor will deny this to be true: And yet we see daily
many thousands want, faunish, and pin^ to death, for want of these earthly
necessa^^es. Reason ^ bused
There must needs be afault in distubution and disposing of these benefits, o^
else none should not wat: for God in his divine wisdom, in the creation, has
not appointed any such place of scar^^tie, nor any number so to perish: not any
time when my such miscrie should befall. This Extremities must needs then
proceed of some wrong course, order, or disposition amongst men, in the
distribution of his benefits: for all the rest of his creatures have not
departed one jot (...) the worthiness of then full creatio.

Well, to proceed, there is a greater benefit then all these; and that is the
reason, understanding, and wit of man; whereby he knows all these things,
then virtues and effects: and thereby of his own propriety and right, he
commands, disposes, orders, and emoyeth, these lower creatures, as it
serves best for his turn and use.

What is it to be of never so great prower, value, vigor, or worthiness, to
such a subject, as neither understands what it is of it self, nor what
virtue is in it self: nor to what turn it serves? laboring still for
others, and taking no pleasure therein it self.

This is the condition of the Sun, the Moon, the Firmament, and all the
whole gainished and rich decked skies, with infinite numbers of Stars. And of
all the creatures in this Sphere of Flements, they are: and yet they know not,
neither what, nor whereof, nor to what purpose they are: what then avails
this glorious richness unto themselves? Surely nothing.

This does wonderfully exalt the creation, worthiness, and estimation of man,
and of his reasonable soul: yea, of the meanest of all the race of man, above
all these creatures, either Codestiall or terestiall; in that he: understands
them all, and enjoys the use, benefit, and profit of them all. May not this
serve for for a conclusion, and moan the hearts of men to be very careful, how
they either use, or abuse the blessings and benefits of God? leasting athering
too much, it turn to worms, as Manna did in the wilderness: or to Quayles,
and it become the destruction of the eaters thereof, in stead of nourishment.

These benefits God has bestowed on Man, principally and chiefly to serve
his turn, and to instruct and teach him, in this first life, which shall
finish and end. Behold, there are further matters, and benefits bestowed and
provided for Man besides these; The second ^se.
the meanest, far exceeding the greatest of these: They are such, as I dare
not define or treat of; and therefore with reverence leave them to the Readers
consideration, with such descriptions as they are left to me. They are such, As
the eye has not seen, the care heard, nor the heart of man can conceive.

Oh, inestimable riches, peace, plenty, joy, fulnesses, which God has
provided for this immortal, reasonable soul, if it vary not from the
direction of the Creator. And are not these yet sufficient? but man must needs
be meddling with himself, patching, and playing the tinker, or botcher, upon
some imagination of his own, and so maire all: which the the ancient
Philosophers hold to be the reason, that man was cast out of the company of the
Gods, into this lower, base, and corruptible Sphere of the Elements.

This is not all, I say, that God has done for man: for beside his creation,
he does still by his holy hand, uphold and support him, he has received him to
savor, being abiected for using the creatures of God contrary to his
ordinance: he has set his holy Angels to preserve and defend him: his only Son
to loose his life to redeem him: his most gracious holy spirit to be his
comfort and consolation. A fullness of all benefits in this life: and eternal
joys in heaven, etc.

Provided always, that we do not use his creatures, to unnatural, unlawful,
or forbidden uses, or employments. This is the happy estate of reasonable man,
if he contain himself within his bounds: All the world will confess no
benefit or blessing can be added unto it.

Let us not therefore seek to alter, change, charge, or incomber, the course
and way, the Almighty power has appointed in these things: least it turn to
our utter confusion. Let us not wrong our reasonable souls, therefore: but
school and instruct them, in such iudiments as may preserve their worthiness.

Reason is the Founder of Arts.
BY the precedent Circumstances, it appears, that among all the creatures
under Heaven, (man only excepted) nothing is seen to be made for it self:
nor man only for himself, but for the service of God. The Sun sins and
heateth, but not for itself. The Faith beats, and yet has no benefit
thereby. The Winds blow, and yet they sail not. The Fire burns, and yet
feels not his own force. The Water bears the ships, and yet knows not
the weight thereof. Althese serve only to the glory of God, and benefit of
man. Behold therefore, how near God has placed man unto himself: nay, what
plentiful premision he has made for fustentation of this sensitive life, and
the necessary use thereof. The Sun warmeth the earth: the earth nourishes
the Plants: the Plants feed the beasts, and the beasts serve man. So that the
noblest creature, have need of the balest, and the basest are served by the
most noble: And all these by the dunne providence of God: wherein as there can
be nothing wanting, so thereunto there may be nothing added.

Now for the better discovery of what dignity, honor, advancement,
benefit, and supply this sensitive life has, by the use and employment of
Reanon, which is an insep^table quality of the immortal Soul, (...) did end
alitle into the Arts, whereby Reasex does supply the defects and miscries,
which otherwise this life must abide: which in reason should move the hearts of
men to use these temporal blessings, in such a temporal measure, as they
might supply and serve the turns and uses of all the race of Mankind. As I
mean not to every one a like, so it is no equal sharing, that some should
have all, and others want, If we consider but this one thing, that by the
admirable reason of man in his first creation, he did sodamely give all the
creatures of God sever all names, and still retamed the memory of them when he
had never seen them before here began the Aite, Memoratiue, and all other
Arts, which afterward had almost perished, and been confounded.

Hermes taking consideration of these things, says; The Sun beams of God are
his actions: the Sun beams of the world, are the natures of things: And the
Sunbeames of man, are his arts and sciences. Whence should he learn, teach, or
understand this, but out of that reason which then remained, though ^^uperfect
and impaired. By which reason, he was led to acknowledge the divinity and
omnipotency of God, being more then many men will at this day acknowledge. But
to proceed to the Arts, albeit they are well known, yet let me recite some
particulars. By Reason, fust the general knowledge is attained. Then Reason
has proportioned things into diverse parts: First, in consideration of their
natures, and worthiness: secondly, in consideration of their numbers and
places: thirdly, in regard of their uses and employments. So has Reason left
nothing vnproportioned which she has set down, and concluded by Arts and
Sciences. By Gra^mer, ye course of true speaking: by Retoricke the mane^ of
persuasion: by Logic, the true proportion of reasoning: by Music, true
consent of Harmony: by Arithin^^^uke, the proportion of numbering, adding,
diminishing, augmenting, and dunding. By Geometry, the manner of even and
infalible proportioning: all these come of Reason. The petty, nay rather the
great helps toward the effecting of these things. The inuenting the making,
and fashioning, of the tools, instruments, and preparations that serve to
these uses. The making of pen, ink, paper, letters, sillables, words,
edge-tooles, notes of music, slat, etc. cards, wheels, loomes, milles, the
me^can^call Arts, of Weauers, Tuckers, Spinsters, Tailors, Smiths, carpe^ters,
sawyers, ^oyners, with diverse other of yt like quality. All these and many
others, have b^ne drawn, taken out, and proportio^ed by ye noble, and famous
arts of authmatike, and geo^^etire: which are neither so highly esteemed nor
understood, as they deserve: for the more nearer reason (with a reverend care
of ye creator) sea^ cheth into these causes, the more nearer does it bring the
soul of man to the principal Artifex and maker of them. Let us proceed a
little further: By the motion of the Sun, which surroundeth the world in 24
hours they have proportioned the circumference of the world, to be 360 degrees:
they divide every degree, into 60. miles: with many other such diuisio^s, which
I omit. By these Arts, they have found that the sun in the whole year, makes
her furthest point, both toward the North, and South pole: and thereupon, they
have divided that time into xii. months. To every of these twelve months,
they proportion an appointed number of days; to every day, 24 hours: to every
hour 60. minutes. And so reducing these learnings to one point or head, they
proportion as well Latitude and Longitude of place, as motion and passage of
time: together with the influence and aspects of the planets and stars; in
such sort, as if this mystery were unknown in any man's understanding, it were
impossible to be found out. And because the sun passes always from the Fast,
to the West, and never fully reaches to ye point of the North, or South, they
have determined, and divided the world into 5. several zones. The 2. remote
parts of North, and South, they call the cold parts: ye middle, they call the
hot or burning zone: the other two, are the temperate parts. To this they have
likewise added a girdle, that goes overthwart the hot and two temperat zones:
dividing the same into 12. equal parts, ascribing a several Lord, or Governor
of these houses: limiting the sun 30. days travel, to pass through every of
these same: with many other admirable and necessary lernings And out of these
Arts, it is well known, they have truly set down the Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon, the revolution of the Stars, s^abiliue of the North, and South
poles, and the motion of the others: by which, all navigations is maintained:
the compass, card, and needle, proportioned: nay the sl^p it self, and all
other buildings, both of land and sea, devised, framed, and fashioned: Al
coutites known and severed, and every man's possession divided, one from
another: Astronomy, and Astrology, have taken their foundation there. And how
much the Physicians knowledges are increased thereby, or what defects they
would find by the want thereof, let themselves judge. But to be short: These
Arts are the only and true directors of the whole course of men's lives, as well
in government, as obedience: in distribution, as well as in receiving for there
being diversity of hono^^s, places, dignities, and worthiness, so ought there
to be a measure and indifferency, in proportioning their contributions. Many
thousands of admirable blessings would follow Reason, if measure and proportion
were truly kept. For then should the King have the supreme place: The
magistrates, their due honor. The subjects true and equal justice: and every
man his own right, without controversy, check, or controlment. But Original
reason is so weakened and impaited, that these things are not to be looked for:
men's natures are preuaricated, and intemperate disires so bent to disorder;
that poor Queen Reason has little place, and her proportions little
esteemed, and less used. Reason of it self discerns, and concludes, that
the heavens are imbowed like a vault about the lower parts. And the lower
parts, circumualated and encompassed within the heavens conuexitie. The earth,
as the flower or planckes to go upon, and retain the massy bodies of men,
and the mighty inuolued numbers of Creatures, there on residing: And the
heavens as the wide drawn, and large extended Canopie, to cover all these,
with many included essences and beings: all serving to exercise Reason withal:
the more fully to apprehend the incomprehensible greatness, goodness, and
bounty of the Creator, and the worthiness of man's original Creation. But as
is before discovered, this perfection of Reason, and innocence is lost:
corruption is crept in, and taken up right and true Reasons ^oome^ and had so
much impaired, blemished, darkened, and obscured, Reasons faculties, that even
the arts themselves, were almost forgotten, and put to oblution: and great
labor has been used to revive, recontinue, and uphold, or make known these
former Arts and Sciences.

Concerning this point: Let us take a short view of the beginnings of
creatures. All things had a kind of perfection yet subject to imperfectio^s.
As creatures, to a Creators command. Then the first declination and laps, after
the Creation, which has overthrown the sincere pureness of Reason The fear
of punishment, for that offense, has exercised man's reason with many
incomberments, and caused a kind of decisting, to continue the rememberance of
such parts of reason as then remained not utterly overthrown. Unto which, I
add two other deca^es: the overthrow of ye world by the flood, and
accursednesse of the earth at that time. And the confusion of languages at the
overthrow of the Tower of Babel, being in manner Arts destruction. For after
this time in many parts of the world, Arts and Sciences were almost utterly
unknown: and there dequi^ed a new time, first to learn and understand languages
before Arts could be taught: and few remained in life, that had the Science of
teaching: or at the least, for the disper^ing of arts, for that there was then
no such common use of letters, as of later time, for that reason had not then
discovered the Art of printing: besides, the amazednes of that co^fusio^ of
tongues, caused the inahbitants of the earth to dispose themselves into
countries unfurnished, with other fruits, then such as ye earth of her own
accursed nature did produce ( none such as were in the original Creation) and
so men had enough to do to provide themselves food and apparel for many
hundredth years: so as besides the forgetting of the use of Arts, there searce
remained so much, as the use of tillage and manuring of the earth, to succor
and defend men's lives: by which means Arts remained raked up, as fire under
ashes, not ^lean^ extinct, yet seeming not to be: In so much as it is reported
of those parts of the world, wherein as well the Greeks and other nations
live, that Philosophy was first discovered by Pithagoras: long after whose
time the Romans are holden to be ignorant thereof. Seneca says, Philosophy
was not found out above one thousand years before his time. Socrates is said
to be the first, that brought it from study to practice: which is not much
above two thousand years since: for which he is so holden in admiration, as he
is said to have brought it from heaven to earth: and thereby to have taught men
how to govern themselves, Pl^^^ch in Is^^ and O^^^ (...) lib^o de n^st^^^s.
Cap 1.
and others: yet these learnings had their Originalls before, though they
attributed the^ to Pithagoras, as the beginner thereof: arguing their own
ignorance: for Pithagoras learned his skill from Gonchedie, and of the Jews:
Plato of Sechnuphis: Endoxus, of Conuphis: and al these of the disciples of
Trismegestus: who out of his own books manifests, that he learned it of
Moses. L^^^cus in the life of Thal^s. Thales in his ep^stle to Pherecides.
Thales is said to be the first that taught in Astronomy to the Greeks: I^
appears as well by his own as other men's works, that it was taught him by the
Egyptians: and to the Egyptias, by the Caldeans. And if Belus as Pltu^
reports, were the finder out thereof, yet he has the same from Abraham, in
whose time he lived: wherein I observe, that many contentions have been about
the beginning thereof to advance the honor of their own Countries. But
howsoever, it is most true, that the perfection of those Sciences and Arts were
lost, and in manner put to absolute obscurity and oblivion. For it is said
that Clearchus, who lived a thousand years after Moses, did visibly and with
his eyes, see the Jew of who^ Aristotle learned his Philosophy. And it is
reported, Phythagoras and Plato had their learning, from Mercuries Pillars. So
that the knowledge of these Arts, Sciencies, and learnings, have been long
discotinued in the world, (...) 2 Plutath^ in (...) of Niceas. (...).
before they were received: and specially to these latter parts of the world:
for it is said, that for the observation of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon
Anaxxagoras was put in prison, and Protagoras was banished Athens. Nay, it was
so obscured, that Tha^es is said to be the first that observed the North
sta^^e: and that Phythagoras, first discovered the morning and evening star
to be all one: and the describing of the Zodiac to go a skew. And that Solon,
first found out the Moons revolution to be within xxx. days: and that
Archimedes out of many observations, made the first description of the
Splieres: and that the obser^ation of the Planets, was not discovered in many
years after. In so much that it is said, that the very account of the year
was uncertain and confused, in those parts where he reigned and was F^opero^:
which is well known to be over the most part of Christendom. And it is
absolutely resolved, that within much less then two thousand years, none of
these parts of the world had any Quadrant dyal: or distinction of hours,
tunes, or places; upon any method of learning: all which may very sufficiently
show, that the understanding and Arts, were in manner forgotten and left in
oblivion: and yet notwithstanding always remaining in it self, though
blemished and obscured. And for the Arts of Arithmaticke and Geometry, they
are fathered upon Pythagoras, Endoxus, and Euclides: who wrote but in late
time, inrespect of Moses or Tresmegistes: but yet the same learning will
conclude, ye though the arts were obscured, yet they remained from ancient
times, long before: and even from the first Creation. And as for Rome, with his
great antiquity, they had no knowledge in Phylicke, until the Co^sulship of
Lucius Aemili^s, and Marcus Liuius. At which time, Archagatus the Gretian, was
made fice of the City of Rome. Which shows that these barbarous parts of
the world, About (...), years before Christ.
had not till that time recontinued or revived the worthy knowledge of
honorable A^^s. But endeavoring to reduce my purpose, to as short a conclusion
as I may, I will omit further to dilate, concerning the original worthiness of
arts, and sciences, and their necessary uses and emplonnents; and have to the
next point, that offers it self to be handled: holding this opinion, that
the reason, depth, and necessary know ledge of these arts, are known to few
in these parts of our world. And that many have an appearance of knowledge, and
yet fail of the substance which has seduced and missed many men, and sundry
matters, to the great wrong of right and true reason. Therefore give me leave
to distinguish between things above nature, things natural, and things
against nature, which will give great light to the point of this argument: and
desire that me^ will not attribute to themselves, that knowledge of arts,
whereof they are ignorant: And that the ignorant will not condemn the Arts
which they know not: for it is truly said; Scien^^a non habet, immicum uisi
Ignoran^^um.

Things above Nature, and natural.
BEsides the former reasons, that it was long before this part of the world had
the understanding and use of Arts, which are the contriuers of c^uill
government and order, as reason has composed, and disposed them. Casar, in his
Commentaries says, That in his time Germany was continually a Forest, wherein
a man might have gone sistie days journey, before he could see any end of it:
and that the people there of were savage and beastly, offering their children
in sacrifice to their imagined Gods. Which caused that the Roman; in many
years after, d^rst not adventure fatre over into that Countery: Whereupon it
is conce^ed, that all the ancient Towns and C^ues, which stood upon the R^^er
of Rhe^^ and Danowe, toward France and Ita^e, were cr^cted and built for
de^ence against the (...). For even in the ^me of Ta^^us, h^ing in the ^me of
Nere, and sithe^s the Germans were a rude, igno^ant, and vngonerned people. As
these parts of the world were unskillful of the Arts, so such as traveled to
understand them, and were able to teach them, lived so far as France Italy
Spain, Germany: And these North parts were searcely known to them, as
appears by Fphoru^, the most diligent Historiographer of those Ages. For he
speaking of Spain, or Iberia, writes thereof, but as if it were one Town:
which argues he had slender knowledge thereof. The (...) Orpheus in (...)
A^^^o^^^^.
It is written, that Orpheus drew the Greeks out of their Forests and Fiens,
about the time Troy was besieged. This worthy and famous service did Orpheus
perform, by the arts, sciences, and skill he learned among^ the Fgyptians:
whereby first he laid aside his own savageness, and after undertook to
duect and govern others: which does much advance the estimation of these
noble Arts. It would require a long discourse, to set down the diverse
opin^^^^s of the dispea^^ing of Arts Sciences, and governments.

Some affirm, Abraham first taught Letters or Characters. Others, father it
upon Moles, or at least, that he first taught the G^amer. If it were
discovered, to what perfection these things grew, or how young or green they
were, in the time of Zoroastres, Seyoniaens, Ogyges, Nim^, Amoses,
Callisthenes, Ptosomie, the Hebrews, the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Assirians,
Medes, Persians, and Phem^ians; It would not much serve to excuse the
Countries, in those arts and serences. For they not knowing our parts of y^
world, could hardly inform them in their learnings, by reason of their
unknown and remote parts.

Besides, it seems they were but in the beginning of the discovery of these
Art^: they vnraked the ashes, and opened the sire, and by the light which they
took, many have since lighted their candles. For itseemeth, their means of
spre^ding abroad their learnings, was very hard, in that they were enforced to
write their minds by Characters: made upon leaves, barks, tyndes of Trees, and
Stones: In so much, as it is written; That in Babilou certame observations of
stars, were written in Tiles or B^icks. By these it seems, that Reason
deprined of her ornaments, has striued to set up, and erect Schools and Vmuc^
sities, for the reviving, and recontinuing of these lost, or obseured sciences,
and worthy knowledges: for the well ordering of men, families, kingdoms,
countries, and nations, which in time by travel, has been brought amongst us,
from the Center on first place, where they were taught, being by comecture of
the learned, in Mesopotamia, the Mount Taure, or in the Wilderness of Semar,
where the Arc first rested, and Noah first landed, and inhabited.

It is said by Viues, that Politian, did spend his whole life, part in
seanning whether he should pronounce Vergilius, or ^^rgi^us: Carthaginence^, or
Carthaginiences. Primus, or Presmus. And despising all worthy scrences, and
orderly course of government or ^udiniets, he spent the rest of his time, in
making filthy Fpigrams. I fear there is much time bestowed in this age, in as
vain and idle courses, which might be bestowed to the learning of better arts
and sciences, more commendable for themselves, and more profitable for the
common wealth. For if it be well observed, what honorable exployts and famous
Acts have been brought to pass in the order of wars, in the government of
countries, and civil courses of life, Cic^^o in his first book of Invention,
and in his first book of Oratory.
appeasing of controversies by these estimable Sciences and Arts, which the
most wise have ever had in admiration, as Tully concludes. That man says he,
that first gathered together dispersed men, was surely a great personage. So
was he (says Pythagoras) which first gave names to things, and which
compounded within a certain number of letters, the sounds of men's voices,
which seemed to be infinite; and which marked the courses and proceedings of the
wandering stars: and which first sound out corn, cloth, buildings, defenses
against wild beasts, and the rest of the things that make our lives the more
civil. These things may be attributed to the nature of man's reason, and reason
of man's nature. Things about the Na^^^ (...) P^ason of man.
But to make and C^cate of nothing, so worthy a Creature as man is above
nature: which C^^ero considered, when he said: There was a certain might or
power, which had a care of mankind, and which would not have begotten him, to
fall into the imschiefe of endless death, after he has outworne the great and
innumerable aducrsities and toils of the world: For, says he, We be not
created by hazard. Which shows duectly, that Cicero did teach into an
understanding; that there was a greate^ blessing and perfection in the
treation, then retained in the nature of man for he conceineth, that neither
misery in this world, nor the mischief of an endless death, were the ends unto
which such worthy Creatures were first made. His Reason could extend to
understand a Creating Nature above nature. For he that makes, cannot be the
same thing he makes: nor of the same quality: Things natura^l.
but of a far more worthy. And so will I leave to speak of this
supernatural cause, as the maker of the rest: and step lower to the next
point, of things natural.

To be brief in this point, because the natures of things are in some sort
before discovered; I will only touch some sewe points.

This great worke-master and Creator of things and natures, has appointed
their kinds, natures, conditions, and effects: their m^reases, generations,
and propagations* for having set the Heavens in motion, they continually move
without ceasing: but in this, there is noe increase, nor generation.

There is still but one Sun, and one Moon: notwithstanding all the
conjunctions since the worlds beginning.

There are no more Stars then were made at one instant.

And so these bodies were ordained to continue their first numbers, places, and
motions, without increase: according to their true natures. And these motions
proceed of nature it self. The earth brings forth the vegitatiue things, but
not by generation. The sensitive things increase by generation, all co^meneing
from a beginning of things of their own natures: which shows the worthiness
of this Creation, and the admirable work that so infinite numbers of things
should be made of nothing: and so admirably composed, and put in order by a
workemaster, that had neither matter, stuff, instrument, model, nor pattern
for the doing thereof.

Things against nature.
I Mind not to speak of the miracles that have been done in the times of the
Patriarks and Prophets. Things againstnature
The incarnation of Christ, his fasting, and other the works of God, in the old
and new Testament, which are above our nature. But to touch these things that
Reason may descend into; It were against the nature of the Sun, to leave his
motion, or loose his light: or of the Moon, to bring forth sons or daughters:
The earth cannot be metamorphosed, or turned into an incorporiall substance,
neither is it her nature to produce or bring forth beasts or men: for creation
has appointed every kinds a several manner of increase. The Fowls of the
Air do not bring forth swine, nor the Tiger engender Doves, nor men beget
Bears or Lyonimen cannot be Gods. It is impossible for the soul of man to
cease or give off his being, and to be of the same nature. The Hynd cannot
bring forth eggs, nor the Ostridge be the Dam of the Roe Bucke. Every thing has
his appointed nature, which it can neither change nor leave. And because we
have spoken before, of number place, and time, let us in this place consider
what they are, or at least what they are not. The better to discover their
employments, they are not as is before recited, any matters, substances,
natures, nor essences, in respect of themselves: neither have they power to
procreate or bring forth any thing, They are only the vessels, engines,
mouldes, frames or organs, wherein things are cast, fashioned, placed, sorted,
and ordered.

Out of these, in respect of nature, can proceed nothing: no not so much as
themselves, issue not, not come not of themselves: but are respected, according
to the (...), course, order, or number of creatures, that pass in, by and
through them. If a man shall offer to bring up the Fox whelpe, among the
sheep, even from the first tune of his littering: It is neither the placing him
among these creatures, nor the use of time, will qualify his greedy nature of
de^^^ing his fellows. The like may be said of all other Creatures, and then
kinds and natures.

It is against nature, for Creatures of one kind, to destroy one an other:
which is a great argument of prenatication of the nature and reason of man: in
that they cease not continually and against nature, to work one an others
confusion. Let us proceed a little further: and set these three, number, place,
and time, to work simply of themselves: they neither engender, nor bring forth
any things: albeit, in them, and by them, that is, in their moulds, infinite
numbers are generated and brought forth. Let us sprinckle a few holy
consideration in these causes, to make them the more saucey; least striving to
set our conupt reason over high, we cast it to the dust. As in the first
Creation, it was against nature, that there should be any imperfectio, or foul
matter, or defect, created in man's nature: So now, nature being corrupted, and
altogether polluted by disobedience, It is both against, and above this corrupt
nature, that any perfection should remain in man: Albeit, there are that
maintain a spark or remnant of persection, of the first original nature, to
remain: whereby it may again work his former perfectio. This is against
corrupt nature: as much as to sunder and take apart wines from water, after it
is once mingled: for no polluted thing entered into the substance, can
afterward be cleansed from this polutio: as ye dye will never be taken clean
out of the white cloth. It is to be observed, that Christ in ministering the
Sacrament of his blessed body and blood; First he brake the bread, and they
cate it: and then he gave the cup, and all was done, whilst he was really
and personally amongst them.

It is unnaturally holden, that they did really and naturally cate his very
flesh, and drink his very blood: This is against nature.

First, it is against the nature of a Sacrament, to be the thing which it
represents: or for the thing signified, to be the signifier, or betokener of
that which is signified. Then it is against nature, that Christ as he was very
man, being present and personally among them, performing this office himself,
should at one instant be, and not be. For, as he was man, so was he local. Now
to deliver himself, and to be caten, and yet remain in the same substance, of
and by himself, at the same instant, is against nature. Besides, that he
should so exhaust or draw his most precious blood, that when the bread (which
they inte^d to be his real and ma^ly body) was eaten, there should be therein
no part of his blood: and more, that himself should be at one instant
absolute man, and at the same instant, see himself visibly caten with the
teeth of men, in distinct and senerall places. This is against the nature of
the manhood, and so against both. For Sacraments are not miracles, not natures
to be enanged. Besides, in miracles, things did not at one, and the same
instant, contain two several natures: nor one nature in two several places:
as in the miracle at the marriage: as long as the water remained water, it was
not wine: and after it became wine, it was no longer water: neither was it wine
and water, all at one instant, though turned in less then a moment: neither
was it water in two several places, nor wine in two places, otherwise then by
dividing it into several cupps or vessels. I make bold to give a touch of
this mystery, which I hold to be of deeper consideration then man's reason can
reach into: which being a matter of spirit, cannot be apprehended but by the
eye of the same spirit, having regard to the second life before spoken of.
Herein I observe, if men be so bold to rack and strain these great matters,
what is it that they will leave vntempted in the less and meaner cause? In the
cases of Alchemy there is some reason (though the opinion thereof has
overthrown many men) for that they propone some matter to work, Althomy.
and some comse of nature: for incorporating and increasing. But such as will
grass on a dead stock, long separated from the earth, a quick grass o^
impe, and expect that the same shall p^ooue a tree, is deceived, for it is
against nature. Lakewise, It any man will sow eggs in the ground, or set
corn under a hen, he will hardly find either Chickens, or harvest. In such
sort are the natures of things tide to then particular sorts, and mea^^s of
increase, that necessine will enforce nature to use her own means, and manner
of increase or generation.

An example of an unnatural product.
Let us proceed to an example. There is an opinio, that the earth would in
time, bring forth all the metals that are in her bowels, fully refined and
pure, without Phesies or drolle: But either the curse has so weakened her
natural heat, or else she is not permitted her tune of bringing forth her
brood, which has caused Arts to true conclusions. If this be admitted, what
will follow of the next question? In this case, though time be not agent, nor
the passive part thereof, yet you must give this great belied Lump, time to
work to persection, and bring, forth her great litter, brood, or spawne. But
it will be answered, that Reason and Art, has found a means, how to help
Nature in this cause, and to supply the defect of heat by fire, for separating
of the purer metal from the ^^oile. Admit this, yet it must be yielded, that
these Mines were substa^^lly in the bowels of the earth: who in time as is
affirmed, would have brought the^ for th^so as Reason and Art, had to work upon.
And in this case, you must likewise give Art and Reason, time to work then
effect, and that by degrees and means: so that Reason nor Art cannot work,
but upon substances, and by means, which in the ensuing example is not
allowed. There is great difference between the Theoricke and Practicke part of
any thing: or between matter of bare imagination and conceit, and matters of
substance and truth: between words and actions: for a man by contemplation may
behold many thousand places in a moment, and set down a thousand proportions in
his mind in short time: conceive a journey of ten thousand miles by Sea, with
all the bowings and turnings: But come to action, and you shall find another
work and labor to perform it. Aman may by conceit and in figures, set down
ten thousand millio^s, to be divided between a hundredth thousand men: but he
that shall come to action, must have money in his purse; words will buy no meat
in the market: neither will fantasy build Churches, although it set down the
proportion and model. Contemplation, conceit, and art, may plot and set down,
how or what to do: but substance, matter and art, must perform the action.
These words, A thousand pounds written, will not pay one penny: although Art
has found a way by letters to signify or demonstrate such or any other sum:
Art has found out by bills, bonds and specialties, to give assurance for
money: but when it comes to payment, there must be materiallie money, or
valuable matter, to make satisfaction. It belongs to Art only, to
proportion, but essential money must make satisfaction. By these it appears,
that God has provided substantial matters to pass from man to man, or to be
used by man. And Reason has found out Arts, to proportion and rate the same.
Besides this: by the observations before remembered, there are sufficient things
created to serve the turn of men, in such liberal and plentiful fort, as they
shall not need any new invention, to create or raise benefit by fantasy,
imagination, or any new sought devise, which will deceive like dreams: they are
like witchcrafts and enchantments, seeming good, and yet in truth abominable.
Let us in this point, consider one maine and principal usage, which nature nor
Art, can make to cohere with Reason. ^
And that is, that money should produce and m^reale money: I would in this case
willingly know, the father and mother of this new (...). ^ust, let us go to
the nature of the metal, be it either (...), or gold, and draw from thence,
what reasons we may.

After that the metal is taken out of the cat ths belly, it can be no longer
her child, neither can she nourish or make it grow. And being once ripened,
pur^hed, and brought to perfection by Art, that is, by (...): It can then never
come again, to be nourished by the earth: for that the mother, which is the
Sulphere, is drawn from (...) And it you would put it again^ into the earth,
you cannot give it such a (...) of blements, as to make it ^owe.

It the Archimist can do any thing with^t, let him take the benefit for his
labor: But I would not have ignorant (...) l^d therewith. It is an Art vn^^^
for them, and me to deal with all.

But to come ne^rer to the point: there is a devise that Time should cause
money to yield increase: wherein they are driven to use the help and labor of
man.

This will not serve the turn, Usury.
that also it is vnnator all: for albeit, the labor of man may obtain
benefit: yet Reveram, there is no increase of the quality, quantity, or
nature of the gold or silver: But the use that a man has thereof, must make
something decrer, and of more value, then nature or Art has made it. For
though Art has refined it, yet cannot Art increase it: but here is the
fallacy, a man is dr^^en thereby to purchase his own labor, a very
unnatural thing.

For by Nature and Reason, enery man's travel should be employed, for the
serving of his own ne^^llat^^e turn.

This is one of the cases I spoke of before: that men not con^ented with the
things of Gods creation, according to their own values, will set God to
learn, as if he knew not what he had done: and will add further promsions
and means then ever was ordained of God. Out of these reasons, it may be
concluded, that the raising of increase upon ba^e money, is v^naturall: and the
means used to raise benefit thereby, is an other course then was originally
appointed by God, and so directly against nature. The consideration whereof,
ought not to be slightly regarded, because God has left nothing vnpromded that
is requisite for the use of man.

But there are, The Liwe wronged.
that spare not to lay a very reproachful ign^mte on this kingdom, of the use
of employing, and disposing of money, to benefit and great increase, about the
principal, by the way of usury And that the laws of this kingdom, eather
alone, or at the least tolarate such taking of usury. See how reason and truth
is w^onged in whose defense I am occasioned a little to digresle, and borrow
leave for a few words, touching that point. Casar for had that an Usurer
should be accounted a good or benest man. This understanding in all likelihood
connuned a thousand years after that. For Glenuile, chief Justice of England,
one of the ancienst Writers we have, in the time of king Henry the second,
censured the goods of an Usurer, at the time of his death, to be confisteate to
the King: the name has been so odious, that they were not admitted civil
society or Christian burial.

I mean not to insist much upon this point, and therefore I refer the Reader
for his satisfaction, Statut. de Judah. sino. 37. H. 8.9, 13. Eliz 2.^8.35.
Eliza. ^
to peruse the margined Statutes: wherein he shall find the trade, to be
holden accursed and damnable. The Trader is odious, and the use thereof utterly
forbidden, by all the laws that ever were made in this Kingdom, concerning
that matter. And whosoever will enter into true understanding of the reason,
whether it does benefit or annoy, shall be driven to confess, a great
devasting of the subjects estate thereby: which in this place I mean not to
handle. Yet seeing it is so repugnant unto nature and reason, let me crave
pardon to go a little further in this matter: and under reformation, to
express such reasons for confutation of an error, which I hold to be
maintained in this point, and furthered, and succored under the shadow of a
clause in the law: In which behalf, because demonstrations are very fit
course; to discover the reasons, as well of actual, as intellectual things; I
have composed 2. Tables: The fust, discovering the fallasie: and the second the
truth: Which course I take, for that I find falsehood will ever vanish, when
truth comes in place. The point is this. It is holden that the Lender upon
Usury, may take at one months end his principal, and a twelfth part for the
use, The like for 3.6. or 9. Months, apportio. ning the use, as if those were
perfect times to dlaide by.
being the highest rate he might have taken, if he had forborne his princiall
and use money a whole year: and so for more or less time; so he take not his
use before the principal: and his contract be not to continue after the taking
of his use. As the point is hard to be discovered, so can I hardly admit my
self to meddle therewith: whereby to open the way into this seeming Labyrinth,
which notwtistading I hold to be pla^e. Before I come to the Table, 37. Her
^8.7.
let me set down the words that they build upon. No man shall lake above 10.
for the forbearance of 100. for one whole year and so after the rate, and not
about: of, or for a more or less (...), or for ronger or shorter time: And no
more greater gain or sum thereupon to be had. Although I mean not to
handle this cause by the course of a Law argument, yet let me crave leave, to
see how Reason and Art will conclude in one truth. The law being to take
construction most strongly and straightly for repressing of Usury.

The law it self is a prohibiting law, in no jot giving liberty, but
repressing. So are the words Negative, and forbidding. And upon that reason,
none of these words can be shained to make any tolleration. These words in the
close of the sentence: And no more greater game, or sum thereupon to be had;
Do sufficiently explain, that by no means 100. li. by any ceurse to be put
out, may yield above the gain of 10. li. for a whole year: But 100. li. put
out for 3.6.9. months, and the money and use taken at that time, being within
the year, may and does yield a greater gain then the rate of 10. li. for a
whole year.

The Reason is, the Lender may again dispose the same principal and vse' for
more gain within the same year: and so not saved by the words nor meaning of
the Law.

Let us see how Reason can bring the former words to this conclusion. And so
after that rate and not above: of, or for a more or less sum: or for shorter
or longer time. These words being in body of the clause, have refere^ce to a
rate: which rate is before expressed; that the forbearing of 100. shall not
raise above 10. pounds, for one whole year.

In this behalf, the borrower is not respected, but the Lender: for the words
are; No man shall take about 10 pounds, etc. Whereby appears, that as the
Law is made only against the taker, so is there no liberty for him to take
any thing, that may exceed ye rate of 10 for a whole year. Otherwise, this
mischief would ensue: the Lender would depart with his money, for one, two, or
three months, to one man, and then rece^ue his money and use, and deliver the
same to an other debtor: and so monthly, or quarterly, or at his pleasure,
raise his benisite upon the use of his use money within the year, contrary to
the meaning of the Law: by often receiving and placing it within one year:
which under correction, can by no means be construed to be saved by the words
of the Law.

A word or two, concerning the rate which I take to be double. A rate of money,
and a rate of time. These two, are specially to be considered: for seeing
Nature cannot work this matter, you must permit Time to do what office it is
enjoined to perform. To this purpose the^, whether there be one, or more
takers, at one or more times, within the year, is not material: but ye respect
is seeing they have nothing to raise this rate of money, but their industry,
employment, and labor, with a limitation of a rated time for the use thereof:
that they may have the fullness of all these without abatements. For the eye of
Reason in this behalf, does not regard how often the money be letten within the
year, nor to how many or few persons: but that the forbearing of 100. li. for
a whole year, shall yield the Lender no more or greater gain 10. li. And in
this behalf, is specially to be observed, the several offices of the Lender
and Borrower. The Lender departs with his money upon time, to raise his
benefit: the Borrower, bestows his labor by merchandising the money, with
diligence, in time to raise the increase upon the use of the money: If the
Lender will take away any part of the time, limited in the statute, be does
not then allow the Borrower his full rate of time: and therefore of a
consequent, he ought to abate it out of the rate of his use money: for in this
cause, those two, that is, the rate of time, for which the use of time is
forborne, and the rate of money taken for use, must ever iumpe, to make the
reckoning even. And common and ordinary reason yields, that no man will give
so much for any thing to be paid at the end of one month, as he would, if
his payment were forborne a whole year. Such is the plain case, as it is now
commonly understood: that the Lender, for one Month will take as much at the
Months end, as if he had forborne his use a whole year. But I take it, this
error has grown out of a fallasie or mistaking in Art, by some Arithmatitian,
Art abused.
that has calculated this proportion by a wrong rule: not fully fitting this
purpose. for I conceive, it has proceeded only by the rule of division: when
it should have been wrought, partly by division, and partly by addition: as
the true consideration of the Tables will manisestly express.

Wherefore, in a word or two, let me remember again the difference between
contemplation and action. Any that works barely by conceit, may practice by
conceit: but he that will perform any act indeed, must have matter and
stuste: sigures and ciphers, make no sums of money. Therefore if the Lender
will have consideration, he must dispose of his money and time: that he, who
will have money and time, may the better give consideration. In this cause
therefore, the matter of Art, and the point from whence I conceive ye error to
arise, is to be looked into. It seems the Arithmatitias has wrought only by
division. In the first part of division, there are two requisite things, a
Diuidende, and Deviser, which in this case must be essenciall and substatiall,
and not by concest and imagination. Let us see, money must needs be the
Dividend, and time the Deuisor. Put the case a man le^deth a 100. li. for one
month, what may the Lender take? The Arithmatition says, I whole year will
yield 10. li. then he divides time, by time: One year into 12. parts: so that
here time is both the Dividend and Denisor: then he divides money by time: that
is 10. li. by 12 months, and he finds the 12. part of 10. li. to be 16. s. 8.
d. which he allotteth to one month. The rule is true, but not to be used in
this case: for Reason the founder of Art, will show, that he has no warrant to
measure by this rule: in that he has no essential Deuisor: Reason and Art.
conclude with truth.
for if you mark it, he wants 11. months of his year, at the time of his
division. And so he works a substantial Dividend, of 10. li. by an imagined
Deuisor, of 12. months, when there is but one occurred: but his course should
be, as in the case of contribution: the shorter time of forbearance of the use,
should not have so large allowance as the longer.

And on this point, does Reason and Art conclude, which are more plainly
expressed in these ensuing Tables: the false being reproved by the excess, and
the true, raised from less to more, as the rate of time, and use of the money
gives occasion.

I have drawn these Tables, as patterns or Modells to show and discover, the
truth from the false, and to manifest how truth and Art still draw to one
Period. I the more insist upon this for my sole example, because it is a
matter so directly against nature: and sophistically brought into the danger
and overthrow of men's estate: for all the world must confess, that in this
case, as having regard to matter of substance, nothing is enforced to produce
something. And though I meant not to fill this place with law arguments, yet
let me borrow a word for further explanation of my meaning. Let us see what the
lender must do, to raise ten of his hundredth, he must contribute toward the
raising thereof, a proportion of money, and a proportion of time. Contribution.
Of money a hundredth to raise ten: of time, one whole year. In this case as I
said before, there is no respect of the borrower: well, then the lender is tied
to both these contributions: so still the rate of his gain must not exceed ten
for the rate of a whole year of time. In this case the lender is tied to his
certainty. Then it follows, Election.
he can have no election, differing from that rate of time which is the maine
point. Let us see what the borrower is to receive and perform. In which is to
be observed, such a proportion of money and time as may perform a ratable
allowance: that the use money may not exceed ten for a hundredth for a whole
year: which performed, he is to render back the money borrowed: and as for
use, the law allows non. Let us examine this by the rule of reason: In all
natural causes, time must be abidde^, for yt working and perfecting of al
increase and growing: the beasts bynature knows the time of bringing forth
their young: the birds keep their eggs under their feathers, til an appointed
time to produce chicke^s; the trees and herbs, according to their sorts,
require time for y^ ripening of their fruits. The Sun in the sphere of heaven,
laboreth a whole year to bring himself to his revolution. If all these, with
many thousands of other things, stay their time by their natural course, why
should not the lender premit the full occurrency of time, for the raising of
his benefit upon a barren, fruitless, and unnatural subject. Things sold in
tender age for want of allowance of time, are of less value then otherwise
they would be.
Though many things offer themselves, yet I strive to be briese. Observe
therefore these resemblances. In all manner of eateable flesh, The tender
lamb will not yield so much as the well grown sheep: the young veale, not so
much as the full grown ox. The young chick, late out of the shel, not so much
as the hen or capon: and so of many other things that time causes to
increase, both in growth and price. Now if the owner will sell any of these in
their tenderness, he must be contented to abate of that he would require, if
the same things were grown to more greatness. If this be so, then in reason
there is more cause the lender should for bear his whole time before he
receive his consideration, howsoever he does his principal.

Let us touch a little the exceeding reason and use the Law has, in some
particular causes of time. Estates for years, must have a certain beginning
and ending. Inheritances have commencements upon time: and limited to the
end of time. So the first estates, determine in time: and the second being
real estates, only with time: and not before the ending of time. Approbations
and elections are concluded in time: things voideable, rely only upon time.
All conditions are tied unto time. In the cases of Cui in ^^ttae (...) funt
infra ^t (...), du^^ non fuit compes mentie; special respect it of the time.
All cases of entries upon dissisors, to take away entries, are tied unto time.
The cases that require continual claim, are bound unto time, with many
others. But among the rest, let me conclude with one or two, to discover what
time, joined with some other matter, does both enable and disable: I mean not
to vouch any case. It is not unknown that one attainted by act of Parliament,
part of his lands sold: time and the act of Parliament made the sale good. But
this attainder being taken off by another act of Parliament, and the former
act made void; Time and the act of Parliament, did restore both the blood and
lands of the attainted: and made their estates void, which formerly were not.
The law has clean taken away the time that was in the Feoffe; and put the
same wholly into cesto q. use: and so wrought upon instants, that there is now
no instant at all in the Feoff, which before had the whole estate. Such a
setuant is time, unto the law, and so assured is the law unto time; That what
contract soever it makes therewith, shall be assuredly performed. In the case
of in^olments, there is special provision of time: wherein I make this short
observation; that time does work, and vnworke, one and the same thing in
nature according as time is employed. The Kings tenant acknowledges a bargain
and sale of land, held in capite to an other and his heirs: before the deed
be enrolled, the bargainer dies, his son within age. In this case, the son
of this bargainor is ward. But the barganie also dies within the six months,
etc. his son within age, and within the 6. meneths the bargain and sale is
enrolled. In this case, the son of the bargainer shall be out of ward, and the
son of the barganie shall be in ward, by relation to time. I put these cases,
only to make known how flexible time does turn and wind according to the
employment it serves, and how stout and sliffe it is in some other cases, as
the rules of law does govern and direct it: and though this resemble not the
case in all points, yet it shows, that in this behalf, time is not to be
disposed at yt election or choice of any, but according to the true
constructio^ scope and meaning of the law: which in this case is to be
co^strued most strongly against the lender.

A word or two concerning this division of the money and time. As I said before,
in actual things there must be a substantial, natural, and present Dividend
and Divisor, Numerat^r, and Denominator, as in these examples are apparent. A
piece of timber is to be made into boords: In this case the timber is the
Dividend, and the Saw is the Denis^r. And of necessity it follows, that
there must be actually and essencially, timber, and a Saw, or else there can be
no boords.

There is a garment to be made, In that case, the cloth is the Dividend, and
the sheeres the Deuisor. But for the performing of the work, there must
essencially be both cloth and sheers. There is a great piece of meat to be
divided between many men; the meat is the Dundend, the knife is the
instrument dividing. There is a necessity, both these should be present,
though I know there be other Diuisors in these cases: yet I make these
resemblances, to make plain my demonstration of the necessity of an
essenciall Dividend and Divisor, at the time of the division. To resemble this;
The Lender at the end of one, 3.6. or 9 months, has not an essensial Divisor
of twelve months, to warrant his division. And so dividing substantial money
by imaginary time, does err in the ground of his Art: and so has
proportioned a rate that is not warranted, either by Nature, Reason, Law, nor
Art.

Reason shows, this life it but an apprentiship.
THere are many other vsages whereof there can be no account given, that they
should proceed either of naturo or vncoralpted reason. God is Truth, and he
has made all things in, and by Truth: and appointed them to continue in truth,
according to their Creation: All the Creature; saving man, continue this
original perfection. Reason does discern and know, though it cannot correct
the cuasions and errors in the course of men's lives, different from truth:
which men's consciences not void of reason cannot deny. Ca^^^ though he would
not deny the killing of his brother Abel, vet he had learned to shift it and
put it off, by asking whether be were keeper of his brother: his reason was
corrupt, and his conscience did accuse him. Such as were sent with Joshua and
Caleb, against their own knowledges, did find fault with the country which
they fought; distwading their companions to enterprise the obtaining thereof.

The whole number of the Israelites felt the punishment of their
credulousnesse, in following these false persuasions. Against false witnesses
and corrupt judgment, the story of Susanna has left sufficient testimony.
Against hypocrisy, the text of Anamal and Saphira. Against Perjury and
Subornation, The story of Iesabe^l, Achab and Naboth. Against treason, the
story of Corab, Dathan, and Abiram. Against rewards and bribes, the story of
Gebasi^. Against fained excuses, the denial of Peter. Against presumption, the
sto^^e of the Tempter. Against despair, the example of Judas. Against
witchcraft, the story of Saul; concerning the vision of Samuel. Against
incell, the example of one of the Patriarchs. Against rigor, and violence, the
story of Ni^or^d. Against deceit, the story of the unjust steward. Against
mercilesnesse, the text of the wounded man, and the Samatiain. Against
covetousness, the state of Dives and Lazarus. Against Incliantme^ts, Simon
Magus. Against undutifulness to parents, the curse of Cain, for disconering
his fathers nakedness. Against mistrust, or fearfulness, the stone of Lots
wise. Against disobedience to God, the four first commandments. Against
usury, and unnatural raising of money and increase, by the way of lone, more
then a hundredth express places of commandment forbidding it in the holy
Bible: acc^^sing the users thereof: and blessing those that forbear and eschew
it. And as for Whore mongers, and Adulterers, the text is plain; God will
judge them. The oppressors of the poor and uncharitable, are not left out of
the number of those that shall receive punishment. Moses the prophets, and yt
Decalogue have left sufficient testimony what is like to become of these kind
of people, And as for the unbelievers, if they escape unpunished, let the text
it self discover. The hypocrites, I am sure shall have their reward among the
unjust. Why should I particular any more? we are all contained under siny And
iniquity has gotten the upper hand. Why should we by inue^tion, raise a new
kind of supply, more tha^ God or nature has ordained, thereby to reprove his
divine providence or imperfection. Now then, to draw to an end of this work,
let us compare the beginning with the end.

Reason I said, is an essential part of the soul: The soul is immortal.
Therefore Reason will have continuance after this sensitive life shall finish;
and is one of the principal parts that will discover, take knowledge and
participate either of beatitude or misery: of hell, or heaven: of salvation, or
perdition. Is it not high time then, that Reason, which is in every man's soul,
and that every soul being endued with Reason: seeing such huge cerruptions in
the world, as are in manner unspeakable, should now begin to look about to
prevent these mischiefs, and imminent miseries, that dail, and hourly are
like to work his destruction.

Is it not time she should erect aschoole, get Schoolmasters, and Hushers, to
teach the danger these creatures partakers of reason are run into; and under
which they are like to perish (...) not good cause to discover the difference
between the sensitive life; and the immortal reasonable soul? the shortness
of these pleasures, and the everlasting joys of heaven? The differences of the
Creatures, having reason, and those wanting? And the uses of them all: which no
creature void of reason can look into. Is it not time she should go about to
subdue and keep under, all the sensitiues powers, passions, affections
perturbations, inventions, fantasies, and counterfeite seeming pleasures of
these her subjects, to make them know themselves? ^est by their stubbornness,
she be pulled out of her better kingdom, whereof she is heir apparent:
appointed to reign with her elder brother, even the Son of God, Christ Jesus
himself: the only possessor and owner, of true, perfect, and vncorrupt Reason.

What a world is this, to make more account of the journey and travel, then of
the mansion and dwelling house? Well, give Queen Reason leave to conclude,
with the solution of this one question.

A young man is at his choice, whether he will be bound to serve certain
years, and then to be free: or else to beefice for certain years, and ever
after to be a bondsman, and in thraldom and misery. I know this question will
readily be answered: It is better to smart once, then ache ever: and as long as
there is hope of amendment, so long the pains are not very bitter: But when
hope is past, then the heart is broken.

Such as the state of man: And such does divine Reason discover, to be the
state of every man in respect of his double life: man has but a kind of
servitude or apprentiship in this temporal, or sensitive life; tied to
covenant, services, precepts, conditions, and commandments. Which if he be
careful to observe and keep, he shall do more then marry his masters
daughter: according to the phrase, and best preferment of merchants. For he
shall be then joint inheritor with his Masters son: and have the fullness of
freedom, felicity and happiness in a haven, and harbor where no custom is
to be paid: no imposition, no giving nor taking of money upon credit: no ^ad
n^r desperate debts: no assurance for (...) v^nor fraught of Ships: no casting
into prison, ch^unes, and yrons, disquietnesse, nor coffeehouse.

But on the contrary side, if this present life be spent, in vain, dishonest,
lewd, and ungodly execises, practices, employments, without respect of
performance of covenants, commandments, and bonds: Then surely, as the
immortal life is much more precious, then the mortal, or more sensitive: so
are the punishments more grievous then the other: And so much ye more grievous,
because Reason understands there is a felicity, otherwise the torments of
hell were nothing.

And for these causes, does Queen Reason persuade and entreat every reasonable
soul, to enter into the closet of his own conscience and heart, to school,
inform, and instruct himself, concerning his own good, and to be so
charitable as to inform others thereof: which she holds to be an office of
charitable duty. And so to conclude, if every man will be his own
School^-maister and instructor, which she desires, her Academie will be
wonderful large: But principally, she advises the learning and instruction
of her Creator, to be taught, followed, and put in practice: for thereby the
number of Gods Saints will be mereased, his glory adaunced, and his Triumphant
kingdom replenished, with the company of holy and reasonable souls, after the
sensitive life ended, which God grant, for his mercy.

Reasons moan.
WHen I ^eruse heavens ancient written story,
part left in books, and part in contemplation:
I find Creation t^nded to Gods glory:
but when I look upon the soul evasion,
Lo then I cry, I howl I weep, I moan,
and see ^t for truth, but truth alas is gone.
Whilom of old before the earth was founded,
or hear^s, or trees, or plants, or beasts, had being,
Or that the mighty Canopie of heaven surrounded
these lower Creatures, ere that the eye had seeing
Then reason was within the mind of love,
embracing only amity and love.
The blessed Angels forms and admirable natures,
their happy states, their lives, and high perfectio^s:
Immortal essence, and unmeasured statures,
the more make known their falls and low directio^s.
These things when Reason does peruse,
She fo^^s her errors, which she would excuse.
But out alas, she sees strife is all (...) vain,
it boots not to contend, or stand in this defense:
death sorrow, grief, bell and torm^^, are her going,
And endless burning fire, becomes our recompense.
Oh heavy moan! Oh endless sorrows anguish,
Never to cease but ever still to languish.
When I peruse the state of prime. Created man,
His wealth, his dignity, and reason:
His power, his pleasure, his greatness when I scan,
I do admire, and wonder, that in so short a season,
These noble parts should have so short conclusion:
and man himself, be brought to such confusion.
In seeking countries far beyond the seas, I find,
Even where fair Edens pleasant garden stood:
And all the Coasts unto the same confinde,
Galt to cruel wars, men's hands embru'd in blood,
In cutting throats, and murders, men delight,
So from these places, Reason's banished quite.
O Jerusalem, that thou should now turn Turk,
And Sions hill, where holy Kites of yore were vid,
Oh, that within that Holy place should ^^urke
Such sacrilege: whereby Io^^^ name's abusde.
What famous Greece, farewell: thou can not host
thy great renown: thy wit, thy learning's lest.
The further search I make, the worse effect I find,
All Asia swarms with huge impiety:
All Asstick's bent unto a bloody wind:
All Treachers against Jove, and his great deity.
Let us return to famous Brittons King,
whose worthy praise; let all the world go sing.
Great Tetragramaton out of thy bountious love,
Let all the world and Nations truly know,
That he plants peace, and quarrel does remove:
Let him be great'st on all the earth below.
Long may he live, and all the world admire,
that peace is wrought, as they themselves desire.
What Union he has brought to late perfection,
Twixt Nations that has so long contended:
Their wars, and e^^tes by him receive correction,
And in his royal Person all their iars are ended.
And so in brief conclude, ought all that live,
give thanks to him for joy, that Peace does give.
By power and will of this our mighty King,
Reason does show it that God wrought a wonder:
Countries distract he does to Union ^ring,
And ioynes together States which others sunder.
God grant him life till Shiloes coming be,
In heavens high state, he may enthronizeabe.
FINIS.

