engraved title page Seianus

Philippa

UNHAPPY Prosperity Expressed in the Histories of Aelius Seianus and Philippa
the Catanian

Written in French by P: Mathieu And Translated into English By Sr. Th: Hawkins.

Anagr: Seianus: Es Ianus.

Es Ianus: qui foelix aspicis ortum Despicis Occasum miser.

Ardent adoratum populo caput, et crepat ingens SEIANVS. Iuuenal.

Printed by Io: Hauiland for Godfrey Emondson. 1632.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM EARL OF Salisburie, Vicount Cranborne, Baron
CECILL of Essendon, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable:
BEhold Sejanus of Vulsinium, and Philippa the Catanian: Prodigious Examples of
Ambition in either Sex: Both which having with great applause been already
presented in France, by the elegant and inimitable Mathieu, clad in the rich
robes of his purer language, appear now in the poor habit of an English
style. Notwithstanding, encouraged by your Lordships particular affection to
this choice Piece in the Original, and obliged for noble favors conferred on
some near unto me; I adventurously presume on this present address to your
Honor; who I doubt not will as freely patronize this slender endeavor of a
weak hand, as the more polished labors of a powerful pen. The matters herein
treated are important, the Observations prudent, Maxims of State useful, and
Sentences weighty, and had not our Author with Posterity, suffered in the
much deplored loss of some part of Tacitus his Annals, there could not have
been a work more amply, and politely furnished out, to satisfy either the
most judicious, or curious His defects from that maime are unavoydable* mine
pregnant, and (I fear) inexcusable. It rests in your Lordships excellent
Nature, as with Justice to apologize for the first, so with favor sweetly to
dissemble the imperfections of the latter, whilst I with due acknowledgement of
much Obligation, shall to your Honor seriously devote the ever ready services
of

Th. Hawkins.

To the King.
SIR:
THe Capitol began, and the Louvre has revived this History, which J present
to your Majesty, amidst public applauses for the happiness of your
Monarchy. It is a Mirror that flattereth not, but rather a pure and
Chrystalline water, which, at the same instant it shows the stain takes it
away. You (Sir) shall therein behold, that a Prince ought to be very careful
to conserve his Authority entire: Great ones here may learn, it is not good
to play with the generous Lion, though he suffer it, and that favors are
precipices for such, as abuse them.

P. MATHIEU.

Unhappy Prosperity.
ALthough Princes do soveraignely dispose of their own hearts; The heart of a
Prince is free, and only depends on God.
impressing love, and hatred on whom, or how they list, yet ought we to wish
their affections toward particular men may be very just, and regular; for if
any disorder happen therein, it introduces public ruins, renders them
odious, and their Favorites miserable: When the play is ended, Excalceantur,
and ad staturam suam redeunt. Sen.
the high buskins are taken off, which raised them above the rest, they are
dispoyled the gaudy garments of the personage represented, they return to
their first form, Magnus videtur? Illum cum sua basi metiris. Sen.
and teach us we should not measure the Statue by the Column which supporteth
it, nor judge of a man by his dignity, or fortune.

Principum animi Deum ira in R. P. varus artibus vin ciuntur. Tac.
The Heavens incensed against the Roman Empire, permitted this exorbitancie in
the soul of Tiberius, through the excess of favor he conferred on Aelius
Sejanus, uniting in his person those charges, which ought to have been
distributed amongst many, and making him so great, that he had much ado to
unmake him. Pari exitio viguit ceciditque. Tac.
In the end the ruin of the state, which was the foundation of his greatness,
was also the cause of his fall. He was the son of Seius Strabo, Si Nurcia
Thusco favisset.
a Roman Knight, borne at Vulsinum in the country of Tuscany; The kitchen of
Apicius devoured more than two millions of gold. H. S.
in his youth he served Caius Caesar, Nephew of Augustus; and was an associate
in the execrable ryots of Apicius the rich Prodigal, that famous Glutton, who
having wasted his own estate, and finding upon account there remained no more
than 200000 Crowns unspent, Millies in culinam congessit.
thought himself poor, and that this would not suffice to continue his
intemperance: of which he had so deep an apprehension, that death seemed to
him more tolerable than want, Illi tam pravae mentis homini, ultima potio
saluberrima fuit. Sen.
and so drank down a glass of poison: Never tasted he a better draught than
this last, which stayed the impetuous violence of his dissolutions.

Sejanus having acquired some reputation in the profession of Arms, his father
Strabo presents him to Tiberius, entreating he would be pleased he might
accompany him in his charge of Coronell of the Pretorian Guards, from which
time the Prince began to take delight in his vigilance and vivacitie, with
confidence that this man would one day with his manage, prove an instrument
capable of any thing.

He follows the Prince Drusus, whom the Emperor had constituted General of
his Army, to reduce under obedience, those who were revolted in Austria and
Hungaria. Rector juveni, and caeteris periculorum praemiorumque ostentator.
The first testimony of the affection of Tiberius, who made choice of him to
direct the youth of this Prince, and to give example of merit to others, to
arrive at recompense, and of worth to attempt things perilous.

He found out the humor of Tiberius, and so absolutely conformed his own
thereunto, that it seemed both their hearts had one and the same motion.
Tiberium obscurum adversum alios sibi uni incautum intectumque effecit.
This conformity entertaineth affection, and from affection so entire a
confidence arises, that Tiberius trusting no man, doubted nothing in Sejanus,
held nothing hidden, or concealed from him, yet never free from suspicion of
others. Favor attracteth all hearts, and all eyes wait on this new light. The
Senate communicates with him their most important affairs, and receive
directions from his lips. In every place troops of visitants are seen, Turba
salutatrix.
who seek to him, or attend to offer him service: Great ones account his
commands, There were three admissions to court him in the morning.
as honors; if he speak to them, he obliges them; if he cast an eye on
them, they are pleased: Such an one expected all night to have the first
admittance.
They wait in the morning at his chamber door, they are ready at his up-rising
and downe-lying, others swallow up the affronts put upon them by the Porter,
whom they bribe with gifts, that they may gain the first opening or admission:
Duras fores expers somni colit. Sen.
And when they present themselves before this Idol whom they adore, it is but
the better to counterfeit words of admiration to applaud him, or slaverie to
flatter him. Loquitur ad voluntatem, assentatur, assidet, adminatur. Cic.
To speak acceptably to a great man, to consent to whatsoever he says, to
admire all he does, to approve all he desires, are the principal pieces of
Complacence, and ever admiration executes much of the office of flattery.

He was desirous his power being upon the first birth thereof to have men
believe, Incipiente potentia, bonis consiliis innotescendum. Tac.
it was supported with a firm resolution of the advancement of the Princes
service, and the good of the State, and that nothing but justice should be
seen in his actions, prudence in his counsels, and modesty in his fortune. He
outwardly exercised moderation, Palam compositus pudor intus summa
adipiscendilibide. Tac.
inwardly ambition; but it was discovered in his expenses and profusions, in
the magnificence of his household furnitures and pictures; in the prodigality
of his feasts, sumptuous as sacrifices; in the beauty of his buildings, gilded
like Temples. He seriously industrious, Industria ac vigilantia haud minus
noxiae, quoties parando regno finguntur. Tac.
and vigilant, had a spirit prompt to discover others, and to take all sorts of
forms, accommodating himself (according to occasion) either to simplicity,
or pride.

He being sole Captain of the Pretorian Guards, lodged them in a part of the
City, where in time of occasion he might have them ready for his dispose;
telling Tiberius, that Soldiers dispersed lived without discipline, Lascivit
miles diductus. Tac.
and that seeing themselves daily to be assembled in one place together,
number would beget confidence among them, Fiducia ipsis, in caeter^s metus. Tac.
and terror with others; and, that distance from ryots of the City, would the
better keep them in obedience.

This agreed unto, and their lodgings appointed, Vallam statuatur procul urbis
illecebris.
he began by little and little to infuse love, and a good opinion of himself
into their hearts, visiting the Soldiers in their Court of guards, calling
them by their several names, endearing the Captains and Tribunes,
entertaining the one with hopes, the other with gifts, and all of them with
good words, which must never be wanting.

To fortify his faction the more, he addressed his practices and
intelligences, to make himself great in the Senate, procures his friends
might be furnished with commissions, Neque ambitu Senatorio abstinebas
clientes fuos honoribus aut prouinciis ornando. Tac.
and honored with charges and offices; supposing it was not sufficient to have
authority among Soldiers, if credit and respect failed him among Judges and
Orators, that had reputation with the people.

In all his Designs, he found so much facility and affection in Tiberius,
Favor changes requests into thanks.
that he had little else to do, but to ask, and give thanks: He denied him
nothing, often times preventing his suits, and protesting he deserved much more;
calling him, not only in his Cabinet, but even in full Senate, Sejanus so^ius
laborum Tiberii Tac.
the Companion of his labors, and commanding his Statue should be raised in
public passages, Effig^es per theatra, fora, and inter principia legionum.
Tac.
reverenced in Theaters, and borne in the front of the Legions. It was to
destroy his own service, to court his servant: For it cannot do well, when
once the people shall perceive, that favor transferreth the sovereign honors
of the Superior, to the Inferior; and that a Prince admits a Companion to
assist him in Empire. Firmius Herculea coelum cervice pependit. Claud.
Hercules was willing Atlas should aid him, but it must be acknowledged,
Olympus stands more firmly on his shoulders, than on any others. Non capit
regnum duos. Sen.
The sway of a Kingdom cannot in the same instant be divided between two.

He disposes all the actions of Tiberius to rigor and severitie; to the end
he might lose the love of the people, who will not wish well to him, who does
nothing but ill for them. He had not much difficulty to persuade him to
cruelty: All his inclinations rended that way; For in his first youth,
Theodorus his Tutor in Rhetorique, called him, Dirt mingled with blood; so that
he had naught else to do, but to find, and seek out occasion to excite his
anger, which never was appeased without a sacrifice.

That which a Prince does for favor, ought to have merit, at least in
appearance.
All honors and dignities were conferred by the recommendation of Sejanus. It
was sufficient proof of merit, to allege his alliance, and protest his
favor, and yet was Tiberius willing it should be thought, he considered more
the one than the other, to avoid blame; so taking from Virtue to give to
Fortune: He had nominated two Proconsuls of Affrique, Lepidus and Blaesus, and
that he might free himself from the ill opinion of him who should be
excluded, he referred to the Senate the election of the most capable. The one
was a man of singular worth, the other Uncle of Sejanus, and for this cause
confident to carry it. It is a great imprudence to argue upon a charge against
them who are supported by powerful favor.
Lepidus loath to enter into competition with one much more favored and
powerful, excused it upon his own indisposition, the minority of his
children, and that he had a daughter marriageable; the Senate takes him at his
word, following the blast of favor: Blaesus made semblance of refusal of this
charge, and all the flatterers loudly cry out, none but himself deserved it.
The same favor that had raised him, maintained him, and dignified his most
inferior services, with amplest recompenses. After he had, not discomfited,
but rather skirmished against the forces of Tacfarinas, Tiberius commands the
Legions to salute him as Emperor, ordains triumphs for him, which only
appertained to an absolute victory, Ad confulatum non nisi per Sejanum aditus,
neque Sejani voluntas nisi scelere quaerebatur. Tac.
and in all things declares it was for the love of his nephew Sejanus.
Whosoever had Sejanus for Protector, needed not to seek out honors; He that
found him an enemy, Vt quisque Sejano intimus, ita ad Caesaris amicitiam
validus: contra quibus infensus esset, metu, and sordibus confli^tabantur. Tac.
languished in neglect and misery. No honor was had without his favor, nor
could it with innocence, and worth be acquired. He made Iunius Otho to come
into the Senate, who never professed ought, but to teach as a Schoolmasters.
He used him as his instrument to ruin C. Silanus Proconsul of Asia, he
accuses him of extortion, and that in execution of his charge, he was rather
swayed by money than justice. This was somewhat, but other inquisitions were
thereunto added, from which the most innocent hardly could dis-involve
themselves. They opposed against him the most eminent Orators of Asia, Proprius
metus exercitam quoque eloquentiam debilitat. Tac.
whereas he was not assisted by any, nor had been accustomed to speak in
public; and Fear, which troubles the best Speakers, and most confident
eloquence, put his discourse into disorder.

Tiberius pressed him so potently, both with voice and gesture, and by demands
so strong and powerful, Saepe etiam confitendum erat, ne frustra quae
sivisset. Tac.
that he was (as it were) amazed, not daring to reject, that he might not
incense, and saw himself enforced to confess, that the interrogation might
not be rendered fruitless. What a misery is this? The awe of the Prince
obliges the accused to betray his own innocence.

Amongst the numbers of those accusers, Iunius Otho a creature of Seianus was
one of the most passionate: for at his first entrance into the rank of
Senators, Obfaura initia impudentibus ausis propolluebat. Tac.
he sought out occasions to advance the obscurity of his beginnings by the
impudency and shameless boldness of his counsels, using the most audacious
ways for the most wholesome.

Silanus had more mind to have recourse to Tiberius clemency, Excusatius
accipiuntur quae fiunt sub exemplum. Tac.
than to confide in his own defense, he therefore presented a petition to move
him: But Tiberius desirous to destroy him, shows, that he in this accusation
sought nothing but the intentions of laws. And because, that, which is done by
president carries excuse with it, he causes a decree to be produced out of
the registers, given under Augustus, against Volesus Messalla, who had also
been Proconsull of Asia: but if the qualities were alike, the lives and
offices were wholly different: the one cruel, the other covetous; for this man
most inhumane, walking in the Market place, where he one day had caused three
hundred heads to be stricken off, termed it a royal act, O rem regiam. Sen.
and of much magnificence.

It then coming to voices for a definitive sentence, Lucius Piso having cast
out some specious words in commendation of the Emperors clemency, was of
opinion, To praise clemency, and conclude upon rigor.
Silanus should be interdicted fire and water, and banished into the Island of
Gyara. This his Council was approved by others, Lentulus adds, Anteire
caeteros parat, absurdum, in adulationem progressus. Tac.
the goods of the mother should be left to the Son, and Tiberius approves it.
But Cornelius Dolabella, extending his flattery much farther, and sharply
reprehending the actions of Silanus, says, that hereafter the government of
Provinces should be given only to such as were free from reproach, and of sound
reputation in the Emperors Judgment: for although laws were only ordained to
punish crimes committed, Legibus delicta puni^ntur quanto melius provider ne
peccaretur. Tac.
yet it was undoubted, if misgovernment in the Magistrate were prevented, great
benefit would redound both to those who were honored with such charges, and to
such as should be subject to their commands: for the one might conserve their
innocence, the other their peace. Tiberius hereupon framed a discourse worthy
of the wisdom, and reputation he had among people, who are over-forward to
applaud the actions of Magistrates, Loquax, et ingeniosa in contumeliam
praefectorum: provincia in qua qui vitaverit culpam non effugit infamiam. Sen.
Non ex rumore stituendum. Tac.
as was then said of Egypt, that it super-abounded in pratteling, and
artificyes to calumniate Governors, and that many, so they might escape
punishment, cared not to free themselves from infamy; He spoke therefore in
this manner.

Affairs make men.
I am not ignorant of what has been published against Silanus, but we ought
not to resolve on any thing upon common bruit. Quidam ad meliora excitantur
magnitudine rerum, ^ebescunt a^ii. Tac.
Many have borne themselves in their provinces, much otherwise than was either
hoped, or feared: For the greatness, and difficulty of affairs presented,
raises courage in some, duls and debaseth it in others. Then insomuch as the
knowledge of the Prince, cannot extend it self to all, nor ought to be
diverted by the ambition of any, Leges in facto constitutae, quia futura in
incerto sunt. Tac.
laws are ordained for things acted, the future being most uncertain. For
which cause our predecessors have decreed, that the crime going before, the
penalty should follow: you ought not to alter, that, which having been once
wisely established, has ever been approved. The provinces are surcharged with
too many affairs; They have sufficient authority, Right is lessened, when
power is augmented, Sapienter reperta, and semper placita non vertenda. Tac.
Non utendum imperio, ubi legibus agi potest. Tac
and it is unfit to exercise command in matters, where laws have provided.

This discourse was applauded, and the place of banishment changed to Cythara,
Gyara being too rude and savage. Tiberius showed he was able to temper his
spirit, Prudens moderandi animum, si propria ira non impellitur. Tac.
when he was not moved with anger.

Sejanus alone disposed of the offices and Commissions. The people no more
entermedled with the choice of Senators, nor any longer made sale of suffrages
and voices, and for the right they held over the election of Magistrates,
Senate, and Legions, they contented themselves with shows, Insula Gyara
immitis, and sine cultu hominum. Tac.
sports of the Cirque, and livery garments. There was not then a man alive, Qui
dabat olim imperium, fasce^, legiones, etc. Tac.
who had seen the Republique, the marks of ancient liberty being wholly
defaced.

Duas tantummodo res anxius optat, pannum, and Circences luven.
The greatest ornament of the City of Rome was Pompeys Theater, which was of
such capacity, that it was able to accommodate 40000. men with seats. Fire
casually happening therein, Pompeys theater was dedicated to Venus, it was a
Temple and a Bourdell.
Sejanus quenched it, and hindered the mischief of this accident from
proceeding any further. Tiberius purposing to re-edifie it again, in full
Senate commended the diligence and vigilance of Sejanus: the Senators to please
him, decreed his Statue should be erected near the Theater. Arx omnium
turpitudinum. Tert.


Laboreet diligentia magna vis intra unum damnum sistitur. Tac.
But as Princes do nothing without some particular end, Tiberius in favoring
Sejanus had one design, and Sejanus in serving Tiberius proposed to himself
another. No affection, nor fidelity comes gratis. As the Prince loves not,
so he is not served but for ends.
Tiberius was desirous the love he bare to Sejanus might oblige him to serve
him without condition, to secure thereby his authority; and Sejanus in serving
the Emperor aspired to the Empire, yet willing to hide his own ambition. It
was not affection in Tiberius, but rather necessity: Non tam bexevolentia
provexit, quam ut esset cujus ministerio ac fraudibus liberos Germanici
circumveniret. Suet.
for he was desirous to make use of the wiles, and policies of Sejanus, to
ruin the house of Germanicus, and advance his own, and Sejanus purposed to
climb to the Imperial throne by the fall of both. His power was not so swift,
as his will, which met with many maine obstacles: For the stock of Caesar's was
yet whole and entire, the son young, the nephews men grown: It was not in
his power to ruin so many at once: Dolus intervalla scelerum poscebat. Tac.
For mischief required there should be distance, between such terrible
counterbuffes, and that he practice the death of Drusus the son of Tiberius,
at the same time that Tiberius meant to murder Germanicus: For as the heart
more apprehends perils farther off, than the present, Tiberius saw nothing
which made him jealous, but the brother, nor any thing put fear upon Sejanus
ambition, but the son.

The worst counsel he gave him, It is ever perilous to change the ordinance of
a predecessor.
was to alter what Augustus had decreed, and hate what he loved: For the
extreme malice he bare against the house of Germanicus, cooled the first
affection he found (when he came to the Empire) in the hearts of the Citizens,
hastening as fast as he could wish, R^mae ruunt in serv^^^um Consules, Patres,
Equites. Tac.
to the overthrow of their liberty, and tumbling it by maine force (as a
rock) into the gulf of servitude, that it might never rise up again.

Germanicus was both favored, and beloved of the people, because he was the
son of Drusus, who formerly had undertaken to reduce the ancient government
of the Commonwealth, and had imparted the project to Tiberius his brother: but
he betrayed him, and discovered it to Augustus. It was supposed the son would
have pursued the fathers plot, Credebatur si rerum potitus soret, libertatem
redditurus. Tac.
to set liberty again on foot, and that if he should attain the sovereign
authority, he would not exercise rigor like Tiberius, but reign sweetly as
Augustus, Augustus civil rebatur misceri voluptatibus populi. Tac.
who was Prince, and seemed Citizen, disdaining not to be present in their
popular recreations. For which cause Germanicus swaied in hearts, and Tiberius
only in provinces: and being advertised, he had pacified Germany, and that his
wife Agrippina had there done all which might be expected from the General of
an army, to show her courage to the enemies, her bounty to the soldiers, her
prudence in seditions, he became jealous: and jealousy degenerating into
mortal hatred, made him say unto her; Nihil relictum Imperatoribus ubi foemina
manipulos intervisat, signa adcat, largitionem tentet.
What shall the Emperors have hereafter to do, since a woman undertakes to
command over men, visit the Court of guards, oblige the soldiers with good
words and large donatiues?

Sejanus, who loved not Agrippina, and well knew the humor of Tiberius, which
brooked not any should trench upon his sovereign Authority, (a thing so
delicate, that how tenderly soever it be touched, is always wounded) wanted
not arguments and surmises to entertain his jealousy, O dia in longum
jaciens, quae reconderet, auctaque promeret. Suet.
adding distrust to suspicion, to suspicion fear, and (as it were) a far off,
preparing the hatred of this Prince to work her ruin in the end.

Germanicus returns from Germany; The whole City rejoices. Tiberius
commands, that only two companies of the pretorian bands should march before
him: all the people ran thither, Populus omnis usque aol vicesimum lapidem se
effudit. Sue^.
the sooner to give themselves the contentment of beholding him, whom they so
long had desired and expected. Tiberius grew so discontented hereupon, that he
resolved to cut off this brave Prince, who was but now entering into the four
and thirtieth year of his age, and had already gained as much reputation, as
another perhaps could acquire in an age.

Sceleratis ingeniis, and plusquam civilia cupientibus non dominari instar
servitutis est. Calp.
This hindered Sejanus, who transported with the desire of rule, supposed this
mighty power he possessed in the affairs of state, was naught else but
servitude, whilst he acknowledged a superior. Tiberius by his advice sends
Germanicus into Sclavonia, under color of honoring him with principal
charges of the Empire: gives him for lieutenant Gneius Piso, an evil man,
proud, and violent; with commission to observe his actions, and discover all
his designs. It is said Sejanus gave him direction by writing, to make away
this poor Prince.

He puts this in execution, Germanicus passes into Egypt, and being there,
was desirous to see the Idol Apis, Apis manum Germanici Caesaris aversatus est
haud multo post extincti. Plin.
to know what his fortune should be. He presented it with meat to eat. Apis
would take nothing from his hand, which was interpreted for a certain sign of
his death. He was surprised with a long, lingering, and painful sickness, and
his opinion of being poisoned, augmented the violence thereof, Fama ex long
inquo aucta. Tac.
so that he held it incurable. The rumor came to Rome, much greater than the
malady; for distance redoubled it. The people ascribe to events all actions
which went before.
Nothing was then heard, but tears and lamentations. And wherefore was it
(says one) that he was sent to the utmost limits of the world, that Piso was
made his Lieutenant: These are the practices of the Emperesse with Plancina,
the wife of Piso. (Poor Rome,) we cannot affect those which love thee, nor
dare we murmur against such as ruin thee: adding thereunto vehement and
mortal imprecations against Seianus.

It was reported by Merchants of Egypt, Latiora statim credita, statim vulgata.
Tac.
that he began to recover. This news was as soon believed as published. The
streets were thronged with the press of people that ran to the Temples to
render thanks to the Gods. Night favored this rumor; Pronior in tenebris
affirmatio. Tac.
Belief seems much more easy, and is most confident in the dark. Tiberius
himself is wakened in the night with the acclamations of joy: Nothing was
every where heard, but these words, Salua Roma, salua patria, salvus est
Germanicus. Suet.
Rome is delivered, our Country is freed, Germanicus is safe.

After this poison slowly-violent, had wasted all the heat and moisture of this
poor afflicted body, Germanicus could not endure the crowing or sight of a
cock. Plut.
his Allies and friends wished it might not be irksome to him to have or see a
cock, to sacrifice it to Esculapius, and that the Gods would restore him life,
thereby to give liberty to the Roman Empire. In this his extreme weakness he
breathed forth these last words, to impresse them in the hearts of his wife,
and friends, whom sorrow dissolved into tears, Qui praema^uro exitu rapitur
illi etiam adversas deos justus dolor. Tac.
and much discomforted.

If I should die by the course of Nature, I happily might with justice
complain of the Gods, that they untimely had snatched me away from my
kindred, children, and country, even in the flower of my youth. But since my
careere is stopped by the malignitie of Piso, Vltimas preces pectoribus vestris
relinquo. Tac.
and Plancina, I will power into your hearts these my last petitions.

Miserrima vita pessima morte finitur. Tac.
I conjure you to present to the Emperor my father, and my uncle, how that
after I had been surcharged with cruel injuries, and afflicted with
unsufferable disloyalties, I ended my deplorable life, by a death much more
miserable. Those, who have followed my fortunes, and are of the same blood with
my self, yea those who have maligned me when I was alive, shall sorrow to see
me ruined by the treason of a woman, at the time when I most flourished, and
had escaped death in so many battles: Erit vobis locus que rendi, apud Senatum
invocandi leges. Tac.
and your selves also shall have cause to complain to the Senate, and implore
the assistance of Laws.

The best office of friends, is, Non decet defunctum ignavo questu persequi.
Tac.
not to follow the deceased with outcries and lamentations, which are of no
effect; but to remember what he desired, and execute what he ordained.
Germanicus cannot want tears; Those who are nothing to him, nor ever knew him,
shall bemoane him; Vindicabilis vos, se me potius, quam fortunam meam
fovebatis. Tac.
but you ought to revenge him, if you more affected his person, than fortune.

Let the people of Rome behold the niece of Augustus, the wife of Germanicus,
and the six children he has left behind him. Compassion will be extended
toward them, when they shall accuse the authors of my death, Fingentibus
scelesta mandata, aut non credent homines, aut non ignoscent. Tac.
and should the accused feign, or find out execrable commandments for their
purposes (this touched Sejanus, who herein had directed Piso) honest men will
not believe it, nor suffer it to pass unpunished.

All those who were present swear instantly before Germanicus, to dye,
Magnitudinem, and gravitatem summae fortunae retinens invidiam, and a^rogantiam
eff^git. Tac.
or revenge his death, every one bewailing the loss of so brave a Prince, who
in his deportments showed the greatness and worth of his fortune, and in words
so much sweetness and affability. He turns himself toward his wife,
conjureth her by the love he had borne her, by the memory she was willing to
retain of him, Fortunae savienti submittendus animus. Tac.
and by their mutual children, a little to humble her spirit, to accommodate
it to the times, and bend it to the rigor of her fortune, in expectation of
amendment. Take heed (my Dearest) above all when you shall be at Rome,
Aemulatione potentiae validiores haud irritandi. Tac.
not to give occasion of suspicion to those who are more powerful than your
self, and employ not the affection you shall find in the hearts of the Senate
and people, to stand out in competition with their favor or ambition.

This was the most wholesome counsel he could give her, but she held her
self unworthy to be accounted the niece of Augustus, wife of Germanicus, and
mother of his children, if she had set an higher price on fortune, than virtue,
or sought to enter into the favor of the Emperor by the help of Sejanus.

Quasirursum ereptum acrius doluit. Tac.
When the people of Rome understood that Germanicus was dead, their sorrow was
so much the greater, as they believed he once before had been snatched from
them, and nothing was now every where to be seen, but grief and affliction.
It was doubted whether he were made away by poison, or witchcraft. The one was
imagined, Crematicor inter ossa in orruptum repertum est, cujus ea natura ut
tactum veneno igne confici nequ^at. Suet.
because his heart would not burn; and the other published, for that there
were found about him, and in his bed, bones of the dead, characters, and
charms.

The friends of Germanicus divulged every where, that Piso had murdered him,
that Agrippina would be revenged; but he hearing the news of his death in the
I Will of Coos, Piso intemperanter accepit Germanicum excecisse, ^aedit victimas,
adit templa, magis insolescente Plancina. Tac.
made many sacrifices, Plancina his wife visits the Temples, he neglects
the menaces of Agrippina, and thinks on nothing but his own establishment in
the government of Syria, supposing the service he had done for Tiberius would
be sufficient to secure him, from the fear of this revenge, and confirm the
recompense of his merit.

Upon his determination to go into Syria, his son advises him to repair to
Rome, without taking notice of vain rumors, Suspitiones imbecillae, aut
inania famae non pertimi scenda. Tac.
and weak suspicions, thereby to dissolve, or prevent the designs of his
enemies, and gain advantage of the first impressions: That it was not fit he
so soon should think to reestablish himself in the government of Syria,
since Sentius was thereunto deputed: That he could not hope great obedience
from an Army, Apud milites recens imperatoris memoria praevalet. Tac.
which yet deplored the death of Germanicus, and resented his memory: That he
would repent it, dravving upon himself the imputation of a civil war.

Vtendum eventis. Dom. Cel.
Domitius Celer on the contrary urges: That he should reassume the charge
had been taken from him, and replenish the place which was become void: That
it would prove a point of imprudence, and peril, to arrive at Rome at the same
time when Agrippina was to come thither, and that the people would be much
moved with her cries and lamentations: Relinquendum rumoribus tempus quo
senescant plaerumque innocents recenti invidiae impares. Tac.
That it was necessary to give time to these first bruits, whereby they might
wax old, and that innocence has much ado to resist the impetuous violence of
envy, when it is first enkindled: That it was convenient he should go into
Syria, Multa quae provideri non possunt fortuito in melius recidunt. Tac.
to undertake command in the Army, and authority in government, and that
nothing was to be done, but to take arms in hand, and manifest himself in
the field; and that things apprehended as perilous, often times succeed more
securely, than could be foreseen, or expected: That he need not fear any
thing, since the Empress was interessed in his cause, Est tibi, Auguste,
conscientia, est Caesaris favor, sed in occulio. Tac.
and Tiberius obliged to dis-ingage him: but rather that he favoring him in
secret, would take it ill, this affair should be so precipitated, as to
enforce him to maintain it in public: That it was undoubted, Periisse
Germanicum nulli iactantius m^^rent, quam qui maxima laetantur. Tac.
the most satisfied with his death would make the most show of grief.

Piso, Haud magna mole Piso promptus screcibus. Tac.
whose spirit ran more willingly into dangerous resolutions with courage, than
into easy with prudence, follows this counsel, and went into Syria, but
finds Gneius Sentius there, who not enduring to have, The Tribunes and
Captains deploring, bare on their shoulders the vessels which held the ashes
of Germanicus.
or suffer a Companion in his charge, drove him out of the Province, besieges
him in a Fortress of Cilicia, and constrains him to yield, and return to
Rome.

In the mean time Agrippina embarqueth on the Sea, with the ashes of her
husband Germanicus; and arriving at Rome is received with many testimonies of
honor, by all the Roman people, who witnessed an excessive sorrow for the
death of an husband, Agrippinam appellant Decus patria, solum Augusti
sanguinem, unicum antiquitatis specimen. Tac.
and an unspeakable joy for the return of the wife and children. The people
call Agrippina the honor of the Country, the only and true blood of
Augustus, Tiberius atque Augusta publico abstinuere, na omnium oculis vultum
eorumscrutantibus falsi intelligerentur. Tac.
the pattern of ancient glory, and add to their acclamations, vows and
prayers for the safety of the widow, the infants, and ruin of their enemies.

Tiberius was much offended with these applauses, and would not be present at
this reception, fearing lest his brow should discover the joy of his heart for
the death of Germanicus: Populus Romanus cladem exercituum, interitum ducum,
funditus amissas nobiles familias constanter tulit. Tac.
he therefore commands the people to moderate their sorrow, and bear, as
himself had done the discomfiture of his Armies, the loss of his Captains,
and ruin of the noblest families.

Presently after Piso arriveth, so much neglecting the threats of Agrippina,
that Marcus Vibius a friend to Germanicus, saying to him, it was fit he went
to Rome, to purge himself, Euidens respondet, adfaturum ubi Praetor qui de
veneficus quaereret, reo atque accusateribus diem praedixisset. Tac.
he angerly answers, as it were scoffing; You shall see me there, when the
Praetor who informs against sorceries shall have set a peremptory day to the
accuser and accused.

He enters Rome proud and magnificent, in a glorious equipage, Fuit inter
irritamenta invidia domus foro imminens festo ornatu. Tac.
his wife brave and cheerful, the doors of his lodgings adorned with
Laurels, which much the more initated the people. The next day he is accused of
the death of Gemanicus, and Tiberius demands trial. Piso desires it, Vera,
aut in deterius credita judice ab uno facilius discernuntur, odium, and invidia
apud multos valent. Tac.
yet fearing the affection of the Senate, to the memory of Germanicus, and
confiding the Judge would be his Protector, he thought better to have recourse
to the authority of one, than the passion of many.

Tiberius sees it was an hard task for himself to condemn the culpable, and
discharge his own conscience: Haud fallebat Tiberium moles cognitionis quaeque
ipse fama distraberetur. Tac.
for well he knew the reports, which truth had made current every where
against himself and his Mother, and that Piso had been but the instrument of
his Parricide. He was willing to handle this affair with little noise, and
therefore hears the accusers in the presence of Sejanus, and some of his most
confident and familiar friends; They require justice, Paucis familiarium
adhibitis, minas accusantium, and preces audit. Tac.
and add menaces to their prayers. It is not to be doubted, but he was
counseled to suffer Piso to perish, rather than suffer his own reputation to
be wounded, and Princes use men no longer, than they are necessary.

But because the History nominateth Sejanus the Inventor of all these
mischiefs, Facinorum omniu^ repertor. Tac.
it passes further, and says the Emperor ought not to entermeddle with these
affairs; for in condemning Piso, he too much should raise the pride of
Agrippina, and by declaring him innocent, it would be said, Favor had so much
oppressed justice, it durst not affirm the confederate should free the
criminal: That it was necessary to refer it to the Senate, It is fit to
proceed wisely, and maturely in doubtful cases, where the Princes reputation
is in hazard.
and that if there he were condemned, the judgment would be ascribed to the
passion of Germanicus his Family; if absolved, the blame would be laid on the
Senators.

N^ in patrocinium quidem, ne dum in gloriam est, encendium extinxisse quod
feceris. Sen.
Sejanus instructs Piso, what he should say, assures him the impunitie of
all his other crimes, provided he tax not him; that the Emperor would quench
the fire he had enkindled, and not suffer the sick man to dye of the malady
he had caused, and that his own reputation (the only engine of his
authority) obliged him rather to ruin himself, than not to save him.

The frame of a Princes power is wholly built upon reputation.
Piso appears in the Senate, Advocates are allowed to speak for the
accusers, and others to defend the accused. The subject was well worthy the
eloquence of the most able, and of those which sought not affairs, but were
found out by affairs, and who better loved the importance, and quality of
employments than their titles, and multitude. Tiberius made an Oration with
such a mixture between the accusation, and the accused, that it was verily
supposed the cunning and contexture thereof, was praemeditated. Quanta fides
amicis Germanici quae fiducia reo, satisne cohiberet ac premeret sensus suos
Tiberius, anpromeret. Tac.
The whole City was attentive to hear what the opinion of the friends of
Germanicus would be, the confidence of the accused, the countenance of
Tiberius, and whether he were able well to conceal and bridle the sense of his
passion, or would suffer it to break out. And the people, who otherwise regard
not occurrents, Populus multum sibi occultae vocis aut suspicacis silentii
permittit. Tac.
gave themselves therein much liberty against the Prince, whether in speaking
they discovered detraction, or through silence bewrayed their suspicion.

You know (Fathers) says Tiberius, that Piso has heretofore been a friend to
Augustus my father, and his Lieutenant in the Spanish army, and that by the
advice of the Senate, he was constituted an assistant to my nephew Germanicus
in the manage of the Eastern affairs. Integris animis judicandum. Tac.
Now is the time you ought with purified and untainted consciences to judge,
whether through arrogance, or presumption of authority he has wounded the
soul of this young Prince, whether he has rejoiced at his decease, or
traitorously and wickedly procured his death.

Legatus officii terminos, and obsequiu^ erga Imperatorem non exuit. Tac.
For if in this charge of Lieutenancy he has exceeded the limits of duty, if
he has neglected the respect due to a General, if he has showed any
contentment in his death, and my sorrow, he can not possibly, but incur my
indignation. If so, I protest I will banish him my house, and revenge my
displeasure, not in the quality of a Prince, but as a private person.

Facinus in cujuscumque mortalium nece, vindicandum. Tac.
And if you shall discover any impiety, which ought not only to be avenged,
in this parricide, but in any other, I conjure you to consider therein your
own sorrows, the tears of Germanicus his children, and ours his near
allies; deny us not (I pray) a just consolation.

Quaesita per ambitionem studia multum. Tac.
Of the one part remember, how Piso has demeaned himself in the army, whether
he have raised any trouble, or sedition, whether he have endeavored to gain
the affections of men of war, to aspire to command, and whether after
Germanicus took his charge from him, he have sought to reestablish himself
therein by force. (...) majus vulcusa^o^es.
On the other side, see whether these matters, as false, and invented have
been published by the accusers, for true, and be of greater consequence,
Nimiis studiis accusatorum jure succenset p^inceps. Tac. Incerta adhuc
scrutanda sunt. Tac.
than really they are.

For my own part I cannot conceal my distaste of their passion herein: For if
we be not (as yet) undoubtedly certain of the cause of his death, and that
information hereof is to be made, to what purpose have they exposed his naked
body in the open market place of Antiochia, Reus cuncta proferat, quibus
innocentia ejus sublevari posset. Tac.
and suffered it to be handled, and viewed by the multitude, were it not to
make a rumor run amongst strangers, Objecta crimina pro adprobatis non
accipienda. Tac.
that he has been poisoned, and to derive from this bruit more acerbity, than
proof.

Verily I deplore my son Germanicus, and shall all my life time bewail him,
yet will not hinder the accused to produce whatsoever he can to maintain his
own innocence, and to make proof of any injury Germanicus has done him.

For which cause I conjure you, that you receive not accusations for proofs,
under color this cause is conjoined to my grief. Si cui propinquu^ sanguis,
out fidei sua patrenos dedit, quantum quisque eloquentia, and cura valet j^vare
periclitanti. Tac.
And you the rest, who by right of affinity, or friendship, have undertaken
the defense of the accused, employ your best endeavor and eloquence to
vindicate his innocence from peril; and I likewise exhort the accusers to
show constancy in their pursuit. All the favor we can do to Germanicus
beyond the laws, is, but to be informed of his death rather in the Palace,
than the Marketplace, and by Senators than ordinary Judges. In accusations
where the grief of the Prince is joined to the cause his interest is not to be
considered.
In every thing else equal moderation. Reflect not on the tears of my brother
Drusus over his son, nor mine for my nephew, and much less on any thing that
slander can faigne against us.

A strange proceeding: time is given to the accused to answer that which is
within his own knowledge, and the knowledge of Orators to color their answers.
Thereupon it was said, the accusation should be drawn within two days, the
accused should have six days to prepare themselves, and in three days make
answer. It was a hard matter to refell the poisoning; Confidence gave some
favorable presumption for innocence, but staggered in the other crimes.

At the first session, Vitellius and Veranius related to the Senate, the last
words of Germanicus, which softened hearts to pity, as affection had already
prepared them for favor. Fulcinius Trio, Celebre inter accusatores Trionis
ingenium, avidumque famae malae. Tac.
in whom exclamation and speech were the same thing, desirous to acquire
reputation by doing ill, began the accusation: but because he produced but
general matters, and old inquisitions of what Piso had done, the Senate gave
no regard to it: Vetera and inania quae neque convicta noxia reo.
For all that could not hurt the accused, although he had been convinced, nor
serve for his discharge, though he were justified, if he otherwise were
attainted of more enormous crimes.

Vitellius speech.
Vitellius accompanies the vehemence and force of his speech with much grace,
The consideration of the quality of accusers fortifieth the accusation.
and gravity, speaking in this manner: Although (Conscript Fathers) the quality
of those who complain, deserve consideration, yet is it not availeable but for
such as seek not support from ought else but justice, and the power of their
own plea.

This cause carries its own favor, A cause strong in it self needs no help.
nor needs any other aid, but, that, of laws, which is not denied to the
meanest. I could say, those who now presently implore it, are of such quality,
that if it be denied them, The authority of a Prince maintains the state, and
it cannot last when the revenge of offence^ is contemned.
the Empire no longer shall stand in need either of laws, or Senate. The blood
of Augustus requires vengeance, the people expect it, the Judges owe it, and
you Caesar are obliged thereunto, both as Prince, and Parent.

I seek not to make this accusation plausible, but in representing the crime
as a prodigy, the criminal as a parricide, and the excess such, that every
one has bemoaned it; foreign nations have admired it, kindred have bewailed
it: Ingen^ luctus provinciae, and circum^acentium populerum. In doluere ext^rae
nationes regesque. Tac.
This City in all things commends moderation, except in so just a resentment
of sorrow as this is: Germanicus is no more; Oh what grief? We have lost him;
Oh what unhappiness? Germanicus, the worlds darling, the love of his Country,
who had so much bounty for Citizens, Illi comitas in socios, manfuetudo in
hosts. Tac,
so much courtesy for his allies, so much modesty for strangers, has been
traitorously and miserably murdered: And by whom? By Piso, an impious and
ungrateful man; By whom also? By Plancina a fury in the shape of a woman. By
what means? By charms and poisons: who are the Accomplices? Sorcecerers drawn
out of hell: And wherefore? to revenge injury, and usurp on authority.

Nemo tantum a naturali lege descivit and hominem exuit, ut an^^i causa malus
sit. Sen.
The souls of ill men (Fathers conscript) are not instantly wicked, nor is
there any man who embraces mischief for naught, but the mere pleasure
thereof. They by degrees give form to their designs, and so direct them to
the utmost limits. Piso by petty crimes is mounted to the greatest, from
avarice to rapine, from thence to practices, so to ambition, and from ambition,
to the violation of the authority of laws, by that way to hasten to the
contempt of the Gods. To Spain he has given testimony of his avarice, to
Syria of his ambition, and to the house of Germanicus of his impiety.

So soon as you honored him with the charge of Lieutenant to Germanicus, Haud
invito imperatore ea fieri occultus rumor incedebat. Tac.
he dissembled not his ambition to become General, practicing at Rome to make
him odious to his father, and in the Army to be despised of the soldiers. He
labored to draw them to his devotion, expelled the Tribunes who would not
depend on him, filled their places with persons trusty, Defidiae in castris,
licentia in urbibus. Tac. Eousque corruptionis provectus, ut in sermon vulgi
parens legionum haberetur. Tac.
and to make himself beloved by men of war, permitted sloth in the Camp,
riots in the City, insolence in the field, and was then called father of the
legions. On the other side, Plancina went equal with Agrippina, and undertook
matters above the decorum of women, was often present in the exercises of the
Cavallerie, and race of swift horses.

And though this was harsh to a temper whose actions were civil, Secreta
studia pai^ non potest animus ad civilia erectus, agendique cupidu^. Sen.
yet he thought it more fit to dissemble them, than disquiet the Emperor his
father with troublesome complaints. He commands Piso to lead one part of the
Legions into Armenia, or send his son thither, he made no account of the one
or the other, and lost the opportunity of a service most important for the
Empire. Si quando adsideret a^rox ac dissentire manifestus. Tac.
When he sat in Council with Germanicus, or on a seat of justice under him,
he sharply and impudently opposed all his designs.

I will recite an incredible insolence, but so certain, that he will not dare
deny it, thereby to manifest, that folly and malice were inseparable
companions, and sisters in all his actions. Being present at a feast of the
King of Nabathaea, seeing the golden Crowns given him were not of like luster
or weight with those of Germanicus and Agrippina, he cast them to the ground,
and full as foolish as malicious, undertook to reprove the magnificence of the
feast, discoursed against superfluity, and said such an expense was fit for a
Roman Emperor, not the son of a King of Parthia.

He who offends a Prince has no safe^y but in absence.
Silly man, did thou think ever after this to find confidence in the soul,
or security in the friends of Germanicus, whom thou so shamelesly had
offended, although he were condemned for being too good, Erat Germanicus
clemens. Sen.
and for suffering too much: Could thou suppose, there might be any safe
retreat in the world, to protect thee from the anger of a Prince extracted from
the blood of Augustus? Have thou ever heard the hearts of this line have been
exasperated without ensuing punishment? And behold why Plancina, Nunquam erit
foelix, quem torquebit. Sen.
who could not esteem her self happy, whilst Agrippina was so, told her
husband he must either perish, or revenge himself, and either pull this
thorn out of his own heart, or suffer another to do it.

Admire (Conscript Fathers) the goodness and generositie of this Prince,
Patres conscripti. Plut. It is a generous way of revenge, to let the enemy see
one can be revenged.
who having so often, and so sensibly been offended by Piso, has ever
contented himself with letting him know he could have revenged, but did save
when he might destroy. Nescius quibus insectationibus peteretur mansue^udine
tamen agebat. Tac.
He came to Rhodes unto him, and was well advertised of all the practices he
used against him, but bare himself with such equality and temper, that upon
notice a storm had cast him on the sands, he sent vessels to dis-ingage him,
Potest quando^ue inte^i^^ m^^ci ad casu^^ ^ofe ri. Tac.
although if he there had left him, only Chance could have been accused of his
loss, and Fortune supposed to conspire in his revenge.

Germanicus visiting Egypt, was curious to see the sources of Nilus, Nilus
cujus inenarrabilu natura est cum mundo traxit principia. Sen.
(that memorable river which began with the world,) and in his return, found
Piso had changed the Decrees made at his departure, altered what he
established, Amici accendendis offensionibus callidi. Tac.
and contemned his commands. He was much troubled herewith, his servants
animated him to resent it, and he could not so dissemble it, but that choler
appeared by his words, and revenge in his menaces, Piso retireth, Germanicus
falls sick; Piso, who knew the force of the malady, removes not far off, and
death is hastened by the violence of the poison.

Ah, cruel man! Hear the words of this dying Prince, yea dying words which
eternally shall live in the memory of the Romans: I dye miserably in the flower
of mine age by the treason of Piso and Plancina; The last words of a dying
Prince fortified the complaint against the authors of his death.
I conjure you my friends, to let the people of Rome know, these wretches cut
the throats of the niece of Augustus, and her six little children. Where are
hearts to be found, which these words do not rent asunder? Yet thou Piso
live still, and the Sun affords thee her light; Thy conscience not knowing
where to hide thee, has brought thee hither to suffer punishment, denying thee
the safety thou elsewhere have sought. Tutum aliquaeres in mala conscientia
praestat, nulla securum. Sen.
As it has failed thee in deliberation on this crime, so has it betrayed thee
in leading thee to punishment: What have thou done after this parricide? Thou
did visit the cities of Asia, and spend thy time in the fair houses of
Achaia. This was done, Subdola mora scelerum probationet subvertit. Tac.
to the end proofs might vanish, and witnesses dye. It is needful (Fathers
Conscript) to set Piso in the condition of a man convict, to reduce him into
the state of one accused.

He has not done as the good man Valerius Publicola, who being accused,
Mihifasces, and jus Praetoris mihi legiones date.
forsook his house at Velia, and lodged in the village, to the end he might
ease them of the trouble to find him out. The innocent man flies not from
judgment, but he that is culpable avoydeth the Judges.

If he had been accused for taking arms, he purposed to shelter himself
with the power he had in Syria under Germanicus his General; if to have laid
hands on public treasures, he supposed the share which he distributed among
his friends, would save the rest. He escapes for a little, who robbed much.

When great ones ar^ accused, they must appear upon easy summons.
If Martina, the notorious Witch and Sorceresse, a great friend of Plancina,
were alive, she could declare the whole mystery of this treason. The friends
of Germanicus caused her to be brought toward Rome, but when she arrived at
Brindisi, she suddenly died, and the poison hid in the knots of her hair,
V^nenum nodo crimu^^ occultatum ne^ ulla in corpore sign samp i^exitii res^rta.
Tac. S^orum in sidiis externas inter gentes o^cidit. Tac.
appeared not on her body.

If presumptions may assist verity, it cannot be said this Prince who found
less security among his own, than with strangers, was murdered by any other
than Piso. Who has done it? He had displeased none but him, and upon the
resentment of this offense, he was declared his enemy, he assaulted him in
his chariot, and it is known to be a very hard matter, to separate the
desire of death; from, that, of succession.

So Leporina sued her husband Sabinus in the time of Vespasian.
We heretofore in this place have heard of one proscribed, who to enjoy the
goods of his wife, told her he would kill himself, she replyeth, she resolved
to bear him company. He prepares the deadly drug, but so craftily, that
drinking first, he left the poison for his wife, which through the weight
thereof remained in the bottom of the glass. Id genus veneni fuit quod
pondere subsideret in imam potionem, bibi^iste usque ad venenum, uxor venenum.
Sen. P.
She dies, he was in health, and enjoyed the wealth she left him by her will.
Never is that poison escaped, which is given by the next heir.

Who rejoiceth more at a death, than he who procured it? And desires it more
ardently, than he that expects it with much impatience? How did Piso entertain
it? Luctus lato cultu mutatus. Tac.
He made sacrifices, he offered victimes; Plancina is so transported with
this joy, that she laid aside the mourning weeds she was putting on for the
death of her sister, and attires her self with the fairest, and richest
garments of her wardrobe.

This accusation abounds with so much variety, and his resolution to free
himself from Germanicus, is replenished with so many mischiefs, that they
smother, Nihil ordinatum quod praecipitatur and properat. Sen.
and by heaps precipitate one another in this discourse, so that I have much
ado to marshall them in order. I had forgot to tell you how Piso sent Spies to
know the condition of Germanicus his sickness, and the symptoms thereof. This
displeased the sick man, and much troubled his mind, not with fear; for
death never terrified him; but with anger and passion, apprehending that so
soon as he should expire, Piso would usurp command over his Forces, Flosti
lenta videntur veneficia. Tac.
and his wife rest at his discretion. Piso in like manner was perplexed, the
poison was so slow, that it wrought not it is effect soon enough, he therefore
returned into Syria, to be nearer the Legions, and upon occasion to make use of
them. Which was the cause Germanicus said in his anguish of mind.

It is a very sensible grief to dye in the sight of an enemy, and to leave a
wife and children in his power.
How then? must I dye, destroyed by mine enemy, shall he see me give up the
ghost? What shall become of my distressed wife, how shall she be entreated,
what shall my children do, to whom tears in this calamity will not be
wanting to weep for me, though words (perhaps) fail to deplore me?

Let that happen, which Heaven will, Piso has taken away my life, but has
left me courage; nor am I reduced to such debilitie, that I ever shall consent
the murderer may derive reward from my death. When the Romans would break
friendship ^ith any one, they gave them notice thereof, and forbade them their
house. Tit.
Hereupon he sent him a letter written with his own hand, to this purpose,
that he held him for an enemy, that he forbade him access to his house, and
abode in that Province.

But there is no doubt, but witchcraft succeeded poison, since the bones of the
dead were seen torn from the members, and fastened to the walls, and roofes of
the chamber, characters with charms and imprecations, the name of Germanicus
engraven on plates of lead, ashes half burnt, Maleficiis animae numinibus
inferni sacrae. Tac.
and mingled with the putrefaction of ulcers, and other incantations and
impieties, with which they use to bewitch any one to death, sacrificing him to
the God of hell.

Although this Prince were dying, Moderatus cursus qui vult propius regredi.
Tac.
and in the agonies thereof, Piso feared him, and at his command weighed
anchor, and departed; but went not far off, that his return might be speedy,
when he should have notice of his death. And if all this put together serve not
to convince him, where shall truth seek for proofs?

Thus (Conscript Fathers) you behold before your eyes a man marked from his
mothers womb for violence, and the spirit of rebellion; for he is son of a
father, Ingenium violemu^, obsequii ignarum. Tac.
who followed the faction of Brutus and Cassius. He not only is an
extortioner, but a robber; not an entermedler, but seditious; not an enemy, but
a rebel: not a murderer, but a tormentor. Cicero says, the crime of Verres
enforced the Judges to condemn him.
Never did any Criminal more exact your justice than this man, for the
execration of his crime enforces you to condemn him: and if in despite of
Gods and men you pardon him, it will be impossible to free him from the hands
of the people, who expect him: and hear (Conscript Fathers) their
exclamations, there is not any woman so low of stature, that promises not her
self to tear some hair from his head.

When the triumphant passed to the Capitol, he put his prisoners over to the
Magistrates, and durst not bring them to his lodging.
Propose to your selves, what their joy will be, when they see the heads of
rebellion dragged after a triumphant chariot, and the next day executed, for
satisfaction of the inhumanities, and cruelties they committed in their
Provinces; yea, much more will they be pleased, when they shall behold Piso in
torment.

They lose their patience, if you do not speedily pronounce these solemn
words; Take, I Lictor coll^ga manus, caput ob nubito, arbori infoeliti
suspendito. Cic.
Executioner, this Parricide, this Thief, this Rebel, bind his hands,
blinde-fold his eyes, and fasten them to a miserable gibbet. And who knows,
whether the multitude transported with grief and sorrow, will rest there,
whether they will be contented with the punishment of one alone, and not rush
upon those who favored this impious man, esteeming them more wicked than him.

No, no, Non majus s^elus in R. P. commisit reus; quam ii qui eum a tam
nefariis sceleribus sententiae sua liberant. Cic.
(Conscript Fathers) there is no dalliance herein, the matter is too important,
the consequence too great, and this man of such condition, that it would be
full of danger, to commit any error in his execution. In judgment upon men of
quality, the time and reason of State are to be considered.
I beseech you (believe) that neither the accused, the time, place, reason of
state, nor quality of the interessed herein, can give consent to steal him
from example, to deliver him in private, and not to suffer him to dye in
public.

Lepidus his speech.
Marcus Lepidus, Eloquentia nulli tota contigit. Sen. P.
who had as much eloquence as might be, (for never any man could have enough
speaking for Piso) in this sort answered the accusers. It is a great calamity
(Fathers Conscript) for poor Piso to have been happy. Great honors are
burdens, which oppress those who bear them.
Great honors many times serve for the felicity of those who nothing deserve
them, and such as merit before they obtain them, find their ruin by a
strange extravagance, Ludos facit fortuna. Sen.
or cousenage of Fortune, which affording content to others, has given to this
man nothing but misery.

The great services Piso did for Augustus, obliged the Emperor to create him
Germanicus his Lieutenant; but this honor was accompanied with so many
disasters, that his fidelity found no favor, Unhappy is the dignity which
has no credit with the Prince.
nor his counsel credit in the heart of this young Prince, who nothing
dismayed by the encounter of things impossible, raised his thoughts beyond
duty, threatened the Sun with darkness, the Ocean with thraldom, and from
thence mounted to imaginations of greatness, which troubled the Emperor.

His affection to his Country, his loyalty to his Prince, obliged him to watch
over his actions, which he ever found so bold, and vehement, that he thought this
young Hercules meant not to climb up to the Stars fairly, Nec in astra lenta
veniet via, iter ruina quaeret. Sen. T.
or peaceably, but would violently pass through the breach to the ruin of the
Empire. These aims of an exorbitant ambition, could not happily succeed, nor
was Piso amazed, when the Priest of Apolloes oracle told him at Colophon,
Necesse est opprimant enera, quae ferento majora sunt. Sen.
this should not long continue: the charge he undertook being too heavy for
his forces.

But as Princes better love to be soothed in their follies, than advised of
their duties, he presently was distasted in that Piso rather desired to
displease him with truth, Malo veris offendere, quam placere adulando. Sen.
then content him with flattery. He esteemed his freedom presumption, when he
showed him the way from which he wandered, and what he ought to follow, yea
even then when he told him he should wrong the Majesty of the Empire, to
entertain with favor men of slight condition and courteously countenance
those abject Athenians who ever followed the contrary part to ours, Quod
colluvi^m illam nationum comitate nimia coluisset. Tac.
nor have at any time been without some plot of revolt against us, formerly
aiding Mithridates against Sylla, Anthony against Augustus.

Was it (I pray) by the Council of Piso, Inter alia dominationis arcana
Augustus vetitis seposuit Aegyptum. Tac.
that he entered into Egypt contrary to the ancient ordinance of Augustus, who
recommended unto you for a secret of State, never to suffer any great man to
pass into Egypt: for in revolting against us, Levi praesidio ingentes
exercitus coercentur. Tac.
they might with a few resist a vast army, and by forbidding the trade of
corn, starve Italy.

Recall (Oh Caesar) into your memory (for nothing of worth escapes you) the
disgust you received when Piso gave advertisement that this young Prince
directed all his actions to vanity, and ambition, who to gain the peoples
hearts, gratified them with gifts of Corn and money, In vulgus gratae, sine
milite incedere pedibus, intectus, and pari cum Graecis amictu. Tac.
marched up and down without a guard, on foot, ill attended, and clothed like
a Grecian, as heretofore Scipio did.

All the furies of hell could never have invented a more detestable Calumny
than this poison of which Piso is accused, but it is so slender, Tenue
mendacium pellucet. Sen.
and transparent that falsehood may be seen through it. How is it possible that
you Vitellius, who have an open eye, and a clear judgment (that I may not
allege matters superfluous) should at this time fix your self on
contrarieties, Non minus vitandum supervacua dicere, quam contraria. Sen. P.
what likelihood is there that Piso eating at Germanicus table, who ever
narrowly observed him, could have leisure to take poison, to rub his fingers
therein, and so infect the meat. Is this easy to be done in another man's
house, Absurdum inter aliena servitia, and tot astantium visu. Tac.
in the presence of a Prince, who has assay made unto him, and so many eyes
about him which observe all?

Qui patrem pulsaverit, manus ei praecidantur. Sen. P.
If this be true, Piso is willing, not, that the hand which perpetrated this
parricide should be cut off, but the heart which imagined it, Offerebat
familians reus, and ministres in termenta. Tac.
be torn alive out of his breast, and that this truth may be known, he
offers his whole family, and servants to be put on the rack.

He is not without fault; what man is free? There is nothing so deformed as an
injury which reculeth back against him who spoke it. Plut.
Diamonds have blemishes, fair faces moles, but he is neither villain, nor
traitor. Those that traduce him of pride, want not arrogance themselves, if he
be hasty, they are violent: never has he attempted on the life of his Princes.

If he have used some severity in his charge, The Magistrates ought to be more
tender to become feared than loved.
he did it rather out of duty, than disposition, It is for Princes to make
themselves beloved, and for Magistrates to be feared. If he have failed in
respect and affection toward Germanicus, There is nothing so natural as to
hate those who have persecuted us.
it is a hard task to be enforced to love him, who resolves, and vows your
ruin. Germanicus, like all great men, wrote Pisoes services on the sand, and
all his offenses on marble, if we so may call the sincere and free councels,
which he for his better direction gave him.

He protests the death of Germanicus has drawn from his heart, a growing
thorn, a continual fear, that he is glad to see his house freed from so
potent an enemy, Tiberius from a nephew so ambitious, the Empire from a Prince
so over-daring. Germanicus would have ruined Piso, and heaven has destroyed
Germanicus, The Eagle having taken away the young rabbits, the dam undermineth
the tree, and throws down the neast of the Eagle, and her young ones stand
to her mercy.
and in dying made him know, there is a supreme justice above, which revengeth
the violences of great ones, over inferiors. Are they permitted to spit in our
faces, or to set foot on our throats, because they are above us? Nay the least
creatures have questioned the Eagle. Nothing is so sweet as revenge, at what
price soever; It is a viand, that is swallowed without chewing.

But never has Piso attempted on his life, as desirous of his death, and it
being well known to have been natural, it is a great impiety to feign it was
violent. Mala and impia consuetudo contra Deos disputandi, sive ex animo id
fiat, sive simulate. Cic.
The Gods would have it so, it is not lawful either in earnest, or by way of
discourse to dispute of their power.

Prompta Pisoni legionum studia.
If he have endeavored to gain some credit among Military men, it was but to
lessen the exorbitancy of Germanicus. His ambition hastened to ruin, Pisoes to
conservation, the one gave cause of jealousy to Tiberius, the other of caution
to Germanicus. If he have acquired good opinion in the provinces, is he
forbidden to cherish it? Are not affections free, Amor affectus liber qui vices
exigit. Plin.
what hurt is it to make them mutual?

But he rather chose to bow under Caesar's goodness, than stiffely dispose
himself to the defense of his innocence. With clasped hands therefore he
imploreth this royal virtue, which abhors the brutish thirst of blood, and
humbly beseeches you (O great Prince) to imitate heaven, Ferina rabies
sanguine gaudere. Sen.
which has more thunder to affright, than lightening to punish.

But if all prove inexorable, Nihil tam peri^ulesum fortunis innocentum, quam
t^ cere adversarios
and that the accusers hasten to ravish and snatch away this soul which they
so much have turmoiled and afflicted, he will dye with this comfort, that his
innocence found no protection, and had rather perish, than offend those, who
might have saved him.

There rests darkness in the accusation of poison; It is a Pyramid which
does not entirely discover it self, for of three sides there is always one
which cannot be seen, Piso and Plancina his wife appeared, A Tribuno deauctus,
vario rumore, custos salutis, an mortis exactor. Tac.
but the third hid Tiberius, and Tiberius, Sejanus.

This first audience ended, Piso went out, but the people were so incensed
against him, that had he not been conveyed away in a litter by the guard, he
never had returned to his house, safe, and alive. That which the multitude
could not do on his person, they acted on his statues, dragging them to the
Gemonian stairs.

Portia said she was not only a partaker of the bed, and table of her husband,
as a Concubine, but was the Companion of his good and evil fortune, as his
wife, Plut.
Plancina his wife who had promised to undergo his fortune, wholly inclined to
levity (a natural vice of that sex,) and being well assured of her own life
by the favor of the Emperesse, neglected Piso, and abandoned him, as if she
had been married to participate with him only in prosperity.

The Judges for many respects were implacable to the accused, This opinion was
common, and Josephus affirms it.
Caesar was willing he should dye, because he entered with arms into the
Province, the Senate constantly believed Germanicus was poisoned, and among
violent deaths poisoning is abhorred with the greatest execration, The mad-love
drink is quaffed in silver in stead of Greek wine.
because thereby persons most precious and esteemed are torn from the Common
wealth, Life-killing Arsenick is tasted in a golden dish.
that poison more easily is mingled and compounded in golden, than earthen
vessels. There is no Antidote has more virtue, or efficacy against poison,
than a private condition, which neither fears avarice may attempt on his
state, nor envy on his dignity, yet is it most certain, Venenicvi^^en
accusatores non satis firmabans. Tac.
this poisoning was never clearly proved, nor confidently affirmed by the
accusers: There was no speech hereof either in Antioch or Rome, but according
to the affection men bare to the dead, or hatred against the living.

Tacitus says it is not certain that the marks of poison appeared on the
dead: Praetuleritne venef^ii signa parum constitit. Tac.
Suetonius affirms he was covered all over with purple spots, that he foamed
at the mouth, Livores totocorpo^^ spumae per os fluebant, cor inter essa
incorruptum. Suet.
and that his heart was found whole among the ashes: Pliny, that Vitellius
pressed this very hard, that Piso retorted the arrow back, against those that
shot it: and as one affirmed that Germanicus being poisoned his heart resisted
the fire: so the other maintained that dying of the Cardiaque disease, his
heart could not be burnt. Negatur corcremari posse in his, qui Cardiaco morbo
obierint, and veneno interemptis. Plin.
So the Hypothesis ever rested in the question, and both the one and the other
had truth on his side, it being equally true according to Pliny, that the
hearts of those who dye by poison, or the Cardiaque evil are not consumed by
fire. But the worst passage of Pisoes process, was, the extreme boldness of
the people, who taking rumor for proof, cried out at the Court gate, that if
justice were not executed on Piso, they would do it themselves.

All this much amazed Piso, who on the second day appeared in Senate, to see if
any change were made in this first severitie. But he found the wind very
contrary, Tiberius so cold, Nullo magis exterritus est, quam quod Tiberium
sine miseratione, sine ira obstinatum, claufumque vidit. Tac.
that for fear of discovering himself, he inclined neither to anger to ruin
him, nor to pity to afford him any hope. He thereupon judged he was to have no
recourse thither, either for his innocence, or truth. Yet notwithstanding
Sejanus told him, Tiberius would take his opportunity when time required, and
not see him lost; others terrified him saying, He who is con^inced of one
crime, is punished for many.
Although he were declared innocent for the death of Germanicus, he would be
put to death for other crimes: For Tiberius was so much exasperated with his
taking arms in Syria, In crimes against the State, there is no compensation of
merit for the fault.
that he resolved to make him an example, not suffering his service to
counterpoyse the crime.

Sejanus regarded not the loss of Piso, so he concealed his secret commission;
but much he feared, lest seeing himself condemned, he might complain in the
Senate of judgment, and at his execution, of the Emperor, and that he should
speak, if not against Tiberius, at least against him. The interest of children
transporteth Parents.
The consideration of his children choked in his soul all resentment of the
injury he suffered; and seeing himself lost, would be ruined alone. And
that their innocence might be distinguished from his punishment, he wrote a
letter to Tiberius, beseeching him to take pity of them, and that done he
resolved to dye, thrusting his sword through his own throat. It is a madness
to dye for fear of death.
He died not for fear of death, but, not to satisfy his enemies in the
manner. If there be any thing troublesome in a public death, it is only the
grief, and shame of content thereby given to an enemy.

When this death was related to the Senate, Tiberius showed sorrow in his face;
Caesar flexo in maestitiam ore. Tac.
but it was feigned, and to distract the judgments made upon this occasion to
his prejudice, and settle his countenance by his discourse, he among other
things informed himself of that, which Piso had done the day before, and how
he spent the night. Plaeraque sap^enter, quae dam inconsullius. Tac
Some there were who answered with discretion, others more inconsiderately, as
upon the like occasions there are some, who cannot endure to be accounted so
foolish, as not to know that, of which we wish they were ignorant.

Hereupon Tiberius read the letters, which Piso had written to this purpose.
Since, Caesar, I see my self oppressed by the conspiracy of mine enemies, and
the violence of a false accusation, Conspiratione inimicorum, and invid^a falsi
criminis veritati, and innocentiae nusquam locum. Tac.
which affords no place in the Senate, either for truth, or mine innocence;
the Gods are my witnesses, I have not failed in duty toward you, or reverence
to your mother, for which cause I beseech you to think on my children. Gneius
Piso ought to have no share in my fortune, Qualiscunque, fortunae meae non est
adjunctus. Tac.
whatsoever it be; for he stirred not out of Rome. Marcus Piso dissuaded me
from going into Syria, and I could wish the father had accommodated himself to
the youth of the son, and the son not yielded to the age of the father.
Nihi^ quidquam post haec rogaturus salutem infoelicis filii rege. Tac.
This is the cause, why I with the greater instance humbly entreat, his
innocence may not feel the punishment of my obstinacy: and seeing my self
in a condition never to beg of you again, I conjure you by five and forty
years service, by the esteem your father Augustus had of me, Pravitatis
p^nas innoxius non luat.
when I was his Colleague in the Consulship, and by the friendship you have
professed, to preserve my poor son.

He spoke not a word of his wife; For how could he remember her, who forgot
him in this extremity, and had perhaps promised the Empress and Sejanus, to
open the chamber door for murderers to kill him. Tiberius having read these
letters, said; Although Piso had deserved the misery whereinto he was fallen,
yet was he moved to pity, for the respect of his house, that it was
notwithstanding very reasonable, Ex arboribus quavontus, aut turbo evulsit
soboles residua est fovenda. Sen.
to preserve the siens of the tree which was felled down, and not to lay the
punishment on his guiltless children, whereof absence discharged the one, and
the fathers command excused the other; Patris jussa filius non potest
detractare. Tac.
and therefore they not liable to the crime of taking arms. As for Plancina,
he besought the Senate to yield her up to the prayers of his mother. The whole
assembly well saw the impudency, and impiety of this request, good men
murmured against this woman, as the cause of Germanicus his death, and Piso's
slaughter. Shall then (say they) the Empress have the honor, to save the
murderesse of her grand child, to visit her, Fas aviae interfectricem nepotis
adspicere, adloqui, eripere Senatui^ Tac.
to comfort her in the death of her husband, to snatch her out of the hands of
the Senate? The Laws will not allow to Germanicus, what they grant to the
meanest Citizen. Vitellius and Veranius, who were nothing to Germanicus, have
bitterly deplored his death, Venena and arts semel faeliciter expertae in
alterius exitium facile vertuntur. Tac.
and Augusta his grandmother defends Plancina, that has caused it; and what
may we expert from hence, but that the force of poisons, and witchcrafts,
having so prosperously succeeded, she likewise will employ them against
Agrippina, and her children, to allay the thirst of the Grandmother and Uncle,
with the blood of this miserable family, and so satisfy the rage of Sejanus.

The opinions summed up, Aurelius Cotta says, the memory of Piso ought to be
abolished, Nomina sceleratorum e fastis radenda. Tac.
and his name raced, and blotted out of the Calenders, and Annals, the moytie
of his goods confiscated, the other given to his son Gneius Piso, with command
to change his name; Marcus Piso deprived of office, and banished for ten
years, Concessa Plancinae incolumitas ob preces Augustae. Tac.
and to have five hundred Sesterces for his entertainment: Life given to
Plancina in consideration of the Empresses request. All consented to this
opinion.

Tiberius, who had what he desired, sweetneth the rigor of this judgment:
Pudore flagitii princeps placabilior fit. Tac.
for the hatred of Plancina's absolution made him less severe against the
children, there being no appearance why he should pardon the mother a
murderesse, and condemn the innocent children. He says the name of Piso
should remain in the Annals, as well as Anthonies, Nomen Marci Antonii, qui
bellum patriae fecit, fastis mansit. Tac.
who had invaded his own Country. Messalina says, A golden Ensign should
be raised in the Temple of Mars-Avenger, and Caecinna Severus, an Altar to
Revenge. No (says Tiberius) it is not good, Domestica mala tristitia
operienda. Tac.
in victories achieved on strangers, domestique miseries should be covered
with sadness.

Fulcinus Trio, who so lowdly had declaimed against Piso, besought the
assistance of his favor, the better to charge the accused; he answered,
Facundia non est violent a praecipitanda. Tac.
Take heed you precipitate not your eloquence by the violence of your passion.
He was offended, that he too much had pressed Piso in the matter of poison;
for all the words that were spoken on this subject, touched him very near.
He wished him to represent the passion of Agrippina, Rerum humanari^ ubique
ludibria. Tac. Audivi ex senioribus, qui ad nostram usque juventam duraverunt.
Tac.
without passion in himself. Behold the vanity of humane practices.

Hereupon Tacitus says; I remember I have heard it told in my youth by those
of that time, That many pieces had been seen in Piso's hand, which he did not
publish, but that his friends affirmed every where, they contained the
commission and command, which Tiberius gave him against Germanicus, and that
he resolved to produce them in Senate to convince the Prince, but that Sejanus
had deceived him with fair promises, Elusus a Sejano per vana promissa Piso.
Tac.
and that he killed not himself, but that one was sent in the night, who
murdered him.

Death delivered Piso, but Tiberius and Sejanus were not thought the more
innocent, and every night these cries were heard about the Palace. Per noctes
creberrime acclamatum est, Read Germanicum. Suet.
Give us Germanicus.

This death, whether it were voluntary, or forced, much abated the hatred of
the people against Piso, and increased it against Tiberius, the rather that he
had saved the wife, and having drawn this miserable man into a precipice,
would not deliver him. If Piso had permitted the Laws and Justice to take
their course, Praebe te legibus. Sen.
and suffered like a man that feared not death, his misery would have been
deplored. There is no life so odious, Confidence lesseneth the infamy of
punishment.
which ending in public with constancy and modesty, changes not hatred
into pity, and pity into favor, leaving a friendly opinion of innocence
behind it.

The death of Germanicus gave no less content to Sejanus than Tiberius, for
this Prince held all their resolutions under control. Tiberius esteemed not
himself Emperor, while he was alive, and Sejanus despaired ever to be so, or
to dispose of the Empire so absolutely, as he afterward did, for this Prince
held him short, as one may say, to a strait diet. Our enemies enforce us to
live regularly and to preserve life irreprehensible as in a strait diet. Plut.
The good affection he possessed in the minds of all, both great, mean, and
middle sort, much crossed his ambition. But after his death, fortune afforded
him a prosperous gale, till pride and insolence rent the sails of his vessel,
and designs.

Tiberius thought he had more authority, yet was not less distrustful,
imagining that as many friends as Germanicus should leave, were so many
conspirators. And therefore often said, he held not the Empire, Lupum auribus
tenere.
but as a wolf by the ears, fearing he might escape, and escaping bite him.
He supposed every man had a purpose to take him out of his hands: He caused the
Horoscopes of the principal men of Rome to be calculated, and such as the
Stars promised eminence above other, he depressed, banished, or put to death.
He knew Galba might arrive to this point, Dion and Tacit.
so that meeting him on the day of his Marriage, he said; And thou Galba shall
one day taste what Empire is. Yet he attempted nothing against him, for this
dignity seemed fatally destined unto him.

Sejanus among the rules of his policy held this ever, to nourish distrust in
the soul of Tiberius, to the end that not relying on any man he might only
confide in him.

The great houses descended from those brave and generous spirits, which had
been sacrificed to preserve the liberty of their Country, were by Tiberius
(who resolved to raise the absolute sway on the foundations of Augustus)
suspected, and to Sejanus odious, who could not endure virtue to oppose his
fortune. Liboni proavu^ Pompeius, amita Scribonia, consobrini Caesares. Tac.
Libo Drusus, as being descended by his father from Augustus, and by his Mother
from Pompey the great, was one of the principal of the Roman youth, and, as
this his birth giving hope to his courage gained him respect among the
greatest, so was it the cause of his fall.

Defertur moliri res novas. Tac.
His youth prompt, and inconsiderate, transported him to thoughts more haughty,
than the times would permit, for which cause he was perpetually had in
jealousy by Tiberius, so that being at a sacrifice, he commanded the Master of
the Ceremonies to give a leaden knife to Libo, who was one of the sacrificers,
Pro cespita plumbeus culter.
lest he might attempt somewhat on his person. The little hatchet of the
sacrificer.
Another time demanding audience in secret, he caused his son Drusus to be
called, and counterfeiting to stand in need of support whilst he walked, he
held Libo (who spoke to him) by the right hand, carrying his eye steady to
observe all his motions. Iuvenis improvidus and facilis inanibus. Tac.
This young man had a Roman Citizen whom he held his intimate friend, that
conspired his ruin, supposing the shortest way to make a fortune, was to
overthrow those, who gave cause of suspicion to Sejanus. He impressed in this
giddy spirit, Hortatur ad luxum, and aes alienum socius libidinum, and
necessitatum quo plurihus indiciis indagaret. Tac.
that there was some great thing designed in heaven for him, he led him out to
riots, which caused excessive expenses, and those put him into inconveniences,
which this wicked friend sweetened with false hopes. Necessity made him dream
on his future fortunes, and that thrust him into the curiosity of knowing from
Astrologers, what the Stars promised him (the ordinary retreat of minds which
admit a Master.) Wherefore that he yet might understand more, his friend
brought him to confer with Magicians, who ask of their spirits what they
knew, and never tell truth: for a while after all his hopes were turned into
despair.

Tib. non vultu alienatus, non verbis commotior, cuncta ejus dicta factaque,
cum prohibere posset scire mallebat. Tac.
The Senator discovers all this to Tiberius, who is heartily glad to see this
young man in the snare, yet desisteth not to show him a good countenance,
affording him the title of Praetor, and often calling him to his Table. Presently
after he caused him to be accused in the Senate as of a matter weighty,
important, and enormous; behold he is brought into the condition of one
accused; he changes his apparel, Keus obsoletius vestiebatur. Cic.
the principal Ladies of the City his allies, solicit for him: There was not
a man to be found would speak in his defense; for when any question is made of
a Conspiracy against a Prince, all intercessions are suspected, and favors
held crimes. It was not permitted to any but the sick to go in a litter to the
gate of the Senate house. Tiberius coming thither the sick man would (...) no
train^.
He went to the Court in a litter, for this stroke not foreseen, had weakened
the forces of his health, and so supported by his brothers arm, he enters
into the Senate, and a far off beholding Tiberius, stretches out his hands,
and imploreth mercy with much humility.

Tiberius reads all the points whereof he was accused, it not being
preceived either by his countenance or words, that he had a purpose to sweeten,
or exasperate the affair. The whole matter consisted in things rather curious,
than wicked, rather vain than serious, and which more required pity, than
correction.

He had asked the Southsayers, Stolida and vana, and si melius accipiantur,
miseranda. Tec.
whether he should ever be so rich, as to be able to cover the Appian way to
Brindisi with pieces of money. A list likewise was produced against him, by
which it appeared he had made certain Ciphers under the names of Caesar's, and
Senators, as it were a mark upon those he meant to ruin, and the way how. He
denies all. Question in caput domini. Tac.
The Senate advises his slavecs should be put to the torture, but Tiberius
rich in subtilties, and subtle in inventions, More majorum de servis in
Dominum ne tormentis quidem quaeri licet. Cic.
caused them to be sold, thereby not to offend the laws, which receive them
not as witnesses against their Masters.

He returns to his house, borne in a litter; yea rather his Coffin, for he
went to death, nor was there any other difference, but that his friends denied
him this last office, and no creature followed him. He sent a kinsman of his to
Tiberius to implore his mercy, Necessarii deseraerant impie jam non r^^m, sed
famam. Sen.
but his answer was, he should make his address to the Senate, he sought out
his Grandmother Scribonia, and asked her counsel, whether it were best to
hasten his death or expect it. Quid te delectat alienum negotium facere? Sen.
This courageous woman made answer; Why will you execute the office of another?
Perform your own.

She thought it a neglect of ones proper business to live at the direction of
another, and that he who expects to be led to execution, did the work of the
hangman: The condition of humane things is wrongfully accused: He that will
not himself, Excruciant epulae in novissimam volupta^em adhibitae. Tac.
is not miserable. The only sight of viands brought for his last dainties
touched his heart; he resolves to dye, calls one to kill him, pulls his
servants to him, puts the knife into their hands, praying them to afford him
this last office. They deny him, abhorring such a commandment, not so much for
pity of him, as of themselves, fearing to be punished; Etiam ubi remedium est
mors, selus (...) occidere. Sen. P.
for although death serve as a remedy for such as beg it, yet is it a crime in
those that give it. The more he pressed and urged them to kill him, the more
they retired, and stepping back overthrew the table, so that the lights which
stood thereon were extinguished.

This darkness confirming his resolution, Feralibus (...) remebris dues ^^^us
in vist^^ a (...). Tac.
and beginning his own funerals, he gave himself two stabs with a knife in
the belly, he cried out, and fell, the whole family ran up into the Chamber,
the soldiers hastened thither, and seeing their work done, departed. When
this passage was related to Tiberius, he counterfeited sorrow, and swear, if
the dead man had let him alone, he had yet been alive, himself being resolved
to have pleaded for him.

Confiscation of goods was prosecuted, Adul^^^ (...) Reip. malum. Tac.
and the Senate through flattery (an ancient wound of the Republique) gave them
to the accusers, abolished the name, and statues of Libo, Iduum Septembium dios
quo se Libi occiderat festus. Tac.
and put the Ides of September among the solemn festivals, because on that day
the Emperor had been delivered from a great peril. There was also a decree
made against Mathematitians, and Magicians, and Lucius Pituanius who was of
this unhappy profession, was thrown headlong from the top of the Tarpeian
hill. Their banishment was but renewed again; for it had before been decreed,
they should forsake Italy, in that through a deceitful knowledge of stars,
Caldaei pluribus atque ineptis ingeniis siderum fallae^ interpretatione
questuesam medaciis suis Caliginem injiciunt. Val.
they abused vain and idle people.

Sejanus was freed from Princes, Pretors, and Senators, he was willing Rome
should know, there was not any conditioned men exempt from fear of his fortune
and power he presently lays hold on the Philosophers, as those whose lives he
hated for innocence, and whose tongues he dreaded for liberty. He banisheth
Attalus a Stoicke Philosopher, Attalus stoicus solum vertit a Sejano
Circumscriptus, magnae vir eloquentiae, ex Philosophis, subtillissimus. Sen. P.
a man of singular integrity of life, admirable eloquence, and incomparable
learning; The sect of Stoics being a most worthy and venerable company, and as
different from others as men from women, I cannot imagine wherein he erred, but
in that Sejanus took to himself in particular, what he meant to all in
general, Malitia maximam partem sui veneni bibit.
when he said, that he who offended others, first displeased himself, and that
the wicked man takes the first draught of his own poison; was not this to
tell Sejanus, that all his violencies returned on himself, as rivers to their
source? Quicquid expectantibus fortuna projecit id fine ^lla voluptate
dimittmus, statim ad rapinam alterius erecti, and attenti. Sen.
When he said men were unsatiable, and that having received some benefits from
fortune they presently beg others, as dogs, who no sooner swallow one morsel,
but they instantly gape for another, discovered not he this gulf of
greediness, who having ruined one family, threatened another?

This Tiger showed his hatred against the choice wits of his time: A Poet
having written some few free words against him, was put to death, not for that,
but because in a Tragedy he had injured Agamemnon, Quod in tragedia Agamemnonem
probis lacessisset. Suet.
and spoken against the honor of Kings: Tiberius punished the offenses
committed against Sejanus, as rigorously as those that concerned himself, he
was persuaded he himself received the counterbuffe of all that, which wounded
him. Princes are offended, when their Favorites are blamed, because it seems
to them the weakness of their judgment is condemned, He who blames the
favor of a Prince condemns his judgment.
in the election of a subject unworthy of their favor. The worke-man is bound
to defend his workmanship. The Painter is troubled, if dirt be cast on the
picture he has drawn. Old faults are sought out, to make new examples of
severitie. The Senate decreed the Statue of Sejanus should be erected in
Pompey's Theater, which Tiberius had re-edified. Cremutius Cordus vexed with
this injury done to the memory of Pompey, Quis nen rumperetur supra cineres
Gn. Pompei constitu^e Sejanum? Sen.
cried out aloud, It was not to re-edifie, but to destroy, thus to set Sejanus
above the heads of the Romans, to raise a mean Soldier upon the monument of a
prime Captain. He spoke truth, but Verity excuses not the imprudence of
those, who inconsiderately are transported into the censure of great ones.
Sejanus bears this in mind, Novam, ac primum auditum crimen. Tac.
and accuses him not thereof at all, but disposes Tiberius to enquire into
his life, all the parts of which were found innocent and commendable. But his
writings were examined, and an History he composed of Augustus, and which
Augustus himself had read. He was accused not to have sufficiently honored
Caesar, P^ul.
and Augu\stus; too much praised Brutus, and called Cassius the last of the
Romans.

The credit of accusers is the despair of the accused. Sejani clientes
perniciabiles reo. Tac.
His accusers were Satrius, Secundus, and Pinarius Natta, creatures of Sejanus,
and this quality made the ruin of this man accused most infallible, and
thrust his innocence into desperation. Yea, the Judge himself made him
perceive by his stern countenance, and words of reproof, that he sat there,
not to hear, but to condemn him; not to arraigne, but to appoint his
execution: Innocence of actions should excuse the folly of words.
Cordus likewise came not thither to save his own life, for he was certain
to lose it, but for the honor of truth, and the glory of his writings. He
spoke in this manner.

My actions are so far innocent, Verba mea a^g^untur, adeo sum factorum
innocen^. Tac
that nothing is questioned, but my words, and yet they offend neither the
Emperor, nor his Mother, who only are comprised in the Law of Majesty. It is
said I praised Brutus, and Cassius, whose actions are registered by many, nor is
there any one has mentioned them, but to their honor. Titus Livius, There is
not an Historian, which becomes not passionate on one side, or other.
to whom the prize of eloquence, and truth is attributed, has so highly
commended Pompey, that Augustus called him the Pompeyan: which never impaired
the friendship contracted between them.

He uses not these names of Thieves and Parricides, Scipio, a man worthy of
all warlike commendation. Plut. Afranius, Lieutenant of Pompey against the
Parthians and Arabians. Plut. Cassius, an enemy of Tyrants from his infancy.
Plu^
which now are imposed on Scipio and Afranius, on Brutus, and Cassius; but
often styles them brave, and excellent men. The History of Asinius Pollio
makes an honorable mention of them: Mesalla Corvinus extolled Cassius as his
General, yet both the one and other have been powerful in riches, and
honors. Caesar the Dictator was pleased to answer in an Oration by writing (as
before his Judges) to a book, which Cicero made, to raise Cato his enemy as
high as Heaven. The Epistles of Anthony, Brutus well wished by the people,
beloved of his own, esteemed of honest men, and hated by none. See the Epigram
30. of Catullus.
the speeches of Brutus object to Augustus things false, and relate them with
much sharpness and animositie. Men spare not to read the verse of Bibaculus,
and Catullus, though farced with injuries against the Caesar's. Julius and
Augustus have permitted, and scorned them. And I cannot well tell, whether they
have showed more moderation, than wisdom therein. For slanders pass away, if
they be despised; and seem avowed, if resented. I speak not at all of the
Grecians, for not only their liberty, but temeritie also has been
unpunished, and if any one has blamed it, words have revenged words. But it
always has been a matter of freedom, and without reprehension to speak of
those, whom death has enfranchized from hate, Convitia spreta ex^lescunt, si
irascare agnita vidantur. Tac.
or favor. Can any man say, that I with my Orations excite the people to
rebel, and take arms for civil war while Brutus, and Cassius are armed in
the the Philipicke fields? It is now threescore and sixteen years, since they
dyed: As they are known by the Statues, which their victorious selves erected,
so writings have preserved their memories Posterity renders every one the
honor, which belongs to him, and if I be condemned, there may those be found,
who will not only remember Brutus, and Cassius, but me also.

He had reason to adorn his discourse with examples of Caesar and Augustus.
For the world has never seen any thing equal to this their generous bounty
in pardoning slanders. Calvus the Orator, Caio Calvo post samosa Epigr. de
reconciliatione per amicos agenti ultro ac prior scripsit. Suet.
and Catullus the Poet, desperately detracted Caesar: Truth settled
shamefastness on their foreheads, and repentance in their consciences. Caesar
was satisfied with it, and seeing Calvus desired his friendship, and durst not
entreat it, in an express letter he offered it himself: Valerius Catullus
perpetua stigmata suis versiculis imposuit Caesari. Suet.
As for Catullus, he invited him to supper the same day he published his Poem
against him.

For Augustus, I find none to parallel him: Timagenes, a noble Historian,
wrote against him, his wife, daughters, and all his family. He advises him to
use his pen and tongue with more moderation, Timagenem Caesar monuit, ut
moderatiua lingua uteretur, perseveranti, domo sua interdixit: post ea in
contubernio Pollionis consenuit. Sen.
especially concerning his house and friends: for Augustus had bred him up. O
extreme ingratitude! He persevers. Augustus enforced to take notice hereof,
wishes him to retire. Asinius Pollio, esteeming more the promptness of this
wit, than his duty to the Emperor, lodges, and entertaineth him. Timagenes
absolutely declares himself an enemy of Augustus, burns that notable
History, which he had composed of his reign, affirming he deserved not to
be remembered at all, and that the good he had delivered of him, was
altogether false. Augustus swallowed all this, and was pleased to say to
Pollio; You nourish a Serpent. But Pollio desirous to reply in his excuse: He
stopped his mouth, Fruere mi Pollio fruere.
saying, My friend keep him, make use of him. Is it possible, that Rome should
grieve to lose her liberty under such a Prince? She afterward found by dear
experience what she lost in the change: It was the same flock, but not the
same Shepherd.

We may well say Sejanus had strangely corrupted the nature of Tiberius, making
him so severe in the punishment of injuries done to his Predecessors, who took
so small account of his own, and who often said, that in free Cities tongues
should not be restrained. Subinde jactat in civitate libera linguam mentomque
liberas esse debere. Suet.
Augustus gave him this counsel; for upon the point of blaming his
dissimulation in the matter of unbridled liberty, used in depraving of him, he
wrote these words: Son Tiberius, flatter herein neither your youth, nor anger,
to believe that any man speaks ill of me: Satis est si hoc habemus ne quis
nobis male facere possit. D. Aug.
It is enough we can so handle the matter, they shall do us no hurt.

As for himself, he slighted the Satyrs, and bitter jests were divulged of
him; and when hereupon the Senate would give information, he said, We have not
so much spare time, Non tantum habimus otii P. C. ut implicare nos pluribus
negotiis debeamus: si hanc fenestram aperueritis nihil aliud agi sinetis. D.
Tib.
as to trouble our selves with these trifles, and if we shall open this
window, we need to do nothing else, and you shall be perpetually importuned
with an infinite number of particular complaints.

Cordus then having spoken so boldly and elegantly, retired to his house much
unresolved what he should do. If he would live, Si vivere vellet, Sejanus
rogandus erat; si mori, filia; uterque inexorabilis; constituit filiam fallere.
Sen.
he must beg of Sejanus; if dye, of his daughter: Both are inexorable. His
courage not suffering him to prostrate himself to the one, he resolved to
deceive the other. And that he might not discover his purpose, he for certain
days takes the bath, At the coming out of a bath, they brought to their
chambers sweet wine with new laid eggs.
and the better to beguile his daughter, he afterward withdrawes into his
chamber to take his refection, and sending his servants away, throws out of
the window some part of that which was brought him, Quaedam per fenestram ut
videretur edisse projecit a coena, deinde quasi jam satis in cubiculo edisset
abstinuit. Sen.
to make them believe it was the remainder of what he had eaten. The hour of
supper arrived, he tells his daughter he had no appetite to eat, that his
former collation served him for a supper; she urges him no further, supposing
it true, and little imagining the thing she approved for his health, should
hasten his death.

He continues this rigorous deceit until the fourth day, that his own
weakness discovered it. Homini non any septimum diem laetalis inedia:
durasse, and ultra undecimum plaerosque ^ertum est. Plin.
Extreme sorrow conspired with his abstinence, which had not otherwise power
sufficient to overthrow him in so few days; for hunger will not kill a man in
so short a space.

His daughter thus deceived, conjureth him by her prayers and tears, to live
both for her and himself. The last hour causes not death, but finisheth it.
This prayer came too late. His life was now almost wholly wasted, he is upon
the last hour: at which time embracing his daughter, Iter mortis ingressus
sum, and jam medium fere teneo; revocare me, nec debes, nec potes. Sen.
he said: Martia, I am too far onward in the way of death, to retire back; I
have gone almost the one half of it: you neither ought, nor can withhold me.

Which spoken, he caused the lights to be put out that he might the more
quietly hide himself, and creep away in the dark. His servants seeing his
resolution so absolute and forward, were no whit sorry, Et faucibus
avidissimorum luporum educitur praeda. Sen.
the wolves had failed of their prey At which time the accusers ran by the
commandment of Sejanus to the Consuls to tell them that Cordus had killed
himself, to wit, had escaped them. Magna res erat in quaestione, an mortis rei
perderentur: dum deliberatur, dum accusatores iterum adeunt, ille se
absolverat. Sen.
This question was then debated, Whether one might hinder the accused to make
themselves away? but whilst this was disputed to resolve it, and condemn him,
he freeth himself.

His books were burnt by the Ediles, Scripta autoris. calamitate. Dio.
the calamity of the Author, and excellency of the style rendered them the
more illustrious, and made them sought after, and studied with the more
curiosity. Martia preserves, Vir Romanus qui subactis jam cervicibus omnium,
and ad Sejani jugum abactis indomitus sit, homo ingenio, animo, manu liber. Tac.
and presents them to the world to renew the memory of her father, who had
written them in his own blood, had stood firm and invincible, when every man
else offered his head under the yoke of Sejanus, and had with hand, discourse
and judgment, Praesenti potentia non extinguitur sequentis aevi memoria. Tac.
maintained ancient liberty. Princes deceive themselves when they grow
passionate to abolish books which displease them, prohibition adds desire,
and difficulty makes good the curiosity. Punitis ingeniis gliscit authoritas.
Tac.
If fear suppress them during their life, they appear more confident, when
they themselves are no more. The affliction of writers augmenteth the
reputation of their labors: punishment is odious; he that inflicteth it, is
blamed, and who suffers it, receives honor.

And it is well for us this fury against books, began not till under Tiberius,
for what would it have been, if the Triumvirs had proscribed or burnt those of
Cicero? R P. interest, ut facta quoeque posteritati tradantur. Suet.
Caligula caused the works of Cordus to be revived, and thought himself
interessed, that posterity might know the lives and gests of his predecessors.
What a contentment is it, to read the History of so worthy a pen, written with
a courage so free, and confident, and in such a manner as he offered it to the
Senate, not unlike the scantling which Seneca observed upon the death of
Cicero, in these terms.

Anthony received much satisfaction when Ciceroes head was brought him, and
said his proscription was at an end, for he was not only glutted, Non satiatus
modo cadendis civibus sed defectus. Sen. P.
but tired with the massacres of so many men. He commanded it to be exposed
to the view of the people in their Rostra, Piis concionibus multorum capita
fervarat. Sen. P.
in the same place where they, drawn by the reputation of his excellency,
thronged to follow him, and where they had heard his elaborate discourses,
which saved so many heads. He is now at this present beheld by his fellow
Citizens, neither in the joy, nor manner as they admired him heretofore (alive
and) entire, but with blood, which all embrued his head, Manus dextera
eloquentiae ministra. Sen. P.
and disfigured his countenance. This head which of late swayed in Senate, and
was the ornament of the Roman name, serves as a recompense for him, who
dissevered it from his body. All hearts were melted into tears and sighs,
when his right hand was beheld (the instrument of his divine eloquence)
fastened to this head. Caeterorum caedes privatorum luctus excitaverunt, illa
una commonem. Sen. P.
The death of others was not bewailed but by particulars: The sorrow for this
man was general. We ought not only to believe the greatness, but admire the
infinite number of his virtues. He lived as Brutus, Cassius, and Sextus
Pompeius, saying: All things displease me, but death alone.

Cordus wrote the history of his time, and perhaps seeing the truth most pure
for posterity, had spoken for the honor of those, Opti^^e meruit de posterie
ad quos ventet in corruptae rerum fid^s. Sen.
who died for the defense of ancient liberty; for (verily) the fear of death
excuses not him, who offe^deth truth to flatter fortune. To publish lying
histories, or give false instructions to those that write them, is to rob
passengers on the high way in good earnest. He retaining the same liberty in
his discourses he had done in his writings, contemned the pride of Sejanus, and
to free himself from the hands of a man so potent, made it appear he was
real, and exempt from the number of the miserable.

This Calamity was not so frequent among the Romans when Germanicus lived;
these two Lions did (as yet) restrain their paws, fear tempered the actions
of Tiberius, and necessity withheld the insolence of Sejanus. Dion says that
opinions often passed current against his, he not therewith offended.
Dion says whilst Germanicus lived, Tiberius did nothing at any time of his
own head. He referred all manner of affairs to the Senate, he ministered
justice by the advice of those who assisted him, allowed every one should
deliver his opinion, endured contradiction, and sometime suffered to be cut off
in his opinions.

Tiberius said I am Lord of slaves, Emperor of soldiers, and over the rest a
Prince.
He would not be called Lord, but by slaves, nor Emperor but of soldiers, he
absolutely refused the name of father of the Country, he gave way in
discourse, and petitions to the title of Augustus, used it in the dispatches he
made to Kings, and in all occasions else was contented with the name of Caesar,
and Prince of the Senate: His ordinary wish was, that heaven would grant him
life so long, as the common wealth should stand in need of his service.

Whilst Germanicus lived, All that was done during the life of Germanicus, but
after his death all was changed.
the day of his birth was not solemnized, no man swear by his fortune, no
statue nor Temple was erected to him. When he went through the City, he desired
not to be attended either by Senator, Patrician, or Roman Knight, or any man of
quality, in all things demeaning himself, as if he lived under a popular
government, yea he descended even to the making of funeral orations for
particular men.

If he exercised any violence, Ambition for a long time makes it self little
to become great.
it was cloaked and colored with semblances of reason, or necessity, or if it
were secret, it appeared not at all. The Emperor Augustus to please Livia
banished him to the I Will of Planasia.
Clemens a famous impostor had slain his Master Agrippa Posthumus, the
grandchild of Augustus, and because he was much of his age, and stature,
Veritas visu, and mora, falsa; festinatione incer, it is volescunt. Tac.
he caused the bruit thereof privately to run as a thing dangerous, and
afterward publicly (as a matter acceptable) that Agrippa was alive: for it was
true, the Mother of the Emperor, had made him away presently after the death
of Augustus, whose memory was so precious and venerable, that under this name
he found friends in Gallia, succors in Italy, and credit in Rome, the people
proclaiming and believing the Gods had reserved him for the good of the Empire.

Tiberius considering that rumor, and his levity gave countenance to this
fiction, and that it could not so slenderly be believed, but it would prejudice
his affairs, commanded him to be attached by those who fained to be of his
faction. Percunctanti Tiberio quomodo Agrippa factus esset respondisse fertur?
Quo modo tu Caesar. Tac.
Being brought before him, he wondered he so cunningly had managed this
imposture, demanding of him, by what title art thou made Agrippa? The gallant
answers by the same thou have made thy self Caesar. Torments could not evict
from him the names of his accomplices, Inanis credulitas tempore ipso vanescit.
Tac.
and although Tiberius knew he had been assisted both with money and counsel
by the greatest, he enquired no further of them. But caused him to be put to
death without further noyce,

Tiberius then had reason to account the death of Germanicus amongst the best
days of his own life, and Sejanus reckoned it one of the greatest steps to
his fortune, but the same malice they bare to the father continued against the
children, yet endeavoring all they could possibly to dissemble it, to the end
it might seasonably appear, in the mean time covering it with large
demonstrations of affection toward them. Neronem e liberis Germanici jam
ingressum juventam commendavit Patribus non sinc risu audientium. Tac.
Tiberius prays the Senate to give Nero a dispensation of age that he might
enter into public offices, and be able at fifteen years to become Questor,
which is not granted but at two and twenty. He was also created Pontifex, and
the day he entered into this dignity, Congiarium pleb. Tac.
he made a donative of provisions to the people, who much rejoices to behold
the children of Germanicus in a flourishing state of youth. For full
accomplishment of alacrity, he espouseth Iulia the daughter of Drusus. ut illa
secundis, ita hoc adversis animis acceptum. Tac.


But she grew disdainful when she heard the daughter of Sejanus was promised
to Drusus the son of Claudius; esteeming this noble family was dishonored by
such an alliance, and that it gave but too much hope to a man, who already had
overmuch power, and who accounted himself unhappy if he commanded not,
impatient to live as a private person. The heavens unwilling to derive fruit
from so bad a tree, disposed thereof otherwise. Drusus sporting in the City of
Pompey threw a pear up into the air, Jason the Tyrant of Pherez said, he died
for hunger, if he arrived not at Tyranny, for he could not live a fool, that
is to say a private man.
and receiving it again with open mouth was strangled, and this daughter
participating in the disastrous end of her father, made her wedding song, at
the foot of the gallows, as in his due place shall be seen. The hatred was so
enraged against Sejanus, that some said he made this marriage to destroy his
son in law,

Miror fuisse qui traderenta a Sejano necatum Suet.
This opinion could have no other foundation, but that this young Prince
discovered too much contempt of this alliance, or too much scorn to be the
son in law of a man so odious, who had no honor in him; his ancestors or
himself, Vain is the praise which comes not from a praise worthy man.
having acquired nothing, he could leave naught to his children, and received
praise but only from those, whom he himself durst not commend.

Drusus could not brook this insolence, nor that his father Tiberius should
prefer Counsels and foreign affections before natural. Secreta viri,
corrupta uxore produntur. Tac.
He spared not to say to his wife, who betrayed him, and to his friends, who
deceived him, that Sejanus was almost become a Colleague, as he has hither to
been a Coadjutor of Tiberius, and his children the allies of Drusus: That his
ambition has deep aims, that he will not rest there: For, Prima dominandi
spes in arduo, ubi fis ingressus adsunt studia, and ministri, Tac.
The first hopes of predominance are difficult, but when one is arrived
thither, means to maintain it will never be wanting. He often spoke this,
and unto many; they were his ordinary complaints. A mind perplexed cease
not to expostulate, and ever lays the hand upon the wound.

He conceived an extreme hatred against Sejanus: He was so ready to strike,
that they surnamed him Castor, Surnames are given according to natures, for
which cause Dion says, Drusus was surnamed Castor, and keen swords were called
Drusians.
and not being able any longer to endure this man, who made himself his
companion, he lifted up his hand with threats, and the other disposing
himself to defense, presented his to stay the blow, whereupon Drusus struck
him on the cheek. Dion and Zonaras write, that Sejanus smote Drusus, but there
is no appearance he used this hardiness against the son of the Emperor,
young, courageous, associated to the Empire, and holding the Tribunitiall
power, Tribunitia potestas summi fastigii vocabatur. Tac.
the greatest next the Sovereigne.

A blow should be answered with a poynard, but strokes which come from the hand
of a Prince ought to be recived with patience and humility. He that can kill,
obliges when he only wounds. This disgust so fresh renews those, which by
process of time were (as I may say) withered in the soul of Sejanus. Yet the
History relates not he made any complaint, or that Tiberius reproved his
son, Tiberius S^^^num singularem principalium onerum ad jutorem in omnia
habuit. Vell.
so to have injured him whom he had selected above all, for assistance to
support the principal burdens of Empire: For it is ever an ill way to seek
out occasions, which may irritate the Emperor against the Prince.

Not daring to complain, he resolved to be revenged, and as revenge is ever
witty, to lay hold of the means how to satisfy the offended, he could find
no fitter wedge to cleave this knot, but to make it of the same wood, and gain
the wife to ruin the husband. Ra^a est concordia formae, atque pudicitiae.
Inven.
She was fair, but her beauty accorded not well with her honor. She
consents to the earnest solicitations of Sejanus, to whom none denied any
thing, because Tiberius gave him all. Familiarity drew on affection, that
which at first was naught else but love, becomes adultery, and adultery
witchcraft. A most strange blindness: The niece of Augustus, daughter in law
of Tiberius, daughter of Drusus, sister of Germanicus, wife of the Emperors
son, Se, ac majores, and pas^cros municipali adultere foedabat. Tac.
mother of two Princes, in possibility of Empire, blemisheth her honor,
disgraceth her house, to consent to the lusts of an ordinary Citizen. But
glorious beauties will be admired, and powerful favors sought unto. Sejanus
could do all by his favor, Livia was beloved of all for her beauty. Upon the
demand made unto Aristotle, why we love that which is fair, he answered, It is
a blind man's question.
To ask why that which is beautiful is affected, Is the question of a blind
man: but it is to have eyes no where but in the head, to wish great men may not
do what they please.

Having then the body at his dispose, he managed the heart as he list: The
first crime made way for all the rest. Foemina amissa pudicitia, alia flagitia
non abnuit. Tac.
When a woman has forsaken her chastity, she has nothing left either to
lose, or deny. Love made her an adulteress, ambition a murderesse, and the
passage is confident from the one to the other. Sejanus infuseth into her mind
a desire to become the Emperors wife, she believes he is able to make good
what he says; for Tiberius reigned not, but in his person, and at his
pleasure. She hears, and tastes it, and the delight she shows therein by
her attention, is not far distant from her consent. The Fort which parleyes,
is half renured.
Their likings concurring for love, unite for marriage, and for that purpose
they conspire to dissolve all obstacles: Sejanus, by the divorce of Apicata,
and Livia by the death of Drusus.

Magnitudo facino^is metum, prolatio, interdum diversa consilia adf^rt. Tac.
But as Great mischiefs cannot so quickly be hatched (for fear draws on
irresolution, affrightment invites slacknesse, and distance of time augmenteth
difficulties) they had not so much trouble to resolve on the act, as to find
out the means, and manner. Order, and secrecy, which ought to be exactly
observed in matters important were not omitted in this wicked plot. They
resolved to poison him: and weighing with themselves, if the poison were given
in his meat, some others (perhaps) might be surprised, and deceived therewith,
they advised to give it in some medicine which he was to take, and that it
should have so slow operation, that death would be imputed to nature, or
accident, and not to treason, and violence.

Eudemus amicus, ac medicus Liviae, specie artis frequens secretis. Tac.
Livia therein employed Eudemus her Physician, who for his quality, and by the
favor of his profession, had ordinary access to her cabinet. Adulteria etiam
in principum domibus, ut Eudemi in Liviae Drusi Caesaris. Plin.
Tacitus says he was her friend, Pliny her adulterer. Sejanus gains Lygdus
the Eunuch, one of the chiefest and most trusty household servants of Drusus,
and to tie his heart more straightly to him, Rumor Sejanum Lygdi spadonis
animum stupro vicisse.
villanously abuses his body, he being both young, and handsome. The wretches
conspire in this execrable attempt: The murdrous Sejanus plotteth it, Livia the
Adulteress gives consent, Eudemus the Ruffian compoundeth the drug, and Lygdus
the Catamite presents it. Four creatures, Jupiter says to Prometheus, he
deserved to have his heart, and liver devoured.
who deserve their hearts which formed, and conceived this prodigious
assassinate on the sole son of the Prince, should everlastingly be devoured
by gnawing Vultures. They all miserably perished, and so may all those Furies,
who traitorously attempt on Princes.

Drusus, without distrust, takes this deadly poison from the hand of Lygdus his
Eunuch, and that which he thought would have confirmed health, hastens death:
but so slowly, that the languishment, and length took away the suspicion of
poison. Time, Ordo sceleris per Apicatam Sejano proditus tormentis Eudemi, as
Lygdi patefactus est. Tac.
which in the end discovers all things, drew truth out of darkness, and
Apicata the wife of Sejanus, eight years after gave the first notice. It is an
admirable thing, that a woman of a great spirit wounded in her honor, and
banished shed from the company of her husband by an Adulteress, could so long
be silent, but this discourse shall not be ended, till this wonder be
satisfied.

Sejanus facinorum amnium repertor habehatur ex nimia caritate in eum Caesaris.
Tac.
The actions of Sejanus were so exploded, and Tiberius for favoring him so
hated, that already being branded with so remarkable, and notorious villainies,
it was thought he had put Drusus to death by the hand of Tiberius, suggesting
that his son out of desire to rule, had resolved on his death, and that it
were fit he took heed, when he dined at his table, not to drink the first
draught, which should be presented unto him: Druso ignaro, and juveniliter
hauriente poculum; cunctis suspitio tanquam metu, and pudore sibimet arrogaret
patri finxerat. Tac.
that Tiberius taking the cup from the Tasters hand, offered it to Drusus, and
that shame and fear not suffering him to refuse it, he swallowed down the
poison prepared for his Father: An imposture without appearance, or foundation.

He who made assay was called in ancient inscriptions Apotione, or
Praegustator, by Xenophon, Oinoch^^s. Tac.
This impious act could not so easily have been perpetrated by Drusus, for the
Father tasted nothing without assay, which custom was brought from the Persian
Court, into the Palaces of the Roman Emperors, since Augustus his time. Make
Tiberius as cruel as you will, yet cannot the honor of a wise, cunning, and
wary Prince be taken from him, and well he might have been condemned of much
imprudence, if he had plotted to make his son away, by the mere advice of
Sejanus, and before he were exactly informed of the cause, and confederates of
this conspiracy.

This only proceeds from the malignitie of rumors, Atrocior semper fama
erga dominantium exitus. Tac.
little favorable to the actions of Princes. All which Tiberius has done, is
curiously collected, and published; but never has there been creature so
transported with hatred, and passion, to dishonor his memory, as to reproach
him with Parricide. Divulgata atque incredibilia avide accepta, non sunt
antehabenda veris, neque in miraculum corruptis. Tac.
We ought not to receive all which bruit approves, without suspicion, nor to
prefer things incredible, (although divulged, and greedily entertained)
before real truth, though often times disguised with apparent semblances, and
frivolous wonders, to impresse amazement on minds.

This death once again restored the hope of succession to the children of
Germanicus; Simulatio habitum, ac voces d^lentium induit. Tac.
and though the Senate for their love to Tiberius deplored this accident, yet
were their tears feigned, and passion without sorrow. There was not a man but
was well pleased to see, that by this death the house of Augustus began to
reflourish. Drusus likewise was not beloved, but for the inveterate hatred they
bare to his Father; A segelflatos cay omotatos. Dion.
for he was much debaushed, and as the vice of another displeases even the
vicious, his Father often chid him for these insolent, and haughty humors, which
made him to be most quarrelsome, Solus, and nullis voluptatibus avocatus,
moestam vigilantiam and malas curas exercet. Tac.
and cruel. But the people excused all that, saying, It were better he should
pass the night in feasts, the day in Theaters, than to languish in the
melancholy of solitude, pensive vigils, and pernicious amusements.

Presently the tears of Tiberius being dried up, Negotia pro solatiis.
he went to the Senate to seek out consolation in affairs, The Consuls sat
on their Sellae curules, and the Senators low, and after them the Praetors, and
Tribunes.
and seeing the Senators sit low, he caused them to ascend, putting them in
mind of the reverence of the place, and the dignity of their charges, and
used his speech to raise up their spirits, which sorrow had dejected.

The custom of mourning was, not to stir out of the house, nor behold day
light. Vix dies a plaerisque lugentium adspicitur. Tac.
Sirs, I may perhaps be condemned, that in so fresh a sorrow, I here am
present, and well I wot, that those who are in grief brook not daylight, nor
condolement of their friends most near: But as I ascribe not this to weakness
of heart, so I desire to let you know, that I have not sought out a greater
ease in mine affliction, than the embraces of the common wealth.

He also said, that the decrepit age of the Empress, took from him the hope
of her assistance, that his grandchildren were in their minority, that he
already had passed more than the moity of the course of his life, that he
prayed them the children of Germanicus might be admitted, the only remedy,
Germanici siberi unica praesentium malorum levamenta. Tac.
and consolation of the evils which at this time afflicted him. Nero and Drusus
were sent for: Egressi consules firmatos eloquio adolescentulos, deductosque
ante Caesarem statuunt. Tac.
The Consuls went out of the Senate house to receive them, and after some words
spoken to encourage them, they were conducted to the Emperor, who taking them
by the hand said.

(Sirs) when these children lost their father, I committed them to the charge
of Drusus my son, and their Cousin, and prayed him, although he had children,
to take as much care of them, as of his own proper blood, educate, and
preserve them for himself, and posterity: But now that Drusus is taken from
them, I address my prayers to you, and conjure you before the Gods, and our
Country, that undergoing the performance of my obligation, and yours, you take
upon you the breedding, and care of the nephews of Augustus, descended from
eminent, and illustrious Personages.

Afterward casting his eyes on the young Princes, he says to them.

(Nero my darling, and you Drusus) these Lords, whom you here behold, are your
Fathers: The condition of your birth is such, ^^a nat^a^tis, ut bona maloque
vostra ad Remp. Tac.
that the state has much interest in the good, or evil you shall do.

In these ocasions they had words proper; of joy, and desire, among the
Grecians Agathetuche, and the Latins Quod saustum selixque sit.
The Senate answered not, but with tears, vows, and prayers, and this
discourse of Tiberius had served for his honor, had he not thereunto added the
same promises, which so often were exploded heretofore, and which much it would
have troubled him to keep.

I protest unto you (Fathers Conscript) says he) I have no other ambition, but
to restore Rome to her ancient liberty, and leave the government, either to
the Consuls, or some other. These last words were so far from the intention
of him who spoke them, Vana, and irrisa, vero, and honesto fidem adimuni. Tac.
and the belief of his auditory, that they took from the first, all the
estimation which truth, and honesty might give them.

All that was naught but mere deceit: This evil Prince thought of nothing but
the utter extirpation of Germanicus his family, which the death of Drusus
brought into grace. The funerals were prepared in the same equipage, as those
of Germanicus, and thereunto many other magnificences were added; Addit semper
ali quid posterior adulatio. Tac.
For the last adulation is ever most costly. Tiberius made the funeral
oration, as Augustus had done for Agrippa his son in law.

There was placed a veil between him and the dead body, to the end he might
not behold the corpse: for the office of the Pontifex being sacred, it was not
lawful for him to look on any thing, dead. The Statues likewise of the Gods
were veiled, or transferred from places, where punishments were inflicted: So
Philo says, that the high Priest of the Jews for that his soul was ever pure
saw nothing direful.
Yea Claudius caused, that, of Augustus to be taken from the Theater of the
Gladiators, that it might not ever be present at murder, or be always
scarfed. Every one bewailed him, who wept not himself: For an object so sad,
Flente populo non flexit vult^m. Sen.
and apprehensible as this, could not bend his gravity, beholding without
passion in himself, how sensible his loss was to others, whilst he would make
it appear, he had no sense at all.

Sejanus standing by his side admired his constancy, but made no profit
thereof: For this act taught him of what temper his heart was, Sejano ad latus
s^^ti experiendum se dedit quam patienter possit suos perdere. Sen.
since he so patiently bare the loss of one so beloved. Could he think, that
a Prince who had so little resentment in the death of a son, would care for
the loss of his servants. He must learn to be more subtle to know the humor
of his Master, who made use of him, as of a felt cloak or gaberdine during the
storm; to cast it off when it ceased. Sejanus thought on nothing, but the
ruin of Germanicus his house, and when that were done Tiberius would ruin
him, for then he should have no further need of him. He dealt presently as with
a good horse, when the rider sees him of gentle manage, he makes much of him,
and lets him go at pleasure where he list, but in the end Masters him.

It was not only violence which guided this excessive power of Sejanus, but
avarice also bare a part, making him believe all he possessed not, Quicquid non
acquiritur, damnum est. Sen.
was wholly lost. Dion says, he was heir of all those, who died without
children, This exorbitant covetousness caused the death of Lepida a noble
Roman Lady, and Suetonius saying, that Tiberius made Lentulus the Augur dye
with grief, to the end he might have no other heir than himself, In gratiam
Quirini consularis pradivitu, and orbi. Tac.
adds the process framed against Lepida, was only to gratify Quirinus her
husband, who was rich, and without issue.

The proceeding related by Tacitus is very strange, it was full twenty years
she had lived from her husband, Exemit Drusum dicenda primo loco Sententia,
n^caeteris assentiendi necessitas fieret. Tac.
when he accused her of adultery, poison, and a supposititious child. Tiberius
affirmed she had consulted with Chaldeans concerning his house and person. He
would not suffer Drusus to deliver his opinion (first) in judgment, that he
might leave the opinions free, and not oblige them to follow his.

There were sports exercised during this process, Lepida went thither with
many great and eminent Ladies of the City, and enjoying the privilege of
Romans, who never were imprisoned during their accusation, nor after judgment,
unless the offense were capital, as she entered into Pompeys Theater, Ammian
Marcolputs Pompeys Theater Inter decora urbis aeternae.
she turned her eyes on the statues which stood there in many places, and
implored aid of him from whom she was descended. This was done with much
exclamation, and abundance of tears, that it moved the people, but especially
the women, to pity her, and to cry out against Quirinus, Adstantes effusi in
lachrimas, saeva, et detestanda Quirino clamitant. Tac.
calling him wicked creature, for that he so inhumanely had used a wife who
having been promised to Lucius Caesar the son of Augustus, had by this
marriage much honored him, as if they would have said, that by reason he was
old, Lepida cui super Emiliorum decus L. Silla, ac Cu. Pompeius proavi erant.
Tac.
and without children, and besides of mean condition, his wife should do well
to make him wear the horn.

The process coming to trial, verdicts propended to the commiseration of a
woman extracted from noble blood, sequestered twenty years from her husband,
and where the accusations were only proved by slaves: But Rubellius Blandus
concludes for banishment, Adsensit Drusus, quamvis alii mitiares, censuisse^t.
Tac.
Drusus was of his opinion, and he drew those to him, who stood not so much for
rigor. The Prince ought not to deliver his opinion first, Quo loco censebis
Caesar? si primus, habebo quod sequar, si post omnes vercor ne imprudent
dissentiam. Tac.
nor last, it is for him to conclude, and decree, Piso confidently said the
same to Tiberius in the beginning of his Empire. In what rank (O Caesar) would
you deliver your opinion? if in the first, I were bound to follow you, if in
the last, our opinions may happen to differ, and so I might commit a fault
against my will.

Dion observes another mean, to get the inheritance of a rich man. Sextus
Marius had a daughter young and beautiful, Tiberius affects her, the father
removes her to a country house. To enforce their return, they are accused of
incest. He lives too long, who survives his own honor.
The daughter says to the father: Let us not afford them the content to
dispose of us at their pleasure, nor so far to prevail, as to hinder us from
dying honestly. I have not used to pray to any, but the Gods; and to Sejanus I
will never be beholding for my life, upon the price of that, which is more
dear to me, than a thousand lives. Marius ashamed to see his courage stand in
need of his daughters example, slew himself first, and she after did the like.

This death much benefited Tiberius and Sejanus: For they were the heirs of
Marius, The same hand which does the injury makes amends.
a man so rich, that being offended with a neighbor of his, he invited him to
his house, made him good cheer for two days together. On the first he pulled
down his house, on the second he reedified it again more fair and large. The
owner thereof returning on the third day, was amazed at this alteration; Marius
said to him, I have done the one as thy enemy to be revenged on thee, and the
other as thy friend, for the good I wish thee. Delatores genu^ hominum publico
exitio repertum, and paenu quidem nunquam satis coercitum, per praemia
eliciebantur. Tac.


There was then no safety in Rome, but for Informers, a pernicious sort of
people, whom disorder had put into credit, to ruin and overthrow all, and who
were so countenanced, that their calumny was not only unpunished, but
recompensed. The more implacable, and stiff they were to maintain a falsehood,
and outbrave truth, the more they were rewarded, nor was it a less offense to
displease them, than things holy and sacred. Vt quis districtior accusator
velut sacro sanctus erat, lo ves ignobiles paenis afficiebantur. Tac.
Others who would not belie their own consciences, nor deliver their opinions
contrary to truth, were despised and punished.

Vibius Serenus proconsull of the lower Spain, was accused by his own son to
have conspired against the Emperor, and to have sent men into Gallia to
incite, Miseriarum, ac saevitiae exemplum atrox, reus pater, accusator filius.
Tac.
and stir up the people. He appears in the nasty, and durty frocke of his
voyage, (for he was but now freshly returned from banishment) and though he saw
his life in imminent peril, yet had he a firm countenance before the Judges,
and with an eye of indignation and menace beheld his son jocund and merry.
Stamping with his feet up and down for anger, and making a noise with his
chains (for he was brought thither by the soldiers that guarded him) he
lifted his hands to heaven, prayed the Gods to send him back to the place from
whence he came, and to punish the ingratitude, and impiety of his son. Nature
so unworthily outraged, How soere the matter go with the son: the father
should dispoile himself of the office of a father, to play the part of a judge.
prompted him these imprecations, not suffering he should show himself as a
father, to this wicked villain, who had revolted from the duty of a son. A
father should content himself with a light punishment, for a heavy fault: but
this disloyalty was so prodigious, Pro peceato magno paululum supplicii satu
est patri.
that it drew from his heart this prayer to the Gods for his chastisement:
whersoever monsters are found they are strangled, without consideration of
whence they are: Birds are fed, which come from forests, In silvis ortas
aviculas pascitis, and domi natos scorpionesoc ciditis. Petr.
and scorpions killed which are bred in the house.

This countenance so confident impressed in the minds of the Judges an opinion
of the innocence of the father, and made the wickedness of the son appear,
who was so terrified with remorse of conscience, and the murmur of people
threatening him prison, stoning to death, and the punishment of parricides, that
he fled to Ravenna, Exequi accusationem adigitur. Tac.
from whence Tiberius recalled him, enforcing him to pursue his accusation, for
he by all means desired to be rid of Serenus, having upon his stomach the
distaste of a letter which he had written eight years before, Haud tutum
contumacius loqui apud aures superbas, and offensioni proniores. Tac.
in terms more arrogant than ears, proud, and curious to resent offenses,
could suffer. The Senators gave their opinions hereupon. Gallus Asinius advised
he should be banished to the Islands of Gyara, or Donusa: which Tiberius
disliked, because there was no water either in the one, Dandus vita usus, cui
vita conceditur Tac.
or other, saying it was but reason, to give those men means of life, who were
suffered to live, Cruel pity! He was willing the commodities of life should
serve for the continuance, and entertainment of the miseries of affliction.

It was permitted to the most wicked to accuse the most honest, to revile them
with injuries, and give affronts: Masters durst not threaten servants either
with word or finger. There was no exorbitancy, Religion gave to the Temples of
the Gods liberty, and flattery to the statues of Princes.
which was not dissembled for those, who could shelter themselves under Caesar's
Image. The same liberty which encouraged the criminal, gave also confidence
and occasion to commit the crime. The custom was thereof in Rome from the time
of Julius Caesar.
This great reverence done to Tiberius, was showed in other places as well as
Rome, his statues being had in as much veneration, as Olympique Jupiter:
Capitale circa Augusti simulacrum servum occidisse.
in such sort that a master was condemned of impiety, because he had stricken
his servant, bearing a piece of coin insculped with the image of Caesar.

Annia Rufillia had been falsely condemned by the Senate at the suit of Cestius.
She vexed thereat, expected him at the Palace gate, near unto Tiberius statue,
from whence as a place of malediction, she thundered against him all manner of
calumnies, which are the weapons of weak spirits. The place where Theseus
cursed the Athenians, in the Burg of Gargettus, was called Araterion, the place
of malediction. Plut.
Cestius durst not demand reparation, because she had reproached him through
favor, and near the statue of Tiberius. He made complaint, and spoke in full
Senate these memorable words.

Princes possess the place of Gods, Principes instar deorum suut, sed noque a
diis, nisi justae supplicum preces audiuntur. Tac.
but the Gods hear none, but just prayers of suppliants. There is not any one
has recourse to the Capitol, or the other Temples of the City, as to a
Sanctuary to commit an outrage: but thy Laws are abolished, and turned
up-side down, since in a public place, at the entrance of the Palace we are
enforced to suffer wrongs, Non licet jus experiri ob effigiem Imperatoris
oppositam. Tac.
to hear menaces without hope of justice, for respect given to the Emperors
statue.

Had the History said nothing else, to represent the state of the miserable
reign of Tiberius, this would be enough to manifest violence and disorder,
and who understands the carriage of Sejanus, cannot be ignorant, how the
State was governed. Pitiful then was the condition of a Roman Citizen: it was
dangerous to speak, Crimen ex silentio, ex voce. Tac.
or to be silent, only thoughts passed without mulct, or peril, so that the
countenance made not appear, either joy for Agrippina, or malice against
Sejanus. This absolute power which he had over the wealth of the Romans, made
some say, it were good to dwell in Rome, and have their estate out of the
extent of the Roman Empire.

Vacia nulla re alia quam otio notua consenuit, and ob hoc unum foelix
habebatur. Sen.
Vacia, a wealthy man, and who had been Praetor, retired to his Country house,
finding no freedom against violence, but solitude. It was a difficult matter
for men of these times, to make any resolution; for it was supposed, who di^ so
of his own accord, was so far alienated from nature, that he stood exalted
above it with the Gods, or was cast under it among bruit beasts. As often as
the friendship of Asinius Gallus, a kinsman of Agrippina's, or the malice of
Sejanus had ruined any, the men of this age cried lowdly our, O Vacia, solus
scis v^vere. Sen.
O Vacia, there is none but thou, who knows how to live.

The solitary life was the most secure, Vita ruftica parsimoniae, jus^itiae,
ac diligentiae magistra-Cic.
the civil most perilous, and the rustique most acceptable, so is it likewise
the mistress of frugalitie, diligence, integrity, and simplicity. It was not
attended with so much honor, nor gave such contentment as heretofore, when the
great Captains went from Triumph to the Cart, from Tillage to Arms, Attilii
manus rustico opere attritae salutem publicam stabilicrunt. Vol.
and from Harvest to the Senate. The earth in those times took delight to
yield fruits in abundance, Gaudebattellus vomere laurea to. Plin.
and acknowledge the labor of those victorious hands, which tilled her with a
Coulter, crowned with Laurel.

Sejanus, this torrent of pride and insolency, overflowed all: There was not a
creature stayed him, all be encountered were utterly ruined. It is not safe to
commit so many, and so great charges, to the fortune of one. Par. de Fab.
Tiberius was blamed for submitting the fortune of the Empire to the discretion
of one sole man, and his will to the power of his servant.

Ambition is often times put blind, Evil enterprises succeed against the
undertakers.
when it should be clear sighted, and thinking to walk the right way,
wanders: It ruined Sejanus, and caused his designs to succeed otherwise than
he hoped. He promised himself, that Germanicus being dead, nothing could
hinder him but Drusus, he poysoneth him, and behold the succession
(doubtless) stands for Germanicus his children. It is necessary for
establishment of his tyranny, that he overthrow it, which he undertakes, and
that the more boldly, Ferox scelerum, quia prima provenerant. Tac.
because his precedent outrages succeeded so prosperously, that the father
neglects to revenge the death of his son.

He makes him believe his enemies will derive profit from this loss, that
Agrippina is resolved to reign. He needs no great art to persuade him; Nun
dubia Germanici liberorum successio. Tac.
for he saw the succession open, and this woman thoroughly resolved to bite the
apple. He is determined to cause the mother and her children to perish, Sejanus
herein finds himself much perplexed: For to think to corrupt Agrippina, as
he had done Livia, there was no likelihood, she being of a chastity
invincible, Sparga venenum in tres non poterat, egregia custodum fide, and
pudicitia Agrippinae impenetrabili. Tac.
and impenetrable: To give poison unto three at once was impossible; and
severally, difficult; so great was the fidelity, and vigilance of their
servants.

Besides, this Lady could not be treated withal, as other women: All the
City was for her, the most confident and shameless calumny durst not seize on
her, she walked firmly between the jealousy of Tiberius, and ambition of
Sejanus, who found no shorter way to ruin her, than to animate the Emperor
against her, by causing him to observe her courage, and her hopes.

He lost no time herein, but in a short space met with a fit occasion, to make
his wicked design break into action. In the beginning of the year, Solennia
vota pro incolumitate tua, qua salus publica continetur, and suscipimus, and
solvimus. Plin.
they used to sacrifice to Jupiter an Ox with gilded bornes, for the Safety
of the Prince, (which is the weal of the State:) The Pontiffes, and other
Priests, by their example recommended to the same Gods, Nero and Drusus, sons
of Germanicus, not so much for the love of them, as to please Tiberius, thereby
to let him know how much they desired to perpetuate the Empire in his house.
Good manners were so much forgotten, Adulatio moribus corruptis perinde ancepa,
si nulla, and ubi nimia est. Tac.
that it was not more dangerous to flatter too much, than not at all.

Tiberius was perplexed to see their youth hold way with his age, Primores
modice perstringendi. Tac.
for which cause he asked the Pontiffes, whether they had done it at the
instant entreaties, or threats of Agrippina, and they answering no, he rebuked
them, but temperately; for they were for the most part, either Allies of
Agrippina, or of the prime men of the City. He hastens presently to the Senate
on this occasion, frames a large discourse, to show them that henceforward, The
minds of weak and mutable young men should not be thrust into pride, Mobiles
adolescentium animi, praematuris honoribus ad superbiam non extollendi. Tac.
by honors immaturely conferred upon them.

Yea, Sejanus made more noise hereupon than Tiberius, saying; All would run to
ruin, since no more difference was made between the Prince, and his kinsmen;
That the City of Rome would fall into division, as in the civil broils,
Facta tribu^ dominis communis Roma. Lucan.
when it had three Lords, Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus; That the authority of
the Emperor would be the least; That the desire of ancient liberty was
awakened; That the faction of Agrippina would be set up, which not resisted,
their number would be the greater; Nullum aliud gliscentis discordiae
remedium, si unus alterve maxim prompti subvertantur. Tac.
That no other remedy could be found for the discord which began to advance,
and multiply, but by causing one or two of them presently to be put to death.

Amicitia Germanici pernitiosa utrique. Tac.
He threatened only two, and aimed at many, but he supposed, that these two C.
Silius, and T. Sabinus should fall from so high an eminence, that all the rest
would be warned by their ruin. Their noble affection to the house of
Germanicus, had in no degree degenerated from the nature of true friendship,
although it were not only barren, but unfortunate to them. Turpe aliis
gratificari per deed cus proprium. Tac.
Varro the Consul wickedly accommodating his conscience, and honor to the
passion of Sejanus, accuses Caius Silius, and Sosia Galla his wife, T. Sabinus
was reserved for another time, and although they made it appear this pursuit
was violent, and that Varro ought to stay till he were out of his Consulship,
yet process was framed as in case of treason, though they were accused for
nothing but to have converted the moneys of the common wealth to their own
use, and of which sums no man required restitution: Proprium Tiberio scelera
nuper reperta priscis verbis obtegere. Tac.
But Tiberius was so wary, that he gave the titles of most odious crimes to the
slightest faults. Silius seeing that, makes no defense, and when ^e speaks, it
is but to show the pursuit is too potent; but foreseeing it was not in his
power to save himself, Immineus damnatio voluntario fine praevertitur. Tac.
his courage counsels him to prevent a necessary death by a voluntary. Sosia
was sent into banishment.

His imprudence, and vanity hastened his ruin, for he forbear not to boast that
Tiberius was bound to him for the Empire, and that if the Legions which he
commanded in Germany had revolted as the rest, he had not long held out. This
reproach touched the soul of Tiberius to the quick; Clitus was undone for
saying Alexander was Master over the lives of the Macedonians Plut.
For it destroyed his fortune, gave him no share in the prosperous success of
affairs, and made it known it was not in his power to free himself from this
obligation. Beneficia co usque laeta sunt dum videntur solvi posse, ubi multum
antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur. Tac.
When the service is so great that it cannot condignely be rewarded, Princes
account it not only as nothing, but as an offense, hatred possessing the place
of recompense, and disgrace of thanks.

It is a safer way to be obliged to a Master, than to oblige, and the service
which cannot be recompensed, makes the servant troublesome.

In the midst of all this Sejanus sees himself so far removed from his
hopes, that he redoubleth his speed to arrive thither, and by a blind
imprudence gives notice thereof to Tiberius. It is true he was forced thereunto
by the ordinary exclamations of Livia, who cease not to challenge him of his
promise to legitimate their loves, and to change the title of a Mistress,
into, that, of a wife. Sejanus gives her words for effects, she grows angry,
Reason should say to choler, what the nurse does to the child, cry not, and you
shall have it. Plut. Sejanus nimia fortuna secors, and muliebri cupidine
incensus. Tac.
he appeaseth her, she weeps, be flatters, and although reason tells her, as
Nurses do children, Cry not, and you shall have it; yet patience is forgotten,
her heart is like a mine which breaks with so much the more ruin, and noise,
as it is restrained and enforced. He suffers himself to be transported by the
ambition of this woman, who thought to marry the title of Augusta with this
husband, and so he to please her discovers her purpose to the Emperor,
entreating him to give way to this marriage. He presents his suit, and
although infinitely favored, brake not the custom to treat with the Prince by
writing.

Caesar paused, to the end he might have time to consider of that which was
demanded, and what he should answer, and to make the expedition of affairs
more easy: for the affluence of them was so great, and the City of such
extent, that it was impossible to satisfy all in an instant. Augustus wrote
all his answers, Serm^n^s elibello habuit, ne plus minusve loqueretur. Suet.
that he might speak neither more nor less, than what he had premeditated.
The subject of his request being bold, he presented it with much presumption: A
fearful suppliant is the more confidently denied: Qui timide ragat, negare
docet.
to beg softly and negligently is to doubt either of the merit of your request,
or the power of him whom you petition. He uses a complement of gratitude, and
acknowledgement, for this good Courtier never began by way of supplication, and
he thereunto adds a pernicious flattery, protesting he takes this course, to
treat of his affairs, rather with his Masters than the Gods. It was delivered
in these terms.

Spes, and vota non prius ad principum aures, quam ad Deos. Tac.
The good which Augustus has wished me, and that you have done for me in many
occasions (O Caesar) oblige me, not, to address my vows and hopes to the
ears of the Gods, Qui excubias and labores ut unus militum pro incolumitate
principis mavult, haud unquam honorum fulgorem precatur. Tac.
before I first offer them to yours, which imports thus much as to tell you,
though I never sought the eminent splendour of honors, and that my ambition
has wholly been to watch, and toil, even as the meanest gregarian soldier
for your safeguard and weal; yet I notwithstanding enjoy this comfort, (which
I value above all the rest) to have been reputed not unworthy the alliance of
Caesar's, by the marriage of my daughter with the son of Claudius. This is the
foundation of my hope, Augustus in collocanda filia nonnihil de equitibus
Romany consultavit. Tac.
and forasmuch as I have heard, Augustus purposing to marry his daughter, had
an intention to make choice of a Roman Knight, I humbly entreat, if you seek
out one for Livia the widow of your son, you would be pleased to remember
him, whom you ever have loved, and who therein has no other aim, but the
honor of your alliance, and not te leave those offices wherewith you have
dignified him. Satis vixit, qui vitam cum principe explevit. Tac.
It suffices me my house may have a support against the malice of Agrippina,
besides what I do is merely for affection to my children: As for my self I
rest contented with life, since I have wholly passed it hitherto in the service
of such a Prince.

Tiberius having praised the good nature of Sejanus, and remembered in few words
the gratitude he returned, answers, Tempus ad integra^ consultationem
necessarium. Tac.
this affair required time for a full resolution, and spoke in this manner.

The undertakings of ordinary men willingly rest upon profit, but the condition
of Princes is quite otherwise: Praecipua rerum ad famam dirigenda. Tac.
For they should direct the principal scope of their ends to reputation,
wherefore I will not reply to your demand so fully as I could. Livia may
dispose of her self, if she resolve to marry, or patiently abide in the house
of my son Drusus, Matris and aviae propi^ra consilia. Tac.
in which point she may have counsel much nearer, than mine; of her
Grandmother, and her mother: But as for my self, I will freely give you my
advice. And first concerning the enmities of Agrippina it is undoubted, they
will more ardently be enflamed, if the marriage of Livia should divide the
family of the Caesar's into diverse factions. Thereupon jealousies of women will
break forth, Quid s^intendatur certamen?
and by this discord my nephews will enter into contestation, and what will
you say, if you must fight for this alliance?

What will become of thee if thou be called?
Thou deceivest thy self (Sejanus) if thou think still to continue in the
same state, or that Livia is of such a disposition, as to be willing to live
with a Roman Knight, Vix cum equite Romano senes^et que nupsit Caesari. Tac.
having espoused Caesar, and after him Drusus: and though I give my consent
do thou believe, they, who have seen her Brother, Father, and our ancestors
in sovereign dignities, will endure I should suffer it? Resolve thy self to
live as thou art. There is no desire so regular, which stays where it begins.
But the magistrates and prime men of state, who visit thee to disease thee,
and ask counsel of thee upon all occasions, know well thou will not rest
there, that thou have raised thy self above the quality of a Knight, and that
I have much exceeded the limits of the love my Father bare thee. In public
they dissemble it, but in private blame my affection for their hatred of thee.
Excessit equestre fastigiam Sejanus. Tac.
You will say Augustus purposed to bestow his daughter upon a Roman Knight
verily it is strange, that he (having a mind rectified to think of all, and
foreseeing even to what degree of power that man might climb, whom he, by this
alliance should prefer before others) never spoke of Caius Proculeius,
Augusti animus in omnes oras distrahitur. Tac.
and some others of remarkable tranquillity of life, who never in any kind
intermedled in state affairs. Insignis vitae tranquillitas nullis R. P.
negotiis permixta. Tac.
But if we be amazed at his irresolution, yea, even in the advancement of
these; How much more may we wonder, that he married his daughter first to
Agrippa, and afterward to me? This is it which my friendship will not suffer
me to conceal, and as for the other faction I do assure thee I will never
prefer it before thy designs, nor those of Livia. I will not at this present
tell thee what I resolve to do before the year be passed, Nihil tam excelsum,
quod non mereantur virtutes. Tac.
nor by what alliance I desire to link thee unto me: I will only give thee
assurance, there is nothing so eminent to which thy virtues, and the affection
thou bear me may not arrive, and when occasion of speech shall be offered,
either to the Senate, or people, I will not therein be silent. In the commerce
of love, and ambition; reason is a coin nothing current.
But Sejanus more trusted his own thoughts than Tiberius his words, and his
soul frantique with this ambition, no longer was capable of reason. Much ado
has he had to come hither, there is no way to pass any further. The Ascent
has been difficult, slippery, and craggy, when he shall arrive on the top, he
shall find nothing but danger, and round about him a gaping precipice.

Tiberius not willing to ruin him, made it appear his course was dangerous,
which he would rectify. He that shows the place, where one has missed the
ready way, obliges no less, than he who directs which way to go. He lets
him know that this marriage will be a perpetual source of discord, in the
house of the Caesar's, and that those things which serve for Ciment, Vincula
charitatis apud concordes, sunt incitamenta irarum apud infensos. Tac.
among such as well accord, cause hatred in the minds of those, who are already
moved.

But Sejanus is not so much troubled with the success of his marriage, as with
suspicions which began to be hatched in Tiberius his brain against this mighty
and puissant authority, he usurped over affairs, which in short time make
confidence degenerate into fear, affection into jealousy, and liberty into
necessity.

Praecipuum indiciu^ magni principis, magni liberti.
When servants are too great, it is no good sign of the greatness of a
Prince; yet is it a thing proper to great Princes, to raise merits, and
recompense services: for, Incujus^unque animo virtus sit, ei plurimum
tribu^ndum. Vell.
Wheresoever virtue is found, it will be honored: More it considers the
person than nation; industry, than birth. In all times Rome has beheld new
men raised to mighty honors. T. Coruncanus chief Pontifex, Sp. Carvillius
Consul, M. Cato Censor, Mummius triumphant, and Marius six times Consul.

It is a madness to oppose the pleasure of a Prince; when he says, I will,
he gives an account what he does. Conse^ratus est vivens senti^nsque Euthymus,
nihilque adeo mirum aliud, quam hoc; placuisse Diis. Plin.
We wonder that Euthymus was put into the number of Gods, before his death, and
that in his life, he received sacrifices: but we are paid with this only
reason, Jupiter will have it so.

To take the power from a Prince, to raise inferiors, and to humble the
greatest, is to snatch the scepter out of his hand, to make his authority a
scar-crow, and extinguish the radiant light of Majesty. It concerns the
State, Interest reipubli^ae quod usu necessarium, and dignitate eminere,
utilitatemque authoritate munir. V^ll. Dub u^ an fato principum inclinatio in
hos, offensio in illos, an sit aliquid in nostris consiliis. Tac.
that liberality acknowledge desert; and affection support service. The
condition of a Prince would be very hard, if he might not choose amongst the
infinite number of his servants, some one worthy of a nearer trust, according
to the happiness of election, or strength of merit.

It imports not, whether favor cause jealousy in great ones, envy in
equals, hatred in inferiors, so it disturb not the course of affairs, and
that particular interest swallow not up the public; Vt pauci illustrentur
mundus evertitur: unius honor, orbis excidium est. Sal.
for when this happens, and that to enrich a few Favorites, the State must
be impoverished, all runs to confusion: the Prince so ill disposing of his
favors, is despised, as having neither judgment, nor justice in his election,
and the Favorite finds, Nullum gravius suppli^ium odio pullico. Sen. Fluxa
fama potentiae non suis viribus nixa. Tac.
there is no heavier punishment, than public hate.

If the Prince please, he casts him as low, as he raised him high, and there
needs but a blast to overthrow a power, which cannot subsist by its own
forces. Tiberius (truly) has some cause of suspicion, upon this excessive
power of Sejanus, but the affection the people bear to the house of Germanicus
vexes him more: and Sejanus, who saw his imagination wounded upon this point,
represents the peril greater than it is, awakeneth in the heart of the
Empress, the old rancors she had conceived against Agrippina; Choler is
appointed as a companion for reason: and S. Basil calls it, The sinnew of the
soul.
this remembrance moves choler in her, and anger, which is the sinnew that
gives the sprightliest motions to the soul, makes her consider she shall be
nothing, if her enemy be ought.

To cause this apprehension to penetrate more sensibly into her mind, he
employeth Mutilia Prisca, her trusty friend, and more to gain her, practices
upon Julius Posthumus, who made love to her. Regibus aequa, nedum infirma
insolita sunt. Tac.
The Empress instantly was stirred with hopes to supplant Agrippina, and the
fear not only to go below, but equal with her, furnished her with
sufficient cunning, to make her more odious to Tiberius, than (as yet) she
was. Besides, Sejanus had suborned men, Facilis foeminarum credulitas ad
gaudia. Tac.
who entertained Agrippina with vanities, and breathed into her soul the sweet
hopes of government; and as things pleasing easily enter into the belief of
women, she rendered her self more prompt, to minister matter of suspicion to
Tiberius, and of contentment to the people.

But the age being so corrupted, that although it was held a virtue, Tiberii
saeculo magna pietas fuit nihil impie sacere. Sen.
not to do a mischief, and piety to do nothing wickedly; yet Tiberius
resolving to do no good for Agrippina, feared to be condemned of impiety and
ingratitude, if he did her any injury. His indignation therefore not daring to
fall directly upon her, assaulted first her friends and allies. Claudia Pulchra
her cousin, was accused of adultery with Furnius, of charms and poison
against Tiberius.

Domitius Afer quoque crimine clarescere propensus. Tac.
Domitius Afer, who at any rate would make a fortune, was the accuser: He was
in the list of those whom Sejanus entertained, and used as an inferior
instrument to remove great engines. On this accusation, Agrippina wholly
enflamed with anger, both for the injury done to her, and the peril of her
kinswoman, seeks out Tiberius, and finding him, offering sacrifice for his
father, says;

It is disproportionable to sacrifice victims to Augustus, and persecute his
posterity. The spirit of this great Prince is not confined to his dumb
statues, Non in effigies mutas divinas spiritus transfusus. Tac.
but his true image, (which is sprung from his celestial blood) Well knows
the difference, by the evil usage is done him, he being reduced to the
miserable condition of the accused. Pulchrae sola exitii causa, quod Agrippinam
stulte prorsus ad cultum dilexerit. Tac.
It is not Pulchra is aimed at, but my self, I am the only cause of her
ruin, she has done no ill, but in showing to have no other affection, but for
the service of Agrippina, and that imprudently: For she ought to have
remembered, that Sofia Galla was banished for the same.

This discourse so galled Tiberius, that he could no further dissemble, but
drew from the bottom of his heart a word sharp and strange, for his humor,
who accustomed not to be so clear: For after he had told her she must
moderate her passion, he adds a Greek verse to this purpose. Daughter, you
think you have wrong, if you command not. If Agrippina understood Greek, this
speech could not pass without an answer; and it is most certain, Ladies of
this quality were learned, Agrippina her daughter wrote an History, Augustus
commended her wit, Augustus quadam epistola Agrippinae neptis ingenium
collandavit, and scripta. Suet.
as one who long time had lived in Athens, and other Cities of Greece with
Germanicus her husband, to understand certain graces of speech.

And it is without doubt, that this word touching his ambition to the quick,
and heating her choler, she could not hold from saying this, either in the
place, or in her retirement.

Now, I pray, behold in what case we are, since the hope of a woman causes
jealousy in Tiberius, and fear in Sejanus. If I have been ambitious, it is
not for my self, Mihi nunquam persuadebunt, ut meos amari a mo nimis, unquam
putem. Plin.
my sex wrongs my courage: If I desire to reign, it is but among children.
What reason is there I should love mine own less than I do? I have ashare in
that which Heaven allots them, and I would have them know, if I desire not
their advancement, I cannot be a mother; and if I wish them not that, which
belongs to their father, I cannot be the daughter of Augustus. Agrippina
semper atrox, pervicax irae. aequi impaticus. Tac.
Let him call me haughty, proud, and impatient, as long as he will, I cannot
be other toward that insolent man, whom he entitleth his companion, and who
will be such with my children, who has allied himself with the Claudii,
thrust in his images among the Caesar's, thrown down the Pompey's, extends
his authority above the Senate, was the death of my husband, has ruined his
family, persecuted my friends and allies. Yes (truly) I am angry I command
not; But I should be ashamed to command so impiously, and unjustly.

But to what purpose are menaces used, where power is wanting? Weakness and
choler ill match together.
There is nothing more unequal than to be weak, and quickly moved with
choler. This mood of Agrippina profited her nothing, and advanced the
condemnation of Furnius, and Pulchra. Domitius Afer, who had showed himself
eloquent in their accusation, was commended by Tiberius, and put in the rank
of the prime Orators, but with more reputation of speaking, Prosperior Afro
eloquentiae, quam morum fama. Tac.
than doing well. The decrepitnesse of his age, cut off much of the estimation
of his eloquence: For his spirits being grown weary and faint, he could not
maintain his speech.

It was doubted whether the condemnation of these two Lovers were according to
the Julian Law, ordained by Augustus against Adulterers, for that was too mild
to content the cruelty of Tiberius, and boldness of Sejanus, which being
rather shamefast than severe, Relegation more gentle than banishment. Namque
religatus, non exul dicor. Ovid.
did only banish Delinquents out of the city of Rome.

Number moderated the rigor of the punishment: for had it been capital,
families had become deserts. Seneca says, this excess was so common in his
time, Argumentum est deformitatis pudicitia: nunquam invenies tam miseram, tam
sordidam, ut illi satis sit unu^ adulterorum par, nisi singulis dividat horas,
and non sufficit dies omnibus. Sen.
that chastity was a note of deformity; for to be wise, there was no need of
beauty: That there was not a woman so miserable and contemptible, who
contented her self with a couple of servants, gave not to each one his hour,
and to whom the longest day seemed not too short. It was by Law decreed, that
she who had a Roman Knight, for grandfather, father, or husband, might not be
a Prostitute. Vistilia extracted from a family of Pretors, declared before the
Ediles, she desired her youth might not be barren, nor her beauty unknowen; in
a word that she was a Curtezan. Satis poenarum adversum impudicas in ipsa
professione flagiti^. Tac.
This was all the penalty, which custom imposed upon these vicious women,
that the ignominious declaration of one so wretched and infamous, might serve
for a punishment. Tiberius commanded her to be shut up in the Island of
Seriphos. We must believe Sejanus rendered him not more merciful toward the
kinswoman of Agrippina his enemy; for exceeding the severitie of his
Predecessors, he already had caused Aquilia to be condemned to banishment,
Aquiliam quanquam Consul lege Iulia damnasset, exilio punivit. Tac.
although the Consul only did it by virtue of the Julian Law.

Agrippina was so incensed to see her kinswoman thus unworthily used, that she
thereupon sickned. Tiberius visits her, and after complements of good wishes
for her health, sorrow instantly drew sighs from the heart, and tears from the
eyes of the sick, when having deplored the misery, and ruin of her house,
she besought the Emperor to ease her afflictions, give her leave to marry,
her youth being unable to continue in this solitude; nor any other co^tentment
remaining among honest women of this her age, but wedlock, Non aliud probis,
quam ex matrimonio solatium. Tac.
as also that he would be pleased seriously to embrace the protection of the
widow and children of Germanicus.

This request which I (O Father) make to you is not because I am either
troubled at my solitariness, or that there is any thing in the world can
reinkindle my love, the first being raked up in the ashes of Germanicus, and
which shall never be revived.

This is not a matter to give me content, there is none left for me: But if
the Gods have (as yet) decreed any favor for me, they must afford me a new
heart to entertain it: For they never hitherto have allowed any to mine, but
acerbities, it not being able to hold, or retain pleasures. I stand in need of
one who may comfort, not my courage, but cherish my patience against mine
enemies. Reason of state is a contravention against common Reason in respect of
one reason, or one benefit much greater and more universal.


State rules, which transcend all the reasons of ordinary laws, could not
approve this her demand, because being a woman as well praised for chastity, as
fruitfulness, she would have filled a house with grandchildren of Augustus,
who all one day might pretend to the succession of the Empire.

For which cause Tiberius considering the prejudice the state was like to
receive thereby, made her no answer, and that he might give her no further
notice, either of his distaste or fear, he slightly retired, not speaking one
word. An advised answer neither discovers the offense nor fear. Ne offensio,
aut metus prodatur. Tac.
This silence, and slacknesse the more inflamed Agrippina, but since the first
arrows of revenge are injuries, and what cannot be done through want of power,
is in heat of anger wished, Prima semper irarum tela maledicta sunt and
quicquid non possumus imbecilli, optamus irati. Salu.
she vomited all out, which lay on her heart. Sejanus who knew how to take his
time, ponders all this, and by an officious disloyalty causes to be said to
this Lady, that the designs which Tiberius has concealed in his heart against
her, are now on the point to break forth, that he is resolved to poison her,
and therefore wished her to take nothing, either from his hand, Solum
insidiarum remedium, si non intelligantur. Tac.
or of his meat. Agrippina who out of her wisdom was not to make show of this
counsel, for the danger might ensue in taking notice to know the purposes of
the Prince, presently bare her heart on her forehead, and being at his table,
stiffely resolved on silence and abstinence. When he saw, she had not tasted of
an apple, which he presented her with his own hand, and that she gave it to
those who waited at the table, he turned to his mother, and said in her ear.
It is not to be wondered at, Non mirum si princeps quid seuerius statuit in eum
a quo veneficii insimulatur. Tac.
if I heretofore have decreed any harsh thing against this woman, since she
accounts me a poysoner.

Where distrust begins, friendship ends: From this instant their spirits became
irreconciliable, and the rumor ran through Rome, Tiberius would put Agrippina
to death, either in private, or public.

Thereupon Tiberius makes a voyage to Naples, the design whereof had often
been resolved, set on foot again, and broken of. Certus procul urbe degere.
Tac.
He said it was to dedicate a Temple to Jupiter at Capua, and another to
Augustus at Nola, Augustus died at Nola. Cum saevitiam, ac libidinem factis
promoret, locis occultabat. Tac.
where he dyed, but his intention was to absent himself from the City. It is
certain that Sejanus knowing his humor, advised this retirement that he might
have opportunity at his pleasure to rule him: but because he remained there
five years after his death, I suppose, he chose this place to cover the
exorbitances of his life. Weak old age makes a Prince to be despised. Dion
speaks it of Tiberius and Nerva. Dia togeras cataphronoumenon.


There are some hold opinion; it was also to conceal his old age which made
him contemptible, and that he might not expose his body to public view, which
was ready to fall in pieces, and his spirit to issue our, as it were from a
building the walls whereof are ruinate, and planchers rotten. This ill habit of
body, made him ashamed: he was tall of stature, meager and thin, his shoulders
crooked and hollow, his head bald, and void of hair, his face overrun with
pushes, and mattery botches, Adrian was the first Emperor who let his beard
grow to cover his scarres.
and always spotted and disfigured with plasters: The hair of his beard
covered not his deformities, for the Emperors ware none. His nature was
pleased with solitariness, and used it much at Rhodes, where he fled from
company, to hide the shame of his own excesses, and those of his wife.

Sovereign authority is incapable of company.
One of the most apparent reasons was his impatience, not being any longer able
to endure near his mother, who would do all, nor could he take the authority
out of her hands, he having received the Empire from her. Matrem dominationis
sociam aspernabatur. Tac.
Upon all occasions she upbraided him, that he teigned not but by her means,
that he was no less obliged to her for his fortune, than his birth. Nor is it
to be doubted; for Livia perceiving Augustus would declare Germanicus his
successor, upon the conceit this election would be acceptable to the people,
(who loved and applauded him) obtained so much by her prayers, and
conjurations, that Tiberius was assured of Empire, after Augustus, and
Germanicus after Tiberius. Livia put him in mind hereof, The memory was a
reproach, Qui exprobrat, reposcit. Tac.
the reproach a summons of acknowledgement, and the failing herein, Ingraritude.

He then undertook this journey to absent himself from his Mother, and was
attended by very few, Martino participe Sejanus Curtium Atticum oppressit. Tac.
One Senator Cocceius Nerva skillful in the laws, Sejanus, one Knight, and
Curtius Atticus whom Sejanus ruined. The other were men of learning, and for
the most part Grecians; For he entertained himself with their discourses, was
delighted with the riches and elegance of this language, and spoke it
distinctly, properly, and eloquently, which is not done without the help of
nature, art, and propriety. Many can speak, few express themselves, for to
express well it is requisite the discourse be ever to the purpose, the words
good, the consequence without confusion. He that medleth in many matters gives
fortune much power over him.


Besides the contentment Sejanus received in wholly possessing his Master, he
managed his affairs with more safety, and less envy: but ever gave fortune
much advantage over himself. Qui assiduos in domum cetus arcet, in^ringit
potentiam: qui recipit, facultatem criminantibus praebet. Tac.
His abode in Rome was not so proper, for dismissing the ordinary companies
from his house, he lost his friends, in entertaining them, he made the number
to be known, and gave suspicion to the Master. He also had another benefit;
for receiving the packets which the soldiers of the guard brought, he became
sole arbitrator of dispatches.

Soldiers carried packets of letters and were called Spies.
All the functions of Tiberius his soul were depraved in this ill leisure, and
all the faculties he had were dissolved into delights, which Sejanus
perpetually seasoned with some notable example, because this Prince thought his
authority weakened, if severitie maintained not his reputation. Hinc metus in
omnes, and fuga eorum, qui convivium celebrabant. Tac.
This retirement afforded him one occasion, which greatly confirmed the proof
of his fidelity; for Tiberius dining in a vault, the roof thereof fell down,
slew some of his officers, Qui non sui, sed principis est anxius, cum fide
auditur quanquam exitio suo suadeat. Tac.
and had overwhelmed him, without the help of Sejanus, who covered him with
his head and hands, the safety of his Prince being more dear to him than his
own. From that time forward he gave ear to his counsels, although dangerous,
not considering the motives or sequels, as proceeding from one who protested to
have no other interest, but his authority.

He persuaded him to quit himself of Nero, the nearest to the succession,
whose hopes much disturbed his repose, and entertained desires of change in the
minds of the people. He played the Judge himself, his creatures were the
accusers, and they condemned him as criminal. Nero quanquam modesta juventa
tamen quid impraesentiarum conduceret oblitus. Tac.
This young Prince had modesty enough in his condition, but little judgment
to resolve on the sudden, and to consider the counsels of his servants, who
ceased not to tell him, that his birth designed him for Empire, that the people
desired it, the Legions required it, that Sejanus was wicked enough, not to
wish it, but not sufficiently powerful to hinder him. Nihil quidem pravae
cogitationis, sed interdum voces contumaces and inconsultae. Tac.
These words put no ill thoughts into his mind, but drew from his lips
inconsiderate speeches, which being reported to Sejanus, and from thence to
Tiberius, were taken for conspiracies. When he is at Court, great observation
is used over his actions: Crime in words, crime in silence: all his ways are
looked into: there is no retreat, nor safety in his house, night it self has
no coverture, A Roman Senator tried the discretion of his wife, as a vessel
ill hooped; He neither powered oil nor vinegar into it, but only water and
satisfied her with toys he invented. Plut. Ne nox quidem secura, eum uxor
vigilias, somnia, suspiria matri Liviae atque illa Sejano patefaceret. Tac.
nor secret place for him: If he repose in his wifes bosom, he there finds
treachery; for as a vessel ill hooped, suffers all that is powered in, to run
out, she relates to Livia, the Emperors mother, his watchings, dreams, yea
even his very sighs. Livia recounteth them to Sejanus, who bandieth his brother
Drusus against him, giving him hope of the first place, when his elder brother,
whom the hate of Tiberius made already infinitely to stagger, should be
overthrown. The spirit of Drusus was eager, for besides the desire of command,
and emulations which ordinarily are among brothers, he was very suspicious, his
mother Agrippina loved Nero better than himself. Iam diusopita fratrum odia
accenduntur. Tac.
Sejanus was no otherwise affected, nor were his intentions better rectified
for Drusus: but knowing he was courageous, and bare himself boldly in perils,
he supposed it would be very easy to prepare an Ambuscado, and so utterly
ruin him.

All the friends of Germanicus were sought out and persecuted: friends deceived
friends, The most established amity went not so far as to the Altar, but
covered under it inhumane disloyalties, which showed how dangerous it was for
man to confide in man, Multis simulati^num involucris tegitur notura
uniuscujusque: frons, oculi, vultus persaepe montiuntur. Cic.
whose forehead was a liar, eye a traitor, and countenance unfaithful. Sabinus
accused by Silius staid not long to see him in the same precipice, wherein
himself had been cast; but it was done by a notable treason.

Four Preters affected the Consulship, Si consulem vide o, aut praetorem,
o^nia quibus honor haberi solet faciam, equo desiliam, capui aperiam, semita
^edam. Sen.
the highest honor of Roman ambition. Twelve Vshers marched before the
Consul; As he passed along, he that was sitting rose up to him, and he who was
on horseback, or in Coach alighted, every one veild bonnet, and many laid
down their swords for reverence.

These Honors being not to be acquired but by the favor of Sejanus he that
could not attain ought by just and honorable means, knew not on what to
resolve. Give him money? He cares not for it, he disposes of the riches of
the Empire, and treasure of the Emperor, which consisted of more than
threescore, and twelve millions of gold: Pleasures? Nature violateth her self,
turning all upside down to furnish him: Titles? He is more than the Emperor;
for his will gives law to his, Sejuni voluntas non nisi soclere quaerebatur.
Tac.
his statues are erected, as high as those of the Caesar's. To gain the favor
of the Oracle, the heads of his enemies must be sacrificed to him

Of this number was Titus Sabinus a Roman Knight, Friendship which ends, was
never friendship.
who being of opinion that a friend which ceased so to be, had never been
such, continued his affection after the death of Germanicus to his wife and
children, assisting them in their household affairs, Sectator domi, ^omes in
publico, post rot clientes unus. Tac.
accompanying them in the City, boasting the constancy of his fidelity, even in
the time when their faithfullest friends grew timorous, and the most obliged
ungrateful.

Eo apud bonos laudatus, gravis iniquis. Tac.
That which pleased honest men, and incensed the wicked, fell right within the
compass of Sejanus aim, who held it for a bravado and a contempt, that a man
of this quality, made so small account of his power, as to declare himself
openly for his enemies. These men knew the wound in his heart: And undertook
to pull away the steel that stuck therein. Latiaris was made the spy to
betray Sabinus, and the rest were witnesses. Compositum inter ipsos, ut
Latiaris strueret dolum, caeteri testes adessent. Tac.
He had some acquaintance with him, which he renewes, cherishes, and
establishes by a more straight familiarity, Florentis domus amici, afflictan
deser^nt. Tac.
and begins to applaud him for his constancy in friendship toward Germanicus
his family, when others failed, speaks of this Prince with honor, of his
wife with pity, of his children with hope, Sabinus believing he had found a man
truly faithful to power his complaints into his breast, Molles in calamitate
mortalium animi Tac.
and (hearts being ever tender in the ressentment of calamities) he set his
tears at liberty, then his plaints followed, and after, reproaches, Effudit
lachrimas, junxit questus, audentius onerat Sejanum, saevitiam, superbiam, spes
ejus. Tac.
and opprobries against Sejanus, speaking of his cruelties, pride, and plots,
and it being a hard matter to bridle discourse, when anger and passion have
taken their scope, many free words escaped him against Tiberius.

This secret passion so breathed forth, Species arctae amicitiae inter eos, qui
sermonibus votita miscuere. Tac.
and his heart thus freely disburdened, he imagined he might build upon the
amity, and freedom of Latiaris, because they had so enterchangeably mixed
together bold complaints, and words both dangerous, and unlawful.

And as discontented spirits penetrate and search into each other, Dolores
quasi ad sidissimum deferuntur. Tac.
Sabinus every day repaired to Latiaris to discover to him some new wound of
his heart, and that, so much the more confidently, as be reputed him for a most
faithful friend, and that he (poor man) might employ the more time and
judgment to make trial of him.

Latiaris relates to the other three Senators the discourse which he held with
Sabinus: but because the testimony of one single man was not sufficient to
convince him; they advised to hide themselves, between the feeling and the
boards, Tarpis latebra, detestanda fraus. Tac.
to hearken, whilst Latiaris should continue, and renew this conference. He
finds him in the street, brings him to his house, saying, he had news to
tell him, and being shut up together in the chamber he represents to him the
perils passed, and the miseries present, Praeterita, and instantia quorum
affatim copia, novos terrores cumulat. Tac.
whereof these times were too fruitful, and redoubled new horrors upon old
grievances, not so much thereby to let him know, that all was naught, as to
give him occasion to talk and prattle in his former guise. Sabinus, who was
still very confident, said to him, Matters were now reduced to such terms,
that one could neither speak, nor presage any thing but ill, that no good was
to be expected in so tyrannical, and insolent a government, and, Moesta ubi
semel prorupere, difficilius reticentur. Tac.
for that griefs and injuries are hardly forborne, when they have once had a
vent (it being painful to hide a wound) he makes Sejanus author of all these
miseries, private and public. With much difficulty conceal we our hurts.

All this conference ascended by the holes in the feeling, to the ears of the
three Senators, who so soon as Sabinus retired, accomplished their treason.
Tacitus affirms, they in the same instant, by express letters, Missis ad
Caesarem literis ordinem fraudis suumque ipsi dedecus narravere. Tac.
let Tiberius understand all, representing the treason, and their own infamy;
and Dion says, it was to please Sejanus. He might have added, it so behoved
them: for besides the recompense they would draw from this disloyalty, and to
arrive to the honor of Consulship, by thus dishonouring themselves, if one of
these should have betrayed his companion, they had been all utterly undone.

The bruit of this mischief brought to Capreae, instantly returned to Rome,
where it marvellously disturbed minds, put every one upon his guard, Notae
ignotaeque aures vitantur, muta, atque inanima, iectum and parietes
circumspectantur. Tac.
ears known and unknowen were suspected, walls were mistrusted, and things
inanimate feared: there was every where silence, perplexity, and amazement.

Sabinus on the first day of the year was imprisoned: Is the new year (says
he to those who apprehended him) thus begun? Must Sejanus have sacrifices of
this quality? What safety then is there for a Roman Citizen, seeing among
vows and holy ceremonies, Inter sacra, and vota, verbis etiam profanis
abstineri mos. Tac.
even where profane words are forborne, cords and halters are used, both to
bind and strangle, yea even Temples are turned into prisons?

He presently was put to death, having no leisure given to defend, and justify
himself. His dog stayed still near the dead body, Cum quidam eu corona
circumstante cani cibum objecisset ad os defuncti tulit. Innatavit idem in
Tyburim cadavere abjecto sustentare conatus. Plin.
laid the bread to his masters mouth which was given him; and when the corpse
was thrown into Tyber, leaped after to support it, that it might not sink to
the bottom: whilst the whole City stood amazed to see such thankfulness in a
beast, amongst so many ingratitudes, and inhumanities which dishonored men.
All the accusers died miserably: and as Princes abhor Traitors after they
have drawn profit out of their treason, Tiberius scelerum ministros, ut
perverti ab aliis nolebat, ita plerumque satiatus, and oblatis in eandem operam
recentibus; veteres, and praegraves affixit Tac.
Tiberius rid himself of them: for when he had made use of these evil
instruments, he discarded them to take new.

The Emperor gave thanks to the Senate, they had delivered the Commonwealth
from such an enemy, and added, he passed his life in fear and terror. That
the conspiracies of his enemies much disquieted him, and though he named them
not, it well appeared it was meant by Agrippina, and her children. Asinius
Gallus speaking according to his liberty, and usual plainness, said, the
Emperor must be entreated to discover his fears, Qui metus fatetur, eos and
amoveri sinat. Tac.
and suffer they may be removed from his mind. Aegrius accipit princeps ea
quae recludit, quam qua promit. Tac. Tiberius lentus in meditando, ubi
praerupisset tristioribus dictis atrocia scelera conjungebat. Tac.
Tiberius thought this speech overbold, for it carried the lamp into the
bottom of his heart, which he would not discover. Sejanus sweetened it, not for
the love of Gallus, but that his choler being the more slow, the fall might be
the more precipitate, and impetuous: having ever found, that the more he
thought upon his revenge, time rendered it the more violent, and the more
distantly he menaced, the more heavy was the blow.

Asinius Gallus had much credit in the Commonwealth, but no favor from
Tiberius, who feared his courage, hated his virtues, and said, Pride was in him
an hereditarie disease, blaming Asinius Pollio his father, Asinius Pollio wrote
a Tragedy of civil wars.
a brave Captain, a vehement Orator, an excellent Poet, and a friend of truth
in a time when it was most hateful.

Tiberius (who ever bare in mind the bitter words, which Asinius spoke to him
at his coming to the Empire, when confessing himself incapable to hold any
more than one part thereof, Interrogo Caesar quam partem reipublicae tibi
mandarivelis. Tac.
he readily asked him, which he would have) cast him into prison, where for
three years he languished: Death dis-engaged him; but it is not known whether
it were natural, or violent. Princes will not thus be dallyed with, Speaking
to a Prince, we are not so much to consider whether that which is spoken be
true, as whether they be fit to hear a truth.
we must speak to them by way of supplication, or remonstrance: we are not
to correct them; to tell them their errors, is to offend them.

About this time the Emperors mother died, foure-score and six years old,
according to Dion, Iulia Augusta Lxxxij annos viti Pucino retulit acceptos, non
aliovino usa. Plin.
or foure-score and two, as Pliny affirms, who ascribes the length of her
life to the quality of a wine she drank. The Senate decreed large honors for
her: But her son, not through modesty, but envy, cut away part thereof, and
by his letters dissembled not, to be distasted with the graces done to his
mother, taxing the Consul Fusius, whom the Empress had loved, a man very
comely to attract the affections of women, and who had a grace in speaking
witty conceits, and jesting at Tiberius with taunts, which touched the quick.
Great men do not so soon forget, yea even that, Facetiarum apud praepotente^
in longum memoria est, dum acerba sunt. Tac.
which is spoken in merriment.

The hairs of Tiberius were grown white under the obedience of this mother.
Neither age, nor majesty dispensed with his duty. The sage Roman heretofore
in his time said, that he who loves not those who brought him into the world,
is impious, Parents non amare impietas est, non agnoscere insania. Sen.
he that acknowledges them not is mad. But this respect grounded upon the
duties of nature, hinders not the liberty of State-rule, which is jealous of
any thing that trencheth upon their authority. He was offended his mother
dedicating a statue to Augustus, near to Marcellus his Theater, Iulia Tiberii
nomen suo post scripsit, Tiberius, ut inferius majestate principis dissimulatum
gravi offensione abdidit. Tac.
had set the name of Livia, before that of Tiberius, he thought Majesty was
wronged herein, and that a Prince should not consent to be touched by any.

She had been married to Tiberius Nero, father of the Emperor Tiberius; and
Augustus, becoming extremely passionate for her love, took her from her
husband, and that so suddenly, that he gave her not time to lay her great
belly, Penatibus gravidam induxit. Tac.
and to leave in her lodging what she there had taken. It is not known,
whether she consented to this change, or whether her ignorance gave some
color hereunto. Fair women, who have done amiss at the suit of a Prince,
Virium autore redemit. Ovid. Matris in admisso falsa sub imagine ^usae, Error
inest pluvia tectus adulter erat. Ovid.
think authority will excuse them. Helena said, her mother erred not, having
Jupiter for the warrant of her fault.

Scribonia the wife of Augustus was rejected, because she too liberally had
complained of the immoderate power of this new Mistress; her fall established
Livia, and her error taught her, that to gain the heart of her husband, she
must comply with his humor, which was the cause she being asked what she had
done to govern him so absolutely, answered, By not prying into his actions,
and dissembling his loves.

Never any woman gave her husband better counsel. For seeing Augustus having
reigned severely, lived not safely, and that Cinna had attempted to kill him in
a city of Gaul, as he was sacrificing, with intent to offer him as a victim
for the public good: Augustus was much displeased, Quid vivii si perire te
tam multorum interest, quis finis erit suppliciorum? quis sanguinis? D. Aug.
when he was advised hereof, and desired death, since so many were interessed
therein, and that a man of quality, nephew to Pompey, undertook to bereave
him of his life. In this perplexity, Livia his wife spoke these memorable
words: Severitate nihil adhuc profecisti, tenta quomodo tibi cedat clementia:
Ignosce Cinnae, deprehensus est, jam nocere tibi non potest, prodesse famae
tuae potest. D. Live.
The remedies you have used have been to no purpose, take the contrary way,
severitie hitherto has nothing profited, try the effect of clemency: pardon
Cinna, his plot is discovered, he cannot prejudice your life, and may much
benefit your reputation.

Augustus believed her, sends for Cinna, and telling him he was well informed
of his design, said: I heretofore gave thee life, as mine Enemy and a Rebel;
now I will grant at thee, as a Traitor and a Parricide: Let us speak no more
of it, but be friends, Contendamus utrum ego meliore fide vitam tibi dederim,
antu debeas. Sen.
and make it appear which of us two has done best, either I in pardoning, or
thou in repenting.

As Tiberius had his confident friend, so Livia had hers. To obtain any suit
from Tiberius, way must be made by Sejanus; He that would gain the favor of
Livia, must sacrifice to Vrgulania, Amicitia Augusta Vrgulaniam extulerat supra
leges. Tac.
whose power in the City was so great, that no man durst enterprise any thing
contrary to her liking, how just so ever it were: For she had raised her
self above the Laws; besides, she was a woman so haughty and arrogant, that
being called to the Senate, she refused to appear, although none were
dispensed with herein, no not the Vestall Virgins themselves. Vestales in foro,
and judicio audiri qunties testimonium dicerent, vetus mos fuit. Tac.
Tiberius enforced through duty to his mother, became passionate in her
causes; in such sort, that her nephew having thrown his wife out at a window,
Vrgulania monitu principis pugionem nepoti misit. Tac.
he went presently to view the chamber, and saw this woman had not cast her
self down of her own accord, as her husband affirmed: for the signs were
yet to be seen, of the violence used to thrust her out, and of her resistance
to hinder it.

While this Lady was alive, he moderated his affections, submitting himself
through duty to her counsels, and Sejanus for reverence humbled his designs
under her commands, not daring to contradict them: But after her death, Tunc
veluti fraenis exeluti proruperunt. Tac.
all was at liberty, and in confusion, nor was there any farther hope or refuge
for innocence.

Caius Caesar who succeeded to the Empire, publicly praised her before the
Palace, that she most religiously had governed her house after the ancient
manner, not permitting time should introduce the vanities and curiosities,
which so much had wasted the former simplicity. A Princess most affable, and
courteous beyond the carriage of women of passed times. As a mother, she could
not suffer, As a wife, nothing was insupportable, yea, was so wary, that she
prudently accommodated her self to the wisdom of Augustus, and the
dissimulation of Tiberius.

The Senate received letters from Tiberius against Agrippina, and her children:
It was thought along time since they were written, but that the Emperesse had
detained them, There is nothing but ambition which never waxes old in man.
Thucyd. and Plut.
foreseeing they would give occasion of trouble, and although her ambition
waxed not old, yet desired she to end the small remainder of her life in repose.

They accused neither Nero nor Drusus of treason, nor of Levies of soldiers,
nor to have plotted innovations, only that they were debaushed. Queis nulla ex
honesto spes, publicamala in occasionem gratiae trahuntur. Tac.
There was not any thing offended the mother herein, but the imputation of
pride and obstinacy. The letters being read, it was moved deliberation should
be used, but as opinions are delivered more, or less rigorous, according to
the disposition of their nature who give judgment, certain Senators, whose
hopes could not be grounded upon honor, yet sought out occasions of grace, and
favor, in public calamities, advised contrary to the most ancient, and sage,
and making their own desires mount much higher than other, found there is not
any spirit so strong or firm, which ought not to be very reserved either in
giving counsel or judgment upon the liberty, or life of him, who may succeed
the Prince.

Tiberius had bestowed the office of the acts and registers of the Senate on
Iunius Rusticus, who having not given before any proof of constancy, or
fortitude, yet showed it was good to proceed gently in this affair, Dandum
interstitium paenitentiae. Tac.
that the accused might have time allowed him to repent, and frustrate this
commandment: for the most important things are altered in a moment. Brevibus
momentis summa verti possunt. Tac.
Besides nature, in the house of Germanicus was vigorous and flourishing; and
in that of Tiberius weary, spent, and frail.

Upon this difference the people who could not endure these Princes should be
used as criminals, detest this injustice, and lay the blame on Sejanus,
Ferebantur sub nominibus consulariam fictae in Sejanum sententiae. Tac
carry the figures of Agrippina, and Nero up and down the City, assemble daily
about the palace, cry out the letters were false and forged, make process
against Sejanus, and counterfeiting the resolutions of the Senators, the
stoutest man amongst them having collected them from this company, pronounces
judgment of death against him. And to this, Per occultum libido ingeniorum
exercetur procacius. Tac.
Satirical invectives are not wanting, so much the more confident, as the
authors were concealed, and gathered and sought out so much the more greedily,
as they in them contained quick and ingenious conceits.

Sejanus who should have avoided these blows by contempt of them, gave
satisfaction to his enemies, by letting them know these things much troubled
him, and informing the Emperor, his Majesty suffered in his suffering; That
the people gathering assemblies, and making decrees, there remained nothing for
them to do, but to take arms, and choose him Emperor, whose Images they bare
for ensigns.

Tiberius wrote other letters, Facile populus duces, Imperatoresq, deligit,
quorum imagines pro vexillis sequitur. Tac.
and continues his complaints against Agrippina, and her children, against the
timerity, and insolence of the popular multitude, and against the Senate, who
more weighed the cunning practices of one Senator, than the reverence of his
Commands, in contempt of his will, and scorn of his authority: but adds,
that he to himself reserveth the judgment hereof. The Senators excuse
themselves, and protest they resolved on punishment, Integra sibi cuncta
postulavit. Tac.
and extremest rigor if his commandment had not stayed them.

The ^se of Tacitus Annals is inestimable, not of some pages, but of all which
passed from the year 782. to 785.
In this point all the world bewaileth the inestimable loss of Tacitus his
books, which recorded the rest of Agrippinaes fortune, the conspiracy of
Sejanus, leading us along with the torch of truth through the mists of
conjectures. Libraries have preserved many books, which we willingly would
restore to them again, for that which wants of this excellent author, who
described all that was requisite to be known of the worlds affairs.

Now Tiberius ceased not, till the Senate had satisfied him, and that all his
violences were authorized by their judgment. Nothing so much urged the
condemnation of Agrippina, Novissime calumniata, modo ad statuam Augusti, modo
ad exercitus confugere vellet. Suet.
and her children, as the information Sejanus gave to Tiberius, that she was
resolved to pass through the temples of Rome, to embrace the statues of
Augustus, thereby to stir the people, and if that took not effect to hasten
with her children to Germany to seize on the Legions.

Agrippina was used no better than her children, and we must understand, that
of her, Accusavit per literas amarissimas, lo^gestis etiam probris, and
judicatos homines same necavit. Suet.
which Suetonius says of them, that he caused them to be declared enemies, and
dye with hunger. Nero was banished into the Island of Pontia, Drusus immured in
the base Court of the palace: the rumor was, that Nero seeing the executioner
who brought the halter, and hook for him to make his choice, slew himself
with his own hand, and that food being denied to Drusus, Druso adeo alimenta
subducta, ut tomentum e culcitra t^ntaverit mandere. Suet.
he eat the flocks of his matteresse; but the death of these two Princes was
not so sudden, nor in this manner. Suetonius wrote it upon bruit, who makes his
freight up, as well of lies, as verities.

The worst was done that might be against Agrippina, and her extremity was to
be exiled into the Island of Pandatria in the Tyrrhene sea, Pandatriam
relegavit. Suet.
where she hourly might expect, when they would come to strangle her, or being
asleep, cause death and sleep to meet together. Somnum mort^ jungere. Petr.
But Tiberius desired life should be her punishment, and, As injuries are
worse borne by those, who think they have not deserved them, Odiorum causae
graviores, quia iniquae. Tac.
and whose cause is just: so this poor Princess ceased not to complain, and
lament the inhumanitie of Tiberius. Seeing then we know the wrong she
suffered, The pen is cold in comparison of the tongue, when the ardent passion
of a woman courageous, and incensed is to be expressed.
we may well co^jecture what the complaints were she made. Her ordinary
discourse was to this purpose, but it is not heightened with that grace she
gave it from her gravitie, nor with that fervor wherewith she enkindled it by
her passion.

Agrippinaes speech.
Fuerim tantum nihil amplius deleturae domus piamentum. Sen.
Will the cruel Tyrant be satisfied, seeing he may now with full draught
quench that ardent thirst in the blood of Augustus, which so long has
tormented him? And will this disloyal Sejanus any more complain of fortune,
who has brought under his own power those three heads, which stopped his
passage to Tyranny?

The Gods have singled me out to bear alone all the miseries of my house, and
the expiation of the rest. I ask them but one favor, which is death; Is it
possible they should deny it to the miserable? And who is more miserable in
life than he who desires to dye; Quid miserius in vita quam velle mori? Quid
in morte quam sepeliri non posse? Sen. P.
or in death, than he that is denied burial?

Complaints, not forbidden to the wretched, and which afford some ease to
misery, are denied me; Nay, I this instant know not, whether spies may be set
upon me to relate all I say. And I wish it so. It is an argument of fear and
pusillanimity, not to dare to tell our grievances. Augustus communicates this
secret to Fulvius, who discovered it to his wife, she to Livia. Augustus is
displeased with Fulvius w^^^r grief killed himself, and his wise followed
him. Plut.
I will complain to heaven and earth of the inhumanities practiced by Tiberius
on the living, and dead. He put my uncles to death who resisted his hopes.
Augustus my grandfather not long after discovered to Fulvius his intention of
repealing Agrippa. This poor Agrippa was the first victime sacrificed at his
entrance into Empire* My Mother Iulia, who for her last misfortune, and third
husband, married this cruel man, presently followed her son. Germanicus was
poisoned, his widow banished, Nero exiled, Drusus a prisoner, Caligula in their
power: what would they more?

I was married; he has taken my husband from me, I found another among the
prime families of Rome; he has hindered it; I was a Mother, he has taken
away my children; I was free, he uses me as a slave; Nothing is left me but
honor, and he indevoureth by impudent calumnies to traduce it: His slander
being unable to fasten on me, he has invented a new imposture, which senteth
of the pollution of the place, Tiberius foedissimis criminationibus exarsit,
impudicitiam arguens, and Asimum Gallum adulterum. Tac.
from whence it proceeds, in saying Asinius Gallus has love in store for
me. I cannot but think well to be loved by a man, whom Augustus held worthy
of the Empire: besides he was my brother in law, nor have I so little
respected my sister Vipsania, as to rob her of the heart of her husband.

It is not fit the wife seek particular friends, but think well of the g^^^ll
friends of her husband. Plut.
Let my former actions answer for my present; Never have I known whom to
affect, but the friends of my husband, nor have I ever transferred my eyes, or
thoughts upon any other. If I have been mistress of some beauty, I have not
been proud of it, nor suffered others to talk of it, or esteemed it at all
but for decency.

They have reason indeed to say I have been too haughty; It is true my
disdaines have served my purposes: For scornful beauties entrap not hearts: I
must affirm the passion of love in my soul has given way to ambition, and I
have taken more pleasure in employments, which only appertain to masculine
minds, Agrippina aequi impatiens, dominandi avida, virilibus curis faeminarum
vitia exuerat. Tac.
than to vanities, which satisfy none but the effeminate, and I may truly say,
it is long since I forsook all the imperfections of my sex, to put on manly,
and generous resolutions.

But these impostures, are naught else, than smoakes proceeding from the ardent
desires of Sejanus to arrive at the Empire: For he seeing Rome affects me,
and that this well-wishing is supported by the opinion of some merit, has
proclaimed me a wicked woman, It is the fashion of good men to do well, and
of bad to speak ill, and do worse.
but as he exceeds me in speaking ill, I have ever surpassed him in
well-doing.

Let him please himself to have cast me into a condition, that I may no
longer be able to give him occasion of fear, I on the other side comfort my
self, he has reduced me to such a state that he can do no worse by me, for
I shall esteem the greatest ill he may work, the greatest good he can do me;
Let him not fear I will oppose his ambition, he ought to dread fortune more
than me, I suppose she cannot be more favorable to a mischievous plot, than
she has appeared unequal in the protection of a just and lawful cause.

His ambition has no limit, The appetite of ambition increases with satietie.
satietie in him procures appetite, he in the beginning protested, the
Colonelship of the Guards should content him, he desired naught else; and now,
Tiberius said, a man who had passed threescore years should not stretch out
his hand to the people, to have their voice, or suffrage. Plut.
when he through age should not stretch out his hand to any, but the Physician,
he will graspe the Tribunitiall staff, to be in the nearest degree to
sovereigne command. Has he asked counsel of his courage, whether he be
capable? He never has seen a battle, but in picture, nor ever drawn his
sword, but to show the blade.

After all this, he would have me live, that death may serve me for a
punishment, and will not suffer me to let it appear a woman knows, how to
conquer the fear of death, which terrifieth the most daring. Since then all
the passages to arrive at death, or draw it upon me are stopped up, I must
seek it in mine affliction, Vici, quem vicerium quaeris? metum mortis, qui
victores gentium vicit. Sen.
and my courage must yield thereunto; It shall not resist these violences,
consolations would redouble it, which I will refuse, on what side soever they
come; Those my friends afford shall in them be commendable, Officium pium, sed
mutile. Ovid.
but for me unprofitable.

If abstinence, affliction, melancholy, and sorrow cannot vindicate me from
this misery, and that needs I must live dying, and dye living, I will expect
which way the Gods will have me finish my days, Expectandus exitus, quem
natura decrevit. Sen.
and hap what hap will, as I have lived Agrippina, I will dye Agrippina.

He who is in the power of another, impaires his condition by his impatience,
and the liberty of his compalints.
The dolor of her wounds daily increasing, she continually laid her hand on the
sore, and without ceasing renewed the complaints, which so excessive a sorrow
was unable to moderate. Her words were related to Tiberius, who was well
pleased, that she perpetually gave him cause, why to augment her ill usage, for
it would have vexed him, her patience should oblige him to any courtesy. He
commanded the Captain who had her in charge, not to let the ill language she
used pass without reply. This cruel man well knowing; the way to please
Tiberius, was to injure her, Convitianti oculum per Centuriones verberibus
excussit. Suet.
and hearing her continue frequent complaints and reproaches, so barbarously
and brutishly beat her, that therewith one of her eyes started out of her head.

After this cruel outrage, she would no longer live, Mori inedia destinanti,
per vim ore diducto infulciri cibum jussit. Suet.
and being resolved no farther to expect death, but to prevent it, she
remained some days without food; but the Soldiers opening her mouth by force,
constrained her to swallow nourishment. She therein being more miserable than
others, who dye when they list, Admoriendum nihil aliud in mora, quam velle.
Sen.
and have nothing but their own wills to hinder them; but she was willing to
dye, and is enforced to live. Death is the only remedy for evils, and she may
not use it. Non magis crudeles sunt, qui volentem vivere occidunt, quam qui
mori volentes non sinunt. Sen. P.
They are no less cruel, who kill those that would live, than such as force
them to live, that desire to dye.

Yet is not Sejanus arrived to that he aimed at, all he has done to advance
his purposes, prospers not; for Tiberius, who was no longer distrustful of
Germanicus, nor jealous of Drusus, and is revenged of the pride of Agrippina,
and her children, imagines nothing can further disturb him, but the arrogance
and immeasurable power of Sejanus. Which is the cause he adds new jealousies
to old fears, and revolves in his brain, that he dreameth of Empire.

Quos diu fortuna sequuta est, eos repent velut fatigata destituit. Q. Curt.
Besides, Fortune began to grow weary of waiting on him, for he went too fast,
she forsakes his insolence, and ill carriage, as if she had not raised him,
but to make him fall from such an height, that there should not be a creature
found durst lend him an arm, or offer a bosom to receive him. Dion says,
Tiberius seeing Sejanus was waited on, and feared by the Senators, doubted they
would make him Emperor.
Tiberius, who loved him, began now to fear him, and seeing the Senate more
esteemed of Sejanus than himself, he entered into an apprehension they would
make him Emperor, from that time he resolved to draw this thorn out of his
heart; but did nothing rashly: For it was not only dangerous to enterprise his
ruin, but even to make semblance thereof. He proceeded very slowly, and
contrary to the advice of the Sages, who council, matters important should
rather be acted, than consulted on.

This delay proceeded both from prudence, and affection; for it troubled him to
ruin a man, who began to serve him, before he to reign.

Yet I notwithstanding suppose, A wise Courtier ought to know the complexion of
his Prince. Behold upon the an excellent Treatise of the Court, written by M.
de Refuges, a Councellor of State.
had this been all, he would have dissembled it, nor ever had rid his hands
of him; for he was apt for his humors, knew them perfectly, consented to his
pleasures, corresponded with his opinions, had readily preserved him from an
ill accident, and disengaged him from his perplexities. He overthrew all the
principal men which ministered matter of fear, or jealousy, reposing himself
on the watchful heed of a servant so faithful and approved, entermedled not
but with occurrents of most moment, and lived peaceably in his Island.

And though it be a matter very difficult, to sound the heart of a Prince,
Rationem foelicitatis nemo reddit. Auson.
and the causes of sudden prosperities, yet doubtless there is no way so short
to merit his good opinion, as to serve him in matters which are either
pleasing, To be loved of a Prince, he must be observed in his pleasures.
or profitable, dispose of his delights, and manage his purse. All which is
honest and profitable should give content. But the passion of pleasure
transporteth the consideration, both of honor and profit. Sejanus had all
which might serve to entertain the Prince in repose, and banish the necessity
of affairs; and such power over his heart, that he gave it what motion he
would, either of love, fear, or hatred.

A Prince ought to take notice of services, that he may be the better served.
He had done many great services for him, and although this consideration is
not always plausible in the minds of Princes, (for there are some, who the
more they are obliged, the less do love.) Yet would Tiberius have great ones
know, what they (in serving him well) might expect. But there is no likelihood,
if he had not been endowed with excellent parts, and of courage undaunted, he
so long had continued in the favor of Tiberius, a sour, severe, prudent, and
suspicious Prince. The History sets before us two diverse Pourtraits; the one
under Tacitus his pensill, who represents him, as wicked; the other from the
hand of Velleius Paterculus, who flatters, and affords him all the luster of a
perfect Courtier, Sejanus laboris, and fidei capacissimus, sufficient vigore
animi, compage corporis, and actu otiosis simillimus. Vell.
he says: The vigor of his body was answerable to the force of his spirit,
that he traveled without pain, acted all, as if he did nothing, and in his
greatest employments seemed at rest, neither showing himself troubled, nor
turmoyled: That he hunted not after occasions, nor gave himself the honor of
it: That he had his desires in all, and ever placed himself beneath the
esteem was had of him: Infra aliorum aestimationes se motiens, vultu, vitaque
tranquillus, animo exsomnis. Vell.
There could never be observed, or found any alteration in his countenance,
his spirit always awakened, and he ever active.

Howsoever it be, Sejanus to all purposes was an able man, and having lasted
almost as long as Tiberius, we must think, if Fortune had not turned her
self against his counsels, he had enforced her to subscribe to his wisdom.
Only I much wonder, that having made so many friends, he wanted friends: That
among so many heads tied (as it were) to his, and which could not stand firm
on their shoulders, were his taken off, there was not one spoke freely and
faithfully, To speak sweetly and graciously to great men. Athenaeys calls
it, Eouglottein Acelyse, choriglotein.
to advise him to prevent his ruin. It is the common calamity of great ones:
it is necessary all discourses addressed to them be of grace, and sweetness:
They believe truth owes them all that, which complacence affords. Were there
Judges appointed for adulation, they would have little to do, for no man
complains, he is flattered.

Sejanus had this unhappiness, not to have a creature, who sincerely and
ingenuously at any time said.

Temper your spirit, provoke not your fortune, abuse not your favor. Dally not
with your Master, This time will not always last, Patience offended turns
into fury. Dion says, If any God were descended, and had assured the ruin of
Sejanus, it would not have been believed; for at that time every one swear by
his fortune.
And should any one have said this, he would not have believed it. Pride dazzled
his eyes, whilst he boasted to hold fire, and water in his hands, and meant to
make use of them when he pleased.

Tiberius then (though tardily) perceiving Sejanus built his hopes on his
tomb, and that he not only dreamed, Not only to attempt, yea think, nay
dream against the State, is a crime.
but plotted, yea attempted on Empire, he resolved to quench the fire of this
ambition, in the blood of the ambitious. Summum ad gradum claritus cum veneris,
aegre consistes. Laber.
The first suspicion he conceived, was upon his marriage with Livia the widow of
Drusus: The second, that the house of Germanicus being overthrown, there
appeared no obstacle for his insolence, which was mounted to such a height, it
no longer could rest in any consistence: The third on the excess of his power
in the affairs of the Senate, treasures and commands: The fourth on his great
retinue of servants, who too much presumed upon him: The fifth that he held
Drusus prisoner, and Caius Caesar at his dispose, Improba blanditia, non quae
amiciorem, sed quae deteriorem facit assentando. Alc.
to produce them when need were, and continue under their names the supreme
government: The sixth upon the cunning he used to withdraw him from his abode
in the City, and detain him as a captive; under pretext of absence, and old
age: The seventh upon the strong, and violent means he made to have the power
of a Tribune, which was so great, that the Emperors annexed it to their own
persons: The eighth, that Sejanus spoke words he should rather have concealed
than expressed. And if upon all this he had had but this one suspicion of his
aspiring to the state, there needed no pains to be taken to find out a
greater crime.

But Tiberius is condemned of two acts of pusillanimity, The first to have
suffered the increase of this excessive power, which could not be acquired
without extreme industry, nor lessened but with over much severity. Blood
drawn abundantly from the best vein is well employed to defend or acquire one
least mite of authority.
The tree, which was in the beginning but a little plant, bears his head and
branches so high, that it gives a most dangerous shadow. That which he might
have drawn forth with one hand, when it did but prick, takes such deep
roots, that it afterward is very hardly pulled up with both. The Prince who
hinders not increase of ambition, when it first grows, deriveth no other
profit from hit sufferance, but loss and repentance. A State will no more
tolerate two Kings, When authority is once cracked it is ruined.
than the world two Suns, or the Temple two deities. Sovereign authority is
a strong sea-wall, not so soon overborne by the impetuous violence of the
tide, or weight of the water it resists, as by a slight rift, or cranny,
which gives passage to the torrent of waves.

The second is to have used so much ceremony in so pressing an occasion, so
much policy in so great a power, so much fear in so undoubted security. Not to
be separated from him, he made him his colleague in the consulship, to whom no
man had been associated without unhappiness.

Quintilius varus, ^n. Piso. Germanicus and Drusus who had bin Consuls with
Tiberius deid of a violent death. Dius.
When Tiberius wrote to the Senate, he stuffed his letters with nothing but the
deserts of Sejanus, and the services he had done the Empire: These words are
many times inculcated, Sejanus my friend, my Sejanus, I say my Sejanus. It
seems he confined not the glory of the Empire, but within the compass of his
life. His statues were to be seen every where, every one raises them as to
their Guardian-God. Who will refuse to yield him honor, on whom the Emperor
so profusely confers it?

This five years Consulship, Vino debemus homines, quod soli animantium non
fitientes bibimus. Plin.
intoxicated him, and as the excellency of wine invites a man to drink beyond
thirst, so this sweetness of prosperities inebriated and transported him to
more, than he wished. He that is embarked on this Ocean, where there are so
many perils, ought never to confide in the Calm, but rather turn his eyes
toward heaven, to direct his hopes to a good haven.

The solitary, and voluptuous life of Tiberius, was the ladder of his ambition:
For like another Sardanapalus, he vaunted nothing but his riots. Sejanus
entertained him in this shameful idleness, spitefully accustoming him to
prefer things sensual, before serious. He, who neglects the office of a
Master, finds servants audacious enough to command him: And who acts the
Prince but in a chamber, runs the hazard to find a companion in the field.

Impudence accompanying his pride, drew these words from his mouth, which ought
never to have proceeded so much as from his thoughts: I am Emperor of Rome,
and Tiberius is Prince of the Island. He caused sports to be presented before him
by bald men, who were brought back again to the entrance of the Theater, by
five thousand shaven youths, therewith to flout at Tiberius his bald Crown.
This number will not be strange to those, Athaeneus reckons 20000. and calls
them Sum proyontas, Anteam bulones.
who know the Romans had troops, and Legions, and such there have been who
have had more than twenty thousand of those marching before them; but it was
much to shave them, for then great care was used in frizeling, and curling
their hair.

Tiberius was instantly advertised of this mockery, Familias calamistratas.
Apul.
and made show not to know it, although he ressented it to the quick, but was
willing ignorance dissembled should excuse the slacknesse of undoubted revenge.
Besides, there is not any thing which more galleth the heart of a Prince,
Praecincti pueri, comptique. Hor.
than to see himself braved by a man, whom he has raised from the contempt
and misery of a mean condition. Aram clementiae, aram amicitiae, effigiesque
circum Caesaris, ac Sejani coluere: cr^brisque precibus efflagitabant, visendi
sui copiam facerent. Tac.
It is no less troublesome to be exposed to the derision of servants, than to
the discretion of enemies.

Upon the news, that the Frisons, a people of Rhine had broken the peace, and
in battle defeated the armies, so great was the terror in Rome, that every one
ran to the Altars of clemency, and amity, adoring the statues of Tiberius and
Sejanus, which stood round about, humbly beseeching them to return again to
Rome. Tiberius, and Sejanus were willing the Romans by their absence should
judge of the benefit, their residence in Court brought them: Nor indeed is it
fit a Prince should still abide in one place: If the Sun stepped not out of one
of his twelve houses, all would run to ruin. Tiberius not withstanding drew
near, and because he sometimes approached even to the suburbs, not entering
into the City, Breve confinium artis, and falsi. Tac.
many thought the limits of Astrology, and lying, stood not so near one
another as it was said: For the Astrologers affirmed, Tiberius went out of Rome
under such a constellation, that he should never return again; and there is
great appearance, if this fear had not seized on his imagination, he had not
resided eleven years out of Rome.

These predictions animated the accomplices of Sejanus, soliciting him to
temporise no longer, since the stars conspired with his purposes. On the other
side Tiberius, would not be surprised, and as the fear of evil which he
apprehended much urged him, so the peril of remedy restrained him: but
imagining he should be prevented, if Sejanus had the wind of him, he durst
ask counsel of none but himself, what resolution was fittest to be taken.

Sejanus (as yet) distrusted nothing, prosperity had seeled up his eyes, he
thought Tiberius meant no other, but to pass his time in Capreae; it was now
five years he had been there, at Rome there was no speech of him, but as of a
Prince who reigned not, and lived but at the devotion of others; that he
neither saw, The Kings of Persia had servants called the eyes and ears of the
King and by them he understood all that was done or spoken every where. Apul.
nor heard, but through Sejanus, who alone was his eyes, and ears, and took
no contentment, but in pleasure, and ease, which was the cause Sejanus put
forward and advanced his design of the Empire the more violently; what
blindness is this; He is not to live one month, and plotteth designs for an
age?

It was very strange he had not some suspicion of the Emperors purposes. All
intelligences which went to Capreae, or came to Rome passed through his hands,
and he hearkened to them all; For it is behovefull those who are engaged in
important affairs, should slight nothing, and though often times tales are
brought, yet some truth is ever stirring; they make use of all, There is no man
so great a liar, who speaks not some truth.
and are well paid for it, when of an hundred informations given, one proves
true.

He held all dispositions at his discretion, Hearts are gained by hope, fear,
or benefits.
either by fear, hope, or benefits. Those who served Tiberius, depended on
Sejanus, and such as served Sejanus, swear by no other name, but, that, of
their Master. Tiberius did nothing which was not related to Sejanus, nor was
advertised of any thing Sejanus acted contrary to his service. He had men for
all sorts of employments; Seneca calls them his dogs, who were only tractable,
and tame to himself, and barked at all others; for he maintained them with
the blood of his enemies. Acerrimi caenes, quos Sejanus ut sibi uni mansuetos
omnibus faros haberet, sanguine humano pascebat. Sen.
Tiberius not able to lay hold on him in the face, sets on his sides, and
embraces him to strangle him: He caused a rumor to be divulged, he would
make him Tribune, and wrote to the Senate, that without him this vast body of
Empire would fall in pieces; in all his letters he signifies Sejanus was the
Oracle of his designs, the companion of his thoughts.

The Senate who observed, not, that Tiberius dissembled, seeks out all sorts
of honors, wherewith to dignifie Sejanus, decrees both their names should be
set in the self same line in patents, and inscriptions, their chaires in the
same rank in Theaters, and Temples, their statues every where erected, and
that coming to Rome one only should go before another

He who will ruin one is well pleased with his evil carriage.
Tiberius is not offended the Senate cherishes the pride of Sejanus, to the
end that vanity rendering him more insolent, his deportments might become the
more odious In the mean time to let Tiberius know his designs aim not beyond
his life, he caused Germinius to be accused, that he had attempted on the
person of Caesar, this man for his fuller justification brought his will into
the Senate house, where he made the Prince his heir, a proof of his
affection, and desire not to survive him. But that being not sufficient to save
him, He who will make one his heir thinks to dye before him.
when he saw the Questor coming to execute him, he thrust a knife into his
own belly, saying, Go tell the Senate, I dye, as a man ought to do. Publica
Prisca his wife, being in the palace, did the like. I much wonder among so
many, who dyed thus courageously, Nullum magis adversarium timeas, quam qui
vivere non potest, accidere potest. Sen. P.
there was non enterprised the death either of Tiberius, or Sejanus: For he who
is careless of his own life is master of another.

This so fervent favor of Tiberius, cooled not at the first occasion, it grew
lukewarm, and then wholly congealed into Ice. He to day strikes one blow for
Sejanus, and to morrow another against him, he assigns the dignity of the
Pontifex to his son, and though he hated Caligula, Tiberius said, beholding
Caligula, I breed up a Serpent for the people of Rome, and a Phaeton for the
rest of the world. Suet.
he gave him the same honor, and that only because he was an enemy to
Sejanus. At this instant he gratified him, in granting what he demanded, and
presently revoketh what he had given him, and held his spirit so suspended
between hope and fear, that he knew not where he was, and did nothing but
like a man amazed. He commands the Senate to free a Proconsull, whom Sejanus
had accused. Tiberius publicly praises Caligula, and lets it be known,
Tiberius desired all might perish after him, and thought Priamus happy, in
that he ended his reign and life together. Dion.
he resolved to declare him his Successor, not so much for affection, as to
make the world grieve at his Successor, being indeed more cruel, and wicked
than himself. He writing to the Senate, says no more but this only, Sejanus
is my friend, his name was found in his letters single, and alone, adding no
more the titles, and recommendations he accustomed. As soon as the affection
of a Prince takes air, it vapors away, and it is an hard matter to conserve
it still in the same degree of heat.

The people were well pleased, that Tiberius began to affect Caligula, not so
much for the love of him, who was naturally violent and inhumane, Caligula
seeing many Senators at his table, laughed at a sudden, and it being asked,
what he meant by it? he answered, for that it is in my power to cause you to
be strangled one after another. Suet.
taking no delight, but in the sight of blood. As for honor to the memory of
Germanicus his father, and the desire of Sejanus his ruin, of whose tyranny
they were apprehensive.

Tiberius, who had pondred and digested this design in his heart, thought
there was no further danger for him to declare himself, and leave the way of
dissimulation, to pursue the tracke of fortitude. He sent an Edict to the
Senate, prohibiting the offer of sacrifice to any man living, and the ordaining
of any kind of honor to Sejanus, it being a matter by him not approved, to
see the reverence conferred on a Subject, which he accounted disproportionable
for the Prince.

Then was the time when such as were but friends of his fortune, Tamdiu
placebit, quamdiu utilis. Sen.
declared themselves enemies to his designs. (Temporary friends) who come but
to drink, and return back again when the bottles are empty. But as thunder
roreth when the air is brightest, Sejanus beheld himself surprised with a
storm, in the cleerest serenitie of fortune. Many presages he had of his fall.
The Theater where he received salutations on the Calends brake, and a Cat
crossed him. Ancient superstition took the crossing of a Cat for an ill
presage.
Coming from the Capitol, the Guard thronging through the press to follow
him, and get before, fell from the top of the stairs, from which criminals
were headlong thrown. Sejanus consulted with Southsayers, to know what that
presaged. Luckie birds appeared not; Tiberius Gracchus going to the Capitol,
three Ravens flew about him, and he was there slain. Val. Vidimus non semel
flammam ingentis pilae specie, quae tamen in ipso cursu suo dissipata est.
Vidimus circa divi Augusti excessum, simile prodigium, vidimus cum de Sejano
actum est. Sen.
He saw none but a great flight of Ravens, ill boading birds, Nightingales of
Hell, which flew, and croaked round about him. There was seen in the air a
globe of fire, such an one as was beheld at the death of Augustus, and
Germanicus: but there was not a man, who in this his most flourishing state,
imagined he was so near his end. Yet desisted they not to style him the
companion of Tiberius, not only in the Consulship, but in the Empire of the
world.

Tiberius, to discover dispositions and affections, wrote often to Sejanus, and
to the Senate, sometime that he was in good health, sometime at the point of
death; other while that his strength was come to him again, and that he hoped
very shortly to see them, and return to Rome. These dissimulations availed
him; for according as the news brought either joy, or sorrow, hope, or fear,
he distinguished between such as depended on him, or Sejanus. He also
besought the Senate, to send him one of the two Consuls with a Guard, to
conduct him safely.

Pudenda miserandaque oratione P.C. precabatur mitterent alterum e Consulibus,
qui senem se, and solum, in conspectum eorum ^ cum aliquo militari praesidio
perduceret. Suet.
He thought the conspiracy was so powerful against him, he could not
withstand it, and had already for the purpose prepared ships for flight, and
caused Sentinels to be set on the rocks, who by fires were to give signal of
what they discovered. Needs must the conspiracy be great, and near at hand,
or Tiberius very timorous and wretched, so to manifest the anguish of his
mind, For never should fear lodge in the heart, or appear on the forehead of
a Prince, who makes his complaint, when those who ought to fear him, terrify
him.

We must not proudly despise prodigies. This contempt undid Alexander. App.
But Sejanus begins to be perplexed, when he heard it reported, the head of
one of his statues was seen to smoke. He commanded it to be broken to know
the cause, and there issued from thence an huge serpent. He despised not this
Prodigy, Perseus. Justin. Crassus. D. Halic.
but made a sacrifice to himself; for so he was accustomed, there also was
found about the neck of the same statue a little cord.

Tiberius judged, the Destinies conspired with his revenge to ruin him, and
therefore continued his subtilties, Dion says, Tiberius to surprise and entrap
Sejanus, caused the Senate to be told, he would give him the power of a
Tribune.
causing a bruit to be spread, he would raise him to the principal charge of
the Empire. Yet at the same time dispatched Nevius Sertorius Macro, with
commission to present his letters to the Senate, to seize on the person of
Sejanus, to set Drusus, who was in prison at liberty, that he might rally
together all his friends against the common enemy, if opposition were made.

The place of Colonel of the Guard, which Tiberius had given to Macro,
encouraged this execution. Princes who desire to be well served, Nihil non
aggressuri sunt homines, si magnis conatibus magna praemia proponantur. Live.
ought ever to make the quality of the service appear by the recompense. He
came secretly to Rome, communicates the cause of his arrival to Consul
Memmius Regulus, and not to his Colleague (for he was a creature of Sejanus)
and to Gracinus Laco Captain of the watch. He found them all very ready, to
sacrifice this wretch to public hatred.

The Consul summoned the Senate for the next day to the Temple of Apollo, The
Senate stayed in the Temples, or holy places.
and caused this scrowle to be affixed to one of the pillars of the Gallerie.

The word was, Bonum factum, Well befall it.
Jn an happy hour. Memmius Regulus shall assemble the Senate to morrow early
in the morning in the Temple of Apollo, there we Conscript Fathers are to be,
and there matters important shall be treated. Penalty for the absent,
inexcusable.

Prima luce. Cic.
To give example to others, he was one of the first, he enters in with the
Ensigns of his dignity, the purple robe, twelve Lictors marching before him,
making way. Being entered, he sacrifices wine and honey, takes his place in the
Ivorie Chair, the other Senators do the like, ranking themselves in their
several seats.

Macro encountered Sejanus, who (as yet) was scarcely entered, and seeing him
somewhat troubled that he brought him no letters from Tiberius, said in his
ear: There is better news, I bring you the power of a Tribune. Qualem quisque
sortem, statumque habeat in mea manu positum est, quod cuique mortalium fortuna
datum velit, meo ore pronunciat. Sen.
This satisfied him: his friends were quickly made acquainted with it, and much
rejoiced saying to themselves, hereafter all which fortune would grant to the
Romans, should pass through their hands, or be pronounced by the mouth of their
Master.

Macro presents his letters and retireth, causes the soldiers to assemble,
under color he was to give them notice of the Emperors commands: and by this
means left those of the watch, for the guard of the Temple, and the other who
followed Sejanus, repaired to the field and ensign. Being there he assured
them the Emperors favor to acknowledge their services, and gratify them with
a donative. There was not a man, Those presents were armours, pikes, ensigns,
scarfes, chains, and Crowns.
who lent not an open ear to this speech, and promised not to be ready. He
chose a good number to guard the passages, and the Temple of Apollo: That done
he presents his letters to the Senate, opens his Commission, retireth, leaves
Laco there, and hasteneth to give direction in the other parts of the City.

The authority of a Prince cannot descend more low, than when he dare not
speak plainly to his subjects, upon any thing which displeases him.
These letters are read, which expressed an afflicted and trembling spirit, that
durst not unfold, but in broken words, what he had upon his heart, against the
ingratitude and treachery of his servant, they were confused by diverse affairs
and out of order; the beginning upon things indifferent, the sequel of other
matters more important, Pursued with many complaints of the immeasurable power
of Sejanus. The tragical end of Sejanus is well expressed in the french.
Tiberius of M. le Mastre the chief Physician of Mounsier.
Afterward he fell upon other occurrents, entreating the Senate to grant out
process against two Senators, familiar friends of Sejanus, and lastly
commanded, but as between both, that they should vigilantly observe the
actions of Sejanus. There was not a word of putting him to death, so much did
he fear, lest the great reputation he had in every place might oppose him, and
that in case matters succeeded not acording to his desire, he might ever
reserve a liberty to declare himself.

Aliquisque pavendo Dat vires fama nullo que antore malorum. Quoe finxere
timent. Lucan.
But as fear believes all it imagines, so the friends of Sejanus finding not
in this letter what they expected, shrunk from him, as from a place threatened
with thunder. When the favor of a Prince forsakes one, it is dangerous to
come near him, disfavour is infectious.

Here Dion observes how variable the minds of men are, saying, before the
Emperors letters were read, there was not a Senator, Cicero charge Catiline
with the like.
who offered not his service to Sejanus, and asked not how he pleased to employ
him. Adventu tuo ista subsellia vacua facta sunt. Cic.
But perceiving the mind of Tiberius altered, they changed in an instant. Those
which stood far from him, looked scornfully on him, such as were near,
removed farther off, they who before accounted it an honor to wait on him,
Every one avoided a traitor.
now held themselves disgraced to sit near him. And where are men to be found
who in adversity remember benefits? Quis in adversis beneficiorum servat
memoriam? aut quis ullam calami tosis deberi putat gratiam? quando fortuna non
mutet fidem. Vell.
or think themselves bound to the miserable? Great amities are not to be sought
in Court, nor are pety enmities there to be found, and that is the cause why
wise men break with none. Ill will, and hatred are harsh plants, the fruits
they bear are always four, there is no sweetness nor profit, but in
amendment of manners, Vsque quaque sapere oportet, id erit telum acerrimum. Cic.
that the enemy may not lay hold on the life, or fortune of him, whose fall or
ruin he thirsts.

Sejanus did ill to come into the Senate, when he saw Macro brought him no
letters. Providence which turns her eye on every side, and is a strong
buckler against fortune, failed him. Nay he should have gone out when he
understood the jealousies, which Tiberius let fall in this letter, and had he
been followed by those of his faction, the rest would have censured his power
by his courage. Presumption contemns safety.
But seeing nothing very express against himself, he thought they were vapors
of his melancholy, and certain inequalities, and that there was not any so
hardy, as to disgust him.

Words of command are harsh to those, who have never obeyed.
The Consul Regulus called him, he sits still; but not out of arrogance, for
he was much humbled, rather indeed because he was not accustomed to obey, or be
commanded. He called him the first and second time, and stretching out his
hand, says, Sejanus come hither. Sejanus answers. Do you call me? (Sr.)
Yea, says the Consul, Sejanus steps forward, and in an instant Laco captain
of the watch stood before him, and all the Tribunes round about, that he might
not go out.

Dacretum ut ^v. Call. utriusque necis dies per omnes unnos donum Iovi
sacraretur.
The day of this memorable act, was the 18th. of October, which is known,
because Tiberius ordained the 15th. of the Calends of November, should be
solemnised at Rome, both for the death of Sejanus, and of Agrippina. And if the
year likewise be observed, it was of Romes foundation the 785. and of the
reign of Tiberius, the 18th. and from the birth of Christ the 34. There was no
danger of hastening his judgment, or of commencing process for his execution.
S.C. actum ut paena damnatorum, in decimum semper diem deferreretur. Suet.
The law of ten days was not (as yet) made. All his life was a stream of
insolence, pride, violence, and fury.

Dion affirms, that in one day he was arrested, condemned, and executed, and
by the shortness of time, we may guess at the facility of proceedings, which
were arbitrary, wherein such retardation, or expedition might be used, as they
listed. Process against Lentulus, one of Catilines confederates was made in
two days; That, of Clentius continued long; This, of Sejanus was dispatched in
a morning. The task of things serious ending at noone, Aristotle gave the
morning to Phylosophie, it was Ergon, afternoon to eloquence, Parergon.
that which is done after dinner, was (as it were) out of time, as well in
matters most pleasing and facile, as important and painful, and now the
Trumpet which served as a clock among the Romans having sounded the hour of
ten, no man expected any new relation.

Memmius did not put the Emperors letters into consultation, and that deceived
Sejanus, who trusted to his friends had he so done, the diversity of opinions
would have marred the matter: For the length of discourses had wasted time,
which he was to gain, to the end Sejanus his faction might not stir. But to
avoid the blame of doing all on his own head, The Consul asking advice of a
Senator spoke this word. Dion.
he commanded a Senator whom he knew to be a good Citizen, and well affected to
Tiberius, to speak his opinion. Dion names him not. This man said.

A Magistrate who has discovered a conspiracy, and seems fearful to remedy
it, is as faulty as the Conspirator himself. Sal.
The affair here presented (Fathers Conscript) is of so great consequence,
that according as you hereon shall make resolution, the weale-publike is either
shaken, or confirmed, and we shall be traitors to our Country, ungrateful
toward the Prince, unjust to our selves, if we exercise not therein all
sincerity, and fidelity. Caesar with one hand shows the mischief unto us,
with the other the remedy; The mischief, the conspiracy of Sejanus; The
remedy, the imprisonment of Sejanus. I doubt not, but the evil is greater in
his knowledge, than he expresses in his letters, yet hold I the remedy more
extreme than he supposes, We cannot be assured of the person of Scianus in
delivering it up to a Magistrate: Eminent persons were put into the custody of
Magistrates.
Who will take this charge upon him? Nor may we do it by the Guard; he
commands them; Lentulus was committed to Lent. Spinth. Cethegus to Q.
Cornificiu^, Statilius to C Caesar, Cepar. to ^n. Terentius.
nor by committing him to any private house, he will not abide there long: Nor
can it be done by his cautions; what assurance is there in state affairs, as
they now stand? We cannot answer it, but in detaining him prisoner. The prison
is but for slaves; There is not any for the Roman Citizen, the Consul, or
Senator, much less for him who has commanded over people, Senate, The first
prison was built by A^ecus Martius, or Tarquin.
and Consuls. Our predecessors will rise out of their graves to defend this
privilege, (the only mark of our ancient liberty) for they thought, to bind a
Citizen of Rome was a great offense; to strike him a crime, to kill him, a
Parricide. Facinus vinciri civem Romanum, scelus verberari, parricidiam necari.
Cic.
The prison is the place of punishment among the Romans, and of custody among
Barbarians.

There is none, but those who know not Scianus, or are ignorant of Tiberius can
doubt the necessity of proceeding further: It would be a great wonder, if he
should prove innocent, and an unspeakable unhappiness, if he escape us He
must be made an example, and to the end he may not take from the public,
let us deal surely; Diogines said, there had been some who slew themselves in
the tempest before the vessel was drowned.
He would have courage enough to drown himself in the storm, and not expect
the ship-wracke of the vessel. Our Ancestors have beheld, how Caius Licinius
Macer, seeing himself lost, and the Judges ready to give sentence against him,
got up to the top of the house, and thence threw himself headlong, Licinius
Macer said to Cicero, Non damnatus, sed reus pereo. Val.
to have the honor to dye uncondemned, though accused. He was willing to
prevent his judgment, and make himself his own Executioner.

Alienae crudelitatis procurationem suscipere. Sen.
The Weale-publique is here in question, the safety of the Prince, the
preservation of the State, our Altars, our Laws. I am ashamed to prefer our
own interests before the commands of Caesar. In deliberations you must always
incline rather to that which is safe, than to that which is convenient, or
profitable. Dion. Hal.
The securest way ought to be the most just. We are to prefer our safeties
before our honors. There is no means to stop this evil, but by arresting
Sejanus, and no course to stay him, but by imprisonmenu. The Person, Time, and
Crime oblige you to make your selves sure of him, and to chase away the evil,
by the evil it self. Sejanus is raised upon the ruins of the State, it is
fit the State repair it self on the ruins of Sejanus. It is a great sloth in
the Senate, to have tolerated so much; Caesar does an infinite favor to the
people of Rome, to free them from this tyranny; Let us not lose the honor to
have seconded his piety; It shall be more glorious to follow Sejanus to
prison, than to serve him at liberty. If he be innocent, the Gods are unjust.

What terror soever possessed the Assembly, the resolution was hazardous,
Prava consilia in incerto sunt. Tac.
and this counsel being approved, every one judged it reasonable to execute,
not examine the will of the Emperor. He was led to prison, and the Consul
would trust none but himself with the adventure of this conduct, lest he
might escape, or be rescued from him. Thus the same Senators, which an hour
before accompanied him to the Senate, now led him to prison. Those who offered
sacrifices to him, Cui genua flexerunt, ac ut Deo sacrifica verant. Dio.
as to their Gods, who prostrately bowed their knees to adore him, now jested
at him, when they beheld him dragged from the Temple to the Jail, from supreme
honors to the lowest shame.

Yea, some there were so transported with fury against him, Pallio coccinio
adrasum oceluserat caput. Petr.
that seeing him to cover his eyes with the skirt of his robe, with which he
veiled his head (for the Romans ware no hats, but in the wars, or time of
sickness, nor caps but in a voyage) they pulled it away, dispoyling him
thereof for the greater disgrace, and with their fifts giving him many blows
on the face.

The people flouted at his fall, detested his life, reproached his insolence,
cried out on the Traitor, and had they been suffered, he had not come
unmaimed to the prison; for they at that instant would have dragged him to
Sestertium, Plutarch says, the head of Galba was cast into Sestertium.
the most infamous place about Rome, and where the bodies of slaves were
thrown. But supposing he was not imprisoned to preserve his life, they flew
upon his statues. Upon this Dion makes a notable observation of human
inconstancy.
Those in a moment were overthrowen, and were seen to be drawn up and down
with ropes, to be melted in the fire. Pieces of that head, Ex facie toto orb
secunda, fiunt urceoli, peives, sartago, patellae, Iuven.
which was adored as the second in the whole world, and which made the Senate
tremble, were converted to mean movables of the kitchen.

There was so little space between his glory and his fall, that he was so
soon stricken, as threatened. Dion notes that Sejanus saw his statues to be
broken, and from it perceived what happened to himself.
He beholding at the entrance of the Palace, what was done to the statues,
imagined the principal would be ill entreated: but his greatest misery was,
to have been no better prepared for this calamity. The ordinary error of
those who are lifted to great dignities, A man must be seasonably prepared for
a fall, and rather to go out, than expect to be expelled.
is, not to be wise, till after their falls, and having the means to descend
at their ease, expect till they are forced to leap down the stairs.

After Sejanus had passed the wicket: the Consul, that he might not lose time,
returns to the Temple of Apollo, enters into, that, of Concord, which was
near unto it, to grant process against the prisoner; for it were a wrong to
the reputation of the great justice of the Senate, to think it forgot any
thing of form, Necessary forms. Accusatio crimen desiderat, rem ut definiat,
hominem ut notet, argumento probet, test confirmet. Cic.
in an affair of so remarkable importance, where it was necessary the
authority of justice should cover the defects, might happen in the proceeding,
the process being begun by emprisonment:

The Accusers, Witnesses, Accomplices, were all heard in full Senate: For the
instruction was public, Populus Romanus circum suosellia coronam facit. Cic.
and the people had (as it were) environed the seats of the Judges. In it there
was much authority, for the Majesty of the Senate was exposed to the view of
all, nothing covered it but Heaven, there was much sincerity, so many eyes, so
many Judges, great example, all acted with order and discipline.

It is not to be doubted, Antigonus being entreated to judge a cause in
private, answered: It is better in the Palace, unless we should be unjust.
Plut.
but some excellent Orator was allowed him, more for ceremony of defense, than
opinion of innocence, and that performance of duty was recommended unto him;
for the more vigorously his cause were maintained, the more would be the
triumph of truth. Timor, perturbatio, suspensus, incertus vultus, crebra
coloris mutatio, quae fuerant antea suspiciosa, aperta, atque manifesta
faciunt. Cic.
Thereupon the Judges watchfully observed the countenance of the accused, and
satisfied themselves often in doubts of intention by troubles of the
countenance; the air of which many times possesses the place of words.

Besides, Macro had given the word Consul, It is Tiberius will he dye: They
were not to expect any other commandment, Many times the Senate related to the
Prince what they had decreed.
nor to send him the opinion of the Senate. It was necessary for the State;
and though he entered not culpable into prison, his quality permitted him not
to go out innocent. The Judges could not err, when they obeyed the directions
of the Prince, who beholds his own affairs with an eye different from that
of his Officers.

Damnaturi jurant nihil se precibus dare. Sen. P.
The Judges make oath to give sentence according to conscience. Neither Consul,
nor Praetor deliver opinions, but take verdicts, The number of Senators was
great, An expectem dum te septuaginta quinque tabellae diripiant. Cic.
Cicero reckons threescore and fifteen against Piso. It was lessened under
the Emperors, and there were to be forty by Augustus his Edict, to make a
Decree. Sentence was given either by discourse, or writing, by a little Tablet
put into a box, or by silence and gesture, as at this day by veiling bonner, a
sign of consent, or by the pace, when those who were of one part, ranked
themselves together against the contrary: This was called going on foot. Many
times in notorious crimes they cried out, Hostis, Hostis.
There was here but one voice to be heard; Let Sejanus dye, let his posterity
dye, let his memory dye, and be all his goods confiscated.

The Senators were so animated, that it is certain those, who knew the
advantage they had above the rest (as Albutius the loudest in speaking) were
not silent, Albutius in altercatione vires suas noverat. Sen. P.
to gain thereby the gracious favor of the Prince, yea, even they who chiefly
depended on the will of Sejanus: And doubt you not, Nunquam si quis mihi credit
amavi, Hunc hominum. Iuven.
but what was spoken among the people, who had nothing to lose, was also said
by the Senators, who accounted all them lost, which had been his friends.

These men were the bitterest, and said; The friends of Sejanus showed
themselves very passionate against him.
If Caesar would extend clemency, it ought to be conferred on men, not
monsters. If the Senate had not been careful to conserve the glory of their
mildness, in the detestation of horrible punishments, he had suffered as a
Parricide, his mouth had been stopped with weeds, wooden slippers had been
fastened to his feet, he had been sowed up in a sack with a Dog, a Cock, an
Ape, and a Viper, (impious creatures, companions for a wretched man) lastly had
been sent to the river upon a cart drawn by two black Oxen, for a mark of
the enormitie, and hideousness of the crime.

In aliis gloriari licet nulli gentium minores placuisse ^enis. T. Live.
But never has any Commonwealth been more curious than the Roman, to preserve
this ancient reputation of humanity and courtesy. Metius Suffetius for his
treason, was drawn in pieces by four horses; all the people turned their eyes
from a spectacle of such horror. This was the first and last punishment in
this kind of rigor, which had made the Judges forget, that Laws and
penalties were ordained, not for Tigers, or Ounces, but for men.

In an arrest it is observed, Quo referente, Quo decernente, and Quo primum,
assentiente.
It was expedient the execution of Sejanus his sentence should be shown, as in
other men's cases, but that herein more pomp for the occasion, and example was
to be used, and more diligence and power for safety, and for that in this
many Magistrates were employed. Here is briefly delivered all which must be
sought in many places, and which confusedly, and variously is related.

Judgment being signed by him, who registers the Acts, and Letters of the
Emperor, Carnifex non modo foro, sed et am caelo hoc, ac spiritu prohibetur.
Cic.
by him who first delivered his opinion which was followed by the rest, and by
the Consul, who decreed what was resolved on: the executioner was sent for,
whose abode by the law of the Censors might not be in the City.

The Trumpet assembled the people, sounding before the gates of the Temple,
before the house of the man condemned, Inversam induit Magistratus vestem Sen.
and in public places. The Consul or Praetor mounteth up to his throne, puts
off his purple robe, or turns the wrong side outward, or else takes one of
black, as a sad and dismal habit, yet not disposing his countenance to anger,
or Melancholy, but retaining the comeliness, Lex non irascitur, sed
constituit. Sen.
and gravity of the law, which is not angry with any man.

The condemned is led forth, the Vshers command silence, the Consul
pronounces sentence, which is written in a Tablet, Fit a praecone silentium.
Sen. P.
and turning himself toward the executioner, Quibus animadvertere in damnatos
necisse est, non dicunt occide, non morere, sedlege, age.
says, Do according to law, or more plainly, pass on. They abstain from
the harsh words, kill, hang, knock him down, as if one should command a
servant to crush a scorpion, or a Caterpiller.

The executioner bound his hands behind him, the Trumpets sounded whilst he
prepared for execution, and the condemned disposed himself to death.
Crudelitatem imperii verbo miliore subducunt. Sen. P.
Time was not at discretion: Nero never gave more than an hour for one to make
himself ready for the mortal blow. Noxio post tergaligantur manus. Sen. P.
As in funerals, there were instruments, which sounded sad and mournful aires,
with Cornets for great men, Adbibentur legitima verba, canitur ex altera part
classicum. Sen. P.
or with the flute for inferiors, which was called Symphony, So likewise at
executions the trumpets sounded an alarm, Quis nam Delator? quibus indiciis?
quo test probavit? Nihil horum, verbosa, and grandis epistola venit. A
Capreis: been habet, nil plus interrogo Iuven.
as it were a charge, or an onset, to march on to death.

In the mean space the people amazed at so sudden a judgment, ask the
cause thereof, one says for what offense is he condemned? who was his accuser,
what confederates, what witnesses, Is there nothing of all this? Another
replyeth. A large and long letter is come from Capreae, And a third says it is
sufficient, we need know no more, All is well.

The form is no other wise expressed, than as Dion has set it down, and the
words he uses signify, he was condemned and executed.

It is certain there was no rumor concerning his punishment. When any one
among the ancients was condemned as a delinquent, it was to banishment (the
civil death of a Roman ^Citizen.) The gibbet, empaling, Supplicium more
majorum. Tac.
the gallows, wild beasts, the halter, the hangman were for slaves, and the
baser sort of people. It is long ago, said Paetus Thrasaeas to Nero, Sunt
paenae legibus constitutae quibus sine judicum saevitia, and temporum infamia
supplicia decern^ntur. Tac
since there was any speech at Rome of the hangman, or the cord; the laws
have ordained punishments which correct the crimes without infamy in respect of
time, without cruelty in regard of the Judges. Traitors, Rebels, enemies of the
common wealth, leaped headlong from the Tarpeian Mount. Tarpeio pr^ditores,
hostesve publici imponantur. Sen.
Manlius was thrown from the top of the hill athwart the Rocks, and he had as
Plutarch says, The Capitol for witness of his most fortunate Acts, and
greatest Calamity; Locus idem in uno homine, and eximia gloriae monimentum and
pana ultima fuit. T. Live.
This punishment was inflicted upon him for having enterprised upon the
government of the comon-wealth. A punishment of all the most dreadful, for the
rock was rough, of an admirable height, the middle and sides bordered (as it
were) with sharp points like tainter hooks, and if the body fell upon them,
Mo^es abscissa in profundum, frequen tibus exasperata saxis. Sen.
it was either broken, or more violently cast off. The very sight of it had
horror, and who once fetched this leap, was sure enough never to make another.

Nondum caput ^nse rotare. Lucan.
The heads also of offenders after the civil war were cut off, not with an
axe (as anciently) but with a sword, and this punishment was so new, that a
Courtesane at the Table of Proconsull Flaminius, saying she never had seen it,
he caused the head of a prisoner, to be chopped off by the hangman. Vt iste cum
amica caenaret jucundius, homo occisus est. Sen. P.
Valerius Antius gave the like satisfaction to a Lady whom he loved. Behold
here goodly Magistrates, who play with the lives of men, and the authority of
laws, to content the cruel curiosity, the one of a Citizens wife of
Placentia, the other of a trull, whose name was so odious, that if the Usher
meeting her in the Consuls passage, had not chased her away, the dignity of the
office had suffered. Majestas laesa, fi, exeunti proconsuli meretrix non
summovetur. Sen. P.


Sejanus had not his head stricken off, the punishment was too mild, in so
violent and public fury. Sejanus ducitur unco spectandus, gaudent omnes, quae
labra, quis illi vultus erat? Iuven.
Iuvenal says, that being dragged through the City with a hook, the people
admired at the greatness of his head, and large size of his lips. I suppose he
was strangled in prison, Iactavit Caesar quod non laque^ strangulata, nequ^ in
Gemonias projecta foret. Tac.
for it was the most ordinary punishment, and Tiberius used it. After he had
caused Agrippina to be put to death at Pandarr i, he boasted what favor he had
done in not commanding her to be strangled, and would have the Senate to thank
him for it.

His three poor children were carried to prison, his daughter promised to the
son of Claudius was deflowred near to the gallows by the Hangman, because it
was not permitted to put a Virgin to death by torment. Dion says she was
slain by the people. Puella a carnifi^e juxta laqueum. compressa. Tac.
Tacitus thinks his son knew what they would do and the hazard he did
incur. There was a daughter of his so young, and of so little understanding,
that the ceased not to cry out, Puella adeo nescia, ut crebro interrogaret quod
ob delictum, and q^o traheretur neque facturam ultra, and possese puerili
verbere ^oneri. Tac.
What have I done? whether will they lead me? If I may be forgiven, I will do
so no more; There needs nothing but a rod to correct me. The hangman took
these two by the throat and strangled them both. The bodies thus slain were
fastened to the Gemonian stairs, The Gemonian stairs in the third station of
Rome, which was mount Auentine.
which bare this name, either from the inventor, or from the groans which
there were heard It was as the pillory, the open place of executions, there the
statues, and pourtraits of the condemned were set. The Jail, the Court where
they pleaded, and the Rolls where they registered decrees, were built near
together; the stairs were in the same place at the foot of Tiber, whereinto
they cast the bodies.

Quo die illum Senatus d^ duxerat populus in frusta divisit. Sen.
Seneca and Dion differ, the one says they dragged his body three whole
days, the other that the same day the Senate accompanied him to the Senate
house, the people hewed him in pieces, and that of a man, on whom Gods and men
had accumulated all that which might make him great and glorious, Ex eo nihil
superfuit, quod carnifex traheret. Sen.
there was nothing left for the hangman to tie to his hook, and cast into
Tiber. To reconcile them I suppose, You must look on P. victor of the 14.
stations of Rome and what they contain.
after he was executed, they set him on those stairs, that the people might
see him, and that in this fury they dragged him from thence in an instant, and
having distended him on the bank of Tiber, they cut him in pieces, or perhaps
in fourteen quarters, as many as the City had wards, and that these pieces
were drawn three days together about the City.

All sorts of outrages were done to this miserable body, some through
inhumanity, others for revenge, many for example, and all to the end, it might
not be thought, they had either loved, or known him. Iuvenal relates the
discourse, which then was frequent at Rome, for every one gave liberty to his
tongue according to his opinion. Behold the prose of his verse.

I perceive it is best to dye; Perituros audio multos, nil dubium magna est
f^rnacula ut male defensua etc. Qum atim^^. etc. curramus precipites, and dum
jacet in ripa calcemus. Caesaris hostem etc. and pavidum in jus cervice
astricta dominam trabat. etc. visne salutari, sicut Sejanus? habere. Tantundem,
atque illi sellas don^^^ curules. Illum exercitibus prapa^ere? ^^tor haberi.
There is no doubt to be made of it: The furnace wherein they are to be cast is
very large: I met my poor friend Brutidius last day, near Mars his Temple,
he was very pale, and much astonished. I fear lest being called Ajax he kill
himself with his own hand. But that we may not be taken for friends to
Sejanus, and perish without defense, let us run to this body, whilst it lies
on Tibers bank, and cry out aloud, We trample under foot the enemy of Caesar.

He who is a servant let him renounce, and forsake his Master, let him take
him by the throat, writh his neck, and drag him all trembling before the
Commissaries. This is the way to save himself, and be rewarded.

The people then made this discourse of Seianus in secret. Would thou be
followed and courted like Seianus, have as much wealth as he, dispose of
dignities, give the Ivory chaires, command over armies, be accounted the
Governor of the Prince, dispatch his businesses, whilst he is in the
straightened Grot of Capreae, Principis angusta Caprearum in rupe sedentis, cum
grege Chaldaeo.
with his troup of Chaldeans, and Astrologers?

Would tbou have command over the company which carries the dart, or three
pointed Iavelin? Would thou command over the Cavalry, over those bands,
which abide in the palace to guard the Prince?

Quinolunt occidere quenquam posse volunt; ut rebus letu par sit mensura
malorum.
Why do thou not desire it? They that will kill no man, wish to have the
power. Every one affects honors, and riches, which are notwithstanding such,
that the measure of their evils, who pursue them, equalleth the contentment
they bring.

Love you better to wear the robe of Seianus, whom you see dragged in the
streets; than to be a Magistrate in the forsaken villages of Fidenae, Gabij, An
Fidenarum, Gabiorumque esse potestis: Et de mensura vis dicere:
or be the Edile of Vlubris, which is almost desolate, and give judgment on
measures, and weights, and cause those to be broken which are not lawful?
Numerosa parabat. Excelsa ^urri tabulata unde altior esset.
you must then confess, that Seianus has never known what is to be desired;
For in pursuing great honors and riches, he did nothing but prepare a scaffold
for himself on a high Turret to fall down, and cast himself headlong from
the top thereof. What overthrew the Crassi, the Pompeyes, and him, that
conquered the Quirites, and scourged them like slaves? Truly, Summus nempe
locus: Magnaque numinibus vota exaudita malignis. Iuven.
elevated fortunes, to which men mount by wiles and ambitious desires, such as
malign stars raise to ruin those that built them.

Few Tyrants have descended to the son in law of Ceres, and a natural death:
Their end was not dry, nor has blood been spared to moysten it.

Seneca saw this execution, and yet wrote nothing thereof, though he were then
of an age to observe it: for he was in Rome fifteen years before the death of
Augustus. He much wondreth, that of the body of a man of such eminency and
magnificence, nothing remained for burial.

If excessive joy killed a mother, Si ad mortem agit matres magnum gaudium?
quid magnus dolor? Sen.
what may extreme sorrow? Apicata was assailed with an incredible grief, when
she saw her children on the Gemonian steps. Cratesiclea, Cratesiclea begged
she might be put to death before her children, but the Hangman slew them before
her face. Plut.
mother of Cleomenes King of Sparta, whose head Ptolomie cut off, and hanged
his body on a pair of gallows, seeing her children slain before her eyes,
said; Out alas, my children, whither are you gone? Apicata spoke to these
innocents, which she beheld on this infamous place, Poor Infants, where are
you now? In this anguish she retired to her house, where she wrote a discourse
of Drusus his death, sent it to Tiberius, which done, she slew her self.

Ordo sceleris per Apicatam Sejano proditus tormentis Eudemi, ac Lygdi
patefactus est. Tac.
She had not stayed so long before she discovered it, had not the love of her
children withheld her; for well she knew, that in crimes of treason, they
should suffer the like punishment with the father. She accuses Sejanus,
Livilla, Lygdus, and Eudemus, these put upon the wheel, (which was the
torture) confessed all. Tiberius caused diverse to be racked, to discover the
accomplices. It was told him there was one arrived, who came from Rhodes, and
forgetting he was a creature of his own, whom he had sent, he presently
caused him to be put to the torture, and having found his own error, Errore
detecto, occidi jussit ne divulgaret injuriam.
commanded he should be killed, that he might not divulge the wrong he had
sustained. This was to preserve the reputation of a just Prince, by a notable
injustice.

The death of Sejanus gave confidence, and safety to Tiberius, and when he was
moved to choose twenty Senators, to be always near about him with swords by
their sides, he answered; Mibi vita tanti n^n est ut armis tegenda sit. Tac.
Life was not so dear to him, that he would submit himself to preserve it by
arms. But vicious and exorbitant habits pass not away: And he, not causing
his vices to dye before his death, had not the pleasure of seeing his enemies
dye before himself. He so sensibly resented the remorse of this, that he
protested to the Senate he daily dyed. Tandem facinora, and flagitia in
supplicium vertuntur. Tac.
His condition was not subject to the judgment of men, but he was convinced
in his own conscience, which accused, condemned, and executed him. Whereupon a
wise man, who lived in that time, said; Vt corpora verberibus, ita saevitia, ac
libidine Tyrannorum animus dilaceratur. Tac.
If the souls of Tyrants might be seen, more ulcers would appear through
lust, than they made wounds on bodies murdered by their cruelty. Of all his
violencies, the most execrable was the death of the Architect, Ferunt Tiberio
principe excogitatum vitri temperamentum ut flexibile esset, and totam
artificis officinam abolitam, ne aeris, argenti, auri, metalli pretia
detraherentur. Plin.
who skilfully re-edified, and repaired the great portall of Rome, and
presented a glass unto him, brake it, and gathering the pieces together,
instantly made it up again, having found out the secret that this substance
obeyed the last office of fire, and became malleable. Pliny says, he
abolished it, lest gold, silver, and brass should be the less esteemed. What
an ornament had it been, if from an herb, which has neither beauty, sent,
nor is good or tastfull for man, or beast, a substance should be derived,
hard, solid, and transparent?

Priscis temporibus summum certamen inter homines ne quid profuturum saeculu,
diu lateret. Petr.
An invention notwithstanding, which the precedent ages were ignorant of, his
admired, and ours ever may deplore; for we shall no more have men, who in this
kind will be grieved, that, that, which may benefit posterity should long
be concealed. Tiberius intermitted none of his profuse, Malus Imperator qui ex
visceribus, provincialium homines non necessarios, nec reipublicae utiles
aluit. Lampr.
voluptuous, and superfluous expenses: He entertained from the sweat and
labors of people, infinite numbers, not only unprofitable, but pernicious to
the Commonwealth: and caused those to be put to death, whose industry might
bring ornament and utilitie. Oh! what disorder in the times, and men? The
reward of an admirable invention is denied, and Sejanus sells one of his
Eunuchs for 3500. Sesterces. But that was during the calamity of the Empire,
and when no man was suffered to reprove his profusions.

Injuriam lueri fecit in luctu civilatis, quoniam arguere nulli vacabat. Plin.
The reign of Tiberius was much more terrible and cruel after Sejanus, than it
had been before. He would not have the people repair by his death, the evils
he had done in his life. Augustus ordained a military treasury, which he
filled with three tributes, as with three living sources: The most pleasing
tribute was the twentieth, which is taken upon inheritances, legacies kindred,
and exempt poor.
from the twentieth part of inheritances, from the twentie-fifth upon the sale
of slaves, from the hundredth of all that which was in trade. Tiberius having
reduced the kingdom of Cappadocia into a province, thought by the increase of
this revenue, the people should be discharged of so much; and therefore in
stead of an hundred, Extrancis facile, domesticis grave. Plin.
he decreed they should pay but the two hundredth part. But after the death of
Sejanus, as repenting himself of this favor, he reduced it to the hundredth
again. Necessity of affairs excused it, which suffers not tributes to be
denied, it is a fury that catches the State by the throat, if not appeased.
Those who are constituted, to stand in the front of employment, ought to render
the people capable of this verity. Da operam, ut omnes intelligant si salvi
esse velint, necessitati esse parendum. Cic. M. Ant. in Asia after the battle
of Philippi. So Themistocles demanding money of the Andrians, said to them* he
was accompanied with two Goddesses, Persuasion and Constraint. Plut.
If you will in peace possess particular benefits* needs must you succor
public necessities. When Anthony the Triumvir was sent into Asia, to draw aid
from thence, he gave no other reason, but this, Necessity will have it so.

Thus (says he) that you may not be expelled from your Towns and
Territories, it is fit you give money for the entertainment of Soldiers. There
is not so much required, but that you may freely part with it. You gave in two
years, to Brutus and Cassius our enemies, the tributes of ten; we need no
more to be freed from affairs, so you this one time grant it.

By the quality of tribute, we may judge of the power of the tribute giver.
He drew from them 200000. tallents, which was 20000. yearly, amounting in all
to twelve millions.

Nec quies gentium fine armis, nec arma sine stipendio, nec stipendia sine
tributis haberi queunt. Tac.
A Commonwealth cannot maintain it self in peace, if it be feeble, nor be
fortified without arms: arms are not entertained without money, and money is
not derived, but from tributes. But moderation is therein to be used, and the
Prince imitating Tiberius, Malo tondere pecus, quam deglubere. D. Tib.
should sheere the sheep, not flay it, and render the disposure thereof
chaste, sincere, and pure, as drawn from the blood, sweat, and tears of his
people, for expenses profitable, necessary, and glorious, not for profusions,
which neither afford contentment, nor reputation.

Happy is the Prince, who finds honest men, whom he may trust with the care
of his Exchequers, whereon depends the honor of his designs, the Majesty
of his Crown, the tranquillity of his State: For they are, both the nerves
which give motion, and the veins which entertain life; and as by the
resolution, and shrinking of nerves, the physical body is many times deprived
of motion and sense: So the politic without money cannot stir, nor support
it self: In a word, with revenues one accomplisheth, and comes to the end of
all. He that has the last Crown gains the triumph. They are sacred, the
charge of them is given to Saturn, or to his Temple. Tunc conditus im^ eruitur
Templo, multis intactus ab annis Romani census populi. Luc.
Caesar had not known how to ruin liberty, if he had not begun by this
sacrilege, robbing the treasury of the Republique, which was filled with all
the spoils of the Orient, and that which the Fabricii, the Scipio's, the
Cato's, the Pompey's had by their victories acquired. The first note of the
desolation of a State is drawn from the unjust, and irregular administration
of revenues.

It is not enough, that such as have the charge thereof be vigilant, to make
the expense not exceed the receipt, but it much imports the State the means
of particulars be husbanded without excess, Res familiaris iis rebus quaeratur
a qu bus est turpitudo. Cic.
with order and modesty, as they ought to be acquired with honesty and
justice. The disorders which are observed in apparel, diet, buildings,
curiosities, and superfluity of private houses, Convivioru^ luxuria, and
vestium, aegrae civitatis indicia sunt. Sen.
are symptoms not only of a sick, but a dying State. Troubles and seditions
are commonly supported by the despair of forlorn people, and such as have
nothing to lose, of which condition were those, Hoc in Republica seminarium
Catilinarium. Cic.
who entered into conspiracy with Catiline. Great and excessive were the
confusions during the reign of Tiberius; but such as were derived from former
times; for he was wont to say, The Romans learned to dispend their own means
in civil wars, and the wealth of others among strangers. It is an admirable
thing, that having provided against so many other exorbitancies, he would not
correct the riot and dissolution, which overflowed through the contempt of
Somptuarie Laws. Non sum offenfionum avidus, pro Rep. suspicio; inanes and
irritas jure deprecor. Tac.
Was not this because he would not begin the example of reformation in his
own house, surfetted with superfluities, or by reason disorder was grown into
custom, and discipline; or that he would not unprofitably, and without effect,
draw public dis-affection upon himself. His greatest reason was, not, to
expose his commands to contempt, nor open the vein, before he had the fillet
ready to stanch the blood.

These remarkable words which he spoke to the Senate on this occasion, should
be represented to Kings, as often as they institute laws, the effects whereof
were difficult and doubtful. Omittenda potius praevalida and adulta vttia,
quam hoc adsequi ut palam fiat, quibus flagitin impares simus. Tac.
A Prince ought rather to dissemble an inveterate disorder, and which is of
much consequence, than to put his authority in hazard, and suffer his weakness
publicly to appear, especially when they are matters, which he cannot remedy.

After the execution of Sejanus, the Senate commanded the statue of liberty to
be erected in the open market place, and that every year on the same day
Sejanus was put to death, a Combat on horseback should be exhibited, and
many beasts there slain. A thing never done before. They likewise prohibited
excessive honors to be conferred on any man, or to swear by other name, than
that of the Emperor.

All the friends of Sejanus ran his fortune, and received what they expected.
Quam male est extra legem viventibus: quicquid meruerunt semper expectant. Petr.
The prisons were filled, some condemned to death, others banished, all
deprived of their offices. The City seemed a field, where nothing was to be
seen but mangled bodies, or Ravens which rent them.

Iacuit immensa strages, omnis sexus, omnis etas, ^ust^es ignobites. Tac.
Tiberius was so accustomed to executions, that he caused all those to be put
to death, who in prison were accused to have any intelligence with Sejanus:
Faeminae quia occupandae re^pub. argui non poterant ob lachrimas iuensabantur.
Tac.
there were laid on the pavement an infinite number of dead men of all ages and
conditions, eminent, noble, plebeian: It not being permitted any man to stand
still to behold them, nor retire to bewail them, for both the one and the
other were reputed a crime. Vitia was punished with death, for having lamented
her son Geminus: and because women were not to be accused for attempting on
the state, their tears were accounted criminal.

Interciderat fortis humanae commercium, ut metus quantumque saevitiae
glisceret, miseratione arcebatur. Tac.
Sorrow was judged by the countenance, and grief by the vehemence of passion,
in such sort, that the bodies which Tyber cast up to the shore, remained there
without burial: so much had fear dissolved commerce between nature, and
compassion.

Ausus est amplecti amicitiam, quam caeteri falso exuerant. Tac.
There was not a man which disavowed not the friendship of Sejanus. One only
Roman Knight, Marcus Terentius accused to have been his friend, freely
protested it, when the rest made semblance to renounce it. Minus expedit
agnoscere crimen, quam abnuere.
And thus he spoke before the Senate.

It were perhaps more expedient for my fortune to deny the crime, whereof I am
accused, than confess it, But hap what will I profess to have been Sejanus
his friend, I desire to be so, and much rejoice to have gained his favor.
There were 4 in the City, 3. in the garrisons. Cunctos, qui novissimi consilu
experti fuimus, non uniu^ discrimine defendam. Tac.
I saw him a Colleague with his father in the charge of the Pretorian Cohorts,
and that he in one and the same time managed the affairs both of peace and
war: That those who were his most intimates, were powerful in the Emperors
grace, and the rest perpetually in terror, and the miserable condition of men
accused.

I will not here produce any man for an example, but with the sole hazard of my
life defend all those, who have had no part in his last designs. For we did
not our service to Sejanus of Vulsinium, but we followed the fortune of the
house of Claudius, whereof he by alliance, was become the head. We (Caesar)
honored your son in Law, Non est nostrum astimare quem supra caeteros, and
quibus de causis extollas. Tibi summum rerum judicium dii dedere: nobis
obsequii gloria relicta est. Tac.
your associate in the Consulship, and him who exercised your commands in the
common wealth.

It is not for us to judge, what he ought to be, nor for what cause you
raised him above others. The Gods have given you the sovereign dispose of
affairs: Nothing remains for us herein, but the only glory of obedience. We
consider what we see, on whom you confer riches, and honors; and who can hurt
or advantage us, and no man can deny, Abditos principis sensus, and si quid
occultius parat, exquirere illicitum. Tac.
but Sejanus was all this. It is not lawful to penetrate the deep intentions
of the Prince, nor what in secret he aims at: That is, doubtful, we
therefore attempt it not. Think not on this last day of Sejanus, but the
sixteen years of his prosperity. In that time we honored Satrius and
Pomponius, his freed men: and it was thought a glorious thing to be known by
his servants, yea, his Porter. What then shall we make no difference between
those who have served Sejanus, as the Emperors creature, and such as followed
him in his designs, as an enemy of the Empire?

Insidia in remp., concilia caedis adversum imperatorem puniautur, de amicitia,
and officiis, Idem, and te Caesar, and nos absoluerit. Tac.
It is necessary this distinction be reduced into its just limits, to the end
the treasons and conspiracies against the state, and plots concerning the
Emperors life may be punished, but for the friendship you have borne him, and
the obserevances we afforded him, one and the same reason ought (oh Caesar) to
discharge both you and us.

The boldness, and constancy of his speech which contained the thoughts of
others, was of so great force, that such as were accused as friends to Sejanus,
were distinguished from his Confederates; and Caesar applauded to have
confirmed the decree of the Senate, for the innocence of Terentius, Scipio said
the worst word might be encountered in friendship was that, which would have a
friend love, as if he should hate. Cic.
who loved not his friend to hate, or disavow him.

Lentulus Getulicus took a clean contrary course from Varro. Abudius Rufus
accused him to have treated the marriage of his daughter with the son of
Sejanus, this man was in Germany in great esteem, and authority for his
mildness and modesty. He spoke a far off on horseback, and in arms, for
which cause Tiberius condemned and exiled his accuser, an act of the wisdom of
a Prince, never to threaten him, who is out of his danger.

Getulicus was hereof advertised, Getulicus effusae clementia, modicus
severitate, m^rum amorem adsecutus. Tac.
and knowing the humor of Tiberius, (who when he fell upon a resolution,
seldom flew from it, but according to the temper of his anger pressed, or
retarded his revenge) let him know, he was in such a state, Confidence does not
always proceed from courage, but from place and caution
he would not forget his own safety for another, and so sent him this letter,
as insolent, as confident.

Caesar, the alliance I contracted with Sejanus, Idem error principis sine
fraud ali^s exitio non est habendus. Tac.
has not been upon my own motion, but your advice: It may be I am deceived
as well as you: but one, and the same fault ought not to discharge one, and
ruin another. My loyalty has hitherto been untainted, Successorem non aliter
quam indicium mortis acceptum. Tac.
nor ever shall change, if some faction be not prepared against me, and
whosoever shall succeed me in my charge, I will receive him as one, who
attempteth on my life. Let us accord as by way of treaty; Princeps caeterarum
reru^ potiatur, ipse provinciam retineam. Tac.
Take you the rest of the Empire, I my government.

Nothing but distance excused the incivility of this letter. He was the only
man among the friends of Sejanus, that escaped. Tiberius cast his eyes
downward, Publico odio and extrema aetate res principis stant magis fama, quam
vi. Tac.
and shrugged his shoulder, for his affairs were more maintained by
reputation, than power. His frail decrepit age cut off his hopes, and public
hatred augmented his jealousies.

Haud minus validum ad exitia Macronis odium qui easdem arts occultius
exercebat.
Mamercus Scaurus was likewise one of Sejanus his friends, but this amity had
not so much power to ruin him, as the malice of Macro, who was no less
violent, than the other to rid himself of his enemies, but he therein
proceeded with more cunning, and secrecy. He was worthy of the friendship of
Sejanus, Mamercus Scaurus ancillarum menstruamore hianta exceptabat. Sen.
for the conformity of his humors, to the others lusts, which Seneca
represents to be so brutish, that the only thought of them, polluteth the
mind; he staid not till condemnation, but followed the advice of Sextia his
wife, who persuaded him to kill himself.

P. Vitellius, P. Vitellius aerarii praefectus militarem pecuniam rebus novis
obtulerat. Tac.
who stoutly had supported the cause of Germanicus against Piso, was accused to
have delivered to Sejanus the treasure of the common wealth, for he was one of
the overseers of the Eschequer. His brothers answered for him, Crebris
prolationibus spe^, and metum juxta gravatus. Tac.
but seeing his process continued long, he was much perplexed to languish
between hope and fear, and so opened a vein with a bodkin. His friends
stanched the blood and stayed the spirits in their passage, much troubled to
remain in a body, which pleasing it self in turmoiles, was resigned to
sorrow, and heaviness.

Pomponius was sick, In custodia mort^ periit. S^et. Vitam aegritudine animi
finivit. Tac.
in the same hospital with the rest, but his patience made him survive
Tiberius, who would have put him to death, because Velius Gallus had retired
into his garden, when they dragged Sejanus.

Tiberius bewailed Sejanus, Honoribus functus es? Numquid aut tam magnis, aut
tam universis, quam Sejanus? Sen.
not for the loss of him, but his own interest, for whilst he lived all the
blame was laid on him, whatsoever he did either of injustice or cruelty, and
after his death no man shared with him, in the general hatred.

As much as the prosperity of Sejanus was admired, so much his fall bred
terror, and amazement. Never any man before him, received greater Honors,
more universal, more unexpected, and all the favors, and dignities, which the
Kings of Europe could heap together, to raise a man, might not be compared
with these. Diu multumque singulis q^id posset, ostendit. Sen.
He made all men know far and near, what he was able to do. He sixteen
years possessed the Sovereign power of an Empire, that commanded the whole
world, and which had the rising and setting Sun, for limit. Clausum mari aut
fluminibus longinquis imperi^m.
Euphrates confined its frontier toward the East, Mount Atlas, the Cataracts
of Nilus, the Deserts of Africa toward the South; the Ocean in the West;
Danubius in the North: so that, as far as the Sun progressed, his commands
went. What glory ever mounted so high, or fell so low.

He that should see a lofty mountain, commanding over a goodly plain to be
swallowed up, to sink, and be ingulfed in a moment, would be amazed, yet were
not that more strange, than to behold these great Colossuses, To see great men
fall is to behold mountains made level.
overthrown in an instant. This breeds astonishment, yet is the example
neglected. Every one trusts his own judgment, thinking to walk the same
way, but with another pace, and more securely than others. One ship alone,
which shall happily return from a long navigation, Every one thinks to do
the best, and to carry himself more wisely, than they who are undone.
is able to encourage an hundred men to attempt the like voyage; and the
shipwreck of an hundred vessels, is not of power to divert one alone: For, no
man believes ill luck is ordained for him.

Macro Captain of the Guard, and Laco Master of the watch, were much better
advised, the Senate decreed large honors to them, for this their good service.
Great services for the State ought to be paid with honor, not money.
To the first the office of Praetor, with power to sit in the rank of Senators,
with a purple robe in sports, and public assemblies; and to the second, the
office of Questor: They refused them, and Dion finds out the reason of their
denial, upon the terror of an example so fresh.

They thought it would be a great imprudence, to fall upon the same shelfe,
Optimum est aliena insania frui. Pliu.
whereon Sejanus was shipwracked. There are some can never be wise by any
example, but their own ruin.
It is better to be taught by the mishap of another, than our own. Wise men
make use of the disgrace and detriment, which they see others suffer. And as
Triacle is compounded of vipers, and wholesome remedies are drawn from poison;
so from the ruins and miseries of the wicked, honest men may derive precepts
for direction.

Sejanus shall always be alleged for a prodigious example of extreme
insolence, and unfortunate ambition: Nemo unquam imperium flagitio acquisitum,
bonis artibus exercu^t. Tac. Alvarus de Luna said to those who admired his
fortune with the King of Castile, You do ill to praise the building before it
be finished.
and his tragical end will instruct us, that, Power ill gotten, is never well
used: That we must not judge of felicity, till death; nor of the day, before
night; nor of the building, till it be finished.

Death, Fortune, Time, and the Course thereof, change in a moment. Favor
acquired by merit, or good fortune, is lost by insolence, and the most secure
cannot subsist, but by support of the Prince.

FINIS.
Unhappy Prosperity: Or, Philippa the Catanian.

Written in French by P. Mathieu; And Translated into English By Sr. TH.
HAWKINS.

Second History:

IUVENAL. -- Optata exegit gloria poenas.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Godfrey Emondson, 1632.

To the King:
Sir,
Favor raised this Catanian from dust to glory, and pride threw her headlong
from glory into dust again. I present this History to your Majesty, as of a
Monster of fortune, which you may peruse for Curiosity, others for Instruction:
For (verily) it is a Model, which figureth the shipwreck of those, who strike
not sail to decline the Tempest.

P. Mathieu.

Advertisement.
BOccace, the Florentine is the Author of this History, in his last book, De
casibus virorum illustrium, and he relates it upon the credit of his own eyes,
and of two old Captains, Marinus of Bulgaria, and Constantino de la Rocca, who
knew her in the Court of Robert King of Naples. I conferred it, upon the first
impression in France, with an ancient Manuscript, and with that which John Ant.
Summoto wrote of it.

It is a tragical effect of the inconstancy of Fortune no less cunning in her
Deceits, than giddy in her Favors. She could not raise this woman from a more
despicable degree, nor precipitate her from an higher, To show, The Ascent to
great Prosperities is of Glass, the Top a Terror, and Descent a Precipice.

Unhappy Prosperity.
STates are as soon ruined by weak instruments, The ruin of States
proceeds from hidden causes, much more dangerous than the apparanr.
as violent attempts; and when the just anger of God will overthrow them; he
does not always make use of his three-forked thunder, he therein employes
naught else, By feeble means God confounds proud power.
but rats, frogs, and flies.

This truth affords more proofs and examples in the history of the Kings of
Naples of the royal house of Aniou, than any other of that time, where may be
seen what abject persons have made the prosperity of this flourishing Kingdom
to totter, which was maligned by the most warlike people of the earth.

The Kingdom of Naples possessed by Grecians, Sarazins, Normans, Almans,
French, and Arragonians.
The Pope gave the title of it to Charles Earl of Anjou, and Province: brother
of St. Lewis, but his valor alone got the possession thereof, which never was
disturbed in his royal posterity, but through desperate counsels. That this
History may be well understood, we must unfold the memorials of the wars of
Sicily, between the Kings of Naples, M^ssacre of the French in Sicily on
Easter Tuesday. 29. of March. 1282.
and Aragon.

After the barbarous and inhumane Vespres of Sicily, Peter King of Aragon who
was much blamed to have counseled and countenanced this cruelty, drew a
powerful army together, dissembling his design so covertly, that the Pope
careful to preserve public tranquillity, demanding of him what he would do
with it? All warlike preparation of a Prince is suspected by neighbors.
he answered that should his shirt know his secret, he would burn it, yet
notwithstanding suffered the bruit to run current, it was to pass into
Affricke.

Charles believed it, not imagining he had any plot upon Sicily, or that he
would hinder him from chasticing the Sicilians, who had added exorbitant
cruelty to furious rebellion. It is an ill example to hinder a Prince in the
chasticement of his rebellious subjects.
He besieges the City of Messina, which turning its defense into submission
and humility, begged pardon: but he still persisting in the impetuous thirst of
revenge, grants them nothing at all, but the same conditions they had afforded
the French. No motion in the soul is more active, than anger, more violent
than revenge.
The Popes Legate entreats him to rest satisfied with their repentance, and to
consider, that extreme rigor is a cure unseasonable; he will understand
nothing contrary to his resolution, lest hope of impunity might cherish
rebellion. In what manner soever a subject repents, cleme^cy ought to be
preferred before Rigor.
Besides he promised himself that by humbling this City, all the rest were
conquered, and peradventure he was well enough pleased to have pretense to
punish their faults, so to take away the privileges they enjoyed, which verily
were sharp thorns in the eyes of the Kings of Sicily, Princes many times are
glad that subjects rebel, that so they may give them fortresses to bridle them
and take away their privileges.
they paying no other tribute, but what they accustomed under William the
first, King of Sicily, In matter of popular commotion among those who are
absolutely subject, you must go before the offense, and hinder them from doing
amiss, but in others who live between servitude and liberty, you were better
expect a revolt than prevent it, that you may have just occasion to dispoile
them of their privileges. The Pope pitied the Messinians, and Charles, not to
render himself implacable, sweetened his anger. He pardoned them on condition
the besieged should send him 800. men to dispose of them at his discretion.
This article was so harsh amongst them, that they protested they would rather
eat their wives, and children, burn them as the people of Araspus, The
Araspians being besieged by the Romans burnt their wives, their children, and
their goods, then desperately fell upon the assailants, that themselves might
be killed in killing their enemies.
and throw themselves into the flames after them, than give consent thereunto.
The wives to encourage the husbands to a common defense, presented their
children, coniuring them not to leave them to the inhumanities wherewith they
were threatened, They speak of nothing but stones, and spared not to carry many
to the top of the walls, to knock down the approachers.

Peter of Arragon enters into Sicily under the title of occasion and
opportunity. For he had not any but, that, of Constantia his wife, who had the
title of Manfredus her father, and Manfredus, Private houses only think how to
preserve their own, Princely how to invade others.
of invasion. Private thefts are punished; It is a Kingly work to invade
another, and in great power, strength usurpes the place of reason. Messina is
succored. Charles enforced to retire with much sorrow, not to have tempered
his anger, and accepted the offer, which had assured him of the whole Island
without a blow stricken. Then was the time his tongue did him ill service, for
had it not discovered his heart, all Sicily would have stooped to his
obedience. The Sicilians found the Catalonians harsh, proud, and untractable.
Other Cities fearing the like punishment having done the same fault, followed
the resolution of the Messinians, and opened the gates to the Arragonians, who
presently handled these people so harshly and haughtily that they wished for
the French again. Gaultier of Calatagirona declares against the Arragonians,
who took him, and hanged him.
Those of Calatagirona, took arms against them, and Alaimus Leontinus chief
Justice wrote to Charles, that if he sent him but ten Galleys, he would restore
Sicily unto him: but he would not trust them, who were dishonored with so
notorious a treachery.

Charles seeing Fortune with one so violent a kick of her foot had thrown
down all his designs, sought pretense of reason, He who will not be angry for
the loss of a Crown, will not be troubled at any thing.
and finding no cause of anger, or quarrel more just than the invasion of a
Kingdom, besought the Pope to admit he might combat with Peter of Arragon in
single Duel, to determine by the death of one, a difference, which might be
the death of many. The Pope seeing Peter of Arragon would not submit to reason,
left him to the hazard of arms. Simon Leontinus a Dominican Friar carried the
letter of challenge.
Charles sent him the lie and defiance. Peter refused not to measure his sword
with Charles. They agree to take Bourdeaux for the place of Combat, and the
King of England for Judge, an hundred Captains of either part for spectators,
and Sicily for Trophey of victory. The King of England at that time held Guyen.
Charles testified his courage by showing himself twice in the field, and
Peter his prudence by accepting the combat to withdraw his enemy, The Combat
appointed in the month of May in the year. 1283 Charles retireth out of the
field upon notice, that Peter was so far off he could not come the next day,
yet arrived the same day, and put his army, and lance into the hands of the
English Marshall.
who in Sicily drew near unto him. He came to Tours, but it was after he knew
Charles was departed, leaving registered with the Marshall of England, that he
had expected his enemy from morning until night.

He complains to the Pope, that Peter of Arragon put a scorn upon him and
that he will neither plead, nor restore. The Pope excommunicateth him as an
Usurper upon the rights of the Church, gives his Kingdom to Charles,
proclaims open wars against him, and begins it with more reputation, than
prosperity. Peter of Arragon surpriseth the I Will of Malta, and his Admiral the
Galleys of Naples, with Charles Prince of Salerno the Kings son, whom he sends
prisoner to Barcellon, draws near to Naples, terrifies, and amuseth minds so
much, that if Cbarles had not speedily hastened thither, the gates had been
opened to him, His presence gives confidence to honest men, The defeat, and
taking of Charles on the fifth of August. 1284.
and terror to the seditious, he caused a hundred and fifty of them to be
hanged, and had he not considered that there is not any man so miserable who is
not a member of the State, It is written that he in his anger commanded to put
fire amongst the Neapolitans, Gerrard of Parma the Popes Legate appeased him,
and showed that how much the more faults were great, so much the more clemency
is commendable.
punishment had taken away a much greater number, which had he omitted, he
should have made a new world through the difficulty of distinction between
good subjects and rebels, and children from servants: for as those are not
chastised by blows, so are the other so refractary they cannot be appeased with
sweetness.

Fortune being now wholly turned against him, his army was discomfited before
Rheggio, and he raising another to recover Sicily, the sorrow of his forepassed
losses stayed him, dissolved his design, and ended his life.

Fortune exacted so rough interests from the contentments she had given him,
that in these his last agonies, seeing the precipice inevitable, If I must
needs fall (said Charles) I pray God it may be handsomely.
he sought nothing but to descend into it after his own manner without either
being urged, or forced. He (as having wilfully concurred to his own
unhappiness, He who is the cause of his own suffering may only thank
himself.
) endeavored not to seek out elsewhere, than in himself, the causes of his
suffering.

It is impossible to live in the world without adversity, but it much imports
to understand for what cause we suffer, In the same army died Pope Martin the
fourth, Charles the first King of Naples, Peter of Arragon, Philip the Hardy.
what the expectation is, and to what purpose we endure, for if it be not
innocently, patience is difficult, and comforts are superfluous. He died at
Foggia the seventh of January 1284. Charles the first King of Naples caused the
head of Conradinus grandchild of the Emperor Frederick to be cut off, on the
26. of October. 1269.
Charles the second losing the King his father, must of necessity part both
with life and Kingdom. The Queen Constantia was counseled to let him dye
under the hands of an executioner to revenge the death of her Nephew; so that
upon this advice, she on a Friday sent him word he must prepare himself to the
same punishment, which his father had inflicted on Conradinus: He answered, I
am most ready to dye for the love of him, who upon the same day suffered for
me. This generous, and Christian answer touched the Queens heart, who replied:
For the same respect he would dye, I will have him live. But to qualify this
inveterate choler, and violent thirst to revenge the death of Conradinus,
Cruelty is an inveterate anger.
she commanded the heads of two hundred gentlemen prisoners to be cut off.

At four years end he was freed from captivity, and left there three of his
children, Lewis, Robert, and John, for hostages, and regaining with his liberty
one Kingdom (accounted as lost) he found another which he expected not.
Hungary was miserable under Ladislaus, and the Nobility enforced to till the
ground.
The Hungarians having put Ladislaus their King to death for his libidinous
life, and cruelties, Charles Martell was crowned King of Hungaria, as son of
Mary, sister of Ladislaus.

But because the sweetest contentments are steeped in the roughest acerbities,
Charles Martell son of Charles the 2. King of Naples and Mary daughter of
Stephen King of Hungary.
and for that strange accidents succeed unexpected events, a Neopolitan
Gentleman named Faelix, the only Privado in the secrets, and favors of
Charles, undertook, not, to share with him, Sovereign authority, which is not
divisible; All ambition is insatiable, for it begins where it should end.
but to bereave him both of Crown, and life to possess it himself wholly; so
hard a thing it is for a great fortune to contain it self within the limits
of reason, and to find contentment in ambition. An attempt upon the King of
Hungary at Villegrad on Easter day.
pressed on by this fury, he assaileth the King on an Easter day, sets his
sword to his throat, and wounds him in the arm; Clementia Queen of Hungary
daughter of the Emperor Rodolphus the first, and mother of Clementia married to
Lewis Hutin.
his courageous wife, daughter of the Emperor Rodolphus, diverting the blow,
had four of her fingers cut, his children were saved, for the conspiracy was
to raise a new house. This miserable creature is punished with his accomplices,
children, and allies, in the detestation of so execrable an impiety. There
cannot too many tortures, nor tormentors be mustered up together to punish
these horrible assassinates: Rigor of punishment in ruining the wicked should
terrify others.
It is fit the punishment be such, that in ruinating the culpable by stroks, it
may humble the rest by astonishment.

After the death of Alfonsus King of Arragon James and Frederick his brothers
sought peace with the Church by the mediation of Charles King of Naples, Martin
the fourth excommunicateth Peter of Aragon, and gives his Kingdom to Charles
of Valois
offering the confirmation of former treaties. They could not make choice of a
more powerful intercession, for all the Councels of Charles were much esteemed
at Rome, and his advises honored: yea, even in the election of Popes. He
labored their absolution, It is much more easy to treat with a simple, and
ignorant man, than a wise, and a wary
and proposed it to Pope Caelestine the fifth, who hearing speech of absolving
an enemy of the Church, refused it as a great scandal, because indeed it was a
long time since this thunder stroke fell upon the house of Arragon. Election of
Calestine in a conclave at Peruge, in the year 1294.
He so much feared to err, that he acted nothing but in fear, which proceeded
from his disproportion to affairs: For the truth is, the most feasible, and
facile, ever present themselves as rough and obscure to such as understand them
not.

It was the blessed man Petrus Moronus, whom Charles had drawn from the Cell,
He accepts it by the solicitation of Charles King of Naples.
to replenish the vacant See, the Cardinals having been two years unable to
fall upon an accord in the election. But he better understood himself, than
they who had chosen him: God requires the greatest account of him, to whom he
gives the greatest charge.
For being much troubled with the care of his own soul, and unwilling to
undergo the charge of others, he took his profession into consideration,
weighed his own duty, and represented the justice of his Master, who being
offended, is not more sharply displeased with any, than him to whom he
commits the manage of his affairs, and of whom he requires a most strict
account. This Example is single. There is none but Celestine has forsaken that
which so many thirst after.
For which cause he pulled off the Myter, and threw himself into his
Hermitage. He had been haled from the port into the storm, and now returns
out of the tempest, into the haven. He who cannot live in the day light, must
abide in the shadow. Charles caused him to come to Naples, to divert him from
this retirement, but could not: For Cardinal Cajetan, of a more unresistable
and prevailing spirit, making him believe he incurred the hazard of his own
salvation, to entertain a charge any longer, whereof he found himself
incapable, thrust himself into his place, Cardinal Benedict of Anagnia
deceived Pope Celestine, and put himself into his place at Naples, and fearing
he would reassume it again deprived him of life in prison.
possessed the Sea a whole year at Naples, where during his abode, Charles
accomplished his negotiation of restoring James and Frederick into the
communion of the Church; Pope Boniface the eighth consented unto it, so they
would wholly, and without hope of regaining, forsake Sicily. Princes leave, but
it is ever with a purpose to have again.
They thereunto accorded, upon promise made by Charles, that he should procure
the Count of Valois to renounce the right he had to the Kingdom of Arragon.
The fruit of this treaty was the restitution of Sicily, the return of three
Princes left Hostages, and the marriage of Blanch Princess of Naples, to James
King of Arragon. King Charles conducted his daughter to Barcellon, there to
behold her husband, and to take his three sons away with him; but of three he
had but two; Prince Lewis takes the habit of Saint Francis at Barcellon.
for the eldest being of the age of one and twenty, forsook both the world
and Court, and in the midst of the universal joy for peace, and solemnities of
marriage, took the habit of Saint Francis, in the presence of the King of
Naples his father, the King of Arragon his father in law, Queens and
Princesses. It was impossible to divert him from this resolution, and that he
might not be charmed by the Sirens of Court, Seneca says, that voice must be
avoided, which Ulysses would not hear, but whilst he was fastened to the mast
of a ship.
he affixed himself to the Standard of the Cross. Every one was much amazed
at this alteration, for he was the eldest of his brothers, the Crown of
Naples infallibly belonged to him, they would have married him to the Princess
of Majorica, he left Roses to make a conserve of I horns, Delights for
Austeritie, and the Court for a Cloister. He raised his heart to God upon two
wings, Simplicity, and Purity; the one is in the intention, the other in
affection, Simplicity seeks for God, purity finds him. In this habit,
After the year of probation, he presented himself to the Convent of
Mompelier, who refused him, lest they might offend the King his father.
he on the feast of all Saints made a Sermon, showing all prosperities of the
world were but trifles, and counterfeit gems, compared with eternal felicity.
He died at the age of four and twenty, on his birth day, being the nineteenth
of August, in the year 1293, and was canonized by Pope John the 22th. in the
year 1316.

This peace, which had cost much blood, Treaties drawn on by necessity last
not long.
money, and time, lasted but a little while; For seeing, that, which is done by
force continues no longer, but during the space we cannot resist necessity,
Frederick thirsting after Sicily, which he had left, began the war afresh
upon the first occasion, Repentance waits on headlong counsels.
but shame and loss (undoubted fruits of rash counsels) recompensed the breach
of the treaty with punishment.

The King of Arragon summoned to constrain his brother to observe the treaty.
The King of Arragon is summoned to join his forces with Charles, to constrain
his brother to observe it. Frederick lost twenty five galleys, six thousand
men, and had there left his liberty, if the Catalonians had not afforded him
passage for his safety, Auxiliaries soon revolt.
thinking they were more obliged to the blood of one of their Princes, than to
the succor of the King of Naples. It is no act of providence to employ those
against an enemy, who are of the same Nation; for in times of necessity they
set upon him, whom they should defend.

Frederick haughty and young, whose courage could never despair of victory,
nor ever fear death, unwilling to retire upon his discomfiture, prepares a
fresh Army, and returns into Sicily. Charles the second sent Robert his son
Duke of Calabria, to encounter with him on the Frontiers. He transported with
an overweening opinion of victory, which easily deceives young Soldiers,
imagined that going about to fight with those whom his father had vanquished,
It is a great advantage to fight with an enemy, whom he has once before
vanquished. That is it, which Scipio said to the Romans on the day of battle
against Annibal. Philip Prince of Tarentum, prisoner at Panormo in the year
1299.
he had not to do with enemies, but with the relicts of their defeature. He
enters into Sicily, encourages his troops to march, fight, and vanquish, but
is overthrowen, Philip Prince of Tarentum his brother taken prisoner, and
Calabria lost.

Robert gathering the rest of his forces together, beleaguers Drepany, and in
this siege it was, where God offended with this house, began to give way to the
ruin of it, by means which testify the most feeble Instruments are in his
hands, powerful Engines to demolish the greatest States.

Violante Duchess of Calabria was in the field to bear her husband company,
So Agrippina accompanied Germanicus into Almaigne, and in occasions encouraged
Soldiers by her valor.
and to give example to the Soldiers by her constancy and courage, suffering
even in the time of her being with child, the solicitudes and toils of a
siege. She was there delivered of her second son named Lewis, and the
immutable decree of humane accidents, which depend on a superior Law, would
needs have it for the much greater unhappiness of this flourishing Kingdom,
that there could not be found any woman fit to breed this Prince, but a
creature so despicable, as that she got her living by being a Laundresse,
Fishing is an abject condition, the Grecians call it a miserable error in the
sea.
and her husband daily stood upon the promontorie of a rock, to catch fish
with an angling rod.

She was young, her countenance sweet, which made all the rest amiable, her
proportion strong and vigorous, The less delicate nourishment is, the more
vigorous is the nourishment.
and stature little inferior to a tall stripling. Besides, poverty added some
favor to her election; for it is thought, her manner of living free from
excess and curiosity, rendered her complexion much stronger, and her
conscience the more simple. Having derived no name from the place of her birth,
she took that of Catania, her country, For being near the proud Typhaeus.
Carthaneen has the sulphur, and drinks the smoke of it. Stat.
and was called Philippa the Catanian; and as this City is unhappily situated
near Mount Aetna, which vomiteth fire and sulphur upon its neighbors, so her
greatest infelicitie was to have approached this fire of favor, which in the
end turned her into ashes. But so soon as she bad drunk in the enchanted cup
of the Court, her primitive innocence degenerated into an ardent thirst of
greatness, in such sort, that in stead of suffering the incommodities of want
in the abject condition of her state, A poor man suddenly enriched, has much
ado to govern himself in riches.
she knew not how to bear the affluence of happiness in this her first
fortune: For it is not so hard a matter for the rich to endure poverty, as for
the penurious to accord with riches.

The siege of Drepany having continued some time, The King of Arragon took
Sicily from King Charles the first, had his son prisoner, and his grand child
the Prince of Tarentum.
the besieged were succored by Frederick, and Robert constrained to return
to Naples, with a smaller company, and much less contentment than he marched
forth withal, whereat King Charles his father became greatly displeased, and
sad: and seeing injuries are weighed according to the quality of the persons,
who either do, or receive them, it was a very distasteful thing with Charles,
to see that a King of Arragon had put such harsh affronts upon the Kings of
Naples, boasting to have furnished out the triumphs both of their Crowns, and
Princes. And although the war was between King and King, The Arragonians
chose Peter Tarres for their King, and took the Crown from him to give it to
Ramirez.
he notwithstanding thought a King of Arragon could not enter into comparison
with him, either as King of Naples, or as issued from an house, which had not
begun to reign like his; for the Crown had stood fully nine hundred years on
the heads of his Ancestors, Ramirez bastard of Sanchez King of Castile, began
to reign in the year 1017.
and the Arragonians had not known above three hundred years, what a royal
Scepter meant.

The Monarchy of France was founded upon the ruins of an Empire, which swayed
the whole world, and amongst the Gauls, the most warlike province of Europe,
(a people so daring as to advance their Standards on the highest top of the
Capitol.) The Arragonians made a Kingdom of a County, choosing a Monk for
Founder, whom they took out of a Cloister, that they might have a King
extracted from the Gothish race.

After he had reigned some time, he retired into his Monastery, and
recommended his daughter to Alphonsus the seventh, King of Castile.
He was so simple and doltish, that mounting on horseback to wage war
against the Moors, and they putting a lance into one hand, and a target into
the other, he took the bridle between his teeth. He quickly shook off his
sottishness: For employments make men: So that putting on the Majesty of a
King, he caused the heads of eleven of his greatest to be cut off, who mocked
at him, and for a satisfactorie reason, only said this, Foxes know not with
whom they dally.

King Charles to exact an account for these last bravadoes, in the 1311. year
raised a great army, and entreated his Cousin Charles, Count of Valois,
Discipline is hard in armies of diverse Nations.
whom King Philip le Bell sent into Tuscany for aid of the Florentines, to lend
him his troops to chase Frederick out of Sicily. Wise Princes appease enmities
among houses from whence they sprang, and those whereinto they are married.
The forces being joined and nothing wanting among them but discipline, they
entered into Calabria, and there exercised violences so exorbitant, that
Violante Duchess of Calabria, sister of Frederick abhorred it, and having
showed her courage in waging war, made her wisdom appear in treaty of
peace, persuading Frederick to require it, Peace between the King of Naples,
and Frederick of Arragon in the year. 1302.
and not to expect, till he were in a condition not to obtain it. Frederick
gave ear to her, and the doubt of the future evil being worse than the pain
of the present, disposed him to peace, and conjured his sister to mediate.

She had the honor both to propose, and conclude it. Sicily rested in
Frederick for his life only, without any other title, than King of Trinacria,
leaving all he held elsewhere, and to confirm amity, married Leonora the
daughter of Charles the second.

But as there is no charm more powerful to gain the good opinion of the
people, than to afford them peace, and oppose any thing which may disturb
their repose; Violante was honored by all as the foundresse and raiser of this
Temple of peace. It was proclaimed every where, Martial said the name of the
Emperor Domitian sprang amongst Roses, and violets
Long live Violante, no other title contented their thoughts than Violante, and
it was much more truly said of her name than of the Emperors, that it grew
amongst roses, and violets. This public well wishing spread it self over
all, whatsoever had relation to Violante: but the best part was for the
Catanian, who alone possessed her soul, nor could any other deserve her
favors; which she cherished, not only by the care of the education of the
young Prince, but with great vigilance, ardent assiduity, Favors of great ones
are merited by assiduity, affection, and fidelity.
lively affection, and a judicious complacence practiced in the Mothers
service, in such sort that she alone was the oracle of her will. But death
which searches into all the corners of the earth, and from which no one
Country is more distant than another, In all parts of the world man is in
equal distance from death.
took away the Duchess Violante, even in the sweetness of this good work of
peace. This death undermining the fortune of the Catanian astonished her, but
it was but for a little while. For Robert remarrying with Sancha daughter of
the King of Maiorica well remembered Violante had recommended her to him,
Affection borne to the dead, appeared in the remembrance of what they
recommended.
and offered her as a present, she loved her no less than her Cozen Violante
had done, and this woman observing her Mistress, did wholly addict her self
to devotion, and took not delight in any thing but to speak with God by
prayer, To pray, that is to speak to God, and to understand his word is to
hear him speak.
or to hear God speaking to her in the reading of pious books, played the
hypocrite, and scrupulous holy one, only to please her. Much ado had she to
strain for it, For devotion is so clear and impolluted, you cannot confound
it; sooner will water commix with oil, than Piety with Hypocrisy. Examples do
not rectify depraved spirits.
I wonder how she grew so wicked among so many examples of piety and virtue:
but she came to the Court, not to settle her conscience, but to raise a
fortune. Sancha Duchess of Calabria who loved her, Affection produces
affection.
because she had the breeding of the young Prince, being most affectionate, and
vigilant for her good, let no fair occasion slip in her advancement.

Her Husband dyed, Sudden favor makes spirits revive and flourish again,
which seemed dejected, and faint.
and she was instantly Courted. For who ever should marry her was sure to
sleep between the arms of Fortune, so supereminent was her power in Court.
This serpent, which during the winter of her wretchedness lay stark, and
benumbed with cold, no sooner felt the heat of the Sun of favor, but she
stirred and high-reared her creast.

The Sarazens for a long time held Sicily, Frederick the 2. gave them the City
of Laceria.
Charles had set out an edict against the Saracens that resided in Sicily, and
who 70 years together possessed Luceria, giving leave to the Christians to
kill them, if they abjured not the Alchoran.

Some forsook the Country, others were baptized, and there were seen many to
be new Christians in appearance, and inveterate Saracens in their consciences:
Forced conversions make Atheists
for it was impossible to root this pestilent seed out of their hearts, Boccace
says he bought it not.
and those who returned to their old vomit, were called Marrans. Never was good
Moore a good Christian. In the general expulsion of this scummy people,
Raimond of Cabanes, Master of the Kings household took to him a young Sarrazen,
and noting in him much affection toward his service, A heart which is disposed
to do well is quickly seen in its courage.
and withal a dextrous and ready wit, gave him his own name in baptism, the
knowledge of his friends in Court, and lastly his proper charge. But as there
is not any mean in the Courts of Princes, and since the slendrest fortunes
require a whole man, he so well managed his, There is no fortune so mean,
which requires, not all the industry of a man.
that of little he made much, and became so acceptable to Charles the second,
and to Duke Robert his son that he created him master of his Wardrobe. Time
cooperateth with his industry, and fortune suits to his vigilance; Labors,
which are punishments to the sluggish, and delights to the diligent, trouble
not him at all. He acquired great wealth which he exposed, He who does any
thing willingly, his travel costeth him nothing.
neither to Ostentation nor envy. Gratuities fell into his purse without noise,
and by ways unperceiveable, and although there is not any condition in Court
free from taxations, nor wisdom so absolute, and judicious, as to make it
self a Master over accidents, The wise man exposes not his fortune to envy.
yet met he with none, who might reproach him to have used therein either
indiscretion, or imprudence. He brought not his wax wings of conferred favors
so near to the Sun, There is no providence so certain that it can assure
things future.
nor at first flight soars up to heaven by strength of wing, he abides within
the knowledge of what he is, and what he has been, is contented with what
befalls him, and not scorning any man dispiseth himself, and priseth those who
disesteeme him

He shows humility toward the great, Courtesy to others, never enters into
competition with any who may hurt him, never embroiles himself with
partialities, nor accounts his fortune by desert, Fortune many times possesses
the place of merit.
he repaires all manner of defects by his modesty: for the truth is modest
ignorance is much more tolerable, than proud ability.

Modesty alone is the assured guide of prosperity, from whence a man never
wanders, who loses not himself. It is hard to join modesty and felicity
together.
It is an especial favor from heaven, when they for some good space walk
both together, It is the first piece which is wanting in the equipage of those,
who suddenly rise to great Fortunes. Prosperity causes Pride, Pride Insolence,
Insolence Folly, and Folly headlong ruin. There are not any but such as get
riches with innocence who possess them with modesty. The Duchess of Calabria
thought the fortune of the Morisco was the Catanoises real act, Peleus, and
Anchises enjoyed (as says Plutarch) wedlock with Goddesses.
wherefore she resolved to marry them together, Raymond Cabanes might hit upon
a better, but he was nothing nice, protesting that were he honored with this
favor he would compare with those, who had married Goddesses.

To make this alliance the more noble, and to cover the shame of both their
births, this good Lady gave the Duke of Calabria her husband to understand;
Great wealth shows ill without honors.
and he the King his father, that they wanted naught but honor, and that their
great possessions well deserved to afford them distinction from the multitude
The Catanian willing enough to oblige her husband to acknowledge her, as the
sole cause of Nobility, labors hard to get him a Title. As she was
importunate in begging benefits, so she became impudent in the pursuit of
honors, and never gave over till Sancha made him a Knight, before he was a
Gentleman. All the Court murmured against the King, as too liberal of the
ensigns of honor, whereof a wise Prince is so sparing, that he never makes
use of them, but to recompense merit, and great services: Nature, Folly, and
Fortune give sometimes the ambition of a Prince to the courage of a groom.
Every one complained of Nature, which gave the high soaring affections of a
Prince to abject souls, and put noble thoughts into hearts inferior.

The King granted him the order of Knighthood, and he received it according to
the form of the institution thereof, made by Charles his father. Information
being given of his military achievements, and dexterity in arms, upon the
witness of those, who bent their consciences to favor, Conscience is
accommodated to time and favor.
giving assurance of that which was not, nor ever had been. (For the truth is
Raymond never handled Iron, but in a kitchen, or at the Oar among
gally-slaves) there was a day appointed for the Ceremony in the great Church.

The History of Provence says the Knight was caused to sit on a chair of
silver, covered with green velvet.
The King seated on his royal Throne, under him the King of Hungary his son,
who with a great train came to see him, Queen Mary his wife, the Duchess of
Calabria his daughter, Princes and Princesses, his children. Raymond presents
himself, the Archbishop of Barri made a discourse upon the nobleness of the
act, then gave an oath to bind him, not to ride upon an Ass, or Mule like the
Knights of the scarf, but to serve the King, defend Ladies wronged in their
honor, Alphonsus instituted the order of the scarf and band.
and to enter into the lists of Combat for them, if he were entreated.

After the oath given, two ancient Knights presented him at the feet of the
King, who striking him on the head or shoulder With his sword, solemnly
pronounced these solemn words, The sword put on by Virgins, bound him not to
use it in any wicked act.
God make thee a good Knight.

Seven well attired Damsels girted him with a sword, and four Knights put on
his spurs. The Queen and Duchess of Calabria led him into his rank, and
the Knights embraced him; but discontentedly, because he had obtained without
merit, or service, through favor and intercession, the honors which were
only ordained for singular, Knighthood was established to recompense worth,
and virtue.
and excellent rewards of virtue. It is the only advantage, which worth yields
to one man above another, if it be not seldom, it is contemptible.

Music, Bals, Tournaments conclude the feast, and the next is the wedding.
Raymond marries the Catanian, and with her, Insolence, Ingratitude, and Pride.
In the Kitchen his thoughts transported him to arms, Desire which aspireth
beyond things to be desired, is no desire, but a disease.
now when he is in the midst of them, he aspires to an higher pitch, and his
desires extend much farther than his hopes.

This extraordinary greatness takes his very countenance away from him, he
is altogether astonished at it, as a Kite on the fist, So Coprous has Greek
attire, and barbarous hands.
or a Monkey in scarlet. Dignities and new riches breed some thing sottish in
the minds of those, who are accustomed to possess, and enjoy them for a long
time. His first modesty brake company with prosperity; Pride makes him glitter
every where, his Riot throws him into all superfluities and profusions,
wherein it may be showed, Excessive riches are garments too long and
troublesome.
and he stands perplexed and cumbred in great riches, as with garments too long
and heavy.

Charles in the mean time sought the peace of the Church, which at that time
was much turmoyled, and felt strange revolutions. Boniface the eighth died a
prisoner, Benedict the eleventh of the order of Saint Dominicke, Bernand
Archbishop of Bou^deaux chosen Pope.
succeeded him for eight months, and seventeen days; and Clement the fifth
chosen after him, came to Philip le Bell, and Charles Count of Valois. His
coronation was performed with great solemnity, but much disturbed by the death
of the Duke of Britain, John Duke of Brettaigne slain by the fall of a wall
at Lions 1306. The holy See transferred from Rome to Avignon, in the year
1307. The abolishing of the Templers in the Council of Vienne, in the year
1309.
slain by the ruin of a wall. The Pope from thence went to Avignon, and there
established his See, setting the Crown of Sicily upon the head of Robert Duke
of Calabria.

Charles began in Provence the terrible persecution against the Templers, and
being at Marseilles in the year 1307, commanded the imprisonment of many of
them, and seizure of their goods, and his will was executed with such order and
diligence, that on one and the same day, being the four and twentieth of
January, by one same signal given, they were all cast into prison, and few
days after executed. Their goods were given to the Knights of the order of
Saint John of Jerusalem, who at that time possessed themselves of Rhodes by a
pretty stratagem, Taking of Rhodes by the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem,
in the year 1309.
causing certain Soldiers to creep into the City in sheepe-skins amongst a
flock of sheep, and the Captains disguised like Shepherds. Charles died a
while after, in the year 1309, threescore years of age. God blessed this
Prince with a plentiful posterity, to afford him alliance with the best and
chiefest houses of Christendom. The first, Charles Martell King of Hungary.
Secondly, Lewis, a religious man of the Order of Saint Francis, and Bishop of
Toulouse. Thirdly, Robert Duke of Calabria, who succeeded his father. Philip
Prince of Tarentum married Catharine Empress of Constantinople, daughter to
Philip son of Baldwin, Emperor of Constantinople, and Beatrice of Sicily,
daughter of Charles the first, king of Naples.
Fourthly, Philip Prince of Tarentum, Emperor of Greece. Fifthly, John Prince
of Achaia, or Morea. Sixthly, Raymond Berenguer Count of Andria. Seventhly,
Tristram, borne during the imprisonment of his father. Eighthly, Lewis of
Duras. Ninthly, Peter surnamed Tempest, Count of Gravina. The eldest daughter
Margarite, married to Charles Count of Valois, and mother of Philip of Valois:
Blanch married to James of Arragon: Eleonor, to Frederick King of Sicily:
Marie, to James King of Majorica: Beatrice, to the Marquess of Este, afterward
to Bertrand of Baux, Prince of Orange, and Humbert Daulphin of Vienne.

Wits are purified in adversity, and Princes who have exercised theirs in the
calamities of fortune and necessity, have had better success than others,
T^^otheus, a more fortunate than able man, was painted sleeping, and Cities
which of themselves were taken in an heap.
on whom Crowns have fallen without labor, and Cities even sleeping. As
Charles the first got not the Crown of Naples without pain, nor preserved it
without peril, his reputation being raised upon glorious actions of his
virtue, and constancy: So Charles the second maintained not his, but by
wrestling with Fortune, which to ruin him, cast him four years into the
power of his enemies. Italy afforded him the glory of its repose, and to have
preserved it from sinking under the desperate and furious factions of Gwelphes,
and Gibel^es. He lived so well that he died willingly; That you may die
contentedly, you must not deplore the actions of life.
There was not any Nation, which admired him not, nor shall any age fail to
record him.

Robert his third son succeeded him, by exclusion of the children of his
eldest, Charles Martell King of Hungary. The disputation of the Uncles
precedencie before the Nephues, was treated by Baldus.
The question whether the Uncle should be preferred before the Nephew was
disputed before the Pope at Avignon, who more considered the age, experience,
and merit of Robert, than the right of those in minority. At his entrance into
rule, Lewis, the second son of Robert, dies at nine years of age.
death took Lewis his second son from him, whom the Catanois had bred, whereat
he conceived such sorrow, as we may of a fruit pulled off before maturitie;
The death of an Infant is a fruit not fallen off, but pulled from the tree
before the time.
so that seeing all the hope of his succession rested on the Duke of Calabria
his only son, he desired in good time to see him a father, and for that
purpose sought out a wife for him. Henry of Luxenbourg the Emperor, offers
his daughter to the son of the King of Sicily, in the year 1312.
Henry the seventh offered him his daughter, but he married one of those,
which the Emperor Albert left, and that no man may enter into this History,
who confirms not the example of the unhappiness of prosperity, he may
observe his fortune to be remarkable.

Having gotten the Empire, Battle of Worms, where Adolphus of Nassau was
slain, the eight and twentieth of June, 1308.
not only by right of election, but by arms (for he discomfited, and slew in
battle Adolphus of Nassau, his Rival, ten years after, in the year 1308,)
he was slain by his Cousin German near the City of Bruch, and as it were in
the sight of the Castle of Habspurg, the Cradle which bred the first Princes of
the house of Austria. This young Prince fell into despair, because the
Emperor who had many children to provide for, denied to restore him the
Seigniorie of Kiburg, which was his mothers. Necessity is witty in ill
counsels.
A Prince young and needy, is apt to enter into ill counsels, against him who
withholds that, which would suffice to preserve him from necessity.

Three little Cantons revolted against their Governors, in the year 1308. The
first league of three Cantons of the Switzers, was made at Brilan the seventh
of December. 1325.
He died in the time of his purpose, to chastise rigorously the three Towns of
the Switzers, which revolted against those who governed them, as subjects of
the Empire. Three Pesants, who had no other use of iron, but to prick forward
their Oxen, and cleave wood, employed it to raise a warlike Commonwealth, which
has an hand in all the wars of Christendom, draws money from the most
powerful Christian Princes, and has fought nine battles to secure their
liberty. He left two and twenty children by Elizabeth of Carinthia, Albert
had two and twenty children by his wife Elizabeth of Carinthia.
and although he had great possessions in Austria, Bohemia, Alsatia, Swevia,
and Suitzerland, there was not enough to afford a Principality to each one,
yet they were all well provided for, and the daughters required in marriage by
the best Families of Christendom. Robert preferred this alliance before, that,
of the Emperor Henry the seventh, and gave to his son Charles Duke of
Calabria, Catharine Princess of Austria.

This Prelation offended the Emperor, and began their enmity, which was
exasperated by the aid Robert gave to the Gwelphes, Robert succoureth the
Florentines against the Emperor. Henry of Luxenbourg the Emperor, condemns
Robert King of Naples to lose his head, 1318.
and Florentines. The Emperor vexed hereat published a Ban, declared him a
Rebel against the holy Empire, condemns him to lose his head, and the Crown
of Naples. The condemned only appeals to his Sword, made his judgment be
revoked, pursued the Emperor, who retired into Piemont, and pressed him so
hard, that he repented to have incensed a brave and masculine courage, Never
injure him, who can take revenge.
which accounted not the suffering of injuries laudable, nor the forgetfulness
of them profitable. The Florentines afterward, to free themselves from such an
enemy, who never appeared amongst them, but for their ruin, caused him to be
poisoned at Bonconvent, Henry the seventh was poisoned at Bonconvent in an
Host, others say, he was hurt with a fall from on horse.
the fifteenth of August 1312.

Death dissolved the marriage of the Duke of Calabria with Catherine of
Austria, and she died without children. Robert, who had but only this son,
presently sought out another wife for him, entreating King Philip the Fair,
he would be pleased the house of Valois might restore to the Crown of
Naples, what it had thence borrowed. Charles the second his father, had married
Margarite his daughter to Charles Count of Valois, and Robert desired Grafts
for his Son of this royal Stock, which had never been tainted with the
least suspicion of impuritie. She is not chaste enough, who by the least
suspicion makes her chastity to be doubted.
It is said of this Lady, that the Ambassadors of France, having required her
for the Kings brother, besought her they might see, whether she were touched
with her fathers natural imperfections, In the choice of Princesses, to be
wives for Kings, the stature, and grace of body was considered.
who was crooked, she unclothed her self even to her smock, made of so fine
Holland, that one might easily behold her shape, and withal replying, that
Never would she for a Crown make any scruple to pull it off.

King Robert desirous to see his son, the Duke of Calabria, fully
accomplished in all virtues, gave him for Tutor the Count of Elzear a kinsman
of the Earls of Provence, Saint Elzear Earl of Arrian of the house of Sabran.
every where renowned for admirable purity of life.

Kings that neglect the education of those who are to succeed them, little
regard their own states, Good government cannot be expected from a Prince ill
bred.
the safety whereof depends on the good education of the Prince: Wars are not
the cause of so many miseries, as ill managed education. For such calamities
are but temporary, but disorder lasts, whilst the scepter swayeth. By the
fruits of Justice, and piety which this tree bare, it may be understood it was
well manured.

The intended marriage being resolved on, It is a great trial of courage to
abstain from that, which is both desired, and permitted.
he sent his Governor to Paris to negotiate it. He could not make choice of a
more unspotted Orator, as one who had lived three and twenty years with
Delphina his wife in voluntary and secret chastity, preserving devotion amidst
the vanities of Court. Humility in greatness, natural frailty among
pleasures, and single life in marriage. Charles Duke of Calabria marries Mary
daughter of Charles Count of Valois. 1324.
Scoffers will make sport hereat for the danger there is in placing powder
near unto fire: But the actions of Saints should be considered, not with
discourse of nature, but effects of grace.

The Marriage of the lady Mary was the raising of the Catanians fortune, whom
King Robert gave to his daughter in law, as a woman, that had seen the birth
and education of all the children of the royal family; she having served
Queen Mary daughter of the King of Hungary, Length of service gains trust
for servants.
the Duchesses Violante, Sancha, Catherine* she was an aged Oak, a worn
Medaile, only honored for her antiquity, every one made address to her, as to
the register of household government.

She was beloved by this Lady, more than by all the rest, and being an
understanding woman, presently perceived, the delights, and inclinations of her
Mistress propended to pretty conceits, neat curiosities, and quaint ornaments.
The Queens of Persia had provinces named from rheir dressings, one was termed
the Queens girdle, another he^ Head tire.
There was not any thing either rare, or excellent through all Europe which she
sought not out to please her, that one would have thought, whole provinces
stood affected to her accommodation.

Robert had other contentments, which nearly followed the marriage of his son
with Mary of Valois; the City of Genova rendered it self up to him, and he had
possession of it full eighteen years; The Church gave him the guardianship
and government of Ferrara, Florence ressented it. Robert is made Vicar for the
Church at Ferrara.
It is a thing very natural for people to submit themselves voluntarily under
the rule of good and wise Princes

The first year of the marriage of his son brought forth a daughter whom he
named Jane, It is a rule in nature, that the best command.
and he appointed the Catanian to be her governesse; and made Raymond Cabanes
her husband super-intendent of his household. Catherine of Austria died on the
15. of Ian 1323. and Mary of Hungary on the 25. of March* 1323.
To preserve the good intelligence he held with the Pope, he often visited him
at Avignon, and was there, whilst in less than two months he received news
of the death of his daughter in law Catherine of Austria, and his Mother Mary
of Hungary. To understand the like grief, one must have such a daughter, and
such a Mother. He there also saw the death of one of his dearest friends
Amedeus the fourth, Duke of Savoy. Pope Benedict would not enrich his parents
with the goods of the Church.
Pope Benedict the twelfth died a while after leaving the continuation of the
sumptuous palace of Avignon imperfect. Flesh and blood had not any power over
him. Some Courtiers brought his father before him clothed otherwise than
beseemed his condition, he would not acknowledge him until he had reassumed
the habit of a Miller, nor give him any thing but wherewithal to buy a Mill.
He often said Popes should neither have kindred nor allies, and that they were
not administrators of Church Livings to enrich their own kindred.

A Prince should consider those treaties, which oblige him.
The great reverence he bare to the Pope was a notable proof of his wisdom,
for he well knew, whilst the Kings his predecessors held good correspondence
with the Popes (having ever before their eyes the treaties, Philip King of
Macedon caused the articles he agreed on with the Romans to be read unto him.
and capitulations between the Sea Apostolic, and their Crown, the more
exactly to observe them) the peace of their state had been invincible, nor had
the Princes of the house of Swevia, who banded against them, derived any other
profit, than loss both of the Empire of Almaigne, and Kingdom of Naples.
Never should we quarrel with those, who may more endammage, In the investiture
of the Kings of Naples, it is said they will not accept the election of the
Emperor Charles Duke of Calabria, as head of the Florentine Commonwealth nor
their army with 200000. ducats rent by the year.
than profit us.

To quiet the spirit of the Pope he promised him by oath never to accept the
Imperial Crown, nor title of King of Lombardy as Prince of Tuscany under the
penalty of losing the rights of Sicily.

The Florentines notwithstanding so well liked his government, that they
demanded his son, and chose him their Prince for ten years. Whilst they
expected his coming, he sent them the Count Brennus his kinsman, and shortly
after went thither with his wife, who was there delivered of a son, whom the
Signory of Florence named Charles Martel in memory of the brother of King
Robert of Hungary. But the joy of this birth lasted but eight days: For the
child died on the ninth. She had yet another daugther named Mary; the abode he
made at Florence much availed the Catanian who grew dexterous by conversation
with the subtle, and wary wits of Italy. Lewis of Bavare enters into Italy,
causes himself to be crowned at Rome the 17. of Ian. 1328. deposes John the
22. who was at Avignon, and puts into his place a Cordelier, called Peter
Corbieres.
He remained there about some three years, but hearing the Emperor Lewis of
Bavare entered into Italy, and had a plot upon the territories of King Robert
his father, he departed from Florence, and went to Naples, where he soon after
deceased. His government was so just and temperate, Death of Charles Duke of
Calabria in the year 1328. No justice, but for them who have money.
that the Florentines never bewailed those that went before. Such care he had
of Justice, and to have it exercised toward all his subjects, that (perceiving
the difficulty of access of the poor to him) he caused a bell to be hanged at
the gate of his palace, so that he who rung it was sure in that instant to be
brought before the Prince, or to have some officer sent out to hear him.

King Robert undertook the ruin of the Duke of Athens, because he began to
alter and trouble the government of the City.
The Florentines unable to agree in their government, had likewise recourse to
King Robert, who assigned them the Duke of Athens, but he thought not long to
continue there, upon notice given, he had put the Signory out of the Palace
where they usually assemble, so that he sent him word, if he could not content
himself with his sons lodging, he should not make any long abode in the City.

Gaultier Duke of Athens Count of Brenne enterpriseth upon the liberty of
Florence
He gave up an unfortunate account of his fidelity, and reputation, in going
about to make that power perpetual, which was given him but limited, he seized
on the forces of the City, and such as might hinder his plot. Those who
conspired against the common wealth to raise him, had a new plot to ruin him,
and seeing it was discovered, not willing to expect till punishment should be
inflicted, He who is discovered casts himself into despair.
took arms. The design which was but of some particulars, caused a general
insurrection against him, to enforce him to forsake the Fortress, and to put
into the hands of the executioner those who had assisted him in his Tyranny,
which lasted but nine months. It were ill with the common wealth if the wicked
should always prosper. King Robert deploring the death of his son spoke
these words; Cecidit Corona capitis mei: vae mihi, vae vobis.
It is the interest both of the particular, and public, that the wicked
perish, and the good prosper.

Nothing could happen to King Robert, which more sharply afflicted him, than
the death of his son, he incessantly said: The Crown is fallen from my head,
woe be to me, woe be to you. If sorrow had power enough to kill, it had
thrown him into his grave, his courage made resistance, and although grief
had banished vivacity of Spirit from his heart, Constancy in an instant made it
return again, but the evil was reiterated with it.

He found no comfort but in his little Inheritrix, He sadly prunes the tree,
from which no fruit can be expected.
the precious pledge of the Kingdoms hope, who was in the hands of her
governesse, omitting nothing in the sollicitous care of exact education, by
manuring her as a plant, that was to perpetuate her house, but with this
grief, that he could not have the contentment to see the fruit she should
bring forth; To oblige her governesse to be careful in the service of this
Princess, O ridiculum vidisse ex ergastulo servili, ac nidore popinae
Aethiopem Roberto Regi regalia obsequia exhibentem.
he created her husband great steward of Naples, and thereupon Boccace, who
relates this story, cries out aloud; What a mockery is it to see a Moore
drawn from the misery of a gally-slave, and smoke of the kitchen, to supply
with King Robert the prime services of the Crown, to take place of the
greatest Lords, to become a President in the Court, and to administer justice
to Suitors: but what shall we say? Fortune raises whom she list. So inconstant
is she, that she suffered Marius to beg his bread at Carthage in his sixth
Consulship, and created him chief general in the seventh.

The liberty of a Prince in the choice of servants is absolute.
The choice a Prince makes of men, whom he advances to great employments, is
not subject to any man's censure: and were it bad, yet ought it to be approved,
lest his judgment be questioned, and reputation wounded; But it is a hard
matter to be silent therein: The Roman^ permitted not new purchasers of noble
houses to change the Images, or furnitures, which upbraided their unworthiness.
For honors weep over those who have not deserved them, and the Images of
Noble houses upbraid the slender merit of the new purchasers.

Raymond Cabanes continued not long in this charge, for death freed him from
the envy and hatred she would have cast upon him, had he lived any longer. King
Robert witnessed in his death the account he made of his life, appointing
funeral obsequies for him, as for a Prince of his own blood, and protesting
he had long time made use of his favor, Wise men make use of favor, and abuse
it not.
but never abused it: It is true, Fortune raised his house, but virtue had a
share in it, and prudence furnished out the Oeconomie. It was as great a glory
for him to have raised it, It is better to begin, than end an house.
as it is a disgrace for others to ruin what they find already framed. Some,
through their own errors, deface the images of their Ancestors, others
transmit theirs over to posterity with admiration. Those not having preserved
what was given them are despicable, these having out of themselves framed that,
which they received not from any man, deserve to be honored. Agathocles King
of Sicily had a Potter to his father; Justinian, a Shepherd; Gratian, a
Ropemaker.
There is a beginning in every thing: the greatest houses were heretofore but
Cabarets, the Capitol was at first covered with thatch: There are diverse
things very great, which would not so have been, had they not been little,
and might the condition of man's extraction depend on his own choice, evreie one
would be borne great; there is not a creature, Ioane, eldest daughter of the
Duke of Calabria, is declared Heir of the Crown of Sicily, in the month of
June, and year 1330.
but would be derived from a noble house.

Ioane was about four years and an half old, when her father died, and when
she was in the beginning of the seventh, King Robert, who desired nothing more
than to establish her, declared her his heir, the Subjects of the Kingdom of
Naples, and the County of Provence acknowledged her, did her homage, and
promised, if God disposed of Mary before she were a mother, they would confess
her sister Ioane for their Queen. Besides, Philip Prince of Tarentum said,
that he would have no other heir, if he died without issue.

As power increased for Ioane, favor augmented for her Governesse, who had a
hand in every thing, Ambition covers it self with any thing it finds.
causing her ambition to pass under the specious pretext of her Pupils
service, and as if all had conspired to her greatness, Loses the best and
most assured guide of her life.
the Duchess of Calabria, who alone held her designs under control, died
shortly after this declaration. Had she lived, she never would have suffered
her to extend the charge of the Princesses person, over the government of the
State. The good education of Infancy was but as a dew, which is exhaled by the
first fervours of youth.

She was a Princess, whose life was truly innocent, as being endued with the
humility of an Handmaid toward God, the goodness of a Mother toward her
Subjects, and the severitie of a Judge toward her self. Her mother Margarite
Duchess of Valois, and sister of King Robert, a Princess incomparable for her
chastity, first bred her. She lived in a Court, which was a Temple of
purity; The Court has long tasted the fruit of those virtues, which Saint
Lewis sowed in it.
for the good odours Saint Lewis, and Queen Blanch left behind them, were not
as yet dispersed; and it is observed for proof of unspeakable modesty, and
goodness, that King Philip the Hardy ordained, no Noble man should lie in the
Queens Palace with his own wife. Greatness excused nor vice, Calisto daughter
of Lycaon, mother of Arc^^, deceived by Jupiter under the form of Di^na, was
turned into a Bear by Juno.
nor could it preserve the fair Calisto (losing her chastity) from being
reputed as ugly as a Bear.

The Duchess Marie deceasing, gave her daughter what she esteemed most
precious, the richest of her Crowns, and the dowry of three score thousand
pounds, which King Philip le Bell had designed her.

The Declaration King Robert made, Who retains another, keeps not his own
conscience in quiet.
that he might not leave the succession of his Crown doubtful, drew not out
the thorn that stuck in his heart, nor could his conscience any longer suffer
it. He enjoyed the Crown of Naples by exclusion of his elder brothers
children. To extinguish these pretentions, and to make but one house of two,
he treated the marriage of his grandchild Ioane, When Andrew was brought to
Naples, he was but seven years old, and his wife was then nine.
with Andrew second son of the King of Hungary, and that of Marie with Lewis
already the declared King of Hungary. Upon this resolution Charles his father
departed from Buda, and came to Naples; Robert received this Prince with
incredible joy, and thought his arrival might repair the loss of the Duke of
Calabria his son.

The impediments of consanguinitie taken away by the Popes dispensation, the
marriage was solemnized at Naples with extraordinary pomp and magnificence,
on the eighteenth of September 1323. But dispositions were so contrary, Forced
and constrained marriages have unfortunate events.
and unequally suited, that there was no other success expected from this
Match, but misery. Thinking to bring concord into his house, he introduced
trouble, left disturbance in his soul, and seeking to sail at the same
instant, and with the same wind into two sundry Ports, saw himself carried
away, both from the one and other. Amities, or enmities contracted in the first
education, are not easily dissolved.
He thought, that by the breeding and education of them together, the love
which might be enkindled in this first acquaintance, would increase with age;
but the designs of men often times succeeding much otherwise than they project;
Life is divided between cares and contentments, as between day and night.
this long conversation bred contempt in those young hearts, who being (as yet)
incapable of amorous flames, were so accustomed to neglects and disdaines, that
when youth would enkindle affection, it found nothing therein but Ice, and
although bodies were joined together to obey the King, yet their hearts were
everlastingly separated.

Anxieties for the present, sorrow for the passed, and fear for the future,
oppressed the soul of Robert, who divided all the days of his life between
grief and watching. In the end, pensiveness called him to yield himself up
to the lodging, which old age had appointed him. He entered thereunto in the
64th year of his age, 1342, the fifteenth of January.

He loved choice wits, (so were the Poets, Poetry was in great esteem under
the Earls of Provence.
and Provence Bards of his time called.) He had in his Library the works of
foure-score famous Poets, the greatest part of them Gentlemen; for it was the
most generous exercise of the Nobility of Provence, in the sweet tranquillity
of peace.

Petrarch made use of the inventions, and conceits of the Provence-Poets.
He took delight to read the writings, and hear the discourses of Petrarch,
he spent three days in conference with him, so much esteeming his doctrine,
as to compare it to the pearls of his Crown. He wrote letters to Rome in his
behalf. Whilst Princes patronize learning, we shall ever have knowing men. It
is not so necessary they have propension to Sciences, as affection to
understanding men, for by cherishing, and giving care to such, they learn much
of them. As Alexander was praised, A Prince, who esteems knowing men, cannot
be ignorant.
for having enforced Sparta to serve, and Athens to be silent, so had he the
honor to reduce Genoa to constancy, and Florence to obedience. But he is not
in this History to appear so free and exempt from the strokes of Fortune, as
not to meet with disasters in the midst of his prosperities. After the death of
so many dear friends, and sorrow for the confusion he was to leave in his
house, he observed on the backside of his bright days, Battle of Mount Catin
the thirtieth of August, 1315.
the loss of the battle of Mount Catin, where Charles of Tarentum was slain,
Philip of Tarentum his brother taken prisoner, and the Count of Gravines
retiring, lost in a Marish. Frederick of Arragon twice attempted on his life,
and Castruccio had a purpose to burn him in his galleys, returning from Aix to
Naples.

He loved justice, and hated rigor, Rigor loses its authority, by the
renewing of punishments.
experience having taught him, that under a cruel Prince, cruelty takes place
of justice, and many so much accustom themselves to severitie, that the most
tractable become thereby inhumane.

He loved the Mathematiques, Robert did believe the prediction of Astrologers,
concerning the renewing of the wars, in the year 1350.
gave credit to Astrologers, and having heard from them, France and England
should arm one against another, he went from Naples to Avignon, humbly to
solicit the Pope to prevent the storm; so passionate was he in all the
interests of France: Provence gave him the surname of Good, during his life,
and after his decease. Ioane and Andrew succeeded him, and nothing wanted in
them, but concord and wisdom; they were only unhappie, It is a great
unhappiness, to be ignorant of your own happiness.
in that they neither understood their own good, nor knew how to enjoy it.
King Robert left them a flourishing estate, huge treasures, an assured peace,
powerful alliances, a people rich and peaceable, and although they bare not
the titles of great Kings, as the Persian, they had estates which afforded the
more contentment; The Kings of Persia passed the spring at Susa, winter in
Babylon, and summer in Media.
Naples was their Babylon for winter, Avignon their Susa for the spring. What
Province is there in the world, which envieth not the affluence of Campania,
and the pleasures of Provence, which happily superaboundeth in so many rarities
that others want.

Necessity sweetened, and moderated the harshnesse and discontent grown
between his son in Law, and daughter; but after his death, respect vanished,
and hatred succeeded, so much the more violent, as the current thereof had
been hindered. Little friend ship in contrary dispositions.
It was impossible to mix two metals so contrary. The Swallow told her mother,
she had found out a jolly husband, it was the Starling, to which she replied;
Daughter, you will not long live together, for he loves winter, thou the
spring. The nature of Andrew was rough, and untractable, Seneca says, Cato
called them Antipodes, who lived in this manner.
his spirit dull and heavy, not regarding the delights and exercises of any,
but his own Nation, who never saw the Sun, either setting or rising: For they
went to supper before it sat, and rose after it was up.

This young Prince, but nineteen years of age, suffered himself to fall into
the contempt of his wife, Michael Montagne says Queen Ioane loved not her
husband, because in marriage rights he answered not her expectation.
and barrenness of her affections, who in the way of her most private
familiarities, entertained more pleasing Imaginations.

She was little more than eighteen years of age, when she began her reign,
at which time youth, and love entered in with her. Liberty consented with her
beauty, and power with her desires to give her leave to taste all kind of
contentments, Darius had for the teaster of his bed a vine whereof the leaves
were of gold, and the grapes, diamonds, and rubies.
and all whatsoever was not proper for her Majesty, was proportionable to her
youth. Splendour, curiosities, and costly Pompes of her Court, her diet, her
Cabinet, her Chamber surpassed the Kings of Persia.

She was bred in the voluptuous pleasures of Italy, the quaint entertainments
and gentile courtesies of the Court of Naples. Her picture to be seen at
Fontaine-bleau represents under a lustrous and sprightly beauty, Thalestria
Queen of the Amazons coming before Alexander, prayed him to lie with her,
that some notable thing might spring from them
a regal stature, a strong wit; lust sparkles through all, and it well appears
this Amazon seeks for an Alexander.

Her governesse who had no desire, but to humor her, rather added increase,
than moderation to her appetites, thinking on nothing but to reign in the
Kingdom, whilst love swayed in the thoughts of her Mistress, and considering,
if Andrew had the authority, she no longer should be favored, she imprinted in
her heart thoughts haughty, Ioane would not admit Andrew to carry the title of
King.
and proud, thereby intimating he should content himself to be the Queens
husband, and not to think to have any share in the Kingdom, or carry the
title of King.

There is difference between actual judgment and intention.
She is not crossed in any of her designs, but by those of Robert the
Franciscan Friar, whom Charles King of Hungary had appointed to be the
governor of his son Andrew an able man, and well knowing how to draw the
quintessence out of businesses, but raw in Court affairs: for seeking the way
of order, he for want of experience pursued the paths of subversion, The Lions
skin covers the Ass, but his voice betrays him.
yet (as the Ass of Cuma, seeing himself clothed with a Lions skin,) put
himself in the rank of the principal Lords of the Counsel. The Catanian
likewise practicing her deepest plots, stirred like a Mastiffe at all that came
near her, The first note of disorder in government is when old servants are
taken from employment.
barking at the least noise, though ignorant from whence it came.

That she might the more absolutely reign over the person of the Queen, she
sequestered all the Hungarians from the knowledge of affairs, sent old
servi^ors home to their houses, gave their offices to others. She made
Protonotary, and principal secretary of state Roger Archbishop of Barry, Philip
Bishop of Cavaillon Chancellor, A great courage tied to the rock of necessity
cannot do its best.
Bertrand de Baux Lord chief Justice, Thomas Earl of Saint Severine
Constable, Robert Cabanes her son high Steward, Charles Artus Chamberlain,
Ieffry Earl of Mursan her son in law high Admiral. She counseled the
Queen ever to keep the Princes of the blood in want, Inheritance of the
Prince of Tarentum cut off.
so that taken by the beak, the wings of their courage might be useless. She
caused the County of Ebula, which had been the inheritance of the Count of
Gravine King Roberts son, to be given to Robert Cabanes her son, to her
daughter Sancha the County of Mursan, and to another, Terlice. There was no
hope of honor, recompense, justice, or favor, but from her hand. Heaven was
of Brass, if she made it not shower liberality; A tree which affords drink
to the inhabitants of the I Will of Ferro one of the seven Canary Islands.
She seemed the tree that waters the I Will of Ferro; All which her favor
refreshes not, becomes dry, and withered.

What extravagancy, and giddiness of Fortune! A Landresse swayeth a kingdom
composed of so many mighty, rich, and Noble families. A wretched woman forces
the soul of a great Queen, and curbs it as if it were interdicted or charmed.
What can we say, nay what say we not, when we behold the brats of the Scullion
of a kitchen raised to the prime dignities of a kingdom? They who were of the
race of Semes bare the figure of a Lance on their bodies.
They who descended from the first founders of Thebes bare from their birth the
mark of the bur of a lance on their thighs.

The race of Raymond Cabanes should bear the leg of a beef pot for a note of
their extraction, and shall women that are borne long time after bring forth
Moors, A Grecian woman having brought forth a black child, was accused of
adultery with a Moore, but it was found she in a fourth degree descended from
an Ethiopian.
they will renew the birth of Raymond the Moore.

And because Andrew had received a Brief from the Pope wherein he was named
King, she made the Queen imagine, that how little authority soever she left to
her husband, it would be sufficient to hold her under command. If the Queen at
any time told her she was too violent, that she could not continue, that every
one murmured against the excess of her power, she made her believe it was not
her they meant, but that they thereby invaded her Princely authority, and that
such as are desirous to trouble a state, ever use to disgrace the government.
This Princess committed no other fault but in too much giving way to the
imperious and violent passions of her Governesse, preferring her contentment
before her own, or the weal of the state. Ambition ever takes for pretext
disorder in government.
Private errors bare their excuses, the Infant finds his, in his childhood,
the woman in her sex, the thief in the occasion, the rebel in his defense*
Secret faults of Princes have their excuses, the public have none.
but the offense of the public has none for particular affections, and
although she may allege, the same thing has been done, yet cannot her
innocence be pleaded upon the example of another folly.

Had nothing bin irregular but in the youth of this Princess, it might have
been tolerable, The imitation of another vice is not innocent.
for we willingly excuse imperfections, which call in, age or nature for
warrant, the people had only murmured, for of necessity this Raven
mustincessantly croak against the Eagle; Anger must be moderately exercised in
faults which have nature for warrant.
Temerity thrusts its censure even into the Cabinets of Kings: but when the
affairs appear thereby ruined, Counsels weakened, the reputation of the State
decayed, every one began to exclaim against the Queen, It is not lawful for
the subject to censure the life, or pleasures of his Prince.
who suffered her self to be transported by the Torrent of the passions of
the Catanian, and honest men grieving to see her so deceived by such
impostures, and illusions, sent of times these plaints to heaven.

One ever complains of heaven for disorders on earth.
Oh God, where is now thy Territory? Where thy Justice? Where thy Thunders? Why
suffer thou a woman, which is come of nothing, which hops all, and for
whom all is too little, to abuse thy patience? Thou will have her live, that we
may perish. The evil were supportable, if it would have an end, but time
aggravates it, and our patience increases it. When the treasure of a Prince is
exhausted, ill ways are invented to fill it again.
The coffers of the State are empty, they must be filled with our blood and
tears, all the members wax meagre to puff up this spleen, and if heaven
afford not a helping hand, we soon shall see more evils than remedies.

The Pope advertised of this wicked government, commanded Bulls to be pronounced
by publications of Churches, and parishes, revoking all whatsoever she had done
without advice of those whom King Robert had ordained to assist her. The
affection of the Catanian withstands the Popes Legate.
He sent a Legate to set affairs into order, but finding the fever changed
into frenzy, and the storm much greater than his wisdom, he returns much
displeased that the faction of the Catanian had seditiously banded against his
legation. The Queen also complains, that the Pope uses her like a child,
seeking to put her into pupillage. Friar Robert solliciteth the Pope for the
crowning of Andrew, Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, mother of Andrew, offers to
defray the charge of the Coronation, which was great.
Queen Elizabeth comes expressly from Avignon to entreat her, Ioane is earnest
to the contrary, and would be crowned alone. The Pope sends her word he cannot
crown her without her husband, she consents thereunto, provided it may not
give him more right, than he ought to have in her Kingdom.

The Catanian, her son, her son in law, In vain men oppose the will of
heaven.
and friends conspire together to hinder this Coronation, but her faction
proves too weak, God had otherwise appointed. Frogs must be silent when
heaven thunders. The Pope sends Cardinals to Cajetta to crown Andrew, and
Ioane. That which many do to advance themselves, pulls them back.
This Coronation gave authority to Andrew, but hastened his ruin: For those who
had conjured to hinder it, fearing to be punished for it, let the Catanian know
they were ready for any thing. A crime which despair proposes, is quickly
resolved on. The greater share one has in the ship, the more he wishes the
safety of it.
The Princes and Lords distasted they had no share in steering the Vessel,
wherein their fortunes were embarked, they retire from the Court, Queen
Sancha went out of this Egypt, and shut her self up in a Monastery of our Lady
of Cross, which she had built, and there took the habit of Saint Francis. The
more speedily to attain the prise of the Goal, she dispoiled her self of all
worldly greatness, and had no other aim but humility, well knowing the gate
of heaven is low, and straight, and we must stoop to pass through it.

Nothing can happen more dangerous to a young Prince than to love none and to
do all upon his own head,
It is no wonder if Ioane so speedily hastened to evil Counsels, which ruined
her, since she used neither rule, nor moderation: For all whatsoever she
feared, or reverenced, was gone, her Grandfather dead, her mother dead, there
was not any left but this good old woman, who with the wink of an eye censured
her actions, and even by silence reprehended them. She saw her self in a worse
condition than a young Princess might be, who has nothing to fear, nor sees
any, who may teach her how to rectify her actions.

Themistocles said that in public fights, they that were hindmost were never
crowned.
Friar Robert who had much ado to inkindle the courage of Andrew, to take the
Crown, (For his nature cold and remiss, ever hung back,) had likewise much
business to make him keep it on his head, and resist this Catanian, so
powerful to do all, that she commanded Devils, sent them with her packets
like Posts, and held them to the chain, as slaves. He changes the battery,
Evil counsel, to stay the fire by burning; and ruin, by destruction.
sends word to Lewis King of Hungary, the Crown of Naples is lost to Andrew,
and that it is in him to preserve the inheritance of his Ancestors; and for
that purpose it was fit he married Marie, sister of Ioane, according to King
Roberts intention, and that coming with good troops to marry her, he may
also gain the Crown.

Had this religious man, and the Catanian, Ambition will see nothing, which
exceeds, or equalleth it.
well understood one another, the State being at their discretion, they had
done at Naples, what Cleon and Clitophon did at Athens, Cleon and Clitophon
ruined, and overthrew the State of Athens.
to manage a Kingdom at their pleasures; but both of them sought to have
superiority. Rome will rather suffer two Masters, than either Pompey or Caesar
endure a Rival.

Charles of Durazzo, A plot discovered is easily dissolved.
eldest son of John Prince of Morea, eighth son of Charles the second,
smelt out this plot, and was too hard for the Friar: For he entered into Castle
d'Ovo, by intelligence of the household servants, he seized on the Princess
Marie, carried her away to his own house, and married her in his garden, on
the last day of April, 1343.

He did not discover his purpose to any man, nor asked the Queens consent, who
was infinitely distasted therewith, very well perceiving this Match was made
upon her Tomb. The actions of him who is to succeed, are suspected by him that
reigns.
As the hope of succession makes him impatient who pretends, so it ever keeps
his heart full of jealousies and distrusts, who is in possession. Ambition
thinks Nature is too slow in her carreere.

This is he shall cause Ioane to be strangled, in the year 1382.
At the same time his younger brother, Lewis Count of Gravine married Margarite
daughter of Robert of St. Severine, Count of Cavillan, and from this marriage
came Charles the third King of Naples, Duke of Durazzo, who seized on the
Kingdom.

Charles of Durazzo, and Marie his wife, took such content in fomenting this
violent enmity between the Queen and her Husband, and blew with all the
strength of their lungs that fire, from whence they expected their light: Who
profits by ruin, counsels it confidently.
For it cannot go ill with the Queen, but it must be well with them, and
should the Crown fall from her head, they are ready at hand to gather up the
pieces.

The Catanian walks by the same path to another plot, Conspiracies are
encouraged by hatred, interest, or revenge.
and meets with them in the resolution, to vindicate the Queen from
captivity, and the Kingdom from confusion, by the banishment and extirpation
of Forraigners. The most trusty servants of the Queen consent thereto. Those
who fear to be looked after in the matter of conspiracy against the crowning
of Andrew pressed her to resolve, and execute in an instant. An execrable crime
ever disguiseth it self, when one proposes it, who if he should see it in his
manner, would abhor it.
The Catanian spoke of ridding her of the Hungarians, yet only meant the King:
But the most notorious mischiefs are never so plainly proposed; they are
disguised, and the intelligent understand with half a word.

About this time the Queen is with child, and that which should reunite her
heart with her Husbands, augmenteth the disunion; for the Catanian, supposing
the King might be the more authorized, by seeing himself a father, and that
Friar Robert might procure his resolution, to banish all those who abused the
youth and goodness of the Queen, To take ill counsel upon fair shows, is
to drink poison in a golden cup.
caused her to swallow the poison of an horrid counsel, in the sweetness of
her liberty, saying; Heaven would do her a great favor, if he made her a
widow, before she were a mother.

In mine opinion this Lady was too well borne, and her courage too noble, to
consent to the death of her Husband. But perhaps she let the Catanian do what
she would, who had wholly ruled her from her Cradle: For indeed, her soul
darkened with the fogs of hatred she bare toward Andrew, no more served her,
than her eyes, which passion had blinded. Who resists not evil, consents
thereto; and who hinders it not, countenanceth it.
She was advised to suffer her self to be led by Fortune, which rather
favored great confidence than virtue that preached cowardly patience.

The resolution of killing the King is undertaken between the Catanian, the
High Steward her Son, her Daughter, her Son in Law, Charles Duke of
Durazzo, and the Duchess Marie his wife, all who agreed upon this point, that
their own safety, the Queens contentment, and the good of the Kingdom
depended upon this act. Some Cabinet Lords participated therein, It is a great
unhappiness for a stranger, to be prosperous in a foreign Country.
not being able any longer to endure the harsh and proud predominance of the
Hungarians. It is a great unhappiness for a stranger to be in grace out of his
Country, for he is enforced, Envy must be tamed, or you must suffer your
self to be mastered by the envious.
either to suffer himself to be oppressed by en vie, or commit unspeakable
outrages to free himself from the envious.

There was no great distance of time between the plot and the execution. The
night which preceded it (thus says Collenutius, but affirms it not) the
Queen twisted a cord of gold, and silk; Andrew asked her, what she meant to
do with it; she answered, It is to hang thee. It may be hate suggested such a
thought to this woman, but there is little probability that she spoke it. Many
things come into the thought, which the tongue utters not.
For either she had no part in the plot of her Husbands death, (and this word
made her culpable) or she was in the conspiracy, and that sufficed to
discover, and convince her at that time, of an execrable wickedness, having
undertaken it; and of extreme impudence, having pronounced it. But we must
speak no more of it, lest we thrust suspicion into an heart less sensible
and distrustful than Andrew's was. It would not have been forgotten in the
letters, and declarations, the King of Hungary his brother, wrote to the Pope,
and Christian Princes.

Many had knowledge of this impious complot; The discovery of the conspiracy
advances the effect: Macrinus finding himself to be discovered by
Maternianus, executes by Martialis what he had conceived against Antonie.
But a secret is not long concealed, when a third man knows it: Those who were
embarked therein, fearing to be discovered, hastened execution, saying, In
matters of such importance, nothing must be done to halves. Great crimes never
ought to enter into the imagination; but when they are resolved on, they must
be acted. There is more peril to resolve, than execute a conspiracy.
They are not unlike certain viands, of which if we eat little they are
poison, and nutriment, if plentifully.

The resolution being made to put Andrew to death, a silken cord was chosen to
be the instrument; the time, night; Executioner Charles Artus, whom the
Catanian had created Lord Chamberlain: the place, the Queens withdrawing
room. What monster of cruelty! What monstrous cruelty! A King unsafe in the
company of his wife, The house of a Prince is sacred, every one ought to be
safe there, as in a Temple.
and her Cabinet become a place of execution. The Palace of Kings is holy, the
Mount Palatine was sacred, and venerable, only because the Emperor there made
his abode.

At the time of this hideous, and damnable conspiracy, Andrew is called from
his chamber, to come unto the Queens lodging; others say, that being in bed
with her, he was awakened, as upon some matter of much importance: but in one
kind, or other, putting his head out of the chamber door, either to go in,
or out, the murderers cast a cord about his neck, strangled him, and tied him
to the bars of the window.

All the City was in an uprore at so execrable an act, and so cruel a
spectacle; Could the people have had means to force the Castle, they had not
sought for the murderers any where, but in the Queens company. They fell upon
certain Calabrian Grooms of the Chamber, who died innocent. The Actors saved
themselves at Constantinople, many were taken, but the Catanian caused some to
be strangled, and others to have their tongues cut out, who might discover her
wickedness; the punishment whereof she already felt in her soul, by the
torment of her conscience, and imagination, Thyestes, after his in^est fled
from the earth, and hell, and said, his presence slackned the Sun, not willing
to pollute his rays with so wicked a man.
that all aimed at her, that her shadow accuses her, that Executioners torture
her, that the Sun denies her his beams, that her presence slackneth his
rising that he may not pollute his bright rays with an object so detestable.

Friar Robert, after this miserable fact, shut himself up, An evil man
fears his own shadow.
there was no way of safety for him, he beheld nothing round about him but
precipices. I know not what became of him. The History speaking of his
authority, threatens him with ruin, but tells not how it happened. A
religious man from his rule and monastery, is out of his element.
Questionless, it was not without repentance to have been in the Court, as
out of his Element, and led a life quite contrary to his Profession. Good
religious men rest in the discipline of the Cloister, seldom stir abroad, live
strictly, pray and meditate incessantly, study when they can, persever in all
purity, and have more care to do well, than speak well. For at the day of
judgment good deeds shall be weighed, not smooth words. Ioane was delivered
on Christmas day of a Son, Birth of Carobert Posthumus, son of Andrew, the
five and twentieth of December 1346.
and the joy of this birth was troubled with the news, that Lewis King of
Hungary came with an huge Army, to revenge his brothers death. Her Council
besought her to marry, that she might have some one, to entrust with the
manage of her Arms. She matched with Lewis of Tarentum, son of the brother
of King Robert, one of the goodliest Princse of that age.

The marriage consummate, she thereon asks counsel and dispensation of the
Pope, Youth and sollitude incompatible thorowout the world.
declaring unto him, herage permitted not solitude, nor could her Counsel
endure to see her deprived the comfort of a husband, that many Princes sued to
her, that the affection she bare to her own house fixed her thoughts upon the
Prince of Tarentum. Scandalous marriage with adultery, and the murder of a
husband.
The Pope hereof advertised the King of Hungary brother of Andrew, showing it
would be scandalous to Christianity to see a wife marry again after she had
killed her husband, and match with him who was suspected to have been both an
adulterer and murderer. So the condemned make sport whilst the Judges give
sentence for their condemnation.
In the mean time they lived contentedly, regarded not rumors which sought to
offend them, nor resisted them but with stopping their ears, and made fair
weather, not imagining what the eternal Justice had ordained for them. But the
Queen understanding the King of Hungary marched with a huge army to revenge
the death of his brother, sent a Gentleman to him with a letter to this effect.

Brother, were I able to express my sorrow unto you, I should not feel the
violence thereof, Great griefs are dumb, and little, speak.
which exceeds my force, and your imagination. This Gentleman will show you
it to be such, that nothing can ease it but revenge upon that which is the
cause thereof: For which purpose, and for the good of my kingdom, I sought not
out a second husband any where but in mine own house, and have freed my self
from the solicitations of other Princes, The inheritance is better loved than
the heir.
who more loved my state than me. With his valor and my courage I hope to
derive light out of darkness, and to make truth triumph over calumny. Much
may you fortify my hope, if you entertain as much affection for the
innocence of the son, and protection of the mother, as I hdve to tell you,
that I am

your dear sister, IOANE.


The answer of Lewis was very rough, and couched in few words:

The loose life you have lead heretofore, the absolute power you have taken
upon you, the neglect of revenge, your second marriage, and the excuse you make
to punish the fault, are sufficient to convince you had a share, or gave
consent to the massacre of your husband: for which cause you ought not to
expect to have either friend, or brother,

LEWIS.


The people is the Barb^ is P^annet which hearing a trumpet sound, forgot all
she had learned before.
This Letter ran every where up and down, was favorably read by turbulent and
calumnious spirits, and the people who overprise bruits, and who upon the first
mention of evil against any, forget all the good had bin done, scandalized the
life and honor of the Queen.

But as truths commonly pass amongst impostures, No man is so great a liar,
who speaks not some truth.
it was said thorowout the City of Naples, the Catanian had perpetrated this
horrible parricide, and that the Count Ebule her son, high Steward of Naples,
had hastened execution, Exaltationes tam egregiae non absque macula pudicitiae
labefactate concedemis in Aethiopas devenere. Nam and si fas credere non sit,
non defuere qui dicerent lenocinio Philippae, Ioannam ad amplexus devenisse
Roberti.
that he might the more freely enjoy the Queens affection.

The many benefits (says Boccace) she had conferred on Robert Cabanes, son
of Philippa, and the Count Mursan husband of Sancha her daughter, made it be
thought, this liberality was rather a reward for love, than merit, and that it
could not be done, but with loss of the honor, and chastity of the Queen:
nay although we should not think so, yet were there many who said Philippa was
the secret instrument of love, and familiarity, between the Queen and her
son. This mischief is credible enough, for nothing important was either
treated, or deliberated, but in the presence of Philippa, Robert, and Sancha,
nor was the Cabinet open to any other. But he thereupon concludes we must slip
over these suspicions: For the least familiarities of men wound the reputation
of the most honest women.

She is not fully chaste, who occasioneth the doubt of her chastity.
Ladies, who will secure their honor from the arrows of slander, must not give
any occasion of suspicion, their chastity is as a Diamond, which for one
slight blemish loses much of its value, and although it somewhat exceed the
ordinary size, the worth does not therewith proportionably increase. This
Princess was nothing careful to disapprove in public, by actions, pure, and
sincere the evil judgments, which were made of her secret deportments.

Life must be changed, to alter the language of slanderers.
Domestique examples perverting more than foreign, had fixed upon her heart some
disposition to voluptuous pleasures, King Robert had had by a fair mistres of
his a fair daughter named Mary, Plutarch says the land should not be tilled,
the fruit whereof must of necessity be hidden.
wanton, and much beloved of Boccace; but such thefts in these times were
covered: no man durst publicly til the lands, the fruits whereof might not be
reaped, but by stealth. Ioane had four husbands, Andrew P. of Hungary, Lewis
of Turentum, James son of the King of Majorica, Otho Duke of Brunswick.
Night and secrecy were then the Curtains of love, nor ever did the Sun
surprise Mars with Venus. This Princess has bin condemned for great
incontinence, yet do I find things in her, which seldom happen in those who
are more curious to preserve their beauty perfect, than their consciences
undefiled.

All the choice wits of that time, praised her; she was infinitely beloved by
her people of Italy, and Provence; she had three husbands after Andrew; the
bravest Princes of that time, and as it is not likely their birth disposed them
to a life disgraceful, There are injuries, which pull patience out of the most
tender and peaceable natures.
or a servitude shameful, so there is not any appearance their courage
consented to dissemble offenses so palpable and pregnant, which no man, how
good, or patient soever, could tolerate.

But admit she entertained affection for others, Cratis fell in love with a
goat, the male goat for jealousy butted his head against Cratis, and slew him.
why sought she out so curiously youth, beauty, strength in her husbands, did
she not well know that dishonouring them, she put her self into hazard of the
frensies of jealousy, which transporteth even bruit beasts to ressentment.

Had she been foolish as they make her, Poppea married to Otho, would not have
Nero for a husband, Plutarch gives a reason: because she was wanton.
she had chosen out husbands who durst not murmur against her pleasures. Poppea
Sabina desired Nero for a friend, not a husband, doubting lest the quality of
an Emperor, might cut off her liberty, and Otho her husband tolerated from
Nero, what he would not endure in another. Princes do not long suffer these
flies about their noses, they quickly free themselves from their very shadows,
and in matter of jealousy of state, Great men think all true, which they
believe.
or love, suspicion creates a certainty.

And although she strayed a little from the rules, which they hold who are, or
would seem chaste, and that her affability ever cast some blemish upon her
modesty, she recompensed this levity, with so many other great, and noble
virtues, that calumny was stricken dumb, meeting with an incomparable bounty,
a royal magnificence, piety without scruple, liberality without choice or
limit. There was at Naples, A hideous tempest at Naples the 25. of Nov. in the
year. 1343.
so huge, and dreadful a Tempest, that it was thought the Sea would swallow up
the City, nothing was to be heard every where, but lamentations, or rather
yellings; She went barefoot with all her Ladies to the Churches, to implore
the mercy of God; Ships in the Haven were wracked, a Galley wherein were four
hundred malefactors, was saved.

The Pope exhorted her to execute justice upon the parricide. The Nobility of
the Kingdom besought her, showing how she stood therein engaged to them, to
her self, and her son; Nothing so much blemished her reputation, A meeting by
the advice of the Prince of Orange.
as the delay of this duty, so that being no longer able to refuse them, she
proclaimed a great meeting, appeared there in a Throne of Majesty, The presence
of the Prince works great effect in the hearts of his subjects.
and easily found the power which the presence of a Prince has over subjects.
The dumb eloquence of her eyes which reflected no less fear, when they were
incensed, than comfort when pleased, effectually served her intention, she
spoke in this manner.

I neither wish my self so much ill, Beauty is a dumb eloquence. Though a
Prince need not give an account of his actions but to God, yet he is bound for
his reputation sake to public satisfaction.
nor desire such contentment to mine enemies, as to let them think I covet to
derive from this assembly any approbation of my actions: I am not to give
account thereof to any but God; Princes may on earth call together arbitrators
of their quarrels, but must seek out their Judge in heaven.

The afflictions which God lays on me exceed the strength of my youth to
bear, and my wisdom to remedy, but not my courage to tolerate.

I take them, as he gives them, and expect the good he will derive from my
evil. But it is my comfort, that not depending on any thing, but his
Sovereignty (where there is naught but justice, and truth) I am not subject to
the judgment of men, whose passion is their reason.

God is so good that he would not suffer evil, if he meant not to derive good
out of it.
Nay I have this comfort, that I am defamed by those, whose praises I should
esteem injuries, and that such as understand their impostures retain so much
candor, as to send them back again, from whence they came. The King of
Hungary has published against me all that, which the most enraged calumny may
invent, and has licked up all the foam he could gather from infernal
Cerberus, Cleopatra beloved of I. Caesar, of G^. Pompey, of M. Anthony.
Messalina wife of Claudius, the sink of all abominations. Clytemnestra
murdered Agame^non her husband.
to throw it on mine honor. He makes me more wanton than Cleopatra, more
insatiable than Messalina, more cruel than Clytemnestra Had he found me in
those infamous houses, where every one knows, why that place is frequented, he
could not use me more unworthily.

He says I have failed in loyalty to my Husband Fie upon treachery: We cannot
judge the inward man by the outward.
he says I did it, because he thinks I should have done it, and that the
harsh and barbarous conditions of his brother might dispense with a Queen,
They who deceive their husbands, recompense with good words, evil deeds
who being in the flower of her age, had no cause to complain that nature
denied her its perfections, or heaven favors.

Is it not a silly trick to derive the proofs of the heart, from the
forehead? When he says I had nothing in store for Andrew, but scorn and
contempt, and that I reserved my affections for others. What he produces to
condemn me, justifies me: who knows not that such as deceive their
husbands, flatter them, whilst others, whose consciences upbraid them not, are
more imperious, satisfying themselves with the interior approbation of their
virtue.

He says, I am guilty of his death. It is false. If my sex permitted, I would
challenge him, and make these words return into his heart with the lie, or his
life issue forth with his shame. I would quickly be resolved upon it, my
courage should make difficulties abashed, and shame valiant.

If I would have committed this wicked act, Oftentimes great mischiefs are
imputed to accident, to excuse the plot.
I had means to perform it in a more secret manner, and to impute that to
accident, which came by violence. I could not do it alone, and if any one
therein assisted me, let him speak, let him accuse me, I promise him pardon.
The King of Hungary assures him reward, but Heaven threatens both the one and
the other with Hell What say I? It is a jest, Polyphemus mocked at Ulysses, who
spoke to him of the fear of the Gods. In many places second wedlocks have
been accused of incontinencie.
to speak to a Cyclope of the fear of Gods.

He affirms I am married to the Prince of Tarentum, but have I done it
without the Churches dispensation? without advice of my Council? without the
necessity of my Kingdom? And where are the Laws, which forbid Princesses of
eighteen a second wedlock? Must none but virgins marry.

He adds, I loved him not, one should have been very tender and
compassionate of heart to affect his person. King Robert made it appear, when
he gave him to me, that he respected not so much my contentment, as his own.
The honor I did him to marry him, obliged him to retribution of honor, but he
on the contrary sought to have all authority, and I was enforced to take it
from him, that I might not submit the Laws of my Kingdom to the discretion of
strangers. So soon as sovereigne authority is shaken, it is lost and
confounded.
I was jealous of mine authority, as of the apple of mine eye, of the heart of
my State. My Ancestors taught me, that if this rock once totter, it cannot be
stayed, the end of its motion is ruin. Who is glad of his own loss, never
loved the possession.
They say, I bewailed him not. Verily, were I bound to deplore deliverance from
an insupportable torment, I confess to have done amiss, for my tears were
quickly dried up. That I neglected the revenge of his death, this concerns me
not, those whom I entrusted with the care of my Laws, and Justice must answer
for that: But revenge, not sorrow, have brought me hither, to tell you I am
displeased with his death, as your Queen, who considers the sequel of
impunitie, All Princes are brothers, and resent the offense of Prin^es.
the scandal of other Princes, the reproach of this Nation, and who should
account her self unworthy the Crown God has placed on her head, if she
employed not it, and her proper self in the punishment of this Parricide,
protesting, there is not any person of what quality soever, whom I abandon not
without hope of grace, or pardon. I conjure you to serve me in this design,
and to take away the mask of passion, that the integrity of justice may
appear, and the Sun dissolve the Ice, which has hitherto covered this wicked
act.

The assembly thanked her for this declaration, To despise the punishment of
great crimes, is to give way to much greater.
praised her justice, and the magnanimous care she had of her reputation, which
could not any way be more sensibly wounded, than by deferring the inquiry,
and punishment of a crime so enormous and horrid, the dissembling whereof were
injustice, and clemency, cruelty.

Hugo de Baux, Prince of Orange, Count of Avellina was appointed, with absolute
and sovereigne power, void of limitation, to punish the guilty. He laid not
hold on wretched and miserable creatures, which like little animals do
nothing, To punish inferiors, is but to crush little animals, says Seneca.
but foul the fingers of those who crush them; he caused to be taken many
Lords, many Ladies of the Chamber, and Cabinet, then the Catanian, the High
Steward of Naples her son, the Count Mursan her son in Law, and Sancha her
daughter. Erecto immaniequuleo in conspectu Neopolitanae urbis medio maris in
sinu, ritu regionis, spec^ante populo in Philippam torsit Mis^llam, Sanctiam,
and Robertum.
And that the Commonwealth might publicly receive the satisfaction he
promised upon this proceeding, the Process being drawn, he without the Town
erected a torture, wherein he exposed to the eyes of all the City, and
Kingdom, the Catanian and her children, who suffered great torments, as an
Antipast of some far more exquisite. The most miserable thought themselves
happy in comparison of such prosperity. Not to be moved with these examples,
is as Pirrho's Pig, to eat barley greedily in the greatest violence of torment.
Boccace tells us not what they confessed; but by the subsequent punishment we
may guess of the confession.

Certain days after, they are dragged naked through the Town upon a hurdle,
then tied to three ship-masts, burning pinsers twitched them, rasors flaied
them, and flames choked them. The Catanian old and weak, died in the midst of
the torments, her heart and entrails were torn out, her head set upon one of
the gates of Naples, and the rest of her body turned into ashes. Enraged hatred
envieth the executioners commission.
Her daughter Sancha was burnt alive, Robert her son, half roasted in the
fire, was drawn thence alive, and as if the punishment had been too gentle
for public satisfaction, the people haled him thorowout the City in the dirt,
and kennels, Egineta counseled Pansanias after the victory of Platea to hang
Mardonius his enemy on a gallows.
then pulled his heart and bowels forth, rent him in pieces, and there were
some who barbarously inhumane tare him with their nails, and fixed their teeth
upon him, not so much for revenge, as through fury, and brutishness.

This history is come to its period, You counsel me not well, said he, it only
is proper to Barbarians to be cruel to the dead
it goes no further, he that would know how Queen Ioane went out of this
tragedy, must travel farther therein, than we have done. It suffices to tell
you the Catanian drew upon the Kings and Kingdom of Sicily a deluge of
calamities, fastening misery, as with nails of Adamant, to the Crown of Naples,
never prosperous either for Ioane, her four husbands, her sister, or those of
her race.

Lewis King of Hungary, entered twice into Naples, as into an enemies Country
to revenge his brothers death, he enforced the Queen to retire into Nice, The
King of Hungary had a black standard whereon is pourtrayed the strangling of
his brother.
put the Duke of Durazzo to death at Aversa in the same place where his brother
had been strangled, Mary his wife escaped into Provence with her two daughters
in the habit of a Franciscan. The Pope declares the Queen innocent, treats
peace with Lewis, she adopts Lewis Duke of Anjou, Queen Ioane strangled at
Naples the 22. of May. 1382.
son of K. John. Charles D. of Durazzo revolts against Ioane, besieges her in
the Castle Ovo, makes her yield, causes her with her sister to be strangled,
and usurps the Crown. Lewis King of Hungary dies a Leaper, Charles is slain
by Elizabeth, She by the faction of Charles: Ladis^aus her son died of poison
in the imbracements of a Lady.

Ioane the second succeeds, marries Jacques de Bourbon Earl of March for her
second husband, Ioane had two favorites, her husband cut off the head of one,
and she stabbed the other.
who unable to correct, or tolerate her imperfections, forsakes her, and shuts
himself up in a cloister. She adopteth Alfonsus, and having nothing constant
in her, but her inconstancy, revokes the adoption, fought to kill him, and
declares Rene Duke of Anjou, Earl of Provence, her heir. He did not long
enjoy her Crown. In all this we must conclude, that ill success w^iteth on
unjust prosperity, that there is not any wickedness which bears not its
pain and repentance; that he who perpetrateth one, expects the opportunity of
another, that whilst the worlds Theater lasts, Fortune thereon will play her
Tragedies, and will make it appear, she flatters those she means to stifle.

FINIS.

