ARTICLES OF THE PEACE agreed upon, between the Archduke Mathias, on the
Emperors part, and the Deputies of the Lord Botzkay, and of other Lords of
Hungary on the other party.

In like manner, the Articles, and Conditions of Truce, set down between the
Emperor and the great Turk, for 15. years.

All being faithfully translated out of high Dutch into French, and out of the
same into English.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1607.

The Articles of the peace of Hungary, conuented and accorded upon, betvveene
the Archduke Mathias, on the Emperors behalf, and the Deputies of the Lord
of Botzkay and of other Hungarian Lords.
In like manner, the conditions, and Artickles of the truce, between the
Emperor and the Turk.
1. FIrst, that such degrees as were heretofore made, touching the defense and
exercise of any other, then the Roman Religion, without there consent, shall
at this present be revoked and annulled, and that from henceforward, al Lords
Gentlemen, Towns, or other estates holding of the Crown of Hungary, as in
like manner, all men of war, upon the Frontires, shall be permitted to
exercise and profess whether of these three Religions they do make choice of,
the Roman, Lutheran, or Caluinistical, excepted always without any
Infringement or prejudice, to the rites, revenues, and profits, of the
Catholic, or Roman Churches, as also such goods shall be restored unto them
again, which were taken from them during the troubles past.

2. That there shall be a Treaty of peace with the Turk.

3. That it shall be lawful, and permitted them, to choose a Count Palatine,
according to the custom heretofore in use, and with those dignities,
prerogatives, and requisite authority. But because his Imperial Majesty, for
many other important Christian affairs, can not be personally in Hungary, or
upon the Confines, and so on the other side it would be very inconvenient for
those of his Kingdom, to follow his Majesty, and upon all occasions to
travail to his Court, he has reestablished the same general authority, and
power which before times seemed necessary, in the Archduke Mathias his Brother,
to be his Lieftenant General in the same Country, it being his Majesty's
pleasure, that in all affairs of importante, conceiving ye aduancements and
benefit of the Crown, that he be heard, and absolutely obeyed, as his own
proper imperial person.

4. That when the Realm shall be in peace, and free from the dangers which now
threaten it, his Majesty will be content, to transfer his Court to Presbourg
upon Danubius in Hungary.

5. That the Lord high Treasurer General, shall be an Hungarian, whose charge
shall extend, but to the treasury, and revenues, without meddling any ways in
matters of State: as also in like manner the Receivers general, and
particular, shall be men natiuelie borne in the Country, and chosen by the
estates thereof, and for the differences between the Bishops of Clan, and
Varandine, they are referred to the censure of the Estates of the Realm

6. Because his Majesty's royal authority, may no ways be infringed by any
thing above mentioned, he shall be free, to nominate, and elect, such as he
pleases to be Bishops, only with this prouiso and condition, that they be
Nobles, and naturally borne in the Country, without augmenting upon this
occasion, the number of Counselors of Estate.

7. That Ecclesiastical revenues, shall remain in their present State, and
if any plea, or suits grow upon them, they shall I be adjudged by the Estates.

8. That the Jesuits shall have no propriety of their own, nor may not
acquire, or purchase any succession, or inheritance within the Realm, only
they shall be permitted to enjoy such donations, as his Majesty does bestow
upon them.

9. That his Majesty shall depute unto the Offices of the Realm (as to those
of the neighbor Countries of Slauonia) Dalmatia, and Croatia, Natural Hungars.

10. All civil causes, and whatsoever depend thereupon, shall be decided
according to the custom of the Realm.

11. That Helias Hary, and the other Lord also, which made a complaint of their
particular greefes, shall be heard, and contented, and that all inmunities and
priuilidges, shall be granted unto the Town of Caslonia, which it heretofore
obtained from the King of Hungary.

12. In that it is impossible, to restore all such loss and damage, as has
been procured by the last troubles, it is thought fit to surcease, all suit,
and prosequution thereof.

13. Such Donations, as were made, by the Lord Botzkay, shall be renewed by
the Estates, and those that are but reasonable allowed of: but all Contracts,
and leuies of money, morgages, or transferments made over, as well by the
Lords, as by Helias Hary, shall be confirmed, and stand good til redemption be
made of them by the Proprietaries, and they by them ennobled, so they be
originally borne of the Country, and of quality, shall be confirmed by the
Estates, and enrolled.

14. Lordships, and lands morgaged, shall remain likewise in their due value,
till their redemption and release, which shall be permitted to ye
pro^prietaries, according to order, and modera^ion, set down by the Estates.

As for the particular matter, of the said Botzkay, he shall be allowed the
Title, and dignity, of a Prince of the Empire in Transiluania, Count of
Cicles, and Lord of the parts of high Hungary, with the revenues of the same
Lands, as also he shall hold the Castle of Touay, and two generalities
depending on the same, as well on this side, as beyond the river of Tubisque
the Fortress of Iacmar, and the two towns called Hereuenture, and Torreualy,
together with the Tenthes of Erlan, and whatsoever before specified for him
self, and his heirs males, discending of him, without that, in default of
such issue, any of his other kinsmen, may pretend any right, or succession
thereunto but if he leave one, or more daughters they shall be kept, and
maintained, according as his Majesty has couenanted with the said Lord.

16. Whatsoever has bin attempted and atted, both by the one part, and the
other shall be committed to utter oblivion.

An end of the present Articles above mentioned.
Articles and Conditions of the Truce made between the Emperor, and the
Turk, translated out of high Dutch.
1. THat every one shall be permitted, to reedifie their houses foretresses, or
any other buildings, and to repair and resettle them in the same estate,
wherein they were before the wars, and moreover to build new, as they shall
think good.

2. That the Ambassadors, both of the one and other side, shall attribute unto
their masters, the title of Father and Son: which is to say, the one of
son, to the great Turk, and the other of father to the Emperor: and that
one reciprocally demanding any thing of the other, by letters, it shall quickly
be dispatched, and agreed unto: and that writing respectively one unto the
other, they shall us the title of Emperor, and not of King.

3. That the Tartars also shall be comprehended within this Truce, with an
iniunction, and inhibition unto them, to do no kind of damage, or make any
incursions upon the Christians.

4. That the truce shall continue, for the space of fifteen years.

5. That all the Lands, Kingdoms, and Lordships, belonging to the house of
Austriche, shall be comprehended within this truce, and if he determine to
make peace with the Spaniard, that he may herein no ways be hindered, but
rather assisted, and furthered by the Emperor.

6. That Incursions, and Inroads, as well of the one part, as the other be
prohibited, and if any one of the several parties, do not observe this, the
transgressors shall be imprisoned, and punished with exemplare justice, as well
on the one side, as on the other, making restitution of damages.

7. That no man be permitted either openly, or secretly, to betray, or
surprise, either foretresse, town, or house, to take any prisoner of the one
or other part, nor to entertain, be it the one, or the other, any spies,
principally in Hungary and that no kind of revenge be pretended, for matters
before time evil carried.

8. That Merchants, and all tran^quants, may freely, and securely travel, and
that they may be safe conducted by Captains, or other Commanders, to the
borders and confines of countries: and that places be nominated, and ordained
of set purpose, for Faires, respectively four or five times in the year.

9. That the Governors of Raab, and Basha of Offen, may have full authority,
to appease all partialities, and divisions, which may peradventure occur upon
the Confines: and the affair being of great importance, that it be determined
by Mediators, toward the Emperor or the great Turk.

10. That all prisoners, conformable to their dignity, and place, be set at
liberty, by way of Counterchange.

11. That according to the Agreement passed, and concluded hertofore within
Buda, by Caesar Gallo, an Ambassador be sent by the Emperor to the great Turk
with a present: and that in like manner, conformable to the accord set down by
the Visio Basha, that an Imbassador be sent from the Turk to the Emperor with
a present of horse, arms, rich raiment, or some such like things.

12. That this truce be firm, and indissoluble for fifteen years, and that
without all fail, there be Ambassadors appointed every three years, of like
condition, and quality, with requisite and convenient presents, without any
ways specifying of them, but it being referred to the discretion of him which
shall send them.

FINIS.

