THE TRIVMPHS OF NASSAV: OR, A DESCRIPTION AND REpresentation of all the
Victories both by Land and Sea, granted by God to the noble, high, and mighty
Lords, the Estates general of the united Netherland Provinces. UNDER THE
CONDVCT and command of his Excellency, Prince MAVRICE of NASSAV.

Translated out of French by W. SHVTE Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip, Anno Dom. 1613.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE and justly honored Lords, WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke, and
PHILIP Earl of Montgomerie.
RIght Hono.
That which slender judgments call greatness, because themselves cannot
compass it, is not so, but a bumbast of titles and other shreds of fortune,
wherewith the least mynds are often stuffed out: But a mind well grown then best
shows it own hight when it stands down, and puts off the slippers of
fortune. Heaven resist that this should ever befall your Lordships, because
your virtues put them on, and they sit clean on you: Yet when I sought first
of what size I might make my respect, my imagination stripped you of all honor
till I found your worths so well set and limbd, that I could not make your
estimation too great. I shall be much bound to your noble apprehension, if out
of all this circumlocution it extract this meaning, That not your fortunes but
virtues begat my love; so happily you will tollerat the troublesomnesse of it
for the parents sake: Yet I hope it will not be altogether a fruitless trouble
for you to admit these plain relations as a Parenthesis in your more serious
considerations. I held them belonging in some sort to your Lordships, many of
these actions being performed by your noble uncles, whose honors you are to
inherit, though without need. And though much hereof be beyond your time, yet
is it not beyond your knowledge, for he whose understanding is not elder than
himself loses the noblest inheritance of his ancestors, and sticks in the
worst kind of minority. You have a most exact commentary of your own upon
this work, the all sufficient and most understanding viscount List your noble
uncle, who has scarce bin ever absent in any service where honor has bin
present among them. Thus humbly dedicating my self and best labors to your
gracious protection, I wish all honor and happiness ever to attend you.

Unchangeably remaining your Lordships humbly devoted, W. SHVTE.

To the Reader.
HIs errors and blots who transcribes the actions of an Age past-by out of
sight, are almost indiscernable, at least incorrigible: Antiquity of whom, and
posterity to whom he speaks, lie at his mercy, the same of the one, and
faith of the other, often suffering miserably under him. But he that speaks to
the face of a Time present, must either speak truly, or make room in his
patience to receive the lie, and undergo a shameful detection. Of this second
kind is mine Author, who tells thee little but what perhaps thou have already
heard from the mouth of the canon, or, if the crampe of fear benumbed not thy
spirits, had an hand in: So that thou may securely hearken to him, since
thy knowledge will not be so unkind as look on and see thy belief abused. Let
not any man's ignorance persuade thee that it is superfluous to read over this
Copy, having the original in thy memory: thou must lay it nearer to thee
than thy memory, in thine understanding. Again, not to endure the rehersall
of thine own actions, is an argument of their deformity; else thou would
as much delight to look in this book, as a fair woman in her glass, or on
her picture. This I can safely promise, That if thy judgment can reach them,
among these leaves, thou may find much fruit worth the tasting. In the noble
and prosperous family of Nassau thou may observe, That a virtuous son
makes an immortal father in despite of treachery and death. In the whole
course of the war, how that deluge of blood wherewith her enemies hoped to
have drowned the Netherlands, did like the inundation of Nile but fatten and
enrich them. By the basseling and coudgelling that proud Armada, that unless
the Lord of Hosts be the Godfather, the name of invincible is improper and
ridiculous to any humane army. By the Hollanders marine expeditions, that
virtue like the heavenly Spheres must never stand still, and that whiles she
goes not forward, she becomes retrograde. In the English, who brake the ice
of Navigations to them and had the wind of same of them in that art, idleness
striking the sails of their industry, are fallen much to Leeward in
reputation, perhaps in sufficiency. In the late treaty of peace, that they
who beat the furnace for Innocents, are oftentimes so ouerreacht by their own
flames, that they are feign to quench them in their derided t^ares. In all,
that art and discipline are more potent than multitude, but a just cause than
both. Those escapes either of mine own or the printers which thou shall meet
with all, furnish thee with good occasion to requite my pains taken for thee,
by favorably correcting them.

Farewell. W. SHVTE.

A RELATION OF ALL THE VICTORIES, BOTH BY SEA AND LAND, Achieved, for the
States of the united Provinces, under the conduct and government of Prince
MAVRICE of Nassau.
A true and brief description of the Netherland Provinces.
THE Low Countries are so named because their situation is low, The original
name of the Low Countries.
in comparison of high Germany: There are diverse Rivers in them, as the Rhyne,
Meuse, Scheld, Waell, and many others, which springing forth of the high
mountains, run through the Country, and empty themselves into the great
Northern Ocean, where the said Countries are situated. Her situation.
The County of Embden and the River Amisa, the Countries of Benthem,
Westphalia, Cleues and Iuliers, the Bishoprics of Cologne and Treues, and the
countries of Lorayne and France, are their limits.

The Low Country is commonly divided into seventeen Provinces: It is divided
into 17. Provinces, and their names.
viz. into four Duchies, Brabant, Limbourg, Luxembourg, and Guelders: eight
Counties, Holland, Zeland, Flanders, Artois, Haynault, Namur, Zutphen, and the
Marquisat of the sacred Empire: Why they a^e ^alled 17. Provinces.
And into five Seignories, viz. Malines, Vtrecht, frise, Ouer-Ysell, and
Gronninghe. They are termed seventeen Provinces by reason of the seventeen
several titles given to their Princes; we can give no other sound reason for
it. At any general Assembly, all the Provinces are not called or summoned, nor
have voy^^s, or do orderly contribute to general impositions: for the
Marquisat of the sacred Empire of Antuerpe, is not reckoned among the
Provinces: the Duchy of Limbourgh, with Valckenbourgh and Dalem, belong to
Brabant: Tournay and Tournesis with Lille, Douay and Orchies, are not usually
numbered among the seventeen Provinces, yet both of them contribute, each of
them as a Province: The like do Valenciennes and Drent. This Low Country
about the year 1550 in the time of the Emperor Charles the fist, did grant
his demand in a sum of 300000 Florins to be paid monthly, which was called
Nouentale or Nouenaire. We find that Limbourgh, Luxembourgh, Guelders and
Gronninghe being Frontiers, paid nothing toward this contribution, for they
were very poor and behind hand, so as none but these 13 Provinces and Towns
contributed; namely Brabant, Flaunders, Artois, Haynault, Valenciennes, Lille,
Douay, Orchies, Holland, Zeland, Namur, Tournay, Tournesis, Malines, and
Vtrecht, yet we must not think that the rest are excluded from conuocations
and general Assemblies.

Her circuit.
The Low Country is in circuit 340 Flemmish Leagues, or one thousand Italian or
English miles. There are more than two hundred walled Cities in it, The number
of towns and villages.
and one hundred and fifty Towns which have the privilege and jurisdiction of
Cities, with above 600 Villages; but during these long wars they have been
very much lessened and ruined. And to give satisfaction to the curious reader,
I will here set down a general number whereby he may know how many towns and
villages there are in every Province. Namely in the four. How many Tow^es and
Villages there are in every Province.
Dutchies. Towns. Villages. Brabant. 26. 700. Luxembourg. 23. 1169. Limbourg.
5. 123. Guelders. 24. 300. In the eight Counties. Towns. Villages. Holland.
33. 400. Zeland. 10. 101. Flanders. 35. 1178. Artois. 12. 754. Haynault. 24.
950. Namur. 4. 184. Zutphen. The Marquisat. In the five Seigniories. Towns.
Villages. Vttrecht. 5. 70. Frise. 11. 345. Ouer-Ysell. 11. 101. Gronninghe. 1.
145. Maliues. 1. 9.

In old time before the Nativity of Christ, Under what countries the Romans
comprehended the 17. Provinces, and wherefore they were called Belgia.
the Romans and Julius Caesar comprehended this country under Gaul Belgik, or
Belgia; a name imposed upon it by her neighbors, because the Inhabitants were
hawty and bold people, not enduring the loss of their liberty, or prejudice
of their customs and privileges: So that as Caesar writes, they are the
strongest and valiantest nation of the Gauls. They had in those days sundry
names, as Germans, Batauians, Frisons, Aduatici, Menapians, Atrebates, Neruins
and Morini etc. The Germans are at this day called Almans: the Batauians are
the Hollanders, How highly the Romans esteemed this Nation: and their ancient
names.
and partly those of Guelders: the Frisons, those of Frise: the Aduatici, those
of Antuerp: the Menapians, partly those of Guelders and Cleue: the Atrebates,
those of Arras, and places near adjoining: the Neruins, those of Tournay: the
Morini, Flemings, etc.

Concerning the situation of the said countries, it is for the most part
champaine, The form of the Country and fertillity thereof
except the Provinces of Luxembourgh, Limbourg, Namur and Haynault, where the
country is hilly: and part of Brabant, Flanders, Guelders and Ouer-Ysell is
sandy. All the Provinces are generally fruitful, and those which lie to the
Southward bear some vines. The higher parts of the country afford pleasant
groves of all sorts of trees, the Champayne abounds with all kind of cattle;
the woods are stored with birds and foul; the Sea and rivers are full of fish:
there are brave and goodly horses bred in Flanders, Holland, Zeland and
Friseland: though the air be gross and moist, yet in all places (the Sea side
except) it is good and wholesome. It is a country which for traffic is
commodiously seated for all the chief countries of Europe, in regard of her
great Rivers; The original of some Rivers which run through the Country.
as the Rhyne, which descends from the mountains of Swisserland, and
dividing it self into three branches runs through Germany and some part of
the Netherlands, emptying it self into the German Ocean: next the Danubium, it
is the greatest river of Europe: the Meuse runs from the mountains of
Burgundy as far as Langres: the Scheld comes from Picardie and Vermandois.
Besides, the Sea does so favor them as in two days and two nights they may
sail from home to Norway, and in five or six days to Denmark, and from
thence to Swethland. Westward, they may in few hours go into England, and
from hence along the coast of France into Spain, and to the East and
West Indies.

Holland and Zeland surpass all other Provinces in shipping.
For this cause the Low Countries, especially Holland and Zeland, are very rich
in shipping, wherein the greatest part of their power, all their traffic and
wealth consists; so as it is almost incredible to believe that sometimes there
are seven or eight hundred great Ships, ready to set sail into the East,
besides those which go toward the West into England, France, Spain, Italy,
the Islands, and along the coast of Africa, and to the East and West Indies,
all of them being well manned and provided. Besides merchants ships, there are
many hundred other, which in the country language are termed Buysen,
Doog-booten, and Crabbens, with which they go a fishing for Herring, Cod, and
Salmon. When they go to fish for Herrings, there will be sometime seven or
eight hundred of these Buysen or Booten; which every year make three voyages to
Sea: so as the wealth which the Inhabitants of this country get by Sea is not
to be reckoned, nor the Mariners numbered which live thereby; for the towns and
villages abound in women and children which do nothing but weaue Nets, and in
great multitudes of people whose occupation is to build ships.

The Netherlanders are for the most part tall, strong, fair, and clean
timbred. Every Province does a little participat with her neighbors
dispositions; as those who dwell toward the East, do somewhat resemble the
Easterlings, those of the South the Almans, they in the West the French. Their
apparel is comely, but not so costly as the Germans, who therein follow the
curiosity and new fashions of their neighbors: they are given to drink, but
not so much as the Almans, nor so usually as three or fourscore years ago:
they are of a settled judgment and constant in all their affairs, seldom
wavering either in prosperity or adversity, they are witty and industrious, and
apt to invent all manner of arts, to comprehend and teach them, and therein
surpass all other Nations: they are never idle but ever in action, much
addicted to trade of merchandise, the which, more than other nations they seek
through the whole world: they are very serviceable to all men, and not so proud
and ambitious as other people: But they are naturally sparing and lovers of
gain, which makes them willingly see other countries, Commendation of the
Netherland women.
so as in every place a man shall find Dutchmen. The women are likewise very
serviceable, and give themselves to all sorts of work, which in other
Countries, servants will refuse to do: they likewise trade in merchandise, and
in all honest manner converse with men: they detest adultery notwithstanding that
they often want their husbands companies: this may perhaps seem strange to
diverse Nations.

They soon learn and speak all manner of Tongues: Commendation of the Dutch
Tongue.
their ancient speech is high Dutch: upon the Frontiers of France they speak
Wallon, a corrupted Language: their Speech is rough, but very rich and perfect,
surpassing all other Languages in antiquity and perfection, for it has more
than 2170 words monosillables, as Simon Steuin of Bruges witnesses in his
book called, the Rudiments of the art of weighing, where he sets them down;
thereunto adding a discourse concerning the worthiness of the Low Dutch
Tongue, fit to be read of all those that love the said Language: which is in a
manner the very same that was spoken 1700 years ago in Julius Caesar's time,
saving that every Province has borrowed the sound and accent of her
neighbors: a speech further extended and spoken in more places than any other,
even from Calais in France, as far as Norway, Swethen, Liuonia, and further.
It is a Country where strangers are better used than in any other: they are a
Christian people, The Netherlanders lovers of Liberty.
lovers of piety and Liberty, as all their Histories and modern wars
testify: for since the overthrow of the Roman Empire, they have freed
themselves from all bondage and invasion, and have invaded and mastered other
Nations, as the realm of France with the Salicks and Franconians their
neighbors, etc.

The Country being divided into Provinces, they have acknowledged some
Sovereign Lords; but on certain conditions, still keeping them from growing
great, for fear of being subiugated by them, and therefore they especially
loved them when they were young: The Princes of the Low Countries have done
many valiant deeds.
these Provinces living thus peaceably under their Lords, and uniting
themselves together in time of need, have oftentimes purchased renown by
valiant actions, as well against the Romans as other nations, namely against
the Turks and Sarafens, as appears by their exploits under the conduct of
Godfrey of Bouillon and other Kings of Jerusalem, as also under Baldwin Earl
of Flaunders who won the Empire of Constantinople, with many other enterprises
mentioned in their Cronicles and Histories. In a word they are a people of whom
the famous Historian Cornelius Tacitus writes thus; the Gauls fought for their
liberty, the Germans for booty; but the Battauians for glory and honor. In
this regard the Roman Emperors chose them to guard their own persons, esteeming
them the valliantest and loyallest people of the world: and some of them, as
the Battauians and Frisons, have been declared friends and companions of the
Romans.

Notwithstanding that all these Low Countries have in time past been sundry
Provinces and Soueraignties under several Princes, yet at last they have been
reduced under four Dukes of Burgundi-, afterward under the Archdukes of
Austria, and finally under one lord absolute, the Emperor Charles the fist,
and his son Philip King of Spain. How the Low Countries have been reduced
under one Lord
It shall not be amiss briefly to set down, how, when, and after what manner
they became subject to these last Princes: and let this continue in eternal
memory, that the Spaniards have attainted the government of these Low
countries, not to rule them as their own subjects, according to their Laws,
but as a free Nation, by their own Laws and privileges.

Margaret daughter to Lewis de Male marieth Philip the Hardy, on whom he begat
John sans peur.
Lewis de Male, by his father, Earl of Flanders, Neuers, Retel, Salines,
Antuerp, and Malines, and by his mother, Earl of Burgondie and Artois, had a
daughter named Margaret, by Margaret his wife daughter to John the third Duke
of Brabant: this lady in the year 1369 in Gant, married Philip of Valois
surnamed the Hardy, Duke of Burgondie, He marieth the E^rle of Hollands
daughter and begets Phillip le Bon.
the youngest son to John the French King: from these two descended John (sans
peur) Earl of Flanders, Burgondie, Artois, etc. This John of Valois, did in
the year 1415 marry the lady Margaret daughter to the Earl of Haynault,
Holland, Zeland, and Friseland; and was treacherously slain at Montereau in
France an^ 1419 the nineteenth of September, being eight and forty years
old, and in the fifteenth year of his reign: he died (as some say) by the
Dolphins command.

His only son, How Phillip le Bon obtained the possession of the whole
Low Countries.
Phillip (le Bon) succeeded him being three and twenty years old, and was
Duke of Burgondie, Earl of Flanders, Artois, Burgondie, Palatin and Marquess
of the sacred Empire, and lord of Salines and Malines. He did moreover in the
year 1429 by the death of Earl Dideric of Namur, succeed him in the same
Earldom, which he first bought; and by the death of Phillip Duke of Brabant,
who died without heirs, he did in the year 1430 obtain the Dutchies of
Lorraine, Brabant; and Limbourg; and by the death of Iacoba countess of
Holland etc. his niece, he got in the year 1436 the Earledomes of Haynault,
Holland, Zeland and Friseland. In the year 1443, his Aunt gave him the Duchy
of Luxembourgh, first as protector thereof, and afterward as absolute lord. He
was the first of the house of Burgondie that instituted the order of the Golden
fleece at Bruges in Flaunders, He that first instituted the order of the golden
fleece marries Isabell of Portugal, by whom he had a son called Charles the
Warrior, who is acknowledged for lord of the Low Countries, and makes a
purchase.
when he married Isabell of Portugal in the year 1450: He died at Bruges an^
1467 in the 72 year of his age, and 48 of his reign. He left his only son
Charles of Valois surnamed the Warrior, heir to all these countries: who
succeeded his father in the 34 year of his age: for an annual pention, and
the sum of 92000 crowns of gold, he bought the duchy of Guelderland and
county of Zutphen of Arnold Earl of Egmond; who dying, did by his last will
and Testament confirm the said sale, making Duke Charles his heir,
disinheriting his own son Adolfe because he had rebelled against him. He goes
about to make the Low Countries a kingdom.
This Duke took possession of Guelderland in an^ 1473: He sought to make the
Low Countries a kingdom, and to that end promised to marry his only daughter
to the Emperor Frederic the thirds son, and he would have called it the
kingdom of Burgondie; because in former time Burgondie had been a kingdom:
but in regard every Province was Sovereign, and had her privileges, laws
and reueneues apart, differing in weights and measures, and had never granted
their Princes any other but limited power, How and where he dyed.
this motion was rejected. This brave warrior was slain before Nancy anno 1477
the fist day of January, betrayed by an Italian Earl called Campobasso that
served him (by the instigation of Lewis the eleventh French king, the Swisses
and Lorrai^s) after that he had won three battles. Three days after his
death he was found naked in a marish which was frosen, as Philip of Comines
writes in his History: His daughter Marie of Valois marries Maximillian of
Austria, by whom she had two children.
he was four and forty years old, and left one only daughter and heir
behind him, called Marie of Valois, of the age of eighteen years, who in anno
1477 on the eighteenth of August, married Maximillian of Austria, who recovered
from the French king whatsoever he had taken from his wife: he reestablished
the order of the golden fleece, which in those days was very contemptible;
this he did in anno 1478. They had two children betwixt them, a son named
Philip and a daughter called Margaret. Marie of Burgondie the third year after
she was married fell from her horse, Maximillian goes about to reduce some of
the Low-countrie Provinces under the Roman Empire.
and of that fall dyed. Maximillian for a time governed those countries in the
behalf of his son Philip, but not very faithfully, for he went about to
allienat and divide the Provinces of Brabant, Holland, Zeland and Friseland
from the Low Countries, to give them to his father the Emperor Frederic, and
did many matters to the prejudice of those countries which to rehearse would be
too long. Philip his son is acknowledged Prince, and marries D. Joan of
Spain
In the year 1492 his son Philip was acknowledged Prince of the whole
Low Countries, and confirmed as hereditarie lord thereof. In an. 1496 in the
City of Lier in Brabant he married D. Ioane of Spain, so as the Low Countries
being before united by sundry marriages, are lastly by this conjunction fallen
to the house of Spain; and although they have attained to a kind of perfect
prosperity, yet by this means they are fallen into a long and unnecessary
war, and into the troubles of civil broiles, to the great hurt and prejudice
of the said countries: and hereby have the seventeen Provinces been under the
Spanish government these seventy or eighty years.

How the Provinces are at this day divided, and who possess them.
This present year 1610 since the said Provinces have been divided, the
Archdukes Albert and Isabella Clara, enjoy one part thereof; namely Brabant,
Limbourg, Luxembourg, Flanders, Artois, Haynault, Namur, Lille, Douay, Orchies,
Tourney and Tournesis, Malines, Valenciennes, Cambray, with part of
Guelderland, and the Seigniorie of Linguen, excepting some places of Brabant
and Flanders, which my Lords the estates do yet hold' wanting nothing but
peace. The estates of the united Provinces possess the rest, as the three
parts of Guelderland, Holland, Zealand, Friseland, Vtrecht, Gronningen, and the
territories adjoining, Ouer-Ysell and Drent, with certain parcels of Brabant
and Flaunders, all which Countries contribute toward the war.

We will now speak somewhat of the particular estate of these Provinces,
Countries under the Archdukes.
as they stand in this present year 1610 during the truce: and first, of those
under the government of the Archdukes, of Brabant, Brabant.
which they wholly enjoy, except the Towns of Berghen op Zoom, Breda,
Steenbergh, Willem-stadt, Grave, and certain Forts, all which are under the
government of the estates of the united Provinces. These Countries have for
the space of forty years, during the wars, suffered much, as well by the
enemy, as their own soldiers, mutyning often through want of pay, and in
such sort oppressing the Country, as it is a wonder how the poor people still
breath; whereby we may conjecture of the Countries power. There are diverse
good Towns which are places of refuge for the distressed Boores. The City of
Louayn is yet in good estate. Bruxels by means of the Court still prospers and
flourishes. The Town of Boisleduke or Sertoghen busch, although it has
endured many assaults and sieges, does nevertheless enjoy her pristine good
fortune. But the City of Antuerpe, renouned for her beauty and trade of
merchandise, has suffered much, having been sacked, ransomed, and partly
burnt, and enforced to build a Cittadell which hourly keeps it in awe, by
means whereof she has lost her trade, so as now it is only frequented by
some few Lawyers, and receivers of the Princes revenues, which does somewhat
help it. The people and inhabitants of Brabant during these wrrres^ are wasted
and consumed more than the one half.

Malines a Sovereign City and Seigniorie has been twice taken, Malines.
and more spoiled than any other.

Limbourg, Limbourg, Valckenbourg and Namur.
Valckenbourg and Dalem, have likewise been much afflicted, together with the
City of Namur; yet at this day they are in reasonable good estate.

Luxembourgh of all other Provinces of the Low Countries, Luxembourg.
has bin least troubled, and sustained no other loss, than sometimes to give
passage to the armies. Haynault Artois.
In Haynault, Artois, Valenciennes, Lille, Douay, Orchies, Tournay, Tournesis
and Cambray, the chief towns at the beginning of the wars, have been taken
and sacked, and the country wasted and spoiled, which was no novelty to them,
being accustomed thereunto in the French wars: they now prosper, and
impositions have done them more harm than war.

Flanders.
Flanders during these forty years war has greatest cause to complain,
having been masterd by the seditious vulgar, all her chief cities and towns
have been besieged, vvoon, and sacked, Graueling and some other few forts
excepted: diverse towns and great villages have been made heaps of earth, so as
in this province alone, more towns, villages, castles and cloisters have been
ruined, than in any other, so that the country is half unpeopled, and the
inhabitants retired into other lands. The Archdukes possess all Flanders,
except the towns of Sluice, Axel, Ternheuse, the whole Isle of Katsant,
Biervliedt, Ardenbourgh with some other sorts and strong places. In stead of
these towns and those of Brabant heretofore mentioned the Archdukes possess
part of Guelderland, and therein the town of Ruremond, together with Gueldre,
Venlo, Watchtendone, Strale and Grolle, then the towns of Lingen and Oldenzeel,
in the farthest parts of the lowcountries: which by a firm and desired peace
would soon recover their former wealth and beauty.

Countries under the States government.
My Lords the states of the united provinces possess these countries following,
the three parts remaining of the duchy of Guelderland, under which is
comprehended the county of Zutphen, and the Archdukes enjoy the town of
Grolle. These countries have been much afflicted, for all the best towns
therein have been besieged, taken, and sacked, in which regard their wealth is
small in comparison of that of other provinces.

Holland.
Holland at the beginning was more ruined than any other province, her cities
have been besieged taken and burnt: but at last by war she has obtained
peace, increasing in great wealth and prosperity, even then when her
neighbors confronted her: now it is so populous and so abounds in shipping, as
at this day no country of the world can compare with it for navigations, or
flourishes more in trade of merchandise, as may appear by the towns of
Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Encheusen, and many others.

Zealand after many miseries had all her towns besieged and taken by famine
and other means, Zealand.
the dikes leueld, so as by boat men passed over the country; yet at last
she has freed her self from these calamities, and reflourisheth in
traffic, people, and shipping, according to her Emblem, Luctor and emergo.

Frizeland has likewise been greatly ruined, Frizeland.
but it has ever borne it self nobly in war, and according to the state and
proportion thereof, the country still flourishes.

The duke of Alua has done more hurt and wrong to Vtrecht than to any other
Province, Vtrecht.
and since then it has been greatly indaungered by discord and dissension; but
United with the other provinces it does by little and little recover her
former greatness and prosperity, and increases in traffic.

The chief towns of Ouer-yssell and Drenct have been besieged and taken
oftener than once, Ouer-yssell.
and the champayne country ruined by sundry invasions.

Gronninguen and the country adjoining together with her neighbors have
endured much, Gronninguen.
the town has been besieged and taken sundry times, and the countries round
about it spoiled; but they are now quiet, though somewhat burdened with
impositions, the greatest part thereof being under contribution, which they
pay to the Garrisons of Linguen and Oldenzeel, by which means the country is
much impouerished.

Yet the united provinces of the low countries are all of them in better estate
than the rest, The united provinces flourish more than any other.
because the sea lies open to them, having many ships, the Northern Ocean at
their command, and diverse other rivers; multitudes of people, coming thither
from other provinces under hope of traffic and gain, and for the liberty of
conscience which they freely enjoy. These countries are by war grown rich,
though it may seem contrary to nature and reason, and do wonderfully flourish
as appears by their fortes, number of great towns, and sumptuous buildings.

So that the low countries may generally va^nt to be (according to the bignesle
thereof) in number of great, Conclusion.
strong and well peopled Cities and Fortes the excellenrest country in the
world, in which for the space of forty years that the war continued, the
brauest soldiers of Europe have been and yet are trained up and exercised in
the school of Mars.

If any desire to read a more ample description of these Low Countries; let
him for Brabant read Adrianus Barlandus, for Flanders Iacobus Marchantius, for
Holland Adrianus Iunius the Hollander, borne in Horn; or the general
description of the Low Countries, written by Lodouico Guicciardin, all which
may give him better satisfaction: For it suffices me to have written thus much
briefly, and as it were by the way.

A description of the Hague and Court of Holland: As also by whom and when the
said Court was builded, and to what end.
BEsides all the goodly, rich, pleasant, and walled towns of Holland, there
are diverse and sundry Seigniories or towns not walled, sumptuously built, and
so enriched, as in beautiful and stately building do not only equal many
Cities, but far excel them, being by their Princes and Lords adorned with
sundry privileges. Description of the Hague.
Among which there is none more excellent, beautiful, better seated, or
plesanter than the Hague of the Earls: which because it is such, was chosen by
the Princes and Earls of the country for their delightful abode; there
establishing their Privy Council, and Court of Justice, where all suits,
pleas, and controversies of Holland and Zeland are debated and decided.

Her beauty and number of houses.
The Hague, in wealth, stately buildings, pleasant gardens, and great number of
Nobility surpasses diverse cities of Holland and Zeland: there are in it more
than 2000 great and goodly houses, and many new are daily built, yea whole
streets.

Description of the Court of Holland.
Among all the great and goodly houses of the Nobility, in the Hague, there is
none more stately and magnificent, than that which is called the Court of
Holland. Which rightly may be termed Royal, By whom and when it was built.
because it was built in anno 1249 by Earl William, second of that name, and
the fifteenth Earl of Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, etc. who for his excellent
virtue and valor was by the mutual consent of the electors chosen king of
Romans, and afterward confirmed on the day of all Saints in anno 1246, as
appears by the old Cronicle of Holland in the eighteenth division and
thirteenth Chapter. This Royal Court is after the manner of Castles environed
with Dikes, and has sundry gates, in which the Princes gards do watch day
and night. On the North side of the Court there is a large and goodly
fishpond, encompassed with many high trees, under whose shade it is pleasant
walking in summer to avoid the heat of the sun: and the place where these
trees stand is called in the vulgar tongue Viuerberg, which is as much to say,
as the fishponds hill.

Within this building is a large and spacious hall, built (as the ancient
chronicle of Holland says) of a certain wood brought from Ireland which will
never rotte, nor bear any spiders or other venomous worm. This hall is
environed with diverse and sundry shoppes, well furnished with all manner of
books in all languages, and with goodly pictures.

But the most excellent of them are, the silver coat armours, trumpets and
ensigns which hang there in great number, won from the enemy at the defeat
of Turnhout, and at the battle of Flanders, which are hung up in the roof of
the hall for a perpetual remembrance.

There is the prince or governor of Holland, The princes court.
Zeland, and Westfrize-lands court: which is the illustrious and mighty lord,
Maurice of Nassau, prince of Orange, etc. who has governed three and twenty
years with such fortunat success as we may rightly term him Pater patriae.

It is also a place dedicated to law and administration of Justice, A place
dedicated to Law and justice.
where the Council (being more in number than were the Consentes dei in times
past) debate all causes, examine and judge them: they are I say more in number;
for the council of Consentes were but twelve; and these counselors are
fourteen beside their chief whom they call president. This assembly of
counselors, who were wont to remain at Grauesand, was transported hither by
count William above mentioned, after that he had received the title of king of
Romans.

Beside this assembly of counselors which is called the provincial
council; By whom the (...) council was transse^ to the Hague.
an other was established in anno 1582 in stead of the great council of
Malines, and it is a sovereign council of Justice, called the great council,
whether all causes which are brought to be decided, by appeal or reformation
of the sentences of the above named provincial court and other judges, are
sentenced by final decree, without any appeal from thence to any other, yet
reexamination may be craved, and error propounded: in such cases the States of
the Country appoint certain men beside the above named Council, to reuiew
the pleas which have been judged, and to deliver their opinions whether there
be any error in the said sentence or not: and according to their conclusion,
every man must rest satisfied without any contradiction.

The Council of Brabant.
An other Council is likewise established, called the Council of Brabant,
which has power over that part, Towns, Villages, and inhabitants of the said
Country of Brabant under the government of my Lords the general States: In
this Council all matters are handled, by commission, commandment and
instruction of the general States, according to the ancient custom of the
Chauncerie and Court fiscall of Brabant, to the end every man may be orderly
governed by their Laws and Privileges. Lastly beside all these there do
reside in this Court of Holland, my Lords the States general, the States of
Holland and West-frizeland, the Council of State, the masters of accounts of
the Chamber of Accounts of Holland, the Council of war etc. every of these
having their Chamber apart.

Description of the Park at the Hague.
Before we end this description of the Hague, it shall not be impertinent
briefly to speak of the situation of the Park, which is in length 1500
paces, but nothing so much in breadth: there grow Oaks, Elmes, Ash and other
Trees, on whose boughs, great and small melodious Birds do with their Songs
delight and recreat the senses of the hearers: there are Dear, Hares and
Conies. It is a place worthy the Muses, and where Princes, Earls, Lords,
Counselors, Aduocats, and all sorts of people do usually walk to recreat
themselves after their toils. I might speak of many other matters; but
because mine intent is only to touch them as it were by the way, I refer the
curious Reader to Lodouico Guicciardine his description made many years since,
which of late has been newly printed, augmented, and enriched with maps.

The Genealogy of William of Nassau, Prince of Orange etc. with the rehearsal
of his death and funerals.
BEfore we set down the great and valorous actions of the most illustrious
Prince, Maurice of Nassau, we will briefly in manner of an introduction
speak somewhat of the Genealogy, descent, birth, life and death of my Lord
his father, William of Nassau of happy memory.

William by the grace of God, The Prince of Orange his Titles.
Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau, Catzenelbogen, Dietz, Vianda etc. Marquis
of Veer and Flushing; Vicount of Antuerpe and Bezanson, Baron of Breda, Die,
Grimberg, Arley, Nozeroy etc. Lord of Castelbelin, Lieutenant general in the
Low Countries, and Governor of Brabant, Holland, Zeland, Vtrecht and
Frize-land, Admiral of the Belgic Seas, was son to William of Nassau,
brother to Count Henry of Nassau, both of them sons to John who was brother
to Engelbert, to whom John of Nassau was Father, (...)
and Marie of Loon their mother. This William married Julian Countess of
Stolberg, a very wise and virtuous Lady, by whom he had five sons; namely
William of Nassau Prince of Orange etc. John of Nassau, Lodwicke, Adolph, and
Henry, three of them were slain in the Low-countrie vvarres; and seven
daughters, all excellently well married to Earls, and have had many children,
so that the said Lady, mother to my Lord of happy memory, being 75 years
old, did in anno 1578 see of her own issue, 123 persons both Earls and
Countesses her children, and childrens children: how the number is since
increased to me is unknown.

The late Prince of Orange of happy memory was borne at Dillenbourg in anno
1533 the foureteenth of April old style. Where and when he was borne.
He was of more than middle stature, the color of his beard brown, more leave
than fat. What his inward parts were, his heroicke actions testify. His first
wife daughter to Count ^^ren.
Being come to man's state, he married first, the only daughter and heir of
Maximillian of Egmont, Earl of Buren Leerdam etc. on whom he begat Philip of
Nassau Count of Buren, now Prince of Orange; and a daughter called Marie,
married to Grave Hohenlo.

His second wife was Anne, His second wife daughter to the Elector of Saxony.
sole daughter to the Elector Maurice Duke of Saxony, by whom he had a son
called Maurice of Nassau borne of Dillenbourg, in the County of Nassau, the
thirteenth of November anno 1567: by whose discreet and valorous conduct it
pleased God to bless these Low Countries, before extremely afflicted. He had
moreover two daughters by her, the one named Anne, the other Emillia.

His third choice was the Lady Charlotta of Bourbon, His third wife daughter
to Duke Mompensier.
daughter to Duke Mompensier of France, by whom he had six daughters; namely
Louisa Iuliana, Elizabeth, Catherina Belgica, Flandrina, Charlotta Brabantina,
and Emillia Secunda.

His fourth wife daughter to Count Colligni.
His fourth and last wife was, Louisa of Colligni, daughter to the Admiral of
France, and widow to the Lord Telligni (both her father and husband were
slain in the masacre at Paris) by whom he had a son, borne in the Town of
Delft called Henry Frederick, a Prince worthy such a father. I will not
write the life and actions of this valorous Prince: For it is not my meaning
or intent to make a long discourse of all his victories and defeatures by sea
and land, taking of towns, sieges, difficulties, and travels, miseries
whereunto this life is subject, especially that of Princes and great men; nor
likewise how often, and by sundry ways his enemies have sought to murder
him. Only I will briefly set down how he was treacherously slain in the
Town of Delft: And if any be desirous to see a more ample description thereof,
let him read the Histories of things done in the Netherlands, written by
Emanuell Demetrus, John Petit and others.

The manner of the Princes death.
In the year 1584 in the beginning of May, there came to the Princes Court in
the Town of Delft, a young man of the age of seven and twenty years, of a
middle stature, simple countenance, and evil aspect, his name was Baltazar
Gerard borne at Villesans in Burgondie, he had changed his name, and termed
himself Francis Guyon of Besancon, son to Peter Guyon of Lions who had
been put to death for his Religion, and for enterprising somewhat in behalf
of those of the reformed Religion. This fellow delivered a letter to the said
Prince, showing unto him the zeal he did bear to the reformed Religion, and
how desirous he was to serve him; and withal, how that passing through
Luxembourg, he had visited a Cousin of his called John du Pre, Secetarie to
Count Mansfelt, with whom he had continued for a time, till at last he
resolved for the quiet of his conscience to leave him: The which he was the
sooner enforced to do, because the Jesuits began to suspect him: He told him
besides how that he had gotten from his Cosen diverse blanks signed by Count
Mansfelt, whereof he thought good use might be made for enterprising upon
certain towns of Luxembourg and elsewhere, with many other such like
discourses and circumstances, tending to this end to insinuat himself into the
Princes favor, and to enter into his service. He grew likewise familliar under
color of Religion with certain of the Princes household servants, and was
present at Sermons and usual Prayers, carrying either a Psalm Book Bible or
Testament still in his hand.

The Prince acquainted with all this, answered that he thought those signed
blankes would do small good in any enterprise, but only serve to safe conduct
messengers from Bruxels to Cambray, and therefore willed him to leave some of
them. And at what time the Lord of Schoonwall went into France, his
Excellency thought good to send the said Baltazar with him to the Marshall
Byron, who men thought should have been Governor of Cambray, that he might
make use of these signed blankes: And with him he went into France.

After that, he returned from France with Letters both to the Prince and
States, mentioning the death of the Duke of Brabant and A njou, in which
regard the Prince sent for him into his Chamber as he lay in his bed, that he
might particularly inform him of the Dukes death.

He has confessed since, that if his dagger had been then about him, he would
have killed him in his bed. Within a while after he was commanded to return
into France, whereupon he craved some money, showing how his hose and shoes
were broken: the Prince commanded his Secretary to give him some on the
eight day of Iulie; with this money he bought two Pistols of one of the Guard,
therewith to execute his devilish enterprise.

The tenth of Iulie about dinner time, The Prince of Orange slain by Baltazar
Gerard who nanamed himself Francis Guyon.
he came to the Prince, of whom with a fearful and trembling voice he craved
a passe-port, which the Princess (there present) did well observe, who asked
the Prince what he was, because she saw he had a bad countenance; his
Excellency told her that he was a fellow that sued for a passeport, and so
gave order for his dispatch: Whilst they were at dinner, he was seen to walk
near the stables behind the house toward the Town Rampires: After dinner as
the Prince was coming sorth, this murderer stood without the Hall door, and
making show as if he craved his passe-port, he discharged one of his Pistols
upon him, charged with three bullets: The Prince feeling himself hurt, The
Prince of Orange his last words.
said only thus, My God, take pity on my soul, I am sore wounded, my God,
take pity on my soul, and on this poor people. Having uttered these words
he began to stagger, but was supported by Jacques Maldre, (who witnesses that
he heard those words) and was set down upon the stairs, where he grew
speechless: And as the Countess of Swartsenbourg (his sister) asked him in
the high Dutch Tongue if he did not recommended his soul to Jesus Christ, he
answered in the same language, yea, and never afterward spoke. He was
presently laid upon a bed in the same room where he dined; where within a
while after he gave up the ghost. He died on the 10 of Iulie 1584.
Such was the end of this Prince, esteemed not only of his friends but
enemies, the most wise, constant, magnanimous, patient, and excellent Prince,
that lived or died in our time, according to his Emblem, Saeuis tranquillus in
vndis, which is to say, quiet in the midst of troubles: A goodly end, seeing
he died for his Country, a thing which all godly wise men desire, whom death
never takes unprovided; as also, because he was soon freed from fear and
grief; a death, whereby our great God has since manifested, that the good
success of war depended not on this Princes person, but on his mighty arm,
seeing that the victory which his enemies thought they had gained of him,
sorted not according to their desire, but has convicted them of inhumane
cruelty: for his second son, Maurice of Nassau Prince of Orange, did from
that time (though he were not above 17 or 18 years old) resolve to follow his
Fathers steps, and to serve his Country: And the better to incite him
thereunto, (...).
he invented an Emblem, of a Tree cut down to the root from which issued
tender young plants, which in time became Trees, and underneath, this motto in
Latin, Tandem sit surculus arbor, viz. In time the plant becomes a Tree:
inferring thereby that they had not yet won all by his fathers death,
represented by the cut Tree, but that the plants which sprouted forth, might in
time let them that cut the Tree, know, how worthy their rash and bloody
attempt is, to be derided by the whole world.

The Princess his wife (there present) was greatly grieved, crying out, and
entreating God to give her the gift of patience, seeing it had pleased him to
take her father, first husband, and now the prince, from the world.

The murderer sought to have escaped by a back way, and in running let fall the
other Pistol, having already passed the stables, and running through the
Schol-street, toward the Rampires, thought to leap from the walls down into
the Dike, which was full of water, having two bladders and a quill to blow wind
into them, which he thought to make use of for his better swimming over: But he
was overtaken and stayed by two of the Princes servants. At first he was
perplexed and daunted, but when he perceived they did not hurt him, he began to
take courage, hoping perhaps to have his fact allowed, and by some means to
escape; and said that he had done nothing but that which the King his master
had commanded him. He was carried before the Magistrates of Delft to be
examined; There he craved paper, pen and ink, promising (seeing he was
prisoner) to unfold the truth of the matter, which he did not, but mingled many
lies among some true points, as it afterward appeared.

He confessed, The murderers (...) confession (...) in writing.
that his name was Baltazar Gerard of Ville sans in Burgondie, and that for the
space of six years he had a desire to kill the Prince, which he imparted to
diverse, who reprehended him for it. But, some three years past understanding
that the Prince of Orange stood attainted and condemned by the King of Spayn,
he used means to come hither to execute that sentence: yet hearing that a
certain Biscan had already dispatched him, he put himself into the service of
John du Pre, Secretary to Count Mansfeldt: but within a while after having
notice that the Prince still lived, he resolved to kill him whatsoever should
happen, hoping to find means of secret departure from Count Mansfeldts Camp,
to the Prince, and by seeming to be of his Religion, to present him certain
blankes of the said Earls signed and sealed with red wax, and so to watch a
time to kill him with less danger. But at last being hindered by sundry
occasions, in March he left his master and came to Treues, where he confessed
himself to a Jesuit, unto whom he bewrayed his design, entreating him after
Easter to acquaint Count Mansfeldt therewith. This Jesuit advised him to impart
it likewise to the Prince of Parma, which he afterward did by letter in the
City of Tournay, but he durst not tarry for an answer fearing least he would
take the carrying of those blankes in bad part; with which he went to Delft to
put his plot in execution: But finding no fit opportunity to do it, he went
into France with the Lord Caron, from whence he was sent back with letters
both to the Prince and States, containing the death of the Duke of Anjou: and
afterward he watched all occasions to perform his devilish enterprise,
thinking it the fittest time to dispatch him, either at a Sermon, or when he
should be at meat: and that thereupon he had bought two Pistols, and charged
them, the one with three bullets wherewith he shot the Prince, and the other
with two which he could make no use of, being hindered by the Guard, for which
he was very sorry, affirming that if at that time he had been two thousand
miles from thence, he would have returned back to kill him. All this did he
voluntarily and without torture confess and set down in writing. Afterward
being in Prison, he confessed at sundry times that which follows, and
perseuered in it to the very death.

First, (without any torture) he declared that not long before he understood
the Kings proscription against the Prince, being in May last at Delft, he would
have done the deed, if he could have found a fit time, and means to escape:
Afterward he sued to carry letters of the Dukes death, and that the day
before, he thought to have slain him, but that he durst not then attempt it,
because he saw no means of escape. But the same day he did it, he wholly
resolved to contemn all danger and to kill the Prince, though he were
environed with fifty thousand men.

Concerning his declaration to the Jesuit he persisted in his former
confession: and how that being in France, this business did so torment him as
he could not rest night nor day: Whereupon, he quarrelled with some of his
fellow servants, that he might the sooner be dispatched away with letters; And
if in that journey he should have missed his purpose, his meaning was to have
returned into France and to have become one of the reformed religion in some
Congregation or other; and to have so dealt with the Consistory, as he would
have obtained letters of recommendation to get him access to the Prince, and
by that means to perform the deed. Being tortured, and likewise before, he
confessed that he had acquainted Doctor Gery Warden of the Friars at Tournay with
his purpose. After his torture he confessed that the said Friar had encouraged
him, and given him his blessing, promising to pray to God for him. That the
Jesuit of Treues had likewise assured him, that if he died in the attempt, he
should be reckoned in the number of martyrs. He had likewise imparted the same
to 3 other Jesuits.

Parma by Assonuille encourages him to this devilish enterprise.
Being again tortured, he said that he was a poor fellow, seeking some means
to advance himself: That he had acquainted the Prince of Parma with his plot,
who appointed the Counselor Assonuille to confer with him: who upon the
difficulty of the matter told him, that he should do great good service to
the King of Spain, and that the Prince of Parma allowed thereof, so as if he
performed it, he should receive the recompense proposed in the proscription;
but if he should be taken, he advised him by no means to make any mention of the
Prince of Parma. He told Assonuille that he would change his name, and call
himself Francis Guyon son to Peter Guyon put to death for Religion and his
goods confiscat, and so being a poor fellow and wanting means, but yet
affectionat to Religion he would go to the Princes Court, and the better to
insinuat, he would present him his service and those sealed Blankes: all this
did Assonuille consent to, and vehemently exhorted him to perform it;
entreating him again not to make any mention of the Prince of Parma, for
diverse respects, and perceiving him resolute in the attempt, he said unto him,
Go my son, if thou perform this, the King will keep his promise with thee,
and thou shall purchase immortal fame: He should beside have the Prince of
Parma for his friend; that the said Prince had seen those blankes and was
content they should be used, but Count Mansfeldt should change and alter his
seal, and have it no more engraven in the form of a Lozenge; with diverse
other instructions which Assonuille gave him: Whereupon the said Baltazar
answered, that he hoped so well to counterfeit himself to be of the reformed
Religion, as to get into the service of some Secretary, thereby to find some
opportunity, to present letters to the Prince to sign, and in the mean time
to kill him with his poniard. After his torture, he still continued in one
mind; that he was not sorry for the fact, but if it were again to be done he
would attempt it though it should cost him a thousand lives.

All these confessions, both those that he had voluntarily set down in writing,
and those that he made upon the torture, seen and heard, my Lords of the great
Council and those of the Provincial, appointed to examine and judge the
prisoner, together with the magistrates of Delft, pronounced sentence against
the said Baltazar, as follows.

Baltazar Gerard borne at Villesans in the franche county of Burgondie,
Sen^ence pronounced against Baltazar Gerard the 14 of Iulie.
having confessed to have attempted to kill the illustrious and mighty Lord the
Prince of Orange, and, to this end, obtained certain Blankes from Count
Mansfeldt, and conferred with the Counselor Assonuille in Tournay sent to him
by the Prince of Parma, who had promised him, that if the Prisoner should
execute the sentence of proscripion against the Prince of Orange, the King of
Spain, should pay him the recompense proposed in the said proscription,
together with the sum of five and twenty thousand Ducats: that the said
prisoner should call himself Frauncis Guyon, and make show of being
affectionat to the reformed Religion, to have the better access to the Princes
Court. That the said Prisoner according to this resolution came thither under
the name of Frauncis Guyon, and, on the ninth of Iulie, bought two Pistols,
which on the tenth day he charged whilst my Lord the Prince was at dinner, and
returning, hung them at his girdle, and hid them under his Cloak: And as the
said Prince after dinner was going forth of the Hall to ascend the stairs
leading to his Chamber, he discharged one of the Pistols, wherewith he slew the
said Lord Prince. This being an execrable deed, and abominable treachery,
perpetrated against the person of so illustrious a Prince of happy memory,
the offender ought not to escape unpunished, but is to be severely chastised,
to serve for an example to all others.

In this regard, my Lords above named, having well and maturely weighed the
confession of the said prisoner, and considered every circumstance thereof,
have by these presents condemned and do condemn the said Baltazar Gerard to
be led to a scaffold erected before the State-house of the said City; there
first to have his right hand, wherewith he committed this so execrable fact,
burned betwixt two burning yrons, and afterward his flesh to be burnt and
torn off with burning pincers in six several parts of his body, as legs,
arms, and other fleshie places, and lastly to be quar ered alive, his bowels
and heart to be taken forth and thrown in his face, his head cut off, and his
quarters to be set upon the four Bulwarks, and his head upon a pole to stand
upon the Schoole-Tower behind the Princes house, and all his goods to be
confiscat. This sentence was pronounced in the State-house of the City of
Delft the 14 of Iulie, anno 1584. Signed, A vander Moer.

The execution and death of Baltazar Gerard.
On Saturday the foureteenth of Iulie, he was publicly brought to a scaffold
set up in the Market place of Delft, where he was executed according to the
sentence, with admirable patience, showing the same courage and resolution he
had at first: he would not confer with any Minister; when his hand and flesh
was burnt and torn off, he made no noise, nor seemed at all to be moved: and
in this manner was quartered, and his head set upon a pole, which was afterward
secretly stolen away.

After this illustrious Prince was thus slain by the hand of this wretched
Bourguignon; A description of the Prince of Orange his funeral's.
his body, by the commandment of my Lords the States of Holland, Zealand,
Frize land and Vtrecht, was magnificently buried in the new Church of Delft,
where his tomb is now to be seen. His funerals were solemnized after this
manner. First the Burguers of Delft armed, went before, next them the Trumpets,
after them followed eight horse, trapped with black down to the ground, behind
every horse went a Gentleman bearing a banner representing the Arms of the
said Lord Princes Signiories, with Scutchions on every Horse. The first Horse
was led by two Gentlemen, the one called Gerard de Schoten, and the other Paul
Wijts, representing the City of Breda: The banner with the Arms of Breda was
borne by Philip of Grutere Lord of Direxland. The second was conducted by the
Lord vander Delft and the Lord N. de Roules: And the Lord John of Egmont
carried the banner with the Arms of the Marquisat of Terueer and Flushing. The
third by the Lord of Sprangen, and the Lord John of Oestrum, Captain of the
Castle of Woerden: And the Lord of Rosue carried the banner with the Arms of
Chalon. The fourth was conducted by the Lord Floris Serclays, and the Lord
Peter of Roon, baylie of Put: and the Lord Jasper of Poelgeest carried the
banner with the Arms of Die. The fist by the Lord Jacob of Almond and the
Lord N. of Raephorst: and the Lord Gerard v^nder Aa bore the banner with the
Arms of Vianden. The sixth was led by the Lord of Wijngaerd, and the Lord of
Linden: and the Lord Lancelot carried the banner with the arms of
Catzenelbogen. The seventh was borne by Philip vander Aa, and the Lord Harman
of Outenhorst: and the Lord Cornelius de Sweet carried the banner with the
arms of Nassau. The eight was conducted by the Lord John Baex, Captain of the
Castle of Heusden, and the Lord Dieric of Dvuenuoord baylie of the Briell: and
the Lord of Marquet, carried the banner with the arms of Orange. All these
Lords were clad in black with long Clokes down to the foot. Next followed the
Lord of Mansardt bearing the Cornet, the Lord of Rihouen the Guidon, and the
Lord of Naeltwijck the banner, in every of which was the Princes Emblem.
After them followed four Scutcheons of the Princes four Signiories, viz.
Nassau, Stolbourg, Hessen, and Conningstein borne by the Barons of Peterschen
and Deure, the Lord Wencelij of Botselaer, and John of Assendelst, Lord of
Cralingen. The lord John of Egmond lord of Kenensbourg, followed bearing his
arms with his crest and colors. After him followed the Lord Daniell of
Botselaer Lord of Mervve bearing the Helm; the Lord Duits Captain of the Guard
bearing the sword, and the Lord Wolfart of Brederode with the Coat-armor. Next,
the Lord of Brecht and the Sr. of Maldere led the mourning Horse trapped with
black Velvet down to the ground. The Earl of Ouerstein followed carrying a
drawn sword, and the Baron of Creange a Coronet of Gold; these were attended
by three Stewards or masters of household, to wit, the Lords vander Aa,
Audenfort, and Viry with white staves in their hands: after them followed
twelve men carrying the Beer wherein was the Princes body hung with the
Princes arms. On each side of the body, went the Lord John of Burgondie Lord
of Froymont: the Lord Walraue, Lord of Brederode, the Lord of Merode and the
Signior de Soeterwoude. After the body and Heralds of Arms, followed Prince
Maurice of Nassau son to the Prince in a mourning robe, the train whereof
was borne by the Lord of Sonsfelt, his Tutor. On his right hand went the
Elector Truxses of Cologne, and on the left, Count Hohenlo. After them followed
Count William of Nassau, Count Philip of Nassau, and the Earl of Solms, each
of them going alone. They were followed by my Lords, the general States, the
Council of State, the States of Holland, the Presidents and Counselors of the
great Council, and of the provincial Council of Holland, with their
Secretaries. Next them, the Praetor, Burgomasters, and all the Magistrates of
Delft; after them followed ministers, the Princes Captains and Officers
confusedly attended by multitudes of people.

These funerals were solemnised with incredible sorrow of the whole town of
Delft. There was nothing seen and heard that day over the whole city but
sighs, tears, and lamentations for the death of this good and virtuous Prince,
the people beseeching God to preserve and defend these Countries from greater
dangers and difficulties, which by this Princes death seemed to threaten them.

At what time Prince Maurice of Nassau received the government of these
Countries.
MY Lords the States of Holland, What moved my Lords the States to make Prince
Maurice Governor.
Zeland, Friseland, and Vtrecht (well weighing the good and faithful service
which my Lord the Prince of Orange had done to these Countries both by his
counsel and actions, in no sort sparing his own person, but had always been
present at sundry dangers and difficulties, the better to effect his
designs; considering besides, that the said Prince had not only spent all his
substance in those bloody wars, but all his brethrens wealth, and not alone
lost his own life therein, but also three of his brethren, viz. Counts,
Lodwicke, Adolph, and Henry) gave the government of these countries, with the
Admiraltie of the sea, to his son Prince Maurice of Nassau in recompense and
acknowledgement of all his merits; appointing Philip Earl of Hohenlo for his
Lieutenant.

So as in the year 1584 my Lord Prince Maurice of Nassau, of the age of
seventeen years, succeeded my Lord his father in the government; a Prince
whom God ha^h made an instrument to revenge his fathers cruel death upon the
bloody Spaniards and their adherents, and to let the world see, that it is he
alone, who with the father lie eye of mercy beholding these wretched and
oppressed Provinces, has freed and set them at liberty; and that it is he
which derideth all our enemies enterprises and determinations, who thought that
when this illustrious and valiant Prince was dead, they should easily subdue
these poor afflicted countries, being then (as they supposed) without a Head,
and with their bloody hands ruin it. But their hope was vain; for from this
goodly tree which was cut down God has raised a plant, which, as a man may
say, is sprouted up to heaven: so as the accessaries to this murder have by
experience seen the contrary of their vain imaginations. For the whole world
knows, and I hope to show it in this description, what victorious blessings
God has given and granted to these countries by means of this Gedeon.

Before the Earl of Leycesters arrival, whom the Queen of England sent to be
Governor, my Lords the general States gave an instruction to his Excellency
Maurice of Nassau, concerning the government of Captaine-Generall and Admiral
of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, but on condition to carry all respect to the
Governor General whom the Queen of England should send; which having
accepted, he honorably discharged. In anno 1586, under the command of the
said Governor, he went accompanied by Sir Philip Sidney, His Excellency goe^h
into Flanders.
Governor of Flessigue, with two or three thousand men, into Flanders, to
Ter-Neusen, as well to divert the Prince of Parma from the siege of Nuys, as
because la Motte did sore oppress the town of Ostend, having made a sort in
S. Katherines churchyard, using means by secret intelligence to make himself
master thereof, which by corrupting and drawing diverse by money to his party,
he had almost effected. But his Excellency made another attempt upon the town
of Axel, in this manner.

The taking of the town of Axel in Flaunders.
THe sixteenth of Iulie anno 1586, his Excellency and Sir Philip Sidney, with
their soldiers and provisions did secretly in the night depart from the sort
of Ter-Neuse toward the town of Axel in Flanders, a mile and half distant
from Hulst, and four miles from Gaunt. It is a small town, and not altogether
encompassed with walls, His Excellency takes the town of Axel.
which by passing secretly oner a wall they took without any great slaughter:
there were four companies of soldiers in it. Within a few days after they
took all the forts round about it; and for the safer keeping of the said
town, they broke down the causies, so as the whole town was environed with
water. The taking of Axel did somewhat trouble them of Flanders and Brabant,
fearing some greater mischief would ensue; so as they forthwith wrote to the
Prince of Parma lying before Nuys, entreating him to come from thence to aid
them; sending him word, That it was more honorable and necessary to
preserve their own country, than to besiege and vvin an Imperial city forth
of the jurisdiction and limits of the Low Countries. The Prince notwithstanding
would not quit the siege, but sent la Motte Governor of Graueling, to besiege
and recover the said town of Axel; but his labor was lost, the town being
(as has been said) all environed with water.

The Earl of Leycester leaves the Low Countries, and goes into England.
Maurice of Nassau is made Governor General.
AFter that Robert Dudley, The Earl of Leycester goes forth of the Low
Countries into England.
Earl of Leycester, in the later end of the year 1587, was gone into England,
leaving the Netherlands in great troubles and dissension, and that Sir William
Stanley had on the nine and twentieth of January delivered up the town of
Deuenter to Taxis, and Rowland York the fort of Zutphen, the general States
were much perplexed, fearing that the English which lay in other towns and
forts would do the like, following the example of the French in Brabant in the
Duke of Anjous time, did in an assembly at the Hague, on the sixth of February,
establish and declare by prouiso, by virtue, and according to the Sovereignty
belonging unto them, The general States make Prince Maurice Governor General.
Prince Maurice, besides his Admiraltie in general, and place of Governor of
Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, Governor general in the said Earl of
Leycesters absence, with charge and instruction of the preheminences, rights,
and privileges, for the profit and conservation of the countries towns, and
inhabitants, to maintain and defend the exercise of the reformed Religion, to
administer justice by advice of the Counselors and Presidents, with authority
to change Magistrates, to choose Burgomasters and Sherifes according to the
ancient custom; in a word, to do whatsoever a Governor General might do:
and all this by prouiso, etc. joining with him, because of his youth, Count
Hohenlo as his Lieutenant.

Hitherto we have briefly set down how and when his Excellency attained the
government of these Provinces; we will now come to the description of the
victories which it has pleased God to grant him.

The town of Medenblicke is enforced to submit it self to his Excellency,
and to my Lords the States.
ALthough the Earl of Leycester had resigned, and deposed himself from the
government of these united Provinces, according to an Act granted at London on
the 17 of December 1587, to my Lords the general States: yet they likewise
caused it to be published and proclaimed in form following.

The Estates general of the united Provinces of the Low Countries, to all
those to whom these presents shall come, greeting. As it has pleased her
Majesty of England to confer with the Commissioners and Ambassadors of the
said Provinces, and in the end to make a certain Treaty, bearing date the
tenth of August 1585: Whereby on either side it was concluded, That during the
war against the enemies of the said countries, as strangers, malcontents,
and their adherents, her Majesty will at her own cost entertain (beside the
garrisons of the towns and forts promised to her Majesty for assurance of
repaiment of such sums of money as she shall disburse to relieve and succor
the said Provinces, and maintain them in the true christian religion, their
franchises, privileges, and laws) the number of six thousand foot and one
thousand horse, conducted by a Governor General, being a Lord of name and
quality, and of the reformed Religion, together with other good Captains; on
condition that the said Provinces generally, and every of them in particular,
shall be bound and obliged to repay unto her Majesty the said sums by a
certain limited time after the war: and for assurance of the said perfect
and entire payment, the towns and forts of Briell, Flessingue, and the castle
of Rammekens, should be consigned to her said Majesty: the which by her or her
successors (the said payment once made) should, without any difficulty or
claim to them, be restored to the above mentioned States and Provinces,
without delivering them to the King of Spain, or other enemies of the said
countries, or to any other Prince or Lord; but should in the mean time be kept
for her Majesty's assurance, and profit of the States of the said countries.
The which Governor, with two other men of note sent from her Majesty, and
being her subjects, should have place in the Council of State of the united
Provinces, together with it to manage the affairs concerning the common
defense and union of the said countries. According to this Treaty the foresaid
towns and forts being consigned to her Majesty, it has pleased her to send
hither with Commission of Governor General of her troops, the illustrious and
mighty Lord, Robert Earl of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, etc. And we have
besides thought good, to require, accept, and make him Governor and Captain
General over all the united Provinces, towns, and associated members thereof:
which place his above named Excellency having accepted, with reservation of his
homage and fealty due unto her Majesty, all Governors of Provinces, towns,
and members thereof, likewise all Officers, Justices, and Soldiers, were by
oath bound unto his Excellency, as Governor and Captain General of the Low
Countries, both in general and particular. But as it has pleased her Majesty
to call home his said Excellency, to employ him for other services in her own
kingdom, so as upon this occasion he being no longer able to govern these
countries, or accomplish the tenor of his Commission, according as the present
necessity of these countries do require, has discharged and unburdened
himself of the said office of Governor and Captain General of these united
Provinces, and from the Commission which we gave him, and delivered it up
again to us, as appears by an Act signed and sealed with his own hand, made
in the city of London, and dated the seventeenth of December 1587. That it
has likewise pleased her Majesty, by Commission dated the four and twentieth
of the said month to appoint Peregrin Lord Willoughbie, etc. Governor General
of her troops in these countries. And considering that in the present state
and necessity of these countries, they cannot but be greatly endangered,
wanting a Governor General. Therefore it has pleased us in regard of these
aforesaid reasons, and after sound and mature deliberation, to make it known
to all men by these presents, That his above named Excellency has accordingly
quitted the said Commission. And we, according to her Majesty's and his
Excellencies pleasure, holding him displaced, have taken unto our selves the
general government of the said countries in matters which concern the common
defense and union thereof, that we may observe the Treaty made with her
Majesty, in the administration of the Council of State of the said countries,
to the end that all matters concerning the common defense and union thereof
against their common enemies, may be managed and conducted by the above
mentioned Lord Willoughbie, Governor General of her Majesty's forces, The
Governors of the respective united Provinces, and the two Counselors chosen
by her Majesty, being her own subjects, brought in, or yet to be brought in
to that end, into the said Council, according to the above named Treaty, and
likewise the Counselors of the united Provinces, whom we have appointed, or
may hereafter appoint: Therefore we certify all Governors and Captains of
Provinces, towns and members thereof, all Admirals, Vice admirals, all
Colonels, Captains, and soldiers, both by sea and land, and moreover, all
Presidents, Counselors, Officers, Treasurers, Receivers, Bailifes, Scouts,
Marshals, Justices, Magistrates, Gentlemen, Vassals, Bourguers, and other
subjects and inhabitants of these countries, of what estate or condition soever
they be, that they are all together, and every of them in particular,
acquitted, freed, and discharged from the oath made to the Earl of Leycester
his Excellency, concerning his authority in these countries: straightly
commanding them by these presents, to account themselves freed, acquitted and
discharged; the oath nevertheless continuing still in full force and power as
they have respectively made it, and thereby obliged to continue loyal to the
above mentioned united Provinces, States, Towns, and members thereof, and to
be obedient to those superiors whom we have appointed over them, or may
hereafter appoint. The which oath we command them faithfully to keep and
discharge, even as they will answer before God and these countries. And for
want of doing hereof, we will proceed against the transgressors according to
the laws of marshal discipline. And as these countries have not otherwise
treated, concluded, or determined with her Majesty of England, than in the
manner abouesaid, and that we likewise are assured from her Majesty, by sundry
declarations, that she pretends no further claim or title to these countries,
towns, members thereof, nor craves nothing more of them but the observing of
the above mentioned Treaty, which we likewise for our part have ever, and
still do desire, faithfully to accomplish in every point, and to her Majesty's
good content, who has likewise at sundry times expressly declared, That it
would be much against her good will and meaning, if any dissension, breach, or
disunion, should under her name be caused or made. This notwithstanding, we
find that sundry inhabitants of the said Provinces, being badly informed of
the above mentioned Treaty, imagining matters that are not, and forgetting
their duty, have done diverse bad offices, to the prejudice of the quiet and
union of the said Provinces both in general and particular, and that under
this color sundry other malicious persons, for the most part strangers, and
come hither from other Provinces, having little or nothing to lose here, have
gone about by their turbulent disposition, and desire tending to sedition, by
secret practices and false pretense, to seduce the inhabitants of the said
countries, to disunite others, and to stir them up to rebel, inciting the
soldiers paid by the country to mutiny, and after that to commit treason,
falsely therein using her Majesty's name and authority. That diverse likewise,
borne in other countries, have calumniated the state of these Provinces,
towns, and members thereof, discoursing of it as if they were natural
subjects, according to their own rashness and seditious affection, and as if
it were lawful for them there to enterprise any novelty, not considering that
they more than any other ought modestly to contain themselves, and to remain
quiet, enjoying the protection and defense of these countries in as ample
manner as the natural inhabitants; and all this under color of her Majesty's
name and authority, who is highly offended therewith, the same being clean
contrary to her intent and meaning: all which is like to procure the general
ruin of the said Provinces. For the conservation whereof all good and loyal
inhabitants and subjects of the said countries, who being driven forth of other
Provinces for religion, are retired hither, have endured much, living peaceably
under their lawful Magistrates both in prosperity and adversity. So that now
by these presents express prohibition is made to every one, of what nature or
condition soever he be, henceforth neither by words, secret practices, writings
or deeds, to enterprise any alteration, novelty, or sedition, in the state of
these countries, among the Burguers, inhabitants, and soldiers, serving by
land or water, be it under color of her Majesty's name and authority, or that
of the Earl of Leycester his Excellency, or to attempt, solicit, or perform
it by any other, on pain that we the States of the respective Provinces, or
Officers, Justices, and Magistrates of the countries and towns, will proceed
without respect of persons, or any fraud or dissimulation, against them,
according to the laws and customs of the country, ordained and observed
against disturbers of the public peace, that they may serve for example to
others.

And because no man herein shall pretend cause of ignorance, we expressly
command, That this present Declaration be proclaimed and published in all
accustomed places, that we will proceed, and cause to be proceeded against the
transgressors hereof, and adiudge them to punishment, without any favor or
respect of persons. The which we have found to be expedient for the
preservation and utility of these countries.

Given in our Assembly at the Hague, under our Seal, the 12 of April 1588.
Egmond. And a little lower, By decree of my Lords the general States. And
signed, C. Aerssens.

All this having been thus done, diverse and sundry persons in these
countries, which did affect and depend upon him, wished for his return, or that
his resignation might be delayed; and for the better hindering thereof did by
these and other means raise great dissension in the country and towns,
stirring up the soldiers to mutiny against my Lords the States, and
especially at Geertrudenbergue, Medenblick, Narde, Worcum, Heusden, Braeckel,
and in many other places: which the said Lords States, and his Excellency, did
by all good means seek to prevent, both by fair promises and constraint. But
they could not prevail with General Senoy, whom the late Prince of Orange had
made Governor of North Holland, neither by fair means, or mediation of
sundry great Lords, so as he could not be brought to give obedience to his
Excellency as Governor General, nor yet to my Lords the States as chief
Lords: Whereupon they were constrained to use force, because that to reduce him
to obedience did greatly import the countries. And for that we will set down
every thing according to truth, we will add in this place, in manner of an
introduction, the reasons which moved my Lords the States and his Excellency
so to do, even as it was printed by their own Printer in anno 1588.

It is known to all men, that the most illustrious, high, and mighty Lord,
the Prince of Orange of happy memory, was so affectionat to the wealth and
commodity of the Netherlands, and especially of Holland, Zeland, and West
Frizeland, under his own government, as he has for the conservation of those
Provinces offered and exposed not only his own substance, and that of his
kinsmen, but even his own person, and those of my Lords his brethren, and
others of his kindred; so that the said Lord Prince (being pursued by the King
of Spain by all hostile means, for the cause abouesaid, and by the Duke of
Alua during his tyranny in the Low Countries) perceiving the state of these
countries to be wonderfully oppressed, he has showed so many honorable,
commendable, and heroicke marks and testimonies of his affection to the good
of these Provinces, as during his absence from thence the inhabitants thereof,
and namely the countries of Holland, Zeland, and West Frizeland, did mutually
determine to free themselves from the tyranny of the said Duke of Alua, to
embrace the Christian and reformed Religion, and to live free under the lawful
government of the abouesaid Lord Prince. And for the maintenance of the said
resolution, he did at the beginning of the war appoint and send into sundry
parts and towns of the before mentioned countries under his government, such
persons as himself thought fit for the service of the country, with such
Commission as the affairs of the time then required: and among others sent the
General Senoy into North Holland and West Frizeland, who upon his Excellencies
commission was willingly and without any contradiction received there, the
inhabitants of the said countries having no respect to the person of the man
(who was a stranger, unknown, and borne forth of the country) but only for
love which they bare to the said Lord Prince, and for that they were there
desirous to show what honor and respect they did bear to his commandments.
It is a matter likewise known, that ever since that time the said General
has been very honorably respected by his Excellence of happy memory, and
by the country: as also that after the lamentable death of his said
Excellency, the States of Holland and West Frizeland, and the high and mighty
Lord Maurice Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau, and Marquess of Vere,
Fiessingue, etc. son to the above named Prince, after that he had received the
government of Captain General of the countries of Holland, Zeland, and West
Frizeland, have continued and maintained the said General in the same office
and authority in the said place, as he had before his Excellencies lamentable
death. And although the said General ought to have acknowledged these benefits
received from the country, at the least not to enterprise anything contrary
to the laws thereof, or to his Excellencies Commission, as Governor general of
Holland, Zeland, and West Frizeland; especially seeing that the said
government was solemnly given to his Excellency upon sound consideration,
and partly in sign of acknowledgement of the good and commendable services
done by the late Lord Prince his father. Nevertheless, means has bin made by
some men (for the most part borne forth of the countries, badly affected to
them, and ungrateful to the house of Nassau) that the said General has
obtained a certain ample Commission from the Earl of Leycester (whom the
general States had made Governor General of the Low Countries) unknown to
the States of Holland and West Frizeland, or to his Excellency of Nassau,
absolutely to command in all matters concerning the state and government of
the countries and towns of North Holland, and West Frizeland, as Governor and
Lieutenant to the said Earl of Leycester: And besides this, has likewise
obtained other Commissions directly contrary to the privileges and laws of
the said countries, and authority of the Governor thereof: By virtue whereof
he has likewise begun to appoint new Receiuors of the revenues of the
country, using forcible means to commit them into the possession of their
pretended Commissioners. Of which the States of Holland and West Frizeland
being advertised, they have (according to the charge of their calling, for the
defense and confirmation of the union and laws of the said countries, as also
of the government and authority of his said Excellency) written to the said
General, to acquaint them with the said Commissions, and not in virtue thereof,
attempt any thing without the knowledge of his Excellency and States. But all
this being to no purpose with him, the States of Holland, Zeland, and West
Frizeland, complained to the Earl of Leicester concerning the grant of the
said Commissions, as hurtful to the laws and customs of the said countries,
and to his Excellencies authority, and by consequence repugnant to the oath
made by the said Earl of Leycester; craving a reuocation thereof. Whereupon
the said Lord Earl at his first departure into England, on the four and
twentieth of November 1586, did upon mature deliberation and knowledge of the
matter, declare, That he was content, if the Commissions of the said General
were preiudicious to the country, and to the authority of his Excellency of
Nassau, that the States should take order therein: Which Declaration be
subsigned with his own hand. Hereupon, within a while after, the States and
his Excellency of Nassau wrote to the said General to come and bring those
Commissions to the Hague, that order might be taken therein, for the
conservation and union of the customs and privileges of the country, as also
for his Excellencies government and authority. Upon this commandment the
said General, in January 1587, came to the Hague to his Excellency and my
Lords the States, and delivered his Commissions as well concerning the said
government, as Captaineship of the Castle of Medenblick, into the hands of his
Excellency. Which Commissions being well perused, were directly found to be
contrary to the customs of the said countries and towns, tending to
dissension and disunion, and likewise contrary to the authority of the
Governor and Captain general of Holland and West Frizeland. His Excellency
and certain chief Lords appointed to administer justice in the said
countries, and very zealous in the true Christian and reformed Religion,
together with many Noblemen of the country and towns of Holland, did acquaint
him with the love and affection which his Excellency of Nassau and my Lords
the States did bear unto him; and that they were desirous to continue him in
the same authority and command which he had had over the troops now present,
and which were hereafter to be appointed for defense of the towns and forts of
North Holland, in the time of his late Excellency of happy memory, and to
give him Commission to that end, with this reservation, That, seeing at all
times the conservation and assurance of all the Towns, forts, and quarters of
Holland and West Frizeland had been under command of the Governor and
Captain General of the said countries, who for conservation and assurance of
them, has ever appointed such Commanders, Captains, and soldiers, as he
thought fit to defend them against all men, the General Senoy was bound, for
the conservation of the rights and union of the countries, as also of the
government thereof, to respect and obey his Excellency in the same manner as
he had done the late Prince of Orange, his father, to receive Commissions from
him, and to be sworn to him. All this the said General accepted, and promised
to observe. And though at his own request his former Commissions were restored
unto him, yet before the restitution of them he made a solemn promise, never
afterward in any sort to make use of them. At the same time the sorrowful
news were brought, of the sale of the town of Deuenter, and forts before
Zutphen, by the traitors Sir William Stanley, and Rowland York, together with
the forts under their command, by reason whereof time would not permit the
said General to tarry so long at the Hague till his Excellency of Nassau had
dispatched the said Commission, and taken his oath. But his Excellency relying
on his word, and desiring nothing more than the preservation of those
countries, did presently after these sad news command the General to depart
into North Holland, to provide, as many shot as need should require, for the
safety of the towns there, and namely to send more aid to the towns and forts
of Guelderland and Ouer-Yssell (where certain troops of his Regiment already
were.) Whereupon his Excellency promised to send him two Companies in their
stead which should be sent forth of the towns of North Holland, and West
Frizeland, to the towns and forts of Guelderland, over whom his Excellency
was content he should command, as well as over those that were already in
garrison in the said towns. Hereupon the General departed, promising, That
having once received his Commission, he would remain in the country, and be
obedient to his Excellency, unto whom for confirmation thereof he gave his
hand. And because that, after the treachery used at Deuenter and forts before
Zutphen, the principal cause of that loss was found to be, for that the
Commanders, Captains, and soldiers that were there, would not acknowledge
any superiors in these countries, nor obey the States General, Council of
State, nor Governor of the countries wherein they lived, nor yet her Majesty
of Englands General that was in the Low countries; but said, That they were
only under command of his Excellency the Earl of Leycester, who was forth
of the country, and had crossed the seas, and could not have any command of the
government of the country, nor provide for the preservation thereof: and also
for that diverse aduertisements were given, That upon occasion they would
propound the same to other Captains and soldiers. So as by that means diverse
other towns would be delivered up to the enemy. Whereupon the Sates of
Holland, West Frizeland, and Zeland, being assembled, did with mature
deliberation determine, that it was necessary for the defense of the said
countries and towns, that all the regiments under the command and pay of the
said countries, besides their oath made to the Earl of Leycester, as Governor
General appointed and committed by the States in these countries, should
likewise make oath to be loyal and obliged to the united Provinces, and namely
to the countries of Holland, West Frizeland, and Zeland, and to the towns
thereof: And that they being in any towns or places belonging to the
government of his Excellency of Nassau, and Lieutenant General of the said
countries, should be obedient to them in whatsoever they should be commanded
for the service of the said countries. All which points were for the most part
comprehended in the oath made, and wholly agreed with that which had been
treated of with his Excellency the Earl of Leycester, at what time he
received the government: For allTreaties, Commissions, and Instructions,
imported loyalty to the countries and towns both in general and particular,
which namely had been done by the Earl of Leycester; and the very words of
the oath made, (by which they promised to obey the Commanders which were
appointed) contained obedience to the Governor and Captain General, as
likewise to the Lieutenant General of the said countries of Holland, Zeland,
and Frizeland; seeing it is a thing most certain, that a Governor or Captain
General of a Province, has the command of all soldiers serving there. This
resolution taken, and his Excellency having been entreated to execute it over
all his government, beside the promised Commission, his Excellency sent a
Commissarie to the said General to take his oath of obedience: He likewise
sent, according to his promise, a band of soldiers, whose Captain, Officers,
and soldiers, were for the most part borne in Holland; and had given order
that the said Company should remain in the town of Medenblick in their
steads who after the yielding up of Deuenter had been sent into the countries
of Guelderland and Ouer-Yssel, for the better defense of the towns and forts
there. And notwithstanding the Generals former promise, he would not suffer
the said Company, nor yet the Captain Arent of Duvenuord, to come into the
town. The said General likewise, contrary to his former promise, refused to
make oath: And although he had his Excellency of Nassau his Commission, yet
would he not govern himself thereby. Whereat his Excellency being moved (as
one that expected better dealing from the said General) thought it fit, by the
States consent, to go himself in person to Medenblick, as well to understand
the Generals intent, as to provide all things needful for the assurance,
conservation, and quiet of the said town, and others in North Holland, and
West Frizeland. But going thither accompanied by Count Hohenlo, and diverse
other Lords and Commissioners of the towns, with the ordinary train of his
haushold, having no forces at all with him, the said General would not suffer
his Excellency in person to come into the town, to the great grief and
discontent of the Burgomasters and inhabitants of Medenblick: which is a thing
never before heard of in Holland and West Frizeland. And notwithstanding that
his said Excellency of Nassau had just cause in this regard to conceive
sinisterly of him, yet did he in no sort alter his affection toward the said
General: and therefore sent certain trusty persons to the General at
Medenblick, to demand of him the reason of his proceedings. And understanding
by them, that the said General had entertained some idle impression and
imagination on no sure ground, his Excellency did again send some of the most
eminent persons of the country, men very zealous to the reformed Christian
Religion, and lovers of their country, to bring him to some reason, and to
persuade him to do whatsoever was needful for the good of the country, and
maintenance of the true reformed Religion, together with the rights,
privileges, franchises, and laudible customs of the said Provinces: and to
divert him from any sinister conceit of his Excellencies true meaning, who
desired to perfect the work begun in these countries by my Lord his father of
happy memory, and to proceed no otherwise with the General but in loving,
just, and friendly manner, promising to forget all former unkindness. And
though the said General, upon the remonstrance of these Commissioners, did not
absolutely condescend to that which his Excellency required of him for the
service of the country, because he said that he had advertised the Earl of
Leycester thereof, whose answer he daily expected, yet in regard he had by
prouiso both by word of mouth and writing, declared that he was sorry for
denying entrance to his Excellency of Nassau into Medenblick, unto whom and to
the States of Holland and West Frizeland, he confessed himself to be much
obliged; and that therefore he would not deliver the town of Medenblick to
any, without commandment from his Excellency and my Lords the States. But
concerning the acceptance of his Commission, and taking the oath which his
Excellency commanded, he therein craved delay for a time. So that his
Excellency and my Lords the States wrote unto him, That they did rely upon his
above mentioned Declaration, and were willing for a time to defer that which
they had required of him, so that upon mature deliberation he would make a more
ample Declaration thereupon. He was moreover requested to continue his loyal
service, and not to charge the towns and citizens of Medenblick with too great
garrisons, which would breed confusion in the state of the country. Two
months after this the General made no farther Declaration, and in the mean
space the truth of that came to light, which his Excellency of Nassau and my
Lords the States had long before doubted; namely, that the good of those
countries, by the apparent loss of the true, Christian, and Reformed Religion,
together with the rights and franchises, were in great hazard, by a
determination held to treat with the enemy. Whereupon his Excellency and my
Lords the States thought good, being well and amply informed of the said
apparent danger, to advertise the said General thereof, by a man very
trusty, and zealous of true religion, and very inward with him, and to
entreat him, That he would weigh the said dangers, and at last resolve upon
that which they hadso often craved of him for the good of the country, or else
that he would come to the Hague to his Excellenie, to confer with him
concerning these affairs, to the end the said dangers might be prevented.

The General, upon his Excellencies word and promise, being come to the Hague,
was by him so lovingly entertained and respected, as if none of all this had
ever been. And being fully instructed concerning all matters, and of his
Excellencies intention, he continued his former Declaration and promise,
requiring for the rest, that they would delay it for a while longer, promising
that he would make suit, so soon as the Earl of Leycester should return, to
be discharged of the Commission which he had given him. And thereupon his
Excellency of Nassau and my Lords the States, gave him free leave to return
wishing him to have a care for the good of the country, and not to ouerburthen
the town and citizens of Medenblick; and that in so doing he should be well
assured of his Excellency and my Lords the States affection, as well to the
common good of those countries, as particularly to himself. The Earl of
Leycester returning afterward into these countries, his Excellency and my
Lords the States did for many months expect the true performance of the
Generals promise: but as nothing ensued thereupon, but on the contrary diverse
things so handled, as there was great likelihood that misprisions, breaches,
and divisions, would ensue, and so by consequent the ruin of those countries,
rather than the preservation of them. The States and his Excellency did at
last request the Council of State and the Earl of Leycester (as he from whom
be had received his Commission) openly to declare what they were to expect of
that which for an whole year had been held doubtful and uncertain. Whereupon
the said Council declared, That the Commission granted by the Earl of
Leycester to the said General, was repugnant to the authority and Commission
of his Excellency of Nassau, and contrary to the union and customs of the
country. Whereof they likewise having written to the Earl of Leycester, they
thought good to send for the said General, to confer with him thereupon, and
to that end gave him all assurance. But the General making a slight excuse to
the Council, would not come himself, but sent William Mostaert in his stead:
unto whom the said Council declared, That they understood that the Generals
Commission was contrary to his Excellency of Nassaus authority, and that he
was already discharged thereof by his Excellency the Earl of Leycesters own
Declaration, dated the four and twentieth of November: That the said General
was likewise bound to receive his Commission from his Excellency of Nassau,
and to respect and obey him. Whereupon the said Mostaert made a Declaration in
the Generals bebalse, how that he doubted not but that the General would be
well pleased so to do, provided, that the Commission might be made to his own
content. And as the Council commanded the said Mostaert to set down in
writing, upon what points the General would have his Commission made, he
delivered them as they are hereafter inserted: wherein, as likewise by that
which has been added to it, may be seen how unreasonable a matter it was. In
the mean time the general States, the Council of State, his Excellency of
Nassau, as Governor and Captain General of Holland, Zeland, and West
Frizeland, together with the Governors and Commanders of other chief
Provinces, for the assurance of the state of the countries, had given order for
the munition of the frontire towns and forts: wherein, to prevent all outward
confusion, it was among other matters thought fit, that the town of Medenblick
should be ordinarily manned with an hundred and fifty soldiers, and no more:
And because the General kept five or six hundred soldiers there, contrary,
or at least without the commandment of his Excellency and Council of State;
and that the Council of State had oftentimes commanded him from the Earl of
Leycester his Excellency, to send the soldiers over and above the two hundred
that were there, forth of the town, for the countries service, he thereupon
made an impertinent answer, how that he could not dismise his soldiers, but
that it behooved him to retain them for the defense of his own person. In this
regard the said general States, the Council of State, his Excellency of
Nassau in quality above said, together with the States of Holland and West
Frizeland, did on the 28 and 29 of January last past, determine to write to
the said General, That according to the said order he should keep but an
hundred and fifty soldiers in the town, and send the rest to guard the
frontiers. An order was likewise taken the same day, that the hundred and
fifty soldiers appointed to remain in Medenblick, and others going to their
appointed garrisons, should presently receive a months pay: Concerning which,
my Lords the States general, the Council of State, his Excellency of Nassau,
and the States of Holland, dispatched letters on the twenty ninth and
thirtieth of the said month, among which the contents of the Council of
States letters was, That the General should obey his Excellency of Nassau. So
that it seems, that indirectly and in contempt, to hinder the effect of the
said commandment, the General, according to his former actions and rash
speech, boasted, That he had conquered and kept the towns of North Holland:
Words not only tending to the diminution of the late Lord Prince of Orange his
reputation, by whose means and good conduct those countries had been defended
and preserved, but to the great dishonor of all good people of the towns and
country of North Holland, and West Frizeland, who in regard of the General
his Commission, and for the said late Lord Princes sake, had willingly received
and entertained him then when he wanted and was unprovided of all things, and
who according to his own speech had very valiantly defended themselves;
saying not long before, That he had rather see the ruin of the country, than
to desist from his determination and purpose: so as he raised sedition and
mutiny among the soldiers in the town of Medenblicke (the which he was not
ashamed to write of to the Council of State) which spread it self so far
abroad, as the Commissarie that was sent thither the same day of the stir, to
crave the execution of the said commandments, received an answer from the
General, That he could not rule the troops being so disordered. And the
soldiers who since their last pay had received more months means than the
other Ensigns, and whose monethlie pay still ran on, said, That they would not
go forth of the town till they had first received their full pay for seventy
two months; of which seventy two months they had already received the two
third parts, according to the general resolution made anno 1581, by the
general States, in the town of Amsterdam, in presence, and by the consent of
my Lord the Prince of Orange. The Burguers of Medenblick (who for the good of
the country had ever borne themselves loyally, and were to be defended by the
soldiers) were by them disarmed, and enforced without delay to carry their
arms to the townehouse, where the General was: and not the soldiers alone,
but the Captains and Officers were constrained to give weekly as much as
their entertainment amounted to. This disobedience, riot, disorder, rebellion,
and mutiny, in Medenblick, without any urgent necessity, caused the garrisons
of other towns and places (which were worse paid) to do the like, so as the
whole country was in a very dangerous estate. And after that his Excellency
of Nassau and my Lords the States of Holland and West Frizeland, were
advertised that matters did every day grow worse and worse at* Medenblick (the
said General giving them no advertisement thereof) his Excellency and the
States of Holland and West Frizeland, who were most interessed therein, thought
good to send, beside his Excellency, certain noble men, to the towns of
those countries, to provide for the redress of those disorders. His
Excellency being come to the town of Alckmaer, did by letters request the
said soldiers to send some among them to him, to treat of their affairs and
end them. But at the same time, namely on the sixteenth of February, anno
1588, the General, with the Captains Crystal and Wolfswinckel, being in the
said town (the better to deceive the soldiers under a favorable pretense,
for the maintenance of his particular design, and to keep them at his own
devotion) made a manifest complot, That none of them either in whole or part
should go forth of the town, till such time as not only they, but likewise
all the said Generals regiment, being partly in Guelderland, Frizeland, and
Ouer-Yssell, had received their full and entire payment: whereof by letters
they likewise advertised the Captains that lay in Harderwijc, Campen, and
other towns, which were signed and sealed by the General, and the said
Captains Crystal and Wolfswinckell: and those whom they had sent forth of
Medenblick with the said complot and treaty, were enjoined to induce other
Captains and soldiers to do the like. For a second color the General
persuaded the Captains and soldiers, that they were sworn to the Queen of
England; which, without direct usurpation on the State of the country, could
not be true, seeing that her Majesty never would pretend any right to these
countries; for she only promised to aid these countries during the war, with
certain forces of horse and foot, under promise, that the money lawfully by
her disbursed, and known to the Commissioners, should by the States be repaied
unto her; and thereupon the town of Briell, and forts thereunto belonging,
with the town of Flessingue, and castle of Rammekins, have been delivered
over to her Majesty as cautions, only for her assurance; which she still
keeps for the States of the country, her Majesty pretending no right to the
said towns, other than for assurance, as plainly appears by the contents of
the treaty made with her: wherein is expressly conditioned, That the
Governors, Captains, Officers, and soldiers, Burguers, and inhabitants of
the towns should not only swear unto her Majesty, for assuraance of the
restitution of the money which she was to disburse, but likewise to the States,
for conservation of their right in all other matters, which they had expressly
reserved to themselves, forth of the said assurance. And as concerning her
Majesty's promise for greater aid, beside the garrisons of the cautionarie
towns (seeing that the same was only promised by her Majesty for the service
of the country) it was expressly conditioned in the last article of the said
Treaty, That both the General, Colonels, Captains, Officers, and others,
should take the oath of fidelity to the States alone, as they had done before
any Treaty was made with her Majesty, reserving only the homage which was
due unto her. And with this reservation the Colonels Morgan, Chester, General
Norris, with other English Colonels and Captains, have successively since the
beginning of the war embraced the service of these countries: So that it is a
very strange thing to see any man so rash, as to dare to say contrary to the
said Treaty, That himself or soldiers, being in the pay of the said
countries, are tied by oath to her Majesty. And touching the oath made to the
Earl of Leycester, he was in no sort sworn unto, as having authority and
Commission from her Majesty, seeing that himself upon the same Commission was
bound to swear unto the States of the country as well as others: but it was
done upon the Commission and authority given (besides the Treaty made with her
Majesty) by the States to the said Lord Earl, as Governor general. These two
pretenses concerning the complot and their entire payment, and persuading the
soldiers that they were sworn to her Majesty of England, and so by
consequent should receive their full pay from her, caused letters to be sent
back in the soldiers names of Medenblick, answering those of his Excellency;
by which they craved to have some Commissioners sent unto the^, to understand
the business together with the soldiers intentions. Thereupon his Excellency
sent the Lord of Famars, General of the Artillery, the Lord of Sweuezeel, Peter
Kyes, Burgomaster of Harlem, and master Adrian Anthony, Burgomaster of
Alckmaer; who being come thither acquainted the soldiers with his Ex. and my
Lords the States good meaning, exhorting the^ to their duty according to their
oath, honor, and bond, and requested them to submit themselves to reason, and to
be ruled by the power of the country. The soldiers answered them, That they
would be wholly paid, not only for themselves, but for the said Generals whole
regiment: so that these Commissioners iourny was in vain. They wrote afterward
to the soldiers, That his Excellency and the States Commissioners were
resolved to make them some reasonable offer, and that for the well
understanding thereof, they should under good assurance, which was promised
them, send Commissioners to Hoorne: the which was denied, so as they did again
demand new Commissioners. Whereupon the States wrote back, That they ought to
rely on his Excelencie and the States Commissioners, and that therefore they
were to send theirs at the countries charge. Whereunto the soldiers answered,
That they would send none, and that they had already declared their intent;
demanding moreover, that his Excellency would send other Commissioners to
them, unto whom they offered safeconduct. Which his Excellency and the States
Commissioners understanding, thought good to set down some reasonable offers
in writing, whereby they promised the soldiers to give them their present pay,
and a months wages before hand: and promised them moreover, that concerning
the rest that was behind, they should be paid as much, and at the same time, as
others that served the country, and should be as well dealt with as the best.
They did likewise declare unto them, That it was not in the countries power to
do more, and that they ought to rest contented seeing they had been best paid,
and that they being for the most part borne in the country, they ought more to
love their honor and credit, than by demanding impossibilities, to seek the
ruin of the Provinces; with protestation, That if they would not condescend to
reason, his Excellency and my Lords the States would hold themselves excused
before God and the world, of the inconveniences which might ensue thereof. And
to make them this offer, to show them the equity of it, and to persuade the
soldiers to reason, his Excellency and the Commissioners sent Master Nicholas
Brunine, Cou^sellor to his Excellency, and Bartholdus Guillelmi Minister of
the word of God in Hoorne, to Medenblick, who (notwithstanding all their
labor) received no other answer of them, but that they would be wholly paid.
And as it was well perceived by their answer, that the above mentioned mutiny
was made for the reasons heretofore alleged, and that their desire was unjust
and impossible; so as other soldiers which had done better service upon the
enemy, and had been without comparison badlier paid and dealt with than they,
would desire the like, which would not be effected with fifty times an hundred
thousand Florins: That the said soldiers had likewise vaunted, That they knew
how to raise their pay upon the country, and that they would have it by force.
Whereupon the General had already proceeded, and in effect fortified himself
against the country, tyrannizing over the villages near to Medenblicke. His
Excellency by the advice of the States found it necessary, both for the
preservation of the country, and to bring the General and soldiers to some
reasonable accord, and hinder their bad determination, to provide for the
besieging of the same town, and therein to make use, beside the soldiers that
were then ready, of certain Burguers and harquebusiers forth of some towns
of North Holland, as from Alckmaer, Hoorne, Enckhuysen, Edam, Monickendam, and
Purmereynde, with certain boores of the country. Before the siege, the Lord
Barbese, Counselor of State to his Excellency, and one of the Commissioners,
was entreated once more to go to Medenblick, to let the General and soldiers
know the wrong they did to themselves, and to try if he could reduce them to
their duty: who told the General both in public and privately, That the
Council of State knew, that himself as General could not make use of his
Excellency of Leycesters Commission, and that he did wrong to that of Nassau,
in not obeying him according to his duty: Likewise, that those soldiers who
were better dealt with than any other, whom they might have sent against the
enemy (yet suffered to live in garrison where victuals were good cheap) did
much forget themselves, by doing things tending to the countries ruin:
entreating them to understand reason, and to desist from their bad and
pernicious enterprise, with promise that all matters should be forgotten, and
themselves very honorably dealt with. All this notwithstanding, he could get
none other answer, either from the General or soldiers, than that which they
had made to the former Commissioners. Within a while after the General behaved
himself as an open enemy, burning and wasting the country at his pleasure:
in regard whereof no man ought to think it a strange matter, if his
Excellency and the States make use of those means which God has given them,
for furtherance of the good of these countries, against the disobedience,
rebellion, and unjust proceedings of those which enterprise against these
Provinces. Which they thought fit and necessary to be published to the world,
that every man understanding the condition of the affairs, and causes of the
said proceedings, may rightly judge thereof, and impute the inconveniences
which may arise thereupon, to those who by their great ingratitude to the house
of Nassau, have been authors thereof; especially seeing the said family has
suffered and done so much for the preservation of these countries, with so
great expense of means and blood, by whom the said General, from low
condition, was raised to such high estate, and exceeding great wealth, who by
his ingratitude to the country and inhabitants thereof (which had lovingly
received him, and enriched him with their means) had shown so great obstinacy
and rebellion therein in continuing one whole year, uttering proud and
swelling speeches, to the prejudice of the house of Nassaus Princely
reputation, and against the state of these countries, which he threatened with
ruin and destruction, making use of the soldiers appointed to serve the
country, for defense of his own person, disarming the good citizens of
Medenblick, whom he ought to have defended, afflicting them with servitude and
intolerable burdens. The which General, spurred forward by his own avarice
and ambition, from one sin to another, shall by Gods assistance be brought to
shame and confusion; so that all good soldiers which love Gods word and their
country, will detest the obstinacy, rebellion, rashness, and malicious
proceedings of the said General, and for that cause will again take upon them
the defense of their dear country, as in former time: and we verily hope,
that the soldiers of Medenblick being well informed, That General Senoy by
his proceedings has none other intent, but only to show under these two false
pretenses (namely of an oath made to her Majesty, or to the Earl of Leycester
in her name, and that he would be a means to procure them the full payment of
all arrerages) his hatred and ill grounded quarrels against the country and
house of Nassau (by which, from a poor estate, he was made rich) will not
consent to any thing against their country and house of Nassau, and will not
hazard, to their own shame, and dishonor of their friends, the loss of their
honor and reputation, nay of their own lives: Especially seeing that by
quitting General Senoys private and unjust quarrel, they may be reconciled to
their country and his Excellency of Nassau, and preserve their lives, goods,
honor, reputation, and whatsoever be, which has nothing but what he has
gotten by these countries, and the house of Nassau, does deceitfully promise
them.

General Senoy likewise did on the one and twentieth of January 1588, present
certain Articles to the Council of State, in form following; to every of
which in particular my Lords the States added their answer.

Articles presented in behalf of General Senoy to the Council of State, by
his deputy William Mostaert.
FOr as much as General Senoy has done many good, Article.
trusty, and notable services, since the beginning of these wars, under the
command of his late Excellency the Prince of Orange of happy memory, and
likewise since his death, to the advancement of Christian Religion, and
liberty of the Country, especially in the parts of North-Holland. And that
the said General Senoy, for the above mentioned causes, does rather merit
encreasement of his Commission and authority (if need should be) than
diminution thereof.

Answer.
General Senoy, for his service done, has been as honorably, and to his
own profit, dealt with, as any other that has done service to these Countries,
which is very well known to himself.

Artic.
In which regard, it is just and reasonable that his Excellency, Count
Maurice, should, by his Commission, suffer the said General Senoy to use the
title and authority of his Excellencies Lieutenant, and Governor General, in
the parts of North-Holland, as my Lord his father had done.

Ans.
In as much as my Lords the State of Holland, Zeland, and Westfrizeland, did,
in anno 1577, make a Decree for the preservation of the union and government
of the said Countries, that there should be but one Governor in Holland,
Zeland, and West-frizeland, to wit, my Lord the Prince of Orange, of happy
memory, and that all particular gouernements should cease; which has been
already practiced for the space of ten years, according to the ancient
custom and manner of the Countries: It is not reasonable that the said
resolution (for any love to the General) contrary to the Laws and union of
the Country, should be altered.

Ans.
That the said Senoy, will keep good correspondence with his Excellency of
Nassau concerning all difficulties which may arise, and to prevent them in
time, as need shall be.

Ans.
We understand, that the General ought to be bound to do more than keep
correspondence with his Excellency, otherwise, he must needs be his equal.

Artic.
That he will remain in those parts, and take care for the well ordering,
preservation, defense, and assurance thereof, against the power, secret
practices and enterprises of the enemy.

Ans.
We never meant to call the General away from those parts.

Artic.
To this end he will still keep the regiment of soldiers, which he now has,
and bestow them in the Towns and Forts, which till now have been committed
unto him, according as he shall think fit, for the safe keeping of them, and
service of the Country.

Ans.
Our meaning has been that the said Senoy should command all the soldiers,
in the Towns and Forts under his command, in quality of General: And,
concerning the changing of Garrisons, the General is to behave himself
therein according to his Excellencies commandments.

Artic.
Retayning authority to change the Garrisons, when, and after what manner he
shall see to be expedient. And if the necessity of the Country require to
have some companies drawn from thence for the Countries service, that his
Excellency shall write to him thereof, as having authority so to do, that he
may levy and send them, according as opportunity will permit him.

Ans.
We mean herein to use our own discretion, and not to grant the General the
prerogatives belonging to the Governor, and so by consequent to his
Excellency.

Artic.
He will likewise use all special care and diligence for the advancement of
the reformed Religion, over all his government, prohibiting all Popish false
doctrine, and will have a care that no Ministers, shall be brought in, or
suffered, contrary to the order of the reformed Churches, or without
permission, and admission of the Congregations from whence they come, and will
also provide that the said Ministers shall be well and duly paid.

Ans.
Because that, according the resolution of my Lords the States, the disposing
of matters heretofore mentioned, belongs to his Excellency as Governor, to
the States Commissioners, to the President and provincial Council, and other
ordinary officers of the Country: His Excellency gives him to understand,
that he will himself take order therein according to the necessity of the
affairs, for the advancement of Gods word, and good of the Countries.

Artic.
He will likewise have a wary eye on all Schole-masters, that none be admitted
or received, but such as are of the reformed Religion, who shall teach no other
doctrine, in their Schools, nor any Books contrary thereunto: He will in like
manner (as much as in him lies) provide, that in all towns, Colleges, and
places of his government, good officers, Magistrates and Regents be
established, who stand well affected to the reformed Religion, and to the good
of the public affairs, and to this end, shall hereafter be appointed,
committed, and continued by himself.

Ans.
Forasmuch as officers and Magistrates are appointed in Towns and places,
according to the prerogatives respectively given to the Lords, Towns,
Villages, by the Princes of these Countries: In this regard we cannot violate
them. But his Excellency for the better service of these Countries, will
provide that the Magistrates and officers be honest and well qualified people.
And for that which concerns the establishment of Counselors, Commissioners
of Towns and Colleges; His Excellencies meaning is, to confer with the
States about these matters, as he shall find it to be expedient for the service
and commodity of the Country.

Artic.
He will likewise give order that the Towns and Forts of Blockzijl and Cuyndert
shall be fortified, maintained, guarded and provided of all necessaries.

He will by all means prevent and hinder, that no sedition arise among the
inhabitants.

Ans.
This belongs to the Governor of the Provinces, and to the ordinary officers
and Magistrates thereof.

Artic.
And because the Commission for Captaineship of the Castle of Medenblick was by
his Excellency granted only by Prouiso, he entreats his Excellency to give
and confirm it absolutely unto him.

Ans.
Forasmuch as the Captaineship of the of Castle Medenblick, is an
ordiofficenarie of the Country, which according to the privileges thereof,
cannot be administered but by any such an one as is born in the Low countries,
his Excellency cannot grant it, contrary to the said privileges, seeing
that the General was not borne there.

Done by advice at the Hague the 21 of January 1588, and subsigned, By me
William Mostaert
.
Disorder in Medenblick.
All this thus done, those of Medenblick continued obstinat, the soldiers
mutined, and would not depart till they had received the arrerages. They
disarmed the Burghers, and carried their arms to Governor Senoys house, and
enforced them every week to give them pay. The States send Commissioners
thither who do no good.
My Lords the States sent the Lords of Famas and Swevenseell, Peter Kyes
Burgomaster of Harlem, and Master Adrian Antonie Burgomaster of Alckmaer, to
them, who presented the arrerages to the mutinous soldiers, and greater pay
than to any other that served the States: but they would neither give audience
to these Commissioners, nor to other which were sent after them, but went a
boothaling up and down the Country, constrayning the Boores in hostile manner
to pay them their entertainment: which to speak truly was a matter of great
consequence, and might easily have ruined all North-Holland, if my Lords the
States had not in time prevented it, who resolved by force to master these
mutines, giving ample power to his Excellency to put it in execution: who
together with the Marshall Villers, who was newly set at liberty from his
imprisonment, brought certain companies of soldiers, Medenblick is besieged.
Burghers of neighbor towns, and some ships of war before the Town, who did
in such sort besiege and nerely press it, as those within it, began to
remember themselves, and so to consider the present danger, as they began in
some sort to change their minds. And perceiving that the Earl of Leycester had
wholly given over the government, and had surrendered into the general States,
whose authority by their resolution did daily increase, and that they could
not but expect some great mischief in recompense of their obstinacy, the
matter was at last so handled by means of Sir Henry Killegrew, It yields to
his Excellency through the intercession of some English Lords.
the Lord Willoughby, and other English Lords, as those of Medenblick, having
been besieged till the Month of April, the General Senoy and his soldiers
made an accord with his Excellency, and delivered the Town into his hands.
The General and soldiers went forth of the Town with passeport, which his
Excellency and his troops entered, where he ordered all matters necessary for
the better assurance of the Town. General Senoy went to Alckmaer, where with
sundry reasons he would have excused himself. Those of Medenblick and
others, did greatly endammage him in his goods: whereupon in anno 1590, he went
into England to make his complaint to her Majesty, Senoy goes into England to
com plain to the Queen.
who in the year 1592 propounded his case to my Lords the States by her Agent
Thomas Bodley, on the fist day of Iulie, which propositions were by them amply
and resolutely answered, to the Agents satisfaction.

During these civil and intestine troubles as well in Holland, Zeland, and
other Provinces, by certain innouators, and some English, who sought their
own particular profit more than their Queens honor, news was brought that
on the twenty ninth of May 1588, the dreadful, renouned, mighty, and
invincible Spanish Armada lanched forth of the haven of Lisbone and sailed
toward the Groyne, to execute her King and Councels Commission. And because it
was so extraordinary and potent a fleet as (to speak indifferently thereof)
it was sufficient to have destroyed and subverted whole Kingdoms and
Countries, we will as well as we can make a description thereof, which we have
taken forth of the most autentick Authors; to the glory of God, who looking
upon these countries in the midst of their troubles (with the eyes of his
mercy) did free and preserve his servants from so mighty a fleet, and from so
many bloody hands: thereby showing how weak humane strength is when it is not
fortified and supported by his strong and mighty arm: who being Lord of all
creatures, can only by his winds and tempests ruiue and ouerwhelme the hautie
and proud resolution, together with the King of Spaines whole power. So as
very few ships of so potent a fleet returned safe home into their Countries.

A true description of the most mighty Armada, set forth by Philip the second,
King of Spain, which being assembled in the River before Lisbone, the chief
city of Portugal sailed toward the Low Countries, the 29 and 30 of May 1588,
under the conduct and command of the Duke de Medina Sidonia, appointed by the
King of Spain as Captain General thereof.
PHilip the second of that name, King of Spayn, having with small advantage
made war in the Low Countries for the space of 21 years, did with his Council
resolve once more to invade those Countrie^ by sea, supposing that
notwithstanding he had in former time attempted to make himself master thereof
by sea, and had bin ever enforced to retreat, because he had not attempted it
with power sufficient, for this cause he was desirous at once to employ all his
forces, the rather because England was his enemy: so as he resolved first to
invade England, which Escouedo Secretary to D. John of Austria, and some other
malicious Spaniards, together with some rebellous Englishmen supposed would be
sooner won than Holland and Zeland, maintaining it to be more profitable for
the king to invade England and the Low Countries by sea, than continually to
entertain a mighty fleet for defense of the voyages to the East and West
Indies against the English and Hollanders. For execution of which resolution,
each of the Kingdoms in Spain for their part, have rigd and mand as many
gallions, galleasses, galleys and other vessels, as the King and his Council
commanded them to furnish.

And for the better and more ample description thereof, it shall not be
impertinent to set down the number both of the Ships, soldiers, mariners, and
munitions, commanders, Nobilities and their followers, as likewise of other
things necessary for the equipage of this fleet, as it was written and
imprinted in the Spanish Tongue, in the City of Lisbone, the twentieth of May
1588, by the King of Spaynes command, reuiewed and signed by his own
Secretary, and translated into Dutch by Michaell Eitsinger the sixth of August,
certain names omitted, and diverse superfluous rehersals excepted.

The number of the Gallions of Portugal.
THe Gallion S. Martin, as Captain General and Principal of the fleet, was
of the burden of one thousand tun, there were in her three hundred choice
soldiers, one hundred and seventeen mariners, and she carried fifty pieces
of ordinance.

S. John's Gallion called the Admiral General, of the burden of one thousand
and fifty tun, had in her two hundred thirty one soldiers, one 179
mariners, and fifty canon.

S. Marks Gallion, of the burden of seven hundred ninety two tun, with 292
soldiers, and one hundred and seuenteen mariners.

The Gallion S. Philip, of eight hundred tun, four hundred and fifteen
soldiers, 117 mariners, and forty canon.

The Gallion S. Lewis, of eight hundred and thirty tun, with 376 soldiers,
116 mariners, and forty canon.

S. Mathews Gallion, of seven hundred and fifty tun, with two hundred
seventy seven soldiers, 200 mariners, and forty canon.

S. James his Gallion, of five hundred and twenty tun, with three hundred
soldiers, 100 mariners, and thirty canon.

The Gallion of Florence, of 961 tun, with four hundred soldiers, one
hundred mariners, and fifty two canon.

S. Christophers Gallion, of three hundred fifty two tun, with three hundred
soldiers, 90 mariners, and thirty canon.

S Bernards Gallion, of three hundred fifty two tun, two hundred and eight
soldiers, 100 mariners, and thirty canon.

The ship called Zabra Augusta, of one hundred sixty six tun, with fifty
five soldiers, 57 mariners, and thirteen canon.

The other Zabra, called Iulia, of 166 tun, with 50 soldiers, 72 mariners,
and 14 canon.

The whole body of the Portugal fleet, consisted of 12 vessels, viz. ten
Galeons, and two Zabras, the whole burden whereof made up the number of 7737
tun, and 3330 soldiers, 1233 mariners, and 350 canon, with all other
necessaries, as bullets, powder, match, etc.

The fleet of Biscay commanded by the General D. Iean Martinez de Ricalde.
THe Admiral, called S. Anne, of 768 tun, with 323 soldiers, 114 mariners,
and 30 canon.

The Admiral Grangrina, of 1160 tun, with 300 soldiers, 100 mariners, and 36
canon.

S. Iago. of 666 tun, with 250 soldiers, 102 mariners, and 30 canon.

The conception Zebeleu, of 468 tun, 100 soldiers, 70 mariners, and 20 canon.

The conception of Iean, of 418 tun, 164 soldiers, 70 mariners, and 24 canon.

The Magdalen of Iean Francesco d'Ayala, of 530 tun, 200 soldiers, 70
mariners, and 22 canon.

S. Iean, of 350 tun, 130 soldiers, 100 mariners, and 24 canon.

A Ship called the Marie, of 163 tun, 180 soldiers, 100 mariners, and 24
canon.

Another called, the Manuel, of 520 tun, 130 soldiers, 43 mariners, and 16
canon.

A ship called S. Maria de Monte Major, of 707 tun, 220 soldiers, 50
mariners, and 16 canon.

Other vessels belonging to this fleet called Pinnaces.
THe Pinnace called the Marie of Aguirra, of 70 tun, 30 soldiers, 23
mariners, and ten canon.

A ship named Isabella, of 71 tun, 30 soldiers, 23 mariners, and 12 canon.

The pinnace called the Miguell de Susa, of 96 tun, 30 souldidiers, 26
mariners, and 12 canon.

The pinnace of S. Steffano, of 78 tun, 30 soldiers, 26 mariners, and 12
canon.

This whole fleet consisted of 14 vessels, 10 great, and four lesser ones,
called Pinnaces, their whole burden amounted to 6567 tun, 2037 soldiers, 863
mariners, which together make up 2802: Also, 200 canon, 1190 bullets, 467
quintalls of powder, every quintall accounted for 125 weight, 140 of bullets,
and 89 of match.

The fleet of Castille, whereof Diego Flores de Valdes was General.
THe Gallion General called the Christopher, of 700 tun, having in her 205
soldiers 120 mariners, and 40 canons.

The Gallion S. John Baptist, of 750 tun, which 250 soldiers, 140 mariners,
and 30 canon.

The Gallion S. Peter, of 530 tun, with 130 soldiers, 140 mariners, and 40
canon.

S. John's Gallion, of 530 tun, with 170 soldiers, 120 mariners, and 40 canon.

The Gallion S. Iago el Major, of 530 tun, with 230 soldiers, 132 mariners,
and 30 canon.

The Gallion S. Philip and S. Iago, of 530 tun, with 150 soldiers, 116
mariners, and 30 canon.

The Gallion of S. Medela and Celedonia, of 530 tun, with 170 soldiers, 110
mariners, and 30 canon.

S. Annes Gallion, of 250 tun, with 100 soldiers, 89 mariners, and 24 canon.

Our Lady of Vigonia, of 750 tun, with 190 soldiers, 100 mariners, and 30
canon.

The ship called the Trinity, of 780 tun, with 200 soldiers, 122 mariners,
and 30 canon.

The S. Catharina, of 862 tun, with 200 soldiers, 160 mariners and 30 canon.

The S. John Baptist, of six hundred fifty two tun, with two hundred
soldiers, and 130 mariners, and thirty canon.

Our Lady of Rosaria, called the pinnace, with thirty soldiers, twenty six
mariners, and twenty four canon.

The pinnace called S. Anthony of Padua, with thirty soldiers, forty six
mariners, and 16 canon.

The number of this whole fleet of Castille consisted of foureteen Gallions,
and two Pinnaces; their entire burden amounting to eight thousand seven
hundred thirty four tun, having in it two thousand four hundred eighty
five soldiers, one thousand seven hundred and nineteen mariners, together
amounting to four thousand one hundred seventy seven men, and three hundred
eighty four canon, with all other necessaries, as bullets, powder and match.

The Equipage of the Ships of Andeluzia, commanded by the General D. Pedro
Valdes.
THe Admiral ship of one thousand one hundred and fifty tun, having in it
fifty soldiers, one hundred and eighteen mariners, with fifty canon.

The S. Francis, of nine hundred and fifteen tun, with two hundred and
thirty souldires, sixty mariners, and thirty canon.

The Gallion S John Baptist, of one hundred and ten tun, with two hundred and
fifty soldiers, twenty mariners, and forty canon.

The S. John Gargaren, of five hundred and nine tun, with one hundred and
seventy soldiers, sixty mariners, and twenty canon.

A ship called the Conception, of eighty tun, with two hundred soldiers,
sixty five mariners, and twenty five canon.

The Bear, or ship called the Duchess S. Anne, of nine hundred tun, with
three hundred soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canon.

The S. Catharine, of seven hundred and thirty tun, with two hundred and
fifty soldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canon.

The Trinity, of filtie tun, with two hundred soldiers, twenty mariners,
and thirty canon.

The S. Maria de Iuncar, of 730 tun, with 240 soldiers, 80 mariners, and 24
canon.

The S. Bartholomew, of 976 tun, with 250 soldiers, 80 mariners, and 30 canon.

A Pinnace called the holy Ghost, with 40 soldiers, 33 mariners, 10 canon, and
well stored with bullets, powder, and other necessaries.

This fleet consisted of ten Gallions, one Pinnace, which in burden amounted
altogether to 8702 tun, having in it 2400 soldiers, 800 mariners, 260 canon,
and all other necessaries thereunto belonging.

The fleet of Guypuscoa, commanded by D. Michell de Quendo.
THe Generals ship called S. Anne, of 1200 tun, having in it 30 soldiers, 90
mariners, and 50 canon.

The Admiral, called our Lady of Roses, of 945 tun, with 230 soldiers, 64
mariners, and 30 canon.

The S. Savior, of 958 tun, with 330 soldiers, 80 mariners, and 30 canon.

The S. Stephen, of 936 tun, with 200 soldiers, 70 mariners, and 30 canon.

The S. Martha, of 548 tun, with 180 soldiers, 70 mariners, and 25 canon.

The S. Barba, of 525 tun, with 160 soldiers, 50 mariners, and 15 canon.

The Marie, of 291 tun, with 120 soldiers, 40 mariners, and 15 canon.

The S. Cross, of 680 tun, with 150 soldiers, 40 mariners, and 20 canon.

The Vrsa Doncella, of 500 tun, with 60 soldiers, 40 mariners, and 18 canon.

The Pinnace called the Ascension, of 600 tun, with 30 soldiers, 20
mariners, and 12 canon.

The Pinnace called S. Barnabie, and another, named our Lady of Guadalupa,
with the pinnace called the Magdalen, these three in burden, soldiers,
mariners, canon, and other necessaries, equalled the Pinnace of the Ascension.

There were in this fleet of Guypuscoa 14 vessels which were in burden
altogether 6991 tun, and had in it 2092 soldiers, 670 mariners, making up
the number of 2708 men, 277 canon, with all other necssaries.

The fleet of Eastern Ships, called Leuantiscas, whose General was Martin de
Vertendona.
THe Generals Ship, called Regazone, of 1294 tun, having in it 350 soldiers,
90 mariners, and 35 canon.

The Admiral Ship called la Laua, of 728 tun, with 210 soldiers, 80
mariners, and 30 canon.

La Rata S. Marie the crowned, of 820 tun, with 340 soldiers, 90 mariners,
and 40 canon.

The S. John of Cilicia, of eight hundred and eighty tun, with two hundred
and seventy soldiers, seventy mariners, and thirty canon.

The Trinity Valencera, of one thousand one hundred tun, with two hundred and
forty soldiers, ninety mariners, and forty six canon.

The Annunciade, of seven hundred and three tun, with two hundred soldiers,
90 mariners, and 30 canon.

The S. Nicholas Predaneli, of eight hundred thirty four tun, with two
hundred and eighty soldiers, eighty four mariners, and 30 canon.

The Iuliana, of 800 tun, with 330 soldiers, 80 mariners, and 36 canon.

The S. Marie of Pison, of six hundred sixty six tun, with two hundred and
fifty soldiers, eighty mariners, and twenty two canon.

The Trinity of Escala, of ninety tun, with three hundred and two
soldiers, ninety mariners, and twenty five canon.

This whole fleet consisted of ten Ships, whose burden was seven thousand
seven hundred and five tun, and had in it 2880 soldiers, eight hundred and
seven mariners, three hundred and eleven canon, with all other necessaries.

The fleet of Ships called Vreas, whose General was Lopez de Medina.
THe Generals ship called the great Griffin, of six hundred and fifty tun,
having in it 250 soldiers, 60 mariners, and forty canon.

The Admiral called S. Savior, of 650 tun, with 230 soldiers, 60 mariners,
and 30 canon.

A ship called the Pedro Martino, of 200 tun, with 80 soldiers, 30 mariners,
and 30 canon.

The white Falcon, of 500 tun, with 170 soldiers, 40 mariners, and 18 canon.

The black Castle, of 750 tun, with 250 soldiers, 50 mariners, and 27 canon.

A Bark of Hambourge, with 600 soldiers, 50 mariners, and 25 canon.

La Cassa de Par-grand, together with S. Pedro el Major, the Sampson, and S.
Pedro el minor, of as great burden as the Bark of Hambourg.

The Bark of Danske, of 450 tun, with 210 soldiers, 50 mariners, and 25 canon.

The white Falcon Mediana, of 300 tun, with 80 soldiers 30 mariners, and 18
canon.

The S. Andrew, of 400 tun, with 150 soldiers, and 40 mariners.

La Cassa de var Chica, of 350 tun, with 170 soldiers, 40 mariners, and 15
canon.

La Cuerbo Bolante, of 400 tun, with 210 soldiers, 40 mariners, and 18 canon.

The white Polonia, of 250 tun, with 60 soldiers, 30 mariners, and 12 canon.

The Adventure, and S. Barba, which were as much in burden as the S. Iago, of
600 tun, with 60 soldiers, 40 mariners and 19 canon.

The ship called El gatto, of 400 tun, with 50 soldiers, 30 mariners, and 9
canon.

The S. Gabriell, of 280 tun, with 50 soldiers, and twenty five mariners.

The Esayas, of like burden.

So that these 25 Vrcas are in burden 10271 tun, and carried 3221 soldiers,
708 mariners, and 410 canon, with all necessaries, as powder, lead, and match.

Pinnaces and Zabras, commanded by D. Antonio de Mendoza.
THe Generals ship, called our Lady del Pilar de Zaragossa, of three hundred
tun, with 120 soldiers, 54 mariners, and 12 canon.

La Caridad Inglese, of 180 tun, 80 soldiers, 30 mariners, and 12 canon.

S. Andrew d'Estoches, of 130 tun, 51 soldiers, 30 mariners, and 12 canon.

The Pinnace of the crucifix, of 150 tun, with 50 soldiers, 30 mariners, and
18 canon.

A ship called our Lady del Puerto, containing as much as the Pinnace of the
crucifix.

The conception of Carassa, and of our Lady de Beguoa.

The conception of Capitillo, with the S. Ieronimo, are of 60 and 70 tun,
with 50 soldiers, and thirty mariners and eight canon.

Our Lady of Grace, the conception of Francis Lastero, our Lady of Guadalupa,
the conception of the Holy Ghost, and our Lady of Fresneda; these ships
contain just as much, as those above mentioned.

Moreover, a ship, called Zabra la Trinidad, with an other Zabra S. Andrew the
conception, together with the conception of Sommarriba, S. Catharine, S. John
de Carassa, and the Assumption, contain as much as those that went next before.

The whole number of 22 Pinnaces and Zabras, were in burden one thousand one
hundred thirty one tun, and had in them 479 soldiers, five hundred seventy
four mariners, and 193 canon, with all other necessaries.

The four Galleasses of Naples commanded by D. Vgo de Moncado.
THe Generals Galleasse, called San Lorenzo, with two hundred and seventy
soldiers, 130 mariners, 300 slaves, and 50 canon.

The Galleasse Patrona, with one hundred and eighty soldiers, one hundred and
twelve mariners, three hundred slaves, and fifty canon.

The Galleasse Gyrona, with 170 soldiers, 120 marines, 300 slaves, and 50 canon.

The Neapolitan Galleasse, with one hundred twenty four soldiers, 300 slaves,
and fifty canon.

These four Galleasses, carried altogether 870 soldiers, 468 mariners, 200
canon, and 1200 Gallislaues.

The four Galleys of Portugal under the command of D. Diego de Medrana.
THe General Gallie with 110 soldiers, 106 mariners, 100 slaves, and 50 canon.

The Princess Gallie, the Gallie Diana, the Gallie Vazana, containing as much
as the General Gallie.

The brief and General account of the whole Fleet.
THe whole fleet together was composed, of twelve Gallions of Portugal, in
burden seven thousand seven hundred thirty seven tun, carrying four
thousand three hundred and thirty soldiers, 1233 mariners, 400 canon, with
ammunition of bullets, powder and match.

Of 14 ships of Biscay, commanded by John Martinez de Ricaldo: these ships
altogether were of the burden of 6567 tun, and carried two thousand and
fifty soldiers, nine hundred mariners, and 270 canon.

Of 16 Gallions of Castille, in burden 8700 tun, carrying two thousand five
hundred and sixty soldiers, and four hundred and twenty canon.

Of eleven ships of Andaluzia, in burden 8762 tun, and in them two thousand
five hundred twenty five soldiers, 900 mariners, and 260 canon.

Of 14 ships of Guipuscoa, in burden 6991 tun, and in them two thousand one
hundred and two soldiers, 718 mariners, and 280 canon.

Of the Eastern fleet with ten ships, in burden seven thousand seven
hundred and five tun, carrying 2900 soldiers, 867 mariners, and 310 canon.

Of the fleet of Vrcas, 23 in number, in burden 10271 tun, and in them three
thousand three hundred and twenty one soldiers, 708 mariners and 400 canon.

Of 22 Pinnaces of Zabras, in burden 1221 tun, and in them three hundred
seventy six soldiers, five hundred seventy four mariners, and 110 canon.

Of four Galleasses of Naples, carrying 864 soldiers, 500 mariners, 200 canon.

Of four Galleys, which carried four hundred soldiers, and 20 canon.

In the four Galleasses there were likewise 1200 Galley-slaues, and in the
four Galleys 888, which together make up the number of 2088 persons: And
beside the above mentioned powder, there was beside, if any danger or
necessity should happen, 600 quintals of powder.

So as in the whole fleet there was 130 ships, viz. 65 Gallions or great ships,
25 Vrcas of the burden of 500 and 700 tun, 19 Pinnaces, of the burden of 70
and 100 tun, 13 Zabras, with two of Portugal, 4 Galleasles, and as many
Galleys, of the burden of 57868 tun, and in them 19295 soldiers, and 8450
mariners, with 2630 Galley slaves, and 2630 pieces of ordnance of all sorts,
among which were great and middle Culuerings and some great canons.

There was likewise 20 small vessels called Caruels for the service the fleet,
and ten Faluas with six oars a piece.

There were in this fleet, 124 voluntaries, attended by four hundred fifty
and six servants bearing arms, and 238 entertained by the King, with 163
servants.

There was 177 persons appointed to wait upon the ordnance, with two Ingeneers,
one physician one Surgeon and thirty servants.

Fourscore and five both physicians and Surgeons, with 180 Churchmen, all
Dominicans, Franciscans, Flagellans or Jesuits.

The Colonel Regiments or Tertios, paid by the King in this fleet, with the
number of men under every Regiment.
DOn Francisco de Bouadilla serving the King as Campe-master general.

The Regiment of Sicilie, commanded by D. Diego Pimentell, under whom were 24
Captains.

The Regiment or Tertio, commanded by D. Francisco de Toledo, under whom were
25 Captains.

The Regiment of D. Alonzo Luzon, under whom were 26 Captains.

The Regiment of Yssa, commanded by D. Augustino Mexia, under whom were 26
Captains.

Diverse companies or free bands, some of which were drawn from the troops of
Castille, by D. Iuan de Guzman: the others from Portugal by Gaspar Sossa and
Antonio Perira: And those which are called the Suelti or new bands, were
conducted by the Duke of Sossa. So that there were in the above mentioned
Regiments or Tertios, and in the Companies Suelti 171 Ensigns, amounting to
the number of 18973 soldiers, with thirty more to make up the number of
19295, with diverse Ministers and officers both of justice, and belonging to the
Dukes Court, to the number of 185 persons. In a word, the whole fleet consisted
of 18937 footmen, 8650 mariners, 224 voluntaries, with 455 servants that were
allowed, and 238 other servants on one part, and 163 on an other. 167 persons
appointed to attend the canon, 85 for the Hospital or sick persons, 180
Churchmen of all Orders, 22 Gentlemen of the Dukes Court, fifty servants,
seventeen Superintendents General of the Army, one hundred servants
belonging to them and to the officers of justice: so that in the whole Army
there were 28687 persons, besides two thousand eight hundred and eight
Gallie-slaues that tugd the oar in the Galleasses and Galleys.

Provision of food and nourishment for the said Ships.
THere was in it 11000 quintals of biscuit, allowing half a quintall monthly
to every man, which proportion would last for six months, foureteen thousand
one hundred and seventy pieces of wine for six months, 6500 quintals of
bacon for six months, three thousand four hundred thirty three quintals of
Cheese, eight thousand quintals of all sorts of dried fish, three quintals of
Ryce, beans and pease for six months, 11398 jarres of Oil sufficient for
six months, twenty three thousand eight hundred and seventy jarres of
vinegar for 6 months, with 11851 Pipes of water.

The said fleet was likewise furnished with diverse other things, as with many
tons of water, spoones, dishes, wooden cups and other vessels, to give
every man his allowance, candle sticks, lanternes, okum and other matter fit
to stop the ships, if the sea or enemies canon should endaunger them.

Great number of Leather sackes to keep powder in, linkes, torches, tallow
candles to put in lanternes, sackes of Fustian and Canuas, wooden hoopes for
the vessels, eight thousand vessels to draw water and wine in, five thousand
pair of shoes which the Spaniards call Zapatos, and eleven thousand pair of
other shoes which they term Alpargates.

There was likewise all necessary provision for the ordnance at Sea, with
other necessaries, as wheels for carriages if the canon should happen to be
laden, with other engines for the easier vnshipping thereof: there was likewise
store of Banderols and Ensigns, with the Kings Arms in them, and the
portraits of Christ and the Virgin Marie.

There was seven thousand Harquebuses a crock, with all things belonging unto
them 1000 muskets, 10000 lances, 1000 partisans and Halberds, and 6000 short
lances or half pikes.

Beside, provision of spades, shouels and pickaxes, with other tools for seven
hundred pioners.

Printed at Lisbone the 20 of May, anno 1588.

Having thus far made a large description of this mighty Spanish Armada, Parma
makes preparations to aid the Spaniards.
we will for the better strengthening thereof add thereunto the Dukes of
Parmas fleet or army which he had prepared in the Low countries, both in the
Havens of Dunkirke, Grauelin, Sluice, and other places, which he intended to
have joined with the Spanish fleet, for the better execution of the King of
Spaines resolution and design.

The Duke of Parma, with many thousands of men, had caused great and deep
channels to be digd in Flanders, as the channel called Iperlee, the better to
convey certain boats from Autuerpe, by Gant to Bruges, where he had provided
more than an hundred boats called Heudes, which he laded with victuals and
munition, supposing to send them from Sluice to Sea, or else through the
channel of Iperlee, into other Havens of Flanders.

He had likewise prepared seventy flat bottomed vessels in the little River at
Waten, each of them being able to carry thirty horse, with Bridges fit to
ship them: he had likewise two hundred more of these Boats (though not so big)
ready in the Haven of Newport.

He had rigd two and thirty ships of war at Dunkirke, and wanting mariners,
he drew diverse from Hambourg, Breme, and Embden.

He had two thousand empty vessels ready at Grauelin, which in a short space
might be soon fastened together in manner of a bridge, with all provision to
make bridges, to choke up havens, and to found them; and near to the Haven of
Newport he had prepared great heaps of Fagots, and other substance to make
Gabions: in many of his Boats, were two Ouens to bake bread: he had likewise
great numbers of Saddles, Bridles and furniture for horse with all sorts of
ordnance, and munition necessary thereunto.

Beside, he had a Camp ready not far from Newport commanded by Camillo the
Campe-Master, and thirty Ensigns of Italians, ten of Walons, eight of
Scots, eight of Burgonians, in all fifty six Ensigns, every Ensign an
hundred men complete. Near to Dixmuyde he had sixty Spanish Ensigns, sixty
of Almans, and seven of revolted English under the command of of Sir William
Stanley. The Earl of Westmerland and the Lord Paget, English fugitives, were
there likewise ready to imbarke. In the suburbs of Courtray, he had four
thousand horse, 900 horse at Watene with the Marquess of Guastos Cornet who
was General of the horse.

Pope Sixtus the fist, the better to strengthen the said Army, and weaken the
Queen of Englands power, did for his part do all he could, employing his
spiritual arms (as they term it) published his Croizades and Bulls for the
advancement of this enterprise, and gave great pardons, which were printed and
distributed abroad: He had likewise (as it is reported) given the Realm of
England to the King of Spain with this Title, of Defender of the Christian
faith, commanding him to surprise it, on condition, that if he should win it,
he should enjoy it as a seodatarie to the Sea of Rome, and to this end, the
Pope contributed a million of gold or ten ne hundred thousand ducats, the one
half in hand, and the other when either England, or some famous Haven should
be won.

And for the better furtherance thereof the Pope sent an English Doctor (called
Allen) into the Low Countries, who should have had the managing of all
Ecclesiastical affairs: He, caused a declaration of the Popes to be Printed
at Antuerpe, confirming his predecessors sentence of excommunication, deposing
and degrading the Queen of England from all her titles and dignities as an
usurper, which, for the advancement of the enterprise, he would have published
in England.

The Spanyard, the better to cover and conceal his practices, or else
peradventure to make the world believe that his design was rather for the
united Provinces than for England, made a solemn treaty of peace with the
Queen at Bourbourg in Flanders. But the Provinces Towns and Forts near to the
Sea, gave aduertisements, protested and sought all means to hinder and break
off this treaty of peace, aduising the English rather to stand upon their
Guard: Yet some in England stood fast for peace or truce, as most necessary and
profitable for the State of their country, as well for their traffic and
navigations, as to cut off the great expense of a long and tedious war; others
by this means thought to divert the fleet from them and so to avoid the
tempest. In a word, Parma hereby did lull full diverse Englishmen a sleep, who
were desirous of peace in the Low countries; himself thinking on nothing less
than peace, studying how he might conquer England, which he had already
promised to himself. Whereupon the English and the united provinces, were in
some sort prepared for defense, against the force of this fleet, but not
according to the greatness of the danger: for it was given out that this great
Armada was only to convey the Spanish fleet to the Indies, and bring it safe
home again; which was the rather believed, because the ships being so great,
some thought that the Spaniards would not hazard them in the narrow seas, nere
to England.

In May the French King sent a message to the Queen of England, The Queen of
of England prepares a fleet.
by which he advised her to prepare for defense, for that he was truly
informed that this tempest would light upon her. Whereupon, the Queen speedily
prepared a fleet of her own ships, and that of her subjects, and sent part
thereof to Plimmouth, in the West parts, under the command of the Lord
Admiral, Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, now Earl of Nottingham, together
with Sir Francis Drake, Vice Admiral, to the number of 100 sail. An other
fleet lay betwixt Dover and Calais under the command of the Lord Henry
Seymer, son to the Duke of Somerset, to the number of 40 or 50 sail.

All England was in Arms under valiant and trusty Captains. And because it
was reported that the Spaniards, conjoined with Parma, would come up into the
River of Thames, a Camp was made nere Grauesend, with forts on both sides the
River by Frederic Ienibelli an excellent Ingeneir. The Queen came in person to
the Camp, like a second Tomyris or Pallas; other Camps were likewise placed in
other parts.

As for the united Provinces of Holland, Zeland etc. they by a mutual consent
resolved to do the like. But because they understood that the Spanish ships
were too big to come nere their shallow shoares, they were more afraid of
Parma and his flat bottomed Boats, and notwithstanding their own incessiue
broiles, they made ready a fleet of ninety vessels, which they sent to guard
all the Havens of Flaunders, even from the Scheld and Lillo as far as
Grauelin, and had placed strong Garrisons in all their Sea Towns.

And to make some opposition against the Spanish fleet, they sent Captain
Cornelis Lonck of Rosendael with five and twenty or thirty vessels to join
with the Lord Henry Seymer, and to lie betwixt Calais and Antuerpe. But the
ships were by Tempest and Northerlie winds enforced to quit the coast of
Flanders, and to return into England, yet when the tempest ceased, they
returned, with Justinius of Nassau, who was there in person with George le More
Vice Admiral of Zeland, being in number fifty five vessels great and small,
of 80 and two hundred and fifty tun, excellently well mand with soldiers
and mariners, beside one thousand two hundred old choice musketeers drawn
from all the Regiments, who were resolute and skillful in Sea fight. This was
door to keep Parmas fleet from coming forth of the Havens, which was a matter
of most importance. The Spanish fleet set sail on the 29 of May.
In the mean time, on the nine and twentieth day of May 1588 the aforesaid
mighty Navy sailed forth of the Haven of Lisbone, under conduct of the Duke
of Medina, to the Groine in Galicia, which is the nearest Haven to England,
where it took in more men and munition. By the way, a tempest arose which
scattered them. The Duke and some eighty sale kept together, the rest followed
by little and little, except 8 which had spent their masts. Of four Portugal
Galleys one escaped, the rest were taken by an Englishman called David Guyn,
wherein D. Diego de Medrena was slain.

The fleet being refreshed at the Groyne, and commanded daily by the Kings
Letters to depart, did set fail on the 21 of Iulie, and held on it course till
it came within kenning of England: from thence by small boats they sent word to
the Duke of Parma of their arrival, aduising him to embarke his forces for
England.

They were discovered by an English Pinnace, at the same time when the English
fleet lay at Plimmouth, who supposed that the former tempest would delay the
enterprise of the Spanish Navy, whereupon the Lord Admiral of England received
letters from the Qu, how she had intelligence, that the Spanish fleet would not
come forward, or at least not in a long time, and that therefore the Admiral
should do well to discharge some of the great ships, and send them away.

But he, having received news of their approach on the 29 of Iulie, at four of
the clock in the afternoon, gave speedy commandment that the whole fleet
should put forth of the haven, and that the soldiers should be embarked,
which was not done but with great difficulty. The Lord Admiral the same night
came in to the road with six ships, and the next day by noone which was the 30
of Iulie, they descried the Spanish Navy, which with a South West wind bent it
course (as it seemed) directly toward Plimmouth, but when they perceived the
English were forth of the haven, they passed on forward.

Here (according to the opinion of some sufficient and understanding men) the
Spanish fleet committed a great error: for D. Alonso de Leyuas advice was, to
have gone and assaulted Plimmouth, for therein was great likelihood of good
success, seeing that the English were unprepared, and had bad intelligence of
the Spanish Navy, whereby they might have surprised them on the sudden: That
the haven was very fit and commodious for the advancement of their design and
that there they might have made some trial of their valor, and had some proose
of the strength of the English fleet, and the peoples affection, and that by
giving an alarm to those parts, the chief strength of the country would have
bin drawn thither, and Parma thereby have had better means to have come forth
with his forces. But their instructions from their king and his Council forbad
it, who expressly commanded them not to enterprise any thing by the way, but
only to join with Parma, and together with his troops and vessels to make an
attempt upon Margate, which they thought might be easily done; which would
have so amazed the English and Low-countrie fleet, as each of them would have
withdrawn themselves to their own defense, to keep their countries and Havens
from invasion.

It is reported that some of the chief of the Spanish commanders which were
skilful in Navigations among whom were the Vice Admiral D. Iuan Martin de
Ricaldo, and Diego Flores de Valdez and others, had protested that it would be
an hard matter to follow those instructions, especially in a Commission with
such restrictions, alleging that in such enterprises, many matters were to be
considered, as the wind, time, and tide to come forth of the Havens of
Flaunders into England, with the places, roads, and deepenesse thereof, which
are subject to wind, and other hazards, and therefore very dangerous. But they
were strictly tied to their commission, which was to come to an anchor before
Calais, where the prince of Parma should meet them with his flat bottomed boats
and other munition, which, under the covert and protection of the great Navy,
should pass on, and land their forces in some part of the downs. The Spanish
Armies project.
But, as some of the Spanish prisoners reported, their principal project was
upon the River of Thames, where they might on each shore land their men, and
by passing up the River surprise the City of London the Metropolis of the
kingdom, whether the lesser vessels might follow them, seeing that London not
strong, but rich, mighty, and populous, and the inhabitants thereof
unacquainted with war, might at the first encounter be easily terrified.
They did likewise hope that the Queen should be badly obeyed, and that some
discontented faction might arise of Roman Catholics. According to their
instruction and commission they went forward, often aduertising the Duke of
Parma of their arrival and intention, and so upon the thirtieth of Iulie they
passed Plimmouth. The English forthwith followed and got the wind of them, by
which means they might assail the Spanish fleet, and themselves not be
assailed by it, so that the two fleets made toward one another. The next day
being the one and thirtieth of Iulie, the English came within musket shot of
the Spanish fleet: The English admiral thundered with his ordna^ce upon the
Spanish Vice Admiral, who perceiving themselves to be greatly annoyed by the
English Canon, fell into a close form of an half moon, hoysting their sails
but half mast high, because they would not fall soul one of an other. Anon,
one of the Galleasses was fore oppressed by certain ships, The fleet abandons D.
Pedro Valdez his ship which bad spent her most on the 31 of June.
and their battle so assailed, as the chief Gallion of Sicile, wherein was
D. Pedro Valdez, which D. Basco de Sylua, and D. Alonzo de Sayas with diverse
other noble men, brake her mast against another ship, so as she could not
follow, and the fleet would not stay to rescue her, but left her behind. The
English Admiral looking on Valdez ship, and supposing that there were no men
in her, went on with as many ships as he had near him, being loath by night
to loose the fleet. For Sir Frauncis Drake who that night carried the lantern
gave chase to five great ships divided from the fleet, and finding them to be
Merchants of Norway let them go; so as the English Admiral, did all that
night, follow the Spanish lantern, thinking himself among his own men, and
in the morning finding that he was in the midst of his enemies, he withdrew
himself from so great danger. The morrow after, which was the first of
August, Sir Francis Drake met with Valde^ ship wherein himself and four
hundred and fifty men were, and sent to hale her. Valdez for his own honor
would have propounded certain conditions, which he sent to Drake; who
answered that he would not spend the time in treaties, but if he would yield
he should find favor: and on the contrary, if he would fight, he should find
him a soldier. Valdez and his people, perceiving that they were fallen into
Drakes hands, and moved by report of his fame, yielded themselves and found
favor. Valdez with his gentlemen and some forty or fifty followers, went
aboard Drake, and the rest were carried to Plimmouth where they remained a
year and half, till they had paid their ransom or were exchanged for others.

Valdez coming into Drakes presence kissed his hands, and told him that they
had all resolved to die, if they had not bin so happy to fall into his hands,
whom he knew to be noble and courteous, and famous for dealing well with his
vanquished enemy, so as he doubted whether his enemies had more cause to love
him for his valor, or fear him for his fortunate exploits, which had already
attained to the highest degree. Sir Francis Drake did courteously embrace him,
and caused him to eat at his own Table and sleep in his own Cabin, where
Valdez reported unto him their strength, how that the four Galleys were
dispersed, and that they had thought to have entered the haven of Plimmouth,
without fear of the English Navy, which they supposed durst not have made
resistance, and so have become masters at sea: They likewise admired the valor
of the English, who durst with so few and small vessels approach their
invincible Navy, and get the wind of it, with other such like discourses.
Valdez and his followers were afterward carried into England: he was a man much
respected in his country, kinsman to the same Valdez who in an. 1573 had
besieged Leyden in Holland. In his ship some of the kings treasure was,
amounting to the sum of 55000 Ducats in silver, which was all pillaged.

The same day, the Vice Admiral Oquendo his ship was fired, where was great
store of powder and munition, all the upper deck was burnt, with all the men,
of whom few were saved It was taken and carried into England with many men in
her, half burnt, and yet all the powder which was in hold was saved, which was
a matter to be admired. In the mean time the English Lord Admiral in his ship
called the Arc had that night so far followed the Spaniards, as in the morning
he found himself in a manner alone in the midst of his enemies, so as it was
four a clock after noone ere all his fleet came up to him. Some say that D.
Hugo de Moncada General of the four Galleasses did at the same time with
great earnestness entreat the Duke of Medina to give him leave to board the
Lord Admiral, which the Duke would in no sort permit being loath to pass the
bounds of his Commission.

Tewsday, the second of August, the fleet being before Portland, the wind
turned to the North, so, as the Spaniards had a prosperous gale; but the
English did again get the wind of them, their ships being lighter and of
better sail. By this means the Spaniards then seemed more to incline to fight
than before; and to speak truth, that days fight was most fierce and bloody.
In the midst of the fight the English Admiral cried out aloud to Captain
George Semmer, saying, o George what do thou, will thou now forsake me, or
will thou deceive my opinion of thy valor? which words did so inflame him, as
he assailed the enemy so furiously, as that day he won greatest
commendation. But the English having with all sorts of ordnance sought with
them from morning, and yet ceased not, the Spaniards did again enclose
themselves in order of battle, whereby their enemies perceived that they
only sought means to defend themselves, and to go to their appointed place
nere to Dunkirke, there to joy^ne with the Duke of Parma, who under protection
of those great vessels might execute his design with more safety. In this
fight a great Venetian Argozey perished.

The English fleet in the mean time did daily increase and grew strong by
ships and men that came to it forth of all havens, seeking to win honor, and
to do good service to their Country, among whom were diverse noble men, and
others of great note, as the Earls of Oxford, Cumberland, and Northumberland,
of Knights, Sir Thomas Cecill, William Hatton, Walter Raleigh, Horacio
Palauicino, Gentlemen, Henry Brook, Robert Carry, Charles Blunt, Ambrose
Willoughbie, Henry Nowell, Thomas Gerard, Robert Dudley, Edward Darcy, Arthur
Gorges, Thomas Wood, William Haruey, and many other noble gentlemen, so as they
were in number some hundred sail, and being come nere to Dover they were
increased to an 120, which for the most part were too small to board the
Spaniards, except some twenty two of the Queens great ships. The mariners and
soldiers amounted to the number of eleven thousand men.

The third of August, The 3 of August
the Sea being calm and without wind, the fight was only betwixt the English
and the Galleasses, which were rowed with oars and therein had the vauntage,
but it did them small good. The English were busied in making Chain shot
wherewith to cut a sunder their oats, and tackings, they likewise sent a shore
for more powder which they extremely wanted, having at the beginning spent
much in vain, of which they afterward complained.

The same day a Council was held, wherein was resolved, That the English fleet
should be divided into four squadrons, the one under my Lord Admirals conduct,
the other under Sir Frauncis Drakes, the third under Hawkins, and the fourth
under Captain Frobiser. The Spanish ships in sailing kept a close order of 3
or 4 ships in rank, not far one from another, and the greater vessels
enclosed them.

The fourth of August, The 4 of August
the fleet being come before the Isle of Wight, the English Lord Admiral did
fiercely assail the Spaniards, with his best ships, as the Lion wherein was
the Lord Thomas Howard, now Earl of Suffolk, the Elizabeth Jonas, wherein
were the Lord Sheffield, and Sir Robert Southwell the Lord Admirals son in
law, the Bear; and Victory, commanded by John Hawkins, and the Gallion
Leycester by Captain George Fenner: All these made up directly toward the
Spanish Admiral who with the greatest part of his ships lay in the midst of
the fleet, where a fierce fight was begun, for being within 3 or 400 paces
nere to one another, they gave each other their broad sides, and discharged all
their ordnance: at last, the Spaniards got the wind and once again joined
themselves together. In the mean time Martin Frobiser Captain of the Triumph,
with some few others, had bravely performed a dangerous fight with the
Spaniards; the Admiral came to reskew him, and found that he had valiantly
behaved himself, and made a discreet retreat, without any great loss.

So as the next day (being the fist of August) The 5 of August
the Admiral knighted him and diverse others

Saturday, The sixth of August they came to an anchor before Calais.
the 6 of August, toward night, the Spaniards came to an anchor before Calais:
it seemed they resolved to stay there to join with the Duke of Parmas forces.
The next day, being the seventh of August, the moon was at full, so that at
twelve a clock it was full sea at Calais, and at eleven at Dunkirke.

The English likewise ankored within Canon shot of them, whether the Lord
Henry Seymer brought his fleet of twenty vessels.

Whilst the fleet lay there, the Duke of Medina sent aduertizement to Parma,
and diverse Gentlemen went on shore to refresh themselves, and among others, the
Prince of Ascoli, a brave young Lord, who (as some say) was base son to King
Philip, who went to land in a happy hour, because the ship wherein he came
from Spain did within a while after perish in Ireland with all her men.

The Duke of Parma having intelligence that the fleet lay upon the coast of
England, made great have to make one in person in that enterprise, resigning
the government general of the Country to old Count Mansfelt: Himself went
on Pilgrimage into Haynault to our Lady of Halles, and from thence returned
toward Bruges, where he arrived on the seventh of August. The next day,
riding toward Dunkirke where his ship tarried for him, he heard the report of
the Canon betwixt the two fleets, and the same night coming to Dixmuyde, he
had intelligence of the success.

On Tewsday the ninth of August about noone, he came to Dunkirke, even when the
fleet was already past, none of his Ships daring to go forth to give them the
least hope of aid, because they were afraid of the thirty five Hollanders
that lay in guard under the conduct of the Admiral Iustine of Nassau, which
were excellently provided of good mariners, and beside the ordinary soldiers,
with 1200 brave musketeers, and lay only there to keep Parmas fleet from
issuing out of the Haven, which was a matter of greatest importance. As for the
great ships, they feared them not, because the Sea was too shallow in those
parts: Beside, all Parmas forces were not ready nor embarked, only 700
revolted English under Sir William Stanleys command were shipped, and thought to
get the advantage by landing first in England: His other soldiers were male
content and unwilling, especially the mariners who were few in number, the
provision likewise of Beer, Bread and victuals was not yet ready nor
embarked: The mariners were so afraid of the Hollanders as they ran away daily,
fearing least the soldiers would enforce them to do that which they knew could
not be done. Then they wanted Galleys from Spain, which might have beaten the
Hollanders from the coasts of Flaunders.

The Spanish fleet lying thus at anchor before Calice, the better to consult
with the Duke of Parma concerning their enterprise, they concluded to execute
their design on Friday the twelfth of August, The stratagem of the English on
the 7 of August, to drive the Spaniards from an anchor.
the night being dark. The Admiral of England with the chief of his Council
determined to enforce them to weigh anchor, and to be gone or else to burn
their fleet, whereupon, they appointed eight of their vnseruiceablest vessels
to be filled with wild fire and other combustious matter, charging the
ordnance in them up to the mouth with small shot, nails, and stone, which on
Sunday, the seventh of August, in the afternoon, they sent with the wind and
tide (after that the men that were in them had forsaken and fired them)
directly upon the Spanish fleet, which fire did in the night so terrify them
(supposing them to be some of those internal ships full of powder and wild
fire with the Ingeueer Frederic Ionibelli had made use of some three years
before at Antuerpe, against the Prince of Parmas bridge over the Scheld) as
crying out, The fire of Antuerpe, the fire of Antuerpe, they presently cut
their cables, and in confusion did put to Sea.

In this amazement, The Galleasse of D. Hago de Moncada, upon the sands before
Calice.
the Captain of the great Galleasse fell soul of the cables of another ship
and lost her tudder, and being not able to sail without it, was carried by
the force of the Sea upon the sands just before Calice, whether it was pursued
by certain English Pinnaces, which played upon her with their ordnance, but
durst not board her; which the Lord Admiral perceiving sent his great Pionace
with two hundred soldiers under the command of Captain Preston, who all of
them together boorded the Galleasse, where the General D. Hugo de Moncada made
brave defense for a while, hoping of some succor from land; but at last he was
shot in the head and slain, and diverse other Spaniards with him, part of whom
leapt into the Sea thinking to escape by swimming, who were all drowned. The
visitor General D. Antonio de Manriques with some others escaped, and carried
the first news home into Spain. This great Galleasse wherein were three
hundred slaves, and four hundred soldiers, was for three hours pillaged,
wherein fifty thousand Ducats of the Kings were found. The English would at
last have burnt her; but Gor^^n, the Governor of Calice, would not permit it,
as a matter tending to the hurt and prejudice of his Town and Haven, and with
his canon played upon the English.

Fight, before Graueling on ^ the 8. of August
The same day, being the eight of August, as the Spanish fleet sell again into
order, it was again fiercely assailed by the English, right over against
Graueling, where they voluntarily lost their advantage of the wind, chosing
rather to let the wind drive them before Dunkirke, than to open themselves or
change their order, resolving only on defense.

Though the English had gallant tall ships, yet but 22 or 23 of them were
comparable to the Spanish, which were ninety. But the English had the
advantage by being lighter and better of sail: so, as they came oftentimes
within a pikes length of them and discharged their whole tire of ordnance upon
them, and then their small shot, continuing it the whole day, till their powder
and shot began to fail; and then, they held it no discretion to board the
Spaniards who still kept themselves together in close order, the English being
satisfied with chasing them from before Calice and Dunkirke, and keeping them
from joining with the Duke of Parma.

The Spaniards the same day, received much hurt, losing many men, and had
diverse of their ships shot through: They likewise with their ordnance played
fiercely upon the English, but did them no great hurt, The English receive small
loss
for they lost few men, and never a Ship or man of note; and in all that
time, and in the whole journey, they lost but an hundred men, and yet Sir
Frauncis Drakes ship had been shot above forty times, and his Cabin twice
shot through: And toward the end of the fight, a Gentleman's bed whereupon he
rested himself, being weatie, was taken from under him by a great shot: And
as the Earl of Northumberland, and Sir Charles Blunt, afterward Lord
Mountioy, and Master Henry Nowell sat at meat, a demie Culuerins shot flew
through the cabin, and overthrew 2 men. The like accidents happened in other
ships which would be tedious to recite, yet it appears that God did wonderfully
assist the English: For as the Lord Admiral wrote to the Queen, there was no
likelihood that the English (in man's judgment) and according to the appearance
of the circumstances should have dared to approach the Spaniards, but that God
had an admirable hand therein, unto whom they willingly ascribed all the honor
of their magnanimity and valor, for that he had confounded their enemies in
their own devises and counsel.

The same day, so many Spanish ships were shot through, as that night and the
next day three of them sanke. Among others Captain Cross fought with and sank
a great Biscan ship, forth of which some few escaped, who reported that the
chief in the ship flew one another, because one among the^ spoke of yielding,
who thereupon was slain, and his death presently revenged by his brother, and
in the mean time the ship sunk under him.

Two Gallions of Portugal of seven or eight hundred tun a piece, were the same
night forsaken by the fleet, viz the S. Philip, and S. Matthew, which had very
great leakes in them. In the S. Philip was D. Francisco de Toledo, brother to
the Earl of Orgas, Camp master, or Colonel of 32 ensigns, with other
Gentlemen, who sought to run a ground on the coasts of Flaunders, their masts
being broken; but being not able to do it, the chief of them escaped in a
boat to Newport, and the ship was taken by the Flushingers.

In the S. Matthew was the Campe-master D. Diego, Colonel General likewise of
32 ensigns, and brother to the Marquess of Tannares, with many other
Gentlemen and Captains. This ship was none of the greatest, but most strong,
for only twenty shot of infinite numbers that played upon her, did pierce her.
In the sight before Graueling it was shot, and received a leake, whereupon the
Captain sent word thereof to the Duke of Medina, who sent him a boat for
himself and some of the chief to escape, which for his own honor he refused:
the same night she took in such abundance of water, as fifty men did
continually plie the pomp to keep her from sincking, and finding her self
forsaken of her Admiral the Captain sought to run her a ground upon the
coast of Flaunders, and for saving his own life, craved the help of poor
Fishermen. But being descried by four or five men of war that lay upon the
coast, they made toward him, haling him up, and willing him to yield, which
he refusing, they discharged all their ordnance upon him, and slew above forty
men, so as he was enforced to yield himself prisoner to Peter Vander Does,
who carried the said vessel and the other likewise into Zeland, Peter Vander
Does takes D. Diego Fimentell prisoner, and carries his ship into Zeland.
which afterward through carelessness and negligence sanke. The said Peter
Vander Does, a very notable man, did for a perpetual memory cause a banner
of an exceeding length which he had taken forth of one of these ships to be
hung up in the great Church of Leyden where he was Scowt, which teached from
the very roof down to the ground, and yet the banner was half foulded up.

An other lesser ship was likewise enforced to run a shore at the same time
nere to Blanken burrow in Flaunders; but Sir John Conway governor of Ostend
with those of his Garrison, seeing this ship, sent three fisher boats thither
well manned, who perceiving that the Spaniards were gone forth of her, and that
they had landed two pieces of ordnance, enforced the Spaniards to quit them,
and pillaged the vessel, and carried it to Ostend.

In this manner it pleased God not only to show unto England, but likewise to
Zeland, their enemies great vessels, to have them see and confess how weak
they were against so great a power, had not he given them discretion and
courage, and in sundry manner fought for them.

The 8 of August the Spanish fle^^ (...) on fight.
The same Monday (the eight of August) the Spanish fleet, being thus assailed,
it resolved, seeing they had sufficiently discharged their Commission, to
return homewards, and to that end the whole fleet passed on with half sail
before Dunkirke, to whom the English with a South-West wind gave chase. And the
morrow after, being onward on their way, they clapped on more sails, making no
show as if they were desirous to fight but only of flight; so as the Lord
Henry Seymer sent back the lesser vessels, to assist the Hollanders, to keep
in the Prince of Parmas forces, and himself with the greater ships gave them
chase till the eleventh and twelfth of August, not fighting with him because he
wanted powder and shot, fearing least they should go into Scotland.

But the 12 of August, the wind waxing high, and the Spaniards making way with
full sails taking their course Northward toward Norwey, leaving Scotland on
the left hand, making show only of flight, exposing themselves to so dangerous
a navigations being already come to six and twenty degrees and seventeen
minutes; The English on the 12 of August give over pursuing, the Spanish fleet.
the English would not share with them in their danger, who wanting all manner
of provision, especially powder and shot, returned toward England, leaving
only some small vessels to follow them, and to give notice what course they
held, and so arrived at Harwich, on the foureteenth of August, with great
danger, a mighty tempest arising which lasted two or three days, which
undoubtedly did great harm to the Spaniards.

The English did presently make provision of victuals, powder, shot, and other
necessaries, to be in readiness upon any occasion: But having intelligence of
the Spaniards course, they resolved not to go seek them out in Northern
Seas, but to leave them to the mercy of the winds.

In those Seas, the Spaniards took a fisher boat of Zeland, with twelve men in
her, belonging to Zirickzee, who were brought a board the Admiral the Duke of
Medina to serve him, and suffered the boat to go at adventure: These fishermen
went into Spain, and afterward returned home, and reported that whilst the
English fleet pursued the Spaniards, they saw them ready to hang forth a white
flag, The Sp^nish fleet in dessaire.
to crave a parley or else to yield; fearing the passage of those Northern
Seas. But certain Clergy men, nere the Duke, (who should have been most
timorous) crossed it, saying that it would dishonor them to yield so easily,
without one fight more; but perceiving themselves to be no more pursued, they
gave over that resolution.

The said Fishermen did likewise report that in the Dukes ship there was a
place so well fortified, as it was canon proose, wherein during the fight, the
Duke with ten more retired themselves: That there were 1200 men in her, 300
of whom were dead and hurt, and that they had seen 18 chests full of money to
be vnshipt in Biscay, which (as they said) were stuffed with double pistolets.

In this manner the Spanish Navy, perceiving that it had already lost four
of five thousand men, had many that were sick and wounded, that it likewise
wanted ten or twelve of their chief ships, went to counsel (after that the
English had left them) what was best to be done; and perceiving that they
wanted victuals, water, tackling, cables, masts, sails and such like things,
and despairing of the Prince of Parmas aid, who (firmly believing that they
would return) continued his preparations, they resolved (seeing the wind
served them) to return homeward by the North, round about England, Scotland
and Ireland.

And understanding that order was likewise taken in Scotland that small aid
should be given them there, and that Norway could yield them but bad
assistance; they took certain fisher boats in Scotland, and carried away the
men to serve them for pilots and fearing to want water, they threw all their
horse and mules into the Sea, and so sailing with a fair wind they passed on
betwixt the Orcades and the farthest part of Scotland, landing in no place, and
bent their course Northward to the height of 62 degrees, still keeping 80
leagues from land.

There the Duke of Medina (the General) gave commandment that every ship
should direct her course toward Biscay, and himself with twenty or five and
twenty of the best ships provided with all necessaries, sailed more to Sea
ward and so arrived in Spain; but the others, to the number of forty sail or
more, with the Vice Admiral bent their course toward Ireland, hoping there to
take in water, and to refresh themselves. But the God of Armies, who abateth
the pride of great ones, and raises up the humble, and has all authority
over his creatures, who commands the Seas, winds and tempests, caused the
Sea to swell and a terrible tempest to arise on the first of September, from
the South-West, which dispersed them for the most part into sundry places of
Ireland, where many of them perished, and among others the Gallion of Michaell
of Oquendo, one of the great Galleasses, two great Venetian Argozies, the
Ratta, and the Balanrara, with diverse others to the number of 38 sail, and all
their men. Some of them with a Westerlie wind came again into the English
Seas; and some others into England, and other some were taken by the Rochellers.

One great Galleasse, the tempest carried into France to Newhauen, where they
found ships full of women who had followed the fleet: There remained two
likewise in Norwey, but the men escaped. To conclude, of one hundred four and
thirty sail that came from Spain, some three and fifty of all sorts
returned home, to wit, of four Galleasses, and as many Galleys, there returned
of each, one; of ninety one great Gallions, eight and fifty were lost, and
thirty three returned; of Pinnaces, seventeen were lost, and eighteen
returned: So that in all, fourscore and one Galleasses, Galleys, and other
Ships great and small perished. Two of those Gallions that returned home, lying
in the Haven, were by casualtie set on fire and burnt, and others since then
met with the like mischief.

Of 30000 men, that were in the fleet, the greatest part of them were slain or
drowned, and most of those that returned home died, by reason of the miseries
they had endured.

The Duke of Medina Sydonia being a brave Lord and well experienced, upon whom
they had imposed that burden much against his will, laid the fault upon his
Pilots, and on want of the Duke of Parmas forces which were not ready.

He was suffered to go home to his own house, but not to come to Court, where
it was thought he had much to do to purge him self from the calumnious
accusation of his enemies. Many other noble men died soon after, as D. Iuan
Martines de Ricaldo, D. Diego de Valdez, Michel Oquendo, D. Alonso de Lieua, D.
Diego de Maldonado, D. Francisco Bouadillo, D. Georgio Manriques, all of the
Council of war. Diverse were drowned, as among other, Thomas Perenot of
Granuell of Cauteroy, nephew to Cardinal Granuell. D. Diego Pimentel
Campe-master, and Colonel of thirty two Ensigns remained prisoner in Zeland,
with diverse others, taken in the same ship. D. Pedro Valdez a man much
respected in his Country was prisoner in England, with D. Vasco de Sylua, and
D. Alonzo de Sayas. Many Gentlemen were drowned in Ireland, and many slain by
the Irish. Sir Richard Bingham Governor of Conach, had received two hundred of
them to mercy, but understanding that a troop of 800 of them were landed and
in arms, he thought it fit for his own better safety to kill the 200, of whom
some escaping, carried tidings to the 800 who were likewise going to crave
mercy (as they said) but thereby despairing, they returned and made ready an
old decayed, vessel in which they put to Sea, where they were all drowned, and
many Gentlemen with them. Yet, D. Alonso de Luson, Colonel of thirty two
ensigns of the Tertios of Naples, with D. Rodrigo de Lasso, and two noble men
of the house of Corduba were from thence sent into England, who were delivered
to Sir Horace Paluicin, by them to set the Lord Odet of Teligin at liberty,
who had been taken nere to Antuepe, and lay in prison in the Castle of
Tournay. In a word, therere was no noble house in Spain, which in this fleet,
lost not, either, a son, brother, or kinsman. There were above 1200 soldiers
and mariners, prisoners in sundry places in England, with 30 Gentlemen and
commanders, whom the Queen released for mean ransom.

Those ships, which escaped from the English and Hollanders, and from the Irish
rocks and tempests of the Ocean, being few in number, did after much labor,
misery and danger, return into Spain, leaving behind them (as has been
already said) so many ships of sundry sorts, so many Lords of note,
Gentlemen, brave soldiers, good mariners, and others, such store of ordnance
and warlike munition, money, plate, jewels and other wealth, which if it should
be severally reckoned, would amount to an incredible sum of money. But by how
much this fleet was great, strong and potent, by so much more likewise was the
victory great, and greater occasions have these two countries to be thankful
to that great and invincible God, to honor and serve him all the days of their
life, for preserving and defending them from so great danger. In this regard,
the Queen of England and my Lords the States of the united Provinces, did,
whilst the fleet houered upon their coasts appoint sundry days of prayer and
fasting, beseeching God to turn away so great and imminent danger from them
and their country, and not to look upon their sins which had deserved such
a punishment, but to aid and assist them for the glory of his name, and for
or Jesus Christ's sa ke, seeing it was his own cause, which the Pope and King
of Spain sought to exterminat. And because these prayers were made to Gods
glory, and in praise of his invincible power, he therefore heard them, and
granted their requests.

And a good while after the fleet was gone, namely upon the 19 of November, the
Queen in England, and my Lords the States in the Low Countries, appointed a
solemn day for thanksgiving, which was spent in preaching, praying, and
hearing the word of God.

The Queen of England, for so great a deliverance, made a Christian triumph in
the city of London, and went with all the Lords and officers of her Kingdom
in solemn manner upon a triumphant Chariot from her Palace to the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul, where the Spanish ensigns and banners were hung up. The
citizens of London in their liueries stood on both sides the street as she
passed along. Her majesty and Lords, gave thanks unto God, and were present
at a public Sermon made in the Churchyard, tending only to thansgiuing and so
with great acclamations of people that besought God to grant her a long and
prosperous life to his honor and ruin of her enemies, she returned in the
same manner as she came.

In this manner did this magnificent, great, and mighty Armada, termed, the
invincible, and such an one as in many hundred of years the like had not been
seen upon the Ocean, vanish into air, to their great confusion which sent it
forth in an^ 1588. Whereupon, the Queen of England was congratulated by all
Princes, her friends and neighbors, and many millions of verses composed in
her honor.

The Prince of Parma in 1588 besieges Berghen-op-Zoom: And rayseth his siege
and departs the same year.
BErghen-op-Zoom, is a Town in the Duchy of Brabant, the first and chiefest
of the 17 Provinces in the Low Countries.

In time past it was but a Seignorie, but in anno 1533 the Emperor Charles the
fist honored it with the title of Marquisat. It is the first Town which ye
leave upon the left hand as ye go from Roomerswaell and Tholen (which are
towns of Zeland) toward Antuerpe. It has been a Merchant Town, not only
in our predecessors days, but there are yet some living that have so known it
in their time, whether, Spaniards, Frenchmen, Almans, English, and Scots, came
to traffic. It is seated in the midst of the mighty Nertherland Provinces,
viz. of Brabant, Flaunders, Holland and Zeland. It i^ not the least part of the
first, for it is within six hours journey of Antuerpe, the chief Merchant
City of the Province. The three other are opposite to it, viz. Flaunders,
toward the South, Holland toward the North, and Zeland toward the West. It
has also a very good Haven, which diuides the South Country from that of the
North (for so are both the countries named, situate on each side of the Haven)
which lies but 535 foot from the town, where it turns toward the West, and
dividing it self into two arms it opens it self and runs into the
town. One of the Arms, toward the South, serves certain water mils and
salt pits, which now are within the town, and that toward the North makes the
towns Haven, Berghen is in circuit 10175 foot beside the Bulwarks: There is a
very high earthen rampire, and dikes round about it, it is likewise in some
places fortified with palisadoes, and in other parts which hedges and walls on
top of the rampires: there are also diverse new bulwarks made for the towns
defense. And though it be now miserably dissigured by the breaking down of
many fair and goodly houses, yet it has at this day above 1000 that are
inhabited, diverse others, ruined by war are daily new built to be made
haibtable: there are fair and large streets in it, 3 fair market places, the
great market, fish market, and corn market; there is likewise a goodly Church
in it.

The Marquis his court, is a great ornament to it. The rich Cloister of Nuns is
converted to an Hospital: for the ho^spital without the town together with
other buildings were ruined in time of war.

After that all Brabant (Berghen-op-Zoom excepted) by the duke of Parmas
conduct was reduced under the Spanish government, the troops of his
Excellency and my Lords the States made diverse incursions into the country,
especially then when the Duke of Parma had assembled all his forces at
Dunkirke, there waiting for the Spanish fleet. Those of Brabant, Flaunders, and
other provinces under the kings obedience, seeing and understanding the defeat
of the Spanish Armada, and feeling to the quick the spoil which the soldiers
of Berghen daily made, protested against the Duke of Parma, and made complaint
that all the towns of Brabant obeyed the King (Berghen-op-Zoom excepted) which
was a very nest of theeties and receptacle of raskals, from whence forces were
daily sent to surprise poor travelers and merchants that brought provision:
that the same mischief did likewise often light upon their Burghers, who were
undone by imprisonment and great ransomes: yet this might in some sort be
tolerated, provided, they might live securely in their Towns; but Be^ingh in
the Country of Liege, Viluord, and Geldernack in Brabant could witness the
contrary, having been taken and sacked: That by reason of Berghen, all the
Villages were under contribution, and those that refused to pay it were burnt,
their houses ransackt, cattle carried away, and themselves made prisoners.
Yet, if the Duke of Parma would bring his victorious Camp before Berghen,
wherewith he had won so many Towns, the enemies joy conceived by the retreat
of the Spanish fleet would be soon converted to sorrow: And, Berghen once
taken a way, would then lie open to surprise the Islands of Zeland one after an
other; at least Berghen and the Isle of Terthole might be taken both at once.
These were the Barbanders complaints. It is not to be doubted but that the
Duke of Parma was much grieved at the flight of the Spanish fleet, and for
that he could not swallow England which he had already devoured in conceit,
as appears by the preparation which he carried with him to Dunkirke, serving
rather to be carried away in triumph into England, than by force to surprise so
mighty a kingdom. He was likewise badly beloved in the court of Spain, for
not assisting the fleet in necessity. Now that he might in some sort wipe off
this stain which blotted his reputation: he enterprised to reduce the town of
Berghen under his command. From that time, diverse reports thereof were
current, not only in the Low Countries but also in England: whereof her
Majesty advertised my Lords the States by letters dated at Greenwich the seven
and twentieth of August 1588. At the beginning of September when there was no
more hope of the fleets return, and that the Duke of Parma was come back from
Flaunders into Brabant, all men held it for certain that some attempt would be
made upon Berghen.

Certain horsemen of Bacx his company, sent forth for discovery, brought
back with them two prisoners, who confidently reported that there was nothing
more certain, than that Berghen should be besieged. One of the prisoners was a
Gentleman, and an officer belonging to the ordnance; and the other was master
of the munition: when our men took them nere to Eckeren castle, and asked them
whether they were going, they answered that they went to the kings camp that
lay before Berghen. Being brought to the town, they assured us that all things
were in readiness to besiege us: that before they were taken the army was on
the march, and that they verily thought to have found it before the town, and
wondered to find the contrary: they likewise affirmed, that there were 36000
men horse and foot in Parmas camp.

The 9 of the said month of August the lord Willoughby, General of the
English, came to Berghen, and had made Sir William Drury knight, governor of
the town. The next day they mustered, and had in all 12 ensigns of foot, 9 of
which lay in the town and the other 3 in the forts; besides 4 cornets of
horse. The Dutch captains were Paul and Marcelis Bacx brethren, the English
were commanded by captain Parker and captain Pooly who was cornet to my lord
Willoughby: From Holland they received a certain quantity of powder. The
Forts whereof we now spoke, are upon the haven; which being too far off from
the towns defense, sundry Forts were made to secure it: For the havens mouth
lies 532; foot from the town: from S. James his gate, it extends 535 foot
toward the North, and from thence falls into the Scheld. In this turning
stands the first, which is called the little Fort, because it is lesser than
any of the rest. The other Fort lies 3320 foot from the head, and is called
Valkenbourg, by the first Captains name that kept it: from thence ye go to
the North Fort, distant from the Houdt-port two thousand nine hundred and
sixty foot.

In Southland nere to Valkenbourg stands the new Fort, divided only from
Valkenbourg by the Dike, and this Fort lies open behind. By a conduit they can
empty the water of the Dike into the haven, or keep it in at their pleasure.
From the new Fort they have made a new dike as far as the town, which is
commonly called the new haven. Right over against the lesser Fort, the sluices
of the haven of Northland were opened to keep the enemy from access to the
North fort. The Lord Willoughby went into Holland to my Lords the States to
take order for all necessary provisions for the town: But before his departure,
he conferred with the Magistrate, and appointed the town to be divided into
eight quarters, and every quarter to be commanded by a sheriff, to ouersee the
Burghers and to look that they labored in the fortifying of those parts of
the town that were weakest.

The Burgomasters for that year were Frauncis Manteau, and Peter Suidlants:
the Sherifes were, William Frauncis the old Burgomaster, Cornelius John,
Cornelius Denis, Mark Martin, Adrian John, John Clarke, and Cornelius of
Heusden. The receivers were, Marin Nicholas the old Burgomaster, and Nicholas
de Ranst. When the sherifs upon important business could not ouersee the
workmen, then some of the chief Burghers of every quarter supplied their
places.

Four days after the Lord Willoughbies departure, the Burghers began at S.
James his gate, as ye go from the head to the new work, making first a trench
upon the bank or causey which leads from the same gate to the new haven. All
along the hedge, which is planted from the powder tower to the wooden gate,
fortifications were likewise made in manner of trenches, they did also labor
very diligently, in other places. On the high way from Wouwe, some of the
enemies horse were descried, whereupon, the sentinel on the watch tower, rang
the alarm bell. Sir William Drury the governor made a sallie, and caused the
enemy to retire. All the horse troops in the town followed the governor,
who with those forces that sailled with him pursued the enemy even to Wouwe:
part of the horse and foot, made a stand at the entering of the heath of Wouwe,
and the Downs of Berghen. In the mean time the governor returned having lost
one of his horsemen and two horse; for he went as far as the Churchyard of
Wouwe, where he skirmished with many of the enemies. Diverse condemned this his
attempt, saying, that he had greatly endaungered himself and the town, by his
too greedy desire of fight: For the enemy was superior to him in strength,
and he had too far engaged himself to return with safety to the town, if
the enemy should have assailed him. Returning from this sallie, he caused the
bridge at the Bulwark of Helstede to be broken down: for they that had
undertaken the works, had made a bridge over the dike, to fetch earth from the
hill of Varij-Bogaert to make an end of their work.

Cornelius John, the cities sheriff, sent messengers from the comminaltie of
the town, into Zeland, to aduertize my Lords the States, that the enemy
threatened to besiege the town of Berghen, and to that end lay with his camp
at Wouwe, and that the town was badly provided of necessaries for maintenance
of a siege, and that therefore, the magistrates of Berghen besought them of aid
and assistance in their necessity, as their neighbors and confederats; that
the cause was common, for if Berghen should be lost the Islands of Zeland
would be mightily endaungered. The next day (which was the 14) a boat came
from Zeland laden with plankes and other necessaries.

And because the States of Holland, Zeland, and those of the town of Dort, did,
during the siege, carefully send provision of all necessaries to the town: In
that regard I will truly say, that it was well provided of corn, butter,
cheese, salt, herring, salt fish, hay, straw, oats, powder, plankes, nails,
lead, bullets, match, pike, oziertwigs to make gabions etc. The Zelanders sent
five Culuerins of Portugal, each of them carrying a bullet of 26 pound weight;
they were of those which Peter Vander Does Vice Admiral of Holland found in
the Gallion of D. Diego Pimentell, which he took nere to Blankenberg, and
brought to Flushing. The enemies horse showing themselves again on the high
way of Wouwe were soon put to flight by our men, because their number was not
great. About the same time diverse fires were seen betwixt Rosendael, and
Calmthout, made by such as went from Calmthout toward Steenberghen to assemble
all their forces to go and invade the land of Tertholen, Montigni attempts to
enter the land of Tertholen.
as it afterward appeared: For, the night before the 17 of September, great
numbers of the enemy under the conduct of the Lord of Montigni, went along the
bank called Matreben to a place called Eendrecht, meaning to surprise the
Island. All the causey of Tertholen, especially where the water is so low as
the river may be crossed, is fortified with a trench, and forts well mand with
soldiers, are made in many needful places. The Count of Solms was governor of
the Island: There where the enemy thought to pass is a large extent of
ground, where on Tertholens side are 3 forts, the one Southward toward Tholen,
called the Botshoost, that in the midst is called Papen-mutse, or priests
cap, because it is square, and the third stretching Northward, is styled the
new Weer, or passage. The water being low, certain ensigns attempted to pass
over to the Fort of Papen-mutse: But the water was not so shallow as they
imagined, and the current was very strong, so that diverse of them were drowned
and slain by our men's shot: some of them notwithstanding passed over, and
being protected by the bank, made signs to their fellows to come over. But
all this being to no purpose, because the rest of them fled away, they were
enforced to take the water where they were all drowned. And as those which were
in the water striued to pass over, their fellows who stood upon the causey on
Brabant side, shot furiously upon those of the Island, yet they slew but one of
our men, which was a common soldier of Berchens company, but the enemy lost
200 men. When the enemy first offered to pass over, there were scarce forty
of our men to oppose them, but within a while after, Captain Lagro of Tholen
came thither with his company. And though those of the Island had fortunatly
repelled the enemy, yet they thought not themselves free from danger, knowing
that he had not idly made that attempt, but that he intended to surprise the
Isle of Tholen, thereby to molest those of Berghen, together with all Zeland,
assuring themselves that it would not be long ere he returned again, and
perhaps the next night following. And because they wanted men, to furnish all
places, they requested those of Berghen to send Adrian Guillaume, and George
Brissaulx with three hundred men under their command to them. This Adrian
Guillaume had in the first wars of Zeland been Admiral of Ziericzee, and was
then Lieutenant General to Count Solms, over all the forces of Zeland: Brissaulx
was son to James Brissaulx, a very good and religious man, who in former time
had bin Burgomaster of Bruges. These two were sent from the States of Zeland to
Berghen, so soon as they understood that the enemy meant to march toward the
Town.

The nineteenth of September the Drossart returned from Amsterdam where he had
bought great store of planks and other necessaries fit for fortification: An
officer, so named, for which we in English can give no proper name.
For besides his place of Drossart (which next to the Marquis is the highest
degree in Berghen) the fortifying of the town and sorts was committed to him.
His name was Elias Lion, son to Doctor Albert Lion, a very learned man, who
for the space of four and twenty years, had been chief professor of the
civil law at Louayne, and was at that time Chauncellor of Guelderland, and
chief Counselor to my Lords the general States of the united Provinces. The
night following, being the 20 of September, the enemy came to Raberch, and
about noone returned to Wouwe: Nothing at that time was done on either side,
for it rayned all that night, and likewise at noone after the enemies
departure. The Magistrates sent certain commissioners into Holland and Zeland
to my Lords the States, to acquaint them with the state of the Town, and to
crave aid. Cornelius John, the Towns sheriff, went to Zeland, and Adrian
Guillaume, the Secretary, into Holland. The two and twentieth of the said
month, by day break, there was an alarm, the trumpets sounded, drums were
beaten, and the alarm bell was rung: For the governor had assembled a troop
of soldiers to reenforce the morning guard, because the enemy was wont to make
his attempts about that time when the guard is most drowsy; wherewith he had
not acquainted the horsemen who had the guard upon the market place. Some of
them going through the streets, met with these soldiers, and demanded who they
were, and whether they went, but one among them giving a discourteous answer,
they returned to their officers acquainting them therewith: they not knowing
the matter, and thinking all was not well, did presently give the alarm. The
governor took this in bad part, and complained to the Captains of the wrong
done unto him therein, seeing his soldiers were assembled by his commandment.
The Captains of the horse answered they were ignorant that it was done by his
command, and that they ought to have been made acquainted therewith, in
regard of the state of the Town: Thereupon proclamation was made, that none
should dare to ring the alarm bell without express charge from the governor.

The next day, the soldiers spoiled General Fremins baggage: He, had been
governor of Wouwe Castle, and about a certain quarrel that arose betwixt him
and a Merchant of the same Castle, came into Holland to complain to my Lords
the States, to have him cassierd, and likewise to make provision of all
necessaries for keeping of the said Fort. The States had given him great store
of musket and faulconet bullets, match and barrels of powder. But before the
said Fremins return, the Merchant had already driven all those sorth of the
Castle which took Fremins part, and had secretly made an accord with the
enemy. Within a while after, about the seventeenth of January 1589, he sold
the castle to the enemy for 20000 crowns, and himself retired into France.
Until then, Fremin had carefully kept all these things: But as he was ready
to depart and had shipped all, the soldiers who had an inckling thereof,
thinking they had found a just cause of excuse (because it was against the law
of Arms to carry away such things forth of towns besieged) seized on all the
munition, together with his own goods and made booty of it, being
nevertheless enforced to restore back the greatest and best part thereof. The
next day after, the enemy was discovered upon the highway from Wouwe, marching
directly toward the town. Our horse and foot made a sallie upon him: but as
they approached the Downs of Berghen, the enemy turned upon the right hand and
went along the sandy way toward Riselberg and Nortgeest, where he encamped.
And because the water of the channel, which some did improperly term the
river of Zoom, was kept in by the sluices of the women's gate and that of
Steenberghen, all the fields betwixt Wouwes gate, and that of the women were
drowned, so as none could go from Wouwes gate to the North quarter. Our men
returned again to the town, and fallied sorth at Steenberghen gate with
displayed ensigns, alluring the enemy to fight, who had enclosed himself in
his camp.

The morrow after, he encamped toward the South, extending his camp from S.
Gertrudes hill as far as the vale, therein comprehending Burghvliet,
Zudgeest, the Raberg, and part of Berghens wood, which lies Eastward from the
town. The Raberg is so termed, because that Rat in the Dutch tongue signifies
a wheel whereon malefactors are broken and executed; and upon that hill
execution was commonly done. The enemy within a day or two alter his arrival,
burnt the gallows upon the hill, Southward from the town, as ye go toward
Antuerpe. S. Gertrude is worshipped by superstitious people, because (as they
say) she preserues them from rats and mice. In former times she was patroness
of the town, and it is said, that she was Lady of the whole country of
Berghen: Her chapel, which in time past stood upon the hill nere to the
drowned country of Southland, gave it that name. The vale is part of the
arable grounds which lie betwixt the wood, town and champaine country,
extending it self, partly toward the West, and in part toward Wouwes gate:
The Southgeest is an high place, and Burghvliet was a village, where a castle
stood which was burnt by the French (as has been said.) Those of Tholen had
placed thirty men in the castle of Halteten, which took it name from the
village, not that they thought them strong enough to resist the enemy, but
only to serve for Sentinels to those of the Island, and to give them notice of
the enemies approach. The soldiers, being threatened by the enemy, yielded up
the castle on safety of their lives and goods. The same day, two horsemen were
slain with the canon from Reigers-tower: one of them was a man of note, and
was afterward buried at Antuerpe with 800 torches.

About the same time we received supplies from all parts. My Lords the States,
notwithstanding that the Isle of Tholen was to be provided for, sent us great
numbers of Hollanders and Scots Those of Flushing, Briell, and Ostend, sent us
store of choice soldiers. There came likewise fourscore men from
Gertrudenbergh, conducted by an English captain called Brock: these men had
forsaken the States pay, and served among the English*Besides all this, six
ensigns of foot came to us from England, about the first of November. So that
the number of soldiers which at the beginning of the siege were in all, both
horse and foot, but one thousand five hundred, as appeared by the muster rolls,
did before the enemies departure amount to five thousand. The Captains of the
horsemen perceiving the enemy to be encamped, thought it necessary to make
some sallie forth upon him whilst they might do it, telling the governor, Sir
William Drurie, that it behooved them, now at first, to give the enemy some
affront, and that it would greatly disgrace them, if they should not make some
proof of their valor. But others, of a contrary opinion, said, that every
victory was uncertain: and that if they should chance to be vanquished by the
enemy, it would greatly endaunger the Town: and that if themselves should
overcome, the enemy might easily bear that loss: that they had to do with a
mighty and victorious enemy: that it was true that sallies are commonly
thought prejudicious to the besieged, but it was only in such places where the
enemies were few in number, and where the besiege might in such sort be shut in
by the enemy, as he could not easily receive new supplies: but our numbers
were great enough, and we might daily receive fresh supplies from the united
Provinces, by means of the commodiousnesse of our haven. Captain Paul Bacx
made answer, We likewise, are not ignorant (quoth he) how it behoues* us to
deal wisely therein: we know very well that the enemy has a mighty and
victorious camp, and many men; we likewise have often made trial what
soldiers they are. But if it shall not please the governor to grant the
demands of the Captains of the horse, for my part, let this mighty and
victorious enemy make his approches, and at last (for I will use his own
words) come and draw us by the ears one by one forth of the town into his
camp. This speech being not allowed of by many, he went his way without any
further talk. But the governor called him back, together with the rest that
were there present, and said, seeing your request tends to the good and
preservation of the Town, I will no longer deny it. Then every man went and
armed himself, no drum was beaten nor trumpet sounded, to call the troops
together, but each man gave notice to his fellow, of the sallie, and forthwith,
at the hour appointed, they were all ready together. A Gentleman of Holland,
whose name was Vchtenbreck, cornet to captain Paul Bacx, was sent forth to
draw the enemy into the field betwixt the camp and town, he was seconded by
14 or 15 harquebuziers, who went altogether toward the camp. Nere to the
town dikes there is a low way which stretches from Steenberghen gate as far
as Helst point, and it is ouerlookt by the hill of Varigobart, which ends nere
to this point, and there makes a vallie. The Lanciers went this way toward the
said vallie, holding down their lances, keeping them from the enemies sight
who was encamped on the Rijsselberg, and Northgeest. Those of the town make a
sallie upon the enemy.
The Harquebuziers of Marcelis Bacx kept themselves close to the Lanciers.
Captain Paul Bacx, and his brother, led the vantgard, being followed by the
lord Willoughbies cornet, and captain Parker. The enemy having descried this
small troop, coming with Vchtenbroeck, sent certain musketeers to encounter
them. In the field where Vchtenbroeck and his soldiers lay, there were many
hedges which divided one field from another; these did the said musketeers make
good; and whilst they skirmished with Vchtenbroeck, our men which were behind
Varibogart hill perceived it, and, being very glad of so fair an occasion, rod
a full galop upon the enemy, sound their trumpets, and with their swords and
lances every man did his best. The musketeers were beaten from their shelter,
and were enforced to quit their arms, and to crave that they might be taken
prisoners: many of them were slain, and many taken, for they were so
encompassed by our men, as they could not escape. Certain of the enemies
musketeers are defeated.
The enemy taking pity on his people, sent three cornets of horse to rescue
them, who were soon put to rout by the two brethren Bacx that led the
vantgard, and enforced to retire to Rijsselberg, from whence they saw their
musketeers slain and taken prisoners. During the fight certain prisoners were
sent into the town, among whom was a young gentleman, Nephew to that Groesbeke
who in former time had been bishop of Liege, surnamed Amsterode, and was
Lieutenant general to a Regiment of Almans, who had received a great wound in
the face. Our men determined to return back to the town so soon as they
should have executed some notable enterprise upon the enemy, not meaning to
tarry till the whole force of the camp should fall upon them, being too weak
to resist; and to speak truly, they had won honor enough and might freely
have returned with their prisoners in triumph: which they had done* but for
captain Parkers courageous resolution, who could not be satisfied with the
flight of the enemies horse, which at their ease beheld the usage of their own
men; so as charging them in a place where they had great advantage, he repulsed
them once or twice; but as himself was likewise constrained to retreat to the
hill, where the enemy stood, to drive them thence, where the whole camp was by
this time in arms, and the enemies cauallerie receiving both new aid, and
courage, making a fierce charge upon him, he and his troop were in danger
either to have bin oppressed with multitude, or to have been taken prisoners:
thrice did the enemy lay hold on Parker, and thrice did he free himself from
them, and bravely defended himself with his sword. The brethren Bacx, and
captain Poolie, perceiving the danger wherein captain Parker was, and being
spurd forward by a desire of honor, galoped into the thickest throng of the
enemies, making more account of the preservation of so brave a soldier, than
of any gain, booty, or prisoners: so that seventy prisoners who had been
taken at the beginning of the fight, and were not yet carried into the town,
were in all have slain, yet some escaped. The arrival of our men opened
Parker a large way to escape from the enemy: whilst they were busied in
fight, the Lord Willoughby and the General Wilford came from Holland, who
without entering into any house sallied forth with great numbers of foot to
reskew the horse, who after they had bravely executed their enterprise,
returned toward the town in good order, being pursued by the enemies who were
extremely grieved that Parker escaped from them. Parker had received certain
musket shot on his armor, but was not hurt, because it was of proof. Where
the heat of the fight had been, great heaps of dead men and horse lay. Of our
horsemen some four or five were slain, but many were hurt, and the loss of
horse was great. It is reported that two hundred of the enemy were slain.
This was done on the five and twentieth of September after dinner. Whilst the
horsemen fought with the enemy, the masons broke down a certain wall of the
remainder of the Abbie, because the enemy should not make use of it against
the town. Presently after this fight the enemy shortened and took in his
camp, which he had at first much amplified and enlarged, and forsook the high
Northgeest, strongly fortifying and entrenching himself both to the South and
Northward of the town to defend himself from our sallies: for he expected no
such dealing, and never thought that there had bin so great courage and valor
in those of the town.

Toward evening the Drossart, Burgomasters and sherifs assembled themselves,
with whom joined the captains, Vere, Scot, Baskeruile, and Salisburie to
consult together what was necessary for the preservation of the town. And ever
after, they observed this order, that the governor and chief of the Council
of war, did once a day meet at the state house, to confer of matters
concerning the present estate of the town, which was a matter very
commendable, especially in a town besieged. For by this means all difficulties
were at first easily removed that did arise at such a time betwixt the
soldiers and Burghers, when any thing is done by mischaunce on one part or
other to the prejudice of either.

Ever since then, the Magistrate, to show his diligence, did daily meet twice,
namely, at eight of the clock in the morning, and two of the clock after
noone.

The lord Willoughby requested the magistrate that the Burghers might arm, and
keep Corpse du guard in the streets; and the matter was brought so far forward,
as captains and officers were chosen: but by reason diverse excused themselves
through want of armor, which the mutinous French had taken from them in former
time, nothing ensued thereof.

On the 28 of this month, Sir Tho Morgan, who had bin governor of the town,
returned from England. The Queen and my lords the states had sent him to be
governor in Sir William Druries place. The states had a while before, sent
Lancelot Parisijs commistarie of the musters, enjoining him to tell the Council
of war and magistrates, that it had pleased her Ma. to write unto them of late,
as likewise to the lord Willoughby, The Queen of England makes Morgan governor
of Berghen.
that it was her express will and pleasure that Morgan should be governor; and
to this end they likewise sent her Ma. letters by the said Lancelot: And in
this respect they would herein do nothing contrary to her Ma. command. The
contents of whose letters was, that having intelligence how the Duke of Parma
had attempted to besiege Berghen-op-Zoom; in that regard she thought it fit to
give the government of the town to Sir Thom. Morgan, the better to assure it
against the enemies power, and that her pleasure was to have him forthwith
installed in Druries stead, who had lately bin reco^mended to her by the
states, not that she in any sfsort doubted of Druries loyalty and valor, but
Morgans long experience in war, together with the peoples love toward him, had
caused that alteration. The cause why the Queen spoke thus of the peoples love
toward Morgan, and the recommending of him to my lords the states, was,
because my lord Willoughby did not greatly affect Morgan. Sir Thom. perceiving
this, and that he could not build upon Willoughbies favor for the government
of Berghen, and that there were diverse that sued for it, found means to get the
favor of the magistrates and Burghers, by whose means he obtained letters of
recommendation to her Ma. both from the states, and comminalty of Berghen. The
Lord Willoughby in the mean time had by sundry practices established Drurie
in the government; but because it was done without the States consent, they
therefore wrote unto the Queen, that no opposition might be made against her
highness command. After Morgans arrival, sundry quarrels arose, not only,
betwixt the two Governors, but among the Captains and soldiers.

The English held more with Drurie than Morgan, the Low-countrie men and Scots
took Morgans part: Willoughby favored Drurie against Morgan; and therefore he
gave the government of the town to Morgan, but made Drurie captain of the
Forts, saying he did so, because her Majesty spoke only of the town and not
of the Forts. Morgan on the contrary maintained it to be a very absurd
matter, because the town and forts depended one upon an other, and never had
different governors.

Count Solms and General Villers came opportunely from Zeland whilst the
governors contested about the government, and exhorted them to peace and
concord. Yet, for all that, Drurie commanded the Forts of the Haven, and
Morgan the Town. Those of Druries faction were likewise placed in the Forts.
Drurie came not often into the town, and spoke seldom to Morgan, but there
was still some quarrel or other; he did also highly complain of the
Magistrates and my Lords the States: who were much displeased with this discord,
especially because their authority and command was directly contemned: every
man feared that some inconvenience would ensue.

The nine and twentieth of this month, the imposition upon wine and beer was
let to ferme, which was paid during the siege as in time before. The next day,
Willoughby made an other sallie upon the North side of the Camp, and though he
used the same order and means as at the first sallie, yet he did no great
matter; for the enemy behaved himself more wisely, and would no more be
surprised from behind the hill of Varibogart as at first: the footmen kept
within the trenches of their Camp, or behind the bushes not far off, and did
no more assail our men as before. Our footmen stood in battle within
musket shot of the Town, yet the Cauallery incountred one an other, and the
fight was sharp on both sides, our men gave a brave charge, and the enemy made
gallant resistance; each did their best. Poolies horse who was Cornet to the
Lord Willoughby, was slain under him, and was presently remounted to revenge
his loss. In the skirmish, Marcelis Bacx encountered a certain Albanois, whom
after he had thrust through with his sword, he took by head and shoulders,
and drew him and his horse by force forth of the enemies throng,
notwithstanding all his resistance, and carried him away prisoner. After he had
done this noble deed, his horse fell down dead under him, for he was shot
through on both sides: the ordnance, on the bulwark of the Friars Minors and
on Steenberghen gate, played furiously upon the enemy, carrying away both men
and horse into the air. Yet this could not discourage the enemy, who was
superior to us in number, and this fight seemed a combat for honor and not
for life, so doubtful and uncertain was the event thereof, which continued
till night and darkness separated them.

The Captains, Lieutenants, Cornets, Quartermasters, Corporals, and common
soldiers had received sundry shot upon their armor, yet very few of them
were hurt, the greatest loss was in horse: how it went on the enemies side I
know not.

Those which lay toward the South did, on the 1 day of October, begin to draw
their trenches from the Ball as far as the Hospital. Two days after, a
certain Spaniard came and yielded himself; he had slain 1 of his fellows,
The strength of Parmas Camp.
and for that cause came to our side. Being questioned concerning the state of
the camp, he said that there were 30000 men in it, that they had already
brought 6 canon with the^ and did daily expect 50 more: that the enemy
determined to make his battery toward the water mill, and so confirmed the
common report how that 60 pieces of ordnance were coming to the camp. This
Spaniard was sent to prince Maurice and the States. And because the rampire,
next the water mill, was too weak to resist the Canon they fortified it and
made it thicker. To this end the Magistrate sent the Burgomaster Suydland into
Zeland, to the States to crave some help toward the fortifications, because
in many places, the town was very weak, and unprovided of money, workmen,
and other necessaries, the enemy daily more and more enuironing it, and doing
his best to win it.

The second day, after the Burgomasters departure, the enemy made a Fort there
where the Hospital had stood, which was within Harquebuze shot of the town.
Then every man assured himself that the enemy would there likewise make a
battery. upon the high way toward Calmthout great numbers of Carts and wagons
were discerned, which the horse could hardly draw, so as they came but slowly
on to the towne-ward. The Burghers and soldiers thought them to be the other
canons which the Spaniard talked of; so as the Burghers began to fortify
betwixt the gate of Wouwe and that of the Nuns, that the rampire might be free
from the enemies small shot. They likewise brake down the walls of Wouwe gate
which were too high, that they might do no hurt when the enemy should play
upon them with his canon. A way was likewise made athwart the gardens at the
foot of the rampires, that the caual lerie might lie safe, if the enemy should
batter the town. But it was far from the enemies meaning to make any
battery; for those carts and wagons had brought no ordnance, but only boats,
having some other design, as the event declared. The morrow after, which was
the seventh of October, fifty two ensigns of foot came on the North side of
the camp, commanded by Count Egmont, these companies encamped on the lower
part of the Northgeest.

There is a causie on Northland nere to Benmoer, called Eesterdike, because
certain trees called Eesters had been planted there. This causie loses it
name nere to Dryanneland. It begins at the nether end of the Northgeest, and
extends it self toward Northlands causie as far as the Sea, and diuides first
the land from Benmoer, and next, the country of Dryanneland from Northland; in
that manner making three ways, as far as the Sea-dike.

My Lords the States had already of a long time pierced the said causie of
Dryanneland, hoping that the water would enter into it, by the Geux Gullet or
hole, and that entering into Northland nere to Bariebas, and so together through
the Gullet of Dryannelands causie, the water would make a great breach, and
thereby take all means from the enemy to come upon Northlands causie. The
enemy was often seen upon that of Dryanneland, making good observations of
all things. Our men presently suspected the truth of the matter; how that they
intended to make a bridge over that Gullet, thereby to come upon Northland
causie, which done, they might then keep our vessels forth of the haven. Much
speech was made of this causie: some were of opinion to level and make it
even; others said it was necessary to build a fort there where the causies did
meet, and for the effecting thereof, had conference with Count Solms. Now
because the first would have bin too great and costly a labor without any profit
at all (for if the causie had bin leuelled and made plain it would have stood
the enemy in better stead than before) and that the second was not without
danger, because the enemy was so nere that place, neither the one nor other
was done. The next night after, the enemy himself seized on that causie,
placing two great shallops in the Gullet, with which he passed over his
soldiers, and within a while after, he made a bridge there. At the same time
likewise, he seized on the causie of Matteberg, whereof we have heretofore
spoken in mentioning the enemies enterprise upon the Isle of Tholen. Upon that
causie he planted his canon, and thereby took all means from those of Tholen
of going into Holland.

In the gullet of Tholen, the causie was likewise pierced through in 2 places,
and there they had also built a fort, called the Gueux hole.

Opposite to the gullet of Tholen, lay certain boats of war, which the enemies
canon enforced to ret^eat. Right over against Barlabas, lay the Admiral of
Zeland with an other man of war. So soon as it was day, the Vice Admiral,
George More, discharged two or three canons: after some shot made these two
ships were enforced to retire to Romerswael, being shot through in diverse
places, not without loss of some soldiers and mariners. As our boats went
forth of the Haven, some toward Holland, others to Zeland, they were likewise
saluted by the enemies canon. The first that went forth, notwithstanding it
received certain shot, went forward on her journey, the two last returned
back, one of which was shot through, in which a Burghers wife with her child
in her lap was slain, and two other women hurt. These, fearing the enemy,
were flying into Holland and Zeland. For at the beginning of the siege somewere
so terrified, as they thought their only preservation to consist in getting
forth of the town. This fear was not lessened, when the people saw the very
captains send away their wives, children, and goods. Some of those, who
received no pay, nor were under any command, living only by booty, in all
impious and voluptuous pleasures, did in troops forsake the town, and spared
for no cost, so they might be gone.

Toward the evening, a boat came from Holland, whereat the enemy made sundry
shot, yet but one soldier was slain, who stood at the Helm.

The horsemen made complaint that they wanted hey and prouender for their
horse, but that want was soon supplied from Holland.

About the same time, the soldiers of Geertrudenberg took certain ships
laden with Delfts beer, cheese, butter, herring, and oil, which they brought
into our haven. These boats were licenced by my Lords the States to go to
Antuerpe and Breda. The merchants were imprisoned at Geertrudenberg, and the
soldiers hung up their passeport upon the gallows. Our men would have
imitated them, and took certain boats; but my Lords the States, commanded
them to desist. The goods were restored to the Merchants, by the States
commandment, presently after the enemies departure; and they sent supplies of
horse and foot to those of Tholen, which were landen at Venusdam, opposite to
Romerswael.

The enemy doing his best to take the Haven from those of the Town, the
townes-men in like manner did their uttermost to keep it, and made sundry new
works, the first upon the North causie some six hundred foot from the North
Fort, called the Priests cap, extending it self toward the Town. On the
Havens bank, nere to Helst, they made a trench. The fort called Stauast, was
begun the foureteenth of October: upon the Northland causie is a place called
Barlabas, one thousand one hundred and five foot from the North fort, where the
causie was pierced through in two several places. These two holes hindered the
enemy from bringing his canon to batter the North fort. Our men fearing that
the enemy in the end would do that there, which he had done at the causie of
Dryanneland, did themselves make good the place, and built a fort there, which
the people called Stauast, because they were to stay there to free the Haven
from the enemy: and for the sooner building of it, they took away the
Burghers fagots, especially from bakers and potters.

And because the sandy bank of Romerswael stretched as far as our Haven, and
that it was very dangerous for such boats as would at that place enter into
it, because they were to hold on their course too nere the enemies Canon; to
prevent this, the shippers or sailors took an other way behind Romerswael, and
so by the South entered the haven, where was less danger: For betwixt the
sandy bank, and the causie where the enemy had planted his canon, the Scheld
runs, so as the boats could not avoid the enemies canon, which lay within 2000
foot of the fort of Stauast, by reason whereof, they could bring their canon no
nearer the havens mouth; for notwithstanding he discharged his ordnance upon
the boats which entered the Haven, yet could he never touch any of them; which
was a manifest work of God.

Nere to the gullet of Tholen, lies a drowned land called Broeloose, the which
confines upon the causie called Steendijke. There did the States of Zeland make
a new haven, very nere to the causie of Tholen opposite to Molsgat (a Fort so
named) on the river of Eendrecht. By this means the Isle was fortified, and a
commodious passage found to go to Tholen: for the Gullet of Tholen was very
dangerous because of the enemies canon, who since that time had small use for
his ordnance.

Eight horsemen of Bacx his company, Eight of Bacx his horsemen take three
captains prisoners
embarked themselves on the 13 of October to go toward Lillo, landing in a
certain place, where they took their way as though they had come from
Antuerpe; by which devise they took 3 of the enemies captains with their
baggage, who came from Antuerpe toward the camp, and with their booty
returned to their boat.

The strife betwixt Morgan and Drurie was not yet ended. Upon the 14 of
October, at night, prince Maurice and General Villers came to Berghen. The Lord
Willoughby had threatened to imprison Morgan, and great harm was likely to
ensue about this contention. But his Excellencies arrival pacified the matter
after this manner; That Willoughbie so long as he remained in the Town,
should command all men as her Majesty's Lieutenant, and in his absence,
Morgan, and that Drurie should get him gone, who nevertheless remained there
till the end of the siege It was reported that the enemy had an intent to
seize on the remainder of the causie of Southland by passing through the drowned
lands at a low water, thereby to keep boats from entering the haven at that
place. And nere to Burghvliet, the footsteps of those who had been sent by
night to view the place, were discerned.

Gabions and three piece of ordnance were planted upon the head, the greatest
of which carried a bullet of 44 pound, and the other two of sixteen pound. The
canons in every Fort did likewise play upon the enemy, when any boat arrived.
The causie whereon the enemy lay was by the continual rain and soldiers
treading become so deep and slipperie, as they could hardly stand upon it.
They had neither plankes nor straw, and the soldiers were enforced to stand in
the rain in the trenches without any shelter up to the knees in water. There
was daily great tempests of wind and rain, and it seemed though the enemy
besieged Berghen that they themselves were besieged by rain, wind, and sundry
other grievous discommodities. Those of the town began to level the causie of
Southland, but perceiving their labor to be vain, they gave over that
resolution. At the causies end was a very broad dike; all men thought it fit
there to build a Fort, because that nere to the said dike there was a great
piece of ground which was commonly dry, so as the same dike might serve to
defend the Fort against the enemy; the Scheld likewise is not very broad in
that place, by reason of the great dike opposite to Southland, where in former
time the toll house of Zeland stood. There, diverse men of war lay at anchor;
but if the enemy with his Shalops had brought his ordnanceto the Southland
causie, he might easily have driven them thence, as he had done before
Barlabas, and the Gullet of Tholen.

George More Vice Admiral of Zeland, having viewed the place, said as much:
they only wanted workmen. Willoughby would have had the Burghers to make the
Fort; but they tired with labor and travail, and afraid of the enemy, who
lay not far from thence on the firm land, refused to do it, saying that he
did them wrong to cause them to labor so far from the town, and in danger
of the enemy: For this dike was distant three thousand one hundred and thirty
foot from Valckenbourg, and Valckenbourg four thousand foot from the town,
which together, amount to seven thousand one hundred and thirty foot.

The Drossart, Burgomasters, and the two preachers, namely Jacob Baselis the
elder, and Jacob Baselis the younger, did so far prevail with the Burghers,
by remembering them of their duty due to their country, as they voluntarily
offered their labor for ending of the work, every man promising to be ready
at the sound of the drum. The afternoon, Sermon ended, for it was upon
Sunday, the drum began to sound.

The Burgomaster Sudland with certain of the Magistrates, and Jacob Baselis the
younger, with the elders of the Church, every man a shouel in his hand did, in
the evening meet at the place where the fort was to be built, and were in a
manner followed by all the Burghers. A cornet of horse was sent forth to defend
them from the enemy, if he should have come down from Burghvliet. But because
the plot of the work was not yet made, and those which should have made it
different in opinion, nothing was done that night.

The Italians that lay in camp nere to S. Geertrudes, seeing so many men
assembled upon the Southland causie right over against them, went forth to see
what it meaned: they set Sentinels every where and were all of them up in
arms. The next day being the ^7 of October, they diligently began the work.

The eighteenth of October, our men made an other sallie on Steenberghens side:
but the enemy kept himself within his trenches and would not come forth,
whereupon they returned to the town. The enemy attempteth to surprise the
North Fort.
On the twentieth of October, at night, the enemy cunningly thought to have
surprised the North Fort; the manner whereof I will set down at large. We have
heretofore mentioned, how that our horsemen, some two or three days before the
siege, had taken two Spaniards prisoners. These were committed to the keeping
of an English victualler called Redhead, of whom Grimston ensign to Baskervile
bought his provision: by this means, both of them fell acquainted with the
prisoners, who did at last earnestly solicit them to do some notable service
to the king of Spain. This did they discover to the Lord Willoughby, and
craved his advice how they should proceed with the Spanish prisoners.
Willoughby enjoined them to treat with them about yielding up the North Fort to
the Duke of Parma. After sundry conferences and consultations with the
prisoners, they did in the end agree to deliver up the Fort, which was an easy
matter for the ensign to do, who was oftentimes captain of the watch of the
Fort when Baskerviles company had the guard of it: This thus concluded, the
ensign and victualler feigned themselves fugitives, and carried the prisoners
letters to the Duke of Parma, unto whom they had many times written about that
business.

On the 20 of October, when it was dark, they went to the duke (who to this
end, did the same night lodge at the low Northgeest) telling him that all
things were in readiness for the surrender of the Fort: It is reported, that
he stood in some doubt of them, and that therefore he made sundry demands
concerning the fort, as who commanded in it, how many soldiers it had, and by
what means they would deliver it unto him; That he did beside, take their oath
that they should deal faithfully with him therein, causing them to receive the
Sacrament of the Altar (as the Papists term it.) Being assured of their
loyalty, he gave to each of them a chain of gold, promising them a good sum
of money the deed being once done. Then he made choice of a certain number of
his best soldiers, to go and receive the Fort in his name, and caused
Grimstons and the victuallers hands to be bound behind them with match, and
gave two ponyards to two soldiers commanding them to kill them, if they
perceived the least suspicion by the way.

The Lord Willoughby in the mean time manned the Fort with valiant soldiers,
and on each side of the causies placed certain numbers of musketeers, and in
the gate whereat the enemy was to enter, he caused an iron port-cullis to be
hung up by roopes, which cut, the port-cullis would fall down and stop the
passage.

The enemy en^eth the Fort, but to his small advantage.
All these things being in readiness, Willoughby with great devotion attends
the enemies coming. At last they came forward passing at a low water the
drowned North-land and found the gate open according to promise. There stood
one likewise at the gate who in the Spanish tongue welcomed them. When some
fifty of the chief were entered, the Lord Willoughby with his own hand, did
cut the cords, and so stopped up the passage that no more could enter.

Grimston and the victualler escape.
Those within the Fort charged the enemies, most of whom were slain, and the
rest taken prisoners. Grimston and the victualler perceiving hoset^ at kept
them to be amazed, escaped. Those abroad finding themselves thus deluded, did
by force pluck up the pallizadoes and gave a fierce assault, but all in vain,
for they could not reach the highest pallizado, and those within the sort
saluted them with harquebuze shot.

The enemy flies.
The enemy being thus beguiled, threw away their arms and fled: those that
were in ambush on the causie, did with great noice break forth, and charged the
flying enemy, making great slaughter among them. In the mean time the tide
came in, so as diverse of the enemies, thinking to escape, fell into the dikes
of Northland and were drowned. Three hundred of them were slain, and as many
wounded, as was afterward known by certain prisoners.

The chief prisoners were D. Iuan de Mendoza, a man of good years, who
afterward died in the Hospital of his wounds: and another D. Iuan de Mendoza,
a young man, Gregorio Vites, Christofero de Porres, Godefredo Gordone, Tristano
Lignicable, and Alonzo Idiaques, all Dons (as the Spanyard terms them) and men
of noble houses.

The next day no ensigns were seen wauing in both the camps, which was a sign
that the enemy lamented the loss of his men: the two Spanish prisoners by
sentence of the Council of war were hanged, for that being prisoners, they had
solicited the ensign and victualler to commit treason.

Much good ensued to us hereby: For by this means we were wholly freed from
fear of treachery, because the enemy being thus deceived, would never give
credit to any other, though they meant never so faithfully: and yet Grimston
and the victualler were condemned by all men for renouncing their Religion and
for perjurie, so as their own Nation did greatly tax them. And it is credibly
reported, that a certain great man of England did in this manner recommended
them to her Majesty, unto whom they went to crave recompense for their
service: Madame (quoth he) there are diverse forcible reasons why these men
should be honorably rewarded, for if those who only expose their bodies do
deserve, what do they which have adventured both body and soul?

Those of the town had true intelligence, that the remainder of the Spanish
fleet perished on the Scottish and Irish coast, so as very few of them
returned into Spain. Those of Berghen g^ue God thanks for the dissi^ation of
the Spanish fleet.
For which, upon the one and twentieth of October, the people by tolling of a
Bell were called to Church to give thanks unto God, and Sermons were made both
morning and evening. At night all the ordnance in the town and forts were
discharged, and the soldiers upon the rampires thundered forth many volleys of
small shot, so that nothing could be heard in the town for the noice of
trumpets, drums and bells. They which had no harquebuzes fastened wispes of
straw to the end of their pikes which they did set on fire holding them up into
the air, so as the town and forts seemed to burn: for beside the fire which
the soldiers made, others were kindled on the Rampires and in the town. The
soldiers cried out to the Spaniards how that the Spanish fleet was coming to
help them to win the North fort: and ever after the enemy began to lose his
courage.

A certain boat laden with corn, thinking to enter the Haven was by the wind
driven upon the North head: the enemy shot at this boat, and touched it thrice,
yet no man was hurt, and at last by the mariners diligence it was brought into
the town. Every day there were skirmishes, and every hour some new matter
or other was performed in the plain betwixt the town and enemies camp: But the
Burghers being tired with continual labor, complained saying that they could
do no more; whereupon, governor Morgan advised the magistrates to impose some
tax upon every Burgher, and with the money hire laborers to end the work. The
Burgomaster Manteau assembled the great Council, and propounded to them the
governors demand. This great Council is composed of the new Council, viz.
of the Magistrates then in authority, and of the old, namely, of such as have
been Burgomasters, Sherifes, receivers, and counselors chosen out of every
company, who have a place in this great Council. The Governors demand was
allowed, and the Burghers were discharged from their labor, and the work
which was imperfect, was within a while finished.

There was great want of planks, so as they were enforced to tear up diverse
new floares to serve for the works, which, after the siege, the town paid
for. But this want, together with that of other necessaries being not fully
supplied, the Burghomaster Sudland was on the six and twentieth of October
sent into Holland, not only to my Lords the States, but to the magistrates of
the town of Dort, who during the siege, showed themselves very affectionat to
the good of the town. Certain Scots lay in a Burghers house called John
Dyalle, who among other things fit to burn, plucked up a piece of timber called
a summer which supported the whole frame, whereupon the whole house fell down
upon them, and slew 3 of them: thereupon, proclamation was made on pain of
life, that no soldier should break up any timber in any house.

On the Rampires of the town and forts, pitch barrels full of chips and straw
were placed, to give light if the enemy should in the night make any attempt
upon the town. The seven and twentieth of October the great bell was rung to
publish the Fair or free Mart, not in hope that many people would come to it,
but because the town is bound so to do for fear of loosing the privilege of
the Mart. During this time, which continued six weeks, all fugitives may
boldly come thither (traitors, thieves, and banished men excepted:) and no man
is called in question for debt, but only for that which he shall fall into
during the Mart. The day following, his Excellency came into the town, by his
presence to encourage the soldiers and Burghers to view the fortifications,
and to take order for all necessaries belonging to the siege. The same day, the
imposition heretofore mentioned was much raised, which did in no sort please
the Burghers: who understanding that my Lords the States were come into the
Isle of Tholen, sent the Burgomaster Manteau, and William Frauncis the old
Burgomaster to them; these at ten of clock at night went in the company of
his Excellencies servants to Venusdam, and prevailed so far with my Lords the
States as they promised to give them three thousand florins toward the
fortification of Berghen, and they received one thousand eight hundred in hand.
The morrow after the Burgomasters departure, the enemy forsook the causie of
Matteberg. Those of the Island perceiving it, did without any noyce set fire on
the enemies camp. The time was not long ere the enemy would be enforced with
great disgrace and loss to retire: For despairing to take the town he could
expect no less, but to have his camp ruined by little and little, with
continual sallies, canon shot from the town, rain, foul weather, and
sickness which ensued: The enemy forsakes the North land causie and prepares
to be gone.
whereupon, on the thirtieth of October, he forsook the Northland causie.
Those of the Gueux Gullet were the first that perceived his departure, and came
with their boats to their causie, where they found none but one Alman who was
fast a sleep, who being awaked and perceiving his fellows to be gone, fell
upon his knees and sued for his life: then did our men presently break the
bridge over the Gullet of Dryanneland.

Upon the thirtieth or one and thirtieth of October, at night, the enemy with
fourteen great shalops went to Sea-ward to see if they could take any booty,
yet they took nothing but a poor fisherman of Romerswael, and about noone
returned from whence they came; our men of war though they were undersail
could not overtake them, for they still kept in the shallowest waters. His
Excellency, Count Solms, my Lords, Barne^velt, Egmont, Valck, Vosbergue, and
diverse others did the same day come to the Town: The soldiers, that they
might show their valors to the said Lords, made a fallie forth of the North
side of the Town, but in vain, because the enemy would not come forth.

The Burghers Fort was not yet ended. The money before mentioned being granted
by my Lords the States, the imposition was lessened and certain Boores hired
to end the work. Our men planted two canons on a certain place called
Boeten-verdriet, with which they scoured the valley betwixt the high and nether
Northgeest, and shot into the enemies Camp, so as sometimes with one shot,
they overthrew tents, barrels of wine^, tons of Beer, and men all at once:
The enemy to redress this inconvenience made many Gabions in the valley, but
to small purpose. In the mean time, a rumor was spread that the enemy had
made a Mine from Holweghen, as far as the town Dike, to blow up part
thereof; and though most men thought it a vain and idle reeport, yet, because
the water in the South Dike was on the sixth of November fallen one foot, this
fable was received for truth. The Lord Willoughby with two or three other went
directly to Holweghen: this way is so low, as a man from thence can scarce
discern the top of a pike, notwithstanding that he that carries it should
advance it as high as he could: and although the enemy was not far from them
upon S. Gertrudes mount, yet the lord Willoughbie would not return ere he had
from above well viewed and considered the depth of that way, where he found no
marks or signs of any Mine.

The ninth of November the Earl of Northumberland and general Norris came
from England with a gallant train of gentlemen: At their arrival all the
ordnance great and small was discharged, and the great Bell was rung: The Earl
came to see the Low Countries and Berghen-op-Zoom: General Norris was by her
Majesty sent to my Lords the States to procure some aid for D. Antonio King of
Portugal; for the Queen prepared a mighty fleet to re-establish D. Antonio in
his kingdom, from whence he had been expulsed by the Spaniards. A skirmish
with the enemy.
Vchtenbroeck with five or six horse galoped forth of the gates toward the
Sautwech before the enemies camp and there took two horsemen prisoners, and a
victualler with a wagon laden with beer, who in despite of the enemy, and
before his face they brought to the Town. And to give some delight to the
Earl, the English did the next day determine to make a sallie; the footmen
sallied upon the enemies camp by the Mine at the powder gate, for in have they
had made a Bridge over the Dike: These at Holweghen did skirmish with the
Italians that lay upon Saint Gertrudes mount: the horse sallied at Wouwe gate.
Parker stayed upon Wijngaert hill, and Poolie in the plain toward
Bourghvliet: The brethren Bacx were not there, for they had no warning of the
sallie. The Almans which were encamped on the Rabergh came down into the
plain at the foot of the hill, and made a stand not far from Wijngaerts
hill, many retired behind the hedges and bushes, others allured our men to come
forward. Captain Veer, with some thirty soldiers, drives away the Almans
from their place of advantage, Parker assailes and pursues them as far as
the Rabergh, and suffers few of them to escape.

A young Gentleman, Captain of a foot company, being on horseback, and
charging together with Parker, was taken prisoner, being carried by the fury
of his horse into the midst of the enemies camp, and was afterward
exchanged for D. Iuan de Mendoza, both of them being almost of one age: All
prisoners that were taken did constantly affirm that the Duke of Parma
determined to raise the siege.

On the eleventh of November, a general sallie was made on Steenberghens side
by all the horse and foot, some few excepted, who here and there guarded the
gates and the Rampires. General Balfort with six hundred choice soldiers,
both Dutch and Scotch, came thither at the same time from Tholen. Captain Veer
conducted the free booters that were to begin the skirmish. Captain Marcelis
Bacx with his harquebuziers marched directly toward the enemies camp. Balfort
embattailed his troops on the highway of Steenberghen. Those of the town stood
in the plain on the right hand of that highway toward the West. The Lanciers
went somewhat on the one side toward the Sand-Wegh. The footmen which went
before with captain Veer, shot furiously upon the enemies, who showed himself
open above from their fortifications. Certain of the enemies horse made a
brave sallie, and were as bravely saluted with small shot, and forthwith
enforced to return to their camp, with loss of some of their horse. In this
manner was the time spent, the enemy still continuing himself in his trenches
which were too strong for us to break into. Our men returned into the Town,
thinking they had won honor enough, in that for two hours space they had
dared the enemy to fight, and in a manner half assailed their Camp. Of
Captain Veers soldiers, four were slain, and 12 hurt with the enemies shot.
On the twelfth of November, The Duke of Parma raises his siege from before
Berghen.
the enemy did set fire on the North part of the camp; he likewise burnt the
castle of Halteren, and the next day, about ten of the clock before noone,
they depart from Riselberg and Northgeest, where they stood a long time in
battle till their lodgings were burnt and their baggage carried away to the
Southward. In their march nothing was seen but their ensigns tops by reason of
the said hills. But coming nere the Ball, on the high way called Habergue,
which leads into Berghen wood, there they discovered themselves openly. There
were they grievously tormented by the canon from the rampire of the wooden
gate. It was delightful to behold how their battle was broken at every shot
our canon made, so as at last they were enforced to break their order, and to
divide themselves. All the night following nothing was heard but the noice of
drums and trumpets to favor the retreat of the wagoners which brought away
the baggage. Before day break, the camp toward the South was likewise seen
all on fire, and the enemy retired toward Calmthoudt, placing sentinels on
diverse hills to give them intelligence if the townsmen sallied forth.

Willoughbie pursues the enemy.
So soon as it was day, the Lord Willoughbie went forth at Wouwe gate with one
and twenty ensign on foot, and all the cauallerie, taking two falconets along
with him. The enemies sentinels seeing this, do presently retire: our men do
speedily seize on the enemies trenches and camp: the fanterie makes a stand on
the Raberg, the cauallerie galops after the enemy, and fell in upon the
rereward, mocking and scoffing them to provoke them to fight. But all this being
in vain, they returned: for it was enough for them to have reproched the base
retreat of so great a Kings camp, which was no better than a manifest flight:
some strangers that were found in the camp were slain, two or three women
excepted whose lives were saved.

The Lord Willoughbie assembled all the horse and foot companies, captain
Marcellis Bacx excepted, who was absent pursuing the enemy with part of the
cauallerie, whom he sent to seek, intending to honor him among the rest for
his valor. But being not found, and the intended ceremony not to be delayed,
because he would perform it in the enemies view, the Lord General turned
toward Veer, Knollis, Parker and Poolie his countriemen, and likewise toward
captain Paul Bacx, a Dutchman, speaking thus unto them: Seeing it is an
ancient and laudable use, The Lord Willoughbie honors the Captains with
the order of knighthood.
that those who have behaved themselves valiantly in the wars, should receive
some acknowledgement of their valor, and for that mine own eyes are witness
of your prowess, whereof I take the enemy to witness, who has often, to his
great loss, made trial what soldiers you are, Our illustrious Lady the
Queens Majesty of England (whose Lieutenant General I am, and whose
commandment I will now perform) does honor each of you with the order of
knighthood; and touching all of them gently with his sword upon their
shoulders, he said, Receive from her Majesty this remembrance of her good will
and affection, which all of you by your valor have deserved.

The Burghers and soldiers, men and women, young and old, went forth of the
gates, and strove who should run first into the enemies camp, visiting
whatsoever they found there, and with admiration beheld the greatness of the
camps circuit, the workmanship thereof, and every man got his booty: for
the enemy had left behind him, shouels, picke-axes, wagons, tons, muskets,
harquebuses, pikes, armor, and all sorts of other provisions. The soldiers
and poor townesmeen found wood enough to burn all winter: for the props and
boords of their lodging were only a little burnt on the out side.

The whole town greatly rejoiced for this sudden and unlooked for departure
of the enemy. The townsmen give thanks to God for their deliverance.
And because it is the duty of all good Christians to attribute the honor of
all benefits to him from whom they receive them, the sixteenth of November,
public thanks was given unto God for so great a deliverance, prayers were
likewise made for the prosperity of the Church and Town. That done, the
magistrates thought good to proclaim from the towne-house, that the thirteenth
of November should yearly be kept holie-day, because the enemy on that day
retired. At night bonefires were made. Nothing could be heard but the report of
canons and small shot, sounds of drums, trumpets and bells, and joyful
acclamations. In every street, and on the Rampires, pitch barrels were burnt,
and no place was free from fire works cast up into the air.

The town made a great feast, whereunto the Lord Willoughbie, governor
Morgan, Captains, old magistrates, and the chief Burghers were invited. In a
word, nothing was foregotten which was usual in feasts and public triumphs.
The town did afterward bestow on the Captains great square pieces of gold,
which the towns arms stamped in them, and the names to whom they were given,
with the causes why.

This is the true description of the whole siege, together with the sallies and
other occurrents which happened during that time, and lastly, the Duke of
Parmas retreat from before Berghen-op-Zoom, as it was set down by Jacob
Baselis, the younger, and imprinted in the said town in Anno 1603.

The Town of Tilemont in Brabant, taken and sacked.
Having hitherunto made a perfect description of the siege of Berghen-op-Zoom,
and how the enemy raised his camp from before it; we are now to set down the
valorous actions of certain soldiers of the Garrison of Berghen, done in the
year 1588.

The States Garrisons, and those of his Excellency Prince Maurice of Nassau,
lying on the frontiers, did the same year make sundry incursions into the
enemies country, doing much harm by fetching in contribution, defeating
conuois, and other such like hostile actions. Among those exploits which
deserve most commendation, the surprisall and taking of the town of Tilemont
is to be reckoned. The situation of the town of Tilemont.
Tilemont is scituat in the Duchy of Brabant, nere to a small river called
Geert, some 3 leagues distant from Louain and S. Tron. It is a great and
spacious town, famous in former time for trade of merchandise, as yet appears
by sundry ancient writings. By whom, how, and after what manner, Tilemont was
surprised.
A certain Sergeant of a band with an hundred foot, together with nine horse
of Bacx his company, which lay in Berghen, had made an attempt upon Borchloon,
though with bad success: yet being unwilling to return without executing some
notable exploit, they went forward through a great troop of enemies, and
marched directly to the town of Tilemont wherein were five or six ensigns of
Spaniards. Notwithstanding all these forces, and that the town was great and
large, they found means to enter it, where they expulsed the Spaniards, took
three ensigns from them, and carried away with them as much pillage as they
could bear, and so left the town. The enemy having notice hereof, did with
four hundred men attend their return. Our men bravely resolving not to loose
their booty, did by force pass through the midst of them, and with their
spoil returned safe to Berghen; a matter almost incredible, and yet very
true, which brave and resolute soldiers should never forget, but still strive
to imitate.

The Garrisons of Heusden and Geertrudenberg did the like with eight hundred
men both horse and foot, The garrisons of He^sden and Geertrudenberg beat ^^
enemy were to Tilbourg.
every horseman taking up a footman behind him, and in that manner went to
Tilbourg nere to Boisleduc where part of the Duke of Parmas forces lay, whom
they dislodged, and slew many of them, the rest fled to a Church, whom our men
durst no longer pursue, fearing the Garrisons nere adjoining, and so with their
booty returned home.

About the same time, Certain soldiers of Zeland defeat a country in Flaunders.
threescore and ten soldiers, that lay in Zeland, went over into Flaunders,
and there defeated the conuoy of Courtray strengthened with a troop of twenty
horse, beside the foot, together with thirty merchants on horseback, and
having gooten a rich booty, returned home to their garrisons.

A true description of the town and country of Breda in Brabant, together
with the admirable taking thereof on the 4 of March, Anno 1590.
BEfore we come to the taking of Breda, it shall not be impertinent briefly to
set down the situation thereof. Breda next to the four chief cities of
Brabant, is among others one of the principal, having the same franchises as
the towns of Tilemont, Louvain, and Niuelle. It stands in the land of Kempen,
eight miles from Antuerpe, six from Boisleduc or Sertoghenbusk, six from
Berghen-op-Zoom, and two from Geertrudenberg, in a plain abounding with corn,
the fields and meadows being environed with trees, and the country wood die:
there are some woods, as Vlpeu, the New wood, and the wood of Lies, through
which two small rivers run, which empty themselves into the Dikes of
Haeghdijck, and run under a water Mill into the town. One of these two
rivers will bear boats beyond Ginneken, and toward Hoochstrate it is called
the Aa, within, and below Breda, the Mercke. We find in ancient Registers that
the Danes possessed and dwelt in a certain Fort or Castle, which by permission
of the Lord of the Country of Breda, they builded in the Crows wood, where
Herons do now breed. Henry, Lord of Breda, assisted by the Lord of Weesmaell
and the Marshall of Brabant, upon some controversy took that castle and
wholly raced it in Anno 1124.

There are in it diverse goodly houses belonging to Gentlemen, a very
beautiful Church, on the North side whereof the Counts of Nassau have built a
goodly Chapel, wherein is a stately monument of Renatus of Chalon: and in a
vault underneath it the Tombs of the ancient Lords of Breda, of Count
Engetbrecht, Count Henry, and of the above mentioned Renatus.

The town of Breda is of a reasonable bigness, and beautiful structure, yet
in former time it has been much disfigured by fire, for in anno 1534 on the 23
of Iulie, a thousand houses were burnt down to the ground. And because it was
the chief abode of those of the house of Nassau, they have beautified it with
many goodly buildings, as especially, Count Henry of Nassau, who was a brave
and valiant Lord; he caused the town to be fortified with large Rampires, and
in anno 1534 both in the Castle and round about the town he caused five great
bulwarks to be made, which defended one another, together with very deep
dikes.

During these wars, four rauelins more have been made, and before every
gate, an half moon, so as this town, among those of the low or plain
Country is held one of the strongest in all the Netherlands. In former time,
after the racing of the above mentioned Castle, the Lords of Breda opposite
thereunto, nere to the Market place, at this day called the Herons nest, began
to build a Palace and Castle where Count Henry of Nassau afterward (suffering
part of the old building to stand still) caused a new court and stately Palace
to be built, moated round about, and without that, a very sumptuous edifice
with a very lordly gallerie, supported by pillars of blew stone, with a
gilded frontispice: within the Court are many goodly Chambers, a large and
stately Hall builded on Pillars, with an artificial winding stairs of blew
stone, which cunning workmen hold for a masterpiece: in the Hall there is
likewise a Chapel. There is a very goodly Armorie stored with all sorts of
Armor, and much ordnance, and among others, diverse old cast pieces, which a
king of Hungary had in time past given to the house of Nassau in recompense of
their good service done to him against the Turk. There were in it likewise 52
great canons and small field pieces, which the Emperor Ferdinand gave to the
last prince and Lord of Breda, which since then, have been taken away by Duke
d'Alua.

Among the most remarkable matters of Breda, as well ancient as modern, these
are much to be observed, How that the lord and country of Breda (in time past
a Lord and country divided from the Duchy of Brabant) has been joined to
the said Duchy in the time of Henry of Lorraine etc. And the Lord Godfrey of
Breda, who, in an' 1212, having received of the said Duke the moitie of the
custom of the Sheld in Fee, together with Shakeloo and Ossendrecht, did
likewise promise to his Lord that himself and heirs with their castles
country and people should faithfully serve the Duke and his heirs.

In this manner, The Lord Gerard of Rassingem ^old the Lordship of Breda to the
Duke of Brabant in anno 1326. The Lord of Polanen buys Breda in anno 13^1. on
the first of April. A piece of coin so called.
the Monday after S. Valenties day, the lord Gerard of Rassingem Liedekerk and
Lens, having sold the Lordship and possessions of the whole country of Breda
with the appurtenances to Duke John of Brabant, the said duke John by consent
of his son Godeuart, and his eldest daughter Joan Countess of Haynault and
Holland, did again, on the first day of April 1351, sell the said country of
Breda with the appurtenances to the Lord John of Polanen, the younger, Lord of
la Lecke, to enjoy it as his lawful inheritance for the sum of 3400
Hallinghen.

Breda is the chiefest Town of the Country, The Privileges of the ^ountrie
of Breda.
and among other privileges and jurisdictions has an Exchequer or Court
fiscall which is common and undivided, whereunto, the town of Steenberghen,
and the sixteen Villages of the Country of Breda, with those of Eyckeren,
Mercxem, Schoten, Loehout and Oostmaell make their appeals. And beside the
said Court, there is a seat of Justice belonging to a Sheriff, before whom upon
the first summons the Burghers and inhabitants are to appear, together with
those of Tettering, Molongracht, Sandberg, Vijfhuyse, and the Haegh-strate.
None may appeal from the sentence given in either of these Courts to any other
Court of justice. They have held this privilege in our time. For in the days
of the Emperor Charles the 5 the said emperor only in stead of this privilege,
granted to those of Breda the same privilege as other chief towns had, viz
that sentences given at Breda, might be reformed, but not appealed from. How,
and when, those of the house of Nassau obtained the lordship of Breda, does
hereafter follow.

Engelbrecht Count of Nassau marrie^ (...) heir^ b^^an^n, (...) Breda (...)
141^.
The above mentioned Lord, John of Polanen, died in the year 1377, and left a
son named John, Lord of Lecke and Breda, who left a daughter named Joan married
to Engelbrecht Count of Nassau, in an^ 1414 he died, and left a son called
John, Count of Nassau, Dietz, and Vianden who was Lord of Breda, and died in
the year 1475, leaving by his wife Marie Countess of Loon, heir to Heinsberg,
and to a 3 part of the Duchy of Iuliers, (...) of the lands of (...) house of
Nassau
Engelbrecht and John, brethren, who divided the lands left the^ by their
parents, so as the eldest son Count Engelbrecht had for his part all the lands
which were in the Low Countries on this side the Rhyne, viz. the county of
Vianden, the Lordships of S. Vijts, of Dudeldorp, and Mijllen, with all the
lands in Brabant, Holland, and in the country of Liege, wherein were
comprehended the Country and Town of Breda: and Earl John had for his share
all the countries and Lordships beyond the Rhyn, the countries of Nassau and
Dietz; and by his wife, Catsenelle boguen, which was adjudged his in anno 1548.
This division was made in this condition, that the male children should be
heirs to both of them, the better to uphold the house of Nassau from whence
they were descended.

In this manner the town and country of Breda was peaceably governed by their
Lords the Counts of Nassau for the space of 184 years, flourishing in traffic
until the 11 of April 1567, when the Prince of Orange was enforced, by the
Duke of Aluas coming, in great sorrow and perplexity to abandon his subjects
of Breda, and to retire into Germany, and after his departure, the revenues of
Breda, being seized on by the duke d'Alua, the said country and town was
brought under the wretched government of the Spaniards, and afflicted with
sundry garrisons, till that in anno 1577 the town of Breda returned again
under the government of his lawful Lord, and so continued for the space of 4
years, and being afterward taken by the prince of Parma 1581, he kept it til
the year 1590.

We will now set down after what manner, by Gods assistance, it was freed from
the Spanish yoke. The prince of Parma and all the forces, being in the year 1590
busied in the French wars, whereby his united Provinces had some rest, my Lords
the States laid hold on this occasion, and by valorous dexterity took the
town and castle of Breda in manner following.

Count Philip of Nassau governor at that time of Worcum, An attempt propounded
upon Breda.
and Louvesteyn, had by Prince Maurice his advice, conferred with a certain
Gentleman of Cambray, called Charles Herauguieres, Captain of a foot company,
about an enterprise upon the castle and town of Breda, telling him that diverse
mariners vassals to the country of Breda and house of Nassau, for love and
affection to their lord had offered their service herein, they being accustomed
to carry turfe and wood into the castle, and under that color fit to make some
attempt.

This was propounded to Herauguieres, who having well considered all dangers,
did, toward the later end of February, go to the Hague to Prince Maurice,
where they resolved, with a certain fellow called Adrian of Berghen (that was
wont to carry turfes into the castle) to undertake the matter. Hereupon,
Herauguieres was sent to the Lord John Oldenbarneveldt, Aduocat of Holland, who
conferred with him not only concerning money and things necessary for the
enterprise, but how to provide for and keep the town, being once taken. The
enterprise is resolved.
Herauguieres gave order to the shipper to make ready his boat, which was deep
and flat and lay in a Dorp called Leure, a mile from Breda, that he might
convey 70 men into her. Round about and on the upper part of the boat, rewes of
Turfe like brick were orderly placed of a good height.

Being thus prepared, they resolved to execute the enterprise on the 25 of
February, but the frost hindered them certain days, not without great danger
of being discovered.

For the execution of this enterprise, Herauguieres had chosen sixteen of
Count Philips soldiers under the command of Captain John Logier, of Mons. de
Famas soldiers that lay at Heusden commanded by Captain John Fernet,
sixteen, two and twenty soldiers of Mons. de Liers, which lay at Klundert
commanded by his Lieutenant Matthew Helt, and 24 of his own company commanded
by Gerard Preys, all young men bold and resolute, Herauguieres thought to have
embarked himself and men the same night, but he could not meet with the
shipper, whereupon in despair he would have burnt the boat for fear of being
discovered. But at last withdrawing himself, he returned the next night having
advertised Prince Maurice thereof, who with his soldiers in boats lay at
Klundert. On Monday, the 26 of February, at night, they entered the Boat and
remained in it till Thursday Morning, not being able to go backward or
forward by reason of the frost and a contrary wind, enduring extreme cold, and
wanting victuals, not being provided for any long time, so as they were
enforced, in the night, to leave the boat and to retire to Nordam. Herauguieres
was enforced to endure many murmuring speeches of his soldiers, but by fair
words and his own example he appeased them, propounding danger and shame,
profit and honor to them, and thereby caused them to resolve to undergo all
danger with him.

Having well refresht themselves one whole day in the Fort of Nordam, on
Thursday, the first of March, at night, they returned to the boat, staying
within a quarter of a mile of Breda, and in this manner continued from Friday
till Saturday Morning at ten of the clock, before the Herons wood nere to
the Castle, where the boat went on ground, so as they were enforced to tarry
till an high water. During their abode there, the boat took in a leake,
through which the water entered in such abundance as the soldiers stood up to
the knees in it, which had like to have killed them all: being come into the
enclosure of the Castle (the which so soon as the boat entered was shut after
them) the leake miraculously stopped of it self.

Whilst they lay there, a Corporal came to search the boat, where finding
nothing he went his way, and by Gods special providence, the soldiers coughed
not, and yet many of them were so hoarse as they could hardly refrain from it.
A generous act of Math Helt.
Among others, Lieutenant Matthew Helt was so tormented with the cough, as
fearing thereby least the enterprise would be discovered, he drew forth his
poniard intending to have slain himself.

The soldiers imitating the Troyans, drew in their own ruin.
The third of March, in the afternoon, at high water, the castles sluice was
opened, so as the boat entered, and because the ice hindered and stopped it, the
Italian soldiers did help to draw it, as the Troyans did the Greeks wooden
horse. Being thus entered, the Sergeant Major, about evening, commanded that
turfes should be distributed to the Courts of guard, which was done, so as in a
short space so great a quantity of them was carried away, as the deck began
to lie bare; this did greatly aflict them in the boat. But the shipper, being a
crafty fellow, perceiving that all the Corpse du guard were furnished, and
pretending weariness, gave money to his mate to go and drink with the
porters, not meaning to unlade any more till the next day; and in deed, the
Sergeant Major had commanded him (having some suspicion that his Excellency
was about some enterprise) to go lie in the town: whereupon, he went forth and
advertised Prince Maurice thereof. Some cunning spies had made the governor
Lansavecia believe that Prince Maurice determined to make an attempt upon
Geertrudenberg, and thereupon, he went thither with corn and other provisions.
Night being come, the watch set, and all things quiet, the other shipper to
drown the noyce which the soldiers made in the boat, did often plie the pumpe
as though it had received a great leake by reason of the ice, thus beguiling
them till toward midnight.

Now the time being come, After what manner they assailed the Castle.
namely, about eleven of the clock at night, Herauguieres in Gods name
exhorted his soldiers to begin their enterprise, commanding the shipper still
to plie the pumpe whilst he vnshipt his men, whom he divided into two troops,
the one under the conduct of Captains Lambert and Frenet, commanding them to
march to the South-West part of the Haven, and himself with the rest went
along by the storehouse toward the Guard that were at the gate which opens
into the Town. Marching in this manner before his people, he met with an
Italian soldier, unto whose demands he gave none answer, but took him by
the throat, willing him to hold his peace, d^maunding of him how strong the
Garrison was, who told him that there were three hundred and fifty men in all,
but he perceiving his deceit, told him that he knew very well that there were
but fifty men in it, and though there should be many more, it now behooved them
to fight, and so marched toward the Sentinel, who asked, Qui vala, but
Herauguieres making no answer struck him through the body with an half pike,
whereupon the alarm was given for those of the guard and round began to make
resistance and to defend themselves in the Corpse du guard, only an ensign came
forth and assailed Herauguieres whom he hurt in the arm, yet was by him beaten
down to the ground: he commanded his soldiers to shoot at the gate and
windows, so, as they that were within begged their lives, which in so
important and dangerous a season was denied.

The alarm by this time was come to Paulo Antonio Lansavecia Lieutenant to his
father; The Castle is taken.
the enemy was beaten into the middle part of the Castle, which was strongly
guarded, from whence they sallied, where six and thirty of Paulo Antonio his
men were slain, so as they were enforced to reenter: Fernet was likewise hurt.

Th'alarme was likewise given in the town, and some began to set fire on the
Castle gate, notwithstanding that Herauguieres played upon them with his shot.
The place being made good, he went with his soldiers to another Corpse du guard,
nere to the Castles great plat-forme, where sixteen soldiers more made some
resistance, who were all slain.

His Excellency enters the Castle.
This done, and a signal given, Count Hohenlo, two hours after, came to the
Castle with his Excellencies vangard, but because the uttermost gate of the
Castle could not be opened by reason of the ice, his suoldiers entered nere to
the Sluice by breaking down a pallisado. Hohenlo being entered, young Lansauecia
made an accord with him to go his way himself and soldiers with their lives.
Within a while after, Prince Maurice and his soldiers both horse and foot
arrived, and with him the Earls Philip of Nassau and Solms, Sir Fraucis Veer
who commanded the English, the Admiral Justinius of Nassau, the Lords of Famas,
Verdoes, and other Captains.

The town yields to his Excellency.
And as Count Hohenlo had exhorted the Burghers to return to the obedience of
their ancient Lord, and Prince Maurice had given order to enter the town at
two gates, they sent a drum, who craved leave that some of the Burgomasters
might come and parley, who in less than an hours space made an accord that
the Burghers should redeem themselves from spoil, by paying two months wages
to the soldiers, the sum amounting to 97074 florins. In this manner, their
arms being thrown down, Prince Maurice sent the Lord Vander-Noot, Captain
of his guard, to seize upon the State-house and other places.

The same night that the first alarm was given in the Castle, the Marquis of
Guasto, his horse company, and five other ensigns of Italians being
affrighted, did in disorder break down a gate, and basely fled forth of the
town, notwithstanding that the Burghers, who feared the spoil of their goods,
promised them all aid and assistance, if they would tarry and defend it; but
in vain. This was a great disgrace to so noble a Nation; which the Prince of
Parma revenged, by reproaching the Spaniards, some of whom he imprisoned, and
beheaded certain captains, and among others Caesar Guitra, Iulio Gratiauo,
Guastos Lieutenant, whose name was Turlantino, and the corporal, who had so
slenderly searched the boat.

The town and castle of Breda were miraculously taken, without any great loss
of blood, one only man being lost, who by reason of the darkness, fell into
the water and was drowned: of the garrison in the castle, forty were slain.

For this victory, all the united provinces and towns, gave public thanks
unto God in their Churches, made bonefires, and in memory thereof, coined
pieces of gold, silver, and copper, with this superscription on the one side,
how that the town of Breda had been on the fourth of March 1590, freed from
the Spanish bondage by the conduct of Prince Maurice of Nassau; and on the
other side was the Dike, with the turfe boat, which carried the soldiers, with
this circumscription, Ready to win, or die, and then, The reward of an
invincible courage.

Prince Maurice, by the consent of my Lords the States, gave the government of
the Town, Castle, and Country of Breda to captain Herauguieres, with ample
command: to Captain Lambert Charles, the office of Sergeant Major, and to
other particular Captains and soldiers, some of the said pieces, or med^ls in
pure gold, with sums of money, with promise of advancement according to every
man's quality and merit; the shippers were likewise advanced and well rewarded.

The town was forthwith provided for, according to the Lord of Oldenbbarvelts
direction, with all kind of muni^ion and victuals from Holland for a year and
a half, and before ten days were expired, four hundred horse, and twelve
ensigns of foot were sent to lie in Garrison in the town, the Burghers were
likewise divided into five companies to keep good watch. And in this manner by
Gods assistance, the town is till now preserved from the enemy.

Count Mansfelt batters and assaults the Fort of Nordam, and is bravely beaten
thence on the 14 of May 1590.
THe Duke of Parma perceiving that his Excellency of Nassau had by a cunning
surprisall taken the Town of Breda from him, The Duke of Parma sends Count
Mansfelt against Breda.
did, for avoiding a greater mischief, before March was expired, said Count
Charles of Mansfelt with 40000 men toward Breda, to hinder their incursions,
and secure the Country, who presently seized on all the places round about it,
as Oosterhout, Tering, and other towns, wherein he placed soldiers, he
likewise took Seuenberghen and other towns where he used great cruelty. Count
Mansfelt makes a Fort at Terheyden.
At Terheyden which is a village betwixt Seuenberghen and Breda, seated on a
little river called the Mercke, he caused a great Fort to be built with a
bridge over the river, thereby to keep victuals from Breda, and lay there
encamped till the work was ended, thinking thereby to oppress Breda.

In May following he besiged the fort of Nordam, which my lords the States
hold, nere to Seuenberghen, seated nere the water, commanded by Captain
Matthew Helt who was in the Turfe boat at the taking of Breda: Count Mansfelt
does in vav^^ b^^^^ and assault the Fort of Nordam.
And the thirteenth and foureteenth of May the said Count Mansfelt battered it
with seven canon, made 1200 shot upon it, and gave a furious assault. They did
likewise at full Sea bring a great bark before the Fort, mand with good
musketeers to anoy the defendants, they had bridges likewise whereon to martch
to the assault. They twice assaulted it, and were still repulsed with the loss
of two Italian Captains, the one, named Horacio Fontano of Modena, and the
other, Giouan Francisco Pageno a Neapolitan, with diverse others of name and
mark. Six or seven hundred of the enemy died there, for by often shooting
they fired the bark, and as many as were in her were burnt, whereupon they
were enforced to retire, to the great commendation of Captain Matthew Helt, who
thereby purchased much honor.

The united Provinces in the mean time had sent a small Army into the field
under the conduct of Prince Maurice and Count Hohenlo, with which in May they
went to a place called Ouer-Betuwe, or High-Betuwe, encamping right over
against Nimmegue^, where they built a strong Fort on the bank of the River
Waell, the better to auoy the Town: they did it likewise to divert Count
Mansfelt from Nordam, and to draw him forth of Brabant. But Mansfelt not
thinking himself stong enough, came nere to Nimmeguen, and having intelligence
that Prince Maurice his forces began to make a Fort on the further side of the
Waell nere to the State-house, he marched toward them with his canon, beating
them thence, and overthrew the work new begun; an afterward, the better to
provide his army of victuals, he went and encamped on the Mase in the Land of
Cuyck: So as Prince Maurice tarried there all the Summer to finish his Fort, in
view and danger of the canon of Nimmeguen, which with the help of Count
Mansfelt played furiously upon the town.

Notwithstanding all these difficulties, Why the For termed Kno^senbourg.
the Fort was made defensive toward the later end of Iulie, and was called
Knodsenbourg or Maces-bourg, in disdain of those of Nimmeguen, called,
Knodsendrages, which is as much to say as Mace-bearers; because the Burghers
when any sedition is among them, carried a Mace before them in the strees. The
Fort was furnished with all sorts of munition, ordnance and victuals for six
months, and mand with five hundred men, under the command of Captain Gerard
the younger.

By this means they fortified themselves afterward in the Betuwe, extending
their bounds as far as Waell, intending to force Nimmeguen. Prince Maurice
placed Garrisons upon the River Waell, from Bommell as far as the Tol-house
or Schenksskonce, lodging them by quarters to hinder the enemies passage, by
the help of certain boats of war: For Mansfelt did daily fortify himself
in the Land of Cuyck, and seemed desirous to cross the Waell, being thereunto
earnestly solicited by those of Nimmeguen, who were much annoyed by the said
Fort, being unwilling to subject themselves to a strong Garrison, which the
Duke of Parma would have given them.

The States did likewise cause a new strong causie to be made overthwart the
lower Be^uwe, from the Rhyne as far as Waell beneath Nimmeguen, and chiefly
by the direction of the Amptman or Magistrate of Thyell, called Diderich Vijch,
who was at the most charge, notwithstanding that my Lords the States of Holland
contributed many thousand florins, thereby to preserve the lower Betuwe, as
far as beyond Dort against the inundation of the Rhyne when it swells above
the banks. In recompense of these exploits, those of Guelderland (as much of
it as belongs to the united Provinces) gave to his Excellency Prince Maurice
the government of the said country and towns.

The taking of the Castle of Heel, Hemert, and the town of Steenberguen etc.
in Anno 1590.
AFter that Count Charles of Mansfelt, with great loss was enforced to abandon
the Fort of Nordam: his Excellency, about the end of September, came into the
field with a sufficient Army; and on the 27 of the said month took the house
or castle of Hemert, the forts of Elshout and Creuecaeur nere to a place called
Engelen, after some small battery and resistance.

That done, he went from thence into Bommeleerweert, and on the 3 of October
took he house or castle of Heel, reducing it under the States obedience: from
thence he made have to the new fort of Ter-heyden, which Count Mansfelt had
made to bridle those of Breda; which, notwithstanding the strength thereof, was
by the canon enforced to yield on the 11 of October. On the 26 of the said
month, he went from thence toward Steenberghen, which being badly provided of
all necessaries, endured but 2 shot and then yielded, 200 soldiers departing
thence on composition: 300 men were sent to raise the siege, but Prince Maurice
his cauallerie stopped their passage, and enforced them to retire to Wouwe
castle, which was thereby much strengthened, but his Excellency in the mean
time took the fort of Rosendall.

After these sudden exploits done, in a months space prince Maurice embarked
3000 foot, and an 100 horse, and went into Flanders, intending some enterprise
upon Dunkirke, which he thought to have taken in the night, by Scalado. The
enterprise had bin well considered by colonel Nicholas Metkerke, son to
Adolph, president of Flanders, but a contrary wind putting the^ back twice,
the attempt was suspected, then afterward discovered and hindered: yet,
landing, Metkerke showed Count Solms and Sir Francis Veer, the place where they
thought to have assaulted the town, which, whilst they heedfully viewed, all 3
of them were hurt: this happened on the 1 of November: whereupon, they returned
with a great booty of cattle and other things.

The garrison of Ostend, some week before, had surprised the town of
Oldenbourg, mand with 400 soldiers, which they burnt and sacked, but they could
not get the Cloister Tower: many other petty exploits were done the same year,
which for breuity I omit.

The siege and taking of the Town and Fort of Zutphen, done in May 1590.
BEfore we come to set down the siege and taking of the town of Zutphen,
which is one of the chief towns of the Duchy of Guelderland, and yet a
county a part, seated nere the river Yssell, a mile and a half from
Doesbourg, four miles from Arnham, and six from Nimmeguen: we will briefly
speak of the taking of the Castles of Turnholt and Westerloo, which were won
a little before, as a preparatiue to the said siege: As also the equipage of
boats, and other warlike provisions necessary for a siege.

The second of April, The Castle of Turnholt taken on the second of April.
the Garrison of Breda with others took the Castle of Turnholt, therein,
making use of a victualler who was wont to bring beer thither: He, as his cart
stood upon the bridge, did thrust the Sentinel into the water, and slew
another, and in the mean time, the soldiers which were hidden in an old burnt
house, stepped forth, killing the rest of the guard, and so took the Castle. In
the beginning of May, Westerloo taken in May.
they likewise took the Castle of Westerloo notwithstanding it was under
contribution. The young Lord of Merode made his abode there, who being one day
gone on hunting, they laid hold on that occasion, and by that means did
easily become masters thereof, finding it fit and commodious to reduce the rest
of Brabant under contribution, and there to busy their enemies whilst
themselves should be employed elsewhere. At the beginning of August, they did
cut off a rich Conuoy going from Brussels to Namur.

The States of the united Provinces having now built their government on a
strong and sure foundation, and so reckoned their contributions, impositions
and revenues, as they could for certain months in the year increase the
number of their soldiers, defray the charges, and send them to the field
provided of all necessaries, and were thereby able to assail the enemies, and
to make an offensive war: So as all the Summer they made their provisions of
Canon, great numbers of Boats, Gabions, Bridges, Powder, Bullets, Tents and
other such like necessaries.

To attend upon the canon they made choice of skillful mariners, finding those
men fit to ship and vnship the ordnance, to plant and transport it, and upon
necessity and want of horse to draw it with their hands through marshes and
over causeis; and likewise to serve sometimes in stead of gunners.

The States did likewise send with their governor General prince Maurice as
chief commander of the army, certain of the Council of State to assist him
in all affairs, as the Venetians make use of those whom they call Prouidatori:
He had likewise a skillful Council of war with all manner of officers
requisite in an army. Their soldiers were voluntaries, well paid, skillful,
and ready, and though they were but few, yet for that time they made use of
their old forces, not raising new, thereby to give no cause of suspision; but
they were very careful to have their companies full and complete, and did
earnestly entreat the Queen of England, That her aid (according to the tenor
of their contract) might not be wanting, which was commanded by Sir Frauncis
Veer, a gentleman of a noble house, a gallant soldier, and more favored of
the Low Countries than all other strangers whatsoever.

Prince Maurice thus prepared, made show as if he intended to besiege
Sertoghenbusk or Geertrudenberg, sending many soldiers to Breda, and diverse
boats upon the Mase: which caused the Duke of Parma to give the more credit to
it, because (as has been said) that the States had already taken the Castles
of Turneholt and Westerloo, as places of retreat, with diverse other signs;
which made him likewise to fortify the garrison of Geertrudenberg, and
commanded those of Sertoghenbusk to fortify their town, but they refusing to
receive a garrison, he fortified some ways nere adjoining.

Prince Maurice in the mean time had secretly sent certain soldiers, under
the conduct of Sir Francis Veer, toward Doesbourg, commanding him to begin
the enterprise, and himself went speedily to Vtrecht, and from thence to Rhene
and Arnham, and there crossing the Veluwe, toward Zutphen.

The Fort of Zutphen taken on the 24. of May by counterfeit Boores.
On the three and twentieth of May, nine soldiers were sent on the further side
of Yssell toward the Fort of Zutphen, four of them clad like Boores, and the
other five like country women with butter, cheese and eggs. These, at the
opening of the Ports stood before the Fort nere which a sufficient number of
soldiers were hidden: So soon as the gate was opened, the greatest part of
the soldiers who had watched that night came forth, and crossed the water to
go to the town: These counterfeit Boores leaned upon their staves, and they
which were disguised like women sat upon the ground, offering their commodities
to the guard, who beheld them without any suspicion, till one of the women drew
forth a Pistol and shot one of them, which done these counterfeits threw off
their disguise, assailed the enemy, and seized on the gate: The soldiers that
were hid having heard the report of the Pistol, ran speedily to the rescue of
their fellows, forced the guard and gate, and so took the Fort, taking twelve
soldiers prisoners that remained behind: this was done on the 24 of May in the
Morning.

The Fort thus surprised, his Excellency did not fail the next day to enuiron
and besiege the town of Zutphen. On the six and twentieth of the said month
Count William of Nassau came thither, and the seven and twentieth they were
busied in shutting in the town, intrenching themselves and making a bridge
over the Yssell. The eight and twentieth of May, eighteen great canon were
planted in three several places, with such speed and dexterity as is almost
incredible, all these were discharged thrice, which amounted to four and
fifty shot. Then they sent to summon the Town; the Burghers in their answer
craved time to consult, which was denied, so as they sent two Captains to
crave three days respit to have an answer from Verdugo the towns governor,
this was likewise denied, and no time of consultation given them: whereupon,
the same day being the 30 of May, they made an accord, viz. that the garrison
should depart the same night with their ensigns, arms, and baggage, together
with all Ecclesiastical persons, and such Burghers as were willing to be gone
had free liberty so to do: Those which would tarry, whether they were
Clergy men or others, should enjoy the same benefit as the other inhabitants
of the united Provinces did. A Conuoy was given them as far as Deuenter, with
certain horse and wagon, which their Lieutenant Colonel obliged himself to
send back. Count Philip of Ouersteyn slain before Zutphen.
Young Count Philip of Ouersteyn was slain there at the beginning, as he
approached too nere the gate to take a prisoner. Those of the town were
dragging away his body, but it was taken from them by force, and honorably
buried in Arnham according to his degree. He was a brave and gallant young
Lord. This strong town was taken on a sudden, unprovided of strong garrison,
there being in all but six hundred men in it, the circuit whereof is very
large: For they thought themselves not able to defend so great a breach as so
many canons would have made; they did likewise want powder and victuals. Prince
Maurice presently entered it, at the very same time as Count Solms brought the
companies of Zeland to him.

So short a time was spent in taking the Town and Fort, as the news thereof
was sooner heard, than that of the siege.

The siege and taking of the Town of Deuenter, together with sundry Forts and
Castles in the Land of Groeninguen, in Anno 1591.
SO soon as his Excellency had taken the town of Zutphen, stored it with all
necessaries, and given order for the government thereof, he made have to
pursue his victory, laying hold on so fair an occasion, so as the very same
night, he sent to begirt the town of Deuenter, seated two miles from Zutphen,
and four from Zwoll, on the right side of the river Yssell. The Canon
according to the usual celeritie was likewise shipped, and carried to Deuenter;
the whole army presently followed. His Excellency made two bridges over the
Yssell, and on both sides of the river planted eight and twenty canons; and
having made some shot, he sent to summon the town; but they within would not
hear tell of yielding: so as on the ninth of June the battery began, which in
a short space, had beaten down a great quarter of the wall nere to the Key.
This wall was double, and on the inside thereof was a thick earthen Rampire.
It being thus beaten down, certain flat bottomed boats were sent into the
Haven, on which a Bridge was made to go to the assault, for which, the
English, Scots, and Dutch, were in readiness, every Nation under his
command, striving who should march first. All things being ready, the Bridge
proved too short, so as they could not continue the assault: Some that went
forward gave a furious assault to the breach, on which, Captain Lamberts
ensign first leaped, and was there shot, Captain Metkerks ensign did the
like, A variant act of Captain Metkerks ensign.
and perceiving that he was not followed, leaped back with his colors in his
left hand and sword in the right, and escaped with his own ensign, and that
of the other who was shot.

In the town, were seven companies to defend the breach, on whom the canon
often played, and did great hurt: The governor Count Harman of Bergue, lost an
eye, and Captain Muller standing nere him had his head shot off. Colonel
Nicholas Metkerke, son to the president of Flanders, a brave and valiant
gentleman, was shot upon the breach: he was much lamented, for the next day
after the town was taken he died, together with another captain.

There likewise happened a matter worthy of note, A single combat betwixt the
Lord of Ryhoue, and an Albanese before Deuenter.
viz. a single combat betwixt two brave soldiers, one of them was Lewis of
Cathulle, Lord of Ryhoue, borne in Gant, and the other a Gallant Albanese
horseman, who coming forth of the town, made a brave, and, like Goliath, dared
any man to fight, asking if none durst break a lance with him. His
Excellency commanded that no man should answer him; but the Lord of Ryhoue
being not able to endure his braues, entreated the General to give him no
leave to abate his pride, who presently ran upon him, and doing great matter
with their lances, they proceeded to other weapons. The Albanese unknown to
Ryhoue had a pistol, who with his sword charged the Albanese, and did almost
cut his hand off that held the Pistol, which he let fall to the ground, and
was by Ryhoue taken prisoner. The Albanese, confessing himself vanquished, did
put his chain of gold upon Ryhouens neck, and was afterward set at liberty
by his Excellency, and sent back to the Governor, having received a just
guerdon for his pride and ouerweening.

Nothing being done that day, the morrow after, the bridges were made longer,
and preparation made for the assault. Those of Deuenter crave parley
Those of the town, thereupon, craved a parley of the Lord of Famas, Master of
the Ordnance, who, asking them if they meant truly, granted it: whereupon,
they sent forth two Captains, the one a Spaniard, and the other a Walon, and
on our side, the Captains VanderNoot and Lenimp, were appointed to capitulate.
The tenth of June, they agreed to deliver up the town, after the same manner
and on such conditions as those of Zutphen, and the soldiers, both horse and
foot, departed with their arms and baggage. It is reported that Count Harman,
notwithstanding his hurt, would not consent to yield, but having lost many men,
and wanting munition, he suffered himself to be persuaded by the bishop,
especially when he had intelligence that Count Hohenlo levied forces in
Germany. Prince Maurice gave kind entertainment to his cousin, saluted him
and caused him to be laid in his own couch and carried toward Groenninguen,
for they were brother and sisters children.

In this manner were the two strong towns, the chief of two Provinces, taken
in a short space with a small army, wherein the wisdom of the commanders,
and mighty provision of ordnance, with the soldiers willingness, The body
of Rowland York is hung upon the gallows.
did greatly prevail. The body of Rowland York, who had betrayed Zutphen,
was dug up, and hung in the coffin upon the gallows.

His Excellency departs from Deuenter.
His Excellency having taken Deuenter, and made it sure, did on the sixteenth
of June go with his army toward Frize-land, with an hundred and fifty
boats, together with the ordnance. They passed along before Enchuysen and
Harlingue: And understanding that Verdugo with forces waited for him at
Steenwijc, he went through the Land of Groenninguen, where first he encamped,
but meeting with sundri edifficulties there, He takes Delfzyll Skonse the 12.
of Julie.
he raised his camp and marched toward Delfzi^ll, which is a skonse seated at
the mouth of a River which comes from Groenninguen, and runs through a place
called Dam into the River Amiss, and there makes a good Haven. In this place
the canon was planted, and after some small battery, the Skonse was summoned
to yield, they within it when they saw the preparations, did on the twelfth of
Iulie yield: five brazen canon were found there, and six pieces of Iron; two
hundred and thirty men went their way, with foure*hundred women and children.

Those of Frize-Land fortified and enlarged this Skonse, and had an intent to
have made it a town of great extent, and to have given it large privileges,
thereby to draw the Burghers from Groenninguen: The Fort of Opslach won.
this, for diverse considerations, was not effected. From Delfzijll Skonse, the
army went to a Fort called Opslach, seated on a River called New zijll, the
which was likewise besieged and summoned to yield: but notwithstanding that
they within it were loath to hear tell of any composition, they were enforced
to depart with white rods in their hand, being one hundred and fifty men
strong.

The Fort of Imitill won.
From thence the camp turned toward Imitill, a Fort standing betwixt Zudhorne
and Mid-wold on the new-dike, within a mile of Groenninguen: this fort was
battered with 12 canon, and yielded. There were 250 soldiers in it, of whom,
30 came from Delf zijll. They left all their arms behind the^, which were
given to the English. After that, they likewise took the Fort of Littelbert,
which yielded so soon as they within it saw the canon planted.

The Duke of Parma is defeated in the Betuwe before Knodsenbourg on the 24 of
Iulie 1591.
Whilst his Excellency obtained all these great victories, and that Almighty
God, who helps the afflicted, assisted these countries and augmented their
means: as many as knew the king of Spaines strength, did not a little marvel
that the Duke of Parma did so easily loose these Forts and strong Towns
without attempting their conservation: But we (as becomes us) do attribute
all this unto God, and say with the kingly Prophet, Not unto us o Lord, but to
thee, belongs all honor and glory; for it has pleased thee, by the weak
forces of the Netherlands to abate the pride and arrogancy of the Spaniards.
Parma makes preparations to encounter Prince Maurice.
Yet because Parma was in some sort desirous to show himself diligent in his
government, and to let the world see that he meant to recover his lost sheep;
on the 22 of June, he departed from Bruxels toward Tyenen, Maestricht, and
Ruremond to make an offensive war, and there had intelligence of the loss of
Deuenter. He had likewise taken great pains to appease the Spanish Mutiners in
Die and elsewhere that he might take them along with him, but they continued
obstinat. He did beside levy what forces he could, sending the Prince of
Ascoli into France to strengthen it more by words than deeds. He sought
moreover to secure the towns of Venlo, Nimmeguen, Geldres and other places, and
so crossed the Rhyn, making a bridge at Rees, borrowing boats of those of Wesel
to transport his soldiers from Nuys, Berck, and other places, the most of whom
cried out for money. The forces which were levied in the country of Liege came
to him, so as he had 5000 foot and 2500 horse, with store of ordna^ce and
munition. With these forces, on the thirteenth of Iulie, he went to Nimmeguen,
where he made a bridge over the Waell, and in the night went into the Betuwe,
with 3000 foot, and 400 horse, with some ordnance, where he began to batter
Knodsenbourg: Parma besieges Knodsenbourg on the 13 of Julie.
he caused the Lord of Barlaymont with his regiment to encampe toward the
East, and Count Octauian of Mansfelt to the Westward, the Cauallerie was
quartered in a village, called Lent. La Mot made his fortifications, and
planted nine canon, with which, on the 22 of Iulie, he made 280 shot, he caused
the horsemen to bring fagots with them, to fill the dikes the better to march
to the assault. Those within the fort made brave resistance, and with their
canon did beat back the enemy, with loss of certain hundreds of them, among
whom were diverse Spanish Captains. There Count Octauian, of Mansfelt, was
likewise slain, with Frederico Caraffa, the Neapolitan, and Achilles Tressino
of Vincenza. For the besieged were well provided of ordnance, and all manner of
munition. La Mot afterward, made a Mine and battered, but the besieged made a
counter-batterie, and brake three of the enemies canon.

Prince Maurice in the mean time being come nere to Steenwijck, and having
intelligence of the siege of Knodsenbourg, resolved to go thither, leaving
Count William of Nassau in Frize-land, and coming to Arnham, he presently made
a bridge over the Rhyne, and caused 4 cornets of Lanciers, 2 of Carabins, and
two thousand musketeers and pikes, to pass into Betuwe; who entrenched
themselves, and sent certain horse to view the enemies countenance, who were
put to rout; so as his Excellency on the four and twentieth of Iulie, laid an
ambush of one thousand musketeers and pikes, together with 500 horse, and so
soon as it was day, Prince Maurice, Count Solms, Sir Francis Veer, and
certain horse went to Parmas trenches, where on a sudden 10 cornets of horse
charged furiously upon them; Our men, according to their instructions, fled,
and drew them into his Excellencies ambuscado, who on every side assailed
them, and slew 60 on the place, taking 150 prisoners. These companies following
were at this charge: That of the Duke of Parma, commanded by Pietro Francisco
Nicelli, Captain of his guard, whose Cornet was taken: That of D. Alonzo
D'Aualos bastard brother t^ the Marquess of Guasto, who with his Cornet was
taken prisoner: The company of Hieronimo Caraffa, and his Lieutenant Count
Decio Manfredi, together with his Cornet were taken prisoners. The company of
Antonio Padilla the Spaniard, hurt and taken prisoner, and dyed at Arnham; All
these were Spanish and Italian Launciers: The company of Biasio Capazuca,
brother to Cosma, the prince of Parmas Secretary, with Antonio Smigalia,
Spaniards, to the number of six cornets, of which diverse noble men were slain,
and one hundred and fifty horse taken, with three cornets which were carried to
Arnham, and four cornets escaped.

On the duke of Parmas cornet the image of Christ was imbrodered, with this
inscription, Hic fortium diuidet spolia, and on the other side was the image of
the Virgin Marie, with her young son in the cradell, with this inscription,
Quem genui adoro. On Alonzo D'Aualos cornet, was the image of S. John, showing
the Lamb of God.

Parmas self saw this overthrow from his Court in Nimmeguen (called
Valckenhof) having intelligence likewise that over all Holland mariners were
ready to come and besiege him with great numbers of boats, and that prince
Maurice did what he might to come upon the Waell to break his bridges:
thereupon, he commanded his army and ordnance to be transported out of the
Betuwe, and made a trench even to the river, garding it with a fort; and so,
under the defense thereof and of the cities ordnance, he easily crossed the
river with his army, artillery and baggage: He excused his departure, by
letters which he said to have received from the king of Spain, who commanded
him to return into France to aid the League, and to raise the siege of that
famous Merchant town of Roan; and yet, he remained in the Low Countries 5
months after. To make Parmas departure more troublesome, those of Knodsenbourg
made a sallie, and together with the mariners did so assail him, as his escape
was not without great loss.

The boats of Holland arrived the next day, but too late to do any more hurt
to Parma: For on the six and twentieth of Iulie he went forth of Nimmeguen,
where those of Knodsenbourg in their Boats made a show as if they intended to
assault the Town.

Thus Parma left Nimmeguen and took his leave of the Burghers, making many
fair promises, how that his camp should remain therabout, and that he would
preserve the city as the apple of his eye, telling them that they needed no
strong garrison, and that the miserable ought not to be burdened with greater
misery: Some of the Burghers said their power was too weak, others refused to
take in more aid; yet he left them some small provision: And this
notwithstanding the common people after his departure derided him.

The Town of Hulst is besieged, and taken on the 19 of November in Anno 1591.
AFter the Duke of Parmas departure, Prince Maurice left Garrisons in the
places nere adjoining, and being not yet satisfied with all his victories, but
desirous of the countries good, and his own honor, he was loath to loose any
fair occasion, but by the advice of his Council, made a new attempt upon the
Town of Hulst in the Land of Waes in Flaunders. Great preparations were made
in Zeland, where they shipped ordnance, powder, ladders, bridges, and all other
necessaries for a siege.

These did Prince Maurice send speedily by water, together with 4000 foot, and
by Brabant seven Cornets of horse: himself with other forces went up the River
of Scheld, and landed in Flanders, where without delay on the 19 of September
he besieged Hulst, the chief town in the land of Waes, the Duke of Parma
suspecting no such matter.

The one and twentieth of the said month, the canon was planted, and all the
Forts nere adjoining were taken, the horse made incursions to the gates of
Gaunt and Veer. By the way they encountered certain soldiers and Boores, who
had barricadoed themselves in a Church, and would by no means yield, whereupon
they fired the Church and burnt them all. And fearing least those of Antuerpe
would send forces to surprise them, they entrenched the way, and opened the
sluice of Calloo, drowning the Country round about.

The garrison of Hulst (from whence the governor a while before was gone with
a Conuoy) perceiving the Canon to be planted, the utter Rauelin to be
battered, themselves too weak to resist so great a power, and despairing of
any aid, fell to composition, and two hundred and sixty men, did, on the
four and twentieth of September depart forth of the Town with their Arms and
baggage. A Spanish captain, who supplied the governors place, whose name was
Ieronimo Stribanij, was by the Duke of Parmas command beheaded, either because
he had so soon yielded up the town, or else, for that his company which
should have been two hundred strong, was found to be but sixty. The Burghers
capitulated to be dealt with in the same manner as other towns in Holland,
conforming themselves accordingly. All Ecclesiastical persons departed likewise.

Count Solms, Colonel of the Regiments of Zeland, was made governor both of
the town and country with full and ample command, and was well provided of
men and other necessaries. The ordinary impositious on merchandise both inward
and outward in the same town, or which from thence was by land transported to
other places, were, for five months space, let to farm for eleven thousand
and eight hundred storms, and they hoped in time to draw great contribution
from the Villages round about.

But Mondragon, with Steeland, baylie of the Land of Waes, determined presently
to fortify some great Villages nere to Hulst, to stop our men's incursions, as
the Dorp called S. Ianten-Steen, the Dorp of Steken, and S. James Skonse. The
Spaniard in the mean time showed himself before Hulst, yet he attempted
nothing.

Those of Bruges, and other towns in Flanders, craved that they might be under
contribution to those of Zeland, because that the Zelanders garrisons made
great incursions upon them; the like did those of Ostend, Axell, Hulst, the
Fort of Ternheuse. They likewise made means to trade in the town by paying
customs, as they did in Antuerpe and the State of Gaunt: But the Duke of Parma
would not suffer it, notwithstanding that the Zelanders continued their
incursions, who in June went toward Gaunt, where they did beat three hundred
Spaniards and Walons, and took ninety prisoners. The same month they made an
other road with greater forces, but nere to Newport they found resistance; so
as in stead of getting booty they were beateh and retired toward the Sea
shore, under the defense of the Flushingers men of war, and lost some 30 or
forty men.

The news of Prince Maurice entrance into Flanders was brought to Antuerpe at
the same time that Parma lay there, whom the town did feast and give presents
to. Mondragon, Captain of the Castle, did presently assemble all his forces,
and made use of the Prince of Parma as a means to move the Spaniards that lay
at Die and other places, to do some notable service to the king in so
needful a time, the which he did both by words and promises. He did likewise
there obtain a voluntary loan of money a great sum, of the Spanish,
Portuguse, and Italian Merchants. Mondragon went into Flanders, where he stopped
Prince Maurice his forces from making any further incursions into the land of
Waes.

The siege and taking of the Town of Nimmeguen, on the 14 of October 1591.
HIs Excellency of Nassau, being animated and encouraged by his former
victories, and loath to omit any means to vanquish his enemies, whom, it
seemed, God delivered into his hands; perceiving likewise that Mondragon went
about to stop his further passage into Flaunders, and having notice that many
things were in readiness for his attempt on Nimmeguen, he resolved to quit the
land of Waes, notwithstanding that many profitable and hopeful enterprises
offered themselves in sundry places and Forts of Flanders; whereupon those of
Zeland did earnestly solicit him, for the better extention of their bounds. The
canon being again speedily embarked, fourteen small boats by too much have
were sunk, which they were enforced to quit, so as the Spaniards at a low
water burnt them.

Prince Maurice with his men and ordnance leaving Flaunders, was kindly
welcomed and entertained in Zeland, from whence he presently made have to go
to besiege Nimmeguen, having intelligence that Verdugo made incursion into the
land of Iuliers and was too weak to raise the siege of Nimmeguen, part of his
forces being gone into France, and the other half called away by Mondragon
for the relief of Flaunders: He had likewise sound aduertizement of the State
of the Town, by Hugo the Secretary, who had a long time been prisoner there.
These things hastened his Excellency to besiege that town before winter, where
with all his forces he arrived on the foureteenth of October, making a bridge
presently over the Waell, which was broken by the canon from S. Huberts Towers,
so as he was enforced to make it further off from the Town, where Captain
Rols and others were slain. By means of this bridge, he soon approached the
town by his trenches, and planted four canon nere to the gate called
Hoenderport, and at the foot of the hill called Hoendenberg in a place termed
Oye, sixteen, and in the Betuwe, opposite to the tower Lappentorne, twelve
more, to make a breach betwixt the Court called Valckenhof and Hoenderport,
where he supposed to have most advantage, and best means to hinder them from
repairing.

Those of Nimmeguen hereby terrified, sent to Verdugo sor aid: there were three
strong companies of foot in the town, but very few horse commanded by Henry
Kieboom, alias Neuse, who had betrayed and sold Geertrudenberg to the Duke of
Parma, who so soon as motion was made of parley, did on a sudden leave the
town, and passed through the camp to the Zelanders quarter. The Townsmen
perceiving the canon planted, did mure up the gate of Hoendenport and
entrenched the void place betwixt the river and castle, dividing it from the
town by a rampire which they made, in which men, women, and children labored,
to the end that if that place were taken, the town might yet hold out, omitting
nothing which valiant men might perform. The canon planted, and the town
summoned to yield, they answered, That Prince Maurice was a young lover, and
that Nimmeguen was a Virgin to whom he made love, which he could not so easily
win, and therefore it behooved him to take more pains. But, when they were
hopeless of aid the town being much annoyed by the canon, especially from
Knodsenbourg fort, whence many thousand shot had been made upon it, the
Burghers ran to the State-house, complaining that the king had forsaken them,
for whom they had a long time spent their goods, blood, and hazarded their
lives; that they had too often sent to Parma, who still had other matters in
hand; so as at last they resolved to capitulate, and on good terms to
compound: and Prince Maurice sending once again to let them know that hope of
succor was vain, and that his canon was ready to play upon them: they sent
their commissioners to the camp on the twentieth of October, requiring to have
the exercise of both religions: That the Magistrate might continue in the same
state he then stood, that an easy garrison might be given them, with diverse
other requests, which they could not obtain: And therefore, the next day, they
sent the Burgomaster Flemming with ample power to capitulate, by whose means
they obtained many of their demands, as the disposing of the Church goods,
power to give regal offices, and other matters; but, concerning religion, they
were of force to conform themselves like to other Countries and towns of the
united Provinces; They should likewise receive six ensigns of footmen, and
two Cornets of horse, and the Magistrate should be altered at the discretion of
his Excellency and my Lords the States. In this manner, the soldiers departed
to the town of Grave. Five and twenty brazen cast pieces were found in the
Town, and twelve of Iron.

Thus was the town of Nimmeguen yielded on the two and twentieth of October,
and was annexed to the united Provinces. Count Philip of Nassau, son to Count
John, was made governor, and Gerard, the younger, governor of Knodsenbourg,
was appointed his Lieutenant. This done, his Excellency sent his troops to
garrison, having in a short space, and in less than five months, won the
Fort and Town of Zutphen, the Town of Deuenter in the Province of Ouer-Ysell,
the Fort of Delf-zijll, and many others in Frize-land; He enforced the Duke of
Parma to raise his siege from before Knodsenbourg, and defeated his Cauallerie;
He did afterward take the Town of Hulst, in the view of Mondragon and those
of Antuerpe; And now in winter, Nimmeguen, the chief Town of Guelderland,
making the Waell her frontier. He had another enterprise upon Geertrudenberg in
December, and departing secretly from the Hague with one thousand six hundred
men, they mounted the wall by Scalado, but they were repulsed with loss of two
Captains. A certain place called Alpen was likewise surprised by the garrison
of Nimmeguen the same year 1591.

My Lords the States made gold, silver, and brass coin, in perpetual memory
of these victories, and taking of Zutphen, Deuenter, Hulst, Nimmeguen and other
Forts, attributing the whole honor and glory unto God.

The town of Steenwijck is besieged and taken in anno 1592.
HIs Excellency of Nassau, having won the town and fort of Nimmeguen,
reducing them under the States obedience, after that he had rested all winter,
did again march into the field, and departed from the Hague, on the 10 of May
1592, accompanied with the Earls Hohenlo and Solms: his Council of war, were,
the Lord of Barchon, as Marshall of the camp; Count Philip of Nassau, General
of the horse; the Lord of Famas, master of the ordnance; Captain Craiessonier,
Sergeant Major; with other commanders and Colonels, as Sir Frauncis Veer,
Floris of Brederode, Morney, Dorp, Groenevelt, and other Captains of great
experience. The Lord of Gryse was Prouidator general. There were beside,
certain counselors of State, and commissiones of the provinces whether the
army was to march, all serving for direction and ordering of al necessaries
belonging to the ordnance, ammunition, treasure, and victuals, with their
dependants.

The army consisted of 6000 foot and 2000 horse, with which his Excellency
departed toward Steenwijck with all his provisions, where he encamped on the
28 of May. Steenwijck is a town in the province of Ouer-Yssell, standing upon
a small river called Blockziell, which nere to Meppell a mile from Steenwijck,
emptieth it self into Zuidersea: it is a passage into Frizeland, serving for
defense to a great extent of ground, being very strong in rampires; it was
very well manned, for there were 16 ensigns of foot, and certain troops of
horse in it. The governor was a brave and well experienced Captain, his name
was Antonio de Quocquelle: there were diverse other Lords and Earls in it, as
Count Lodwick younger brother to Count Berguen, the Lord of Waterdijke, with
omen of note. The town was well provided, and wanted nothing but powder,
whereof a great quantity was sent forth of Germany, which passing through the
Country of Munster, was seized on by the inhabitants, in recompense of a
certain booty which the Duke of Parmas soldiers had taked from them.

Before we come to the siege of Steenwijck, we will speak of a certain
enterprise which was intended under color of this siege: The Spaniards and
those of Steenwijck thought to have surprised the town of Enchuysen, by means
of a certain mariner that dwelt there, who was lately come from Spain, where
he had spoken with the king, and had received a good sum of money, both of
his Majesty, and Duke of Parma, as well for his own service which he was to
do, as to win other Captains and soldiers to embrace the enterprise. But
this Burgher bewrayed all to my Lords the States and to his Excellency, of
whom he received such instructions, as he persuaded the Spaniards, that the
best way was, to attempt the Haven, and to that end they should send a thousand
men from Steenwijck, which was not far off, which should be shipped in a night,
in the beginning of May, whom he without any suspicion would conduct, having
already won the captains and chief of the town, who wrote v pon their
credits all things were sure. And the better to color it, and to blind those
of Steenwijck, this Burgher offered to remain as hostage among them, and to
undergo all manner of punishment, if he should deal otherwise than faithfully
with them, or if matters succeeded not well according to his direction. And in
the mean space, Prince Maurice should be at the same time in Enchuysen to
surprise the surprisers, which might easily be done, because that the Haven is
dry at low water; and having taken them all prisoners, he should presently
send his army before Steenwijck, to besiege it, and threaten them, that
unless they would presently deliver this Burgher, he would hang up all his
prisoners: but somewhat croft this business, so as the enterprise went not
forward: yet Prince Maurice went on with his army to besiege Steenwijck.

From the thirteenth of May, till the ninth of June, his Excellency was busied
in making of trenches, and finding out solid and fast ground whereon to plant
his canon: he made a Cauallier of 19 foot high, on which he laid three pieces,
wherewith to beat down their defenses, and lay them open; forty five pieces
being planted, on the thirteenth of June the town was battered; yet at that
time they did no great matter: for they could hardly batter the curtains,
notwithstanding they discarged many thousand shot. They shot wild fire into the
town, which at first did terrify them, but it was soon quenched.

His Excellency, perceiving that the canon was to small purpose, and that those
in the town did not greatly regard it, resolved to shoot no more, but made two
mines toward the Counter-scarp, which likewise did no great matter; they
dug till they came under the Counter-scarp which he won from them, and in a
certain place at the foot of the pallisado, discovered how they within labored
in the dikes, so as to give an assault would be but lost labor, vnesse those
within were beaten from thence: and therefore they brought certain pieces into
sundry places in the dike, to beat down the fortification at the foot of the
pallizado; and being protected by their canon they came into the dike, where
they shadowed themselves so well, as the townsmen could not hurt them: so as
by that means they possessed the foot of the rampire of the principal Bulwark on
the East side, where they dug 23 foot under the ground ere they came to make
any chambers: they spent to days in this work, du ring which time, the
besieged made 2 sallies; in the first they took an ensign, and defeated
certain Englishmen; in the 2 they slew captain Olthof, who in the former
siege had bin in the town and defended it, with certain others of note, and
part of those which had the guard in that place. Our me^ cold never take any of
the besieged prisoners. On the 23 of June the besigers batered one of the towns
rauelins; when those within perceived the battery, they forsook it.

From the 24 till the 27 of June, our men were busied in making a wooden tower
on wheels, which in Dutch is called Lijmstang, in English, discover Pot, it
was invented by captain John Corput of Breda. This Tower was square and made of
Mastes fastened together by iron vices; there were nine floares in it one above
another, each of them twelve foot high; they might at any time be taken down
and had curtains of canuas toward the enemy. This new tower being brought
nere the Town Rampires, and musketeers placed in it, they did not only beat
the besieged from the Rampires, but shot those that went up and down in the
streets: The townsmen, with two canons, and help of the wind, did in two
days beat down the two uttermost floares, so as no man would any more go up
upon it.

From the 27 till the 29 of June, they were busied in prepayring two Mines in
the rampire underneath the Bulwark. The thirtieth of June, the Townsmen sent
three Captains to parley, viz. Bernard de Moutberck, David du Wall, and an
other called Vandensand, son to the Provost of Herderwijck, and in their
stead Captain Peter Dorp, Asseurs and Buck, were sent as Hostages. They craved
to depart with their armor, ensigns and baggage, which was granted on
condition that they should presently cross the Rhyn, and for six months
space, serve no more in those quarters, which they refusing, the parley was
broken off.

The same night, Verdugo, governor for king Philip, sent three hundred
soldiers to the town, each of them with a bag of powder of fifteen or
sixteen pound weight, seventy of whom entered, the rest were defeated, and
taken prisoners.

The first of Iulie, his Excellency gave a false assault, having made four
hundred shot to note the behavior of countenance of the besieged, who on
every side were ready for defense. The second of Iulie, by night, he brought
all his men secretly into the trenches, intending in the morning to give fire
to the Mines, and to make a general assault. Every Captain with his men
stood in his place appointed. The third of Iulie, in the morning, after that
the canon had played for four hours, the besieged perceiving all things
ready for the assault, came to the rampires, and then the Mines were fired;
one of them did in such sort overthrow the rampire, as a breach was made for
ten men to enter in front; being in that place where Count William of Nassau
stood with the companies of Frize-land to give the first assault: and at the
trumpets sound, the English were to give the second.

The other Mine toward the South-West, brake forth without, and buried many
Hollanders alive, who stood there ready for the assault: all this while, his
Excellency had given no signal. But Count William perceiving the townsmen to
be terrified, assaulted and took the Bulwark which had been overthrown on
the East Side, and commanded and discovered the whole town.

On the other side toward the South they likewise took a gate with great
loss to the besieged, who perceiving themselves discovered on every side, did
the same night send a drum to parley; but Prince Maurice for the time would
not hear him: yet the next day, the above mentioned Captains had audience,
but all their demands were denied; in the end, they were content to embrace
whatsoever his Excellency would grant; for the canon by this time commanded
all places in the Town, and all the houses and Churches were for the most part
beaten down, so as the people kept in cellers. Prince Maurice granted to the
governor Antonio Quocquelle, and to the Lord Waterdijke, captains and officers
of the garrison of Stenwijck, and likewise to the Clergy and Burghers, these
conditions following, dated before Stenwijck the 4 of Iulie 1592.

That they should depart forth of the said town, the governor, captains,
officers and soldiers, having first sworn and promised not to bear arms for
the king of Spain on this side the Rhyne, for the space of six months.

That they should depart with their baggage, wives and arms, warlike munition
and victuals.

Such soldiers as had revolted, and to escape the hand of justice for enormous
crimes committed, were retired to the said town and served there, should not
enjoy the benefit of his accord.

That all prisoners should be delivered and set at liberty, paying twelve
pence a day for their expenses.

That all Burghers and officers belonging to king Philip, might without
molestation depart thence.

That an hundred wagons should be granted them, according to their request to
carry them to Coeuord, on condition they would be obliged to send them back
without any harm.

That the Surgeons and hurt people might remain in the town till they were
healed, and then depart whether they pleased.

His Excellency granted them two commissioners to conduct them beyond the
Rhyne, upon caution of the Governor and Captains.

After this accord, the soldiers went their way on the fifth of Iulie. Prince
Maurice beside all this, in regard they were valiant soldiers, did of his
princely courtesy grant the Governor his horse; the like did he to Captain
Waell, and to all his men to every one a horse, and to the soldiers their
swords. Those which went away were five hundred and threescore footmen, most
Walons, all healthful and well disposed, and two hundred that were hurt, with
some sixty or seventy horse. There were slain in the town some three
hundred and fifty, and among others Count Lodwick of Berghen, a young Lord of
some eighteen or nineteen years old, together with the Captains Blundel,
Hessel, and others.

On Prince Maurice side, five or six hundred were slain and many hurt, and
among the rest, the Prince himself, presently after the Mine was fired, being
desirous to see what effects it had wrought he was shot in the right cheek,
without any great danger. At the same time Captain William Dorp, Colonel of
the Regiment of Hollanders, was hurt whereof he died. Sir Francis Veer was
likewise hurt. The soldiers being gone, four companies were put into the
town, commanded by the Captains Berestein, Rijswick and others, and the
Camp remained there till the rampires and Dikes were repaired. In this siege
all things were more plentiful and better cheap than in any town, by reason
that provision was easily brought thither, and because they paid no impost.
Certain soldiers who had been actors in betraying the town of
Gertrudenberg, not comprehended in the contract were taken and hanged. And thus
the Town which was thought impregnable was enforced to yield, his Excellency
having made more than nine and twenty thousand canon shot upon it, and was
annexed to the united Provinces, being hitherunto preserved from all the
enemies power and attempts.

The Towns of Ootmaersen and Coevoerden are taken in anno 1592.
AFter that his Excellency of Nassau, had taken Steenwijck, repaired the
rampires, and taken order for the government thereof, he determined to march
with his army to Coevoerden; and appointed certain numbers of horse to go
and begirt the little town of Ootmaersen, whereof Alonzo de Mendoza was
governor for the king of Spain, having sixty horse and two ensigns of foot;
where Charles of Leuin, Lord of Famars, was shot, he was a valiant Lord, and
one of the Commissioners to the Noble confederats, who in anno 1566 had
presented the supplication. He had continually borne arms for the country,
and was now master of the ordnance, he was very much lamented. The town of
Ootmaersen was battered with the canon and enforced to yield on composition, on
the thirtieth of Iulie, like the town of Steenwijck. That done, his
Excellency did in August besiege Coevoerden; those within it burnt the houses
nere adjoining; perceiving that Prince Maurice with his trenches made his
approach, and hap taken away the sluices from them, and drawn the water forth of
the dikes, taken the Counter-scarp of the Castle, and broken down the bridge.

Count Frederick of Berghen, having provided all places round about, did with a
strong garrison enter into it himself; it was a strong town and famous for
the situation thereof, it was artificially fortified, on such foundations as
the Lord of Senoy had formerly begun to lay.

Prince Maurice his soldiers being upon the Counter-scarp, did for their
defense make a gallerie in the dikes, under covert whereof they might easily
come to the rampire to dig and Mine without danger of the enemies canon,
which they soon effected by the help of a Cauallier they made; they did also
beat down a Rauelin: with much to do sundry Mines were made in the rampires,
which still sunk: the besieged made counter-mynes, which by taking air were
unprofitable: yet our men did not give over myning, and fired some of them:
whereupon, an assault was given, so as they got upon the rampires, where by
means of the Cauallier they fortified themselves, and took from the besieged
all means of defense, as they had done at Steenwijck. They within the town
began to be discouraged hoping still for succor, they likewise wanted water and
other necessaries.

The Council of State of the united Provinces, having intelligence that the
Duke of Parma made preparations to enter Frizeland, levied a regiment of
supplies under the command of Colonel Stolberg, who passed Muster, nere to a
place called Heerenberg in the presence of Count Hohenlo: For Count Philip of
Nassau was sent into France with three thousand men; and the Queen of England
had likewise called away her forces to send them into France, and were
already departed from the army, and gone as far as Swoll: but upon
intelligence of the Duke of Parmas coming they were countermaunded. Count
Philip in the mean time and his troops returned opportunely from France, who
were sent to Garrison in Holland to be refreshed. And the old Garrisons were
presently sent to the army, and other some to Grauenweert, the better to anoy
and stop Parmas passage. The army was but weak, and by reason of the bad
ways the camp could not be well provided of victual and munition.

Verdugo, governor of Frizeland for the Spaniards, had earnestly solicited the
duke of Parma for men and money, which in great abundance was at the same time
sent from Italy: thereupon, Parma granted, that the regiments of Count
Charles of Mansfelt, Mondragon, Gonzaga, the two regiments of Arenberg and
Barlaymont, with certain horse and ordnance should march to his aid: with
these he crossed the Rhyne, making a Fort on the other side of the river, and
so marched toward Groll, and from thence to Oldenzeel, where they arrived on
the third of September.

Verdugo, having assembled all the forces in the country nere adjoining, and
understanding the want and extreamitie of those of Coeverden, marched toward
Herderberg where he thought to have encamped, but changing his mind on a
sudden, he went to the Dorp of Vlsen, and from thence to Imlichen in the
county of Benthem, not far from Coeverden, in a place commodious for
victuals.

Prince Maurice having intelligence thereof, sent three hundred horse to view
and skirmish with them, but he could not draw them forth of their advantage;
he took a certain boore whom he suspected to carry letters to the enemy,
wherein he was not deceived: for the boore fea^ing to be hanged, delivered them
unto him; wherein Verdugo acquainted those of Coevoerden, how he intended the
next day to come and relieve them through Count Hohenlo and the horsemens
quarter: For he was informed of the site and estate of his Excellencies camp,
by a gentleman whose name was John Steenwijck, who had told him that it was an
hard matter to approach the town: whereupon, he made choice of this morish
place, as least guarded and suspected.

Prince Maurice strengthened this place with men and ordnance, which was
planted on the high way, through which the enemy was to pass: and standing
thus secretly on his guard, Verdugo came on with all his forces, wearing white
shirts upon their armor, and on the seventh of September, at night, they gave
in upon the trenches in their several places, crying victory, victory.

But, his Excellency, Count Hohenlo, and Count William of Nassaw with their
troops did beat them back, and in their retreat the canon played upon them:
many were slain upon the place, many men and horse stuck fast in the mud, 136
were the next day found dead in the place, and two and fifty horse; many were
carried away hurt: Two and forty wagons full of dead and hurt men were
conducted by four cornets of horse toward Oldenzeell: In a word, three
hundred men were slain. On his Excellencies part only three were slain and
six hurt, and Count William of Nassau was hurt in the belly, but not
dangerously.

Verdugo thus put to rout, did the next day make great provision of fagots, to
make a way through the Marshes; and the country ways being many and very
narrow, he made show as if he would have entrenched the passages, and by that
means cut off victuals from his Excellencies camp: But at last, those of
Coevoerden perceiving their succor to fail, began to parley; and in the mean
time, Verdugo did again show himself in battle, and came to view his
Excellencies trenches and fortifications, who came from receiving and welcoming
the English to his Camp. These two Armies having thus viewed one another,
Verdugo discharged two canon: Those of Coevoerden answered him with two more,
which done, he marched toward Velt-huyse in the county of Benthem.

Those of Coevoerden, being thus forsaken and continually battered, to the
great loss of their soldiers (our men by means of their mine being lodged on
their rampires and curtains) resolved to compound. His Excellency was
likewise willing to grant them any reasonable conditions, in regard Verdugo lay
not far off, and might have attempted somewhat to his prejudice, as also,
because the country and ways were very bad, and unfit for bringing of
victuals to the camp: and on the 12 of September, granted them this accord
following. The commissioners were Evert de Ens, Christophero de Vasques, and
Alonzo de Marteny, Captains of the Cauallerie.

Prince Maurice, in favor of Count Frederick of Berghen, his loving cosen,
does by these Presents permit and suffer him, together with the Captains,
officers and soldiers of the garrison of Coevoerden, to depart with their
ensigns, arms, horse, baggage, and whatsoever belongs unto them (the
ammunition of war and victuals excepted) whether they shall think good.

His Excellency granted the like to the Clergy, Ladies, women, children and
domestic servants of those of Coevoerden above mentioned.

And for the better furthering of their departure, wagons and a necessary
conuoy for their safety shall be granted them; for which the said Count shall
give caution for their safe return to the camp. And his Excellency promises
in the word of a Prince, that no harm either in body or goods shall be done
to the said Earl, or to any other that comes forth of the said town. Given
before Coevoerden on the 12 of September 1592.

Thereupon, the Earl and his soldiers came forth, himself was royally feasted
by his Excellency, his kinsman, and other Lords of the house of Nassau, who
discoursed with one another, questioning how it came to pass, that they being
children of brothers and sisters, should be so divided in love and affection,
and serve several parties. Five hundred soldiers, that were in health and
able to march, came forth of the town, and many that were sick of the bloody
flix. It was a strong town, and 9 canon were found in it.

My Lords the States, in perpetual memory of the taking of these 3 towns,
Steenwijck, Oetmaersen and Coevoerden, made several coins of silver and
brass, attributing the honor of these victories to God alone. The young lord
of Nieunoort was made governor of Coevoerden.

The camp remained there, till all the fortifications were repaired, and the
town provided of all necessaries. Verdugo lay at Velthuyse, and made show as
if he would besiege Oetmaersen; but it was presently fortified.

On the fifteenth of October, his Excellency with his army went toward Zwoll,
and there resolved to march to Emmerijc, and to encamp nere the Rhyne, to be
better able to pass on from thence upon any occasion should be offered by
Parmas forces, under the command of Verdugo, being ready to besiege ^eyther
Groll or Goore, or to stop the enemies passage over Rhyne: but before they
could come thither, the ways were all drowned, and Verdugos tro^pes were gone,
and the greatest part of them, as the two regiments of Arenberg and Barlaymont
had repassed the Rhyne with five or six Cornets of horse, that were much
discontented. Verdugo, with the residue of the horse, Spaniards, Italians and
Liegeois, continued nere to Oldenzeel, and fortified the towns of Groll,
Goore, Enschede and Lingen.

His Excellency, on the 8 of November, came to Arnham and quartered his camp
in the towns nere adjoining, the ammunition ordnance, and bridges of boats were
put in certain ships, to be ready at an hours warning, to make a running
camp; for it was thought that his Excellency had an intent to cross the
Rhyne, and to march into the countries of Valckenbourg and Luxembourg, to find
the duke of Parma at Spa, but the said Prince his departure from thence to
Bruxels brake off this enterprise.

Those of Groeninguen were not yet moved by these exploits, nor by the loss of
Steenwijck, and Coevoerden, to come to any agreement with their neighbors the
Ommelands, and the Nobility of Frize-Land, notwithstanding that a thousand
head of Cattaile had been taken from them in a road, and had but one passage
left open, namely Bourtaign, nere to Wedde: but Count Frederick of Berguen went
thither in winter, with six ensigns of foot, and certain horse for the
countries safety.

A description of the brave and gallant siege of Geertrudenberg in anno 1593.
AFter the Duke of Parmas death, the king of Spain bestowed the government of
the Low Countries on Count Peter Ernest of Mansfelt, by prouiso (as they term
it) until the coming of Archduke Ernestus, in which mean time, Count
Fuentes and Stefano Diuarra, both Spaniards, were joined with him as chief
counselors. And the chief of the Nobility, for more honor, received great
promotions and offices: And the better to win the Countries love, the people
were put in hope, that at the ArchDukes arrival, all matters should be well
ordered: for all men supposed that in respect of his greatness he would not
come thither, but with an intent, ample authority, commission and means to
make pacification, or to manage war in better manner for the countries
defense: in this hope the people did with more content undergo their misery.

During this government, the Spanish Counselors would presently have set the
late Spanish cruelty committed by the Duke d'Alua, on foot, and commanded the
soldiers to keep no more Quarter (as they call it) videlicet, not to release
prisoners in exchange for others of the same quality, or in paying a months
entertainment for their ransom, but would have all prisoners to be rigorously
chastised by the hand of the executioner. This did they, the better to move
their own people for fear of the gallows to fight to the last man, and to be
rather slain fighing, than yield themselves prisoners. But common soldiers,
who follows the wars more for pay than for honor, and makes an occupation of
the art military, wish for no such rigor, especially, seeing valor at this
day is so slenderly rewarded, honored and esteemed. Under this word Quarter,
they likewise comprehend, not to pay any ransomes or contributions to the
enemy. This did much trouble the Clergy, Gentlemen, and Boores, who have the
most part of their wealth lying abroad, and not in towns, being rather
willing to pay small contribution for their safety, than to have their goods
burnt and spoiled.

Mansfelt then by the advice of Fuentes, published a declaration, dated the 5
of January 1593, That no man should after that, pay any ransoms or
contributions to the enemy, nor procure any pasport from him on pain of
death: but that every man should prepare to hinder the enemies incursions, to
arm and fortify against him, and by the larme bell to assemble themselves to
kill and take their enemies prisoners and to hang them up: whereupon, diverse
soldiers on either side were hanged.

The general States of the united Provinces, did likewise against this,
publish a declaration dated on the seven and twentieth of February, wherein
they showed how their enemies the Spaniards being strangers, sought nothing
but the ruin and destruction of the Country, together with the peoples blood
and goods: entreating and exhorting all men to look well unto themselves,
their Country, wives and children, to resist such Spanish cruelty, and to
deliberat thereupon, giving them respit till April following, after which
time, they would keep no more Quarter, but account them al for mortal enemies,
intending to cause the Authors and counselors of this rigorous Decree, to
repent their rashness: and likewise all towns and villages, which following
the tenure of Mansfelts letters, should arm, fortify, and make defense
against them, together with all those which should refuse to pay such
reasonable contribution as they were rated at. By this means afterward, all
these things were on either side permitted.

Count Mansfelt, in the time of winter, in anno 1593, assembled his forces
under the conduct of his son Charles, upon the frontiers of France nere to
Guyse, sending them into France there to employ them. In the mean time, my
Lords the States of the united Provinces, sent Count Philip of Nassau into
Luxembourg, with four thousand horse and foot, hoping to take some towns
there, as S. Vit, and others; which he effected not, but caused all the
garrisons to be drawn forth of Brabant. For so soon as the news of his being
there came to Bruxels, all the horse and foot, both Spaniards and Italians,
were taken forth of the towns of Liere, Malines and other places, and were
sent in great have to the Country of Luxembourg, conducted by Count
Barlaymont. Count Philip having notice thereof, retired, and in the mean time
burnt many villages in the Country, and likewise levied great exactions in the
country of Limbourg, bringing many places under contribution, sacking the town
of Hanuijt in Brabant, and having got much money, horse, and a great booty,
they returned to their Quarter.

In the mean time, the States of the united Provinces resolved to besiege the
town of Geertrudenberg, a dependant on Holland, though seated in Brabant nere
the Mase on a river called the Douge. This town, in ann^ 1589, was by certain
traitors sold to the Duke of Parma for 15 months pay (notwithstanding all
honest and reasonable offers made unto them) whereupon, they were all as
traitors to the country condemned to be hanged, wheresoever they should be
caught; most of whom were executed. The said States, had of a long time on
sundry pretenses kept victuals from thence, by way of license, and in
February, did cut off a Conuoy of all necessary provisions that was going
thither: and having intelligence that the governor was gone forth to meet the
Conuoy, and that two did strive about the government, they thought this
occasion might greatly profit them, and thereupon gave commission to Prince
Maurice, to enuiron and shut in the town with his Cauallerie, which he did,
all the forces being returned from Luxembourg, and the captains having
re-enforced their companies; and on the nine and twentieth of March he begirt
the town both by land and water, at such time when the Spaniards most doubted
the siege of Sertoghenbusk or Grave.

And because this siege is very memorable and famous, we will relate the most
remarkable matters; for the town was strong, manned with more than a thousand
old soldiers, and well provided of all necessaries.

His Excellency lying before the town, did at first quarter himself on the
West Side thereof, with the regiments of Count Henry his younger brother; of
Count Solms, Groenevelt, and Balfour. Count Hohenlo encamped toward the East,
in a Village called Raemsdone beyond the river Douge, toward Oosterhoude, with
the regiments of the Lords of Brederode, Lokres, and others, every regiment
presently fortifying his Quarter.

The Spaniards had a Fort abroad, within musket shot of the town, upon the
causey of Steelhof, which secured the passage to the town: Count Hohenlo did
presently entrench before it, and brought the channel of the river into those
trenches, and with great danger of his life, took the free access of the fort
to the town from the enemy, and planted the canon in an Island opposite to the
conuoy and fort. Whereupon, the captain and garrison (perceiving themselves to
be cut off from the town) yielded the fort on the sixth of April, and for
their labors were imprisoned by the Marquess of Varembon.

The Fort being won, his Excellency made two bridges over the river, the one
on boats, very strong and broad, and the other upon masts, that the two camps
might help one another, which by reason of the marshes, lay a good mile from
each other. On both sides the bridges before the town, he placed ships of war
to keep continual watch. For the river was as a dike, defending a great part
of the camps trenches, there being diverse water mils and sluices to keep the
dikes of their trenches continually full of water, but by reason of the high
tides, they were often hindered in their works.

On the waters side they enclosed the town with an half moon made with boats
of war, lying at anchor, made fast by cables, and supported by small boats,
wherein watch was kept. Without the said half moon ships of war went too
and fro, keeping good guard. Within it, certain small boats stood sentinel
beneath the town: these, took a Spaniard swimming, that carried letters from
Count Mansfelt and others; his Excellency gave him his life, and sent him
back to the enemies, to tell them how he was entrenched.

Without the half moon, toward the West and East of the town, the boats
that brought victuals lay, and were shrouded from the enemies canon. The camp
on the water, was a German mile in length, every camp having his boats of
ammunition and victuals. The mariners had likewise their camp apart, and
behaved themselves valiantly by carrying wodden canons and empty boats by
night nere to the shore and Key, to cause the besieged to bestow their powder
in vain, whereof they had great need.

His Excellencies camp on land, was environed with high rampires and deep
ditches without, with four great and strong Bulwarks, on each of which lay
two canon. Such was Count Hohenlos camp, extending it self two miles in
circuit, and fortified with trenches, bulwarks, strong rauelins and broad
dikes. Without the camp, many stakes were pitched in the ground, and in each
of them an Iron pike called Turkish ambassadors, so nere to one another, as a
man could hardly put his knee betwixt. The chief high ways were fortified with
strong forts and rauelins stored with ordnance, so as an hundred canons were
planted there, upon the ways caltraps were laid, and deep pits made stuffed
full of powder.

Being thus entrenched abroad against the enemy, they likewise began to
fortify themselves against the townsmen, bringing their trenches under the
Towne-walls: they planted their canon, and made galleries, under whose covert
they might come to the towns rampires. The besieged, beside their rampires and
caualleries, had two strong rauelins on the Land-side, opposite to which lay the
Zelanders and soldiers of Vtrechts battery, which did so oppress the town,
as every house almost was shaken, especially the Prince of Orange his Palace
which was utterly ruined.

For making of these great works and fortifications, the States had sent
certain hundreds of boats provided of al necessaries: and though the boores
wrought in every place for pay, yet most of these great works were done by
soldiers, according to the manner of the ancient Romans, not by constraint
but for daily hire; and those days they were not upon the guard, each of them
was employed in what labor he best liked, getting ten or fifteen souls a
day; by means whereof they wrought so hard, as they made themselves invincible
against the kings power which came to relieve the town.

So great good order and discipline was likewise observed among the soldiers
and mariners, as not only the boores which were in the camp, were freed from
all outrage and violence, but they allured their neighbors of the country, to
bring their corn, cattle and goods to the camp as a place of safety and
refuge; and by reason of this strict discipline, they were as free as in any
well governed town, bringing their geese, hens, eggs, butter, cheese, milk,
and flesh to the Market, without any fear or trouble, to the great wonder of
all men: yea the very owners of the Lands nere adjoining, did in diverse places
plough, and till their grounds, whereby all things were cheaper than in any
town round about, whereas victuals in the enemies camp were six times
dearer. Many came from all parts to behold his royal camp, which was so well
ordered as every one admired it. The Princess of Orange came thither, with
the Lady Loysa, daughter to the Prince of Orange, who was going into Germany
to her husband the Elector Palatine of the Rhyne, with many other great Ladies.
Diverse things were as remarkable in this siege, as in any other that has been
these hundred years.

Those of the town made brave defense and valiantly behaved themselves, they
were well provided of all necessaries, and made sundry sallies. But the canon
at last played on every side, and counter batteries were made upon their
canon, so as the ways and rauelins were entrenched and beaten down. Some hope
and promise of relief was sent them by many cunning means. Among others, the
Lord of Waterdijke, on the seventeenth of April, sent letters unto them from
Sertoghenbusk by a pigeon which fell down in Prince Maurice his camp,
containing, that forces were ready to raise the siege, which they would
without all doubt perform, and therefore they should do well to heighthen the
platform of Ramsdouck, and from thence give signals by fire according to the
instructions sent them. His Excellency by the same pigeon sent another letter
to deceive them.

Count Hohenlo upon a time caused the nearest ordnance to be secretly turned
upon the towns tower, from whence they usually viewed the camp, and the
besieged hourly expecting succors, he made a false alarm among his own
soldiers as though aid had been come, whereupon the governor and other
commanders ran presently up to the tower to see what the matter was, on which
on a sudden Count Hohenlo at once discharged all his ordnance, wherewith the
governor and others were slain, which did much weaken them.

Mansfelt, Fuentes, and other of the king of Spains commanders, weighing this
disgrace if they did not relieve this town standing in Brabant, called home
Charles of Mansfelt from France, mustered all their regiments and sent them
toward Turnhout, under the conduct of the Marquess of Varrabon, which were
often assailed by Prince Maurice his cauallerie, which for the most part lay
forth of the camp in the neighbor towns of Breda, Heusden, and
Berghen-op-Zoom. Among others, the lord of Risoyre, Marcelis Bacx, and captain
Egmont, did, on the eighth of June, with one hundred and ninety horse, nere to
Turnhout, encounter 400 horse, coming from the camp, and were going toward
Antuerpe to conuoy Varrabon and Barlaymont, whom they charged and defeated,
chacing them to the castle of Turnhout, whether the Marquess and count
Barlaymont escaped; they brought threescore horse, and three captains
prisoners to Breda.

About the 6 of May, Mansfelt and all his captains came into the field, with
his troops of Lorrainers which came from the wars of Straesbourg, together
with Suisses, Almans, Italians and Spaniards, who would not willingly march
without the company of old Mondragon, that durst not leave his castle of
Antuerpe. Mansfelt in this manner being 30000 strong, came with 18 canon, many
boats and other provisions, and encamped nere to his Excellencies quarter, in a
village called Hout, where he began to build a Fort on the causey of Steelhoof:
whereupon, diverse skirmishes were made: but perceiving that place to be too
strong, he raised his camp toward the later end of May, and went to a village
called Oosterhoudt, where he entrenched his army, and having stayed there
certain days, and used al means to annoy the princes camp, he departed
likewise from thence with his camp toward a village called Waesbeec nere to
count Hohenlos quarter; where (as in other places) he entrenched himself, the
better to get victuals which he wanted, so as count Hohenlo often skirmished
with him, whereupon, Mansfelt durst no more make any attempt upon his
Excellencies camp.

Whilst he lay there, his Excellency upon some occasion sent a trumpet to
him, of whom Mansfelt demanded, why his Lord had so fortified and entrenched
himself, telling him, that Prince Maurice like a brave and valiant young Lord
that was jealous of his own honor, ought to come forth of his fortifications
and give battle: The Trumpet made this wise answer, saying, His Excellency
of Nassau is a young Lord, that would willingly prove an old soldier, like
unto your Excellency: this made those that were present to smile, and caused
Mansfelt to hold his peace, having met with so witty an answer.

During Count Mansfelts abode there, one thousand two hundred foot, and twelve
cornets of horse came to increase h^s forces, which Count Fuentes sent him,
together with four great canon, four and twenty firkins of money, and all
sorts of ammunition for the camp.

The day before the town was taken, Count Hohenlo and Sir Frauncis Veer, made
a brave skirmish, wherein (beside those that were slain) they took forty
soldiers prisoners, and 3 captains, even in view of the town, which daily made
many signals by fire, and was wholly discouraged, so as the town was taken in
this manner following, in the view of Count Mansfelt and his mighty army.

On the 24 of June, in the morning, as the Captains Haen of Tournay, Beuerie,
and Calfe, went up to the guard to relieve those in the trenches under the
towns North rauelin, they resolved among themselves to mount upon the rauelin
to see what was done there, and caused a wodden bridge to be made over the dike
opposite to the bulwarks point. Haen and Beuerie took two musketeers, two
targuetiers, and two halberdiers with them, being in all eight persons, and so
went up very secretly.

Being mounted, and the Sentinel giving th'alarme, these Captains called for
more soldiers to assist them; whilst they fought with those of the guard, one
of their targuetiers was slain, and the most of their soldiers mounted: they
fought hand to hand a long time, so as 16 of the besiegers were slain, and of
the besieged 9, who were enforced to quit the rauelin and to retire into the
town: and because the towns governor was slain at the same time whose name was
captain Tigean, and had bin the third governor, they were much danted, and sent
to crave a parley, which was hardly granted, because the soldiers more and
more got upon the rauelin. At last they sent two captains and the Auditor of
the garrison to Count Solms who had already entered it.

Prince Maurice, count Hohenlo and those of the Council of war were busied in
skirmish with Mansfelt, and so soon as they heard this news, they scarce
believed it, thinking the captains had made a skirmish by chance, having no
commission so to do. These commissioners craved but 2 hours respit to send to
crave count Mansfelts consent; this could not be granted: but when they heard
of the state of Mansfelts camp, and how that Prince Maurice offered to save
their lives, i^ was concluded, that they should depart forth of the town with
their swords and baggage, as appears by this accord following.

We Maurice, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassau, Catzenelboguen, Vyanden, Dyetz,
etc. Governor and Captain general of Guelderland, Holland, Zeland,
West-Frizeland, Zutphen, Vtrecht, and Ouer-Yssell, Admiral general, have
granted, and by these Presents do grant to the Captains, officers and
soldiers of the Garrison of Geertrudenberg free liberty to depart with their
swords, horse and baggage, whether it shall seem good unto them, without any
let or impediment, to which end fifty wagons shall be lent them: and if they
shall need any boats for the king of Spaines officers, their servants, hurt
men, and baggage, we will freely cause them to be conducted to Antuerpe, so as
they will give sufficient caution to send back the said wagons and boats; and
so, that the receivers Matthew Daulthat, John Fransen, and John Matthew, will
remain in the said town, till they have delivered up their Registers, papers,
and records belonging to their office, unto such as shall be by us appointed
thereunto. And concerning the Clergy and Burghers (those excepted who have had
an hand in betraying the town) we grant them free liberty to depart with
their baggage: and promise them by the faith of a Prince, that whatsoever is
above mentioned shall without any let or contraction be observed.

Given in the Camp before Geertrudenberg on the five and twentieth fo June
1593. Signed underneath, Maurice of Nassau.

Notwithstanding this accord thus passed, Prince Maurice at their earnest
request granted them their arms. Thereupon the same day an hundred wagons
went forth of the town, with the baggage, hurt people, women and children:
next them followed three Captains attended by sixteen Ensigne-bearers with
their colors, which with great reverence they delivered to Prince Maurice, who
highly commended all their colors: next them followed the officers with their
halberds, and some two hundred and forty pikes, and then 384 musketeers and
harquebuziers, with others to the number of 600, and marched along by
Oosterhoudt toward Mansfelts camp.

Besides, his Excellency suffered three boats laden with silk and hurt men to
depart to Antuerpe. Three soldiers who had in former time been consenting to
the delivery of the town to the Duke of Parma, were by his Excellencies
command presently hanged.

After the departure of the enemies soldiers, Prince Maurice with his forces
entered the town, and found it so well provided of all necessaries, as had it
not been taken in this manner he would have lost more men in the attempt, so
as himself gave the glory unto God, and exhorted others to do the like: His
officers found eight hundred pound weight of powder there, beside, flesh, fish,
bread, bear, salt and corn, of all which they had plenty. In this siege
three hundred men were slain, and four hundred hurt. He made his brother
Count Henry Frederick governor there (unto whom the Prince his father, of
happy memory, by his testament had bequeathed the town) and the Lord Arent
of Duvenvoord his Lieutenant, and on a sudden all the trenches were leuelled.
Mansfelt perceived not that the town was yielded, till such time as he saw our
men to displant the canon on every side, and that the armed men burnt straw
upon their pikes ends.

Count Mansfelt having intelligence of the towns loss, raised his camp on
the 26 of June, and marched by the Lang-straet toward Bommeler-weert, thinking
by force to have surprised the Fort of Crevecoeur, which stands nere the Mase
at the mouth of the river Diese, opposite to Heel in Brabant: But those of
Gorcum and Bommell, had in part prevented it, by stopping the water nere to the
said fort, whereby all the water which runs by Sertoghenbusk forth of the
rivers Dommell and Aa, drowned the country round about.

Before Count Mansfelt could come thither, Prince Maurice and his troops were
there, hindering him from making any fortifications, and by fortifying against
him, enforced him to depart with his ordnance toward Vliemen and Engelen and
to encampe on the higher grounds, which notwithstanding were presently
environed with water. Those of Crevecoeur Skonse, did presently bend all their
ordnance thitherward, with which they greatly annoyed the enemy who lay open
without any shelter, and imprisoned by water: So as many of them were miserably
slain there.

Prince Maurice fortified the frontiers and Bommeler-weert, he likewise sent
forces into Frizeland to Count William, and commanded Count Solms to make a
road into Flaunders, where the Boores (detayned by the Spaniards) brought not
in their contributions, who had fortified themselves nere Hulst and Axell, and
had likewise intended some enterprise on these two towns, and to that end had
won certain soldiers, who (whilst they should attempt to carry away the
towns cattaile) had undertaken to kill the guard and to make themselves masters
of the gates; but this was discovered.

Count Solms, on the 24 of Iulie, went into the Land of Waes with eight hundred
horse, and three thousand five hundred foot: he sent his cauallerie before, to
a place called S. John ten Steen, where the Spaniards forsook their fort,
flying to Veer, opposite to Antuerpe, but thirty of their horse were taken, and
the Dorp of Steken was burnt. Our cauallerie, nere to S. Nicholas encountered
with eighty Lorrain horsemen, who were beaten, and most of them taken
prisoners: our footmen planted the canon before S. James Skonse which yielded,
the like did those of S. John ten Steen.

All this being done in a short space, news was brought that Mondragon sent two
thousand foot, and six cornets of horse from Antuerpe, and that ten more
followed them: whereupon, Coun^ Solms retired, racing the forts he had taken,
and with no great booty embarked himself, having by this road (wherein at
first he was too slack) gotten very small contribution.

The Town of Coervoerden is freed from the siege in Anno 1594.
THe town of Geertrudenberg thus taken, provided of all necessaries, and order
given for the government thereof: prince Maurice had diverse enterprises upon
sundry towns, and among others on Bruges and Maestricht, which for want of
good intelligence, and fearfulness of certain soldiers, had no good
success: Count William of Nassau likewise lost no time in Frizeland, but did
mightily annoy the enemy, taking diverse forts, as those of Gramberg, Wedde,
etc. using all means to reduce the town of Groeninguen to extremity; but the
said Earl perceiving the enemy to be too strong for him, and that he had
taken the town of Ootmarsen, and fearing if he should go to encounter Verdugo,
the enemy might invade Frizeland, he marched with his forces toward the
Lecke, and knowing that the forces of Slochteren, Wintschoten and Wedde, with
other small Skonses in the vaert or passage, could not long hold out against
the canon, he sent them word on pain of death not to yield the said places,
till the canon were planted against them: this he did to win time, and to be
the better able to finish his chief fort upon the Bourtagne, which he had
begun; to master and oppress those of Grouninguen, and he had already brought
it so forward, as by the situation thereof no canon could be brought to batter
it: The rampires were of the hight of a pike, the Dike was at least fourscore
foot broad, full of water and very deep: It had five bulwarks, two of them
faced the enemy, the storehouse was built, and the soldiers cabins made, and
it was provided of all necessaries for two months, and beside, they might
fetch whatsoever they needed from the country of Westphalia, in despite of the
enemy. There lay five ensigns of foot in it, commanded by the Governor
Gerard the younger, and if this fort could be kept, they made no doubt but in
time to take the town of Groninguen. Therefore Count William, perceiving
Verdugo to be master of the field, and that he expected greater forces under
the conduct of Count Herman of Berghen, he durst in no sort stir abroad, but
stood on his defense, looking for more aid under the comaund of Sir Frauncis
Veer and others, and his Excellency had promised him if need were, to come
himself thither with an army.

The Grouninguers requested Verdugo to divide his forces into two troops, and
to besiege Reyden, and Bellingwoderzile, thereby to cut off victuals from the
fort of Bourtange, and to that end they were ready to send him six double
canon: But he allowed not thereof, fearing least Count William coming to
Slochteren Skonse would cut off his passage betwixt that and Grouninguen, and
hinder the coming of his canon: and though he should besiege those towns, he
was in doubt to be daily assailed by him. And because Verdugo in that place
could not make use of his horsemen, he resolved to go and besiege the Fort of
Bourtange, where in a short space he wanted victuals, and was enforced on a
sudden to raise his siege, causing a report to be made that he meant to besiege
Coevoerden, and so matched on Groeninguens side, from thence craftily taking
his way in October toward Count Williams camp, to assail him on the sudden
and unlooked for, which he might easily have done, had not a soldier stolen
forth of a little Skonse by which Verdugo passed, and given th'alarme, by which
means the camp arrived, which the same day began to fortify and entrench,
and had almost made it defensible: the enemy could come no nearer it than
within musket shot, and only made some skirmish which continued six or seven
hours till night, in which time Verdugo sought to draw them forth into the
field; but Count William would not come forth of his fortifications, so as
Verdugo was enforced to retire toward Groeninguen with great loss, by reason
of his long skirmishes. Count William lost one Captain and many brave
soldiers, the Scottish colonel Balfour was hurt in the foot with diverse others.

Verdugo perceiving his attempts on Count Williams camp to be vain, and that
winter would drive him forth of the field, and finding but small store of
victuals in the country, because that the boores of the Ommelands and country
of Drent were retired into the forts and towns, he marched toward Coevoerden:
and seeing that the country on one side of the town was high, he caused a way
to be made within canon shot of it, with hurdles and fagots, covering them with
gravel taken from under the mudd in the marshes, and on this way he caused two
or three forts to be built as far as the Drossarts house, and that of
Steenwijck, and by that means did shut up the town passages from those of
Coevoerden, in that manner besieging them. But these forts being wet and muddie,
many soldiers died in them that winter to the number of two thousand. Verdugo,
with the remainder of his forces, went toward Oldenzell, where most of his
soldiers afflicted with poverty and sickness ran from him both horse and
foot. Of 2000 Lorraines, only four hundred were left; seven ensigns of
Walons were brought to so small a number, as they durst not for very shame
unfold their colors. Verdugo went to Lingen to meet with a new regiment of
foot, levied by the young Duke of Saxony, whose Lieutenant Colonel was by the
garrison of Deuticum and others, taken prisoner, and an hundred of his men
slain, the rest fled. In the mean time, Verdugo and Count Herman sent
consolatorie letters to the Groeninguers, which were intercepted, whereby they
entreated them to take courage, for they were going into Brabant to crave more
aid of Ernestus.

Count William thus freed from his enemy, sent part of his forces to garrison,
and placed another part at Visflit to keep the passage of Vrijse against the
enemy, and himself with three thousand men embarked at Zoltcampe, and went
toward Bellingwolderzill, to recover the Fort of Wedde, which they took, and
wholly finished the new Fort of Bourtange, making provisions to send to those
of Coevoerden during the frost. The Grouninguers in the mean time made ready a
conuoy to send to Verdugos forces before Coevoerden; but Count Philip of Nassau
lay in wait for it with 500 horse, and his enterprise being discovered, he
took but fifty wagons.

Coevoerden by reason of Verdugos forts having been oppressed by 300 foot, and
four hundred horse; the united Provinces, did in Germany levy a regiment of
Almans under the conduct of count Euerard of Solms, cousin german to prince
Maurice, together with certain horse: the Queen of England likewise permitted
them to raise a regiment of English in her realm, who were commanded by Sir
Frauncis Veer. Verdugo and Count Herman were busied at Bruxels, craving more
aid of Ernestus. The Grouninguers sent a present of silver plate, and twenty
goodly horse to count Ernest of Mansfelt, which were taken by the States
soldiers. That done, his Excellency with his whole Cauallerie, and two and
fifty ensigns of foot went toward Arnham, there to receive his cosen count
Euerard of Solms, the regiment of Almaus, and certain horse, but their
arrival was delayed by reason of the high waters and bad ways, so as they
were enforced to come by boat. Verdugo had likewise done his best to assail
them nere to Lip at a narrow passage: He went from Coevoerden with eleven
cornets of horse, and certain foot companies, but he came too late, because
they were already gone. These forces being come nere to Ysseloort consisting
of two thousand six hundred foot, and 260 horse, the States sent a command to
the next garrisons to meet nere to Zwoll, whether Prince Maurice likewise came,
to go and raise the siege of Coevoerden. Ernestus suspecting it, sent forces
thither from Brabant, but his Excellency made show to stop their passage over
the Rhyne, and so kept them back as much as as in him lay. In the mean time
he made have to join with count William of Naslau, who had already provided
1000 wagons, with all manner of provisions, and had now 10000 foot, and 2000
gallant horse, who met both together at Zwoll, and on the 5 of May, they went
from thence in good order to Dae'ffem, and the 6 of May, in like order to
Ommen: Verdugo thought it not good to attend them, but resolved, on the 6 of
May, to raise his siege and to quit the forts by night, and the same day he
departed without sound of drum, 'ogether with all his old regiments, as those of
Chimay, Arenberg, the counts Herman and Frederick of Berghen, marching toward
Lingen, diverse of his men running from him by the way, so as Coevoerden was
freed from the siege, and the forts taken and manned against the enemies
assaults.

The siege and taking of the town and country of Groeninguen, in Anno 1594.
AFter that his Excellency by Gods help had raised the siege of Coevoerden,
and well provided it of al necessaries after Verdugos departure: he was
unwilling to let slip or loose any occasion which might serve for the good and
profit of the state of those countries: and therefore marched with his army
into the land of Groninguen, whether part of Verdugos forces were retired,
showing himself before the town. And, on the 20 of May, he environed it, and
sent to summon it to yield: the townsmen made a courteous answer, That their
town was too strong to yield so soon: whereupon, he caused all his warlike
provisions (which were in a manner numberless) to be vnshipt and landed. He had
an hundred and forty ensigns of foot: he quartered his cauallerie at Suytlaten
upon the ways, to guard the passages, which being well kept, he could not easily
be driven from his siege. The sort of Auwarder ^^j^l taken the last of May.
Count William, on the last of May, sent 8 ensigns of Prisons before the fort
of Auwaerd-zijll, where 135 men lay, who were assaulted and battered, with 8
pieces of ordnance; and after 182 shot had made a breach, they gave an assault
on the one side with bridges and ladders, whilst some on the other side (the
besieged mistrusting no such matter, because the marshes lay on that side)
passed on hurdles and bridges secretly under the rampires, and mounted the
fort, firing the powder and cabins; where captain Prenger was slain.

The besieged, being terrified with their surprisal, begged for mercy, which
was not granted, because, not long before the taking of the fort, they had
used some cruelty, and given vile and hautie speeches to the drum that
summoned them to yield: whereupon, they were all slain (some 8 or 9 excepted.)
It was a very strong place, 20 of our men were slain there, and threescore
hurt.

On the 28 of May, his Excellency summoned those of the fort of Slochteren,
who refused to yield, yet they fled away by night, as did those of the fort of
Hagenbrug, and other Skonses. Before the taking of these forts there was
scarcity in the camp, these skonses enclosing all the passages, but afterward
all things were very cheap there, by reason of a channel they made, by which
all provisions were brought to the great camp by boat.

His Excellency had with him more than sixty pieces of ordnance of all sorts;
and the better to plant his canon, was constrained to begin a far off,
because the townsmen made a fierce counterbatterie upon him, for they had
store of ordnance, with more than 400 great barrels of powder and other
necessaries, so as few towns in the Netherlands were so well provided. The
town is very populous, and the Burghers trained up in arms, of great
antiquity, and have a long time lived in freedom: there was no garrison in
it, but the meaner sort of the inhabitants served in stead of soldiers, and
received pay from the king of Spain. Beside these, they had still Verdugos
troops at their command, and now during the siege, five ensigns of old
soldiers, under the conduct of colonel George de Lauckema, who lay without the
town in a strong place called Schuytendiep, beneath the town walls, and were
there ready upon any occasion.

Prince Maurice with his ordnance did no great harm to the town, whose
rampires, bulwarks and rauelins were exceeding strong, from whence they made
above 4000 shot upon the camp.

They likewise made sundry fallies, especially upon the English quarter,
where, among others, the Captains Brook and Wray were slain. Those of
Schuytendiep, also, did on a time in the trenches, surprise Hittinga and Hardo,
Captains of two companies of Frizons, whose matches the rain had put out;
they slew fifteen men, and took seventeen prisoners, together with the two
ensigns: whereupon, the trenches round about the camp were made stronger.

Our men shot wildfire into the town, so as many that were busied in quenching
it, perished by the canon: and the besiegers profited little by battering the
rampires, because the besieged did speedily repair them: our men did beat down
a gate, and a way or bridge leading to a Rauelin, and did likewise undermine
certain Bulwarks, filling the Dikes, so that the Burghers by little and
little began to be discouraged, as also for that their messengers sent to
Ernestus and Verdugo gave them small hope: whereupon, by certain trumpets and
other messengers they began to treat on means of capitulation. This treaty
being suspected by diverse (as the mariners and Jesuits) who feared that the
meaner sort would carry it away, did, unknown to all the rest, call the five
companies that lay at Schuytendiep into the town, Content^^ be^^ ^t t^ose of
Groeni^g^^n.
against whom the Burghers presently rose, in which tumult diverse were slain,
and some of their houses who had mentioned the treaty ransackt, as among
others that of John de Bour. At last they agreed in friendly manner, that the
soldiers should return to the trenches. This nowithstanding, they thought it
fit to continue their treaty with the besiegers, by means of the said John de
Bour, so as they sent hostages to the camp, craving fifteen days respit,
with cessation of arms, which was denied them.

They likewise demanded by the said du Bour, Whether in former time there had
not been a treaty motioned to the Duke of Brunswick by the mediation of Count
Hobenlo, whereby the duke propounded certain conditions unto them, and if they
might not now capitulat on the same conditions? and thereupon, they sent
likewise to count Hobenlo, who made answer, That it was now too late, and that
the times were changed.

His Excellency, on the 12 of Iulie, as he looked over the trenches, received a
shot upon his targuet, which stroke him down to the ground.

Whilst the said Prince undermined a great and strong rauelin before the
Eastgate, on which the townsmen had planted four canon, these Mines being
ready to be fired, they gave a false alarm and assault to the rauelin, The
great (...).
from which (being repulsed) they retired on a sudden, and upon a certain
signal, gave fire to the bigger mine which was blown up, together with
whatsoever was upon the rauelin, as also 140 men who were cast into the camp,
of whom one was alive: whereupon, our men leapt upon the rauelin, and there slew
as many as were left alive, driving the rest into the dikes, and presently
entrenched themselves: they found a soldier under ground who was still alive,
together with four canons, two of which the Burghers with cords drew into the
town: two hundred were slain there.

The rauelin thus lost, and fearing other mines in other places might cause a
greater danger, the Burghers that served as soldiers, and were called May
Birds, began likewise to be discouraged, and were not so opposite to agreement
as before. So as the chief Burghers fearing that the town would be more
undermined, did by mutual consent send their comissioners, both from the
clergy and magistracy of the town, as likewise from colonel Laukema,
together with hostages, treating from the sixteenth to the two and twentieth of
Iulie, Those of Graninguen capitulate.
with his Excellency and count William of Nassau: who by advice of the
Council of State, did on honorable conditions grant, that they should live
in their rights and privileges, as other Provinces to whom they should be
united; and concerning their contention with the Ommelands and country nere
adjoining, the true motive and beginning of the war, they should therein
refer themselves to my Lords the general States: and for matters of
religion, should conform themselves like to other countries, accepting Count
William of Nassau governor of Frizeland, for their governor, together with
five companies of soldiers. The articles thereof we have thought good to
insert, for better satisfaction of the curious Reader, because it is a mighty
town, and may well be termed a Province.

FIrst, all wrongs, injuries and offenses perpetrated since the beginning of
these troubles and late alterations, as likewise whatsoever has been done
during the present siege of Groeninguen, in what place or manner soever, either
general or particular, as well within as without, shall be pardoned and
forgotten, as things never done, so as no more mention nor inquiry shall be
made thereof to call any man to question; on penalty that the infractors and
transgressors hereof shall be held, accounted, and punished as desturbers of
the public peace and quiet.

2 Those of the Magistracy and inhabitants of Groeninguen shall promise and
accept, as by these presents they do accept and promise, to re-vnite themselves
to the united Provinces of the Netherlands, as dependants thereof, and to
continue loyal to my Lords the general States of the said provinces; and so
consequently those of Groeninguen, as a member joined to other provinces, shall
vnsaignedly like good confederats entertain firm and inviolable friendship
together; and at all times, and upon all occasions shall aid and assist one
another, and resist the Spaniards and their adherents, as those who contrary
to all right and reason have gone about to oppress the subjects, and to
deprive them of their goods, keeping them in perpetual misery and bondage.

3 Those of Groeninguen shall likewise live in their rights, privileges,
liberties, franchises and immunities.

4 Again, those of the town, and the Ommelanders or country nere adjoining,
making appearance to give their general voice, shall rest satisfied and
govern themselves according to the sentence pronounced and declared by my
lords the general States, upon due consideration of the cause.

5 That my Lord Count William of Nassau etc. Governor of Groeninguen and the
Ommelanders, according to the tenure of my Lords the general States
commission, shall be acknowledged, received, and so held: and that the strife
now present, or which may hereafter arise betwixt the town of Groeninguen and
the Ommelanders, shall be referred according to the decision and dispose of my
Lords the States general or their deputies.

6 Moreover, none other Religion shall be used in the town and country of
Groeninguen, but the reformed, in the same manner as it is publicly in use in
the united Provinces, on condition that no man shall be enforced in his
conscience. That all Cloisters and ecclesiastical goods shall continue in the
same estate they now stand, till the state of the town of the Ommelands shall
be duly reformed by my Lords the general States, on condition, that then, the
Provinces themselves shall give order for the bestowing of the goods and
entertainment of the ecclesiastical persons: always provided, that
whatsoever belongs to the commanderies of Witwert, Oosterbirum and others,
shall be held and disposed of according to the commaunderies which are in other
of the united Provinces.

7 That for the general safety of the town, and likewise to prevent and
hinder all tumults and division among the Burghers and inhabitants, those of
Groeninguen shall receive five or six foot companies, who by advise of the
Magistrate, and to the least prejudice of the Burghers and inhabitants shall be
provided of lodging, or money to provide it, according to the agreement which
shall be made betwixt the Lord governor and those of the town and country.

8 As for certain forts which are to be raced, it shall be done according to
the first convenient occasion, and as my Lords the general States shall think
fit.

9 That the town of Groeninguen, together with the Ommelanders, in that which
concerns the general means and contributions serving for direction of the
common cause, shall hereafter conform themselves like other contributorie
Provinces.

10 Beside, concerning rates and contributions, which till now have been
rated, contributed and received, as likewise demaines which have been
accountable, the accounts thereof shall be held for good. And those which have
not been accounted, the accounts shall be made before the old lords, on
condition they shall not meddle with the receipt of any remainders.

11 Again, all those that were fled from the town of Groeninguen and the
Ommelands, or their heirs, shall be again restored to their goods, it they be
not yet alienated or sold, wherein singular courtesy and modesty shall be used.

12 And concerning goods immouable sold or alienated, either for debts or
morgage, and likewise such as have been confiscat, the said heirs may recover
the said goods, in redeeming them for themselves within the term of four
years, and by repaying the value of the principal money, together with the
rent thereof: whereupon, the revenues which the buyer has received shall be
abated: and if any contention shall arise thereupon, it shall be referred to
the deciding of an ordinary and competent Judge.

13 Again, it shall be lawful for all Burghers of the town of Groeninguen,
whether they be ecclesiastical persons or others, freely to remain in the
town, or to withdraw themselves into other towns or places newtrall as shall
seem best unto them, and there to continue and enjoy their goods: provided,
they go not to the enemy side.

14 All strangers of what quality or nation soever, now presently remaining
in the said town shall be comprehended in this treaty, and may reside there
or in any newtrall place so as they will swear to be loyal to the States of
the united Provinces.

15 All letters of rent, debt, and morgage of all Abbots, Prelates, and
ecclesiastical persons as well foreign as domestic, that during these
troubles have retired themselves to the town of Groeninguen, made for their
entertainment, shall be decided by the Estates and Magistrates of the Province
or town, wherein their Monasteries or Colleges do stand, according to
equity.

16 The deputies of this town of Groeninguen, being in commission at Bruxels,
together with their servants and goods, shall be comprehended in this
agreement: provided, they return within three months.

17 Those Burghers that were taken prisoners during this siege, shall be set at
liberty, paying their ransom.

18 The town shall be governed by the Magistrate, saving that he and those of
the comminaltie that are sworn, shall for this once be established by his
Excellency and Count William, with consent of the Council of State; and ever
after, the election of the Magistrate shall be done according to the ancient
custom: So as in stead of distribution of beans (a ceremony by them used)
the said lord Earl as governor may chose five even among the 24 that are
sworn, who shall proceed to election of the Magistrate according to the
ancient custom: and this to continue so long as the wars shall last.

19 Again, it shall not be lawful for any man by means of this union, to
transport or resign the town of Groeninguen to any king, prince, lord, or
commonwealth, without the mutual consent of the said town, nor yet to build
any new castle there, to guard or countermaund it.

20 The Magistracy and Burghers of Groeninguen, shall take the same oath to
continue loyal, as others have done.

21 Moreover, all provisions, either of money, warlike munition, victuals,
ordnance, and such like, sent into the town of Groeninguen, belonging to the
king of Spain, or otherwise sent thither during the war, shall be delivered to
his General or his commissioners.

22 The king of Spaines soldiers shall depart forth of the town of
Groeninguen, and from Schuytendiep.

Given in the camp before Groeninguen the eight and twentieth of Iulie. 1594.
Here follows the agreement concluded with the Lieutenaunt general George
Laukema, and soldiers of the garrison.
FIrst, the said Lieutenant, together with the Captains, officers, and
soldiers (those excepted which in former time have served under the States)
their wives, followers, and baggage, shall freely and without any molestation
depart with their arms and ensigns (which his Excellency at the intercession
of the commissioners of the town of Groeninguen has granted them, without
sound of drum, and match lighted) forth of the said town and camp, without
any impediment either in body or goods, and shall be safely conducted by the
river Drent to governor Verdugos camp, and from thence over the Rhyne, on
promise not to serve on the hitherside of that river for three months.

2 That his Excellency for the better carrying of their stuff and baggage,
and for ease of women, children, sick and hurt persons, shall furnish them
with eighty wagons for their use, with a commissarie and safe conuoy, such as
his Excellency shall think good to appoint, who shall conduct them to
Ootmarsen, or at farthest to Oldenzeell: And the said Laukema shall be bound to
leave some of his Captains as caution for the safe return of those wagons.

3 All Captains, officers and soldiers, who by reason of their wounds and
sickness cannot endure to travel by wagon, shall remain in the town till
they have recovered their healths, and then, pasport shall be given them to
return to their companies, either by land or water.

4 That Captain Wyngaerden, having paid for his expenses, shall go his way
without ransom, as likewise all soldiers, victuallers, and carters of the
camp that are prisoners in the town.

5 That all goods belonging to Verdugo, remaining in the said town, shall
freely be carried to a place appointed, or else may remain safely in the
Town, till the said Lord governor have otherwise disposed of them.

6 That all horse and baggage belonging to the king of Spaines officers (such
as are now absent) shall have free passage and be conducted together with the
other soldiers.

7 That all those who do presently reside in the town of Groeninguen, of what
Nation soever, officers, and others, all Churchmen, as the two fathers Jesuits,
and other temporal persons that were willing to depart with the soldiers,
their wives, children, family, cattle and goods, may enjoy the benefit of the
same above mentioned conuoy and safety.

8 And if any of the said inhabitants, either man or woman, by reason of their
private affairs, cannot depart with the said soldiers and conuoy, six months
are granted them from the day of the date of this present accord, during which
time they may remain here and finish their business, and afterward depart
with their goods and families either by land or water whither soever they shall
please.

9 That all Captains, commanders, and soldiers, that are indebted to the
Burghers, shall be bound to make satisfaction before their departure: and if
there be any stuff or baggage belonging to those that are absent who are
indebted to any Burgher, the said goods shall be detained till such time as the
creditors be fully satisfied.

10 That the Lieutenant general, Captains, commanders and private soldiers
shall depart (this accord once concluded) without any longer delay forth of the
town of Groeninguen, Schuytendiep, and other usual places of their retreat.

Given in the camp before Groeninguen, and underneath signed and sealed by his
Excellency the 22 of Iulie 1594.
Hereupon, Groeninguen yielded the next day, being the 23 of Iulie, which did
not greatly please his Excellencies soldiers, who hoped to have taken it by
force, and to have sacked it; but the other Provinces thought good to preserve
and unite it to the rest, declaring that they managed war as well for their
neighbors profit as their own liberty. The companies of Count William of
Nassau, of John de Niell, Charles de Vijngaerden, of Steenhuyse, Cobbe, and
Appell, entered into it: the like did his Excellency and Count William, who
visited the rampires, which they found to be very strong. Ten thousand
canon shot were made upon the town, which in powder and bullets cost 100000
florins. Of our men 400 were slain, besides those that were hurt: of the
besieged, 300 were slain, and many Burghers. Six and thirty brazen pieces,
with many of iron, were found in the town.

His Excellency did afterward change the magistrates according to the
articles. These two following verses were likewise made, containing the day and
year of the towns taking. QVI nt ILI In Patr IVM foe DVs GrunInga reVersa est,
Et noVa Nassa VIs parta trophoea VIrIs.


General Laukema with his soldiers in number 295 men departed, together with
100 that were sick and wounded, and marched toward Oldenzeel where Verdugo
lay; Count Frederic went to his government at Lingen, and placed garrisons in
Grolle and other towns, sending certain regiments and 8 cornets of horse,
beyond the Rhyne, whom count Philip of Nassau in vain pursued. Prince Maurice
returned to the Hague; all towns through which he passed, congratulated and
honored him with triumphs and presents. The soldiers were sent to garrison,
900 horse excepted, that made incursions into the countries of Luxembourg and
Flanders.

The general States of the united provinces, set forth certain ships toward
Noua Zemla and the Eastern Indies, in an. 1594. and 1595.
ALthough it may seem impertinent to set down (among the many gallant
victories which the Author of all goodness has by his Excellencies conduct
granted to these countries) the admirable, strange, and tedious voyages to the
Northward, Way-gate, and Noua Zemla, as also toward the East Indies; yet for
diverse reasons following, I cannot forget or pass them over in silence. First,
albeit the Northern voyage has not much profited these countries, yet those
to the Eastern Indies, have on the contrary been very commodious: So as my
lords the general States have much annoyed the king of Spain in those parts,
who thinks that these countries do alone belong unto him; and have thereby
much diminished his power and reuenews, and freed the Netherlands from more
grievous and tedious war. Secondly, I thought good here to insert them, that
when the Reader shall look upon the victories which these united provinces have
obtained against the king of Spain, he may here likewise find the valorous
actions of our countrymen, and all that they have done and endured abroad in
foreign countries many thousand miles from home, to the ruin and diminution
of the greatness of this Spanish Pharao: as also by this means the better to
move and incite their children and successors to the like, or if it be possible
to greater and more noble enterprises. 3. To the end that the inhabitants of
these united Provinces may never forget but always remember, that the Almighty
and only good God, has not alone thus blessed, preserved and defended them
from the power of the king of Spain and his bloody Council: but likewise how
so small a country has been able to make head against the mightiest
potentate of Christendom, having not only kept their own, but invaded him in
his own land, as we already have and will hereafter set down: Beside, that
these countries for the space of forty years that the wars have lasted
(contrary to the nature of war) are become so rich and potent, as in the midst
of all these great sieges so dearly bought, they have yet been able to send
forth ships (with exceeding expense) to annoy their enemies. We will first
speak of the Northern voyages, and of Noua Zemla.

The united Provinces living under a free government, having shaken off the
Pope and king of Spaines yoke, excelling all nations in the world in navigations
and number of ships, the country being full of good mariners and men skilful
in marine matters, wherein they are more expert than others, as appears by
their works and learned Cosmographies, thought it fit to lay hold on that
occasion which in former times had bin snatched from them by their sovereigns
the Emperor Charles the 5 and his son king Philip, in regard of the Spaniards
and Portuguise, who were first discouerers of the new and Eastern Indies; so as
by advise of diverse Pilots and learned Cosmographers, they have caused a way
and passage to be sought out to the North-East, to pass by Tartarie to the
countries of Cathay, China, and Eastern Indies, and so to the Islands of Iapan,
Molucques, etc. which, by two voyages made by the English, the first by sir
Francis Drake, and the other by Candish, who compassed the world, has bin more
and more discovered. The Englishmen have often sought out this way to the
Northward, as in an^ 1553, by Hugh Willoughby and Rich. Chancellor: Willoughby
went into Groenland, where he was frozen, and there found more than a year
after, together with his men and provision. But Chancellor arrived in Muscouy,
and discovered that way which the English and Flemmings have ever since yearly
used. After that, Setphen Burrows in anno 1556, and after him in the year
1580, Arthure Pet and Charles Iackman Englishmen, found out a passage by
Way-gate toward Tartarie: And then Oliver Brunell of Holland discovered the
river of Pechora. But al these (though they seemed not to be far off from the
passage) could never find it. The English likewise sought out a passage to the
North-West, along the coast of America, or new France, as sir Martin Forbisher
thrice with diverse ships.

After him, John Dauies discovered two hundred leagues further, thinking to
find America to be an Island, and to pass behind the North to the Southward,
and so to go to China, but hitherto nothing has been done.

In this regard, the States of the united Provinces, did, toward the end of the
year 1594, sent four ships to those parts, one, a ship of Amsterdam, under
the command of William Barrentsen; one of Zeland, of Campeveer, under
Cornelius Cornelison; and one of Enchuysen, with John Hugh of Linschoten, who
had remained in the Indies with Isebrand Tetcales. All these setting sail on
the fifth of June, those of Amsterdam took an higher course seventy seven
degrees to the Northward (where in August they met with store of ye and sea
monsters) giving names to havens: but the mariners being unwilling, who feared
that they should not be able to pass forward, they resolved to return. The
two other ships met with Islands, unto which they gave names. At last, they
likewise found a passage, even in a mist, as if God had brought them unto it,
for which they thanked him. They found that strait to be very commedious and
deep, wherein great and small ships might ride, and to be five or six leagues
in length: and after that sailed into a greater, larger and warmer Sea, where
they saw the ice to melt before their faces, and so went to the coast of
Tartarie near to the river Oby, The strait of Nassau found out to the
North-Eastward, in anno 1595.
where they found Islands, men, and a fertile soil. They gave names to those
countries, and called the strait, the strait of Nassau, and as they supposed
they might have passed on farther, if they had had commission so to do, and
more provision; and so rejoicing, they returned to the strait, setting up
marks every where, and on the sixteenth of September in anno 1595, they came
back to Amsterdam.

Upon the report, the States resolved to further the voyage, being desirous to
plant the Christian faith in those countries, not after the Spanish manner by
force of arms, but by Christian means, dealing gently with the inhabitants,
thereby seeking to augme^t their navigations, fishing and traffic; this way
being two thousand German leagues shorter than the Portugals voyage, by the
cape of Good hope, much safer and free from Pirates, and less subject to
diseases, because they need not pass the Equinoctial line as the Portugals
do, four times, forward and backward.

The States of the united Provinces, caused another voyage to be made, and the
year following sent forth seven ships, two from Amsterdam, two from Enchusen,
two from Zeland, and one from Rotterdam: six were laden with all kind of
Merchandise and money, every ship having his committee for traffike: the
seventh, being a small vessel, was commanded to return, so soon as the
others were past the cape of Tabin (which they met with before they come to the
last point of Tartarie) to bring home news of the other ships. Jacob de
Heemskerck, was committee general of the fleet, and William Barrentson chief
Pilot. Some of them were commanded to winter in those quarters, to know how
long the winter and ice does continue, having to that end provision with them
to make Stoues. The most learned Cosmographers doubt not of the passage, but
only of the promontorie of Tabins extension more to the Northward, which
diverse think to be impossible, because that certain Indians (as Pliny writes
seventy and two years before the birth of Christ) were by tempest thrown upon
the coast of Germany, People of the Eastern Indies, thrown in former time by
tempest upon the coast of Germany.
and presented to Quintus Metellus Celer, governor for the Romans in France.
Since then, some came into Swethland, and others (as Dominicus Niger writes)
came in the Emperor Frederick Barbarossus time, in the year 1160, and after
that (as Otho speaks in his History of the Goths) certain Indians of the
Eastern Indies were cast upon our coast: so as there is hope, that by the same
way that these people came (being alive and in health and not knowing any
place) our men being well furnished of all necessaries may make discovery, or
may fall upon the rivers of Oby and Quian, which go far up into Tartarie; from
whence they may more and more discover countries. If this passage could be
found out, traffike would be changed over the whole world; for those countries
do abound in silk, cotton, wool, lead, tin, copper, gold, silver, and
precious stones. The chief adventurers in this voyage, for Zeland, are, Jacob
Valck Tresorer of Zeland, Christopher Roelsins pentioner to the States of
Zeland, with diverse merchants, as Balthazar Moucheron; and at Amsterdam, Peter
Plancius, John Ianson Charles, Dirrick de Osse, and many others.

These seven ships, upon hope of good success, did altogether on the second of
Iulie, depart from Texell to the Northward, and sailing toward the North-East,
in an^ 1595, they found too much ice at the strait of Nassau; for by reason of
contrary winds they came thither too late: and after sundry dangers and
difficulties, without attaining their wished Port, returned, on the 18 of
November, the same year, into the Mase, not despairing for all that to find
out the passage some other time. Whereupon, the same voyage was again
attempted the third time by the Magistrates of the town of Amsterdam (because
the States of the united Provinces were no longer willing to prosecute that
discovery at the countries cost, but promised to give a good sum of money to
him that should find out the same passage) who, at the beginning of the year
1596, manned forth two ships, and agreed with the mariners on two conditions,
viz. what to have, if they performed not the voyage, and what recompense they
should have if they found out the way to China: promising them great reward if
they could discover the passage. They took as few married men as could be,
because they would not have them to return home by their love to their wives
and children, before they had prosecuted the journey.

The Master, and Committee for trade in one of the ships, was Jacob de
Heemskerck, and the chief Pilot William Barentsoon; and in the other John
Cornellison Rijp was Master and Committee.

On the 16 of May 1596, they went from the Vlie, but by a NorthEast wind were
with great danger enforced to put in again: And on the 18 of the said month
they pursued their journey, and sailed so far to the Northward, as on the 19
of June they came to the height of eighty degrees and eleven minutes, where
they descried a new country, whether they bent their course, and entered
certain leagues up into a Bay: they supposed this country to be Groenland,
which stands under the height of 80 degrees, where they found green grass,
cattle feeding upon it, and far less cold and ice than when they were under
the height of 76 degrees.

From thence they returned to an Island, which they had before named the land
of Bears, in regard of the great number of white bears they found there, nere
to this Island the two ships departed from one another: John Cornellis sailed
back again toward eighty degrees, thinking there to find a passage on the
East Side of the said country; but that ship did no great matter, but returned
home into Holland.

The other, wherein William Barentsoon and Heemskerke were, sailed toward Noua
Zemla, where they rounded the coasts to the Northward, till they came to an
Island called the Isle of Orange, in the height of 77 degrees: from whence they
went Southward, where they found much ice, so as they could discover the land
no farther: and on the last of August went with their ship to land, where it
was soon frozen, so as they were enforced to remain there, where they resolved
to build an house with timber which they found on the Sea shore, into which
they carried their victuals and merchandise, and there continued all winter,
where they were extremely tormented with cold and snow: the like whereof was
never heard. The inner walls of this house where these thirteen or fourteen
men lay, was frozen an handful thick only with their breaths,
notwithstanding they kept a continual fire day and night.

They were likewise much molested with white bears, which devoured some of
their men: there were store of white foxes, which they took and did eat.
Perpetual night in Noua Zemla all winter till the 27 of January.
All winter long they saw no day nor sun till the four and twentieth of
January 1596, when it appeared a little, but on the seven and twentieth of the
said month, they saw the sun in his full circumference.

The 22 of June, these men departed thence with two great boats which they had
provided, and left their ship sticking still in the ice. They left a written
scrowle in the house, put up into the bandelier of a musket, which they hung up
in the chimney, wherein was written, how they came thither with an intent to
go from Noua Zemla to China, and how necessity had enforced them to return
home in two boats. In this manner, with much travel, misery and cold, they
arrived on the second of October 1597, at Cola in Lapland, where they found
their other ship with John Cornellis, who had already made one voyage into
Holland, and togethether with him returned home on the 26 of October, but
William Barrentsoon dyed by the way.

Having briefly spoken of the voyages to Noua Zemla, we will now proceed to
those of the Eastern Indies. The reasons moving my lords the States, and the
inhabitants of these countries to begin and undertake these voyages, are these.

They perceived that their trade with Spain grew every day more daungeros,
for their ships were stayed, goods confiscat, their masters and merchants
imprisoned under color that they came from the Low Countries, and were
questioned by those of the Inquisition concerning their religion, or else
enforced for poor wages to serve the king against their country and
conscience.

These considerations moved some to establish a company, and to seek means
to trade to the Eastern Indies: so as in the year 1594, nine merchants of
Amsterdam entered into an association together, viz. Henrick Hudde, Reynier Pau,
Peter Dirrickson Hasselaer, John Ianson Carrel, John Poppe, Henrick Buyck,
Dirrick de Osse, Siuert Peter, and Aert of Grootenhuys: these were the first
that traded to the Eastern Indies, and were termed The far company. They
built four new ships, viz. two great ones of the burden of four hundred and
sixty tun, the one was called Mauritius in honor of Prince Maurice, and
carried six brazen pieces, and fourteen of iron, being well stored with
small shot, and manned with eighty four men, having for Master John Ianson
Molender, and Cornellis Houtman for committee. The other was called Hollandia,
manned with eighty five men, and carried seven pieces of brass, twelve of
iron, with store of small shot: her master was John Dignum, and the committee
Gerard de Boninge. The third was termed Amsterdam, wherein were nine and fifty
men, six brazen pieces, ten of iron, the master was John Jacob Schillinger,
and the committee Reynier de Hell; it was of the burden of two hundred tun.
The fourth was a pinnace called the Dove, of fifty tun, manned with twenty
men, and carried two pieces of brass, and six of iron, the masters name was
Simon Lambrecht.

These ships being rigd and set forth by the States of Holland were bound for
the East Indies, to begin the navigations and trade of spice with the Indians,
especially there where the Portugals had no command, thereby to avoid Spanish
impositions.

These four new ships being well stored with all necessaries for a long
voyage, and manned with two hundred and fifty men, sailed from Texell the
second of April 1595, and held on their course toward the Cape of Good hope,
where by the way they met with a Portugal Carrack, carrying the Archbishop of
Goa to the Indies, which they might have taken, yet according to their
commission they meddled not with it, but only went aboard her as loving friends.

The second of August, they descried the said Cape, where their men grew very
sick and some died, and having passed beyond the Cape, they cast ankor nere to
the Isle of Madagascar or S. Lawrence, where they continued a long time: The
Hollanders trade to the Indies and to Iana, in anno 1^96.
from thence they pursued their journey, and on the eleventh of June, in anno
1596, they came near to the Isle of Su^atra, and so visited all those
countries round about; from hence they sailed to the Island of La Major, to the
merchant city of Bantam, where they found merchants of Turkey, China, and
other countries; there they began to buy pepper and spice, but by the envy of
the Portugals, they were maligned by the countries governor, who at their
instigation became their enemy.

The Indians after that, had like to have surprised them under color of
friendship; diverse of the Hollanders committees, and the chief Pilot were
slain, so as they could not prosecute their trade any longer there: whereupon,
perceiving themselves to want men, they vnloded one of their ships called
Amsterdam, and burnt it, the better to man the rest.

The eleventh of January 1597, they resolved to return homewards, and came to
the Islle of Balie, scituat to the Eastward of the great Island Iaua, where
they were kindly used and welcomed by the king, so that two Hollanders did
voluntarily remain in that country.

From thence, being well stored with rice, water, and such provisions as they
could get, they set sail on the one and twentieth of March 1597, to return
homeward, and on the seventh of May, doubled the cape of Good hope, and on the
five and twentieth of the said month, came to S. Helens Island, where they
found many Portugal Carracks, so as they durst not touch there, but passed on,
and arrived at Texell in Holland on the 11 of August, The Hollanders return
home the 11 of August 1597.
having bin two years and four months abroad: of 250 men they brought home
90, and left some 160 behind them. They brought two boys of Madagascar, and
two of Sumatra with them, and one of China, who soon learned the Dutch Tongue,
and gave more ample knowledge of their countries commodities.

The above mentioned company of Amsterdam, notwithstanding the voyage had not
been very profitable, resolved to send thither again, in the year 1^98, and
because there was another company that were likewise willing to trade to the
East Indies; because they would not hinder one another, they joined altogether.
The new adventurers were Vincent de Bronchoorst, Simeon Ianssen Fortune, Gouert
Dircsen, Cornellis de Campen, Jacob Thomassen, Eldert Simonssen the younger,
and John Harmans.

Their ships were named, the one Mauritius, which had been there already,
whose Master was Gouert Ianssen, the other, Amsterdam, of the burden of six
hundred tun, the third, Hollandia, and had likewise been there before, Simeon
Mau being Master thereof; the fourth, Guelderland, of four hundred tun, and
John de Bruyn was her Master; the fifth, Zeland, of two hundred and sixty
tun, and Nicholas Iansz Melkman was her Master; the sixth was called Vtrecht,
of 260 tun: with two pinnaces, the one named Frizeland, and the other
Ouer-Yssel. The Admeral of these eight ships, were Jacob de Neck, the
Vice-Admerall Wybrant Warwijck: and beside these, there were seven committees
for the Council, among whom was Heemskerck that had been in the last voyage to
the Northward, all very skillful men, the ships were well furnished with men
and all other necessary provision, and on the first of May, they set sail from
Texell toward Iaua. This company did afterward build four great ships to
send them the year following into those parts, the better thereby to continue
the Navigations.

In Zeland, a famous Merchant, named Balthazar de Moucheron, sent two ships
likewise to the East Indies, the one called the Lion, and the other the
Lyonnesse, whose pilot was a very skillful English man, called John David's;
the chief committee was Cornellis Houtman, who went with the last fl^et from
Amsterdam.

After these, at sundry times other greater fleets were sent to the Indies;
for the Merchants by this time felt the commodity thereof, notwithstanding
they had much to do both with the Indians and Portugals; of which, if any one
desire to have further knowledge, I refer him to the descriptions thereof,
which have been written and published.

The taking of the town of Huy in the country of Liege on the eighth of
February 1595.
CHarles of Herauguier, governor of Breda, the better to advance the
enterprises on the countries of Luxembourg and Namur, went forth of Breda on
the last of January, with twelve ensigns of foot, and four cornets of horse,
and marched toward the town of Huy, which stands upon the river Mase in the
country of Liege: it is a fine town, and has a bridge over the Mase, and a
Castle, and is the ordinary abode of the prince and bishop of Liege. In the
Castle was a weak garrison, 24 or thirty of our men were hid in a little
house under the castle which stands high upon a rock, over this little house
was one of the Castles windows: these thirty men with a ladder made of ropes
got up to the window, which they brake and entered: some among them knew every
corner of the castle, so as in the Morning when the chief of the castle went
forth of their houses thinking to go to Mass, they were on a sudden taken by
the throat, bound, and laid in a dungeon; which done, they took the castle and
gate, and some moved the town to yield. The Burghers ran to arms, thinking to
defend themselves, but perceiving Herauguier to come forwards with his troops,
they compounded, and suffered him to enter with three ensigns of foot, and two
cornets of horse, on the 8 of February.

Herauguiere fortified the town and castle, reducing the enemies countries
near adjoining, under contribution. The Town was very well seated for our
men to make an offensive war, it being a passage into the countries of Namur
and Brabant, near to the confines of Luxembourg, where they supposed to
obtain great victories, under the conduct of the duke of Bouillon, and count
Philip of Nassau.

Herauguieres troops of horse did at the same time near to Montmedy, meet
with seven wagons laden with rich Italian Merchandise, as veluets, and silk
stockings, which were going toward Antuerpe, and were worth three hundred
thousand florins, which they took and divided amongst themselves. But part of
this Cauallerie, belonging to the garrisons of Breda and Berghen in Brabant
being desirous to return home, met with certain of the enemies ordinary
bands, conducted by general Schets, Lord of Grobbendonck, who not far off
had ten foot companies; whereof our men having intelligence, divided
themselves into 3 troops, one of which was assailed by the enemy, and being
ouerloden with booty, were beaten, and 70 of them slain and taken prisoners,
among whom were two Lieutenants.

The taking of Huy (belonging to the Bishop of Liege, who lived as a Neuter)
was thus excused, namely, our men borrowed that town but for a place of
retreat without any hurt to the inhabitants, which so soon as the war should be
ended, they would willingly surrender: that the Bishop permitted the like to
the towns of Berck and Bonne, which were his, and yet were detained by the
Spaniards.

But the Bishop complained to the States of the wrongs done unto him, and of
the breach of the neutrallitie, craving to have his town redeliuered, and
therein employed al his friends: but because small regard was had of his
complaints, he implored the aid and assistance of the Archduke Ernestus, who
presently sent forces thither, to free the countries of Namur and Brabant from
incursion, with commandment to aid the Bishop; these troops notwithstanding
Ernestus death, besieged the town of Huy, because they perceived it could not
easily be relieved. Herauguieres, with Captain Balfort, le Vos, and others,
did shut themselves into the town, and yet the waters were risen over the
whole country by reason of the great snow which was melted by a continual
rain, The Rhyne and other rivers ouerflow the banks in February and March.
so that they had small hope of aid, for all the rivers, and especially the
Rhyne had so ouerflowed their banks, as in the memory of man the like had not
been seen, for all the country round about was drowned, many thousands both
men and cattle perished. In Guelderland and Holland the Isle of Bommell and
others were drowned, as the Betuwe, and the country near to Vtrecht, and
Ammersfoort, even to the gates and suburbs of Vyane: three thousand persons
were drowned, so as it was a great and just punishment of God: Diverse skonses
and Bu^warke were borne away, so as the soldiers had much to do to secure the
country, and with great cost to repair the forts.

Fuentes, la Motte, Barlaymont, and other captains, considering that the
States forces were cooped up by water, and that small relief could come to
them, did on the one side of the Mase besiege the town of Huy, and the bishops
forces on the other side, and at last on the thirteenth of March took the
town by force, slew many of the garrison, and took diverse of them prisoners;
the rest fled to the castle, which was battered with two canon, and undermined
by all the myners in the country, so as in the end, the castle was by
composition delivered to the Lord la Motte, and upon the twentieth of March,
our men departed with their arms and baggage. At their departure the Spaniards
would have murdered them, but la Motte and Grobbendonck sent them safely away.
Herauguieres by this means lost much credit, being taxed for yielding the
castle so soon, seeing that near to Coloigne, forces were ready to relieve
him, as also, because the breach was not sufficient for the enemy to come to
an assault: but others judged the contrary, and said that he had done
discreetly; and so this enterprise did smally profit the united Provinces.

The taking of the Island and town of Cales-Males in Andelusia in Spain, in
the year 1596.
IN the year 1596, The Queen of England sets forth a fleet under the conduct
of the Lord Admiral and Earl of Essex.
the Queen of England did set forth a mighty fleet of sixteen or seventeen
of her great ships royal, in twelve or fourteen of which were three or four
hundred mariners in every ship, beside forty other English ships of war,
with fifty others which carried soldiers and provisions. The Lord Charles
Howard Baron of Effingham and now Earl of Nottingham, was Admerall general of
this fleet. The Lord Thomas Howard, now Earl of Suffolk was Vice-Admeral, and
sir Walter Raleigh knight, and captain of the Queens guard, was rere-Admerall.

My Lords the States of the united Provinces, The united provinces send 24.
ships of war to serve the Queen of England under the conduct of the Lord of
Warmont.
did at her Majesty's request, set forth eighteen great ships of war, each of
them being manned with one hundred and thirty men, beside six others laden
with victuals and ammunition, and in each of them forty men: the Lord John of
Duvenvord, Lord of Warmont, Admerall of Holland, was by the States made
Admerall of this fleet, John Gerbrantsoon of Enchuysne was Vice-Admerall, and
the rere-Admirall was Cornellis Lensen of Flushing: but they were tied by
agreement to be under command of the English. Many voluntaries were likewise in
this fleet, as count Lodwick of Nassau son to count John, and others. An army
of land soldiers was likewise in this fleet, of whom the Earl of Sussex was
general. In this army were sundry regiments, commanded by the Earl of
Sussex, sir Edward Conway, Sir Conihurst Clifford, Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir
Thomas Gerard, Sir John Winckfield, and others, The number of the soldiers
amounted to 6000 able men, among whom were two thousand two hundred old English
soldiers brought forth of the low countries by sir Frauncis Veer, chosen forth
of every company. There were likewise certain Dutch companies under captain
Metkerke, and above one thousand voluntary gentlemen, among whom was D.
Christophero of Portugal, son to the king D. Antonio: Count Lodwick of Nassau
commanded these voluntaries: Sir Frauncis Veer was Lord Marshall of the field,
Sir George Carow Master of the ordnance, and sir Conihurst Clifford Sergeant
Major.

This fleet departed from Plimmouth in England on the thirteenth of June, there
were in it one hundred and forty sail great and small. Being come near to
the Spanish coast, they had intelligence by a small bark that came from
Ireland, that in the Bay of Cales in Andeluzia (whether they were going) fifty
seven great ships and twenty galleys lay, four great gallions, each of them
carrying forty or fifty pieces of ordnance, and in every of them six or
seven hundred men, two great galleasses of Andeluzia, four great ships of
Biscay, four Easterlings, certain great Argozies laden for the most part with
ordnance and munition, being bound for Lisbone in Portugal: where another fleet
of thirty ships was prepared for Bretayne and Calais, and money ready for
that purpose. Beside these, there were three great Fregats of two hundred tun
a piece, which came from Porto Ricco with the money. Besides these ships of
war and galleys, there was another fleet of five and thirty ships very
richly laden, which were bound for the West Indies, ready to set sail; in
which vessels were above six thousand pipes of Spanish wines, two thousand
pipes of oil, five thousand weight of wax, and all manner of precious
merchandise, as cloth, silk, cloth of gold, lace, quicksilver, etc. And it
was reported by the king of Spaines officers, this fleet was thought to be
worth eleauen or twelve millions of ducats.

The English fleet comes before Ca^es on 30 of June.
The English fleet having notice hereof, made toward the Bay of Cales, where it
arrived on the thirtieth of June in the Morning, and came to an anchor nere to
S. Sebastians point, from whence they might easily see the Spanish ships and
galleys that lay before Cales under the two castles.

The Vice-Admerrall the Lord Thomas Howard, and sir Walter Raleigh, being sent
for by the Council of war, Raleigh was commanded to go before with
certain ships to set upon some great vessels, which (as they heard) were
ready to set sail forth of the Bay of S. Lucars; coming thither they found
them to lie so nere the shore, as they could not approach them, and were hindered
from doing it by a certain mist that arose, in which the said vessels escaped,
and were by Raleigh so nerely chased to the land, as his own ships were in
great danger to have run on ground.

From thence Raleigh made toward the great fleet, which in the mean time had
ankored on the thirtieth of June, in the Morning, without the Bay of Cales,
into which all men (especially the Low-countrie fleet) thought they would have
directly entered, seeing the ships and galleys to lie before the town under the
two castles: but the English Admerall would not suffer it to be so, because he
thought the entrance would have been very dangerous, as also the assayling
of the kings fleet, before the town were woon^which if they had done, they
must have fought both with the gallions and galleys, and been opposed to the
shot from the Town and castles.

Thereupon, The English fleet lets slip of fair occasion to have taken the
ships, laden for the Indies.
sir Walter Raleigh came to the fleet, and went aboard the General, the Earl
of Essex, who was busied in landing his men on the West side of Cales, where
the Sea was so rough by reason of a West wind, as the boats began to sink
near the ships: Raleigh told him it was very dangerous to land his men,
because that betwixt them and shore, four galleys l^y to keep them from
landing, saying, That he was very sorry that he had not first entered the haven
where the Spanish ships and galleys lay, which by their delay were now
encouraged: of this, the general likewise complained, at whose entreatie,
Raleigh undertook to go and persuade the Admerall to enter, which by many
forcible reasons he did, and cried out, Let us enter, Let us enter: whereupon,
all the ships weighed ankor and sailed toward the haven. But night prevented
them, the sun being already set, so as it was then too late to assail the
Spanish fleet that lay above a mile and half within the river, as also, for
that it was a dangerous matter to fight by night in a strait: On this
consideration, they came to an ankor, where the canon presently saluted them
from the town and castle.

The English went to Council, to consult after what manner it were best to
assail the Spaniards the next Morning: every commander striued to have the
vantgard, yet they resolved not to hazard the Queens great ships but upon
urgent necessity, so as it was thought fit, that sir Walter Raleigh, with
eight of the Queens leslesser ships, six Hollanders, and twelve English
Merchants ships, should have the vantguard; this resolution was oppugned by the
Lord Thomas Howard, who said, that honor belonged unto him: whereupon it was
concluded, that both of them should go together.

So soon as it was day, Raleigh would not loose time in weighing ankor, but
did let them slip, and thereby had the advantage to let sail first; the
Spanish galleys discharged all their ordnance upon him, but he made not one
shot, leaving it to those that followed him, and so went directly toward the
gallions, which lay in the deepest part of the river, viz. the S. Philip, S.
Matthew, S. Andrew, and S. Thomas, with two other very great ships, which
together took up all the breadth of the river.

Behind these gallions lay 6 others, and behind them, the galleys, nerer the
shore where the water was shall lowest, and upon the land stood the castle
Puntall which flanked the river: the lesser English ships assailed the galleys,
who thundered one upon another. In the mean time, the Vice-Admeral the L. Thomas
Howard, came up to sir Walter Raleigh with 6 of the Queens ships, as nere to
the gallions as they could possible, discharging all their ordnance, and
fighting from six of the clock in the Morning till none, with as many ships as
the channel could bear. During the fight, an unfortunate event happened in a
ship of Rotterdam, called the Dolphin, where Guillaum Henrick was captain; the
powder was by mischaunce set on fire, whereby the Captain and his two sons
were burnt and blown up.

Expecting the tide, the two Admerals sent for six great vessels, each of them
manned with four hundred musketeers, to board the Spanish gallions, being not
willing to hazard the Queens ships: Six ships of Lubeck and Dansk were sent
from the fleet, but they fell foul of the others, and peradventure willingly,
so as the earl of Essex about noone did set sail, the like did the Lord
Admerall; but the Earls ship drawing too much water, he went aboard sir Robert
Dudleis, who was base son to the earl of Leycester: All the commanders
being aboard the general, they resolved to assail the gallions, commanding
the Lord Howard and sir Walter Raleigh to begin, and they would follow. So
soon as these began to hoist sail, The Spanish fleet runs on ground.
the Spaniards fled toward the shore and sands on Puerto Reals side, where
their ships ran on ground, and themselves leaped into small boats the better to
get on shore, and those which could not get into the boats, adventured to
swim, and being many in number, most of them perished.

The S. Matthew and S. Andrew were saved from running on ground, and were
carried away, each of them were of one thousand tun. The two Easterlings ran
on shore and were burnt. As Raleigh thought to have boorded the great gallion
S. Philip, a Negro gave fire to the powder, and escaped by swimming: It gave so
great a crack, as the mast was blown up into the air as if it had been an
arrow: a Pinnace that lay near it was likewise burnt, but the men escaped in
boats. The other Gallion called S. Thomas, was likewise blown up, but did no
harm to the English. The Galleys fled toward the bridge of the Isle del
Suazzo. The Indian fleet lay about two leagues higher up in the River near to
Medina.

This fleet thus broken, The earl of Essex landeth his men, and the Hollanders
take the castle of Puntall.
burnt and scattered, the General began to land his men, and to assault the
town of Cales. The Hollanders and Zelanders took the Fort of Puntall by
force, and in it presently displaied and erected the Lord of Warmonts ensign:
this discouraged those of Cales, and encouraged the rest which landed near the
Fort, who began to put themselves in order. The earl of Essex led the
vantguard, the Lord Admerall commanded the battle, and sir John Winckfield led
the rereward.

Upon news of the Englishmens approach, the gallants and nobility near to
Cales, who are called Los Cauallieros de Xeres, had armed themselves, and were
for the most part better furnished with brave horse than valor.

These, with 600 foot drawn from Cales, did presently offer skirmish. Count
Lodwick of Nassau (whom the earl of Essex had honored with the conduct of the
voluntary gentlemen) went forward to encounter them, and near to him Melchior
Leben, one of Prince Maurice his Gentlemen, and with them the General, and sir
Francis Veer with some four hundred armed pikes, and a brave company of
musketeers, which stood behind a sand hill: these men did put the Cauallieros to
rout, killing many of them, some of whom for sooke their horse, and fled
toward the town, which was shut against them, others fled to a bulwark
without the town; but perceiving that Count Lodwick began to assail and mount
it, they presently fled through the Dikes into the Town, at a place which was
scarce made up, leading their enemies the way, who presently pursued them, and
slid down by their pikes into the town, The Earl of Essex wins Cales on
the second of Iulie.
running to open the gates for the General. The earl of Sussex his company
was the first that entered, who very valiantly behaved himself, the like did
captain Sauadge, Bagnall, Euants and others. Captain Nicholas Metkerck was
hurt there, and died within a while after, yet before he died the General
knighted him; he was a brave and well experienced gentleman.

The English being thus within the town, two companies of soldiers that lay
there in garrison, with many of the townsmen, fled to the castle; others with
stones, defended themselves in their houses. But the Market place and
townhouse once taken, every man yielded without any great effusion of blood.

Sir John Winckfield (who in former time had been Governor of Geertrudenberg,
when it was sold and betrayed to the Duke of Parma) being wounded, rode up and
down the Market place with his sword in hand being disarmed, who not regarding
the Marshal Veers good counsel, that wished him either to arm himself or else
to return, was shot into the head.

The Generals being busied in taking of the town, forgot to pursue the Indian
fleet. Sir Edward Conway, sir Christopher Blunt, and sir Thomas Gerard,
offered, with their soldiers in small boats to assail and take it: but
Raleigh would not have that honor taken from the Seamen, notwithstanding that
the Earl of Essex and the Lord Admerall would have had it so; and whilst they
contested about it, time passed away, and they thought themselves sure enough
of the fleet, yet therein they were deceived.

The town taken, and night being come, the two Generals entreated sir Walter
Raleigh to return to the fleet to his ship (fearing least the Galleis should
the same night at a low water set fire on the ships) promising to keep his
share of the booty, and to give him a good quarter in the town. He craved
leave to go and take the Indian fleet, desiring no more than his owneship and
twelve merchant men of London, but the Generals entreated him to give them time
to consider of it till the next morning: at which time sir Walter sent his
brother in law Throgmorton, Henry Leonard, and John Gilbert knights, to know
their resolution; but the Generals sent him word to come a shore to the town.

In the mean time, the committee of the contractation house, with the purueior
Pedro Herrera, Two millions of Gold offered for the ransom of the fleet, but
too late.
the Corrigidor, and other the kings officers in the town offered 2 millions of
ducats or 600000 pound sterling for ransom of the fleet: this did Raleigh
oppugn, saying that they ought first to be masters of the fleet, and then
ransom it afterward, for if already they offered two millions, they would
giuefoure when it was taken: whilst the English spent time in consultation,
The Spaniards burn their rich fleet.
the Spaniards day and night vnloded all the richest wares, because that the
Duke of Medina governor of S Lucars and those parts for the king, had
commanded to burn the ships, which was done upon the third day before the
ransom could be agreed upon: the men saved themselves and escaped, so as the
contractors that were onward on their way to negociat for the ransom,
perceived the ships to be all on fire: this was a sharp and rigorous
resolution, for which the Duke was greatly contemned by those that had a share
in this loss; but he knew the king his Masters mind.

Three and thirty great ships laden for the Indies were burnt, beside five
ships which came from S. Lucars, three of which ran on ground: it was the
greatest and welthiest fleet that ever went to the Indies. The most loss fell
to the Merchants, the king had some wealth in it, as quick silver, warlike
munition, his Imposts and Alcaualles, which, together with all his ordnance he
lost. The English and Dutch mariners saved certain goods, and canons, which
they took forth of the ships bottoms.

The earl of Essex had appointed the colonels sir Coniers Clifford, Sir
Christopher Blunt, and sir Thomas Gerard, with their regiments, to march
toward the East side of the Island, where was a bridge (called Ponte del
Suazzo) over which men passed forth of the Isle into the firm Land, to guard
that passage, and to keep out those of the terra firma from entering that way,
not far from whence the people were assembled in great troops: but when they
perceived the English to be there, and knew the town was already lost, they
fled.

These English regiments perceiving none to be on the other side, and knowing
that Cales was taken, returned to the town without any order or commandment
so to do, leaving no guard at the bridge, leaving the castle near to the
bridge untaken (which the Hollanders call Herod's house:) For want of a guard at
the said bridge, the galleys, in that place passed on to Seaward. The Dutch
mariners before their departure went and assailed that fort, from whence the
Spaniards flying, they took and sacked it, and brought thence diverse pieces of
ordnance.

The two companies of Spanish soldiers that with some Citizens were retired to
the castle, hoping for aid from Andeluzia and the firm land, being aduertized
that the English had taken and made good that bridge and passage (which was
untrue) did by night send the Corrigidor and other Magistrates to sir Edward
Conway, The Citizens of Cales ranjome themselves for one hundred and twenty
thousand ducats.
who summoned them to yield, and agreed to pay one hundred and twenty thousand
ducats for their ransom, besides loss of all their goods, and to this end
gave forty of the principal among them for hostages, who were afterward
carried into England: those that retired from the town into the castle, with
those that were in it before, were in number eight or nine thousand persons
both men and women. The best and noblest sort of women were courteously used,
and suffered to depart thence with their children and baggage; the like was
done to the Clergy and Nuns.

The town of Cales is sacked.
The wealthy town was wholly sacked, and the booty great, which was carried to
the ships. It is thought that the king lost at the same time 1200 pieces of
ordnance, besides armor sufficient for five or six hundred men which was taken
forth of his Arsenall there.

The Spaniards perceiving what the English intended by spoiling the town,
which was, not to keep the town long, began to take courage, and to shake off
the fear which had seized the provinces near adjoining, especially the great
city of Civil, which was in an vproare, so as if an army well conducted had
marched thither, and to other towns and places likewise, as S. Lucars, S.
Marie Port, Puerto Reale, etc. it would have found small resistance. But they
saw that the booty and spoil of Cales was to the English as a great and
sauorie morcell to glut their hunger; who continuing ten or twelve days in
the town, and having carried the booty to their ships, did hourly expect
when the Generals would command them to hoist sails and depart homewards.

A Council was held whether it were convenient still to keep the town and
Island: the earl of Essex, the Marshall Veer, and most of the gentlemen were
of opinion to tarry there with three thousand men, and thought that the Island
might be easily kept, which would prove a sharp thorn, not only in the foot
of so great a Monarke, but even in his side, and thereby divert all the wars
of Europe thither, where the English might daily receive provisions from the
Leuant, Italy, and Barbary, and if the worst should happen, they might easily
procure a good and honorable composition, and with that town, make an easy
exchange for Calice in France. But thereupon, various opinions were uttered,
for the Sea Captains and the lord Admerals Council oppugned it, showing their
want of victuals, and if they should remain there, they must be enforced to
fetch provision from England and the Low Countries, which is too far off, or
else from Barbary, where the king dwelt an hundred leagues up in the country:
Hereunto, the Admerall added, that he would not adventure and engage his
Princes honor and reputation so slightly: Sir Frauncis Veer said, That by
tarrying there they should do a pleasing and acceptable service to the Queen,
and that victuals would soon be brought from Holland: that the town and
Island were strong, and might easily be made stronger: that the town stood
well to receive supplies from Barbary, and to that end, they would make use of
and employ D. Christophero of Portugal, etc. but all this was to no purpose.
Thereupon, a general search was made through the whole fleet to see what store
of victuals was left, wherewith to furnish the garrison, till more could be
brought; but they found a small quantity, for every ship had imbezeled and
hid as much as it could, fearing want; and in the town, through bad husbanding
of victuals, they were very skarce; for the soldiers spoiled all, and knocked
out the heads of wine vessels, which they found in cellers and warehouses,
making like wast of other provision. In this respect, every man cried out to
go home: whereupon, the lord of Warmont, Admerall of Holland, The Admeral of
Holland offers the English at Cales, victuals for a month, and with his fleet
to stay with them.
reuiewed his victuals, and offered to bring as much from his fleet as would
suffice the garrison and two thousand men for a month, and that himself would
likewise remain there: But the earl of Essex found never a ship of the Queens
willing to stay there, nor yet victuals for two months; so as he was enforced,
much against his will to abandon Cales, whereof at his coming into England he
excused himself.

Before his departure he made above fifty Knights, among whom were, the Lord
of Warmont Admerall of the Hollanders, Count Lodwick of Nassau, Peter
Regemortes, Melchior Leben, and likewise Captain Metkerke before his death;
the rest were English.

Cales is abandoned and burnt on the 15 of Iulie.
Having thus continued some thirteen days in Cales (in old time called Gades)
they departed on the fifteenth of Iulie. Essex (according to his commission)
commanded the town to be burnt, and especially whatsoever might any way
serve for the furnishing forth of a fleet, as masts, poles, cordage, and
cables, whereof there was great store: and in this manner they did set sail,
carrying with them two of the kings great gallions, with certain prisoners,
and forty hostages for the townesmens ransom, which amounted to the sum of
120000 ducats.

It is heretofore mentioned how that the galleys fled to the bridge called
Ponte del Suazzo, where the English thought they could not have passed; yet by
breaking the bridge they found a way into the Sea, where they did set upon the
tail of the fleet, and took a Fliboat of Holland laden with horse and
baggage, which lagged behind.

And because the Englishmens commission imported that they should visit all Sea
Ports, and destroy all ships and warlike provisions, they did in their return
homewards sail to the haven of Faroo, where they landed part of their men, and
most of the Hollanders, from whom the country people fled: whereupon, they
took and brought away with them whatsoever they could. Being come nere to S.
Vincents cape, and having committed two notable errors (first, because they did
not in time assail the Spanish fleet before it was burnt: The second, for that
they had thus abandoned Cales) the earl of Essex requested the Lord Admerall,
not to fall into a third, but to sail toward the Azores, to meet with the
East and West Indian fleet which at that time was ready to arrive; but by
reason of a contrary wind, this likewise was rejected. Yet afterward when the
earl came near to Lisbone, he propounds this matter again, The English do
again loose the opportunity of meeting with the India^ fleet, notwithstandding
that the Hollanders offered their service.
offering to send home those ships that had taken leakes, and wanted victuals,
with the hurt and sick men. But the Lord Admeral and sir Walter Raleigh
contradicted it, both by writing and word of mouth: and when they came to view
what ships were willing and fit, there were none that would undertake the
matter, but that of the Earl of Essex, and the Lord Thomas Howard, together
with sir Frauncis Veer, and the Low-countrie fleet, which offered it self, and
had been by the earl of Essex accepted, if the Lord Admeral would have given
leave to those two ships and some eight or ten English vessels more; but his
Lordship thought it not fit so slightly to adventure the Queens ships. These
various opinions set down in writing, the Noble earl propounded them in
England for his own excuse; and in this manner was the third gallant occasion
lost: for if they had gone to the said Islands, and made some small stay, they
had met with a most rich Indian fleet, which arrived there 12 or 14 days after.

Passing along the coast of Portugal they would not meddle with the city of
Lisbone, having no such commission, but only to visit the havens and Sea
Ports: whereupon, they went to Cornua and Ferol, where they found few ships and
small provision. After that, they held their last Council, namely, Whether
they should likewise visit the havens of S. Andrew and S. Sebastian, with
others near adjoining, where certain Spanish men of war were reported to
lie: but the Admerall and Sea Captains flatly gaine-said it, complaining of
want of victuals, saying, That the Queens ships might be in danger to run
on ground in those places: so as the earl of Essex could not herein prevail,
who would willingly have assaulted the town of Cornua, but every man cried
out to return home, taking upon them to excuse the said earl: and so sailed
toward England, leaving the earl and the two gallions behind, which were
scattered by tempest, together with the Low-countrie fleet which stayed with
him to the end. Being thus arrived in England, about mid-August, they gave up
an account of their voyage: and being taxed for letting slip those fair
occasions, they excused themselves by the forementioned reasons: and it was
found by experience, That two Generals having equal power and command do
commonly hinder many gallant and noble enterprises.

The Admerall of the Low Countries returned home with his fleet, and brought
back the English soldiers that had been chosen forth of every company;
together with some booty, and threescore pieces of ordnance, having lost the
Fliboat of Rotterdam called the Dolphin, with all her ordnance. The
preparations of this fleet stood the united Provinces in more than five hundred
thousand florins.

The Queen of England in sign of acknowledgement, did, on the 14 of August,
in anno 1598, send a letter to the Admerall of Holland, in form following.

MY Lord of Duvenuord,
The Queen of Englands letter to the Lord of Duvenuord, than king him for his
good service.
the report of the Generals of our army (who are safely returned from the
coasts of Spain) concerning their service who have obtained so notable a
victory, does attribute a great part thereof to the valor, industry, and
good will, which your se^fe and our other friends of the Low Countries under
your conduct, have shown in the whole course of this action. This having
filled our heart with exceeding joy and content, has likewise begotten a
desire in us to communicate unto you by writing, that which we conceive thereof;
and having none other means at this present to express our good will, we have
thought good to make use thereof, till some fitter occasion be offered. And for
our better discharge herein, we know not where to begin, for that the
greatness of each party surmounteth the others merit. The love and diligence
which my Lords the States have used in this action, does witness unto us, That
the sincere affection we have ever borne to the united Provinces, and benefits
bestowed upon them, have not bin ill employed. Your valor, skill, and good
conduct manifested in this service, are so many evident signs that your self
and whole Nation, deserve all favor and defense of Christian Princes, against
those that would tyrannize over you. But the honor and faithful friendship
which you my Lord Admerall have showed to our loving cosen the Earl of Essex
in his home return, at such time as he was by night scattered from the fleet
and destitute of all aid and assistance, your self tarrying with him,
conducting him to our Haven of Plimmouth, does declare your wisdom and
loyalty, preventing by your own patience and labor, all mischief, that by
falling on one of the Generals of our fleet, might have spoiled and disgraced
the whole victory. Moreover, your zeal and affection to us ward, does
increase our debt toward you, the knowledgement whereof is so deeply
imprinted in our heart, as we thought good by these Letters to make some part
of satisfaction, the which we entreat you to impart to the whole company of
our friends under your command, letting them understand beside, that they may
be well assured, that as heretofore we have given sufficient testimony of our
sincere affection toward their country, we are now by their valor and merit
more incited, to augment and increase our love in every part, as it becomes
a Princess who acknowledges the virtue and desert of so worthy a Nation as
yours: and so we will continue your very loving friend.

Signed Elizabetha Regina.


A description and rehersall of the victory which his Excellency obtained of
the enemy, on a plain called Tielsche-Heyde near to Turnholt, in an. 1597.
AFter the departure of the illustrious, high, and mighty lord, Prince Maurice
of Nassau, etc. from the Hague on the one and twentieth of January 1597, he
arrived on the two and twentieth of the same at Geertrudenberg, and there
finding his army ready, consisting of 6000 both horse and foot, with all
things necessary for his enterprise, he went speedily and without rumor the
next day, to a village called Rauels, some league distant from the jurisdiction
of Turnholt; where his Excellency caused his soldiers to rest a while. Count
Varax and the lord of Bolanson, with 4 regiments of foot, and 5 companies of
horse, had entrenched themselves in Turnholt: he having intelligence that his
Excellency was so near, did, by the advice of his Council, cause the baggage
to be laden by night, and sent it away before, intending by break of day to
follow with his whole army, and to retire safely to Herentals His Excellency
in like manner, on the 24 of the said month, early in the Morning did set
forward, marching still in his order when the ways would permit him.

The cauallerie bearing long Pistols, made the vaunt-gard, and was divided into
six troops. The two first in each of which were four cornets, were somewhat
separated, and yet still flanked one another: that on the right hand was
conducted by the Earls Hohenlo and Solms. After them, followed two other
troops, each of them consisting of three Cornets, marching likewise somewhat
divided from the rest, to be the better able upon any occasion to receive the
former into their ranks, or else they to be by them received in like manner.
His Excellency followed the Cauallerie, with two other troops, marching as
the rest did somewhat divided.

The footmen were divided into eight troops, viz. presently after the horsemen
followed two squadrons very near to one another, after them, three, and then
two, all of them marching in like manner as the former. After them followed two
demie canon, with other field pieces, placed betwixt the munition wagons, and
drawn by those that ordinarily had charge thereof, together with certain
mariners. Next them followed the rest of the foot troops enclosing the battle,
still marching in this order when the ground would permit them; otherwise, they
troopt closely together, fitting themselves to the ways, waters and bridges
that lay betwixt Rauels and Turnholt.

His Excellency being come before Turnhoult, which was abandoned, thought good
by the advice of the said earls and other captains, to set forward speedily
toward the enemy only with the horse, and to let the foot troops follow,
and to leave the canon nere to the mill of Turnhoult guarded by part of the
footmen. This did his Excellency presently put in execution, but meeting with
a little narrow way full of water, beneath Turnhoult, where the enemy had left
forces to defend the passage, he forthwith sent certain musketeers thither
under the conduct of sir Francis Veer, and the lord Vander Aa, Lieutenant of
his guard. These, enforced the enemy to quit the passage: whereupon, his
Excellency went forward, and presently came to a plain champaine, where he
descried and followed the enemy that fled in this manner.

The manner of the enemies march.
Their baggage went before toward Herentals, guarded by certain soldiers, next
followed the battle. The caualerie for the most part was gone before, viz.
Nicholo Basta, D. Iuan de Cordoua, Alonzo Dragon, Guzman, and Grobbendonck.
After them followed four regiments, divided one from another: the first was
the regiment of Almans under Count Sultz: the second, La Mott his old regiment,
commanded at that time by the lord of Achicourt: the third was the regiment of
La Barlotte: the fourth of Neapolitans under the Marquess of Treuick. On the
right hand, sometime two cornets of horse marched, and sometime on the left: on
the left hand were trees, near which was a small river running from Turnhoult.
It was not long ere they were overtaken, but by reason of the bad ways and a
valley full of water which lay between the enemy and the States forces, our
men had no fit opportunity as yet to assail them.

Sir Francis Veer with a few horse and certain musketeers entertained the
enemies rereward with skirmish, thereby hindering him from his intended flight,
till they came to the farther end of that valley of water: then the earls
Hohenlo and Solms as first at the battle, perceiving a certain place of
advantage betwixt them and Count Varax, fearing likewise least the enemy would
entangle a narrow passage wherein his baggage was already entered, told his
Excellency, That it was more than time to assail the enemy: whereupon, a
signal being given, they charged him. The earls Hohenlo and Solms, with 4
cornets of Breda, gave in on the enemies right side, those of Berghen-op-Zoom,
upon the enemies hindmost regiment, so, as the Neapolitans being last, were the
first that were assailed by Marcelis Bacx and his brother, accompanied by Du
Bois, and Done, two captains. Count Hohenlo and Solms, with the 4 cornets of
Breda (charging directly the enemies first regiment, to which their cauallerie
was already turned back, meaning to charge those of Berghen in flank) did
very opportunely prevent them, and putting them to rout, went on and fell upon
Count Sults regiment, with such fury, as the enemies were only content to
make slight trial of their valor; and betaking themselves to flight, left
Alonzo Dragon his cornet behind them.

His Excellency perceiving that the charge was already given, sent sir Robert
Sidney, and sir Frauncis Veer (who till then had entertained the enemy with
continual skirmish) with certain horse to cut off the enemies rereward. The
rest of the cauallerie stayed near to his Excellency to succor and relieve
the first, if need should be, till at last, perceiving a manifest advantage,
all of them in a manner fell into the battle. Count Varax slain.
Count Varax General of the enemies army was slain upon the place, and all
his men (being on every side fiercely assailed) fell to open flight; which
was to no purpose, as being on the one side encompassed by our cauallerie on a
plain ground, and on the other with a river and trees: so as few of them could
escape to the narrow way, and above two thousand of them lay dead upon the
plain, and four hundred were taken prisoners; all this was done in so short a
space, as the States footmen, notwithstanding all their have, could not come in
in time, but before their ariual, the horsemen had gotten the victory.

The enemies cauallerie perceiving they could not well escape, some of the
brauest and most resolute among them to the number of 40, caused a trumpet to
sound a charge, and fell upon those whom in disorder they saw busied in pillage,
making show as if they intended to give a fresh charge upon our men: whereupon,
some of our timorous cowards, fled toward the footmen who were coming
forward. Prince Maurice looked after his troops of horse which he had reserved
for succors, but in vain: whereupon, he commanded the prisoners to alight
from their horses, who earnestly begged for mercy, saying, That there was
already sufficient blood spilt to finish the victory: yet diverse of them were
slain, and then we perceived the want of our troops of succors; but every
man making have toward his Excellency (especially Marcelis Bacx and Edmunds)
the enemy was so amazed as he again betook himself to flight.

Eight and thirty ensigns were taken there, together with D. Alonzo de
Mondragons cornet. Most of the baggage was pillaged; and the dead bodies
stripped. More than two thousand were slain upon the place; for the country
people reported that they buried above 2250.

The Lieutenant general La Bourlotte, with most of his captains and officers
were slain there; and not above eight of the victors, among whom was captain
Donck, who died of his hurt, together with captain Cabilleau of Flanders.

This gallant victory was gotten by eight hundred horse, but not without great
danger, if the enemy had been discreet and well advised. There was one thing
worthy of note. A Roman, called Septimius Fabius was found wounded and half
dead among the dead bodies, and yet by careful looking to, recovered his life.
A certain Roman gentleman (whose name was Septimius Fabius, who derived
himself from the noble and ancient family of the Fabij in Rome) having some
command among the Italians, was deadly wounded, and lay among the dead; those
that stripped him perceiving some life in him, and that he seemed some man of
note, notwithstanding that he was much disfigured with his own blood and that
of others, did in compassion take him thence, and half dead as he was, laid
him on a horse, and carried him to Turnhout, where visited by skillful and
careful Chirurgians, he recovered his health, and was afterward for ransom
set at liberty.

There were four or five hundred prisoners taken, among whom was a young Count
Mansfelt, Hieronimo Deutico one of Count Varacx his Council, the Marquess of
Treuico his Lieutenant colonel and Sergeant Major. Above one hundred prisoners
died of their wounds. And thus his Excellency returned toward Turnholt, and
the runnawayes held on their course toward Herentals, where some three hundred
of them arrived. The Generals dead body, was by his Excellency given to his
servants, who carried it to Malines where his wife and children remained, and
with them sent a letter to Cardinal Albertus, where he offered to deliver the
prisoners, if he would keep good quarter. But the Cardinal being too long in
sending back an answer, Prince Maurice threatened to hang or drown the
prisoners, if he did not ransom them within twenty days: whereupon, he
constrained the villages of Brabant to contribute toward it.

The boores of this country called Tielsche-Heyde, did after the defeat gather
up all the armor and weapons which they found, and laid them up in a Church:
those of the town of Die, commanded them to bring them thither, and as six
carts were laden with them, some of the garrison of Breda having notice
thereof, took them away by force, and brought them into the town on the three
and twentieth of February, for a greater testimony or trophee of their
victory.

The earls Hohenlo and Solms, sir Robert Sidney, and sir Frauncis Veer (whose
horse was slain that day under him) were highly honored for their wisdom
and valor, as also other captains and commanders that had valiantly behaved
themselves, especially Bacx and Edmonds with all their officers and soldiers.

That night the camp rested at Turnholt where the canon was left: the next
day, the castle was battered, and after some eight or ten shot, those of the
garrison, commanded by captain Vander Delft, yielded it on condition to have
their lives and goods saved. The castle being strongly manned, every one
returned to his garrison. His Excellency passed through Geertrudenberg, and
the 8 day after his departure from the Hague, he returned thither again,
whether he brought 38 of the enemies ensigns, and one of their cornets, which
were hung up in the great hall; and in all places caused thanks to be given to
God, for this victory.

The first siege and taking of the town of Rhin-Berck in Anno 1597.
MY Lords the States of the united Provinces, The States resolve to set forth
an army.
having made great preparation for war, did, together with his Excellency
and Council of State, resolve and conclude (though it was something late) to
send an army that Summer into the field; and to that end, commanded the
horsemen to arm themselves after another manner, without lances, appointing
the light horse or carabins to carry a Petronel of three foot long, others,
Pistols of two foot in length, and to be beside armed down to the knees,
inflicting penalty upon such as should want any part of their arms; their
horse were to be full fifteen handful high, and the men to wear cassaks.
The Council of State allowed 300000 florins monthly for the army. There were
two hundred foot companies and one and twenty cornets of horse in the States
pay. But the fanterie lying abroad in garrison, his Excellency sent but for
sixty and eight ensigns and the cauallerie, commanding them to meet on the 5
of August, upon the Rhyne at a place called S Gravenweeert: for the Council of
State had determined and concluded to besiege the town of Berck, to have a
more free passage upon the Rhyne.

According to this Decree, his Excellency with his train, and most of the
nobility, went from the Hague on the first of August toward Vtrecht, there to
prepare and assemble wagons for his journey, and on the fourth of Aug^st
arrived at Arnham, whether count William of Nassau and his troops came unto
him. The counts Hohenlo and Solms came thither likewise, with the earls Ernest
and Lodwick of Nassau, together with young Count Henry Frederick brother to
his Excellency, who was desirous then to try his first fortune in the wars.
From Arnham they went to S. Grauenweert, where they found thirteen ensigns of
English footmen, twelve of Scots, fifteen of Frisons, nine ensigns under the
command of Count Solms, eight under the Lord Floris of Brederode, and 6
commanded by the Lord of Duvenvoord, with some twenty or one and twenty
cornets bravely mounted. Thither likewise came great numbers of boats, laden
with ordnance and other necessaries for a perfect camp.

His Excellency on the 6 of August, caused part of the foot and horse in boats
to cross the river of Rhyne and Wael, and commanded them to tarry that night
at Cleverham not far from Carcar, making a bridge of boats the next day over
the Waell, to pass over his wagons with the residue of the army, so as his
Ex. arrived the same day at the Cloister of Marienbourg, leaving three
companies of the regiment of West-Frizeland (commonly called the regiment of
North-Holland) with the boats, which in great numbers did the same day set
sail and went up the river.

On the eigth of August, His Excellency takes Alpen on the 8 of August
Prince Maurice with his army and certain field pieces marched before the
town and castle of Alpen, commanded by captain Bentinghs brother, which he
summoned. This place seated upon the way, would have stood the enemy in great
stead, and on the other side have much annoyed his own camp. It forthwith
yielded. He committed the keeping of the castle to captain Schaef with fifty
soldiers, and the said Bentingh with six and thirty soldiers departed thence
with their arms and baggage: so as part of the army arrived that Evening
before Berck.

The town of Rhynberck both by nature and art is exceeding strong, and not
easily to be taken, and was at that time beside the ordinary garrison, mand
with five hundred men, which came from Alpen, Grave, and other towns nere
adjoining. His Excellency having exactly viewed the town, thought it
necessary to make two principal camps, one above the town, before the gates
called Rhynport, and Casselport on the one side of the Rhyne, where on the
tenth of August he lodged fifteen ensigns of the Frizons regiment under the
command of Count William of Nassau, with thirteen English ensigns under sir
Horacio Veer, brother to the General sir Francis, and the regiment of
West-Frizeland conducted by the Lord Aert of Duyvenvoord, Lieutenant Colonel to
prince Henry Frederick of Nassau, together with his Excellencies guard, and
five cornets of horse, quartered a little farther off toward Botberg. Count
Hohenlo General of the other quarter, together with Count Solms were quartered
on S. Annes hill before the Sautenport, with eight ensigns of Count Solms
regiment, twelve companies of Scots under colonel Murray, Count Hohenlos guard,
and twelve cornets of horse: hard by them lay the Lord of Cloeting with eight
ensigns of his own regiment: a little beneath the hill betwixt the two
quarters, Prince Maurice was lodged.

At their first arrival before the town, Count Lodwick of Nassau was shot in
the leg. The eleventh of August was spent in fortifying and entrenching the
two camps, which were conjoined; together with forts of retreat, of which,
three were built to stop the enemies passage, so as thereby the town was
environed from the one bank of the Rhyne to the other.

The same night they began to draw trenches from his Excellencies camp to the
town, and the next day the quarters of counts Hohenlo and Solms were
entrenched. His Excellency likewise caused a bridge to be made whereon to
pass over from his own camp into a little Island, and so from thence unto the
other side of the Rhyne, the better to get forage and provision.

Three canon being afterward planted, a great tower (from whence the townsmen
continually shot into the camp and trenches) was fiercely battered, as also
another called the Toll-tower, and the Rhyne Port, that our men might work
safely in the trenches. Two other pieces were likewise planted against the
Bulwark before Castle Port, which played so fiercely on the fifteenth and
sixteenth of August, as those of the town were enforced the same day to
abandon the great Tower, from whence they had done much mischief, and shot
through his Excellencies Tent.

The sixteenth of August at night, twenty four canon were planted in sundry
places to batter the town on all sides; yet because the trenches were not so
near the town as it was expected; his Excellency would not as then suffer
the battery to be made, but caused a gallerie from the East side of the
bulwark before the castle-port to be made for the sum of one thousand two
hundred florins, which was promised to be finished in four days. The
nineteenth of August, as the trenches began to approach the one side of the
half moon, which lay without the Bulwark of the Toll-tower before the Rhyne
Port, they did let forth the water of a small river called the Niep, which was
kept in before the half moon by a sluice. And because the gallerie stood far
in upon the dike, which was not very broad nor deep, his Excellency and the
chiefest commanders of the army determined to begin the battery, The town
of Berck is battered with 35. pieces of ordnance on the 19 of August.
which was likewise resolved, hoping thereby to come into the bulwark. It was
begun about ten of the clock, with five and thirty pieces of ordnance, viz.
nine and twenty great canon, and six field pieces, of which, ten were
planted before the Rhyne Port, 11 before the bulwark of castle-port, five upon
the Island of Rhyn against the Tol-tower, and four somewhat lower before the
town walls, and others in other places. After the 3 volley, his Excellency
(according to the usual manner) summaned the town to yield; the Burghers having
parolyed with our men, stood upon 3 days respit, which they earnestly craved.

Some hour after the parley, the battery was renewed; it was very furious
and lasted till five of the clock in the evening, having in all, made above
two thousand shot, in which mean space, Count Williams men by favor of the
canon gained the half Moon, and his Excellency the better to win time
(notwithstanding that some thought it fit to tarry the townesmens leisure) did
again summon the town, which now began to be somewhat terrified, for the
soldiers on every side approached it, and stood in order of battle.
Whereupon, they within it, sent 4 commissioners viz. captain Benting, old
captain Dulken, the Admerall Pasman, and the Quartermaster of Count Hermen of
Berguens regiment, and in counterchange of them, the captains Schaef,
Ingelhauen, and Waddell were sent into the town.

After long contestation and earnest entreaties, Berck yields upon the 21 of
August.
his Excellency was content to let them depart with their ensigns, arms and
baggage, leaving out the article of not serving on this side the Mase for the
space of three months, promising that the Burghers should enjoy their
privileges, and upon the 21 of August they departed under the conduct of the
Governor captain Snatere, with 5 ensigns, being in all, some nine hundred
men, unto whom his Excellency lent seventy or eighty wagons, for which,
Captain Bentings son remained hostage. The same day, they went to the town
of Guelders, where they could not be suffered to enter, and there tarryed with
their conuoy.

But on the two and twentieth of August, because those within it would not
furnish them with victuals, or else, for selling them at too hight rate, they
thereupon quarrelled with them that had the guard of the gates, A mutiny in the
town of G^lder on the 22 of August.
and forced their entrance into the town, where they began a mutiny, crying
out for money, money, notwithstanding that Count Henry of Berguen lay there.
The garrison of the town took their part, and expulsed Count Henry and all
the captains. The Lords of Gileyn, Vtenham, and Grammay offered them 2 months
pay, which satisfied them not, but they kept Vtenham and Grammay as prisoners.
After that, Count Herman came to appease them, but in vain: whereupon, he
departed with his forces to Arsen, where he assembled some 3000 men.

In this manner did the town of Rhynberck yield to Prince Maurice, being
besieged ten days, and having received 2870 shot. Great store of ordnance
was found in it, viz. 44 cast pieces, among which were seven for battery,
together with a great quantity of course cloth brought thither to cloth the
garrison, which was thought to be worth 170000 florins: there were five ships
of war sunk, and two great Ferrie-boats which were made at Coloigne, with
which they hoped to have done some notable exploit, besides other provisions.

His Excellency did forthwith repair the ruined places, and caused the
trenches to be leuelled; and because Captain Schaef had valiantly behaved
himself in that siege, he made him governor of the town, and gave him six
ensigns of foot, well furnished with munition and victuals.

T^^se of Coloign demand the town of Rhynberck.
The town being taken, the commissioners of Coloigne, by virtue of their
letters of credence, would have had our men to have left it to them, saying it
was theirs: this could they never obtain of the Spaniards, though it had been
promised with oaths. But in regard it was won with so great cost to the united
Provinces, and that neither his Excellency nor commissioners of the Council
had any authority to grant their demands, it was flatly denied, and they
were referred to the General States.

The next day after the town was yielded, which was, the one and twentieth of
August, Count Herman came to Gelder with 2000 foot, and eight cornets of horse;
the fanterie was conducted by D. Alonzo de Luna governor of Liere, and the
cauallerie by D. Francisco de Padiglia; their intent was to have put succors
into Berck; but upon intelligence that it was yielded, he returned to Arsen
near the Mase, which he crossed, still thinking on the defeat at Turnholt: he
sent four hundred men to the town of Meurs, beside the 200 whom he had
already sent thither from Maestrecht two days before. And the better to
secure the said Garrison, he commanded Captain Arnult Boecop, Camillos Fort
is abandoned.
Lieutenant to the governor, to abandon Camillos fort, and to retire with his
men into Meurs, which the said Boecop did with such have on the 15 of August at
night, as he left three pieces of ordnance behind in the fort, viz. one canon,
a demie canon, and one field piece.

The taking of the Town and Castle of Meurs, in Anno 1597.
PRince Maurice having intelligence that Count Herman and his forces had crossed
the Mase, did, on the six and twentieth of August, go to view the town of
Meurs, with 12 cornets of horse, and some ten thousand foot, and returning by
Camillos fort, he resolved to assault the town of Meurs, and to that end (the
cauallerie being returned which conuoyed Count Hohenlo and his wife the
Countess of Buren toward Germany) he commanded the boats to go up the river
toward Camillos fort, and himself with all his forces, on the 28 of August,
marched toward Meurs, having 60 foot companies, and 21 cornets of horse, and
the same day, quartered two camps before the town, one and the greatest before
the gates, (...).
of which, one was called the Kerck-port, the other H^enport, where himself
lay with 49 ensigns of foot, and all the horse; the other before the gate of
the new town, where the lord of Clotting lay with 6 ensigns of his own
regiment, and 5 ensigns of the regiment of Frizeland, under the command of
General Duyvenvoord. At their arriual were some skirmishes before the church
without the gate, which the enemy kept till night, when as 2 companies of
Scots came to relieve the Frizons.

The next day, they entrenched themselves, and at night they began the trenches
with 15 foot ensigns, viz. 5 of the Frizeland regiment, 4 English ensigns,
four Scottish, and two of count Solms regiment, the Frizons lay before the gate
called Steen-port, the Scots with count Solms his ensigns before Kerck-port,
and the English betwixt the two gates. The same night, Captain Waddell the
Scot was slain in the trenches. His Excellency had brought twelve canon with
him, which, on the last of the said month he caused to be planted, and the
next day began the battery. The night following the trenches were brought from
the Frizons quarter to the very brinke of the dike, which was narrow and
nothing deep: And for that in regard of the rain and foul weather, they were
not come so forward in other places, therefore the canon played not on the 2 of
September: his Excellency thinking to have quartered himself upon the very
dike, and by favor of the canon, and help of bridges to pass over the dike
to the towns Rampires. But before this could be effected, the Governor of
Meurs, a Spaniard whose name was Andrea de Miranda, beyond all expectation
(wanting powder) sent a drum in the afternoon to Prince Maurice, craving to
have hostages sent in exchange of those whom he would send to surrender the
town and castle to him. His Excellency sent the Lord of Gistelles thither,
who was Lieutenant General to Count Solms, together with Captain Ingelhauen,
who conferred with the towns commissioners, which were, Captain Muchet and
Captain Boecop Lieutenant to the Governor, and after long disputation about
granting three days respit which the besieged craved to expect some succors,
they at last concluded to deliver up the town and castle.

The next day, which was the third of September (after that the Governors wife
was come, for whom Prince Maurice had sent a trumpet to a place called Lint in
the country of Couloign with certain wagons) they went their way according to
the accord, being eight hundred and thirty men (among whom were certain
Spaniards, and likewise an Ensigne-bearer of the castle of Antuerpe) with their
ensigns, arms and baggage, and a small piece of ordnance belonging to Count
Meurs, his Excellency having granted them forty wagons, for which Captain
Boecop was caution. Six pieces of ordnaunce were found in the castle, 4 of
battery, one canon of an extraordinary weight, one demie canon, and two field
pieces. Four great cables made at Couloign were likewise found in the
Storehouse, of eight thousand weight, which were for service of the ferrie
boats.

In this manner did his Excellency in a months space win three towns and
three Castles from the enemy, videlicet, Alpen, Berck, Meurs, and Camillos
Fort, with all the boats upon the Rhyne, and in the said places found above
fifty and four canon, among which were eleven for battery, and the rest of
different bigness (as has been said.)

The siege and taking of the towns of Groll and Goor on the 28 of September
1597.
AFter that Prince Maurice had spent some time in repairing the dikes and
rampires of the town of Meurs, and in leuelling the trenches, he went thence
with his whole army on the eighth of September: he had six thousand foot, and
one thousand five hundred horse, beside mariners and others that attended the
ordnance, and a great train following the army. Having in have made a bridge
over the Rhyne of one hundred yards in length, the army crossed the river the
same day, and lodged that night betwixt the Lip and Rhyne.

The next day crossing over the Lip, he marched by Wesell and went to Bruynen
in the country of Munster. From thence, on the tenth of September, he passed
along by Boecholt, and lodged that night at Alten near to Brevoot, which he
sent to view. But upon intelligence that Count John of Limbourg and Stierum lay
in Groll, with twelve ensigns of foot, and three cornets of horse, his
Excellency went thither the next day: And on the eleventh of September, he
quartered his camp in a square form toward the West end of the said town,
which was fortified with five Bulwarks, so as it seemed his Excellency would
have enough to do; yet he made such have in a short space, as he environed the
town with trenches and other works that none could enter in or issue forth:
and perceiving that the town would not be taken but by force, he caused seven
galleries to be made (which are covered ways by which men pass over the dikes
to the rampires) the better to enter two bulwarks, and to that end made two
principal batteries, and two lesser ones, to play in such sort upon the
rampires, as none should dare to stand upon them, the better thereby to further
the work.

His Exccellencie at his arrival before Groll (having intelligence that the
enemy had not mand the Town of Goor) he caused it to be taken, placing a
foot company in garrison there. About the same time, eight ensigns of footmen
arrived at the camp.

In the mean time, certain light skirmishes were made, but to small purpose:
they labored hard near to the gate called Beltemorport, to draine the water
forth of the ditches, which at last was done by night on the five and twentieth
of September. His Excellencies Master of the fire-workes, did his best to shoot
wildfire into the town, the which at last he did at three several times,
videlicet, on the four and twentieth of the said month in the night, which if
the Burghers had not labored to quench, a great part of the town would have
been consumed to ashes; for the soldiers ran to the rampires, and suffered
the houses to burn, so as more than forty houses were burnt down to the
ground, and on the five and twentieth of September (after dinner) as many more.
Though the townsmen had made an half Moon in the bulwark called Lebelder,
and begun another in that of the Hospital, perceiving their ditches to be
dry, their town much annoied by fire, and that 7 galleries were brought even
to the very rampires, after that Groll had been twice summoned, Groll is
yielded upon the 2^. of September.
they sent their commissioners to his Excellency on the eight and twentieth of
September, who conferring a long time with him, would not be drawn to grant
them their horse and ensigns, yet at last he granted it, and was content they
should depart with their goods and arms, on condition that they should not
bear arms on this side the Mase against the united Provinces for the space of
three months, and should deliver up all the books, writings and records of the
country to those of Gelders and the county of Zutphen: thereupon, he gave
them wagons and a conuoy as far as the Rhyne, and was content to suffer the
Clergy and others to remain freely there, or else to depart thence at their
own pleasures.

The eight and twentieth of September, in the Morning, after that his
Excellencies guard, with those of count William of Nassau, and Count Hohenlo,
together with some ninety wagons for the baggage, had entered the town, those
within it departed thence in the afternone (the sick and wounded excepted, who
were carried thence in wagons.)

Captain Bodbergue with his cornet and some eighty horse, led the vaunt-gard;
after them followed one hundred and twenty wagons, with an incredible number
of women, boys, and baggage: next them, followed Sanchio de Leva and his
troops, together with fifty three horse: after him, twelve ensigns of
footmen, of the companies of the Earls of Stierum, The great and famous
grandson of Groll, de paris thea^e on the 28. of September.
Count Henri of Berghen, Euert de Ens, Cortenbag, Malagamba, Francisco de
Robles, de Rykin, de Sand, de Fournean, de Decken, de Worms, de Sickinga, all
of them amounting to twelve. They marched thus, first, ninety four musketeers
went before, after them, two hundred and thirteen armed pikes, next, the
twelve ensigns and eighty officers, and then two hundred pikes, and eighty
musketeers, making up together the number of seven hundred and fif^ie foot, and
two hundred thirty and five horse. In the rereward was the Cornet of captain
Paul Emilio Martinenga consisting of fifty lances and forty four Carabins.

All these were conuoyed forth of the camp by four cornets of horse, and
marched toward the Rhyne beyond Emmerick; an hundred men were slain in this
siege. There was but one demie canon, three culuerings, with certain bullets
and small store of powder found in the town.

His Excellency having thus by great speed and Gods assistaunce won this
strong Town in eighteen days, mand it with six foot companies, and gave the
government thereof by Prouiso, to the Lord of Dort, causing the dikes and
rampires to be repaired, the sorts and galleries to be broken down, and
trenches to be filled, and then gave some ease and refreshing to his weary
soldiers.

The siege and taking of the town and castle of Brevoort on the 12 of October
1597.
HIs Excellency like a victorious Prince pursuing his victories, did, on the 1
of October, set forward with his army, and came before the town and strong
castle of Brevoort, where having intelligence the next day, by one that came
forth of the town, that the lord of Aenholts company conducted by lieutenant
Broekhuysen, seemed to take the Burghers party against captain Gardots
company, he sent a trumpet on the second of October to summon the town to
yield: but the Sergeant Major made answer, That they kept the town for God
and the king of Spain, and in his quarrel would live and die. Whereupon, his
Excellency gave order to assail it, and to that end caused trenches and three
platformes to be made before the two gates, and on the West Side to plant the
canon on; It was effected with incredible speed, Brevoort seated in a moorish
place is assaulted on the 8. of October.
considering the place was seated in a moorish soil: for, notwithstanding the
continual rain and bad ways round about the town, which made their
approches to be almost impossible, his Ex. so prevailed by fagots, on which he
made ways to bring on the ordnance, as he planted it, and had all things
ready on the 8 of October to assault the town: On the ninth day, he
discharged three volleys, and afterward offered composition to the townsmen;
who in derision craving twenty four hours respit, twenty canon played with
such fury upon a bulwark before the said gates, from nine of the clock in
the Morning till three at afternoon, as those within being terrified, did
first beat their drums, and placed their hats upon their pikes heads, and at
last, with their wives came to the rampires and craved parley. But the
besiegers being in the trenches, took two half Moons that were before the
two gates, and the Scots had almost forced a way through the gate called
Mester-port: whereupon, they within the town ran confusedly to the castle, and
forsook the breach made in the bulwark, which was first taken by the pioners
and those that were near the bridges, not any one of them that stood ready
for the assault, having broken their ranks, one soldier excepted, who
mounting it and seeing no body there, made signs to his fellows, who
presently followed him, so as those within were enforced to yield themselves to
his Excellencies mercy, who presently imprisoned them, and though they had
deserved death, yet he saved their lives and ransomed them at 3900 florins (the
officers excepted) and on the twelft of October suffered two hundred men to
depart thence, Those of Brevoort are put to ransom.
on promise no to bear arms on this side the Mase for the space of three
months. Two thousand and three hundred florins was demanded for one hundred
twenty three of Broeckbuyse soldiers (himself excepted) who paid one
thousand five hundred florins for his daughters ransom, beside that which he
gave for his ensign Boetselaer. For the ransom of Captain Gardots officers
and soldiers, which were seventy seven, one thousand six hundred florins
were demanded. The Burghers ransom was forgiven them at the entreatie of the
Lord of Tempell in regard of their loss sustained by fire, and they in
recompense gave his Excellency three tun of Rhenish wine; and yet the town
(I know not by what means) was all burnt, five or six houses, and certain
Cabins excepted.

The siege and taking of the Towns of Enschede, Oldenzeel, and Ootmaersen, on
the eighteenth, one and twentieth, and three and twentieth of October 1597.
HIs Excellency having in this manner, by continual labor and Gods help,
won this impregnable town in nine days (for it was supposed to be stronger
than Berck, Meurs, or Groll) and given order for repayring the rampires at the
Countries cost, he did again give some little rest and refreshing to his
soldiers, in regard of a great and laborious journey he purposed to make
toward Enschede, Enschede yields on the 18. of October.
Oldenzeel, and Ootmaersen, which would hardly be effected in four days: but
by his great speed the army arrived before Enschede on the 18 of October,
which was fortified with an earthen rampire, and two dikes, the one without,
the other within: where the captains Vasques and Grootvelt sent two men to his
Excellency to view his ordnance after that the town had been summoned, and
afterward treated with him: whereupon, he licenced them to depart beyond the
Mase, on condition, not to serve the king of Spain for three months next
ensuing, and granted them a Conuoy to the said river. According to which
agreement, they departed thence on the 19 of October in the Morning, and were
in number one hundred and ten men, for a while before, some 50 men that had
gone forth a boot-haling, had been beaten and taken prisoners by his
Excellencies soldiers on the 9 of October.

The next day, Oldenzeel besieged.
his Excellency brought his army before Oldenzeel (and presently sent two
regiments, viz. that of Count Solms, and that of Count Henry his brother, with
certain horse, and four piece of ordnance, to Ootmaersen) which they
summoned: but Captain Otho de Sand, O^denzeel is battered, and yields on
the 21 of October.
with some 30 of the town of Oldenzeel that were there, refused to yield it;
on the 21 of October, the canon was planted before Oldenzeel, and after three
volleys had been discharged, they surrendered the town upon the same agreement
as those of Enschede, and 130 men presently departed thence. Two falconets, 2
iron pieces, 800 weight of powder, 200 of match with 112 bullets, and some
other provisions were found in the town.

From thence he went to Ootmaersen, which he presen^ly summoned; but the town
being manned with six companies, viz. General Billyes, the Drossart Egmonts,
the governor Boymers, Herman de Ens, Borchgraue, and Eylkema, they answered,
That if they should on a sudden yield the town, they knew not how to answer
it. Thereupon, his Excellency presently caused trenches and batteries to be
made, and discharged certain volleis, whilst the platformes were preparing
for the battery, which being ready, and the Burghers fearing some greater
mischief, certain men came forth of the town on the 22 of October at night,
viz. Captain Borchgraue, Egmonts ensign, and the two Burghomasters of the
Town, who after some parley, compounded with Prince Maurice the same night at
eleven of the clock, according to the agreement of those of Euschede; it was
likewise concluded that all ecclesiastical persons might at their own choice
either stay or depart. The next day, in the Morning, the garrison left the
town, which consisted of four hundred men, and laid the fault on the Burghers
fear and evil will, and on their own want of soldiers.

His Excellency having vanquished these old captains and soldiers, did on the
23 of October make his entry into the town together with the Princess of
Orange (who for certain important affairs was come to the camp) and count
William of Nassau, where he found three brass pieces, many of iron, and about
seven thousand weight of powder, and placed the companies of the Drossart
Sallant and Jacques de Meurs in garrison there, making the said Meurs governor,
and sent Captain Potters company to Euschede; so as his Excellency in five
days, manned three towns with garrison, and won the whole Country of Twente.

The four and twentieth of October, he sent to view the river called Dinckele,
and made a passage over it, sending the Drossart Sallant with ten Cornets of
horse and six foot companies of Frizons, to prepare the way toward Lingen, and
to enuiron the said town.

The same day, the three young Earls of Benthem, together with Count Weda,
came to his Excellency at Oldenzeel, the like did the Commissioners of the
government of Munster. His Excellency likewise sent Captain Euuoot de Bout
with Letters to the officers near adjoining, craving their help in making a
bridge over the river Amisa. He resolved likewise by the advice of the general
States deputies, Council of State, and those of the country of Ouer-Yssel, to
raise the Rampires of the Towns of Euschede and Otmaersen; which within a
while after was done.

The taking of the town and castle of Lingen in Anno 1597.
PRince Maurice on the six and twentieth of October, led his army from
Odenzeel, and coming with the vantgard to Northoorn, he went to Benthe^ Castle
with the Princess of Orange accompanied with Brabantina of Orange, who with
other Nobility was come to take her leave, where they were very honorably
and kindly entertained by the earl of Benthem and the Countess Palatine the
dowager, who remained there, from whence the Princess departed the next day,
and his Excellency went near to Emsbuere where his army lay, which, on the
28 of October, crossed the river Amisa, and went before the town and castle of
Lingen.

Lingen is a frontier town seated in the farthest part of the lowcountries, it
is a Seignorie, wherein is a town, castle, and 4 villages, which the Emperor
Charles the fifth usurped by confiscation, in the year 1546, together with the
County of Teckelenbourg and the Seigniorie of Reyden, which he took from count
Conrade of Teckelenbourg, who had an hand in the league of Smalcald, making war
upon him, and was therefore condemned as a rebel. Whereupon, the emperor gave
the said county and Seignorie to Maximilian of Egmond, Count of Buren, in
recompense of his good service. Afterward, the earl was reconciled to the
Emperor, on this condition, that Lingen should remain to Count Buren. But
within a while after, as Count Nicholas of Teckelenbourg, uncle to Conrade that
was deceased, called the matter in question, as a fee belonging to the Duchy
of Guelders, the Emperor again took it into his own hand, and disposed of
it afterward according to his own pleasure.

This town was well fortified with Bulwarks, Dikes and a strong garrison; for
beside four strong bulwarks in the Castle, the town had double rampires and
dikes, A description of the town of Lingen.
with four bulwarks and three rauelins, and six hundred soldiers in
garrison, comprehended in three foot companies, and one Cornet of horse, under
the conduct of Count Frederick of Berguen, the Drossart Indevelt, Laukema,
Verdugos Lieutenant, with all other necessaries belonging to a siege.

Count Frederick had caused certain houses that stood nere the town, to be
burnt, because the enemy should not seize on them. The next day the besieged
made a salley, burnt a mill which stood without the town, and skirmished with
the Scots, who did beat them in again. In the night, as our men began to make
their approches, those in the town and castle did nothing all that night and
most part of the next day, but discharge their ordnance, so as the whole town
seemed to be on fire.

The thirtieth of October, six ensigns of Frizons came to the camp, and the
besieged about eight of the clock the same evening, did, with one thousand
five hundred men, assail the guard of Frizons, where captain Peter Leenwaerd,
his Sergeant, and two or three soldiers were slain, after which, the
townsmen with some loss retired.

The one and thirtieth of October, and first of November, certain canons were
planted, and our men began to batter the fortifications, the better thereby to
make their approach. The night following, we made a battery with six canon,
and the soldiers marched the same day even to the dike of the rauelin before
the gate called Molen-port.

The second of November, nineteen boats came to Embden, laden with ordnance
and munition, and passed along by a place called Oort, notwithstanding the
opposition of the castle which belonged to the Earl.

The third and fourth of November, the approches on every side were advanced,
so as the soldiers before Molen-port came so far into the rauelin, as they
found a Mine which the townsmen had made, and some of them took their hats
and filled them with gun powder, which being perceived by the besieged, they
flung forth wildfire upon our soldiers, which burnt diverse of them, together
with certain Myners: this happened on the 5 of November.

The same day, the Ambassadors of Denmark arrived, viz. the Chanceller
Witfelt, and the Lord Barnekou, with a great train and strong Conuoy, they
came from the Hague and passed by Swoll, to come and see the camp, visiting
the trenches, but not without admiration wondering at and commending our skill
in martial matters. The next day, they departed thence, and were strongly
conuoyed toward Dulmenhorst.

The same day, the works were well advanced, and the 6 of November, three
galleries were made, which were bargained to be done, the one for one thousand
six hundred, the other for one thousand five hundred, and the third for one
thousand four hundred florins; this money was more bountifully bestowed,
because the States of Holland had sent 10000 florins to the camp for payment
of the works: so as before Molen-port and Leuckport our men were gotten into
the rauelins, to level the causies which kept the water in the dikes.

The seventh and eighth of November, the besiegers began to seize upon the
rauelins before the gates, and to let forth the water. The ninth of November,
artillery and munition came to the camp: whereupon, three days after, his
Excellency made another battery, with four and twenty pieces of ordnance
upon the castle; and after that, upon the twelfth day, he had battered the
fortifications for eight hours space, and under favor of the canon, began to
undermine two bulwarks, he summoned the town: thereupon, the townsmen craved
an hours respit for consultation, and a cessation of the ordnance and Mine,
but his Excellency would give them no time; so as they demanded two hostages
for two of their men whom they would send unto him, Count Frederick of Berguen
yields up Lingen on the 12 of Nomember.
the one was Verdugos Lieutenant, and the other Euert de Ens, and late in the
Evening, a composition was made, That they should depart the next day, with
their horse, arms, Cornet, ensigns and baggage, and should cross the Rhyne
and Mase according to the agreement of those of Oldenzeel, delivering up all
their papers and writings concerning the demaines of the Country to his
Excellency, craving fifty wagons for their first days journey: and that all
the officers and Burghers might remain six weeks in the town to end their
business, and afterward with passeport, to go whither they should please.

This capitulation was made in the presence of the Earls of Lunenbourg, Lip,
Swartzenbourg, and Benthem, who were come to the camp to salute Prince
Maurice. The same night count Solms, Count Lodwick, and Count Ernestus went to
sup in the castle with Count Frederick of Berguen and his brother Adolph, and
returned at night to the Camp, where gards were every where placed.

The thirteenth of November, Count Frederick requested that he might remain
there that day, which was granted on condition that his men should leave the
Castle, and Captain Martin Cobbe with his company was sent into the Castle,
and Captain Telinghen with his companies into the Town, where they found one
canon, two demie canons, one Coluering, three demie Culuerings, one Falconet,
and two A piece of ordnance so called.
morters, with 12000 weight of gunpowder.

The foureteenth of November, the garrison went away, it consisted of 500 foot,
and one Cornet of 50 horse, and the first, night they lodged at Salsbergue in
the land of Munster. The same day his Excellencies troops began likewise to
march, the horsemen, through Munster toward Berck, and the Fanterie to Swoll,
there to be embarked for Holland.

The fifteenth of November, his Excellency, Count William, and the rest of the
army departed from Lingen, and went that night to Vlsen, where the next day
they separated themselves, each one going to his garrison.

Prince Maurice in all his exploits is highly to be commended, for his great
and continual speed, wisdom, and skill in martial matters, having in three
months space obtained such great and notable victories; for in these actions
(beside the Danish Ambassadors, and the commissioner of the towns and
Countries of Cologne, Munster, and Osnabrugge) there were two Dukes, nine
Earls, with many other Lords and Noble men, which came in person to his camp
to salute and congratulat him, and to be eyewitnesses of his victories and
valor. In these actions he did in a short space vanquish two thousand men on
the farther side of the Rhyne, in the towns of Berck, Alpen, and Meurs, and on
the hither side thereof, six and twenty foot companies, and four Cornets of
horse, all old soldiers under the conduct of two Earls, sundry old Colonels,
Captains and other officers, which lay in strong walled Towns and Castles.

So as in these exploits, he did not only win nine Towns, and five castles
manned with strong garrisons, but three Counties, and three Seignories,
crossing seven rivers, four with bridges, and three without, and thereby
secured the passages on the Rhyne, Countries of Zutphen, Ouer-Yssel, Twent,
Drent, Frizeland, and the Ommelands, which is in a manner the fourth part of
the seuenteen Provinces of the Netherlands as they are reckoned; at that time
when Cardinal Albertus had threescore thousand men in pay, and himself in
person in the field, coming from Amiens in Picardie in November, before
Ostend, with which he durst not then meddle.

A recital and description of the siege of Bommell, and how it was raised in
Anno 1599.
AFter the conquest of so many sundry Towns, we are next to speak of the
siege of Bommell, and of the enemies entrance into the Island called
Bommels-weert under the conduct of the Admerall of Arragon: and for better
recital thereof, we will make some brief description of the town.

Bommell is a frontier Town upon the confines of Guelderland toward the
South, and stands upon the river Waell on the North side of the Isle of
Bommell: it is of a reasonable bigness, and exceeding strong by nature: it was
first walled by Duke Otho, under whose government the Country of Guelderland
and the number of towns in it were much augmented.

The river Waell does not only make Bommell commodious for traffike, but
impregnable on the North side and free from all invasion. The Country about it
is very low, and not alone unfit for Mines, but for continuance of any long
siege, for in winter, by reason of great waters and ouerflowing of rivers, it
inforceth the enemy to leave the field. Beside her natural strength, it has
been ever well fortified with bulwarks and Towers, and is environed with a
double rampire and dike, as the Reader may perceive by the Map.

From the beginning of the Low-Countrie wars till this day, each party has
labored to become Master of this town in regard of her situation; especially
the united Provinces, because it serves as a rampire against the incursions and
invasion of their enemies, and is a strong and sure key to their confines,
which they likewise fortunatly obtained by means of those of Gorcum, who took
it in anno 1572, and have kept it till this present, notwithstanding the
enemies many attempts, and daily diligence of the Spanish commanders, who have
often gone about to become Masters thereof, and to take it from them: As in
Anno 1599, when they brought their whole strength into the Isle of Bommell,
under the conduct of D. Francisco de Mendoza high Admeral of Arragon, and
besieged the town with the bulwarks and forts round about it. And because this
siege of Bommell, together with the raising thereof, is one of the notablest
exploits of war done in the Lowcountries, we will briefly set down, the
most remarkable matters which were there acted, entreating the Reader to take
it in good part.

The Admerall of Arragon, having assembled all his forces lying on the Empires
territories and neutrall countries, did, on the sixteenth of April, take a
general muster of them, and on the six and twentieth of the said month,
brought them before the impregnable fort of the Island called S'Graven-weert;
whose garrison was so strong and well provided of all necessaries, as it was to
be presumed, that the Spaniards would not have dared to hope for the winning of
it, especially in view of the States army, which hindered them from enclosing
it. Their weak attempts likewise, and the event thereof showed that they aimed
at some other place, and that this was but a counterfeit siege, only to draw
the States army thither, that they might be able on a sudden to surprise the
Town of Bommell, and forts adjacent.

My Lords the States of the united Provinces, having intelligence certain
months before, that the enemy would invade the Isle of Bommell, to be able
from thence to make his entrance into Holland, had given order to fortify and
circle the said town with new bulwarks and flankers, and to enlarge the forts
of Voorn and Creueccoeur, which by reason of their smalnesse were not able to
hold out long: these works were already begun in the town of Bommell and
fort of Voorn, but not ended, by reason the ground was too soft, and the waters
too high; so that the west side of the town lay all open, the old walls being
beaten down and the new not yet erected, as likewise in Voorn fort, where the
new work was scarce defensible, and would not have been able to withstand the
enemies fury.

These things drew the Spaniards into the Isle of Bommell, that they might
become Masters thereof ere these places were fortified. And to this end they
came before the fort of S'Grauen-weert, to draw (as it fell out) the States
camp thither.

By which occasion, the Town of Bommel, and forts near adjoining, were not so
well provided of men as was requisite. The Admerall of Arragon lying before
S'Grauen-weert, and amusing the States camp, had sent certain troops, under
the conduct of Zapena, toward Gennip upon the Mase, under color of a conuoy;
unto whom he sent a great part of his army on May day, conducted by La
Bourlotte.

The enemy, for execution of his enterprise, had provided certain boats upon
the Mase, in which, they meant to fall down toward the Isle of Voorn, and on
the 3 day of May, in the Morning, they all embarked themselves and came to the
said Island. But Prince Maurice, according to his usual care and diligence,
had advertised the Garrison of their intent, commanding them to arm and stand
upon their guard, who by this means prevented the enemies purpose, and kept him
from making any attempt: Whereupon he was enforced to go back with his boats
to a place called Litt, where he remained that day and the next.

The fourth of may, at night, they did with canon shot enforce the man of war
(which the States kept upon the Mase, to guard the river, and to stop the
enemies passage) to retire thence, and to fall down the stream, and caused
certain boats to be brought by land toward Keffell, whether they sent their
own fanterie, which was embarked by night, and passed on betwixt Rossen and
Herwaerde.

And the fifth of May, before day break, they entered the Isle of Bommell,
where they fortified themselves on both sides the water. This sudden arrival
of theirs, did so affright those of Bommell, as diverse Burghers fled confusedly
forth of the Town, carrying away with them what they could conveniently: And
to speak truly, had the enemy, presently after his arrival in the Island,
showed himself before the Town, he would have mightily endaungered it, the
walls lying open and the Burghers being terrified. But by his negligence, and
staying for the Admerall, who was hourly expected with his whole army, he
lost that gallant opportunity.

His Excellency, in the mean time, having intelligence of the enemies
arrival in the Isle of Bommell, made have thitherward with his Cauallerie and
certain foot companies, where he arrived on the sixth of May, and gave order
for all things necessary in the town, commanding the Burghers still to abide
there, who by his coming were so encouraged, as they alone thought themselves
strong enough to withstand the enemy.

The seventh of May, the Spaniards forsook the town of Emmerick, and joined
with the Admerall, who was then marching toward the Isle of Bommell. It was
supposed that the Admerall had an intent to have seized on Heusden, a very
strong Town, and seated within an hours journey of Bommell.

But his Excellency, like a provident prince, went thither on the 11 of May,
with ten foot companies, and caused the Isle of Hemert to be fortified and
entrenched round about.

The Admerall perceiving that Heusden was too well provided, did, with all his
force, assault the Fort of Creuecoeur, which by reason of the smalnesse was not
able to hold out against him: Whereupon, the garrison yielded it up, and
departed thence with their ensigns and arms.

His Excellency having intelligence tha^ Creuecoeur was yielded, returned
speedily to Bommell, and caused it to be environed with many trenches, half
Moons, and such like works.

By these fortifications, the Town of Bommel (in man's judgment) was made
impregnable, and as many as saw the height and breadth of those works, were
amazed, for it is almost incredible to see what they wrought in view of the
king of Spaines mighty army.

Beside these fortifications a far off, the bulwarks of the Town which had
bin begun, were finished, and the walls closed up, the Town being well
furnished with ordnance and other provision in places of most necessity. The
Admeral, in the mean time, lay with his camp at Creuecoeur, where he was
busied in making a bridge over the Mase, and a half Moon on Heels side,
thereby to secure the river.

The 13 of May, the enemy made show as if he would have returned to Heusden:
whereupon, his Excellency sent 31 ensigns mo thither. But he marched toward
Rossem, hoping to enter into the Isle of Tiell, called Tielche-weert, to
enclose the Isle of Bommell on all sides: but Prince Maurice sent ordnance
thither, and caused batteries to be made, thereby hindering the enemies passage.

The 14 of May, Count Frederick brought the most part of the army before
Bommell, having first run up and down the Country, and done nothing, but
warned those of Bommell and Voorn to fortify themselves, and given them time
to do it. He came and sat down on the West Side, where the Town had been
most open, there beginning his skirmishes, hoping to enter it, but those within
it, did bravely repulse him. During this skirmish the enemy thought to have
entered the Isle of Rossem, but all things being there well ordered, his attempt
had no good success. Then he began to besiege the town, seating his camp at
a place called Oensell, above the Town, and made his trenches at the causey
called Oensen-Dijke, that he might lie safe from the Town shot. Prince Maurice
perceiving that the enemy meant to set upon him with his whole power, did
likewise break up his camp which lay in the Betuwe, and brought it to
Bommell, making all preparations for defense, sending for all sorts of
munition, and making sundry batteries.

His whole camp being assembled, he divided it very skilfully, and fortified
all necessary places. He manned Bommel with eight ensigns belonging to the
Lord Peter de Dorp, eight ensigns of the Lord Vander-Noot, four ensigns of
Suesse, and the Lord de la Noiie, with seven French companies; and himself
with his youngest brother, Count William, and Count Lodwick, retired thence. He
quartered the English at Haesten, the Gards at Tuyll, the residue of the French
at Wardenbourg, at Opinen the rest of the Frizons, at Hessell Count Ernestus
with the Almans, the Scots with Edmonds regiment at Voorn, and all the horse in
the Isle of Tyell, and so from thence as far as Gorcum, to keep continual
watch along the River. The Admerall Duuenvoord likewise went up the River
Waell, with fifteen men of war, which lay from Opinen as far as beneath
Haeften.

On the sixteenth of May, all things being thus ordered by the States army,
the Admeral of Arragon came at last to his camp, so as all the power on both
sides was assembled nere to Bommel. The Spaniards were in number 26000 foot,
and 4000 horse; the States forces consisted of 16000 foot, and three thousand
horse, most of them old soldiers, and had a long time bin trained up in war,
and purchased great experience.

The same night that the Admeral came to his camp, he made a furious assault
upon the towns furthest fortifications, toward the gate called Oensche port,
which were scarce finished; but he was bravely beaten back, with great loss
of his men, and among others, La Motte was taken prisoner, who died at Bommell
of his hurt, together with Alfonso D'Aualos, who was grievously wounded, yet
within a while after, recovered his health.

Prince Maurice caused the causey called Oenschen-Dijke to be undermined, that
he might blow up the enemy, if he returned to assail the fortifications. This
was his last assault upon Bommell; for afterward he kept himself very quiet,
standing rather on defense than offense.

His Excellency on the contrary, was not satisfied in defending the town of
Bommell, but did likewise with all his might assail the enemy, shooting on
every side into his camp, and visiting him often in his trenches. The works
and fortifications did daily increase round about Bommell, and a bridge of
boats was likewise made over the Waell before the Town, five pace in breadth,
and four hundred and fifty in length. There were ten great boats, and eight
and twenty lesser ones, and a very great Ferrie-boat serving for an opening
to the bridge when need was.

By his Excellencies command, all mariners that were in the States fleet, came
into the town of Bommell to aid the soldiers to make a furious assault upon
the enemy, who was advertised thereof by two Frenchmen that fled from our
side: whereupon, the mariners were sent back to their ships.

The 18 of May, Count Lodwick, with 8 cornets of horse, was sent on Brabants
side, to surprise the enemies gards, but returned without any effect.

On the one and twentieth, at night, our soldiers being for the most part
English and French, did fiercely assail the enemy in his trenches, and slew
above six hundred men, and would peradventure have troubled the whole army,
had not a quarrel arose betwixt the two Nations: whereupon, they returned to
the Town, bringing Captain Aldeno prisoner with them, with some other
soldiers. And on their side lost two Captains, and some others, who for the
most part were slain by themselves.

The enemy at that time was very busy in his fortifications, making
platformes and sundry batteries, from which he shot into the Town and over
the bridge, but did no great hurt, spoiling the houses more than men; daily
approaching toward the waters side, that he might be able to reach our bridge
with his ordnance; and our men to defend it, did much eleuat the wings of their
trenches. Our trenches, bulwarks, and batteries were daily increased, being
stored with diverse cano^, culuerins, and other iron pieces, which continually
played upon the enemy, doing great hurt among his men, so as they drew back
their cabins and Tents to be free from the canon. Diverse of the enemies dead
and wounded men were daily carried to Sertoghenbuske and other places near
adjoining, which filled the Hospitalls, among whom were many Captains and
commanders, beside those that were daily buried in the fields.

The four and twentieth of May, the enemy departed from the Isle of Bommell,
with five thousand foot, and one thousand horse, to fetch in victuals,
munition, and other necessaries: and on the six and twentieth, he sent four
thousand foot men, and certain horse toward Antuerpe, to conuoy the pay for
the army to the Camp, and the better to cover his intent, he discharged many
vollies of shot, seeking thereby to carry away certain ordnance.

Thereupon, his Excellency, with all the gards, went down lower, being
followed by six cornets of horse, and out of every English company, he took
fifty men, which in all amounted to one thousand three hundred foot, and with
them embarked himself from Worcum, and marched far into Brabant: but the
enemy having descried our men, retired with all the treasure into Herentalls,
being unwilling to leave his advantage: whereupon, Prince Maurice returned to
his Camp, leaving certain straglers behind him.

On the seven and twentieth of May, the enemy received his pay in the Isle of
Bommell, which was thought in value to be worth six tun of gold: I hardly in
this beeleue my Author.
all the garrisons dispersed here and there over Brabant, were commanded to
come to the camp to receive their pay. The same day, our men of war upon the
river, dragged up certain engines that went under water, which were carried
away by the current, wherewith the enemy thought to have blown up either our
ships or bridge; they were five foot long, and one foot broad: there were in
them six Chambers charged with powder, very artificially made with
fire-lockes, and did bear out a point before, which coming to strike against
any thing, the spring vnbended it self, and gave fire to the powder, which
brake all things near it in pieces: the enemy had made many of these, yet
they did in no sort hurt either our bridge or ships. The thirtieth of May, the
body of the enemies Camp was much enlarged by great numbers of Tents and
Cabins: for he had newly received twelve great canons called the twelve
Apostles, each of them carrying a bullet of threescore pound weight; with which
came four thousand Spaniards and Italians, and certain cornets of horse.

The same day, the enemy attempted to cross the Waell near to Dreule, two
leagues beyond Tyell, but his Excellency forthwith sent sixteen foot
companies and five cornets of horse to stop their passage. The same day, our
double canon, and other ordnance played fiercely upon the enemy, who did the
like upon the Town, and especially toward the bridge; but the bullets, for
the most part, fell in a place called Haeftensche-weert, doing no great hurt
either to the bridge or men.

Dail^e skirmishes were made betwixt the sentinels and soldiers which deserve
no long discourse, only, our men were commonly victorious. Beside those of
Bommell, the inhabitants of Voorn, Heusden, Gorcum, and other neighbor Towns,
made incursions upon the enemy, and took daily store of prisoners, and many
gallant horse, and in Bommell alone during the siege, more than four hundred
were sold.

News came from Sertoghenbusk, that on the eight and twentieth and nine and
twentieth of May, above fourscore wagons of dead and hurt men were brought
thither, beside those that were carried to Heel and other Towns. His
Excellency caused the place where the old Cloister stood to be fortified, from
whence the enemy might have greatly annoyed the Town, if he had come on that
side. He did likewise fortify a place called Litsenha^, began an half Moon
there, that he might from thence make incursions upon the enemy.

The third of June, his Excellency caused all the ordnance of the Town,
Bulwarks, and batteries, to be discharged upon the enemies camp for an hour
together, which enforced them to retire from before the town, and by night to
burn their cabins, and by to dislodge.

In this manner did the canon raise the siege of Bommell, which the enemy had
begirt for the space of twenty days.

The Spaniards from the beginning had no great hope of this siege, but had
rather to have gone before Breda or some other Town in the champaine country,
accusing La Bourlotte to be a traitor to the king, whose negligence had held
back their first intended enterprises.

Those of Bommel, perceiving the enemies retreat, did in troops run to their
forsaken camp, where they found much baggage, armor, and other engines, many
dead men unburied, many hurt men and young children left behind, whom his
Excellency sent after them, causing the dead bodies to be buried, and the
wounded to be brought into the town to be healed.

The fifth of June, the enemies trenches, batteries, and other works, were
made plain and level by the Burghers and soldiers, with their own tools
which they had left behind. The enemy was so afraid to tarry in
Bommelers-weert, as diverse Captains which were not hurt, withdrew themselves
to Sertoghenbusk, wearing their arms in Scarfes, the better to absent
themselves; the number of them was so great, as proclamations were made by
sound of drum and Trumpet, That all commanders and officers, being in the kings
pay, should return to their quarter and ensigns; and a general search was
made, to enforce such to the camp as were unwilling.

The enemy having abandoned Bommell, retired toward Rossem, where the Country
lay somewhat high, and there encamped, causing his bridge to be taken away from
Creuecoeur, and to be carried higher betwixt Alem, and Marem.

His Excellency, to keep the enemy forth of the Isle of Tiell, fortified all
the passages, and sent 7 French ensigns to Nerines, 8 companies belonging to
the Lord Vander-Noot, and four of Suesses to Varick. He began to plant sundry
batteries, and to fortify the Island called Rossensche-middel-weert, and other
places, he likewise strongly entrenched the Isle of Voorn.

Both the camps were quiet all June, because the enemy was afraid to pass on
his way, and Prince Maurice attended him in vain; each side being busied in
making batteries and other fortifications, and annoying one another with the
ordnance.

The enemy began a very great and strong Fort at Rossem, upon a Dike called
Lorre-graft, in a straight and narrow place of the Isle of Bommel, with
Curtains, the better to shadow himself and to cause the said dike to run into
the Waell.

It is reported that fifteen thousand of the enemies divided themselves into
three troops, and cast lots which of the three should first cross the water,
having many boats for that purpose, so as their whole number might easily have
passed over at thrice: this should have been put in practice upon the four
and twentieth of June in the Morning before day break, being Mid-Summer day;
but it was not effected. Those of Midel-weert, Varick, Heesselt, and Opinen,
stood all night in good order, expecting the enemy who stirred not. His
Excellency did often send certain horse, musketeers, and armed pikes to
provoke him, but he would not come forth of his hold.

The Admerall of Arragon, sent D. Ambrosio Landriano with most of the horse,
and the regiment of D. Lewis de Villar, to prevent the frequent incursions of
those of Litsenhall.

The first of Iulie, the enemy made above five hundred great shot, but did not
hurt a man of ours. The second of Iulie, the Englishmen that lay at Haeften,
the French, that were at Weerdenbourg and Nerines, and six ensigns of the
garrison of the Isle of Hemert, called Hemertschen-weert, marched up higher.

His Excellency having in vain long expected the enemies coming, did, on the
fourth of Iulie, by day break, send three thousand men toward Herwaerden,
there to make an half moon in the enemies view.

Herwaerden is seated on a plain or leuel ground, higher than all the trenches
in the Isle of Voorn: there did our men presently fortify themselves, making
an half Moon, which they fenced with pallizadoes. This work being in some
sort defensible, his Exc. sent more men before and at last, followed them
himself.

Our men labored very hard from four of the clock in the morning till six at
night, without any let of the enemy, but when the half moon was almost
finished, he then showed himself with certain troops of horse and foot,
thinking thereby to draw our soldiers into an ambuscado; who upon intelligence
that a great troop of horse lay behind a bank, would not go forth.

The enemy within a while after, returned with 2500 Spaniards and Italians, who
under the conduct of Zapena gave a furious assault to our half moon, and with
them a great number of monks and Clergy men, who came with crosses and banners
to encourage them: but our men did valiantly defend the half moon and
repulsed the enemy, notwithstanding his fierce assault, in which many of them
had gotten over the palizadoes, fighting hand to hand with our men, and killing
one another with push of pike.

Those of Voorn, Varijck, and Heesselschen-weert, did continually with their
canon and small shot, play upon the enemies, so as in the end they were to
their great disgrace enforced to retire, leaving more then 700 dead men behind
them, (among whom were diverse Captains and Commanders) beside those that were
hurt, of whom 150 died in Sertoghenbusk. This assault continued two hours
long, and yet there were but 8 of our men slain, and some 20 hurt. The enemy
had brought two field pieces to batter the half moon, but did not hurt one
man of ours, and in his retreat lost 96 men, among whom one of the above
mentioned monks was found, being armed with many holy relics which did him no
good, he died with his arms full of palizadoes which he had valiantly plucked
up.

The same day, the enemies with 2 demi canon which were sent them, sanke one of
our boats near to Herwaerden, but the men were saved, some six or seven
excepted, that were slain and hurt.

The 5 of July, la Bourlotte with a troop of horse and 400 musketeers, lay in
ambush, thinking to draw our Cauallery thither, which were upon the guard before
the town of Bommell: But our men mistrusting the matter, because the enemy
came on with so few, gave back, till they were safe from the ambuscado, and
then fell upon them, putting them to rout, and took the Baron of Rosne
prisoner, and an Italian Captain that presently died of his hurts, whose body
was afterward redeemed. His Excellency likewise began to fortify the Island
or Widdel-weert, called Nat-gat on Herwaerden side, and all the Villages round
about it, with trenches.

The seventh of Iulie, a second half Moon was begun upon the Litsenham, and
was conjoined to the first by wings, the better to secure the bridge, which was
afterward placed betwixt Voorn and Herwaerden. They likewise made a new wing at
Herw^erden, toward the enemies bridge, extending it abroad round about the
village, from whence we might easily discern it; so as our men did daily
approach nearer it, watching for a fit opportunity to cut it off from him.

The 8 of Iulie, his Excellency and his whole Court removed from Bommel and
went to Voorn, quartering himself at the head of the Island, whither his own
guard, and those of Count William and Count Hohenlo, presently followed him.

The army of the States were busied in making two sundry bridges of boats:
The first, on the third of Iulie, upon the Waell from the Isle of Tiell to the
Isle of Voorn: The second, on the 8 of Iulie, from Voorn to Herwaerden, on
which, ten ensigns of Scots, and the Lord of Gistels, with twelve other
ensigns of his regiment, passed over the same day toward Herwaerden. The
enemy being fearful and jealous of his bridge, transported it on the ninth
of Iulie to the old place betwixt Heel, and Creuecoeur. His Excellency, on the
12 of Iulie, sent three thousand five hundred foot, and 1000 horse toward
Litsenham to assail the enemy, who not appearing, our men returned, bringing
hack with them 40 horse and four prisoners.

The Spanish horsemen, so soon as ours were gone from Litsenham, showed
themselves on the bank, but were soon beaten thence by our canon.

The same day, a French lord, son to a great man of France, was shot into the
head before Herwaerden, and dyed of his hurt; he was much lamented both of his
Excellency and his whole Court.

The fif^eenth day, the Bridge was removed from Herwaerden, and placed higher
betwixt the Isle of Voorn and Litsenham upon the Mase, over which, 6000 foot,
and 1800 horse passed toward Litsenham, to raise the enemy, who lay dispersed
up and down, at Lit, Kessell, and Maren.

The enemy was in those Villages on Litsenham and Herwaerdens side, strongly
entrenched, but on the other side very slenderly, so as our men were to fetch
a compass about, to assail the enemy behind. But the French that were in the
Vant-gard being impatient of delay, and desiring a speedy victory, assailed
the enemy in front, where he was strongly fortified. At the first arrival of
our men, the enemy stood before his trenches, offering skirmish, but was soon
beaten in again, and one of his captains taken prisoner and carried away into
the Isle of Voorn.

These thus defeated, our men did valiantly assail the enemies trenches, but
by reason of the hight of their fortifications, and great numbers of their men,
we did no great matter, but were feign to retire, bringing away some 60 dead
and hurt men, most of whom were Frenchmen, and to speak truly of them, had
with incredible valor, marched even into the enemies trenches.

The enemy planted a battery at Kessell, from whence he played upon Herwaerde
and Voorn, but did no great harm. The 26 of Iulie, he took one of our men of
war that lay in guard on the higher side of Amelroye, and slew most of the
mariners. These were the notablest exploits done in the Isle of Bommell and
places near adjoining, from May till the 26 of Iulie.

All August and September, both Camps lay very still, being strongly
entrenched, keeping good guard, ever seeking some advantage one of another.

There were continual mutinies in the enemies camp, in regard of bad pay and
other quarrels. The regiments which lay at Driell and other villages, did most
of them retire to Rossem for fear of being beaten. There were continual
skirmishes betwixt our caualerie and the enemies, who went about to surprise
one another, and to drive away the sentinels.

Our men still made incursions upon the enemy, and, on the 10 of August, took
more than 200 horse, and much baggage from him, who was busied in fortifying
his new Fort of Rossem, with high and broad rampires, thinking thereby to stop
the passage of the river Waell, to conquer the Isle of Bommel, and to open
himself a way into Holland, Vtrecht, and the heart of Guelderland. Many
wondered why the enemy was so long idle in the Isle of Bommell: some thought
that he would not retire till the fort of Rossem was fully finished.

But because the Archduke Albert had promised the States of the subjected
provinces, That he would not burden the towns and country with Garrisons,
it is likely that he busied his Army in the Isle of Bommell, the better to
keep his promise: As also because it was necessary to keep the Army near the
enemy, for his soldiers being seditious and wanting pay, it was to be
feared, if they departed forth of the Isle of Bommell, and should be far
from their enemies, that the country of Brabant would be in danger of spoil
and ruin, as it has often happened during these Low-countrie wars.

These are the most likely reasons that moved the enemy to keep his army so
long a time in the Isle of Bommel, without any other exploits; to these, an
other may be added, which is, that they thought good to tarry there, in
regard of the fitness of the place, from whence they might make attempts on
the neighbor towns of the united Provinces, as they had already done upon
Worcum, Breda, and Nimmeguen; but by Gods assistance and the carfulness of
our commanders it took none effect.

My Lords the States of the united Provinces, showed themselves very careful
for the defense of this town, yea some of the General States, and most of the
Council of State, came in person to Bommell, not without great danger of
their lives: for Canon bullets did not only fly over the late Martin de
Rossem Lord of Pouderoys house, where they were assembled, but pierced through
it.

The expense of his Excellencies camp at Bommell.
The Provinces did greatly further this business, for they furnished the Camp
with all necessaries, and all that Summer kept two hundred and eighty boats in
pay, three hundred seventy nine wagons, three hundred fifty six horse of
draught; there were two hundred and three Bridge-Masters, and other officers
fit for such service. To conclude, the extraordinary expense in boats, wagons,
drawing horse, munition, and provision for the ordnance and officers thereof,
did stand the Provinces that Summer (beside the soldiers pay) in twelve
hundred thousand florins.

This is in brief the true description of the occurrents which happened at
this siege.

A true description and recital of the enterprises and voyages of the mighty
fleet of the united Netherland Provinces against the realms of Spain and
Islands of Canaries, under conduct of the Admerall Peter Vander-Does, set forth
in anno 1599.
THe States of the united Netherland Provinces, did, in the beginning of the
year 1599, lay a general imposition on their wealthiest subjects, craving the
two hundredth penie of their goods, which they voluntarily granted. Whereupon,
they concluded, beside their other enterprises, to set forth a mighty fleet,
to invade the King of Spaines dominions, as the Englishmen had often done with
good success.

And to this end, diverse ships were rigd forth the same year in the havens and
Merchant Towns of Holland and Zeland, and many mariners were taken into pay
over all the united Provinces. Some of these ships were double mand and
victualled for a long voyage, the rest, only to continue in ordinary places.

Those which were double mand were chiefly bound for the West Indies; others
only for the Canaries to conuoy them, and to assist them by the way. All these
vessels were strong, tall, well built, and swift of sail. The greatest of them
was a ship of Amsterdam, strongly built, and well furnished for war.

The chief command of these ships was given to the Admerall Peter Vander
Does, a discreet and valiant gentleman, well experienced in martial matters,
both by sea and land, as it appeared in anno 1588, in the defeat of the Spanish
fleet, and more especially in this present action. All the Captains, officers,
soldiers and mariners were valiant and skillful men. Their ships being ready,
did set sail on the four and twentieth and five and twentieth of May, forth
of sundry Havens, and on the five and twentieth, at night, came before
Flushing, which was the Rendezvous, the whole Fleet consisting of 72 sail, all
of them well provided of ordnance, munition, and other necessaries.

The Admeral was called Orange, the great ship of Amsterdam was Vize-Admerall,
but being as then scarce finished, it remained for a time at Texell, and the 30
of May it followed the fleet and ouertooke it on the coast of Spain before the
Sea Town called Groine.

The 26 and 27 of May, the fleet stayed before Flushing to receive directions
from the Admerall, and on the 28 weighing ankor, they set sail from Flushing
with a Northerlie wind, directing their course East-South-East. The whole fleet
was divided into three squadrons, the first under the Admerall Vander-Does, who
carried an Orange color flag; the second, under John Gerbrantsen with a white
flag; and the third, under Cornellis Geleyn of Flushing, bearing a blew flag,
as rere-Admerall.

In this order the fleet departed, and on the nine and twentieth came in view
of Calice, where the foremost ships stayed for those that were behind. In this
place, the Admerall did twice send for all the Captains to come aboard his
ship, first, to hold a martial Council, after which, two Brigantines were
sent from the fleet; and the second time to acquaint them with his intent, and
other necessary affairs, giving to each of them a sealed letter, which was to
direct them how to order themselves in any difficulties that should happen.

This sending for the Captains was signified from the Admerall by shooting off
a piece of ordnance, and by displaying in the stern two of the Princes
ensigns. The same night, the fleet did again set sail, and doubled the point
of Zartenes, there coming to an anchor, expecting the Vice-Admeral of
Amsterdam.

But all that night they could not descrie her; so as in the Morning, on the
thirtieth of May, they went forward with a Northwest wind, shaping their course
East-North-East, and about Noone they came near to Beuersier, with a fair
wind which did blow from West-North-West, but toward night they were becalmed.
In the evening, the foremost ships took off some of their sails tarrying for
those that were hindmost.

The last of May, by day break, they came in ken of the Isle of Wight,
directing their course Eastward with a Westerlie wind. About Noone the air was
cloudie, so as the Fleet durst not approach the shore, but lessened their
sails, putting to Sea.

The first of June, in the Morning, they descried Gausteert, directing their
course toward Plimmouth, and there stayed, tarriing for the two Brigantines
they had sent abroad, who whithin a while after came to the Admerall:
whereupon, another martial Council was held; after which the fleet with full
sail shaped their course South-South-East, but toward Evening the air began
again to be cloudie, and the night was very calm.

The ninth, by day break, the whole fleet came upon the coast of Galicia,
near to Viuero, and holding their course North-East to the Northward, and
North-North-East, toward Evening they came right over against the Cape
Ortegall, which lies some 11 German leagues from the Groyne. In the night the
wind ^urnd North-East and by North; and being come to the height of 44 degrees
and 24 minutes, the said Cape stood off from them 5 leagues South-East to the
Southward.

The tenth of June, they set sail with a South-West wind toward
East-South-East, along the shore toward the Groyne, A description of the
Groyne.
which they descried about Noone, making all things ready to assail it. It is
a Sea town in Galicia, standing in the height of 43 degrees and twelve minutes
on the North-side of the line, opposite to England and Ireland, one hundred and
fifteen German leagues from Plimmouth, being seated on a triangular Cape in a
deep and spacious Bay, where not only the said Town has a goodly Haven,
but Ferol, Ponta de Mas, Pitanca, and Fontuna, have the goodliest and most
commodious Ports of Christendom: In which regard the king of Spain had lately
fortified it with many Castles, and there and at Ferol, he rigd his fleet for
England, Ireland and the Netherlands, together with that of this present year.

In some sort to hinder the preparation of that Spanish Fleet, and there to
destroy the King of Spaines ships and means, the Admerall Vander-Does was
commanded to assail the Groyne with his fleet.

To this end, on the eleventh of June, the wind being North-West to the
Westward, the six above mentioned ships went before toward the Groyne to see
how things were there ordered, directing their course South-South-East toward
the Cape de Prior, where they stayed to the Southward of the Town. Those of
Ferol descrying these ships, sent forth two shalops to know what they were,
because the day before, they had seen the fleet at Sea. These ships went
before the wind to attend these shalops, which suspecting somewhat, kept aloof
off and would not come near, but our men cried out aloud saying that they came
from Hambourg, and that they were laden with merchants goods, and only wanted
a pilot to carry them into the Groyne.

By this means our men got one of the shalops to come aboard, and took a
Spaniard, but those that were in it made all the have they could to escape. The
Spaniard whom they had taken prisoner, was one of the Kings servants, and was
come the same day from the Groyne: He being brought to the Admerall, told him
that some 4000 foot, and certain horse, with 36 carts of silver ready coined,
and 300 pipes of wine, were come to the Groyn to furnish the future Spanish
fleet.

After dinner, the whole fleet came before the Groyne, where they met with the
Vice-Admerall of Amsterdam. The Groyne and the above mentioned Castles, were
well provided of strong garrisons, ordinance, munition, and other necessaries,
having a long time before had intelligence of the coming of this fleet by
Hispaniolized French and Dutch.

The Admerall Vander-Does at his first ariual did presently with all his ships
fall beneath the town, casting anchor at 13, 12, and 21 fathom.

Those in the town and Castles played furiously with their ordnance upon our
men, so as in a short space they made more than 200 shot. Beneath the town 12
great Gallions lay with certain other French ships, which likewise discharged
their ordnance upon us: yet their shot did no hurt to our fleet, only one
vessel was spoiled.

The Admerall perceiving such resistance, sent for all the Captains and
Officers to come aboard his ship to consult together how they might best
assail the enemy: yet in regard the City was so well provided, they thought
it not fit to hazard the whole fleet, or for one town to lose their good
fortune, in atchiuement of other enterprises.

And therefore the fleet went thence, not meddling with the town, and because
it was very calm weather, they caused their boats to towe their ships, lying
still open to the shot, both from the town and castle, which did them no harm.

Toward evening the wind rose, so as the whole fleet was under sail, holding
their course South-South-east toward Cape Saint Vincent, that they might on a
sudden surprise Saint Lucas.

Saint Lucas is a town in Andaluzia on the Southern coasts of Spain at the
mouth of the River of Seuill, in the height of 39 degrees and 40 minutes: but
the Admerall Vander-Does being already gone beyond S. Lucas, left off that
enterprise, because the time was to far spent, and the wind stood fair for the
Canaries, making preparation to invade those Islands, which are in number 7,
viz. the graund Canarie, Palma, Tenerifa, Forteuentura, Fero, Gomera, and
Lancerotta. They are not far one from another, and are seated betwixt 27 and 30
degrees from the line, they are all called Canaries after the name of the
fertilest of them, heretofore called Canarie, and now the Grand Canarie.

These Islands by ancient writers were in former times termed the fortunate
Islands, Description of the Canaries.
in regard of the abundance of all necessaries and fruitfulness of the soil,
producing all things fit for the sustenance of man's life, but especially the
grand Canarie, Palma, and Tenerifa, which do not only produce all necessaries
in abundance, but likewise sugars, wine, and oil, and such like commodities,
wherewith they store Europe and other Countries.

These Islands have been a long time subject to the Spaniards, who now remain
there, and are not inhabited by their ancient inhabitants, who now are all
rooted out. But by whom and how they were subdued and by what means they fell
to the Crown of Spain is not certainly known; this only cannot be denied
that Forteuentura, Fero, Lancerotta, and Gomera, were the first that were
taken, and the Grand Canarie, Palma and Tenerifa were long after that Pagans.

The valor and cruelty of these Islanders, their discommodious havens, and
dangerous sea coasts, caused them so long to hold out against the Christians,
whom they have often repulsed with great loss. The Fleet directed it course
toward the Canaries forcibly to invade the Grand Canarie and Gomera, according
to the appointment of my Lords the States. The Admerall sent for all the
Captains and Commanders and Pilots to consult with them about the commodities
of the said Islands. He likewise distributed the Mariners under new Captains,
130 men under every Ensign, and gave order for all things, instructing the
captains how to behave themselves on shore.

And because the fleet did daily approach the line, coming to the hottest part
of the world, where too much eating and drinking is very dangerous causing
sundry diseases, and commonly death, the Admerall did very descreetly moderate
his soldiers diet commanding every man strictly to observe it: He likewise
sent for all the land and sea Captains to advise him in what manner to assail
the enemy and town.

The 24 of June the wind was still North-North-West, and they went
South-South-East, so as toward evening they descried Lancerotta, and bending
their course thither-ward they went East to the Southward. The 25 of June in
the morning they came near to Lancerotta, and Forteuentura, which they might
descrie, and after noone, they doubled it, going toward the South-East along
the Western coasts, and about Evening descried the grand Canarie; whereupon,
they struck sail, and tarried till the second watch, and then did again set
forward, directing their course Eastward toward the grand Canaries, which
stands in the height of 28 degrees on the hither side of the line, and 155
German leagues to the South East toward the South of Saint Vincents Cape in
Portugal, being in compass 260000 paces, amounting in all to 26 German
leagues. On the East side of this Island stands a small town called Allagona,
wherein are above four hundred houses: It is the chief Town of all the
Canaries, and there the Judges Courts both Ecclesiastical and Civil, with the
Inquisitor of Spain, and the governor of the Islands for the King, do reside.

Through the Town runs a small shallow riuulet which descends from the
neighbor mountains, and emptieth it self into the sea, and is in no sort
capable of shipping. The haven of the grand Canarie lies four hundred paces
toward the North-North-East of Allagona, and is of an indifferent breadth and
depth: For defense of this Haven, the King of Spain had caused a strong Castle
to be built, called Gratiosa: All the forts of the grand Canarie were provided
of strong Garrisons, munition, and other necessaries.

The 26 of June, the fleet with a North-East wind entered the Haven of the grand
Canarie, and all of them together came to an anchor beneath the Castle Gratiosa.

Thereupon, the Spanish Governor came with seven Spanish Companies to the Sea
side, placing gards upon the haven, planting three small pieces of ordnance
behind certain banks to hinder his enemies landing. upon the fleets arrival
the Gastle Gratiosa played furiously upon it, but the Admerall, vice-Admerall
and those ships which carried the biggest ordnance drew near the Castle and
requited it with the like.

Two Spanish ships rode near the Castle, one of which was sunk, and the other
together with a small bark, was brought to the fleet. By this means the
Castle was much weakened, and those within it began to be discouraged, leaving
off their furious shooting, notwithstanding that they had already torn some
ships and slain certain mariners.

Thereupon, the Admerall did presently man his boats and landed his men, and
those ships that could not reach the Castle, bent their ordnance upon the shore
driving the enemy thence. These boats rowed altogether to land-ward, where for
a while they fought with the enemy. The Admerall perceiving that the enemies
would not remove, and that the water was shallow, leaped up to the middle in
the Sea, and with his men marched bravely against them.

By this means the Spanish troops after some slight fight were beaten from the
shore, flying toward Allagona together with the Kings Governor, who lost his
leg: many were hurt, and some 36 of them slain. Of our men, the Admerall at
his first landing was hurt in the leg with a pike, and was in great danger,
but he was rescued by one of his soldiers who bravely slew the Spaniard that
had hurt him. The Admeralls Lieutenant General was shot into the throat, and
another Captain in the head, and beside these some 20 soldiers were slain
and wounded. The Admerall having won the shore, sent all the boats back again
to the ships to fetch more men, to the number of 24 Ensigns, which were
divided into seven troops, and marched in order of battle 21 in front. Those
in the Castle kept themselves quiet, discharging no one shot after our men were
landed, making signs as if they intended to yield, which the Admerall
understanding, went thither with certain Captains and soldiers, and at his
arrival, without any capitulation at all they yielded on discretion. There
were 138 men in the Castle, many had bin slain and some fled thence; there
were likewise 9 cast pieces in it and 6 of iron, with all sorts of munition.
These 138 men were brought prisoners into the ship which was taken, 3 captains
except, whom the admeral kept nere him to be by them instructed concerning the
affairs of the Country. In this manner, Graciosa, the strongest Castle not
only of Grand Canarie, but of all the other Islands, was easily taken, which
was presently manned with 80 soldiers, who threw down the King of Spaines
ensigns, and displaied that of Prince Maurice.

Two Moors were at the same time brought to the Admerall which were taken in
the mountains, who because they were found sleeping could give no certain
advertisement.

In the night, 24 ensigns went toward Allagona, where they divided themselves
into four troops, the first placed themselves beneath the town, the second
under the neighbor mountains, the third upon the shore, and the fourth made
the rereward: These four troops stood all night imbattailed, and the 27 of
June by day break, they came all together before Allagona: But the townsmen
defended themselves, and shot fiercely from the Castle which stands on the
North side, not without some loss on our part. Thereupon, our men retired
behind the neighbor hills, where they began to entrench themselves, and by
that means secured themselves from the Canon.

Those of Allagona, perceiving our men to be entrenched, brought six small
Falconets upon the hills, which they charged with wooden bullets, and did us
much harm, because they had so well planted their pieces: Ten or twelve of
our men went up the hill, but returned without any exploit, one excepted which
fell into the Spaniards hands, who did cruelly cut him into four quarters.
This inhuman cruelty incensed our men and caused them the same night, to do
the like to a Spaniard.

The Admerall perceiving the enemies great resistance, caused five pieces of
ordnance to be brought from the Castle, which he had woone, therewith to make a
battery and by Canon shot to enforce the Town to yield.

Those of Allagona made a counter battery, attempting by their shot to drive
their enemy thence and to enforce, him to give over his work.

But our men did valiantly persevere, and in a short space planted the battery
notwithstanding that diverse of them were slain by the townsmen, and that
night planted three Canon, and shot five or six vollies into the Town.

The 28 of June at night, the 24 ensigns were embattailed, 15 in front, and by
day break every man went to his appointed place, making preparation to assault
the town the same day: The two other pieces were likewise planted on the
battery, four to batter the North Castle, and the fifth to play upon the
Falconets, and presently began a furious battery on all sides. Four did
continually batter the Castle, so as those of Allagona were much annoyed and
were enforced to place wool sacks and barrells full of stones upon the Castle,
by that means to shadow themselves: But this, in steed of profiting, did most
annoy them, for when the bullets touched the barrells of stones, they scattered
them abroad and slew as many as stood near them: So as by this means the
Castle before noone was wholly ruyned, and the enemies pride abated, whereupon,
the Admerall presently sent four companies up to the hills to drive the enemy
from those Falconets, and to set fire on the City gates: Those of Allagona
forsake the town which is taken by the Admerall Vander Does.
But they within it perceiving the extreme danger, and their enemies furious
assault, abandoned the Town and Castle, and with their wives, children, money,
jewels, and whatsoever they could carry with them, fled into the mountains.

The Admerall perceiving that the enemy fled from thence, caused two ladders
to be forthwith brought from a Church that stood without the town, the first
was too short; yet on the other, himself was the first man that mounted the
walls, and was courageously followed by his soldiers: some ran presently to
the Castle, where they found five brass pieces, and took down the King of
Spaines ensign, displaying that of his Excellency.

The enemy had made a mine in the town gate, which as our men came before the
walls, was blown up of it self, and did hurt to no man: they had likewise
scattered great store of gunpowder here and there, but our men did sier it.
And in this manner Allagona, the chief of all the Canaries, was by Gods favor
forcibly taken on the 28 of June about noone, by four and twenty Dutch
ensigns, after it had been beseeged two days, battered with Spanish
ordnance, and scaled with her own ladders. The Admerall having most of his men
in the town, did again embattaile them in a void place, fifteen in front,
whither the four Companies which he had sent along by the hill side to enter
the town, came unto him, bringing with them a man of Flushing, whom they had
freed from prison. The Admerall, together with him, and other Captains, went
to the prison of Allagona, where they found thirty six prisoners, whom they
presently released.

The Spaniards, had carried one English man and a Dutchman away with them into
the mountains, who had already been committed to the holy house (as they term
it) and were condemned to be burnt. Toward evening, all the soldiers and
mariners of the fleet came to the town and sacked it, certain houses and goods
excepted, which the Admerall had seized on for his own use.

That night all the Captains with their companies were lodged in houses apart,
and kept good guard every where, for the enemy did often show himself upon
the hills.

The 29 of June in the morning certain mariners did rashely ascend the hills,
whom the enemy (which was skillful in the ways and passages) surprised and
for the most part slew.

Toward Evening 300 men marched toward the Castle on the South side of
Allagona, but so soon as the Spanish Garrison saw our men, they presently fled
to the mountains.

In this Castle, our men found three canon, with other munition, and it was
manned with some few of our men. In the night the Spaniards came secretly down
the hill, surprised our centinell and slew him.

The last of June by day break our men begun to ship the wines and other
goods. About noone five Spanish Captains came to our centinells with a little
flagge in sign of peace, and were brought to the Admerall, and after they had
conferd with him, were again sent back to the mountains. The enemy often
times sent in this manner, only to spy what we did, whereupon the Admerall
would no more speak with any that came, but on the second of July proclaimed
by sound of Drum that every centinell should send back all such as came from the
mountains with flags of truce.

The first of July a Sermon of thanksgiving was made in the great Church of
Allagona by a minister of the Reformed Religion, by whom thanks was given to
God for their victory obtained, earnestly beseeching him daily to increase it
for the glory of his holy name and benefit of his Church. The same day, the
Admerall sent four ships to Sea, as well for other respects, as to try their
good fortune, and to lie in wait for certain Spanish chants. The second of
July the Admerall commanded that no man without leave should attempt to go up
into the mountains, because that the soldiers rash and unadvised incursions
had caused diverse of them to fall into the enemies hands. After dinner, one of
our Brigantines took a small Spanish Fisher boat near to the Island
Forteuentura, wherein were 7 men which were presently brought to the Admerall,
who imprisoned them. The same night, the rest of the goods were shipped, and the
third of July by day break our men carried away the Bells, ordnance, and
munition which the enemy had left in the town, aboard their ships, making all
things in a readiness for their speedy departure from the grand Canarie, that
they might put their other enterprises in execution.

The Admerall, notwithstanding the great danger in the mountains whether the
enemy was fled, had determined to assail them and to take away those goods
which they had carried thither: To this end, on the fourth of July in the
morning 2000 men marched up toward the enemy, and gave him a furious charge,
but after some slight encounter, the enemy retired farther up into the hills,
into Caves and obscure places, by rough and unknown ways, and our men
returned without any exploit, and with loss of some 70 men. The same day, the
Admerall did fire the Town of Allagona, with all the Cloisters, Churches, and
houses round about it, rasing all the Castles, and so in good order, himself
and men left the Town and returned to their ships. We were no sooner gone, but
the enemies entered it, and labored to quench the fire, and often times showed
themselves in small troops, whilst our men embarkeed themselves, but durst
never come near our boats.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh of July the fleet remained in the haven and Road
of the graund Canarie, as well in regard of contrary winds and other
impediments, as also to tarry for the four ships, which had been sent to Sea.

The Admerall in the mean time did carefully visit the fleet, and in the
places of those commanders that were dead, he appointed others. He likewise
called all the Captains aboard his ship and conferred with them concerning the
commodities of the other Islands of the Canaries.

Our men burnt one of their own ships which at the fleets first arrival, had
been battered from the Castle Graciosa, the Captain having transported his
men and goods into the bark which they took in the Road. In this mean time
certain Spaniards came at sundry times to the water side with flags of truce,
who in a boat were brought to the Admerall, and afterward sent back again,
after they had redeemed some prisoners.

The eight of July in the morning, the fleet sailed along the Coast of the
Grand Canarie, and at the North point met with the four ships which had been
at Sea: So soon as they descried the fleet, they weighed anchor, and did put to
Sea with the rest. Toward Evening the wind blew hard, so as the fleets course
was stopped, which returned to the South-East point of the Grand Canarie, where
they all came to an anchor in the view of Tenerif. The ninth of July all the
boats went on shore to fetch in fresh water, unseen of the Spaniards. The
tenth, the fleet did again set sail with a North-West wind and were presently
becalmed.

The 11 of July in the morning, the wind again was fair, but coming near to
Tenerif, the weather grew calm and very changeable, so as the fleet was
dispersed, being not able to hold on their course, but were enforced to come to
an anchor twelve times in one day.

The twelueth of July, the wind was more constant, so as the fleet directed it
course toward Gomera. Gomera is the least Island of all the Canaries, and has
a small town on the South-west part thereof, with a strong Castle upon the
shore.

Toward evening the greatest part of the fleet came up together, and among
others, the Rere-Admerall, Ian Geerbrantson with his white flagge, who in the
night with two other ships rode near the town: But those of Gomera began
presently to shoot at them, so as the said Admerall did speedily fall off, and
with as many ships as were near him, came to an anchor, waiting for the rest
of the fleet, which was far off betwixt Tenerifa and Gomera.

The thirteenth of July before noone the whole Fleet came together and sailed
toward Gomera, and doubling a point to the North-west of the Town, they came
to an anchor.

The Admerall presently sent for all the Captains and held a Martial
council, acquainting them with what they were to do.

Thereupon four Ensigns of soldiers were presently landed in the valley, to
assault the backside of the town, and to hinder the enemies flight into the
mountains.

After that, the fleet went forward before the town, on which it forthwith
bestowed some shot and found no resistance at all. Then the Admerall landed 6
Ensigns more, who without any resistance entered the town and Castle: For so
soon as the enemies descried the fleet, they fled away like those of Allagona
with their wives, children, and goods into the mountains, having buried their
bells, ordnance, wines, and other commodities here and there in the fields.

The four above mentioned Ensigns perceiving the enemies flight, sent a troup
of soldiers before to intercept them, and to take those goods which they
carried with them: But the Spaniards having notice thereof, hid themselves in
Caves and dark places, and in a valley encompassed our men.

Our men thus enclosed on every side, made brave resistance and slew many of
the enemy, and in the end after a cruel fight, made way thorough them, and
retired to the town, having lost some 70 or 80 men, among whom were two
Lieutenants, which had behaved themselves very valiantly, one of whom had
received fifty wounds in his body.

After dinner, the Admeral placed strong gards every where, and commanded the
soldiers to search the fields, where the same night they found diverse pipes of
wine. In the night our men took a Spaniard who by the Admerals command was
committed to the Provost Marshal, to cause him the next day to discover such
goods as were hid: but about midnight, by negligence of his keepers, he
escaped, and so fled into the mountains. The 14 of July in the morning our men
shipped all the enemies goods, and after dinner, found three bells more which
were buried in the fields.

The 15 of July in the morning, 10 or 12 of our men running rashly up the hills,
were environed and slain by the enemy. The same day, the Admerall made a
General muster, and those ships which were not double mand and victualled,
began to deliver up the remainder of their munition and soldiers to the other
ships, and in exchange, the sick and hurt men were stowed in them, and
preparation made to send them home into the Low Countries, to carry news of
their victories and purchase, gotten from the enemy even in his own Country.
After dinner, our men found two great pieces of ordnance, the one sixteen foot
and a half long, and the other 14 foot.

The 16 of July after dinner, the enemy showed himself sundry times, scoffing
at the defeat of our men in the valley, and in derision, bad them to come fetch
their muskets which they had left behind them. Thereupon, the Admerall would
have landed certain soldiers and mariners, to assail the enemy the next day
in the cool of the morning: but in the night a great tempest arose so as the
fleet in regard the ships lay near together, had like to have suffered
shipwreck, had not some of them fallen off farther to seaward and there
anchored, so as by this means the former determination was hindered, and
peradventure the mischief prevented which might have befallen our men, if they
had gone up into the mountains to the enemy.

The 17 of July 300 men were sent to the said valley to visit the enemy, who
keeping himself hid, our men returned, bringing with them two small brass
pieces, and two barrells of powder which they found buried in the ground.

The 18 of July they shipped all the enemies goods, and those ships which were
appointed for execution of such enterprises as were to be made in the King of
Spaines remotest dominions, were stored with such proportion of Canarie wines
as befitted the length of their voyage.

The 19 the Admerall fired the towns, cloisters, and houses near adjoining,
abandoned the Island, and shipped his men, whereupon, the Spaniards presently
came forth of their starting holes to the town and quenched the fire, as those
of the Grand Canarie had done.

The 20 the fleet remained in the Road of Gomera, receiving instructions from
the Admerall what course they should hold; he sent for all the Captains,
highly thanked them for their good and faithful service, and earnestly
entreated them to proceed from good to better.

The 21 of July, he sent again for the Captains and Commanders, and
courteously took leave of those which were to return home, making Iean
Gerbrantzon their Admerall, commanding them to follow him, and to obey his
commandments. Then the fleet was separated, and failed with a Northerlie wind.
The Admerall Vander-Does with 36 ships, held on his course South-South-East
toward the kingdoms of the Western Indies, and Iean Gerbrantzon with 35 ships,
and an Easterly wind sailed home-ward.

Iean Gerbrantzon till the 24 of July kept his whole fleet together; but they
were afterward dispersed by continual tempests, and contrary winds, taking
sundry courses under sundry Admerals, every man striving who should first get
home.

Sixteen of these ships under their Admerall Frederick Arentz did on the eight
and twentieth of August, in the height of thirty six degrees and twelve
minutes to the Northward of the line, meet with two small Spanish ships, going
from Capo Blanco, toward Wolvis: In those ships were seven and forty men, and
among those a Spanish merchant, forty seven Muskets, four pieces of ordnance,
and were laden with sundry commodities amounting to the value of 60000 ducats,
and had in them beside four tun of train Oil, and Arabian Gums, and two
thousand one hundred and forty Rialls of silver plate.

These thirty five ships came altogether about the eight, ninth, and tenth of
September into sundery Havens of the Low Countries and were with great joy
welcomed home.

But General Vander-Does with his thirty six ships went toward the Coasts of
Afric and Guiney, along by the Islands of Cape Vert, and so to S. Thomas,
which is an Island under the equinoctial line, where they forcibly landed, but
the inhabitants with their goods fled into the mountains: our men by
entrenching and approaches which they had learned in the Low Countries took
the Castles. The inhabitants did afterward come down from the mountains being
seven thousand in number, and assailed our men, but the General repulsed and
slew many of them. In the end, the Island and Town of Pauoasan with the
Castles were sacked, and the booty carried to the ships. They found an hundred
brazen pieces there, nine thousand chests of brown Saint Thomas sugar, one
thousand four hundred Elephants teeth, much Cloth, Cotton, and other
merchandise, with a very great sum of money.

But having been long at Sea, and the air very unwholesome and pestilentiall
for our men, who could not temper and moderat their diet in that hot Country,
nor abstain from fruits, a disease or burning fever, in those parts termed la
Madorca, which commonly falls on those that come from Europe, seized on them,
some of them had their grease melted in their bodies as if it had been molten
butter, as appeared by diverse that were opened; many died boath on shore and
at Sea of this disease, General Vander-Does dies in the fleet.
and among others, the General Vander-Does, which was a great loss to the
fleet and united Provinces, for he was a valiant Gentleman, and skillful in the
art military both by land and sea. His men buried him in an house in the
Island deep in the ground, and then burnt that house with others, to the end
his body might not be found. There died likewise his Nephew, George
Vander-Does, son to that learned Gentleman Iean Vander-Does Lord of
Nortwijck, with diverse other land and sea Captains to the number of fifteen
and some 1200 Soldiers and Mariners. After their death Captain Cornelius
Leynsen took upon him the Command of the fleet, and having embarked all the
goods together with the Governor D. Francisco de Meneces he failed homeward,
sending seven of his best ships with one Brigantine under the conduct of the
Captains Hartman, Broer, and others to the coast of Bresill, with instructions
what to do.

Himself being likewise sick did in February 1600 bring home his ships, with
the booty and many prisoners: His men were so sick and weak, as certain of
his ships through want of men stayed in France others in England, and one in
Ireland. Among the rest, one ship that was weakly manned and wanted a Pilot,
the air being mistie came to Sluice, where it was taken, there was in it some
money, and some four or five hundred chests of sugar.

The above mentioned seven ships under the conduct of Captain Hartman went to
Bresiill, where they likewise met with good booty doing great hurt to the
enemy, and returned home n anno 1601. There was hope that this fleet would
have done great mattsrs, but they could not meet with the Spanish fleet which
went from Cales to the West Indies: and then, things fell not out according to
their expectation for they were overtaken with sickness by being enforced by
contrary winds to stay long in those hot Countries. Their own profit was not
so much to them as the loss was to their enemies: They have put the King of
Spain to great expense, they have purchased honor, and made Spain jealous of
other such like invasions, and putting it in fear of losing his Indian fleet.

These are the principal matters done by this fleet: wherein if we consider,
the experience of the pilots, discreet conduct of the Captains, and valor of
the soldiers, we cannot but admire: especially if we look upon the great
victories obtained by them whose fame has qualified the Spaniards cruelty
against our seamen, and themselves braued the enemy in his own land, and
before Groyne declared the admirable strength of the united Provinces, and have
sought out the King of Spains future fleet, wherewith he thought not only to
have caused the Low Countries, but all Europe to tremble, having challenged and
dared it to fight, even in so many towns and castles of Spain: and has
beside so easily won the Grand Canarie, the mightiest of all the Islands, the
taking whereof cost the last King of Spain many tun of gold and many brave and
experienced soldiers; which Sir Francis Drake could not effect,
notwithstanding that he in a manner took all the sea towns and castles of the
Western Indies, and terrified the whole Spanish world. Who would ever have
thought that Allagona the chiefest City of all the Canaries would have been so
easily taken, that Gomera would have been won without any resistance, and his
Garrison slain? Is it not a great matter that the whole Island of the Grand
Canarie and Gomera have been ruined, the towns, castles, and houses burnt, the
ordnance an munition and other commodities brought thence, that such great
number of poor and wretched captives have bin freed from the hands the bloody
Spaniards? Let the King of Spain stay our Merchants, let him kill and burn
our Mariners, and suppose that he has weakenedour countries: yet he shall find
that we have braued him in his own Realms, and made his Cnaries so wast and
desert, as of along time he will reap no profit by them: and we on the
contrary increased our countries means, by wealth, gotten from him and
revenged our intolerable wrongs, wherein by Gods assistance we will still
valiantly persist.

The taking of the town of Deuticum in Annno 1599.
BEcause the Admerall of Arragons Army remained for the most part in Brabant,
his Excellency like a wise and valiant Captain, laying hold on occasion, sent
his cousin Count William of Nassau Governor of Frizeland with ten companies of
horse and 24 foot Ensigns, with Commission to take forth of sundry Garrisons,
26 Ensigns more, amounting in all to the number of 50 with ordnance and other
necessaries for a seege, and to do his best to take the town of Deuticum from
the enemy: and thereupon on the 24 of August he came before the town, and on
the 25 began to fortify and entrench himself, on the 26 he planted two pieces
of ordnance, and after that, one, and began to make his battery, whereat they
within it being terrified, so soon as they were summoned to yield, craved a
parley, which was forthwith granted, and by their capitulation, they were to
depart thence on the 27 of August with four Ensigns, commanded by Don Inigo
de Otaela, who was Governor likewise of the Castle of Schuylenbourg, which he
yielded up to his Excellency, fearing if he should delay the matter till the
Almanes were arrived, who were hourly looked for, that then he could not make
his peace at so cheap^ a rate, nor procure so sure a Conuoy. These two places
thus woone, the united Provinces were masters of all the Country as far as
Rhine, and his Excellency manned Deuticum with a Garrison. There was 52
barrells of powder, and other warlike munition found in the town: This being
done, Count William and his soldiers did on the 29 of August return to his
Excellencies camp near to the Isle of Voorn.

The taking of the Town and Castle of Wachtendonck in An. 1600.
Whilst the Archdukes were received over all Brabant and Flanders as Princes
and Lords of those Countries, his Excellency made an attempt upon the town of
Wachtendonck: Which is a strong place, seated beyond Guelderland upon the River
Niers, which some twelve years since had been taken from the united Provinces
by Count Charles of Mansfelt, after two months seege. His Excellency one the
22 of January lying in the Monastery of Bebber near to Cleue, assembled 8
cornets of horse, and 800 foot, under conduct of Count Lodwick and Colonel
Edmunds, who with certain wagons, did before noone begin to march, and went
the same night to Niekercke near to Watchtendonck; after some repose they went
toward the town, where some over the ye, and others by the dikes gat up upon
the Towns Rampires: there were not above 80 soldiers both in the town and
Castle, for the horse Garrison was gone a boothaling toward Cologn, where they
sacked the Castle of Wander-stuyt, where they were beaten by certain soldiers
of the Gariso^s of Bonne and Bruiler. His Excellencies soldiers being gotten
into the town, the alarm was presently given, but they found no great
resistance, but with ease became masters thereof. That done, they placed
certain musketeers upon the rampires, causing them to shoot continually upon
the Castle, and on such as made defense, whereby the Governor the Lord of
Geleyn was hurt in the throat, and some other slain. The Governor had but 30
soldiers with him, and presently sent to the Earl of Bergue that lay at
Ruremond, for aid, who forthwith sent thither all the Garrisons near
adjoining; but they came too late, for Count Lodwick of Nassau was by this time
arrived with his troops of horse. In the mean time certain of them alighted
from their horse, and together with the Lieutenant of his Excellencies company
had passed the dikes and gotten upon the Castles Rampires, where at last they
became masters of it, promising to some their lives within it. A maid that
served the Governor, and was of a manly courage, did with an iron forke
ouerturne a ladder whereon five men were ascending. In this manner the town
and Castle were taken on the 23 of January. This town being seated in the
very midst of the Country where the Spaniard has great Command, and in a
moorish soil was very commodious and fit for overthrowing the Admerall of
Arragons practices there. Not far from thence, lay certain foot Companies of
Spaniards which were in great danger to have been discovered and beaten, for
they could not be received into Guelder nor other towns in regard of their
mutinus disorders. This enterprise being fortuna^ly achieved by Count Lodwick
and the Scottish Colonel Edmonds, did greatly enrich them, for all the boores
of the Country had brought their cheifest wealth thither. After that they had
given order for the safety of the town and Castle, they departed thence on
the 24 of January with the Cauallery, leaving the Lord of Ryhouen Governor of
the Town, with all the Infantrie, and because the town was unprovided of
munition, Colonel Edmonds went back thither on the 5 of February with a
conuoy of all necessary provisions. The 14 of February his Excellency sent
thither again, under conduct of Count Lodwick, assembling seventeen cornets
of horse, and two thousand foot, either to send a greater Conuoy to
Wachtendonck, or else under that color, to make an attempt upon some other
town. But in their march, intelligence was given that Colonel la Bourlotte
was upon a march in Brabant with his own regiment and that of Achicourt, about
a certain exploit. The Lord of Sidenisky being at Bommel, countermanded Count
Lodwick and his forces back to the Isle of Tiell, there to stop and prevent
Bourlottes attempts. Bourlotte thought to have made use of some of the
mutineers of Hamont, but they having some bad suspicion of him would not march
notwithstanding all his fair promises; he thought likewise to have taken away
with him part of the Garrison of Saint Andrews fort, and thereupon on the
fifteenth of February, he took muster of them: But those of that Garrison
having received no pay of a long time began to mutin the very same day, and
though, at first, they were pacified by fair words, yet the same night, they
fell into a greater mutiny, discharging the ordnance, and took their Captains
prisoners, ransacking the Governors lodging and other houses. The sixteenth
they sent their officers whom they had imprisoned together with diverse women
and children to Sertoghenbusk. Those of Creuecoeur having notice hereof, and
perceiving that there was no pay for them neither, did on the seventeenth day
follow their example, and began to mutin. La Bourlotte by this means
perceiving his enterprise to be frustrate, returned toward the Mase. In the
mean time a rumor was spread abroad in Holland of Bourlottes enterprise, so as
his Excellency went in person to Gorcum, and sent for forces thither, fearing
some invasion, because the River there was so frozen, as from Dort four field
pieces mounted on their carriages were drawn over the River to Papendrecht:
and understanding that Bourlotte was gone back, he went no farther, but
thereupon, commanded Count Lodwicks Conuoy to pass on toward Wachtendonck,
which was done on the twentieth of February, with seventeen cornets of horse,
and eight foot Companies (which lay in Garrison at Wachtendonck) with one
hundred wagons laden with all manner of munition and other necessaries: and
ariuing the same night at Bebber, they marched (...) the 25 of February to
Niekerck, and the 26 of the same, they (...) all the wagons into the town, and
after dinner, thems^^^^ (...) turned back and came to Marienboom; and so every
man ^^^^ned to his Garrison having well and sufficiently victualled (...) town,
which was a very fit place, from whence to make incursions into the Country
round about Coloign, and Aix, betwixt the Rhin and Mase, and into other parts.

The fort of Saint Andrew is yielded up to the States in Anno 1600.
AFter that his Excellency and my Lords the States had received intelligence,
that the Archdukes soldiers in sundry places mutinied through want of pay,
and among others also, those of Saint Andrews fort, unto each of whom at a
muster on the 15 of February the Archduke, somewhat to satisfy them, gave a
Doller, cloth worth a months pay, and two pound of bread a day, which did in
no sort content them, who demanded their whole pay for 30 months, and
proceeded so far in their mutiny, as they threw one of their Captains from
the bridge into the water, shot one of their Sergeants and enforced the other
Captains to keep their houses as prisoners: yet afterward they sent them to
Sertoghenbusk, to see if they could procure them any content from thence. Those
of the Garrison were Walons, and Almans, who fell at variance among themselves
which of the two nations should choose an Electo or Protector to govern and
defend them in all difficulties which might arise, and ended their strife by
casting lots, which fell on the Walons, who elected on of their countrymen.
Those of Creuecoeur on the 17 of February did the like.

Hereupon, the States of the united provinces and his Excellency resolved not
to lose this occasion, but commanded 80 foot companies to be in a readiness
before Dort on the 19 and 20 of March, with whom he went up the Mase toward
Creuecoeur fort. The report was that his Excellency would go into Flanders,
but he went that night to Hemert, and on the 21 of March to Creuecoeur. And
though it were a very cold season, yet he beseeged the said fort, making
trenches, and preparation to plant his ordnance.

Those of Saint Andrews fort suspecting some attempt would be made on
Creuecoeur, did the very same day send two Companies thither, consisting of one
hundred and thirty men. But those of Creuecoeur thought it neither profitable
nor possible to keep the place, and fearing to be contemned and casseered in
regard of their mutiny, and dispairing ever to receive their pay, they yielded
on composition upon the 24 of March, viz that those which came from Saint
Andrews Fort, might again return thither and an hundred men of the other two
Ensigns that were in Creuecoeur, entered into the Sates pay: They were
soldiers under the Regiment of Count Christopher of Emden.

Supplies sent to Creuecoeur are defeated.
The same day, being the 24 of March, 500 Burguignons of Varrabons Regiment went
forth of Helmont and Eindhouen toward Sertoghenbusk meaning to enter into
Creuecoeur: but understanding that the fort was yielded up, and that his
Excellencies Cauallerie lay in the Country round about, they craved entrance
into Sertoghenbusk; but the Burghers jealous of their own liberty would not
permit it, whereupon, they were beaten by the horsemen of Berghen, their
Sergeant major and two other Captains taken prisoners, with other officers and
many soldiers, and 290 of them were slain: the rest of the prisoners were
ransomed and set at liberty upon their Captains words, who promised to
answer for them. And within five days after, two Cornets of horse, one of
which was Grobbendoncks Cornet, were defeated as they carried a Conuoy toward
Antwerp, by the Garrison of Berghen.

The Admeral of Arragon had enlarged the fort of Creuecoeur with three great
Bulwarks, and his Excellency remained there on the 25 of March to hasten the
fortifications, and to provide against the enemies assaults and incursions.

The six and twentieth of March his Excellency went to Dalem to the same place
where the Admerall and his Camp had lodged, there to fortify himself, and
thereby to entrench Saint Andrews great fort, where the Garrison through want of
pay were still in a mutiny. Before his ariuall there, he caused the fluces at
a place called great Lit to be opened, thereby to drown the Champaine Country
of Brabant, toward Osse, Geffen, Merland, and as far as Sertoghenbusk: So
soon as he had brought his Camp to Alem, he sent Colonel Gystells with
twelve foot Companies to Littoyen, and opened the sluice there, the better to
ouerflow the Country: He planted 12 piece of ordnance at Maren upon the
frontiers of Brabant opposite to Saint Andrews fort, with which he daiely
battered it.

He repaired the fort at Keffell made by the Spaniards which was wholly
ruinate. He likewise fortified the Church of Maren round about, the higher
Country of Alem, a place called Saint Annes-berg, and the Church of Empel, to
the end that the enemy (the Country being wholly drowned) should have no
means to relieve Saint Andrews fort, unless along the causey, or from
Sertoghenbusk by the way of Empell, or from Grave, by Littoyen, Lit, Keffell,
and Maren, where on all sides he should be constrained to enforce the trenches
and fortifications. By this means Saint Andrews fort was altogether shut up
and environed with water, which with great labor and travail they were
enforced to keep out with their counterscarpes; it was so high at the
beginning of April, as none could go in nor out of the fort but by boat.

The besiegers lay in their forts upon the causey and in boats. The waters
being high, they could not at first entrench themselves, but at last they began
to fall. The fort was battered on every side especially from Maren, and that
so fiercely, as they were enforced to uncover their houses, and many were
beaten down: our men likewise went about to take the mill from them, thereby
to reduce them to all want and extremity.

The beseeged did bravely defend themselves, shot much, yet did no great harm
to us, who were too far off and well fortified; the bullets which they shot
weighed forty, and 45 pound weight.

His Excellency sommoned them many times, but they would not harken to it,
notwithstanding they saw the whole Country from whence they might hope for any
relief, to be ouerflowed like a sea: and yet they wanted many necessaries, as
money, the sinews of war, clothes and other things, but espetially wood to
brew and bake with: they likewise wanted medicines and drugs for sick and hurt
men: they had corn enough but wanted beer, having no means to brew. They
were more than 2000 mutinous soldiers, and had no Commanders and Captains, but
their Electo and necessary officers.

Those of Sertoghenbusk were very careful for them, and did their best to
relieve them, Those of Sertoghenbusk seek to relieve Saint Andrews fort.
making signs by fire and ordnance shot, sending them messengers who promised
them much, yet the effect proved nothing.

On the twelueth of April at night they attempted to send certain flat
bottomed boats over the drowned Country, which came behind Maren, where they
were discovered, and driven thence: in the boats were certain commanders,
with some provisions and money.

The Archdukes forces begun likewise to be assembled near to Die, from
whence they came to a place called Os, under the conduct of Don Lewis de
Valasco, hoping to relieve the fort: but finding the above named Villages upon
the Causey to be strongly fortified, the whole Country drowned, and no means
to pass, they returned back again.

His Excellency, the better to put the beseeged in despair, caused the Castle
of Batenbourg seated betwixt Lit and the town of Grave, in the Country of
Ma^e-en-Waell, to be taken, because from thence, relief might be brought to
the fort: there were in it five and twenty men, who by his Canon he enforced
to yield.

Toward the end of April, as the waters of the Mase and Waell began to fall,
his Excellency brought his ordnance on every side, ^eere to the fort, and in a
short space made his approaches even to the dikes of the counterscarpe, by
reason that the water was wholly fallen. There was likewise a bridge made from
Alem to the causey of Rossem 360 paces in length, in a word his Excellency at
last came so near their counterscarpes, as it was impossible they should be
releuied, whereupon the beseeged were enforced to cry out to the pioners,
telling them that they desired to capitulate: diverse Wallons were persuaded by
their Priests to hold out to the last man, assuring them to win Heaven thereby:
but many Almans being among them who on that promise were unwilling to hazard
their lives, they sent two men from the fort to the Camp; and his Excellency
likewise for his part sent two, viz. the Lord Vander Aa, Captain of his guard,
and the Lord John of Huchtenbroeck Colonel of the regiment of Vtrecht: These
men made a conclusion, that the beseeged, in lieu of the arerages of their
whole pay due unto them for many months, should receive the sum of 125000
florins.

The states of the united Provinces thought it more profitable for themselves
to give the said sum than to continue their army any longer before the fort,
Saint Andrews fort capitulateth and agrees with Prince Maurice on the sixth of
May.
or to hazard their m^n in the assaults.

After long consultation, notwithstanding that the beseeged pretended more
arerages than the sum of 125000 florins amounted to; yet they were content to
deliver up the fort, on condition that the said sum might be distributed among
them.

Hereupon, they condescended to keep the fort for my Lords the States, until
the said sum were paid, and swore to his Excellencies Commissioners in form
following.

We swear, that so long as we shall remain in Saint Andrews fort, we will
keep it for the use of my Lords the States of the united Provinces, and for
his Excellency till we have received the money which he has promised us, and
will obey our Captains and Officers which shall be appointed over us,
renouncing the oath which we have made to the King of Spain or Archduke.

And these ensuing articles were granted to them.

First, that all sick and hurt men, shall be carried to the next villages to be
healed, and shall have their share of the said sum.

2 Some gratuitie and recompense shall be given out of the said sum to their
widows that are dead, according to the discretion of the officers.

3 All soldiers who in former time have served the States and quitted their
party, shall be pardoned and paid their part out of the said sum.

4 All such as having received their part, are desirous to return home into
their Countries, shall have their passeports: But those that will again serve
the Archduke, shall receive no one penny of the said sum.

5 All such as will serve the Lords States of the united Provinces shall be as
kindly dealt with as any others.

6 As many as came from Creuecoeur, shall likewise receive their share out of
the said sum.

7 Whatsoever they have done or committed in former time shall not be imputed
to them.

The Confirmation of this article was presently seen before their departure:
for the 19 of May a French soldier being denied entrance into the fort, began
to revile the Garrison, calling them traitors and sellers of the fort, who was
forth with apprehended, condemned to die, and sent by his Excellency into the
fort to be shot to death; but the Garrison pardoned him.

8 The soldiers by his Excellencies consent shall choose eight Wallon Captains
out of the regiments of Achicourt, and the Marquis, together with three Almans.

9 All Commissaries both for war and victuals, all Prouosts, Brewers, Bakers,
Millers, and others that are desirous to depart shall have safe conduct,
passeport, and conuoy.

10 The Priest with the ornaments of the Church and other baggage, shall
likewise depart with passeport and conuoy.

11 All Sergeants and Corporalls that will serve his Excellency shall have
like usage as the former.

12 Such soldiers as will come forth of the fort and serve the States, shall
take the oath of Allegiance like unto other soldiers that serve them, and,
having passed a muster, shall receive a months pay before hand.

All these conditions were concluded on the sixth of May, and performed on the
eighth, and ninth of the same, four great Canon, as many demi, three
Culuerins, and other pieces of ordnance to the number of eighteen, eight
barrells of powder, forty thousand iron bullets, sixty or seventy load of
wheat, with other arms and provision were found in the fort.

These mutineers made up a strong Regiment of eleven Ensigns, and were every
where named the new Gueux: they were all in a manner old soldiers and chose
their own Captains, The greatest part of the garrison of saint Andrews fort
serve Prince Maurice.
they were all ragged and poorly clad, but so soon as they were distributed
into good towns, they all new clothed themselves, and the most of them in
suits of buffe. Count Henry Frederick of Nassau his Excellencies youngest
brother was made their Colonel, and the Lord of Marquett, his Lieutenant; with
express commandment not to revile or tax them, The excuse of the Garrison of
Saint Andrews fort.
for they excused their revolt, saying that the Archduke had not used them like
soldiers, but left them in a new fort in face of the enemy, wanting all
necessaries, as money, garments etc. so that necessities had enforced them to
revolt: besides, they had done their duty in holding out six weeks expecting
aid and other necessaries, and yielded not so long as there was any hope of
relief; and in recompense of their good and loyal service, were to look for
nothing but loss of their pay and arrerages, wanting money and means to cloth
themselves: and because the loss of the place should not be imputed to their
mutiny, An unfit comparrison betwixt those of S. Andrews fort and the
garrison of Gertrudenberg.
nor themselves reproached for it; they therefore resolved to serve the States
of the united Provinces.

Neither had they done (as they said) like to those of Geertrudenberg, who sold
the town to their enemy for ten months pretended arrerages, and five
months present pay, being in no want of money nor apparel, for they caused
boats upon the River and the Champaine Country to pay contribution, being
neither besieged nor pressed by the enemy; nay their Lords unto whom they were
sworn, would have maintained and defended their honor and loyalty, given
them pardon and pasport, yea whatsoever in equity they would have demanded:
yet all this was to no purpose with them, but provoked by their enemies, they
did in hatred, envy, and covetousness sell the town to them, whereupon they
were in derision termed merchants, and banished both by name and surname,
rewards being proposed to such as could take them, and were every where
punished by the gallows, to serve for an example to others.

In this manner, Saint Andrews great fort which had cost so much money, and
before with so great an army had layen a long time encamped, fell into the
hands of his Excellency, and under command of the States of the united
Provinces: a fort which had put the enemy in great hope to have bin able from
thence in winter time and upon the ice, to conquer Holland. The cause why it
was so easily taken, proceeded from the Spaniards too much profuse and large
expense of money, who undertook more than their treasure could perform, and
in making a bad account, did in that Province build a mighty fort to command
and bridle their own country: so as the Archdukes retained nothing of all
their two years conquest, but only Berck, and the united Provinces on the
contrary had taken Emmerick, which was more profitable to them, than Berck to
the Archduke; yet these two towns belonged to neither of them: his Excellency
and my Lords the States did within a while after restore Emmerick to the Duke
of Cleues.

A Description of whatsoever was done from day to day in Flanders in the army
of the most Illustriuos Prince Maurice of Nassau, Accompanied by the noble,
high, and mighty Lords, my Lords the States of the united Netherland Provinces
in An. 1600. the 17 of July.
The cause why the army went into Flanders.
THe enemy of the united Netherland Provinces with sundry forts having blockt
up the Town of Ostend, being master of all the sea coasts of Flanders, and
thereby for the space of certain years done incredible hurt to the loyal
inhabitants of the said Prouinnes, and other neighbor Realms trading by sea my
Lords the general States, after the yielding up of this great and mighty fort
of Saint Andrews near to Rossem in the Isle of Bommell, being desirous to
pursue the victory which God had so favorably given them there and elsewhere;
in the beginning of this year, after mature consultation thereupon, with the
Illustrious Lord Prince Maurice of Orange, Count of Nassau, Catzenelboge,
Marquis of Vere, and Flushing etc. thought it fit by common consent to
transport their whole Army and power into Flanders, there to try their good
fortune upon the enemeie, and if it were possible, to execute their determined
proiects for freeing the sea Coasts; with this resolution, that the said Lords,
for the better advancement of their affairs, would in person assist his
Eccellencie in this Army and new expedition.

The 17 of June, after that 2000 great and small vessels were rigd forth of
diverse places and Havens of Holland and Zeeland to transport the Army, with
victuals, warlike munition, wagons, Horse for draught and all other
necessaries: His Excellency went from the Hague to Rotterdam, and so to Dort,
from whence he caused all the fleet to sail to Rammekins in Zeeland, which was
the Rendezvous.

The 18 of June, my Lords the General States, viz. The Lord James of Egmont,
Lord of Kennebourg, Schipluy, and Maeslant, John Oldenbarneuelt Lord of Tempel
and Groynenelt, Advocate and keeper of the seal of Holland and West-Frizeland,
Jacob Huygens Vander Dussen, Bourgomaster of the town of Delft, Master
Nicasius Sille Doctor of the Laws, Councellor and Pentioner to the town of
Amsterdam, M. Geraert Coren, Bourgomaster of the Town of Alkmaer, M. Jacob
Boellenssz, Burgomaster of Amsterdam and Counselor of State, M. Iean de Santen
Counselor and Pentioner of the town of Middelbourg, M. Ferdinand Alleman
Counselor of State, M. Nicolas Hubert Burgomaster of the town of Ziriczee, M.
Gerart de Renesse Lord of Vander Aa, M. Abell Franckena Doctor of the Laws, M.
Egbert Alberda Burgomaster of the town of Gronningue, M. Cornellis Aerssen
Register to my Lords the General States of the united Netherland Provinces.
All these with their train, departed from the Hague about five of the clock in
the morning and came to Rotterdam, where they embarked themselves, and sailed
the same day to Saint Annes-Lant, where they came to an anchor, tarrying for
the tide.

The 19 day because the wind was contrary, they could that night but reach to
Armuyde, and because the tide was spent they were therefore enforced to cast
anchor there likewise.

The twentieth about five of the clock in the morning the said Lords landed at
Armuyde, and from thence went to Flissingue to visit his Excellency, who lay
at anchor before Rammekins, where so great an army and such numbers of boats
lay, as no man living ever saw the like together at one time.

The same day a consultation was had before Rammekin how to transport the army
safely into Flanders for execution of the determined project: and all things
being well and maturely considered, after that sundry matters were propounded,
in regard the wind was contrary, and for other difficulties which might arise
at sea, they at last resolved, (because they would not long be idle nor put
the country to unnecessary expense, nor yet give the enemy time to fortify
himself in those quarters) to land the whole army at Philippine; and from
thence to march thorough the Country betwixt Gaunt and Bruges, toward Ostend.

According to which resolution, his Excellency on the 21 day, departed with
the army toward Philippine a fort which the enemy yielded upon the first
summons to Count Ernestus of Nassau, who commanded the fleets vantgard.

The two and twentieth of June about noone his Excellency arrived with his
Army at Philippine, the vantgard having already taken the fort, from whence
the garrison to the number of thirty or forty were departed without other
arms than their swords.

The same day, his Excellency in five hours space landed all his forces;
which done* he dismissed the boats, willing them presently to be gone, for fear
least after the armies departure, the enemy by fire or otherwise should
endanger the vessels: Then he mustered his Army, and found it to consist of
twenty thousand strong and able men: His Excellency likewise rode throw the
Army, and demanded of the soldiers, if any among them could complain for
wa^^ of pay, and if any one had not received money, he willed him to speak,
because my Lords the States were there present to give them all contentment:
They all answered that they were well satisfied, saying that they would live
and dye for them and in their service.

The same day, the States departed from Flushing toward Philippine, and
arrived there at the same time as the army was landed: Then they began to
dispose the Regiments, and to place them every one under his commander; and
the soldiers were furnished with six days victuals, which they were to carry
along with them.

The three and twentieth day the Army marched from Philippine toward
Assenede, a village not far from the t'Sasse of Gant, where the vantgard before
the arrival of the whole Army did by composition take a certain Castle,
wherein were some forty men. Those of t'Sasse, having laid an ambuscado took
thirty or forty of our men prisoners; our soldiers likewise toward the
evening, brought Priests, Bailies, and other prisoners to the army, most of
whom they had taken from before Gant.

The four and twentieth in the morning the army departed from Assenede
toward Eeckeloo, situate on the passage betwixt Gant and Bruges, where seven
hundred soldiers had gone over the same morning that we arrived there at
night: those soldiers were drawn forth of the forts before Ostend to man the
t'Sasse, because the enemy feared we would have besieged the same place.

The 25 we went from Eeckeloo to Male near Bruges, where our men brought away
much cattle and many prisoners from before the town.

The 26 we came within Canon shot of the City of Bruges, and marched toward
Iabbeke: Those of Bruges with their ordnance played upon our Army all that
day, yet did no great harm but only slew one of his Excellencies Muleters.
They showed themselves likewise with certain troops of horse, but durst not
come forward, so as if our men had bin willing to have fought with them, they
could not have done it with any advantage.

On the way betwixt Bruges and Iabbeke his Excellency had intelligence that
the Garrison was fled from Oudenbourg, so as on the 27 day, the army marched
from Iabbeke thither, whither he sent two Companies of soldiers, because the
fort stood upon the passage toward Ostend. Those which live in the forts of
Plassendale and Bredene were likewise fled, those of Bredene left 4 piece of
ordnance behind them, and burnt the houses, cabbins, munition and other
necessaries, having not once seen the enemy.

My Lords the General States with their train, accompanied by Count Solmes
with 8 Cornets of horse, and the Regiments of French, Walons, and Swisses,
together with the Colonells Gistels and Huchtenbroeck, who that day marched in
the vantgard, went on and arrived the same afternoon at Ostend, and his
Excellency in the mean time remained with his army at Oudenbourg.

In all our march we found the villages naked and forsaken, diverse goodly
houses ruyned, and not one boore to be seen, but only the Sexten of Eeckeloo
and his wife, with two aged and sick persons unapt for flight.

The Boores that were hidden in the woods, showed themselves very cruel to
some of our soldiers that were scattered here and there upon the ways and
were fallen into their hands: so as our men displayed the bloody Ensign,
which did in no fort hinder their cruelty to us ward.

Our soldiers took great store of cattle, so as flesh was better cheap and
more plentiful in the army than either wine or beer. The first night we lay
at Assenede, a pot of beer was worth six pence, the second night at Eeckeloo
twelve pence, and the next night at Male and Iabbeke, eighteen, twenty, and
twenty six. In this journey three Cowes were offered for one pot of beer, and
yet it could not be gotten. At Male a Cow was sold for three groats, and after
she was milked, he that sold it would have given seven pence for the milk.

Whilst we made this journey by land, it hapened on the 24 of June that some
forty boats laden with victuals and other provision, conuoyed only by
Captain Adrian Banckerts man of war, sailing from Flushing toward Ostend were
set upon by the Galleys of Sluice, who on the five and twentieth day, took
above twenty of the said boats, which being vnladed, they burnt. The said
Captain did what he could to free them from the enemy, but himself and one
and twenty of his men were slain in the fight, and his ship though much
bruised arrived at Ostend with some of the hurt men.

The six and twentieth day the Admeral the Lord of Warmont arrived safely in the
Haven of Ostend with the chief fleet, wherein, were victuals, ordnance,
munition and other necessaries: yet by taking of the above mentioned boats, the
Country received a great loss, which fell for the most part upon some
particular persons, who procured it to themselves by being so hasty and not
tarrying for the chief fleet, the which consisted of many brave ships of war.

To return to that which was done on land, Count Solmes on the eight and
twentieth of June with eight Cornets of horse and five foot Regiments, with
which troops the day before, he had led the vantgard, went to beseege the fort
called Albertus, which stands upon the Downs, some hours journey from Ostend,
on the passage toward Niewport, it was not very great, but well built, and
strong.

The nine and twentieth day, having battered it with four demi Canon and made
a passable breach, Captain Neron that lay there in Garrison, did beat his Drum
and craved parley, in which it was granted, that the Garrison should depart
thence with their arms and as much baggage as they could carry away with
them, but on condition to leave their Ensign behind them, promising not to
serve in Flanders for six months.

Count Solmes is before Niewport.
The last of June the said Earl with the vantgard according to his Excellencies
direction, went to beseege the Haven of Niewport, and took the forts there:
his Excellency early in the morning the same day, marched with his Camp from
Oudenbourg toward Nieuwen-dam, a fort not far from Niewport, to take it. But
his journey being stopped by reason of water he returned by an other way over the
Downs toward Albertus fort, and the next night tarried there with his Army.

The first of July early in the morning his Excellency marched thence with his
Camp toward Niewport, and presently gave directions, as well as the situation
of the place would give him leave, for enclosing and beseeging the town.

After dinner, my Lords the General states received news how that Archduke
Albert had levied ten thousand foot and one thousand five hundred horse, and
was come to Oudenbourg: Hereupon, four of our Companies that lay in the forts
of Bredene and Plessendale, withdrew themselves not tarying his coming, and
the Garrison that was in Oudenbourg, which consisted of six foot Companies, and
two Cornets of horse (left there by his Excellency) were enforced to yield it
up on composition. The like did two Companies that lay in a fort at Snaeskerck:
unto which Garrison though the enemy had promised good quarter, and that they
should depart with their arms and baggage, only leaving their Ensigns
behind, and the capitulation signed by the Archdukes self; yet they brake
their promise, for first, diverse horse and foot of the Garrison of Oudenbourg
breaking their rancks, slew many of them, hurt others, and disarmed the rest;
and for a testimony of their treacherous and bloody nature, did most
villanously murder the two Companies that lay in Snaeskercke, contrary to
their word and promise.

Some few soldiers that escaped, having brought these news to Ostend, my
Lords the States did in post advertise his Excellency thereof, that he might
be in readiness, and presently sent more men to Albertus fort, which they
furnished with victuals, munition, and other necessaries.

The second of July, the bloody battle near to Niewport was fought, whereof
we will speak in the next description.

The third of July, about nine of the clock in the morning his Excellency came
in person to Ostend, bringing Don Francisco de Mendoza Admeral of Arragon with
him as his prisoner. And after that my Lords the states had congratulated his
Excellencies victory, he requested that general thanks might be given to
God; which done, himself with the Admerall, dined with the states, the army
remaining on the Downs beyond Albertus fort.

The same day, and the day before, diverse prisoners men of note, brought from
the Army to Ostend, were slain both within and without the Town, by the
remainder of the Scots and other soldiers, in revenge of the wrong and
cruelty committed by the Enemy upon our men, contrary to their promise and
Law of arms. The fourth, and fifth day, whilst the army refresht it self his
Excellency remained in Ostend in consultation with my Lords the states: The
same day we were busied in burying our dead, looking to the hurt and sick
soldiers, sending them to places where they might be healed, and in delivering
prisoners. Many horse, arms, and much booty taken in the battle, were sold:
many Spanish cloakes, cassocks, with store of apparel were likewise taken,
which were not unwelcome to our men.

The sixth day in the morning, his Excellency returned with his army to
N^ewport, and lay before the town in the same quarter where he had formerly
rested, not being able that day, nor the night following to do any notable
exploit, by reason of the continual rain and foul weather. After dinner,
order was taken for sending the prisoners into Holland, and likewise the
Admerall, who by some of the States was conducted aboard the man of w^rs
Brigantine.

His Excellency on the seventh day received letters from Count Frederick of
Berguen, wherein he craved liberty to send some to search among the dead
bodies for some Captains and chief Commanders, and for burial of the dead in
the place of burial. Toward Evening the Admerall Iustine of Nassau came to
the States with letters of credence from his Excellency, containing certain
propositions wherein he craved their resolution: but the said Lords thinking it
necessary to confer with his Excellency, sent for a conuoy. About the seventh
day we took from the enemy a certain half moon standing before the town
on the North side of the haven, which was taken with loss of six or eight men
on either side.

The eight day in the morning a Conuoy of four Cornets of horse arrived, and
the said Lords, departed from Ostend to the Camp before Niewport, where they
consulted with his Excellency concerning those propositions which the Admerall
of Nassau had made unto them the day before.

In the evening, 25 soldiers with Lopestaues and half pikes, were sent to
leap the dikes, carrying with them two Wagons, each of them laden with one
boat, and other provision, to set on fire on some bridg^s on the Southeast side
of the town, which in part was effected, but not wholly.

The enemy the same day made great fires upon the towns steeple, and
discharged many shot from a Rauelin on the Northside of the town, to hinder
the approach of our men: we afterward understood by prisoners and others,
that supplies were the same night brought into the town and in that regard,
those fires were made. The ninth day after that the States had dined with his
Excellency, they returned again to Ost^nd, crossing the haven on foot over a
bridge, leaving their wagons and conuoy behind to follow them: the enemy made
many shot at them, but did no harm to any man.

Whilst the wagons passed over, the said Lords walked on foot for a while upon
the Downs, where they saw such numbers of dead bodies, as was l^mentable to
behold.

His Excellency having intelligence the same Evening, that Colonel La
Bourlotte was onward on his way with two thousand soldiers to try if he could
enter into Niewport, did presently double all the gards, and ga^e directions to
hinder the enemies attempt if it were possible.

The 10, and 11, days no notable matter was done, but only our approaches
were set forward, as well as the bad and raynie weather would permit.

The 11 day at night the foot Regiment of the Marquis Varrabon entered the town,
and the next day they made three fires upon the tower.

The twelueth the enemy made a salley upon our trenches and with such fury, as
our soldiers, were enforced to retire to the principal gards: and then the
alarm being given, our men began to skirmish, and did in such sort assarle the
enemy as they dra^e him in disorder to the town gates, and slew the
Lie^tenant Colonel, two Captains, and certain soldiers of the same Regiment.

The Marquis his Regiment having entered the Town, and others likely every
day to enter, in regard we could not enclose the town on one side, by reason
of the broken lands and other inconveniences, his Excellency found many
difficulties in continuing the seege; and therefore on the 13 of the said
month, he went early in the morning to Ostend, to propound these difficulties
to the States, and to crave their advise.

After some conference, it was thought fit, (seeing that General Wijngaerdens
Regiment was newly arrived, with five new Cornets of horse (wherewith our Camp
was strengthened) to continue the siege, and thereupon, after that his
Excellency and my Lord his brother had dined, they returned to the Camp.
During his Excellency abode in Ostend, the enemy had made another sallie on
Count Ernestus of Nassau his Quarter, (but not so fierce an one as that of the
day before) and was presently repulsed with loss of Commanders and soldiers.

The 14 and 15 we were busied in making three small forts, there where our
battery was to be made, thereby to assure the Canon, and in the mean time,
the ordnance that was landed, was again sent to the ships.

My Lords the States perceiving their presence at Ostend and in those parts to
be to no great purpose made all things ready for their departure the next day,
and to this end, the Advocate Barnenelt went to his Excellencies Camp after
dinner, to confer with him once more, returning the same night to Ostend.

The sixteenth of July in the morning the Admerall of Nassau came to Ostend
from his Excellency, propounding new difficulties to the States for
continuance of the seege, whereon having consulted, they wrote back to his
Excellency that they wholly referd it to his own discretion, to proceed
therein as he should find it most profitable for the Countries service, and if
he did break up his Camp, to give careful directions for the timely
imbarking of the munition, ordnance, and other necessaries, for preventing of
greater mischief: with this answer, they dismissed the Admerall.

About five of the clock in the Evening my Lords the States being embarked in
the haven of Ostend, and word brought them that his Excellency was come
thither in person accompanied by my Lord his brother; Barneuelt, the Lord of
Santen, and others were set on shore and had some conference with his
Excellency, which done, they took their leaves and returned to the ships.

His Excellency had showed them sundry reasons, why he thought it not fit to
continue the Army any longer before Niewport, and therefore resolved to depart
thence, and to lead it before the forts about Ostend, and first, to assault
Isabelles fort, and then the rest. The States having taken their leave, set
fail about six or seven of the clock the same evening, and arrived, on the 17
day in the Morning, at Middelbourg, where they resolved to go to
Berghen-op-Zoom, and there gave audience to the commissioners of the general
States of the Provinces on the other side, assembled at Bruxels, viz. the lord
Gerart of Horn, Earl of Bassingeri, Philip of Pentinck, lord of Vicht, the
Drossart or Magistrate of the land of Montfort, and Master Henry de Co^t
pentioner of the city of Ypre, and to this end sent them passeport, writing
unto them to meet at Berghen-op-Zoom on Thursday the 20 of Iulie: these letters
were sent in post to governor Bacx, that he might send them away by a Trumpet,
with commandment to make ready the Court against their coming, and to
prepare lodging for both parties.

The eighteenth and nineteenth of Iulie, the States tarried at Middelbourg,
taking order for whatsoever was necessary for the Commonwealths service.
Letters likewise were brought from Ostend, certifying them that his Excellency
had, on the 17 of the same month begun to break up his camp, and had brought
his army near to Ostend to besiege the fort of Isabella.

The 20 of Iulie, early in the Morning, the general States departed from
Middelbourg to Berghen-op-Zoom, where they arrived the same Evening, whither
the commissioners of the other side likewise came, the same night, within an
hour after their arrival, being in number 23, who supped that night in the
company of the said Lords, at the governors house.

The 21 day they delivered their letters of credence and commission, and after
dinner, an answer was prepared for them. At night, the commissioners supt with
the said Lords, whither the governor and some of the Magistrates were invited:
and having received their answer in an enclosed letter whereof a coppie was
given to each of them, they departed thence on the 22 day very early in the
Morning. The Magistrates of Berghen did that day at dinner feast my Lords the
States, who in the afternoon embarked themselves, and sailed till they came
before Saint Annes-land, where they came to an ankor, tarrying for the Aduocat
Barnevelt, and the Burgomaster Vander Dussen, who were goneto a place called
Saint Martins Dike to visit Count Hohenlo who was sick, meaning to return the
next day to the States. The three and twentieth day, the said lord Barnevelt
being returned, they weighed ankor and set sail: but having a contrary wind,
the said lords landed in the country of Put, and by crossing certain
passages, arrived the same night about ten or eleven of the clock at the
Hague, leaving their baggage with the ensigns and cornets won at the battle
of Niewport, to follow after, which were brought the next day in the afternoon
to the Hague. The said ensigns, cornets, and some Trumpets, were, on the eight
and twentieth of Iulie, hung up in the great hall of the court, for a
perpetual remembrance of so famous and notable a victory granted by God to
these countries.

A true description of the bloody battle, betwixt. Prince Maurice of Nassau,
and the Archduke Albert of Austria, won near Niewport in Flanders, the 2 of
Iulie, Anno 1600.
THe Archduke, upon intelligence that his Excellency lay before Niewport, did
speedily march with his army toward the Downs, the very same way that his
Excellency had gone, intending to pass on directly to Niewport. His
Excellency, using all means possible to hinder his coming, and to win time*
did, on the 2 of Iulie, by day break, send his cosen count Ernest of Nassau
forth of the army, with 2 foot regiments Scots and Zelanders, and 4 cornets of
horse, unto whom the States (according to his Excellencies direction) added
certain companies of the garrison of Ostend, to stop the enemies passage over
the bridges lying upon a water on the high way toward the Downs near to
Alberts fort. But the enemy before their arrival had already taken the
bridge, and passed over his chief force, our men being too few to hinder his
passage to the Downs, and our regiments being engaged by the enemy, and too
weak to make resistance against their whole army; yet after a brave fight
like valiant soldiers, they were at last put to rout, the whole loss falling
on the Scots, who lost all their Captains and commanders, and 800 of
themselves were slain upon the place, among whom were eleven Captains, many
Lieutenants, and other officers: upon this victory the Archduke wrote to
Bruges, that he had defeated Prince Maurice his vantgard, and so engaged the
rest of his Army, as he could not escape, whereupon, Bells were the same day
rung at Bruges, and afterward in other towns, as though they had already
won all, but, to their great loss, they soon perceived the contrary.

This overthrow did greatly perplex the States and others that were in Ostend,
considering the great danger the Commonwealth might have sustained if any
mishap had befallen our Camp, which lay on both sides the Haven, divided one
from an other. And because in such extremities, when human help seems to
fail, there is no better remedy than to have recourse to the Lord of hosts:
Therefore my Lords the States with their followers, and many others there
present, together with the Minister prayed unto God for preservation of his
Excellencies person, and those of the other Lords and Captains and the whole
Army, recommending the rest to God, hoping for fortunate success.

The Archduke being puffed up with his good fortune went in all post have to
Niewport, verily supposing that he should find his Excellency and whole Army
daunted with this loss, and so be able easily to disorder them. But God would
not have it so, but in his mercy provided for the preservation of the State of
these Countries, and by consqeuent for defense of his Church, giving his
Excellency such foresight, as he had caused all the ships and boats to
withdraw themselves from before Niewport, to Ostend, and had moreover caused
his troops which lay on the one side of the Haven of Niewport, to pass over at
a low watel to the other shore, intending with a courageous resolution to fight
with the enemy; whereupon, his Excellency rode through all the troops
animating and exhorting them; That seeing they were on every side encompassed
with the Sea and enemy, there was no means in the world to escape but by
giving battle: And for that his Excellencies reputation and all their own
honors, lives, and wealth of the Country depended thereon, he entreated them
to fight valiantly, assuring them that God would give them good and happy
success Count Henry Frederick of Nassau did likewise encourage the Walons or
new Gueux, of his own Regiment, the like did other Captains and Commanders.

His Excellency caused his Army before Niewport to cross the haven after
this manner.

Cont Lodwick passed over first with five Cornets of horse, two of which being
Carabines, passed on toward the enemy, and about ten of the clock skirmished
with two companies of the enemies horse, and then the rest followed, who were
scarce come on shore, when they perceived the enemy coming on from Ostend
ward, who if he had then come forward, might have prevented his Excellency,
ere his fanterie could have past the Haven: but the enemy being ignorant how
many passed it, stayed a long time upon the shore and gave his Excellency time
to send over his English and Frison Regiments, which were in the vantgard
together with the gards of his Excellency and Count Hohenlo, commanded by Sir
Francis Vere, and also the Regiments of French, Walons, and Suisses, that made
up the bataile commanded by Count George Euerat of Solmes, and in a manner all
the rest of the Cauallerie, the two Regiments of Count Ernest, Gistels, and
Huchtenbroeck, were left to shut in the town of Niewport and commanded to stand
still in good order, and to pass a bridge upon his Excellencies first command,
which was made on boats overthwart the haven of Niewport. For a more ample
declaration of this fight, we will hereunto add his Excellencies order who
aranged his battles after this manner.

His Excellencies vantgard.
Count Lodwick of Nassau brother to Count Ernest had charge of the vantgard of
horse, as their Lieutenant general, and had with him his own Company of
horse, that of his Excellencies commanded by the Lord Walrauen of Gend; that of
Count Henry Frederick the Princes brother, conducted by Captain Bernard all in
one troop. The second troop was commanded by Marcelis Bacx, with his own
Cornet, that of Paul Bacx conducted by his Lieutenant Hans Sixen, and that of
Captain La Salle: behind these were the Carabins of Couteler, Peter Panny,
and Batenborch.

Near to this vantgard, were the foot Companies of his Excellencies guard
commanded by Captain Vander Aa, and that of Count Hohenlo conducted by
Lieutenant Stridthorst, with the English Regiments consisting of thirteen
Conpanies under the General Sir Francis Veer, viz, his own Company, tha^ of
Captain Iapley his Sergeant Major, those of Denis, Daniel, Veer, Hamond,
Ogley, Tyrrill, Farfax, Sir Calistines Brook, Foster, Garnet, and Holcroft.

Nere to these was Sir Horatio Veer his Regiment, viz his own Company, with
those of Sutton, Sir Thomas Knollis, Cicil, Morgan, Meetkerck, Scot, and
Vauasour, etc. making up together eleven Ensigns. Next them, were the Frisons
commanded by the Lieutenant General Taco Hottinga with his Company, that of
the Baron of Sidenische conducted by his Lieutenant, that of Gaspar Eussem by
his Lieutenant, and others amounting to seventeen companies. These one and
forty Ensigns made the foot vantgard, ad were all commanded by the General
Sir Francis Veer.

His Excellencies Battle.
Count George Euerard of Solmes led the battle with his horse Company, those
of Count Frederick of Solmes, Ioos Wierich Clout, and Iean Bacx, in an other
troup was the Cornet of Godard de Balen, that of Sir Francis Veere conducted by
his Lieutenant, and that of Sir Edward Citill, making up together seven
Cornets. The footmen in midst of the Cauallerie, were the Regiment of Count
Henerie Frederick of Nassau commanded by Daniell de Hertain Lord of Marquette
his Lieutenant Colonel, and in this Regiment was his own company, those of
Iean du Bont, Antonie de Sauoy, Francis Marli, etc. amounting in all to nine
Ensigns, unto which was added the Regiment of Suisses, wherein were four
Ensigns, viz, that of Hans Kriegh, of Ballichom, of Hans Sas of Vnderwald, of
Hans Meyer of Zurichland of Guillam de Puis.

Moreover two French Battaillons, commanded by the Lord of Dommeruill
Lieutenant Colonel to the Lord la Noue, his company, that of la Rocques by
his Lieutenant, that of du Sault, commanding the second Battaillon, that of la
Simendri, de Mareschot, de Hamelet, de Brusse, de Corimeres, conducted by his
Lieutenant (himself being shot before Albertus ^ort) de Formentiere, de
Verneuill and du Pont Aubert, to the number of twelve companies. In midst of
whom, was his Excellency to give directions for all matters, accompanied with
his brother Count Henry Frederick, and other Lords, as Iean Adolph Duke of
Holsteyn, Iean Ernest, Prince of Anhalt, three Earls of Solms, the Earl of
Coligni, lord of Chastillon, Nephew to that renowned Admerall of France, and
the lord Iustine of Nassau, the lord Gray, sir Robert Drewry, and many other
English, Erench, and Alman gentlemen, who without any command accompanied his
Excellency: the battle consisted of five and twenty ensigns of foot, and
seven cornets of horse.

His Excellencies Rereward.
THe rereward was conducted by Oliver Vander Tempel, lord of Corbecke, wherein
were three cornets of horse, commanded by Wernhard du Bois, viz. his own,
that of Hammelton, and that of George Couteler, which Couteler, was set foremost
in the battle.

There were likewise three battaillons of foot, the regiment of Count Ernest of
Nassau, wherein was his own company conducted by his lieutenant, the company
of Heusman lieutenant Colonel, that of Massau, Imbise de Corwis etc. in all
thirteen ensigns.

The regiment of the lord of Gystelles, his own company, that of George
Euerard Count of Solms by his lieutenant, that of Aeneas de Treston, de
Trebourg, de l'Amovillerie, de Langevelt, de Ruisse, and de Floris de
Wijngaerden.

In the third Battaillon was the regiment of Colonel Huchtenbroeke with his
own company conducted by Marlin, that of the lord of Tempell by Belin his
lieutenant, that of the said Marlin, of Dierick de Ionghe, de Ruyssenbourg, of
John de Loon, and de Caluart: these 26 ensigns made up the rereward, together
with 3 cornets of horse.

His Excellency stood fast in Battle upon the shore expecting the enemies
coming, he had sent the gards to the Downs, and had drawn some fifty
musketeers forth of the battle, placing them on the shore, and four troops
of Frizeland musketeers for second, with these to flank the enemies troops,
if he had come along the shore, and the better to divert their approach, he
had planted fix demie canon there.

About eleven of the clock, the enemies cauallerie approached, who were
saluted by our canon, which made them retire to the Downs, when they tarried
for their own ordnance and fanterie that came on very slowly.

His Excellency had enjoined the lords of Warmont and Duyvenvoord to command
the ships to shoot into the enemies battles, which was effected: the
Vice-Admerall of Zeland, whose name was Ioostle Moore and Captain Knoopes made
some shot into the enemies battle, who on his part answered them with two
demie canon.

His Excellency, in the mean time, abandoned the town of Newport, and caused
the bridge to be broken, commanding the rereward to follow him and to place
themselves in order; he caused two demie canon to be brought upon the Downs,
and planted them upon a little rising, meaning with them to scour the plains:
His Excellency still had the wind and Sun, which is no small advantage,
especially on the Downs, when the wind blows somewhat hard, as it did all the
time of the battle.

The enemy being come betwixt the parishes of Westeynde, and Willekins Kerck,
within a small mile of Niewport, and two miles from Ostend, did likewise plant
five demie canon and one field piece upon the shore: then his Excellency shot
into the enemies battle, who answered him presently with the like, but the
enemy receiving much hurt by our canon, was enforced to retire farther up into
the Downs, in regard the Tide did rise, by reason whereof, the shore was so
narrow, as few men could stand upon it, and then all the boats which lay dry
before Niewport, began to float, and sailed toward Ostend, five excepted,
together with the greatest number of those boats that made the bridge, which
could not be loossened: those of Niewport took a Carvell and carried it into
the town.

To defend these boats from the sallies of those of Niewport, his Excellency
left certain troops of soldiers to skirmish with the Townsmen. Then the
Archduke began to march athwart the Downs toward the plain behind them, the
like did his Excellency, causing his troops to march against the enemy: sir
Frauncis Veer led the English pikes and muskets, as also the Gards and Frizons,
and himself marched in the foremost rank, and was the first man that charged
the musketeers of two Spanish regiments: he was seconded by Count George
Euerard of Solms, who led the battle: the French musketeers being divided
into four troops, he did with three of them charge the musketeers of two
Spanish and Italian regiments; the said French shot were led by Captain du
Puy, Captain Bruill lieutenant to the Lord la Noue, Captain Pommared
lieutenant to Dommerville, and captain Vander-Burch lieutenant to Captain du
Fort.

His Excellency perceiving that he must needs fight, and that he could not
avoid it, did valiantly resolve thereon, trusting to the equity of his cause,
and to God, and thereupon commanded Count Lodwick to charge the enemy with 6
cornets of horse, viz. that of his Excellency, Count Henry, and his own,
appointing Marcelis Bacx, Paul Bacx, and Captain la Sale to second them, who
brake the enemies horse, and put them to rout: this done, the battle began on
every side with a furious battery, which was terrible to behold: on the
Downs they fought continually from the beginning to the end, but in the plain
beyond the Downs, by sundry charges, his Excellency having divided his men
into diverse troops, unwilling to have them fight all at once. The General Veer
fought with a battaillon of pikes of two Spanish regiments, after that he had
repulsed the enemies shot. The said battaillon was conducted by D. Lewis de
Villar, and D. Hieronimo de Monroy; on the right side, the enemy had a wing of
horse, with which he did much anoy our Vantgard: General Veer being sore
wounded, did notwithstanding fight along time, leading the English and the 2
Gards, but at last retired, being seconded by his brother sir Horatio Veer, and
Captain Quirin de Blau. The enemy charging furiously upon us, certain of our
soldiers began to fly, but it was soon redrest. Presently after the first
charge, these Captains of horse, viz. Coutelor, Peter Panier, and Batenburch,
charged the enemies fanterie; they were seconded by count Lodwick with six
companies of Cuirasses, with whom Count Frederic of Solms served.

Count George Euerart of Solms, with the French, did, by his Excellencies
command, charge, marching foremost in the battle, and divided into two
troops, of which, that on the right hand was conducted by Monsr. Dommervile,
lieutenant Colonel of the French, and the other on the left hand, by Captain
du Sau. This was the second charge of the French, fighting with a battaillon of
pikes of two regiments, the one Spaniards, and the other Italians, conducted by
D. Alonzo d'Aualos, and Sapena the Camp Master.

Count George Euerart retired with the French, and brought up Count Henry of
Nassaus regiment, videlicet, the Walons (of whom Monsr. Marquet was Lieutenant
Colonel) to charge the enemy again, and also the regiment of Suisse by Hans
Krijc; these two regiments, fought with la Bourlotte and the Earl of Bucquoy,
who commanded the enemies rereward, consisting of three regiments of Walons,
and Irish. Then his Excellency commanded Monsr. de Gystelles, who conducted
the rereward, to charge with his own regiment, and that of Huchtenbroeke. And
the regiment of Count Ernest, under the conduct of Heusman his Lieutenant
Colonel, did likewise charge.

The fight continued doubtful for three hours space, They fight for three
hours space uncertain of victory.
for now one side prevailed, and anon another, and yet his Excellencies
Cauallerie had still the advantage of the enemies, which gave back by little
and little, and some of them fled toward Niewport, and were pursued by our men.

The enemies Fanterie fought with better vantage on the Downs, where they
took one hill after another, from his Excellencies footmen; and did mightily
endaunger the ordnance. Behind the Downs, Sir Horatio Veer charged, with six
English ensigns, with Captain Henry Sutton his Lieutenant Colonel, Captain
Louell, Captain Ogle, and Captain Farfax. Count Lodwick, with ten horse,
was engaged by the enemy: captain Cloet knowing the Earl by his Orange
colored plume, charged upon a company of Lanciers, that were coming to
charge the Earl, who by this means escaped: our cauallerie retired to his
Excellency, who encouraged the soldiers, re-enforcing them with two companies
that were with him, who constrained the enemy to give back.

His Excellency sent two cornets of horse to the shore, viz. his own,
commanded by Captain Bael, and General Veers company commanded by Captain
Pembrooke.

These two companies being come to the shore, stayed near the battery,
expecting the enemy: Our ordnance, charged with musket bullets, played upon
the enemy, who lost many men and horse, and were enforced to quit the Downs;
and yet they returned again to the shore, and came before the battery.

Then the companies of Baell and General Veer charged fiercely upon the enemy
who fled, The enemy is put to rout.
and then charged the fanterie likewise, so as Baell took Sapena prisoner on
the Downs, and General Veers company D. Lewis de Villar. His Excellencies
cauallerie on the plain repulsed the enemy; for he did continually put them
in order, and caused them to charge there where he saw most need; so as in the
end, our men perceiving that the enemy began to fly both on the shore and
Downs, took courage, and on every side charged him, who at first began to
give back, and afterward, betook himself to open flight: and thereby our men
won the place of battle, and obtained the victory; diverse pursued the
enemy into the Marshes, and to the new Dam, taking many of them prisoners:
this battle was sharp and bloody on both sides.

The Archduke, who hardly escaped, did in this battle (both of such as were
slain and taken prisoners) lose the greatest part of all his commanders,
chief Lords, Noblemen, and household servants, together with most of the
captains and officers of his army, videlicet, D. Francesco de Mendoza,
Admerall of Arragon, Count Salines, D. Lewis de Villar, Campe-Master, D. Lewis
d'Avila, D. Pedro de Mendoza, Doctor Andrew N. one of his highness
physicians, Count Charles Rezin, one of his Pages, D. Gaspar Moragon, five and
thirty Captains both of horse and foot, two hundred and three Lieutenants,
ensigns, Sergeants, Dons, Caualiers, and others of name, to the number of
thirty.

And beside these, we got 8 pieces of ordnance, all the munition, much baggage,
and the very furniture of the Archdukes own Chamber and Cabinet, and among
other things his Signet, and above 100 ensigns, with certain cornets and
Trumpets. The number of the dead on the Archdukes side was 7000, beside those
that were afterward slain and died of their hurts: and his Excellency lost
betwixt two or three thousand, accounting those which had been defeated in the
Morning.

Among other ensigns, there was presented to my Lords the general States, a
Standerd belonging to 1600 Spanish mutineers, made of blew Damask, having on
the one side in midst of a field, the figure of our Lady in a Sun, before
whom a Moncke kneeled, and over his head, these words in golden letters, Aue
gratia plena, over the virgins head was a great golden star, and near to it in
golden letters, Stella Maris; in the midst, on her right hand, was the figure
of a Sun, and near it, these letters, Electa vt Sol; on the left hand the
Moon, with this inscription, Pulchra vt Luna; at her feet stood a Turret, with
these words, Turris Dauidis, and beneath upon the hem of the Standard,
Benedicta tu in mulieribus. On the other side, was the represention of our Lord
Jesus Christ upon the Cross, over his head were these words in golden letters,
Adoramus te Christ, and benedicimus tibi; in the midst, Recordare
nouissimatua, and in aeternum non peccabis; and beneath, Quia per crucem tuam
redemisti mundum. All these figures were cunningly wrought even to the life.

In this battle, the greatest loss fell to the Spaniards and Italians, who
were the chief strength and glory of the Spaniards army, who in the Morning
did assure themselves of the victory, and that with such confidence, as they
made no doubt of it, but marched on before, hoping alone to gain the honor of
the day.

It was a magnificent and gallant victory for my Lords the general States,
his Excellency, and for all the united Provinces, but obtained with much
labor and blood: for on his Excellencies side, 1000 men were slain, among
whom, were three Captains of horse, thirteen of foot, viz. six English
Captains, two Frizons, three French, one Walon, and one Alman, with many
Lieutenants, ensigns, and other officers, beside some 700 hurt men, among whom
was the noble sir Frauncis Veer, and many other Captains and officers both of
horse and foot.

As the enemy fleed, the Cauallerie came forth of Ostend and slew many of
them. But his Excellency (who in the battle had showed himself valiant and
discreet, and for better encouragement to his soldiers, had himself, together
with his brother and other Lords there present, charged the enemy) did in the
end reasse^ble certain cornets of horse, and some foot regiments, setting them
in order in the place of battle, keeping them for reservation and seconds if
any disorder should arise.

The enemy being wholly put to rout, and night drawing on, his Ex. marched to
the Church of Westend, where with his whole army he remained that night upon
the plain where the battle was fought, and in his Tent supt with the Admerall
of Arragon and others, who were requested to deliver their opinions, what they
thought of these exploits, and of these new unexperienced soldiers (whom they
had so termed) who could do nothing but win towns and skonces, not daring to
show themselves in open field; and whether they thought that they would one day
prove tal soldiers, with such other like discourses. But the Admerall gravely
and discreetly knew very well how to answer: and among other discourses, at
Table, concerning the battle, he complained of their own cauallerie, taxing
them for not doing their duty; for had not they retreated, there was some
likelihood that their footmen would have become Masters of the ordnance, with
which they might have obtained the victory. He complained likewise of their
charging all at once, and for that they had not reserved some to second the
squadrons here and there, who should have put them in order again when they
retreated, and with them have given a fresh charge, as Prince Maurice had done,
husbanding his horse and foot, not hazarding all his forces at once. He highly
commended his Excellency likewise for planting his ordnance: but he chiefly
praised him, for that he had so bravely presented his forces to his enemy,
sending away all his boats, and thereby enforced all his soldiers to fight, if
they meant to save their lives, and for that himself and other commanders,
had no more advantage than the meanest soldier.

His Excellency perceiving, the next day, that his soldiers were much
burdened with the enemies prisoners and wounded men, that all the victuals
were lost in the battle, and that they could get none, by reason that the
boats were gone; marched with his whole army toward Ostend to refresh it,
sending the wounded to places where they might be cured, discharging his
soldiers of the enemies prisoners.

He brought his army to S. Mary's Church near to Alberts fort, and himself
went into Ostend, where he presently caused public thanks to be given to God
for this notable victory, himself and whole Court being present at it.

He remained certain days at Ostend to order matters, and to provide for the
better execution of his enterprises. He caused all the prisoners to be brought
together, viz. the Admerall of Arragon, D. Lewis de Villars, with many other
Captains and officers, whom for the most part he shipped for Holland: he kept
some one hundred and fifty prisoners still in Ostend, and among them diverse
hurt men, to exchange them for his own soldiers whom the enemy had taken.
The glory of this victory belongs to God alone, who has not only been
pleased thereby to maintain (as he has wonderfully hitherunto done) the just
and lawful cause of the united Provinces for the conservation of his Church,
but has likewise pleased to abase the hautie and insolent courage of the
Spaniards, learning them to feel his mighty arm, and letting them know how
dangerous it is to kick against the prick.

To this only God, the Lord of hosts, who in the battle has taught his
Excellencies hands to fight, and so admirably exalted his countenance that day,
be honor, praise, and glory for ever.

To conclude, we must of necessity hereunto add that which certain Historians
mention; how that justly upon the same day the second of Iulie 1600, some three
hundred and two years before, viz. in anno 1298, one of the Archduke Alberts
predecessors (called Albert of Austria like him) had with his power defeated,
one of Prince Maurice of Nassaus predecessors, called Adolfe of Nassau,
Emperor of the Romans: whereby we may see, how that by this means the house
of Nassau has revenged the wrong done to it by that of Austria.

This is a matter worthy of note, and we may be well assured, that though God
defer for a time, yet he can and will aid and assist those that put their
trust in him.

The Lord John of Duyuenvoord, Admerall of Holland, fights with the Galleys
of Sluice, and puts them to flight.
Whilst Prince Maurice his army marched in Flaunders, there were some forty
or fifty flat bottomed boats and and other vessels laden with munition and
victuals, which, on the five and twentieth of June, did set sail from Zeland
toward Ostend: these, had a man of war for their conuoy, whose Captain was
called Adrian Baucker: he, being come before Blauckenbourg, was becalmed: the
galleys of Sluice perceiving it, four of them came forth and assailed the
fleet, and took twenty of the boats, but most of the men escaped: some of
these vessels they burnt, and carried the rest away with them. The man of war
made what resistance he could, but the calm made him like an vnplumed bird.
The Galleys approached the ship, but did not board her, thinking to sink her
with their shot, or else enforce her to yield: she was in sundry places shot
through, and began to leake, and without the help of men and women, that came
aboard her from other boats, and with scuppets, tubs, and their very hats
emptied forth the water, she would have been in danger of sinking: by this
means she was kept above water; and when the galleys came near her, she
played so terribly upon them with her ordnance, as they were enforced to give
back. The ship, having at last, lost three and twenty men, among whom was
Captain Baucker, and most of the rest wounded, the men cried out desperately,
saying, That rather than they would yield to the enemy, they would blow
themselves up and set the ship on fire: Hereupon, the galleys left her, and
with great harm and loss of men returned to Sluice, with a good booty, and
the ship went back to Flushing.

The next day, being the six and twentieth of June, the Lord John of
Duyvenvoord, Admerall of Holland, with six ships of war, called,
Cromstevens, or Smackseylen, all well provided, sailed from Zeland toward
Flaunders, to conuoy one hundred and fifty vessels laden with ordnance and
warlike munition for the army. This fleet being come before Sluice, and the
wind very calm, four galleys came forth; and presently the wind rising, the
men of war came so near them, as they did not only anoy them with their
ordnance, but with their small shot: whereupon, they were constrained by force
of oars to return back again against the wind: one of the galleys was shot
under water, and did for a long time lie upon one side, till the leake was
stopped.

A certain Turk of Constantinople, a very valiant and skillful man, being a
slave in one of the galleys, had his chain wherewith he was fastened, broken a
sunder by a canon shot, himself not hurt, and perceiving that he was loosse,
leapt into the Sea with a piece of his chain, and with great danger of his
life (for they shot terribly at him) swam to the Zelanders ships, and in
swimming showed his chain: whereupon, the ships took him in: being aboard, he
acquainted them with the galleys intent and loss. They afterward clothed him,
and presented him to prince Maurice, who asked him if he would serve; but he
having great means at Constantinople, craved a passeport, unless they would
make use of him for a Patron of a gallie to command the Spanish slaves, which
charge he had in former time taken upon him: But the Netherlanders, having
never used to employ any infidel, would not then begin, but gave him a
passeport for England, whither he went, and from thence to Barbary, and so by
land to Constantinople, where by the way he acquainted Princes, and Kings, and
the great Turk his Lord, with the wars of the Christians.

The Admeralls ship of Antuerpe, and seven other ships, are taken by the
Captain of the Black Gallie, on the 29 of November, 1^00.
MY Lords the States and his Excellency, perceiving the great loss they
sustained by the galleys of Frederick Spinola, which lay at Sluice; resolved
likewise to build and set forth certain galleys, and with them to anoy their
enemies. Whilst they were making ready, the galleys of Sluice came not abroad,
wanting slaves to row; for the Zeland ships had slain most of them, many of
them likewise were dead in winter with extremity of cold, and those prisoners
of the united provinces, whom they had taken and made slaves, could not
suddenly be brought to handle the oar.

They likewise sent into Hungary to buy Turkish prisoners, but they knew not
by what means to transport them into the Low Countries.

Whereupon, the four Estates of Flaunders were about to buy the said Galleys
and slaves of Spinola, and to build others, hoping to move the Archduke to go
and besiege Ostend, to free Flaunders from daily contributions and expense it
was at for entertainment of so many garrisons and forts upon passages, and to
that end offered the Archduke a great sum of money.

The States of Holland, did with all possible speed build a great gallie at
Dort, to make head against those of Sluice, in length eight and forty paces; so
soon as it was ready, it was in September sent into Zeland, it carried
fifteen brass pieces, many Bases, it was mand with rowers and soldiers: the
rowers sat upon benches, and were shrouded with a defense which was musket
proof: it was called the black gallie of Dort, the Captains name was Jacob
Michielz; it was presently sent to Sluice, and there recovered a ship taken by
the enemy.

On the 29 of September, the Admerall of Zeland, and Captain Legier with this
gallie well provided, and certain shalops, went toward Antuerpe, and in the
night passed by Ordam Fort: the garrison supposed they were boats which went to
victual Hulst: About midnight, coming before Antuerpe, they there found the
Admerals ship, a goodly great vessel, called a Smackseil, or Cromsteven, so
big and strong, as the Hollanders had none such, it was of the burden of one
thousand eight hundred tun or more, it carried sixteen or seventeen brass
pieces, beside those of Iron and the Bases: it had three tier of ordnance one
above another. Captain Maes, the Admerall, was then absent; this vessel lay
opposite to the new Town, toward Flanders point. The black gallie stemd this
ship with her iron beak so forcibly, as they could hardly get it out again,
but with great danger were feign to saw it off: the soldiers, in the mean
time, became Masters of the ship, some of them that were in it were slain,
others leapt into the water, and escaped by swimming. The ship being taken, our
soldiers enforced the two ship Boys, whose lives they saved, to tell them
where the sails and other tacklings were, which done, they fell down the
river with the Tide. They likewise took two new vessels which daily carried
provision to Bruxels and Malines, each of them carrying four brazen pieces,
and others of iron, with five other vessels called Smackes, which by chance
they took the same night, and with these eight vessels, fell down the river
toward Lillo, having gotten above fifty pieces of ordnance, and a booty more
worth than the gallie. Those of Antuerpe hearing the shot, th'alarme was
presently over the City, and the sooner, because our Trumpets upon the Key
sounded the song of William of Nassau, so well known, wherein they recorded
the commendation of the late virtuous Prince of Orange.

Within a while after, the Admerall and Count Arenbourg came to Antuerpe to
punish the negligence of the Admerall Maes and others, and to prevent the like
affronts: he likewise caused a Fort to be built upon the Key to defend the
ships by night.

Captain Cloet wins the Castle of Cracow on the 9 of February 1601.
THe Castle of Cracow, and Lordship thereof, being by the last will and
Testament of the Countess of Meurs, given to his Excellency, as a Lordship
under the jurisdiction thereof, the Duke of Parma, in ann' 1586, had given it
to Salentino Count of Isenbourg, in regard of certain claim he laid unto it,
since when, the said Earl had still possessed it, and placed a certain fellow
for captain there, who was called long Huben, with 15 or 16 soldiers to guard
the Castle, which by nature was strong, being seated in a fennie soil.

But Prince Maurice being desirous to enjoy his own, and understanding that
the Dikes were frozen in winter, commanded Captain Cloet, a brave and valiant
soldier, to make an attempt upon the said castle, with three hundred horse of
Nimmeghen, and certain foot companies from Watchtendonck. The said Captain,
according to his Excellencies command, came to Niewkerke, nere to
Wachtendonck, on the eighth of February, whereof the governor of Stralen
having intelligence, followed him with forty horse, and 500 foot, who, in the
Morning by day break, did so fiercely assail Cloets soldiers, as 40 of them
were surprised ere their fellows knew it: who at last turned back, and
perceived that those of Stralen retired through a certain narrow way, very
aduantagious for footmen against horse; the enemy having by this time taken 30
of Cloets horsemen prisoners, most of whom being of his Excellencies company,
were soon released: for Cloet thereby incensed, took another way, by which, he
intercepted their passage, and incountring them at their coming forth of that
way upon a plain, he assailed the Governor of Stralen in front and behind, and
overthrew many of his horse and foot; the rest escaped into a house, which he
presently encompassed, and enforced them to yield on composition, and on
condition to pay ransom.

He freely sent away three hundred and seventy soldiers, and only detayned
the General Dulchen governor of Straelen prisoner, with Captain Golstein and
seven officers as caution for the rest. Cloet lost six or seven men, and many
of his men and horse were hurt.

After that, the foot companies of Wachtendonck came to Cloet, and went
forwards toward Cracow, and arrived there on the ninth of February at night:
the horse men alighted, and went over the ye into the first Court of the
Castle: thereupon, those within it began to shoot, but Captain Cloet shot so
terribly upon the Gate, as those within it durst not abide there, and then he
caused his men to cross the dike, to let down the drawbridge, and to plant
the Perard at the Gate, which presently brake it open: Whereupon, those within,
yielded themselves and Castle by day break. Captain Cloet left his Lieutenant
there, with forty men and 20 horse, til his Excellencies further pleasure were
known, and returned again to his garrison, having performed that which was
enjoined him: and by this means his Excellency became Master of this Castle
and Lordship.

The second siege and taking of the Town of Rhynberg in Anno 1601.
RHynberg is a town belonging to the Bishopric of Collein, seated on the
Southward of the Rhyne, eight miles from Collein, it is rather small than
big, and fortified with double rampires, well seated both for war and
traffic, taking great toll of all goods and Merchandise which come down the
river.

During these wars, both parties have sundry times fortified it: and first
in the war of Collein betwixt the two Bishops, it fell into the hands of the
united Provinces, which a long time held and defended it against the atte^pts
of the Spaniards, freeing the river, both from the prince of Parma, who after
the taking of Nuis in anno 1586, did furiously assail it on the 13 of August,
and w^^ enforced to raise his siege, having lien three months before the
town, which he left blocked up with many Forts: as also from the Marquess
Varrabon, who pursued and continued the said siege, in whose view the town was
often victualled, which Marquess, as he thought on a time with all his power
on a sudden to charge the rereward of those that brought succors, was
himself wholly defeated by Coun^ Ouerstein and sir Francis Veer. Whereupon,
Count Charles of Mansfelt came presently thither from Brabant with seventy
ensigns, who in the end, on the 30 of January 1590, won the town for the
Bishop of Bauier (as it was reported) but in effect for the king of Spain, as
experience did afterward manifest, that he might thereby become Master of the
Rhyne, and divide Germany from the united Netherland Provinces, and likewise
to open a way for him to enter into these Countries, and to burden the town
of Zutphen and Ouer-Yssel with continual contributions.

In this regard, Prince Maurice did again besiege it on the 10 of August, in
anno 1597, and after ten days siege took it, as heretofore has been
largely mentioned in the description of the first siege: whereupon, the Bishop
craving to have the Town restored to him (which was granted) it was left
unfortified, and enforced to fall into the Admerall of Arragons hands, who
easily took it with his mighty army on the fifteenth of October 1598: and
with so much the more ease, because the Governor Shaef, and the whole
garrison, in a manner died of the plague, and likewise, for that treachery the
by powder, to the quantity of 150 barrels, was set on fire: this did not only
much diminish the remainder of the garrison, but overthrew the greatest part of
the Town rampires near to Rhyn-port, and made a great breach.

The town was afterward kept by a strong garrison: yet prince Maurice did
besiege it on the twelfth of June, in anno 1601, with one hundredth and fifty
foot ensigns, and three and thirty cornets of horse, it being a very
important place for these Countries.

The enemy reported, that there were in the town 900 Italians under John
Baptista Pecchio, Sergeant Major, 4 Spanish ensigns, 700 Burgonians, 1300
Almans, 200 sailers, fifty horse, amounting in all to three thousand five
hundred and fifty men, among whom were many revolted traitors.

They were well stored with ordnance and all other warlike provision, having
two and thirty great piece of ordnaunce, whereof twenty were brass, three
canon, and twelve iron pieces. There was likewise store of victuals and other
necessaries (salt and medecines for sick persons excepted) which they
extremely wanted, being most necessary in a town besieged.

D. Hieronimo Lopes de la villa, borne in Barbary of Spanish parents was
governor there; he was renowned for a good soldier, well experienced, and
much esteemed of his Countrymen. He, at the enemies first arrival, encamped
round about the town, intrenching himself with forts and counter-points: He
likewise took in certain pastures to feed horse and cattaile, which they
durst not kill for their own provision, because they wanted salt to powder
them: He likewise sanke his own ship of war, and other vessels, cutting the
masts a sunder, for that the enemy should not make use of them.

His Excellency presently sent his ships of war up the River, one of which
the enemy sanke: These vessels kept good guard every where on the river Rhyne
as far as Cullein, and by the way, met with certain of the enemies boats which
were sent abroad for provision.

The eighteenth of June, he took the Fort that stands in the Island, which
being weak, the enemy soon abandoned.

The camp was likewise speedily entrenched with dikes, Pallisadoes, gates, and
draw-bridges, and the ways every where fortified, both abroad and within
against those of the town, who in great troops made continual sallies,
namely, on the twentieth of June, they fell upon the French with 1500 men
divided into three troops, who charged one after another, and after they had
fought an hours space, were beaten back and enforced to re-enter, not without
loss on both sides.

In this sallie, the French General the Lord of Chastillon was hurt in the
leg, and the governor of Berck in the face, as he stood upon a bulwark to
behold the skirmish, so as for a time he could not speak, but was constrained
to refer the government of the Town, and authority of commanding to
Captain Botberg, and to an Italian called Francisco Nello.

The enemy likewise, on the eight and twentieth day, came with a thousand men
to Count Ernestus quarter, and with great rumor fell upon one of our trenches,
from which he was soon beaten with great loss of men.

His Excellency, on the contrary, did daily approach the enemies trenches: he
also made four batteries, and on the first and second of Iulie, planted
thirty piece of ordnaunce: He planted 2 can^n in the Fort of the Island called
Middle-weert, and two demie canon, by which, as by the rest from other
batteries the Town was greatly annoyed.

The besieged, on the seventh of Iulie, took order for their victuals,
distributing to every man a pound of bread a day, and began to fortify the
Market and Church, making it a place of retreat upon extremity.

They had likewise sent many letters and messengers which for the most part
were intercepted: so as on the 5 of Iulie they made diverse signs by fires, and
were continually answered with the like by those of Guelders, who gave them
hope of aid; whereunto the Archduke seemed to incline, raising many men near to
Maestricht and Ruremond, who notwithstanding, were sent away into Flanders, as
were the Italian troops newly arrived, of whom, first eight hundred were sent
toward Ostend, then afterward 2500 more, and twenty forth of every company
of those that remained behind.

And yet al these troops seemed to be appointed, for raising the siege of Berk,
under conduct of the Earls Barlaimont and Bucquoy, who had already made great
provisions for it at Couloigne, and hired sundry wagons, which they were
enforced to send back, the enemies intent being only to encourage those of
Berck by a vain appearance, and to cause them hold out to the last, and
themselves in the mean time to assail Ostend on the sudden, and thereby to
draw away our army from that siege into Flaunders.

Notwithstanding, of all our army no man was embarked for Ostend, but the
Admerall Duyvenvoord, with eight English companies under the conduct of sir
Frauncis Veer, unto which, afterward twelve other ensigns were added, in
whose stead other ensigns from elsewhere arrived at the camp on the 22 and 27
days.

His Excellency, in the mean time, came under the enemy* trenches: he
likewise undermined the Counter-scarpe on the East Side of the Town, and, on
the seventeenth of Iulie, having drawn great numbers of the enemies thither by
a false alarm, he fired the Mine, which having prosperous success, our men
presently assailed it on every side, and took the Counterscarpe with loss of
one hundred men, notwithstanding all the enemies resistance. This counterscarpe
taken, his Excellency made three Galleries, which were brought on as far as
the Town Dikes, and from thence to the Bulwark on the East Side, which he
began to undermine in three several places.

The days following, he likewise won, with the time, the rest of the
intrenchments which were without the town, partly by force and Mines, and
partly because the enemy quitted them: And on the two and twentieth of Iulie
his Excellency came altogether before the Town, having been kept from it by
his works without.

The next day, he sent his Trumpet to Rhynberk, who received this answer, That
they thanked his Excellency for his offers, but that they could not as then
intend to yield, seeing the Town had been besieged but one day: whereupon,
his Excellency, the day following, summoned the Town the second time, because
all his Mines were ready to play.

There the Townesman began to hearken unto it, craving that they might first
send some speedy messengers to Guelders to request aid, which was denied them.
Whereupon, at last, after some treaty with the Trumpet, on the one and
thirtieth of Iulie, they sent Captain Botberg and Francisco Nello the Italian,
to the Camp about six of the clock in the Evening, who granted to yield up
the Town to his Excellency on these conditions following.

Articles in regard whereof those of Rhynberck yielded on the 30. of Iulie.
FIrst, his Excellency is well pleased, that the Governor of Rhynberck, all
the soldiers, both horse and foot, and all those which have served in the
ships of war, with their Captains and officers without exception, shall
freely depart with displayed ensigns, arms, kindled match, bullets in their
mouths, and drum beating, their wives, family, stuff, wagons, horse, and
other things thereunto belonging, without examining any one, for matters done,
and namely the person of John Peters-Thas Captain of a Ship, who certain
years before, yielded both himself and ship to the enemy.

2 The governor shall carry away with him two fieldpieces, such as his
Excellency shall think fit, with two barrels of powder, and fifty bullets.

3 His Excellency shall lend them two hundred horse to carry the sick,
wounded men, and baggage to Guelders and shall give a safe conduct for the
soldiers and their baggage to Maestricht, and if any of those that be hurt,
are unwilling as yet to depart, they may remain in the town till they be
healed, and may afterward go their way with the governors Passeport.

4 That the Lord Evert de Ens, his wife, and children, with their writings,
stuff and goods, may freely depart, as also the Councellor Westendorp,
Nicholas de Houe, and the receivers of the reuenew and contributions, with
their writings and stuff, as has been said, and namely Goswijn de Manen, the
customer and his officers, who may depart either by land or water, unto whom
his Excellency will give a passeport, as likewise to all Commissaries and
officers belonging to the king of Spain or the Archduke, without any refusal,
who are not to be detained for any cause or pretense whatsoever.

5 That the Governor shall satisfy the Magistrate and Burghers for all such
debts that he owes since the siege, with the goods belonging to his Highness,
arising of booties taken, and Merchandise confiscat and found upon the river
Rhyne, contrary to the Placard.

6 That the Governor shall send for all those whose cattaile have been taken
from them during the siege, and give them letters of assignation, to procure
satisfaction from their Highnesses, because it was done in their service.

7 That the prisoners expenses by reason of contributions, shall be presently
paid, according to the treaty made with the Admerall of Arragon, and
confirmed by his highness.

8 That the receiver John le Bruni may freely depart with his writings and
stuff, in giving a coppie of the moneys remaining behind hand of the
revenues of the County of Zutphen, and Country of Ouer-Yssel.

9 That all horse taken on both sides during the siege, shall be redeemed,
every one at the rate of twenty livers.

10 That all victuallers and Merchants following the Camp, belonging to the
king, together with his Highness soldiers, may remain in the town till such
time as they have sold their wares, and afterward depart with the governors
passeport.

11 That all Burghers, who are willing to leave the Town and dwell elsewhere,
may sell their goods and horses within the space of ^ixe months.

12 That all religious persons, men and women, may freely and safely depart.

13 That prisoners on both sides shall be released.

According to this treaty, the governor D. Hieronimo went his way on the
first of August, in the Morning, with sixteen ensigns, amongst whom were six
companies of Almans, thirty horse, eighty sailers, accompanied with two
hundred and nine wagons full of stuff and hurt men, leaving the town very
ruinous, and more than one thousand two hundred of his soldiers de^d there,
fifty barrels of powder, and victuals for two months.

The States of the united Provinces, and Prince Maurice, did after this manner
win the town, resolving to keep it, both for the ser^^ce of the Country, and
for their neighbors and allies of ^^e sacred Empire, unto whom it imports
much to have the River free, that no foreine armies may cross it; a town
deserving to be kept at the Empires common cost: so as they determined to
fortify it, and caused a great fort to be made in the Island standing in the
river before the town, for finishing whereof, a bargain was made with
certain men for a round sum of money: the government of the town was given
to Colonel Gyst^lls.

The Nobility and the States of the Country of Ouer-Yssel, perceiving that
their Country and the river Rhyne was free, caus^d a placard to be published
on the eight and twentieth of Iulie, forbidding to pay any contribution to the
enemy, appointing good guard to be kept in every village and parish, on great
penalties, as to the officers on forfeiture of 25 crowns, and the Boore one
crown, as often as they should be found faulty therein: They were likewise
commanded to be ready with their armies so soon as the alarm bell should
ring, prohibiting on pain of life, that no man should harbor any of the
enemies soldiers, and he that could take any of the enemies soldiers dead or
alive, in the Country, should receive five and twenty florins of the
Countries money.

If any Merchant travailing by the way should happen to be taken or hurt by the
enemy, those of the Country or place where it was done, shall be bound to pay
his ransom, and satisfy his losses, and it shall not be lawful for any man
to hold any correspondence with the enemy, with many other points, necessary
for the countries preservation.

His Excellency takes the town of Meurs on the 16 of August Anno 1601.
BEcause the town of Meurs was guarded but by certain soldiers called
Hanevederen, His Excell^ncie takes the town of Meurs and fortifies it.
which lay there in garrison, serving the Duke of Cleues, for whom they kept
it, Prince Maurice pretending claim to that Earldom, as given unto him by
the Countess of Walbourg, did, on the sixth of August, send Captain Cloet and
Colonel Edmonds thither, with twelve cornets of horse; yet the garrison would
not give place nor leave the Town: Whereupon, his Excellency, the next day,
came thither in person, with five and twenty cornets of horse, five and
thirty foot ensigns, and four demie canon: which when they within it saw,
they delivered up the town to the true Lord prince Maurice, who placed a
strong garrison in it, and gave order for fortifying of the Castle, causing
five bulwarks to be made there, which cost more than 100000 florins.

The twelfth of August, with great magnificence, he was received into the
town, as Lord of the Country, with all due ceremonies: he was afterward
received into the Castle of Cracow, which he likewise caused to be fortified,
in which, he spent eight and twenty thousand florins, keeping above 2000 men
at work there, so as these two places were made exceeding strong, and cannot
be taken but in Summer, or in time of great drought.

A description of a long fight at Sea, in the Eastern Indies near to the City
of Bantam, betwixt five ships of Holland, and the Portugals mighty fleet, in
Anno 1601.
IT is notorious to the whole world, that the Staple or principal Mart of
Spices, as Pepper, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Macis, Ginger, and other
medicinable drugs; of precious stones, as Diamonds, Rubies, Turkois, Emeralds,
Saphirs, and others; of Pearl, and infinite other rich Merchandise, which are
only found in the East Indies, and from thence brought into these parts; has
chiefly been for many hundred years, in the famous and magnificent city of
Venice, Venice in time past the staple for merchand^se bro^ght from the Eastern
Iudies.
where they were wont to be bought and sold, and from thence sent abroad over
all Europe: so as the said city and republike flourished, and was every where
famous in regard of the said traffic. These Spices, drugs, and other strange
things, were transported by Sea from Alexandria to Venice, but they were first
brought by land to Alexandria, with great and incredible cost and danger, as
well by reason of the long and tedious way, as the great Conuoys, which the
Carauans usually had to secure them from the incursions of the Arabians, who
lay in wait upon the ways. All these merchandises were burdened with these
great costs and expense, to the profit and advantage of those who transported
them from the Indies to Alexandria, from thence to Venice, and from Venice to
other parts of Europe, where these things were much desired, and could be
brought hither by no nearer way, nor by any other means, but by land, and by
these Cor^uans. But, within these few years, by the resolution of certain
bold and valiant Sea men, who contemned all the fearful and tempestious
dangers of the winds and seas, and endured infinite miseries, torments and
adversities, a new way has bin discovered, altogether unknown to our
predecessors, by which we may go to the said Indies by Sea, viz. in sailing
round about Afrike, in view of the Cape of good hope, and passing from thence
to the other side of Afrike, betwixt it and the Isle of Madugascar, in coasting
sundry Islands, the red Sea, Arabia foelix, and the Persian Sea, as far as
Calicut or Goa, or else from the said Cape, directly toward the strait of
Sunda, leaving the Isle of Madugascar with many more on the left hand. By this
means the said spices, druges, and other costly merchandise, have been brought
into Europe with far less charge and difficulty, so as in Venice, the trade
has begun to decay, and does now flourish in Portugal in the City of
Lisbone, From thence the trade is removed to Lisbone.
so as we may say, it is removed from one town to an other, and that it is at
this present wholly and alone in the said City; for all other places must rate
their wares according to the price made in Lisbone. And because the Realm of
Portugal, and namely the city of Lisbone has for certain years had the said
traffic, as it were proper to themselves, both because they were the first
which discovered and found out the said way, as also for that their king gave a
certain sum of money to the Emperor Charles to buy this privilege, that the
Spaniards should in no sort go that way; by this means the said city of
Lisbone, with the inhabitants of the whole kingdom, are become so rich, as
perceiving the great profit which their kingdom and people obtained by this
trade, have sought all means to appropriat to themselves alone this traffic,
by sailing into those parts: And to this end, have not only subdued diverse
towns, provinces, and entier kingdoms in the Eastern Indies, subiecting them
by force of arms, and continually bridling them on every side by forts and
castles, but have likewise made leagues and alliance with other Kings, Princes,
and Potentates of the Eastern Indies, whom they could not subdue; as it seemed,
(according to the report which came from thence hither) none should trade
thither but themselves. This notwithstanding, some few years since, certain
ships of the united Netherland Provinces tracing the Portugals, did likewise
pass the Cape of good hope, and arrived in the East Indies, where by
experience they found the contrary of that report which the Portugals had
caused to be bruted, how that none but themselves might trade into those
Countries: for diverse kings and Islands where the said spices and other costly
merchandises grew, were either mortal enemies to the Portugals, or else so
inclined as they would not (to satisfy them) prohibit others from trading into
those parts: The Portugals by force seek to keep the Hollanders from coming
to the East Indies.
which the Portugals considering, and being incensed with the Hollanders
arriual, did with great expense set forth the above mentioned mighty fleet to
enforce the Kings of those Countries and free Islands where these spices grow,
not to give them comfort to trade with any but themselves: and on the other
side, to keep the Hollanders from landing or taking in fresh water, and in a
word, to assail and encounter them in such sort, as no news might be carried
home of them into Europe. Now because this famous encounter and sea battle
happened but in the year 1601, and the said fleet was ready in anno 1599, we
will briefly set down how this Armada was employed in the interim of the two
years, because for the novelty thereof it deserves it. The king of Calicut
being a mortal enemy to the Viceroy and Portugals of Goa, and other places
of the Eastern Indies, they armed against each other both by land and sea: The
King had a certain Indian in his service called Cunall, a man so fortunat in
all his enterprises and piracies, as in a short space he became so famous and
wealthy (by his continual booties gotten from the Portugals) as those who
followed his party, seeing these happy beginnings, made him King: He had a
castle and place of retreat, on the coasts of Malauar called by his own name
Cunall, or Cuchall: where after he had forsaken the king of Calicuts party,
he did so continue his thefts and robberies for the space of 50 years with good
success, as in all incounters with the Portugals, he still carried away the
honor, F^r what cause the Portugals rieged forth a fleet in the Indies.
til at last the Viceroy of Goa did rigge forth the said fleet, and made peace
with the king of Calicut.

The King was moved to grant this peace in hatred to Cunall, who had shaken
off all obedience: and so soon as he had confirmed it with the Portugals, he
did presently proclaim war against him: The Viceroy was loath to lose this
fair occasion whereby he might pluck this thorn forth of his own foot, and
having his fleet ready, sent 1500 men under the conduct of D. Lewis de Gamma
his lieutenant general, to Cunals fort. This lieutenant landed all his men in
a country called Ariori, where he fastened his ferrie boats together upon the
river above Cunal in manner of a bridge, and of these, made 31 bridges, on
which he placed gards. That done, he appointed a captain called Lewis de
Silua, to pass over the said bridges with 300 Portugal soldiers who began the
fight, and opened a way to the fort, himself in the mean time remaining in
the Camp with the rest of his troops, to send succors to those that should
stand in need. This done, the soldiers on the 22 of March 1599 by night passed
over the bridges, and incountered with Cunals men on the further side of the
river, who after a short fight, drove them thence: Toward noone 300 Portugal
soldiers more, and 5000 Najos or Indian soldiers which had already passed
over in an other place, marched toward the said Castle: the fight was fierce,
resistance great, the ordnance and small shot played furioursly from both sides,
and among others, Captain Sylua sla^ne.
captain Silua was slain with a musket shot: he was a brave soldier, and his
valor caused the Portugals to make head, but so soon as he was dead, the rest
fled toward the bridges, which being abondoned by the gards, floted in the
midst of the river, so as the runnawaies could not make use of them.

This first attempt of this fleet in anno 1599 had bad success, their own
pride and ouerweining procuring their loss and overthrow, for had they
followed the King of Calicuts counsel who was present in the battle, this
had not happened, as appeared the year following: for having then learned to
their cost, they renewed the enterprise under conduct of their general Andrea
de Furtado de Mendoca on the 20 of March anno 1600. They were not now so greedy
of getting all the honor to themselves, as before, but behauing themselves
discreetly and avoiding the former inconveniences, The pir^te Cunall and his
Castle are taken.
with little labor they took Cunals fort, and himself prisoner, who with his
soldiers were put into the Galleys. By this means Cunall, who from a mean
fellow became a king, was at last made a slave. This exploit performed in anno
1600 toward the end of the year, they began to strengthen the fleet with men
and two new Galions. In August 1601 they determined to go before Bantam, but
winds and tempests did so beat them back, as it was the 24 of December ere they
arrived there, even on the same day, as by a singular providence of God, three
ships of Holland and two Brigantines were come thither: these fought the sea
fight.

The Hollanders so soon as they are past the Cape of good hope, do commonly
stow their ordnance in hold, because they have no use for it till they come to
the strait of Sunda, and by this means they had like to have fallen into the
Portugals hands, had not almighty God (a matter worthy of note) sent an
unlooked for messenger to aduertize them what would ensue. It was a man of
China, who in his boat came to them and gave them notice of the aproach of the
mighty fleet of those of Goa, Cochin and Malacca, assembled before Bantam, in
number thirty sail, amongst which, were eight Gallions, twelve Foists and
Galleys well provided, the least of the Gallions was of the burden of 400
tun.

The Chinois told them, that the Portugals meant to besiege Bantam by land and
sea, that none might trade thither but themselves.

These ships of Holland were called, the one, Guelderland, of two hundred and
fifty tun, the other Zeland, of two hundred tun, the third Vtrecht, of one
hundred and thirty tun, the two Brigantines, the one called the Pigeon, was
twenty eight tun, and the other la Guard, threescore and ten: these vessels
came from the Tussell and had set sail on the 23 of April 1^01 in company of
seven other ships, making up the number of twelve vessels, both ships and
Brigantines. Being at sea they were dispersed, so as but five of them arrived
at the straight of Sunda, where the Chinois brought them that news, who
thought he had done them a great courtesy, in aduising them to shun the
encounter of so mighty a fleet.

But God strengthened them, so as they resolved otherwise: for the Admiral of
the fleet, whose name was Wolfart Harmans, so soon as the Chinois had told him
these news, commanded them to cast ankor, and calling the captains aboard
his ship, after prayer, they consulted together what was best to be done for
the present good of the fleet, and for the future trade to the East Indies, and
what was most expedient for the honor of the Netherlands: whereupon they
mutually resolved, considering the importance of the business, whereon the
preservation or ruin of Bantam depended, The Hollanders resolve to assail the
fleet and to relieve Bantam.
valiantly to assail the Portugals fleet, and by Gods assistance to drive them
thence, and thereby to free the City of Bantam. Thereupon, the deckes were
cleared, and all impediments removed, to the end, the ordnance might be well
managed, and every man have room enough to use his arms against the assault.

This done, as soon as time and place would permit, the next morning two
hours before day, after a sign given, they al weighed ankor.

The 25 of December about sun rising, they descried the Portugal fleet, which
had placed two gallions in Guard directly beneth the West point of the Isla^d
Pulo Penzano, and little dreamt of our men, who came on their backs before they
could hoisse sale or be rescewed by the rest; so as they would have been
enforced to yield, had not a certain mishap befalne our Admerall, who shooting
off one of his pieces, it brake, which fell out well for the enemy. The two
gallions fearing to be assailed again, went away with their Foists.

Our Vice-Admerall Hans Brower, ignorant hereof, played with his ordnance so
furiously on the ship of Malacca, as we might easily perceive a certain
amazement in the Portugal fleet, who retired, and came to an ankor beneath the
Island Pulo Penzano. Our men having notice of the mishap which befell the
Admeral, did likewise cast ankor under certain high Islands, where they
repaired the hurt done by their canon.

The 26 of the same month was very foul, so as neither side could use their
sails or ordnance, God thereby fighting for us, giving our Admerall sufficient
leisure to repair his loss.

The 27 day, they set sail, and made toward the Portugal fleet, shooting
fiercely one at another. On the East side of Bantam, toward the farthest
Island, lay two great galleys, who seeing the Hollanders, betook themselves to
flight, thinking to escape, but two of our ships, the one called Vtrecht, and
the other la Guard, assailed them. Diverse Portugals got up into the Vtrecht,
thinking to save themselves, but our men being in fear of their multitude,
called the Brigantine, to their aid, at whose arrival, most of them leapt into
the sea.

The Captain of the one gallie, was called Francesco de Sousa, son to John
de Teues, Contador Major of Lisbone: In this gallie were 23 Portugals, and 60
Indians, among whom the said captain, with certain Portugals, were saved, the
rest were for the most part slain.

In the other gallie, which our Brigantine la Guard assailed and took, was an
old Captain, who had faithfully served the king of Spain, in those parts, for
the space of 32 years, his name was Andrea Rodrigues Palhota: he, refusing to
yield, was stricken through the body with a pike. They took four brass
pieces out of the said gallie, and afterward burnt them both, notwithstanding
that they were laden with Rice and other victuals.

And because by certain prisoners we have learnt the particulars of that
fleet, it shall not be impertinent to speak somewhat of them.

First, A particular rehersall of the strength of the Portugal fleet.
there were five gallions of Goa, of which Andrea Furtudo de Mendoza was
Admerall, the Vice-Admerall Thomas Zuza de Reucha, Francisco Silua de Menesee,
Antonio Zuza Faleud, and D. Lopes d^Almeyda, were Captains. There were two
ships of Malacca, whose Captains were Traiano Rodrigues de Castel-Bianca, and
Ioza-Pinto. There was one gallion of Cochin, whose Captain was Sebastiano
Swarco. These are the Captains names of the eight gallions.

There was moreover, one Gallion and eighteen foists, which departed likewise
from Malacca, came to Seylao, and went on no farther (one of them excepted)
which our men took, whose Captain was Francisco de Zuza Toues. From Nimar and
Seylao came two foists, and as many galleys, whose Captains were, Andrea
Rodrigues Palhota, slain by our men, Andrea Guiedes de Carnalco, Diego de
Melo, and Manuel Dias. From Malacca came two gallions, commanded by these
Captains, Goncalo Vus de Castel-Bianco, and Andrea Pessoa. And beside these,
two other vessels, called Ioncques, commanded by Captain Francesco de Maris,
and seven Brigantines with oars.

It was likewise reported that there were above eight hundred Portugals in the
fleet, beside the sailers which were all Indians: That four other ships* and
one Brigantine, lay at Achea, and that the fleet expected none other supplies,
but only those which in April were to come from Goa.

The eight and twentieth day, the wind blew hard, so as they could bear no
sail, each side being enforced to lie still. The nine and twentieth and
thirtieth days, they remained quiet on the West of Iaua, a little beyond the
point of Bantam: The Portugal fleet, had gotten the wind of the Hollanders, but
durst not come up to assail them, which our men would have done, if the time
and wind would have permitted them: yet because they would not be idle, they
did set fire on 2 of their galleys, meaning thereby to enforce the Hollanders
to retire, but they were burnt ere they could come near them: they did
likewise sink two of their Foists near to the shore.

The one and thirtieth day, the Hollanders weighed ankor, setting forward with
an intent to charge their enemies, notwithstanding they had a fair wind, who
perceiving their meaning, hoisted sail, and the wind beginning to slacken, the
Hollanders struck sail and tarried for them, and because the Portugals should
not think that they meant to run away, they let fall their ankors, which
they seeing, did the like, not daring to assail them.

The first of January 1602, in the Morning, the Admerall of Holland, Wolfart
Harmanz, weighed ankor, clapped on all his sails, and directed his course
toward the Portugal fleet, who with full sails came likewise toward them,
so as at first, every man imagined they would have fought; but when they came
nere one another, the Portugals turned back, being afraid of our ordnance:
Their Admerall in vain displaied the banner for the fight, his men having no
devotion to it.

Whereupon, on the third day, the Hollanders returned toward Bantam, where
they were most kindly entertained. Their loss was small, and they were greatly
honored over all the whole Country. They lost but one man, yet many of them
were hurt; the harm done to their ships was repaired ere they departed from
Bantam, where, to that end, and likewise to refresh their men, they continued
till the 12 of the same month.

And, notwithstanding there was freight enough at Bantam, yet they were
desirous to pursue their voyage to the Molucques, where, on the 17 of Febr. the
Admeral arrived at Terrenata, finding our men that had bi^ left there, to be in
good health.

The king did with singular love and affection entertain him being exceedingly
grieved, that the gathering time of Cloves, had been for certain years very
unseasonable, so as he could not furnish the fleet to their content, yet he
hoped ere long to give them full satisfaction, promising that none should buy
any Spice in his Dominions, ere our fleet were sufficiently stored.

Not long after, our other ships arrived likewise at Bantam, and there took in
their burden, all of them retiring into the Low Countries richly laden.

We cannot be thankful enough to God for this victory, the benefit whereof
was by time more manifested. For we have not a little daunted the Portugals
pride, ouer-weening, and reputation, and augmented the valor of those, who
from hence, travail to the Eastern Indies, For, as the Reader may perceive by
the above mentioned enterprise of Cunall, the Portugals think three hundred of
their men good enough for five thousand Indians, what rumor then will be spread
in India, how that five of our merchant ships, did put the great fleet of
Portugal to flight? But it is God that encourages his servants to attempt
great matters, bravely to execute them, and to come off with honor, To him be
glory for ever.

A description of the horrible, bloody, and unheard of siege, of the town of
Ostend besieged by the Archduke Albert of Austria, in the years 1601, 1602,
1603, and 1604.
SOme will peradventure think it strange, that among the victories of the
united Netherland Provinces, we set down the famous siege of Ostend, seeing
it was not Prince Maurice, but the Archduke of Austria that besieged and took
it, with great loss of humane blood, incredible expense, and to the small
profit and advantage of his countries. Yet, if any man will well consider this
siege, and the sequence of the History, reading it to the end, he will find
and confess, that this siege has given to the state of these countries, not
one, but many victories, both in that this town was so well defended, and
thereby much hurt done to the enemy, forces, as also because during this
siege, they have won from the Archduke, the towns of Rhynberck, Grave, and
Sluice, each of which is as much worth, and as commodious for these countries,
as Ostend ever was or could have been. On the other side, seeing this siege
was so notable, as we never read of the like, and that the honor of our
gallant Captains and soldiers in defending it together with their brave
exploits do manifestly therein appear, we should do them wrong, to paste them
over in silence.

Before we come to the description thereof, we will first briefly speak of
the situation of the town, and the duke of Parmas sundry attemps upon it, and
lastly what moved the Archduke to besiege it, for it would be over tedious, to
set down every days actions there: we will only touch the principal
occurrences, and whosoever is desirous to know more, we refer him to a
Iournall that has been Printed thereof.

Ostend, not long since, was a small contemptible town, fortified at first
against the enemies incursions with wooden gates and Pallisadoes: six years
after, videlicet, in an. 1572, the States of the united Provinces having well
considered the situation and commodiousnesse thereof, caused it to be so
strongly fortified, as the duke of Parma, by reason of alteration in the
government, having won the towns of Dunkerke and Niewport, coming before
Ostend, could not take it; for considering with himself that he should lose
much and win little by tarrying there, after some 5 days lying before it, he
departed thence in anno 1583.

Since that time, Ostend continuing under the States government, they have
omitted nothing necessary for the fortifying and assurance thereof, and in
anno 1600, it was so well fenced, not only within by renewing and heighthening
the bulwarks and rampires, but likewise without, by new dikes and
counterscarpes, as we may rightly number it among the most impregnable places
of Europe; for the rampires within were very high, and divided by a deep
ditch from the counterscarpes without, which took all hope from the enemy of
being able to force or hold them.

Beside, it seems that Nature, by this Town, was willing to show the world
some raritie, for within these few years, the Sea has made it more
impregnable than before, by a new rupture on the East Side of the town, which
they term the gullet: it is in breadth above one hundred foot, and within the
land, the depth of two pikes, even at low water, and in the Sea where it takes
it original it is not half fathom deep. It cannot be denied but it has ever
had a Haven, but the old is not comparable to the new, for the old Haven every
six hours at an ebb, leaves to that which encloseth the Town, a free
access, and means to fill it up; so as no boats can that way enter without
great danger.

The general States, for the better defense of the town, having caused the
sand hills on the East Side, which are near the Gullet, and whose height
command it, to be leuelled, the sea at every Tide does so fill the leuelled
place, as the seems unto man's judgment, that no means can be found to take
that Haven from the town, for commonly at every Tide the Sea rises so high,
as it extendes it self 1200 paces beyond the Town, and at full sea, a league
into the country, so as the whole land round about, is filled with water,
together with many dikes and ruptures, so that without great danger a man can
hardly pass. In a word, whatsoever might serve for the strengthening and
assurance of a town, has not been omitted or spared for any cost whatsoever:
for Ostend stands so, as it can keep a great part of Flaunders, every way,
under contribution, whereupon the Flemings have still gone about to make it
theirs: and since that the Prince of Parma was enforced to give over his seige
before it, they have by all means sought to surprise it on the sudden, or
otherwise: and among others, La Motte governor of Flaunders in anno 1585,
having along the sea shore surprised the old town, which was only fortified
with a Raueling and Pallisadoes, attempted to fortify and entrench himsefe
there, but he was driven thence with great loss of men, among whom, forty of
his Captains were slain.

Again in anno 1596, after Archduke Albert had taken Calais, the States of
Flaunders did earnestly solicit him to employ his forces in besieging Ostend,
and to that end, promised to give him beside the ordinary allowance of three
months, three hundred thousand florins: to which motion his Highness in part
seemed to incline, taking certain sums of money before hand, yet he only
showed himself before the town, and having viewed it, presently went thence.
This attempt being vain, and perceiving that stratagems, and sudden
surprisals, made the soldiers of Ostend more vigilant, they watched a time,
till the Archdukes army enuaded the fontiers of Holland, amusing the States of
the united Provinces, thereby to divert their forces from Flaunders and
Brabant, and then they built seventeen or eighteen forts about the town,
therein following the direction of a revolted corporal, who had a long time
served in Ostend, and knew what would most annoy them: this they did to stop
the incursions of those of Ostend, and to cut off the contributions which they
raised in the country.

But time and experience taught them, that the intertainment of the Garrisons
which they were to keep in the said forts, amounted to more than the
contribution which the townsmen raised upon the country, and besides, that
the roades of them which lay in Gartison in the forts were more hurtful than
the contributions, so as at last they were so earnest with the Archduke,
showing him the necessity of the matter, and how he ought to lay hold on that
occasion, (his Excellency lying then before Berck) with diverse other reasons
which they alleged, as his highness was moved to enterprise and begin this
siege: and to this end, on the fifth of July 1^01, he sent Count Frederick
Vanden Bergh thither as marshall of the Camp, with four regiments of
soldiers, who encamped on the downs Eastward from the town, and the next day
played with four canon upon it, to give them notice of his arrival: and the
same day, after noone, D. Augustino de Mexia governor of the castle of
Antuerpe came thither with 5 regiments making up the number of 8000 men, and
four Cornets of horse, who encamped on the West side of the town, that he
might lie betwixt the forts of Isabella and Albert: but those of the town shot
so at him, as with loss he was enforced to retire to the downs, from whence
by little and little he made his approches with entrenchments, and so planted
his canon.

In the town were one and twenty camps of soldiers of sundry regiments, and
one company of Burgers, it was well stored with ordnance, munition, victuals,
and all necessaries: the Lord Charles Vander Noot was governor there.

The General States of the united Provinces having intelligence of the siege
of Ostend, sent Colonel Huchtenbrock thither with ten companies, and entreated
general Vere to go thither with three thousand men which were expected from
England, but he made some difficulty therein, being laoth to go without his
own regiment, and that of his brother: whereupon on the eight of Iulie, eight
companies were sent unto him, and on the fourteenth of the same, twelve other
companies which had been at the camp before Berck, making up in all one and
twenty companies, Sir Frauncis Vere enters Ostend on the 15. of July.
among whom were six English: General Vere came thither on the fifteenth of
July by night, and the next day all sort of munition were brought thither by
the Lord of Warmont in despite of the enemies canon, the report where of was
heard into England: for the besieged, made counter batteries, and often brake
the enemies ordnance, and dismounted it: whereupon, two double canon, and four
demys were sent to them.

The fifteenth of Iulie, Th^se of ^^ten^ (...) by (...) (...) (...) d^^. N^^t.
two of the Queen of Englands Ships arrived there with new supplies of
soldiers. Two days before General Veer his arrival, the besieged had made a
furious sallie upon the enemies in their trenches, killing many of them, to the
number of five or six hundred, who were not well entrenched; D. Augustino de
Mexia was hurt there, and D. Hieronimo de Monroy the Campe-Master, was slain
in his Tent; the besieged lost some 30 men: At the same time, or thereabout, D.
Diego d'Idiaques, and D. Iuan Bracamonte, Nephew to Count Fuentes, D. Pedro de
Lojas, son to the Marquess de Lojas, who brought news of the Kings
daughters birth, with diverse others, were likewise slain. Sir Frauncis Veer,
being in the town as chief commander, gave direction for all matters,
dividing the Dutch companies into two regiments, under the conduct of the
governor Vander-Noot, and Colonel Huchtenbroecke, who commanded in the old
town.

The seventeenth and twentieth of Iulie, General Veer having store of men,
seized on a piece of land that lay Southward, which he fortified and
entrenched, placing strong gards in the counterscarpes and forts near
adjoining.

The two and twentieth of Iulie, the enemies canon did so command the Haven as
no boats durst enter; but, the five and twentieth of Iulie, the governor, and
the Ingeneer Master David of Orleans, with other old and experimented mariners,
found that the gullet would serve to bring in boats, by opening a causey or
rampire of the counterscarpe, and that the said boats might lie safe in the
town dikes: But the Archduke caused boats to be laden with stones at Niewport
and elsewhere, which he sanke within and near the gullet to choke it up; but
all the labor was to no purpose.

Those of Ostend made many curtains to secure their men from the canon, they
likewise filled the fortifications which were made in the Sea, with stakes and
cross beams, full of stones, the better to divert the Sea waves from the
Town. By this means the works and counterscarpes abroad were fortified, like
the rampires of other strong towns, being guarded with rauelins, half Moons
and forts, so as the enemy could not bring his ordnance near the town to
make a battery or come to the assault; they did moreover secure the going out
and in of the boats; so as the united Provinces were encouraged to defend the
town, sending thither daily all manner of stuff, and workmen to make it more
strong therein sparing for no cost.

The enemies could by no means come nearer the town than by the West side
along the downs, from whence they fiercely battered it, Description of
^^^wa^ke called S^and^^ll.
and especially the Sand hill. This Sand hill was a Bulwark of double works
one upon an other, having round about it sundry ranks of Pallisadoes from the
bottom to the verrie top, all made of fagotts laid one upon an other, with
other Bulwarks near adjoining, for it was made to defend the West side, which
was the weakest part of the town, together with the haven on that side. This
Sand hill was so battered with the canon, as it seemed like an iron hill, for
they shot bullet upon bullet, which struck upon one an other, and sometimes
rebounded back again.

Near to the Sand hill was a causey opposite to the sea, extending it self as
far as the downs where the enemy lay. This causey was defended by a half
moon, and by pallizadoes, and the Porcuspine by a very strong fort, which the
Archduke caused to be undermined, the better thereby to approach the town: In
that regard, the besieged on the fifteenth of July perced the said causey,
behind their half moon, and armed the point of it with planks and fagots
against the force of the Sea waves: and yet they feared that the same opening
would have done more hurt to the Bulwarks and other works than it did: this
only enforced the enemy, by reason of the water, to quit sundry forts. By
this means the town became like unto an Island, wholly environed with the
Ocean Sea, being divided the breadth of one hundred foot from the firm land,
and from the enemy, who was in great hope that the Sea (the causey being
perced) would do more hurt to the town in winter.

The united Provinces on the contrary were assured that God by that means
would preserve and keep the town, so as they for their parts used all
diligence to secure it, and at General Veres entreatie, sent three and twenty
foot ensigns more thither after the taking of Rhynberck under conduct of Earl
Chastillon, notwithstanding that there were already nine and fifty ensigns
in the town, Many men and much provision are sent to Ostend.
beside those who were daily sent from England, whose number amounted to 2000
men.

The enemy shot continually into the town, more than ever into any that was
besieged, so as many men were daily slain. The united Provinces in September,
sent thither in less than fifteen days (under conduct of the Lord of Warmont
Admerall of Holland, who with his men of war guarded the Seas,) one hundred
threescore and ten boats laden with all sorts of victuals, wine, beer, bread,
turfe, and fire wood for winter (not reckoning five hundred and fifty barrells
of powder which were there before the siege:) the said one hundred threescore
and ten boats did likewise bring three hundred seventy three thousand pound
weight of fine and course biscuit, seventy seven thousand weight of match,
ninety eight thousand pounds of musket and harquebuse shot, with fifteen
thousand iron bullets, and all manner of provision necessary for defense of the
town, so as victuals were so plentiful and cheap there, as a pot of wine was
sold for a groat, and the best for six pence, and a tun of Delfts beer for
five florins.

By this means the siege of Ostend grew so famous, as people came from all
parts to behold the besiegers and besieged.

The Inhabitants of Zealand, did for curiosity sake go boldly thither with
their wives and children. All manner of victuals were better cheap there than
in Holland or Zealand, in regard they paid no imposition.

The Duke of Holst brother to the King of Denmark, with Count John of Nassau,
Count Hohenlo, and the Earl of Northumberland came from England thither, to
view the manner of the fortifications, Count Saint Paul Governor of Picardie,
was likewise onward on his way thither, but by a contrary wind was carried into
Zealand: yea Henry the fourth the great French king came in August to Calais to
understand the particularities of that siege, from whence he sent one of his
Lords to visit the Archduke, who likewise sent Count Solre to the king.

The Lord Chastillon, Colonel Hucht^nbro^ck and others, slain in Ostend.
Count Chastillon, a gallant, noble, and valorous Lord nephew to the great
Admerall of France commanded the French forces in Ostend, and as by unlucky
chance he stood on the top of the Sand hill viewing the Gabions in company of
the governor, the Lord Vander Noot, Colonel Huchtenbroeck governor of Saint
Andrews fort, and Brog Lieutenaunt Colonel to the Scots, with diverse other
gentlemen, the scalpe of his head was carried away with a canon bullet, so as
the brains and bones flew in the face of Huchtenbroeck, Captain Brog and
others. Within a while after, namely on the last of September, the said
Colonel Huchtenbroeck was likewise slain, and was much lamented, as also a
French Captain named Pomarend: It would be an impossibility to set down the
names of all the Captains which dyed both within and without the town
together with the sundry accidents which daily happened there, with so small
terror and amazement as is almost incredible, custom wholly banishing fear.
Among others, a soldier bought a loaf of bread, which he held up in his hand
showing it to one of his fellows, and in the mean time a bullet took away
the one half of it, whereupon, the soldier merrily said that there was some
good fellowship in him that made that shot, because he left him some bread and
took not all away.

An English gentleman of the age of twenty years had in a sallie his right
arm shot off with a Canon bullet; he took it up and carried it along with
him to the Surgeons, who dressed him, which done, he took his arm with him to
his lodging, where without being sick or distempered, he held it in his left
hand, saying, this is the arm which to day at dinner served the whole body.

An other soldier having his arm shot off, and being very weak was led
away by two of his fellows, as he went along an other bullet took away one
of his legs, of which hurt he presently dyed, those two which led him being in
no sort hurt.

A Grocer standing in his shop was slain with a great shot, and being laid in
a coffing, the body was carried away with a Canon bullet.

A young man being on horse back, his horse was slain under him with a bullet
which entered at his hinder parts, and came forth at his breast, and yet himself
had no harm, only his breeches were torn a sunder betwixt his legs with the
wind of the bullet.

A Sea Captain being in conference with one, who laid his arm upon the
Captains shoulder, it was taken away by a great shot, the Captain having no
hurt but only astonished with the wind of the canon.

It fell out likewise oftentimes that the enemy discharging his ordnance, the
bullet flew into the mouth of our canon which was charged, and setting it on
fire, two bullets were sent back in steed of one.

Diverse other strange accidents happened there among so many millions of shot:
for the first ten weeks both from the town and enemies camp more than
threescore thousand Canon shot were spent, beside fireworks to burn down the
town building, which took no great effect in regard the houses were low. Now
this is not strange, for the meaning of the Spaniards was to win the town with
their ordnance, and to make it a heap of stones and ashes, but the besieged
shot as much as the enemies, dismounting their canon, and tearing down their
forts. For there was never any place among Turks, Heathen, or Christians, where
so many shot have been bestowed on either side: the canons being so worn,
and the holes made so wide, as the like has not bin seen.

The foureteenth of August, General Vere being on the Sand hill, was hurt in
the head with a wodden splinter, and because his wound was dangerous, the
surgeons told him that he must withdraw himself to some quiet place free from
the noice of ordnance, whereupon, he went from Ostend, and remained for a time
in Zealand.

The besieged made brave sallies, wherein the enemies were still put to the
worst: the four and twentieth of August, our men made two sallies, the first
by the English alone, the second by Dutch and English, of whom some nine or ten
were slain, and thirty hurt, but of the enemies many more were slain who
still repulsed our men, and when their foot men were too weak, they made use
of their horsemen, among whom, the ordnance made great slaughter, so as this
siege was very bloody and long, as it shall appear by the sequel of the
History.

The enemies were often at variance among themselves, because many of their
attemps had no good success.

They were entrenched in the West downs in seven or eight trenches, the one
higher than the other according to the nature of the ground, their trenches
being conjoined with fagots and sand: further off from these, they had made an
other trench, with platformes for their ordnance, which extended as far as
their fort in the ruined churchyard, betwixt the forts of Grooten-dorst and
Isabella, standing on the river Yperlee, where likewise Saint Clares fort
stood, and part of the camp of the Southern quarter, from whence they had made
a way with fagots as far as the Eastern camp.

Count Frederick Vandenbergh had made a trench to the Southward, opposite to
the Englishmens trenches on the Polder, well fortified with ordnance and
batteries.

D. Augustino de Mexia with some eight thousand men commanded that quarter: on
the East side of the town near to the bridge, was another camp likewise,
wherein lay two thousand men, under Count Frederick: Beside, they had a
company of revolted English, commanded by Captain Flood, and four cornets
of horse: Three thousand men did every night guard the camp: Captain Catrice
had chief command of the trenches with one Simon Antonio: Matheo Serrano was
lieutenant general of the ordnance, D. Lewis d' Auila, Balthazar Lopes, and D.
Iuan Panrache were Sergeant Majors of the Army. The Regiments of the Earls
Solre, Bucquoy, Frisin, Achicourt, and others where there, who agreed but badly
with the Spaniards whose intolerable pride they could not endure.

The mutiny in certain forts was not wholly quieted, but the mutiners were
sent to Saint Winocks Bergue till they might receive their full pay, which came
too late, so as they reduced the whole country under contribution.

Archduke Albert was in person in the Army, and lay in Alberts fort, where the
Camp was fortified and provided for winter, as if it had been a town, and it
was called West end. The Infanta Isabella lay at Niewport, and on the second of
August she came with eighteen Coaches to the camp, being seen by those of
the town. It is reported that whilst the ordnance played fircely on both
sides, herself gave fire to certain canons, which was reputed for a singular
honor.

They fastened wodden platformes to the shore on the East side, which they
fenced with Gabions tied with Cables from thence to play upon the boats which
entered the old Haven: They attempted likewise to stop the sluice of the Causey,
with wood and sacks filled with ^and, but those filled sacks sank down to the
bottom, and were carried away with the tide, so as all that labor was vain.

After that, by the advice of Captain Catrice who had bin lieutenant to la
Bourlotte, and had now his place, they resolved to give a general assault to
every corner of the town, contrary to the opinion of the whole Council of
war, thinking at a low water to win the West Rampire of the old Town, and
there to fortify themselves: but the besieged had provided for it, and the
assault being begun, Captain Catrice was shot in the head, whereupon it was
deferred, and yet his wound was not mortal, for he was healed for that time.

From August to September, the Archdukes Camp spared for no travel nor expense
to win the town, which they continually battered day and night, overthrowing
certain fortifications, killing diverse, and laming others: They likewise came
at sundry times into the trenches, half moons, and other works, from whence
by the courage and magnanimity of our soldiers, they were beaten with great
loss of men. They went about by all means to choke the Gullet, therein using
all the cunning that man could invent to keep victuals from the town, but they
could not do it, nor yet by all their attemps cause the besieged to yield. For
General Vere and all the Captains were resolved to defend it by all means
possible, and by their sallies did much annoy the enemy both in his Camp and
forts.

At the same time, certain men went about to betraie and deliver up the town
to the enemy, but they were bewrayed and executed.

After Harvest, the soldiers on both sides were so badly clad, as they were
much tormented with cold, especially the besieged, who kept guard without the
town in the counterscarps and forts, where the ways were very dirtie, which
caused diverse English men to run away, others grew sick and died, the
Garrison being so weakened, as of seven or eight thousand, there were in
December but two or three thousand left; whereupon, General Vere wrote to the
States for more men.

The Archduke lying in Alberts fort, and the nights waxing long, was desirous
to make some attempt, sending four hundred of his soldiers on the one and
twentieth of December about midnight at a low water over the Haven on the West
side, along the shore, who passing by the Sand hill gave an alarm to the East
side, and from thence, at a place called Schottenbergh, mounted the rampires,
killing a sentinel of Gystels company, and by help of a great wind, fired a
curtein or great heap of fagotts which were laid to break off the Sea waves
and to preserve the Bulwarks foot made on the North side at the end of the
falce-bray or out-wal beneath the Sand hills point, where the foot of it, made
with fagots, burnt three days and three nights and could not be quenched, by
reason the enemy shot so fiercely.

The same night, an Italian soldier that had lost his way, was taken betwixt
the rampires and pallisadoes. This Italian being secretly examined by General
Vere, told him, that the Archduke having intelligence of the Garrisons
weakness, and how the town had not of a long time been supplied with men and
victuals, had speedily sent for all the Garrisons of Brabant, Artois, and other
places, and with these, was come before the town, with a firm resolution to
assault it in sundry places, namely toward the South and West Quadrant, and
the half moons, and that Count Bucquoy should assault the Northwest rauelin
of the old town at a low water, which he might easily do in the night.

Certain other Captains should assail the Sand hill, and two places of the
old town, namely the Porcuspine, which was a small rauelin in the
counterscarpe, which guarded a certain place called the Biere: they retained
the water of the dikes, which is a matter of great importance.

The other assaults should be given to the works without the town to the
South-South-East ward, called the South Quadrant, the Polder, and East
Quadrant, to which some three weeks past, the enemies had given a fierce
assault, from whence they were driven with great loss.

General Vere, knowing this in particular, did on the three and twentieth of
December at two of the clock in the afternoon, send four Captains to view
the Porcuspine, and to bring him word whither it might be defended against the
enemies assaults: and as the said Captains were visiting this place, Captain
Lewis Couture came thither about three a clock with commission from the
General to crave a parley of the enemy, and to send hostage from either side:
This was done unknown to the Captains, but Captain Couture, found the Archduke
very willing thereunto.

The General to excuse this parley, alleged sundry reasons, viz. that he
feared the assault, because he was weak in men, and they of sundry nations,
that he was loath to come to a general assault, and therefore thought good to
beguile and amuse the enemy and win time, till cernaine fortifications in
the old town were finished.

Whereupon, hostages were presently sent from the town, upon the enemies word,
namely Captain Ogle lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Farfax to procure that
some others might be likewise sent from the Archduke to treat: And the same
Evening, the General sent the Sergeant Major Carpenter, commanding him to let
in on the East side of the town, the governor of the Sluice Matho Serrano,
master of the ordnance and Councellor to the Archduke, together with Captain
Ottaigno, Sergeant Major of a regiment, both of them discreet and well
experienced persons, with promise, that in the mean time there should be a
cessation of arms by land on both sides, and not otherwise. These two
Commissioners from the Spaniards were brought by the falce-braye over the Sand
hill, and so carried toward the new town: But a great tumult rising on a
sudden among the Captains and soldiers, especially because this was done
unknown to them: they were by the Generals commandment sent back again the
same way without audience: and in the mean time, the tide was risen so high,
as they could not pass on the East side, but went through the town toward
the West part, where they passed over in a boat to Count Bucquoys quarter with
some excuse, promising to send back our hostages, who returned not to the town
the same night. General Vere, the next day at one of the clock after
midnight, in regard of the tumult among the Captains and soldiers, sent for
all the Captains, French, Scottish, and Dutch, and after long debating on the
Garrisons weakness, and great want of men to defend the old and new towns
with all the counter scarps, rauelins, South and East Quadrants, together with
the half moon beyond the Gullet standing toward the Southwest, he craved
their advice, by what means all these places might be defended from the
enemies assaults, demanding whither the Captains thought it not fit, to race
and abandon those works, which were already forsaken unknown to the
Captains, together with the falce-bray, or lesser Sand hill, where they had
already planted one canon and a demi, and carried five barrels of powder
thither the same day.

All of them thought it fit to race the South Quadrant which was least hurtful
to the town, and to send the men to more needful places; and yet this was not
effected, because five companies came from Zealand on the five and twentieth of
December.

The falce-bray which should have been abandoned, was nevertheless by consent
of certain Captains, and in presence of Captain Saint Clare the Scot
unknown to the General mand with six musket^ers of Saint Clares company,
two other companies being appointed to second them, if the enemy should give
an assault.

The next day at nine of the clock in the morning the General sent again for
the French, Scottish, and Dutch Captains to his lodging, where in presence of
Colonel Loone he made his Apology in French, declaring to what intent, he
entered into communication with the enemy: the Reader may see the excuses he
alleged, in a letter hereafter ensuing which he wrote to the States. The same
day, and in the same assembly, it was concluded to demand hostages and
commissioners from the enemy for assurance of those which had been sent from
the town, whereupon, two Captains, John le Rijck, and Charles Cassart with
Captain Saint Clare the Scot, were sent to receive the two above mentioned
hostages and Commissioners, viz. Serrano, Governor of the Sluice, and captain
Ottaigno the Sergeant Major, who craved to hasten the business, being sent
into Ostend for none other purpose. They were answered, that in regard it was
very late, and diverse Captains already upon the guard, they must have
patience till the next day.

The same night the five above mentioned companies from Zeland arrived, and
because it was Christmas day, the Archduke sent a Spanish Captain with a
trumpet and a letter to his Commissioners, wherein he willed them to hasten
the matter by all possible means. Captain Rijcks fetched the letter and gave
it to Serrano, who thereupon was very earnest for dispatch: he was entreated
to stay till eleven of the clock, and then he should receive all content:
this answer he presently sent to the Archduke. In the mean time the five
companies which came from Zelland entered the town, viz. that of Captain John
Pottey, the company of the Lord Iustine of Nassau, those of the Lord
Vandernoot, Captain John Piron the younger, and Captain la Cord. These five
companies being come into the town, General Vere about noone, gave this
answer to Serrano and Ottaigno: how he could not deny, but that being
overtaken by want of wind, fair weather, and other accidents, he had been
enforced to invent means to help himself and men, and through want enforced
to come to some agreement. But perceiving that the States of the united
Provinces, had so well reliued and furnished him with all necessary
provisions, he could not as then proceed any farther in this treaty with his
Highness, and therefore had no more to say, unless some new necessity should
unluckily surprise him, and enforce him again to crave parley, hoping that his
Highness as a virtuous Prince, would not take this denial to proceed any
farther in the treat, in bad part, for being a soldier, he could do no
otherwise for maintenance of his own honor, and that this slight was
commonly used among soldiers: Thereupon, the Spanish commissiioners went their
way.

The Archduke was much displeased with this warlike policy, and grew exceeding
angry with some of his own servants, who had counseled him thereunto. By
this slight, a rumor was bruted abroad, how that Ostend capitulated, and it
was so confidently beliued, as in the Courts of France, England, that of the
States of Holland and Zealand, nothing was known to the contrary, till such
times as they received letters from General Vere. The Burgers of Gant, Bruges,
Dunkerke, and Newport came with their wives and children to the camp, thinking
that the town would yield, but they were all deceived. This did so incense the
enemies, as they resolved more by passion than reason, to give a general
assault.

The States of the united Provinces were amassed at this treaty, and never
thought that the English soldiers would have so slipped away through the
carelesenesse of their Captains who gave them passeport, so as forty, fifty,
sixty, and more at a time returned into England, who were lusty and in
health; whereupon men, and other necessary provisions were sent thither, which
did encourage the besieged.

The Archduke tired with lying so long before Ostend, and deceived in his vain
hope, was persuaded by his Council to give a general assault, ere greater
forces entered the town: and to this end, he did satisfy and pay many of his
mutiners and unwilling soldiers, making great preparation for an assault
hoping to surprise the Sand hill, there to entrench himself and become master
of the old town, appointing the seventh of January 1602 in the afternoon at
a low water the time for execution.

Colonel Gambiotta the Camp master was to assault the new town, and Count
Ferneste with Captain Ottaigno, the Sand hill and falce-bray: The governor of
Dixmuide, the Porcuspine, an other, the West and South Quadrants, and the North
Rauelin: and Count Bucquoy with two thousand men was to assault on every side,
Count Triuulcio, Alonzo d'Avalos, and other troops were ready to help and
second those that should stand in need, the cauallier likewise having an eye
every where.

The Archdukes felfe stood behind the battery of the key, and the Infanta was
in Isabellas fort.

This thus appointed, a certain Italian whose lot was to be one of the first
that should give the assault, fearing the danger, swam over the haven by night
with his sword in his mouth, and declared to general Vere the enemies
resolution concerning the assault, whereunto he gave the more credit, because
the precedent day and night their ordnance had without intermission played upon
the town: so as he gave order for defense, fortifying all places, transporting
the ordnance, and planting seven great morters at the entrance of the haven,
charged with stones and musket shot, commanding his men carefully to do their
duties, and not be too hasty in shooting, but to do it opportunely.

A Description of the fierce and bloody assault made upon the old town of
Ostend and other forts on the seventh of January 1602.
AFter that the Archduke on the seventh of January, had with his ordnance all
the day long, played upon the Sand hill, and places near to Helmont, the
Porcuspine, and others, from his two batteries, namely, that beneath the downs
upon the cauallier, and the other to the Southward with eighteen great Canon,
carrying bullets of forty and fifty pound weight, beside his battery on the
East side: about 6 of the clock in the evening when it was low water, he
enforced his foot men to give a furious assault, causing his cauallery to push
them forward.

First with great noyce they assailed the old town whereinto they came, along
by the Western haven, beginning at the Sand hill, and so going on with many
light ladders and bridges for assault, which they carried with them to skale
the town; for the pallizadoes which were wont to be there, were all burnt.

This assault was so fierce, and made by so many troops in sundry places at
once, as it seemed they would have taken the town, and made passage through a
wall of steel: But General Vere who had an eye to every place, together with
his brother Horatio, who was near him with a gallant troop of choice
soldiers to second and relieve where need should be, marched over the mines
to the falce-bray, where with great cries he assailed the Archdukes troops,
whom he thrice repulsed, for as often as they came on with fresh men, so often
did he beat them off, their shot and pikes doing them small good against the
English, who at every time made hauock among them with their short swords.

It cannot be denied but that the Archdukes soldiers did very valiantly
behave themselves, assailing their enemies on every side without fear, but
their coming being known and expected, they received such entertainment, as
they had soon their bellies full; for they in the town had their cates
ready, which so soon as the enemies tasted, many of them could never digest:
all places were so well fortified, as their condition here would have resembled
that of their fellows in the half moon on the further side of the Gullet, if
they had become masters of the place. The assault on the East side was given
very near 2 hours too late, so as the tide began to rise, which did not a
little terrify them, perceiving that if they staid there any longer they could
not be relieved, whereupon, they retired, and in their retreat a great
slaughter was made, for our men with great and small shot which could not
miss, thundered among them. The Archduks soldiers gave the like assault to the
Bulwarks of Helmont, the Porcuspine and all other trenches belonging to the
English wherein few men were, which the General had done of purpose so as they
were easily taken: but within a while after, forces being sent from the town,
namely from the Polder and Southren bulwarks with their Rauelins, and the
enemy perceiving they could not that way gain any access into the town,
forsook those forts again, setting fire on the corpse de guard. General Vere
had caused two double canon to be planted on the flanquers of the West gate,
beside the seven which were there already, the which with others, scoured the
Sand hill and West Rauelin where the assault was given, being charged with
chain shot, nails, and bags full of musket bullets, which could not miss the
enemie^; on whom they fell as thick as hail, and made a terrible slaughter,
the cry being so great among those that were hurt, as the living and dead
fell in heaps one upon an other. In the hottest of the assault as the tide was
risen, General Vere vnstopt the Sluices, the more to terrify the enemies, who
saw pale death on every side before their eyes, which he considering, would
not omit that occasion, but with his troops so furiously assailed them, as he
did wholly put them to rout taking all the enemies ladders, bridges of assault,
and other warlike engines, leaving all places near to the Sand hill, as far
as the old Church, and round about the Porcuspine, the Westren Rauelin, and the
English trenches, filled with dead bodies: the number of those that were slain
by the Canon and small shot was very great, and no less was that of those that
were drowned in the Sea, for many of them were taken up beyond Callais in
France, and in Zealand, where they were stripped: the booty was very great, both
in money, garments, and fair armor, and among other a Spanish woman was found
in man's apparel who had been at the assault, as appeared by her wounds; she
lay at the foot of the Sand hill, under her garments she had a chain of gold,
enriched with precious stones, beside other jewels and money.

The Archduke during the assault was in person behind his batteries upon the
Caualliers. Those which assaulted the town had brought victuals with them for
two or three days, (though in vain) and made all manner of provisions for
intrenchment, if their attempt had prospered, they had likewise brought six
barrels of powder to the Rauelin of the Porcuspine, to undermine the town, but
they were soon enforced to abandon all, for the besieged had of set purpose
dismounted the ordnance on the falce-bray, and porcuspine, because the enemy
should not use them to the towns detriment.

The assault beginning on every side, the Archdukes men were gotten on the
West side beyond the Gullet, having many bridges on which to pass over at
their pleasure, and to assault the old town likewise on that side. There was
great likelihoode that thi^ assault would have had good success, considering
the great number of those that might have seconded, whom the besieged could not
have well resisted, had it not been prevented by one that went and yielded to
the enemy, and likewise by the rising of the tide, this revolted fellow ran
forth of the half moon, and told them that there were but forty men in it,
offering to conduct them thither, and to give them entrance, which he did, so
as they easily took it, not considering that their adverse party had done it
of purpose, to divide their enemies forces, the better to be able to defend
the most dangerous places where the assault should be g^uen, being well
assured that they could with more ease recover the said place, than the enemy
take it.

The said half moon being taken, and many men placed in it, they presently
began to entrench themselves with spades and mattocks which they had brought
with them for that purpose, but all their labor and diligence was in vain.
For the ordnance and small shot from the South side, and Spanish bulwark, fell
so thick upon them, as heads, arms, and legs, flew every where, and
perceiving that the Sea might enclose them, they grew fearful, which the
General considering, sent Captain Day thither, who with great cries fiercely
assailed them and with much effusion of blood drove them thence, so as the next
day, above three hundred dead bodies were found in the said half moon, beside
those that were hurt and drowned. In this general assault which continued two
hours; the Archduke lost in all above two thousand men, for in the fury no man
was spared, notwithstanding he cried out, take me prisoner, I am an Ensign,
Lieutenant, or Captain, one promising an hundred, an other, two, three, four,
five, yea six hundred crowns to have their lives saved, but it was to no
purpose, for none were spared during the fight, but afterward, the heat being
past, many were taken prisoners, and great numbers of them brought into Ostend.
Very few of our men were slain, and in all but thirty or forty, and some
one hundred hurt: these Captains were slain, Captain Haeften, and Captain
Nicholas de Leur, a lieutenant of Saint Andrews fort, two English lieutenants,
one Ensign, two of Captain Haeftens Sergeants, one of General Vere his
gentlemen, and Sir Horatio Vere was shot in the leg. There died of the enemies
commanders, Count Imbec an Italian who was very rich, and had three hundred
pistolets to spend every day, he promised to give as much gold for his ransom
as his body weighed, but a common soldier slew him with a poniard, Don Durago
camp master, the Sergeant Major general who had been hostage at Ostend, the
governor of Antuerps lieutenant, Colonel Lewis Gambaliotta, D. Alvaro Strugas
knight of Malta, Monsieur de la Tour, lieutenant to Count Bucquoy, D. Pedro de
Velasco, Lewis de la Villa verde were sore wounded. His Highness sent a Drum,
craving leave to survey the dead, who had four hours granted him.

The commanders which conducted the soldiers to the assault on the seventh of
January 1602, were Count Ferneste an Italian, commanding 2000 of his country
men who were to assault the Sand hill; Count Bucquoy on the West side of the
Gullet with two thousand men, assailing the Eastern Rauelin, but the tide being
risen very high, he assaulted the half moon beyond the Gullet, from whence
he was bravely repulsed.

The Governor of Dixmuide, at the Porcuspine with two thousand men, from whence
he was likewise repulsed, besides an other Captain with five hundred men on
the West Rauelin, who was also beaten thence. An other Captain with five
hundred men on the South Quadrant, who did nothing. The Sergeant Major with one
thousand men on the West Quadrant, who was likewise repulsed.

After this, because the prisoners said that the enemy would the next day give
an other assault, General Vere did every where fortify and fence the weakest
places. He was likewise told that on the one and twentieth of January, the
town should be again assaulted by two thousand cuirasses armed at proof:
but it seems, because they could get no firm footing on the Sand hill, that
therefore it was deferred, as also, because the soldiers began every where to
mutine, especially the old Spaniards and Italians, by reason of their bad
usage, in being led so to the slaughter, contrary to all law of arms, and
driven forward ^^^e bruit beasts by the horsemen after the Turkish manner,
against the opinion and consent of all the wise and discreet council of war;
so as it only seemed to be done in despite and bravery. But the Archduke
presently caused part of these mutineers to be imprisoned, and hanged up forty
or fifty of them, of whom, three were men of note and respect among the
soldiers, one of them being an old soldier, said aloud at his execution, that
there were four thousand who would revenge their death; an hundred and fifty
of them were likewise condemned to the Galleys. The mutineers of Isabellas fort
were sent to Winocxbergue, without pay, who reduced the whole country under
contribution, paying themselves.

Within a while after, the States of the united provinces, sent more men to
Ostend, and furnished the town with all necessaries, notwithstanding the
enemies continual shooting, so as we can reckon, that from the first day of
the siege, which was the fifth of July, till Christmasse, one hundred sixty one
thousand and five hundred shot had been made upon the town, and half as
many from thence. The harm done by the enemies Canon was not only repaired,
but the town thereby made more strong. The Sand hill was so full of bullets as
the workmen could not enter the pallizadoes which had iron points, meeting
many times with seven or eight bullets in one hole. It was a very hard task
to undermine the town, by reason that there were so many trenches and
fortifications abroad hindering the enemies approches, the Sea did likewise
keep them from any long work: To famish the town, was likewas impossible; for
though the enemy shot on every side, yet in one day, twenty, thirty, yea'
forty boats entered the town, and they had moreover an other haven ready, by
which they might at all times enter with less danger, and though all the
havens should fail them, yet they might continually bring provision into the
old town by shallops. After this assault, The Garrison of Ostend changed.
the united Provinces, resolved to change the Garrison of Ostend every four
or six months: so as by little and little the Lord Frederick of Dorp entered
the town as Governor and Collonell, together with William Edmonds the
Scottish Colonel, with the Colonels, Daniell de Hertaing Lord of Marquette,
Barendrecht, the Lords of Dort, and Domervile, with their troops of sundry
nations. These men so fortified the places of the Corpse du gards, as the enemy
could no more do such harm as he was wont, and in that regard, shot not so
often into the town. As these entered, the old Garrison departed thence to
refresh themselves. General Vere went away likewise, and made a journey into
England.

The going out and in of these soldiers was seldom done without danger, and
yet sometimes it was not dangerous: as on the seventeenth of March, when five
boats entered by night without any harm, notwithstanding, all the enemies shot.
The next morning at clear day light, nineteen boats richly laden entered: the
enemy made one hundred twenty and two shot after them, and those of the town
discharged above sixty shot upon the enemies Canon and Gabions. Of these
nineteen boats, sixteen were touched, but no great hurt done, only two men
were slain, and seven hurt. In a word, they entered sometime with danger, and
sometimes without.

In less than six weeks, one hundred thirty and six boats laden with all
manner of provision and munition entered the town. A Sea Captain called John
Adrian Caut, did on the tenth of February bring 60000 pound weight of match,
and thirty barrels of powder thither, the like did diverse others, so as the
town was provided for a long time. Great quantity of fagots and other stuff
was likewise sent thither to defend the town from the Sea waves.

Soldiers were commonly brought in, in great shallops and by that means the
old Garrison of English and other nations were carried thence in March.

The Archduke likewise sent for more men to his Camp, with a firm resolution,
according to his directions from Spain, to continue the siege to the end,
because it stood him so much upon, as the only means to shut up the havens of
Zealand, and thereby to hinder their fishing and trade, yea, their passage to
and fro into England. To effect this, he sent for many Galleys from Spain and
Italy conducted by Frederico Spinola and hired mariners from Embden and the
East parts, thereby to take the dominion of the Sea from the Hollanders, for it
was that which made them able to resist the power of so mighty a Prince: This
was a matter of great importance, not only for the king of Spaines reputation,
but likewise for the Archdukes. Whereupon, he sent for more money from Spain,
and raised certain sums in the Country. He likewise sent abroad for skillful
Ingeneers, who were entertained and set on work, not sparing for any cost, and
to some of them 100000 crowns were promised. These men made sundry new
inventions to choke the Gullets haven, and to keep boats from entering, as by
making plat-formes and Caualliers whereon to plant the Canon; by filling boats
full of stones, and sinking them in the haven, filling baskets full of sand,
and rolling them into it, they likewise made engines of wood and wicker like to
Gabions, which they termed Sawsiges, some of them fifty foot in length, and
eighteen in height, filled with stones and gravel tied together, the which
they thought, by help of men, to roll into the gullet, and with many of these
to build a fort. They likewise tied diverse wooden beams together, and began
to make Bulwarks upon them, which at a full Sea they intended to have thrust
into the Gullet, and from those bulwarks to sink all ships that passed along,
with such like other inventions, devised by skillful and ingenious men: and in
this manner, did every day make some new work or other.

But so soon as the enemy finished such inventions, those of the town
presently devised remedies against them, either to beat them down with the
canon, to set them on fire, or to keep their workmen from their labor; and
when they descried any of these works, they knew well enough how to pluck
them into the Sea, which at an high water carried them clean away.

The siege continuing, diverse houses and cabins were built in the camp, so as
it resembled a new town, by which means the enemy was well lodged: and the
camp toward the West, was called the West-eynd.

In continuance of time, the town was fortified both against the enemies
ordnance, waves and tempests of the Sea, yet the enemy approached by little and
little, the soldiers cabins were repaired and renewed, the better to preserve
them from the plague and other contagious diseases: especially the second year
of the siege, at what time the plague was very rife both in the Camp and
town.

The united Provinces, notwithstanding this continual siege, which did put
them to such infinite charge, as our children will hardly believe, what mass
of treasure has been spent there, viz. in extraordinary expenses one hundred
thousand florins a month, beside the soldiers pay, and how these small and
weak Provinces, have been able without extraordinary means to furnish such
expense, resolved to keep and defend the town so long as they could, yea
though the siege should continue many years.

The Archduke for continuance of the siege, used all possible means to get
money, and to that end went to Bruxels in winter, and there assembled the
States of the Country, but those of Brabant would give no money, unless his
Highness did first fulfill his promise to satisfy the mutiners of Artois,
Hainault, and Luxembourg, saying that they expected the French, so as they of
Flaunders only contributed. Those of Brabant likewise craved to be
disburthened of twenty five thousand florins a month which the champaine
Country was enforced to give the Hollanders for their contribution.

An Assault given by the Archduke on the thirteenth of April 1603, on the
Polder, East, and South Quadrants.
AFter that the Archduke had continually battered the town all anno 1602, and
by his infinite number of shot done great hurt both to it and the forts, slain
many men, and yet never the nearer to his purpose, in regard the besieged made
such brave resistance.

He did again on the thirteenth of April 1603 give a furious assault on the
Quadrants of the East, South, and Polder, so as he took them, in this manner
following. The thirteenth of April, the wind was so high, as it carried away
the tops of houses, threw down whole buildings, and namely the tower where many
were slain. The enemy laying hold on this occasion, made an assault both on
the East and West side with great numbers of men: on the East side, they plucked
up about 100 stakes forth of the half moon, but they were enforced to quit
it, for they were beaten back even to their Quarter: they came on the West
side as far as the Porcuspine whether they brought two barrells of pitch, but
they were likewise driven thence with loss of men.

They did also with great fury full on the Rauelin of the Polder, and were
likewise enforced to retreat, but they renewed the assault with freshmen, and
became masters of all these three places, videlicet, the Quadrants of the East,
South, and Polder, notwithstanding that a demi Canon and other iron pieces lay
upon the Polder Quadrant: in taking these places they inhumanely slew all they
met with, the fight lasted some two hours.

The next day about nine of the clock at night the besieged gave a fierce
assault to the East Quadrant, but were driven thence with loss of some four
hundred men, among whom were many brave soldiers. But the enemy in these
assaults lost above one thousand.

Continual travel, and resistance made this truce so famous, as it was termed
a martial academie, both for Governors, Officers, Captains, and private
soldiers, as also for mariners, Pilots, Ingeneers, Physicians, Surgeons, etc.
so as those who had but continued certain months in this schole became
masters in in their arts, both for defense and offense.

Skillful Ingeneers, notwithstanding they had studied a long time in books,
did confess that in comparison of practice here, they were but nouices:
Physicians and Surgeons learned more here in a week, than elsewhere in a year.

Pilots and mariners learned here how to guide their vessels to avoid the
enemies canon.

Canoneers were taught here how to plant their ordnance to sink ships under
sail, how to make counter batteries to dismount the enemies Canon, which on
both sides consumed infinite numbers of men.

The six first months the enemy made above two hundred and fifty thousand
shot, shooting bullets of thirty or forty pound weight: for all the time the
Infanta lay at Newport, if she heard not the repot of the Canon, she was
malcontent, and commanded her Gunners to shoot continually.

The besieged were not much indebted to the enemy, but in the first 20 months,
discharged 100000 shot, 18000 of the enemies were slain the first twenty
months, as well by the ordnance, and extreme cold which they endured the
first two* winters, as by sallies, sickness and misery. And in the town six
or seven thousand died, though the number was not well known, for sick and
wounded men were sent away: the like did the enemy, who sent his to the next
towns and hospitals.

Notwithstanding all these batteries, and that many in the town died of the
plague, and through want, yet the besieged were visited by their friends,
kinsfolks, wives and children which came forth of Holland and Zealand and went
thither as to a festival. Some Captains brought their wives and children
thither: Gentlemen and great Lords came thither from France and England to see
the fortifications,

All the three years that the siege continued, the besieged kept the fifth of
July holieday, beating their caudrons in steed of bells, discharging all their
ordnance: and that day a solemn sermon was made, wherein thanks was given to
God for preserving them so long a time from their enemies, entreating him still
to do the like.

Sundry sallies and assaults were made, store of fireworks were thrown into
the enemies Camp and plat-formes which were made of sagots. Among others a
certain Ingeneer called Pompey the Romain, invented sundry means to choke
the gullet, but all his labor was to no purpose.

The besieged had made an half moon on the farther side of the Gullet to
defend the going in and out of the boats, and to keep them safe in the town
dikes: and the better to skale the said stalfe moon, this Pompey had framed a
bridge for assault, mounted on four great brazen wheels like to a Chariot, on
which this bridge was to be drawn: it bended in the midst and rested on a
great mast one hundred and fifty foot long, whereon this bridge might be
drawn up and let down: It was made of Cables and small cords twined together
on small masts. The fore part was drawn up along the mast like a draw bridge,
which being brought near to the town, they would have let fall overthwart the
dikes, upon the Rampires: this bridge was drawn by forty horses. With this
bridge which they termed the luy-wagon, or idle wagon, they thought to have
assaulted the half moon beyond the gullet. The besieged perceiving it to come
forwards, did with their Canon shot break one of the wheels, and before it
could be mended, had erected masts upon the counterscarp of the half moon,
that when their bridge should be let fall, it might rest upon the said masts:
this being perceived by the enemy, he gave over his invention.

In June 1603, D. Rodrigo Lasso came from Spain and brought news that Marquis
Ambrose Spinola (brother to Ieronimo Spinola that was slain in the Galleys
before Sluice) had after his brothers death couenanted with the king of Spain
to take up great sums of money for his Majesty's service, on certain assurance
and conditions, viz. to have the chief authority and sovereign command at
the siege of Ostend, with ample power from the Archduke, and not to be envied
of the other commanders in the army, of-what nation soever.

The said Marquis being come into the low Countries with this commission,
undertook the charge, and presenly reformed many matters, deposing sundry
officers, placing others in their steds, carefully providing money, and setting
diverse skilful Ingeneers on work, by whose help he hoped to take the town: for
the besieged had long since lost all their fortifications and works abroad.
The Marquis presently caused mines to be made, and assaults to be given.

The Sea and high tides caused by a North-east wind which blew on the first day
of March, did great harm, spoiling and carrying away the mines, trenches, and
conterscarps.

The besieged, though they daily received supplies of men and other
necessaries, yet the six last months they were mightily annoyed by the
continual batteries, and sustained great loss: for after Collonell
Huchtenbroeck, the Lord of Gystels, the Governor, being slain in March, who
was a brave and valiant gentleman, and much lamented, Colonel Loon succeeded
him, who within a while after was likewise slain, and after him many other
Captains which had the chief command, next, Colonel Berendrecht, whom
Colonel Vtenhove succeeded, and left the town being hurt. At last when the
town had been a long time without Governor, the Lord of Marquet was sent
thither on the tenth of June 1604, he was the last Governor there. David of
Orleance the Ingeneer was shot in the town, and went his way into Holland to
be healed. But master Rafe Dexter the Englisman, a valiant and skillful person
tarried there still. This change of governors hindered the prosperous success
of many matters: their good Decrees being not well observed: some of which, we
will here set down. It was decreed, for preventing controversies betwixt
victuallers, That no wares or victuals should be sold till they had first
continued four and twenty hours in the Market place. All soldiers were
likewise forbidden to play at Dice or Cards, on pain of eight days
imprisonment, and fasting with bread and water. No officer might come upon the
guard being drunk, on pain of loosing his place and arms: because that many
soldiers went to the enemy, the townsmen offered fifty crowns to him that
could bring in such an one either alive or dead. The enemies, in regard diverse
of their men came to our side, caused their horsemen to keep continual guard,
yet it was to no purpose at all. In April, May, and June, Marquis Spinola used
all speedy means to take the Town, that he might go and relieve Sluice,
sparing neither men nor money. Among others, Captain Catrice was slain, he
was a man of great experience in martial affairs: diverse other commanders,
Colonels and Captains, were likewise slain: they also took the Porcuspine,
and approached daily by assaults and Mines.

The twelfth of June, Spinola blew up a Mine near to the Polder Bulwark,
which buried many of his men alive: thereupon, he gave an assault, wherein
certain hundreds of his men were slain, and some forty or fifty of the
besieged. The sixteenth of June, the besieged made a fierce sallie upon the
Pioners, and drove them away. Diverse other assaults, Mines, and sallies were
made that Summer, by means whereof, they came at last even to the Dikes; they
likewise stopped up the old haven with Fagots. In August, they undermined the
Sand hill, and approached the other Bulwarks, by means of their platformes,
from whence they shot fiercely. In the end, Spinola resolved, in September, to
assault the chief Bulwark the Sand hill, and finding the Spaniards and
Italians unwilling to march, in regard of the danger they had before been in,
he resolved to make use of the Almans, promising them great rewards: and though
Mines were made on both sides, yet he was desirous to get the Sand hill:
whereupon, he gave an assault by part of the Almans of the regiments of Biglia
and Barlaymont, and as those that went foremost were blown up into the air by
the Towns Mines, and they that followed retiring, thereupon, he enforced them
to march again to the charge, saying, that there were no more mines, which
they found to be true, and so without any resistance took the Sand hill, and
highly recompensed the Almains: he used like means against the other forts,
for all the besiegeds defense consisted in sallies whereby they often drove the
enemies forth of those places they had gotten.

The besieged, by means of their Ingeneers, and by Rafe Dexter the English man
who had a long time served in these countries, had behind the bulwarks of the
Sand hill and Helmont, made a new Sand hill and Helmont: which done, they
divided the town in the midst, with bulwarks and flankeers a thwart the
town; and behind it, they likewise entrenched more than a quarter of it,
toward the Gullet and new haven, with bulwarks and flankeers, for their latest
retreat, naming that place new Troy, hoping still to hold out for a time.

But all these new works being not steadfast and firm, could not long resist
the Canon: for the enemy had already brought his ordnance upon the Rampires
and battered the new town.

Whereupon, the besieged perceiving that the Sand hill was lost, and that the
enemy undermined the town near to the old Church, and that it was likely
that high tides with an North-east wind would do much hurt, because the old
town was their best defense against the Sea, they aduertized the General
States, and Prince Maurice, (who were assembled at Sluice) of their condition.
Their Lordships and his Excellency, considering that by the conquest of Sluice
and other places, they had now gotten footing in Flaunders, and thereby were
able to invade the enemy in his own Country, which they had a long time
desired, and that now Ostend would stand them in no great steed, it being
environed and blockt up with so many of the enemies forts, and also a place
from whence the Archduke could not annoy them, and might easily be by them
recovered, so long as they were Lords at Sea: These and such like reasons
being well weighed: The States gave authority and leave to the Lord of
Marquet Governor of Ostend, to capitulate with the enemy for his most
advantage, seeing themselves were out of fear of the Archdukes forces before
Sluice that winter.

Thereupon, the Lord of Marquet with his Council of war, fearing least winter
would impair his composition, began to ship away his ordnance, munition,
remainder of victuals; and all those whom he supposed might have hindered the
treaty, as, Preachers, Ingeneers, Gunners, etc. Then he sent two Captains
forth of the town to treat with the Marquis about surrendering it, the enemy
likewise sending two hostages into the town.

At last on the twentieth of September 1604, after much contestation about the
ensuing articles, the accord was made betwixt Marquis Spinola in name of their
highnesses on the one side, and the Lord Governor, Colonels, and Captains in
Ostend, on the other.

FIrst that all Church men with their goods and mouables may freely and without
impediment depart thence.

2 That the Governor, Colonels, Captains, and soldiers, of what quality or
condition soever, as well within the town, as abroad in the forts, the
Captains of ships of war, with their officers, mariners and soldiers may
freely depart with all their vessels laden, or otherwise, to Flushing, with
all their arms, ensigns displaied, drumes beating, match in cock, and
bullets in the mouths, together with all their baggage: and if they shall want
boats for transporting their baggage and hurt men, time shall be granted them
to procure such, according as wind and weather will permit, which boats shall
likewise freely return.

3 That the said Governor, Colonels, Captains, and soldiers may take four
piece of ordnance with them and no more, without any powder: And to this end
for better assurance of his Highness, Captain Wingaert Lieutenant of the
ordnance, shall make a reuiew thereof, not unloading any of the boats in the
haven. And for conduct of the said boats, the Master of the ordnance,
Gentlemen, Conductors, Gunners, Carpenters, Pioners, horse, and whatsoever
depends thereon, shall freely depart.

4 All Officers and Commissaries, which have managed accounts and soldiers
pay, and others, may freely depart with the goods, armor, horse, and other
things belonging to their office.

5 That all Commissaries of victuals, and other the States Officers, may do the
like.

6 That the two Captains Lantscroone and Gystels that were prisoners, with all
other Officers and soldiers shall be freely released: as likewise all
Captains, Officers, and soldiers belonging to his Highness, who are
prisoners in Ostend: Always provided, that the prisoners on either side, shall
pay their costs and charges.

7 That all Burghers, victuallers, and others, in pay or out of pay, may
likewise freely depart, with their arms, mouables, boats, and baggage.

8 That the said Governor, Colonels, and Captains, shall this present day
deliver up to such as the Marquis shall appoint, all the old town, with the
small plat-formes, called Moses Table, and four hostages, in whose stead the
said Governor, Captains, and Colonels, shall retain those whom they have
already.

9 The said Governor, Colonels, Captains, soldiers, and officers, are all of
them bound to depart on the two and twentieth of this month, because it is not
possible for them to do it sooner, by reason of foul weather; as for sick
and hurt men, they may follow after with the baggage.

10 If, by reason of a contrary wind, the Governor, Colonels, Captains and
soldiers, can not depart at the time appointed, they shall then be bound to
go their way by land, and to that end, such wagons as are needful, shall be
lent them.

11 And for security of their persons and boats, if foul weather should
happen to delay their departure, yet, that this Article may not be infringed,
hostages shall be given them for their Highnesses, who when the boats shall
depart, shall be safely sent back to Ostend; as also, those Hostages given by
the Governor, Colonels, and Captains, to his Highness, shall remain as
caution for the above said wagons till their return, and shall afterward be
sent safely to Sluice.

In this manner did the famous siege of Ostend, break up, which continued
three years and fourscore days; a siege which will be spoken of so long as
the world lasts, and will seem incredible to after ages.

The accord thus made, the enemy entered the old town, and our men into their
entrenched works called New Troy, till the two and twentieth of September, and
then they went away by land, according to the capitulation, crossing the
gullets, in sloops and Ferrie-boats. Governor Marquette, the Colonels,
Captains, and others, were by Marquis Spinola invited to a banquet, whilst
the troops were putting themselves in order to march. They went along the Sea
side, after this manner, the French led the Vauntgard, the Dutch, the battle,
and the English and Scots, the rereward, they were in number three thousand,
all lusty, and able men; they carried four piece of ordnance with them toward
Blanckenberg and the next morning arrived at the camp, where Prince Maurice and
all the Lords did courteously welcome them, taking them by the hand, saluting
them all as they rode through the troops, thanking them for their faithful
service done to the commonwealth: Then, their Quarter was appointed where they
should rest, the captains, officers, and brave soldiers being preferred to
good places, and largely recompensed.

Most of the Burghers likewise went their way to Sluice: The Baylie of Ostend,
was made Baylie of Sluice, and none tarried in Ostend, but a few old people.

Diverse notes were found of the number of those that died at this siege: one of
Spinolas soldiers that was slain before Sluice, had a note about him, of all
the colonels, captains, officers, and soldiers which died before Ostend. An
Alman gentleman that was at Ostend, says, that during the siege, there died 15
Colonels, seven Marshals of the camp, 19 Sergeant Majors, 560 Captains, 322
Enseignes, 4911 Sergeants, 1166 Lieutenants, 9166 Corporals, 56366 soldiers,
six thousand and eleven Mariners, one thousand one hundred nintie six women
and children, amounting in all to 76961. All these died, from the beginning of
the siege, to the last of July, 1604, not accounting those that died since.
This number is great and incredible: unto which, the sick and wounded, which
were sent abroad to the Hospitals may be added.

Some have likewise set down the number of the besieged which was very great,
but I think it impossible, truly to number them, for those that were sick or
hurt were presently sent away; but the number of the enemies was far greater,
yet the besieged had more plenty of all things, and endured less misery than
the Archdukes soldiers, who lay 3 whole winters, in so cold and moist a place,
and therefore it is likely that very many of all nations died there. Ostend was
afterward visited by diverse men of all sorts, who found it an heap of stonss
and sand, there were few houses, but many cabins, much munition, and some 11
piece of ordnance which were unserviceable, with certain morters and other
engines, and an infinite number of bullets.

The Archdukes went thither to see the town, which they wonderfully admired,
and perceived, that they had spent and consumed, huge sums of money, time, and
men, only to win an heap of sand, and finding it ruinous and inhabitable,
they gave order to have it repaired.

From thence their Highnesses went in pilgrimage to our Ladies near Dunkerke,
to whom many attributed the victory: they gave order that the houses and
Church should be reedified, and the town fenced against the waves of the Sea:
and the better to draw people to dwell there, they gave great privileges and
immunities to it, but the first year few came thither: and at this day, they
have neither fishing nor navigations.

A description of the General States army marching through the Duchy of
Brabant, under conduct of Prince Maurice of Nassau in Anno 1602.
THe Estates general of the united Provinces together with his Excellency
Prince Maurice of Nassau, considering that the Archduke of Austria went about
by all means to reenforce his troops which he already had in the low
Countries with a new and mighty army from Italy, and with it, not only to
continue the siege of Ostend, but to invade the said united Provinces; were
likewise desirous for their parts, to show their fatherly care as well for
defense of their own subjects, as for abating the pride of the haughty
Spaniards, and preventing all his determinations, did, in the beginning of June
1602, with great expense, set forth a gallant army of horse and foot, which on
the 17 of the said month passed master at Elten in the Isle of S Gravenweert,
at Pauderen, and places near adioining; it consisted of more then 5000 horse
and 18000 foot, with 1930 wagons, not accompting those of victuallers, and 6047
horse of draught. General fasts and prayers being made over the whole country,
the army crossed the Rhyn and Waell upon two bridges made over those rivers,
and marched toward Nimmeguen, and from thence to Moocke, where his
Excellency, as General of the army, caused some of his troops to pass the
Mase, and the same night reposed his army at Moock, from whence without any
stop, he passed his forces over the Mase, and lodged at little Linden, bravely
determining to go and seek the enemy, and to offer him battle, who had
already received his Italian forces; and if God should grant him the victory,
he then hoped to be able to relieve Ostend, which had been besieged eleven
months, or at least, if he could not sitly meet with him, yet to dare him,
who seemed to desire nothing more than to meet with his Excellency upon his
own territories, to revenge his loss at the battle of Niewport in Flaunders.

The whole army being in Brabant, the General States of the united
Provinces, made a declaration and caused it to be printed, wherein they showed
the causes why they had prepared this army: the effect whereof was thus.

For as much as the General States of the united Netherland Provinces, The
States letters for contributions.
have by Gods grace, and assistance of Princes and and Potentates their
friends, done their utmost, for the serious advancement and profit of the
Netherlands this present year, to free them wholly from the tyranny of the
Spainards and their adherents. And because it is just and reasonable that all
provinces, towns, villages, parishes, and inhabitants of the low Countries,
that groan under the Spanish yoke, should presently aid and assist them: In
that regard, the administrators of N. N. are entreated and warned for the first
and last time, to deliver within three days after sight hereof, into the hands
of the deputy of the receiver General of the united Provinces resident in our
army, the sum of N. N. in abatement of the contributions, wherewith they
have been and still are charged, for the freedom of the low Countries: upon
sight hereof, the said administrators shall send two hostages into our camp for
the said paiement, with commission to treat with our commissioners as well in
regard of reasonable contributions, as for their own defense, that they be not
molested by our soldiers; wherein, these presents shall serve for their
safeguard and passeport: otherwise, for default of accomplishing the tenor of
these presents, we will therein proceed (which we shall be very sorry to do)
by way of arms.

Given in the assembly of the said Lords general States at the Hague, the 7
of July 1602. Here de Hotting a vidit, and subsigned C. Aerssens.

The said Lords did likewise cause this ensuing placard or inscription to be
printed, that the Countries might seriously look to what they were to do.

To the high, illustrious, honorable, noble, learned, wise, and discreet Lords,
good friends and neighbors, the Prelates, Princes, Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, and
Cities of Brabant, Flaunders, Artois, Hainalt, Valenciennes, Lisle, Douay,
Orchies, Namur, Tournay, Tournesis and Malines, representing the body of the
Netherlands, under the Spanish, or Archdukes government: To all of them in
general, and to every of them in particular.
MY Lords, we doubt not but that your Excellencies do still remember, the
loving remonstrances and exhortations which we have often made unto you,
wherein we entreated you maturely to consider, and well weigh the determination
and end of the Spaniards and their adherents, enemies to the State, laws,
privileges, goods, and persons of the Netherlands, viz. their original, and
rooted determination, which is so base and hurtful, as it wholly tends to the
entire ruin of the Inhabitants of these Countries. We know very well
(notwithstanding that the said determination is likewise among you held
indubitable) that some of your Excellencies, have been drawn thereunto,
partly by your own good natures, and partly by persuasions, that matters might
be redressed and amended, by means of the Archdukes and presence of their
Highnesses. But because we are well assured of the Spaniards and their
adherents continuance in their determination for ruin of the Netherlands, and
subiecting them for ever to the Spanish yoke, that they might bear rule over
the consciences, bodies, laws, and goods of the inhabitants thereof, and that
the Archduke can no way help it; this is the reason why we cannot be of your
opinion. And not to precipitate your Excellencies nor our selves, into a
certain, continual, and irreparable ruin, we have found out this to be the
best remedy, still to continue, with a constant courage in the laudable
resolution taken from the beginning by the chief persons and members of the
whole Netherlands, of all estates and conditions: and being assured of the
aid and assistance of God, and that of Kings, Princes, and Republiks with whom
we are in league, as also on the equity of our cause, we do patiently
expect good success, especially by your Excellencies directions and discreet
government,, and will voluntarily undergo all difficulties, dangers and
expenses requisite for maintenance of so holy, commendable, honorable, and
necessary resolution. Nor can the base and deceitful conueyance of the low
Countries, made to their Highnesses, ever move us to any alteration: we having
in that regard, after the said conueyance, seriously by letters and word of
mouth conferring with your commissioners, requested and exhorted your
Excellencies to be careful on your side for the managing and government of
affairs of State and war, both within and without the Country: we are well
assured, that if it be duly considered, and not with a passionate spirit,
that none will judge otherwise, but that the said deceitful conueyance does
undoubtedly tend to the assured ruin of all the Netherlands and the
inhabitants thereof. Your Excellencies do perceive, understand, and
effectually feel what is past, and may easily judge of that which is still
likely to ensue, so as we think it needless to writ more amply unto you of
it: only we lovingly entreat, exhort, and earnestly request your Excellencies
to remember the laudable reputation purchased by your predecessors certain
hundreds of years past, which they have left unto us as a rule, which is, to
be Protectors and defendors of the liberties and laws of the Netherlands in
common, and of the members, towns, and inhabitants thereof in particular; and
to consider whether the contents of the said idle and unworthy conueyance, and
of the treaty which ensued it, does agree with the duty, wherewith your
Excellencies are tied, to your houses, estates, posterity, and especially to
your Country. If so, (which we by no means think) we will pray unto God to
enlighten your Excellencies, and to give you a better and cleerer judgment:
But if your Excellencies perceive that the said pretended conueyance (made for
necessity, and to avoid a greater mischief) be deceitful and dishonorable,
and as an infamous blot to the Netherlands: if likewise ye understand that the
Spaniards and their adherents proceedings which have ensued thereupon, and are
till now grown from bad to worse, both in affairs of state and war (as we
know that the most of your Excellencies do) are preiudicious and intolerable;
and so by consequence your Excellencies are not bound and tied to them, as
repugnant to the common good, the laws and privileges of the Netherlands. If
your Excellencies do likewise consider, that all forcible extremities, all
prohibitions of trade and commerce, all devises and practices to entangle the
Majesty of England and the united provinces, do more and more come to light,
and are not only repugnant to this resolution, but bring forth clean
contrary effects: That the treacherous attempts on the Towns and Castles of
the French king, give great occasion to take speedy revenge: That libels and
rimes (wherewith they seek to make the French King and his affairs odious to
the common people; and call in question the rightful successions of the
Crowns of France and England) are but vain propositions, only tending to
incense their Majesty's; and that they go about in vain to raise tumult and
sedition amongst the people of the Low Countries, considering that whilst they
are at quiet, and live under obedience, their condition (thanks be to God) is
an hundred times better and more safe than that of the common people under the
king of Spain, and Archdukes; and that they have no occasion to distrust their
lawful superiors or their actions: but on the contrary, the Spaniards, and
Archdukes subjects (perceiving that all their affairs do daily impair) that
the authority of the States, Prelates, Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and towns of
the Provinces both in general and particular are without any respect trodden
underfoot: that they defend themselves only with strangers in contempt of all
good Patriots: and that, not only in the chief garrisons, towns and forts,
but generally in all matters (some few excepted) they seem to proceed formally
and in appearance, the which without all question they will soon leave off, if
they were once absolute Lords; so that the Provinces and people should not be
only without trade, wealth, and navigations, but even the third part of the
Inhabitants would be deprived of necessary means to live, the chief cities
made Doue-coats, the Country villages ruined, and the people eaten and
consumed to the very bones by soldiers, who are so badly paid, as mutiny in
one place is no sooner quieted, but two worse than it breaks forth in another;
so as it is to be feared, that in the end all will become desperate. In which
regard, we entreat your Excellencies, effectually to embrace the necessary
remedies, and so to handle the matter, as their Highnesses may be persuaded to
depart from the Netherlands, and to procure themselves a more quiet and
certain portion: for then it will be no hard matter for your Excellencies and
us, to cause the Spaniards, and other strangers to follow them, and to enforce
the greatest parts of their adherents, to become true Patriots and Countriemen.
If any shall herein propound some impossibility, how that your Excellencies
cannot safely take this course, let it please you to believe the contrary,
videlicet, that if your Excellencies for six months will assist us with as
much money, as the moytie of the ancient and ordinary taxation of Brabant,
Flaunders, Artois, Haynault, Valenciennes, Lislie, Douay, Orches, Tournesis,
Tournay and M^lines amounts unto, and to lie still your selves, respecting
their Highnesses, or else to join with us, which we leave to your Excellencies
choice and pleasure, we hope, by Gods help, to bring things to such pass, as
your Excellencies shall judge that there is likelihood of good success. And
seeing that many honest people, dare not set themselves forward, but are in
diverse points irresolute, your Excellencies shall give such directions, both for
government, and matters of Religion, as ye shall think fit and most expedient;
and ye are not to suppose, but to be well assured that we will not attempt to
do any thing to the contrary. Your Excellencies may likewise be assured that
in an action so necessary, laudable and honorable, neither your selves or us,
shall want the aid and assistance of our neighbors Kings, Princes, and common
wealths. In which regard, we once again entreat your Excellencies, to forget
all passion, suspicion, and bad conceits, and with us to embrace this present
occasion, as the only means to settle the Low Countries in their ancient
glory, prosperity, peace, and quiet; not depending on pretended new forces,
which cannot but cause great ruin and misery. If otherwise, we foresee, that
miseries and mischiefs will grow greater than ever heretofore, from which,
before the whole world we will clear our selves.

Whereupon, we beseech God, high, illustrious, honorable, noble, magnificent,
learned, wise, and discreet Lords, friends, and neighbors, to inspire your
Excellencies, with a desire tending to the common good of the Netherland
Provinces, and prosperity of the true and honest Inhabitants thereof.

From the Hague in have this seventh of Iulie 1602, signed by Hero de Hottinga,
and underneath, The true friends and neighbors of your Excellencies, The
general States of the united Netherland Provinces. By their appointment,
signed by C. Aerssens.


So soon as all things which were thought necessary for this army were
speedily prepared, and that certain Lords of the General States, and council
of State, were appointed to be present with his Excellency, to assist him in
all matters which might happen in the army, videlicet, from Holland the
Burgomaster of Alcmaer whose name was Gerard Coorn: from Zealand, Albertus
Ioachimi, counselor and pentioner of Tergoes: from Vtrecht, Gerard de Renesse
Lord of Vander Aa: from Frizeland, Julius Essinga, and from Ouer-yssell Otto
Roeck. The army was divided into three troops: The first was that of his
Excellency, conducted by Count Ernest of Nassau, which commonly marched in the
left wing: the second, by Count William of Nassau governor of Frizeland and
Groeningue with whom was Count Henry of Nassau his Excellencies brother, who
usually marched in the middle or battle: The third by Sir Francis Vere
General of the English Regiments, who led the right wing. The horsemen were
conducted by Count Lodwick of Nassau General of the cauallery, and with him
the Lord Gray, who were likewise divided into three troops, each of which near
to one of the foot troops. The wagons and carts were also divided into three
parts, (the ordnance excepted) being twelve demi canons and three field pieces.

The three and twentieth of June the Camp departed from a place called Little
Linden, and marched in the foresaid order not one behind an other, but close
together, being sometime separated half an hours journey from one an other,
and sometimes less, and was quartered the same day at Sambeer, Mullem, and
Oploo.

The four and twentieth at Bleyterwick, Meerle, and Venroy: the five and
twentieth, at Baecken near to Venlo, Brey and Zeuenum: the six and twentieth,
at Bingenum near to Remunde, Baxen and Heilhuyse: the seven and twentieth, at
Aldeneyck near to Masieres, Gestinghen, and Ophouen. The Reader may consider
that by the first mentioned places, are meant the quarters of his Excellencies
troop, the second of Count William, and the third of General Vere.

The eight and twentieth, nine and twentieth, and thirtieth of June, and first
of July, the whole camp remained in the said places, setting up mills to
grind, and ouens to bake, and making other provision in the town of Masieres.
The second of July, the army marched in the same order, and quartred at Lent
and thereabout. The 3 day, (leaving Mastricht on the left hand) at Gellick,
Moperdingen, and Eygenbilsen.

The fourth at S. Heeren-Elderen, Heins, and near to Tongren, where it stayed.

The fifth and sixth at Gelmen, Hopperdingen and Rijckel, near S. Torns: the
seventh, all the troops lodged together at Halmael near S. Trons.

The Archduke having assembled his army beyond the town of Thyenen, under
conduct of the Admerall of Arragon, at a place called Hackelduyuel, entrenched
and fortified his camp with Rampires and Bulwarks well fenced with ordnance.

His Excellency on the eight of July, with a great part of his horse and foot
(leaving the rest in arms together with the wagons and baggage at Halmael)
crossed a small river called Dormaele, and a village in Brabant called
Nerelant, leaving Louayn on the right hand, and went even in sight of the
enemies camp, sending some of his horsemen to a little river called the Get,
not far from the enemies Camp, to view and to try whether there were any
likelihood to draw him from his place of advantage to battle. But perceiving
that he did not stir, his Excellency and men after some stay on an high
place, having showed themselves to the enemy, returned to his Camp at
Halmaell, where he continued the ninth day, the enemy not once coming
abroad: and want of victuals enforcing his Excel. to abide there no longer,
and perceiving that the enemy was strongly entrenched, having with them
certain Italian troops newly arrived, amounting in all to the number of 20
thousand men, together with 18 piece of ordnance, he resolved to do that which
should be most commodious for himself; the difficulties of the passages and
bad ways were propounded, the number of wagons being very great, and the
labor to journey greater with such a carriage.

They found the towns and villages of the country of Liege very unwilling to
give them bread for money, and there were so many men and horse in the army as
sufficient forage could not be found for them; corn could not be ripe in a
fortnight or three weeks: they came likewise too late to hinder the Italians
from ioining with the Admerall: whereupon they resolved to besiege some town
of importance: some propounded Antuerpe, but their necessary provisions were
not ready for such an attempt. In the end they resolved to turn back and
besiege the town of Grave, and there to attend the Admeralls army. Thereupon,
his Excellency departed the next day being the tenth of the said month, in
the self same order as before, toward Aix, and places near adioining. The
heat of that day was so intolerable, as many soldiers (though the iournies
were not long) died of faintness by the way, and others were so weak as they
were enforced to tarry behind, yet in the cool of the evening they came to
the camp, the enemy in all the march giving no alarmes to our men either by
day or night.

The 11 day, the heat continued, so as his Excellency stirred not that day,
but refreshed his army.

The 12, the army lodged upon the heath before the town of Hasselt.

The thirteenth, at Helchteren, the fourteenth, at Lille, the fifteenth, at
He Is, where his Excellency sent a trumpet to the enemies soldiers at
Eyndhouen, commanding them to depart thence, which was done.

The 16, the army lodged before Helmont and Stiphent, and upon refusal to
depart which the enemies garrison in Helmont Castle made, his Excellency
commanded a volley of six canon to play upon it, whereupon, they presently
capitulated and went thence.

The 17, the army rested at Vden, the 18, at Cassell, Esteren, Reken, and
Welp, and at last before the town of Grave, which his Excellency besieged and
took, as shall appear in the following description.

The siege and taking of the town of Grave in the land of Cuyck, in anno 1602.
HIs Excellency according to the resolution of the General States, brought
his army before the town of Grave, the chief City of the land of Cuyck,
seated in Brabant upon the Mase: in former time it belonged to Guelderland, but
was afterward reduced under the government of Brabant, being engaged to
Maximilian of Egmont Count of Buren. The Prince of Orange of happy memory
mariying his daughter, bought it together with all that depended thereon, and
enjoyed it a long time: but after the pacification of Gand, certain Almain
troops lying in garrison there for the Spaniards, were driven thence by the
Princes forces together with the help of the Burgers.

The Prince of Parma did afterward besiege it in anno 1586, unto whom, the
Lord of Hemert delivered it up. Since then, the town being strong by nature,
was better fortified with Bulwarks, Rauelins, and Counterscarps, and is now one
of the strongest places of the Netherlands. Antonio Gozales the Spaniard was
Governor there, who fearing and expecting a siege, D. Inigo d'Otaiola a very
skillful Captain, brought forces thither, most of them being Italians and
Spaniards with some German Companies, under command of Pangus Gallais of
Tiroll, Lieutenant to Colonel Tyssing, amounting to the number of one thousand
and five hundred men, beside the Burghers: the town was well stored with
ordnance, munition, and victuals.

His Excellency being come before the town, disposed his quarters after this
manner: himself encamped on the West side of the town on the banks of the
Mase, on which a bridge was made of two hundred and thirty paces in lenght:
Count William lay on the South side of the town, and the English under
General Vere on the West side, where another bridge was likewise made over the
river, whither diverse boats came presently forth of Holland laden with
victuals and all other necessaries for a siege. In the mean time news was
brought that the Admerall of Arragon, had broken up his camp at Thynen, and
was coming with 20000 horse and foot into the Country of Liege, and from
thence to Ruremond and Venlo, with an intent, by one means or other, to relieve
the Grave. Whereupon, his Excellency spent some time in fortifying his camp
abroad, especially on that side where it was most likely the enemy would come.

And the whole circuit of the camp round about the Town on both sides the
Mase (partly by reason of the Marshes, and partly to enclose certain high and
eminent places which were not fit to be left abroad least the enemy should
seize on them and thereby give some advantage) was wholly entrenched, and
fortified with Skonces and Pallisadoes. Batteries were likewise made upon the
principal ways, where ordnance was planted.

Certain engines were likewise directed to give signals by fire, that the
quarters might in the night advertise one another, if any alarm should be
given.

All the time, from the six and twentieth of Iulie, till the 3 of August, was
spent in these fortifications and works, which were very great and many. But
then, in the Evening, the musters being taken, and certain wagons and horse
for draught sent away, they began to make their approches.

The Admerall, in the mean time, tarried near Venlo, making show as if he
meant to cross the Mase, to go to besiege Rhynberck, thereby to draw his
Excellency from the Grave, who in time prevented him, sending his cosen Count
Ernest of Nassau with sixteen foot companies thither. The Admerall having
notice hereof, departed from Venlo, and by easy journeys came on slowly,
putting men into the town of Gennep, which belonged to the Duke of Cleues.

The tenth of Iulie, he lodged at great Lynden, within half an hours journey
of his Excellencies quarter and there encamped, drawing his Camp forth in
length as far as the Mase (where he made a bridge) and Heumen Castle, which
he took and fortified, intrenching his camp before, and planting diverse
canons.

The Garrison of Grave had at times made sallies upon the approches, but very
slowly at first; yet after they perceived succors, they came forth with
greater fury, as on the thirteenth day in the morning by day break, having
first made some signal by fire, so as it was thought that the enemy would
have assailed the camp, but nothing was done: whereupon, the enemy was beaten
back into the town with great los^e, and with little or none at all on our
side.

The fifteenth day, the enemy did again make show to assail our camp,
whereupon, the town garrison made a furious sallie upon the English Quarter,
and was again beaten back: in this skirmish we lost an English Captain.

In the mean time the enemies soldiers (namely the Italians) did in great
troops come and yield themselves to his Excellency in regard of the great
want and misery they endured, and told him that the Admerall approached with his
ordnance near to his Excellencies Quarter, on which he meant continually to
shoot, and thereby enforce him to dislodge: upon this advertisement diverse
fortifications were made, whereby this mischief was prevented.

The twentieth day at night the enemy made some shot from a far off, both upon
the bridge over the Mase, and into his Excellencies Quarter, hurting two or
three men, and within a while after he began to dislodge his troops, who
carried ladders, spades, mattocks, and other preparations with them, coming
down to our trenches betwixt two skonces which stood in the midst betwixt
his Excellencies and Count William of Nassaus quarters, intending as it seemed
there to break in, and attempt to put forces into the town. But considering
that his Excellency stood on his guard and that all his men were in arms, he
presently retired in great fear, and attempted nothing leaving certain ladders
and tools behind him, which our men took and brought to their quarter.

This attempt being vain, the Admerall without sound of trumpet or drum
departed thence in the night, and marched toward Cuyck, which his Excellency
perceiving, the next morning, would presently have followed him, but was stayed
by a thick mist which arose, whereby the enemy had sufficient time to get far
enough.

After his departure a rumor was spread, how that he was gone to Rhynberck,
whereupon Count Ernest was sent thither again the second time, and yet nothing
ensued: for the enemy remained near Venlo, attempting to put a garrison into
it, which the townse men for a time refused, in regard of the disorder which
soldiers usually do commit where they once are masters.

The ninth of September, the General States whose names here follow, departed
from the Hague, and on the eleventh day, arrived at his Excellencies Camp
before Grave: The Lord John of Renesse Lord of Wulp: the Lord John of
Oldenbarneuelt Lord Temple: Cornelis Frans Wits Burgomaster of Dort: Arent
Meynertsz Burgomaster of Harlem: Jacob Vander Dussen Burgomaster of Delft:
Gerart Keg eling Burgomaster of Ter Goude: Bartholt de Vloswijck Burgomaster of
Rotterdam: Nicolas Jacob Simons Burgomaster of Horn: Albertus Ioachimi of
Zealand: the Lord Hottinga of Frizeland: Doctor Scherf of Ouer-yssell. John
Reingers ten post of Gronningue and the Ommelands: Corneillis Aerssens the
Register: And of the Council of State, Jacob Boelejz of Amsterdam: Ferdinand
Alleman of Zealand, Ecko Everts Boners of Frizeland, Lauwijck of Ouer-yssell,
George de Bie Tresorer, and Christiern Huygens Secretary.

After the enemies departure our men on every side approached the town, the
counterscarp being even with his Excellencies quarter, so as our men partly by
galleries made overthwart the dikes, and partly by undermining, mounted the
chief bulwark in Equal height with the town Rampires.

From Count Williams quarter the galleries stretched to the midst of the
chief town dike: and the English were come as far as the enemies
fortification on that side, being ready to assail it and make themselves
masters of the chief dikes. Those in the town perceiving this, and
considering that succors failed them, did on the eighteenth day send a drum to
crave a parley, whereupon, hostages were sent from both sides, and on the 19
day an accord was made in form following.

FIrst, that the Governor, Captains, officers, and soldiers both horse and
foot, together with sick people, shall come forth of the town, with their
horse, arms, baggage, and goods, Enseignes displaied, drum beating, match in
cock, and bullets in their mouths.

Secondly, for better carrying away of their baggage, sick and wounded men, his
Excellency shall lend them one hundred and fifty wagons as far as Die.

3 They shall leave two Captains as hostages, for assurance of the return of
the said wagons, horse and wagoners.

4 His Excellency will give them passeport and conuoy to carry them safely to
Die.

5 Those soldiers which have in former time served the States shall enjoy the
benefit of this treaty, like other soldiers of the said garrison.

6 That all prisoners shall be released on both sides, of what estate or
condition soever, in paying their charges.

7 The Kings officers both of war and justice, shall freely depart with their
baggage: such as cannot follow the troops, it shall be lawful for them to
tarry longer in the Town, and at their departure, boats shall be lent them to
Mastricht: Provided, that they give caution for them.

8 That all officers of victuals, warlike munition, and ordnance, shall be bound
to deliver the said victuals, munition and ordnance, to such Commissioners as
his Excellency shall appoint to receive them, without diminishing or wasting
any of them, or else this treaty to be broken.

9 The Governor shall promise to be a means to their Highnesses, that what
the Magistrates and Burghers of the said Town have lent to the said governor,
Captains and Soldiers, may be presently repaid.

10 The said Governor, Captains, officers and soldiers, shall depart the
next day, which if it cannot be so soon, the said Governor shall suffer two
thousand men, whom his Excellency will appoint, to enter the Castle and
Bulwark behind it.

Granted in the Camp before the Town of Grave the nine and twentieth of
September 1602.
According to this agreement, the enemy, on the twentieth of September, went
his way, and gave place to our men: their number was eight hundred, beside two
hundred that were hurt: The Church being cleansed and purified from
superstitious images, divine service and a Sermon was made there after the
manner of the reformed Churches, with Prayers and thanks giving to God in the
great Church, in presence of his Excellency, the general States and other
Lords, on the two and twentieth of September being Sunday. Upon the eight and
twentieth of the said month, a solemn Sermon and exhortation was made in the
same Church, about the inauguration and reception of his Excellency, as Lord
of the town of Grave, and land of Cuyck, the which after the sermon, was
presently solemnized in the market place, before all the people. And after
that, order was taken for keeping of the town, (whereof the Baron of Sidnisky
was made Governor) and for the government and fortifying thereof, the Camp
was dissolved on the last of September: his Ex. returned to the Hague, and the
soldiers were sent to their garrisons.

A supplication, together with the points and articles of reconciliation of the
town of Grave, with his Excellency Count Maurice of Nassau, as Lord of the
town, and general of the army of the united Provinces.

His Excellency having well viewed and considered these points, together with
the Lords general States of the united Provinces, has granted and disposed of
them, according as is here noted upon every article.

FIrst, a general Pardon of what soever is past, from his Excellency and the
said Lords States, in behalf of the Burghers and inhabitants of this town,
both those that are gone away from thence, and those that remain still, as
well for matters of religion, administration of offices, as otherwise without
any exception: no man to be punished or taxed for any thing heretofore done.
And therefore his Excellency in quality abouesaid, shall take the burghers and
inhabitants of this town, as well ecclesiastical as civil into his
protection, and as their Lord, use them with all love and gentleness.

His Excellency grants this demand.

Secondly, confirmation, and continuation of the towns privileges, in the
same manner as before the troubles, and afterward during the life of my Lord
the Prince of Orange (of happy memory) his Excellencies father, and Lord of
the town.

His Excellency does likewise grant his request.

Thirdly, that all religious persons both men and women without exception,
together with the burghers and Catholic inhabitants, may have the exercise of
their religion, without any molestation, so long as they live peaceably: and to
this end, they crave the Church of the new covent called S. Mary's Sepulcher to
be given them; to the end that matrimony and Christning be not taken from the
Catholics.

For this matter, the suppliants shall in all equity be dealt with, as the
other inhabitants of the united Provinces.

Fourthly, that the old and new Nuns, as also the crossed Friars of S. Agathas
Cloister may remain there still, and live in quiet, enjoying their revenues,
both patrimoniall goods, and Church livings, the same to be likewise granted
to all Ecclesiastical persons of both Chapters being in this town, who are
willing to remain there, among whom the Parson of the town, who is newly come
thither, to be comprehended.

This shall be granted in the same manner as the former article.

Fifthly, because diverse companies of this Garrison, who are already gone, are
greatly indebted to the Burghers of this town, leave may be granted them six
months after the date of these presents, to procure their payment in the
Archdukes Country, and to return again to the town, without craving any
passeport for that purpose: and if any of them shall need longer time, he
shall then crave a particular passe-port of the towns Governor, whom his
Excellency shall appoint: The same also to be promised to the officers of the
receipt, that they may make up their accounts in Court and there clear their
businesses.

His Excellency grants this demand, provided, it be done with consent of
the Governor, and Magistrates of the town.

Sixthly, that it may be lawful for all Ecclesiastical persons and others,
who after the conclusion of this treaty are desirous to depart hence, and to
dwell elsewhere, to do so the three years next ensuing, if it so seem good
unto them, with their goods and families, not craving any passe-port to that
end, but only this present treaty, and such as are willing to dwell in the
champaine Country, or in any neutrall town, may likewise freely and without
any impediment return hither, to take order for their goods mouable and
immouable, and to dispose and alienate them at their pleasure, either by
themseues, or such as they shall appoint.

This demand is granted.

Seventhly, in regard this is a frontire town confining the country of Cleues
and Rauesteyn, where the imposts of Holland have no force, such taxations not
being to be laid on this town without manifest ruin thereof, especially now
when the Burghers have been charged with intolerable Garrisons, and hindered
by this siege: It may please his Excellency to free the said poor and
desolate communaltie especially so long as it shall be a frontier town, from
the said general impositions of Holland thereby to cause the inhabitants, to
continue their residence there.

My Lords the General States will take order for this, according to equity.

Eighthly, and to this end it may please his Excellency, according to the
decree of Holland, to lodge the horse and foot Garrison, in the void places,
now, or hereafter to be made upon the towns Rampires or elsewhere, to the
ease of the poor burghers, seeing that till now, all officers and most part of
the Garrison have been lodged and entertained at the expense of the Court,
which has therein spent within these 14 years more then 200000 Florins, in
compassion of the small means and ability of the poor people.

Order shall be taken herein according to reason.

Ninthly, that no inhabitants of the united Provinces of what estate or
condition soever, claiming any debts or personal actions of the body of this
town, or any particular burgher, shall (in regard of the towns poverty)
commence any suits against them till two years next ensuing be expired.

We will proceed herein as in the former article.

Tenthly, all those are likewise to be comprehended in this agreement, who for
the towns service, or their own particular affairs, are any where absent.

His Excellency grants this request.

Eleuenthly, the gardens near to the town dikes, and other places which of
right belong unto it, which have been granted from the Court, shall remain to
the true owners.

The grants shall be seen, and order taken therein according to justice.

Made in the Camp before the town of Grave the 18 of September 1602. This
done, his Excellency with all solemnity was received into the town, as Lord
of the land of Cuyck.
Certain instituted bands are defeated by the Captains, du Bois and Bacx;
together with a description of a journey, which our men made into the Country
of Luxembourg under conduct of Count Lodwicke of Nassau.
WIthin a while after his Excellency had taken the town of Grave, the
Captains, du Bois and Bacx, did on the first of October depart with their
Cauallery forth of the Garrisons of Breda, Berghen, and Gertrudenbergh, being
in all fourteen Cornets, intending to make an attempt in Haynault, watching a
time when the mutineers were gone into Brabant, and the Archduke returned from
his camp at Venlo and Thoren.

Being come to Bilsen within three miles near to Mastricht, they understood
that eight troops of horse which had been to convey the Archduke, were not
far from thence: the said troops were bands of institution belonging to the
Earls, Mansfelt, Buren, Bucquoy, Beaurie, and others, with three Cornets of
Walons and three of Italians.

These were in the nightenuironed in two villages where they lay; the gards
were set upon, and part of them slain, the rest sled, and others were taken
prisoners: the Captains were not there, five Cornets were taken, and one was
burnt in a Church: they found a good booty there, videlicet, five hundred
horse saddles and two hundred prisoners. The Cornets were brought to the Hague,
and hung up in the Hall for a perpetual remembrance. Chalon, bastard to
Renatus of Chalon of the house of Nassau, escaped: This being done, our
Captains with their horsemen returned to their Garrisons.

In November following, the united Netherland Provinces resolved to make a
journey into Luxembourg, under conduct of Count Lodwick Gunther of Nassau, with
33 Cornets of horse and 1000 foot, under the Colonels Edmonds, Ghistelles,
Dommer ville, and Marquette, there were 200 French, 200 English, 200 Scots, 200
Almans, and 200 Dutch, making up in all the number of 1000 foot, with three
field pieces, and 50 wagons, for the munition four, one for every Colonel,
and the rest for the horsemen.

These, on the third of November, departed from Nieumeghen, and went to
Keppelen and Bedbourg: the fourth day, they lodged at Niewkerke and Oldkerke
near Wachtendonck: the fifth, at Grevenraet in the Duchy of Iuliers: the sixth,
at Iuggen, from whence certain troops went to take in S. Vit: the seventh,
they lodged at Renghen: the eighth, at Zeverwijck: the ninth of November at
Blommendaell, where they had intelligence that their men had failed in their
attempt upon S. Vit: the tenth, all the troops came before S. Vit, and lodged
at Meve-dorpe, and the same night approached the Town, Colonel Marquet
commanding the troops.

The eleventh day, those of S. Vit began to parley, and an accord was made,
that the soldiers of the garrison, both horse and foot, should depart thence
with their arms and baggage, and should swear not to bear arms for the
space of two months in the Country of Luxembourg, this was accomplished, and
the Burghers compounded for reasonable ransom.

The twelfth, they marched forward, and lodged at Iulligh: the thirteenth, they
came before Bastoigne: the 14, they still remained there, and Captain Marcelis
Bacx was sent to S. Huberts, burning the Country all along: the fifteenth,
they went from Bastoigne, and lodged at Housnegen or Hardengue: the 16, at
Pedro-dorf near Dechery, where Dommer vile, the same night, began his
approaches, and the next day, the Burghers compounded for a reasonable ransom:
from whence certain horse were sent to demand contributions as far as
Luxembourg, being conducted by Captain Cloet: The 18, 19, and 20 of November,
they remained at Vitterdorf, Wolset or Walset, and on the one and twentieth
marched toward Dopwiell: the 22, at Andanach in Iuliers, the 23, at Gheldorp,
and there rested the four and twentieth day, whither the troops which had
been at S. Vit, viz. 50 horse, and 200 foot came to them.

The 25 and 26 they lodged at Korcum, the seven and twentieth at Nedertzier,
the eight and twentieth and nine and twentieth at Wanlor, the thirtieth of
November, the troops of Brabant divided themselves, and went to Grave, and the
rest went to Couborch, and the second of December to Nieumeghen: Thus in a
months space they ouerran the whole country without any resistance enforcing
it to contribute, because the Governor Count Peter Ernest of Mansfelt had
commanded that no contributions should be paid, whereupon our men burnt
diverse houses and villages, none being found to ransom them. The Archduke
sent forces to stop their journey, but wanting money they staid by the way,
consuming and wasting the country as enemies. Count Lodwick brought away many
prisoners, gentlemen, and boores, and among others the Abbot of S. Haberts:
they all paid ransom. This voyage ended, every man returned to his winter
Garrison.

A description of a fight at Sea betwixt seven of the States men of war, and
six Spanish Galleys, the third and fourth of October Anno 1602.
THe States of the united Netherland Provinces did under command of the
Admerall Opdam, send forth certain warlike vessels to serve the Queen of
England: four of them were commanded to wait for six Galleys which D.
Frederico Spinola brought from Spain to join with the rest that lay at Sluice
in Flaunders.

These were the names of the Galleys under Spinola, the first the Admerall S.
Lewis whose Captains name was Cardinalin, and in her an other Captain called
Castalis d' Avila with a company of soldiers: The second, S. John, in which
Vergas was Vice-Admerall, and in her two Captains with companies of soldiers:
The third, Padilla, the Captains name was Hasso, and in her an other Captain
with a company of Portugal soldiers: The fourth, la Lucera, and the Captains
name Calliado, with other companies of Portugal soldiers and Captains: The
fifth, S. Philip, and in her D. Rodrigo de Naroys Captain of a company: The
sixth, S Iacento, and in her Lewis de Camours with an other company of
soldiers, so as there were in all nine ensigns, videlicet, two of Spaniards,
and seven of Portugals, to the number of nine hundred men, beside one thousand
and five hundred slaves, every Galley carried three brass pieces and no more.
And notwithstanding that the Hollanders were aduertified of the coming of
these Galleys, yet the Lord of Opdam was upon necessity constrained to go for
victuals into Holland, leaving the vice-Admerall John Adrian Cant for General
in his ship called the moon, accompaned with Gerbrant Iansz Saell of Horn in
a ship of 4 hundred run called Bansome together with Captain Henry Hartman in
the Lioness of Rotterdam, and Gerbant Iansz in the hope of Enchuysen. These
were appointed by the Queen to go toward the West parts, but were stayed to
meet with these Galleys; one of the Queens ships called the Hope under the
command of Sir Robert Mansell, with her Pinnace called the Advantage under
Captain Jonas, were likewise commanded to wait for these Galleys. These
concluded that the vice-Admerall Cant and Captain Gerbrant Adriansz Sael
should lie at anchor in the downs, where an other of the Queens ships lay
called the Answer, under Captain Breadgate: Sir Robert Mansell and his
Pinnace lay at Sea betwixt Dover and Calaice, and not far from them the other
two Hollanders.

Lying thus in wait, Sir Robert Mansell on the third of October about noone,
descried the Galleys, and they him; but the air being misty, they sought to
creep along the coast of England, or if the worst should come to pass,
perceiving that the two Hollanders lay near them, they intended to board and
take them, for the prisoners confessed afterward, that they did not respect two
or three men of war: Yet it seemed that they were afraid of the Queens ships,
for they turned back hoping in the night to pass on along the coast of
Dunkirke or Niewport. Sir Robert perceiving this, sent his Pinnace toward
Calaice and the coast of Flaunders, to warn the Hollanders to stand upon their
guard, and to stop the Galleys passage: He likewise did his best skill to keep
them in sight, the like did the two Hollanders, who were nearer betwixt him and
the Galleys; and thus they gave them chase till sun set: Then did the Galleys
set sail again, so as the two Hollanders were behind them. Sir Robert
Mansell observing their course, and assured that they would fall into the hands
of the other two Hollanders, and the Queens ships, which lay in the downs,
he shaped his course toward the coasts of France, that he might get before
them ere they should recover Flaunders, still bending his course toward the
Sands called Goeyingen to meet with them there. The Queens ship, and the two
Hollanders Cant and Sael having discried the Galleys, made up toward them, and
fiercely began to shoot: but the weather being calm, the galleys out-stript
the ships; but within a while after, a strong gale blew from the North-East,
and then the Hollanders with full sail gave them chase two or three hours
long. The galleys were come so near Dover rocks, as diverse Turkish slaves
found means to break their chains, and leaping into the Sea, escaped by
swimming, and so freed themselves from their bondage. Sir Robert Mansel, being
near to Goeyingen, espied a gallie making away a pace, and coming within
musket shot of her, he discharged thirty piece of ordnance upon it, whose
Masts he brake in pieces, and heard a lamentable cry in her: This done, he saw
the other five galleys coming up toward him, on whom he made many shot, and
suffered them to pass on, thinking it rashness and indiscretion to suffer
himself to be boorded with so many galleys at once. The four Hollanders
followed them fair and softly, and being come near Graveling about ten of
the clock at night, Gerbrant Iansz-Sael of Horn, with his ship of four
hundred tun, encountered one of the galleys called la Lucera which with full
fail he boorded on the larboord side, so as the poor slaves were in water up
to the middle, crying out for mercy, not making any resistance: then the said
Sael discharged two demie canon, carrying bullets of foureteen pound weight,
with which he flew and hurt many. A French Pilot being in the gallie, whose
name was John Evout, borne at Niew-Hauen, did, unseen, get aboard the
Hollander, and so saved his own life. In this encounter, the gallie lost her
sails and oars, and had her Helm broken in pieces, whereby she became
unserviceable. Captain Sael used all means to clear himself from her,
fearing to be over pressed with the multitudes that were in her, and in the end
came clearly off, having lost some of his sail. Then did Captain Hartmans
ship board the said gallie the second time, thinking that he was the first, and
saved some forty of the men, and then fell off. After this, Captain Sael
boorded her again, sending five of his men aboard, but perceiving, by the
lamentable cries of those that were in her, that she sanke, he took in his
own men, and for fear of farther danger would save no more of them, this was
about midnight, and they continued near the gallie, till they could no longer
see her mast above water.

John Adriansz Cant the Vice-Admeral, did likewise encounter the Gallie called
Padilla, which he ouerran and drowned, and did great hurt to an other.

Captain Gertsz Everts, and Jacob Peter's Niele, with other ships that kept
guard, hearing the report of the Canon, made up toward them likewise, and
boorded this Gallie and the rest: but fearing to be endangered by them, they
only saved some few, to the number of two hundred and no more. The rest of the
Galleys being near the shore, made no resistance but sought all means to
escape. The Admerall ran on ground near to the land of Schouwe, being pursued
by a ship beyond West Cappell, which gave her over thinking it would perrish by
foul weather. But General Spinola that was in her, behaved himself so
courageously, flinging many things ouerboord, and promising freedom to the
slaves, as at last he arrived with his Gallie at Dunkerke, an other came
safely to Calice, whose men ran away: two others that were fore bruised by the
canon ran on ground on the coasts of Flaunders and there perished: Those two
which were encountered by the Admerall Cant and Sael perished. Cant made
relation of what he had done in Holland: Gerbrant Sael of Enchuysen and
Hartman did theirs in Zeland to Lord Jacques Maldre who examined the French
Pilot and others, sending them into Holland, where honor was already done to
the Captain that first brought the news. The English Captains likewise were
much discontented, for that they had no share in the honor, saying they were
the first that had discovered, and endaungered the Galleys, chasing and
bringing them up to the Hollanders. Of these eight galleys belonging to
Spinola, wherewith he thought to have tormented these Countries, two of them
were burnt in Portugal, two were drowned, and four ran on ground: Herein we
may consider Gods judgments, for these Galleys were the self same, to which
diverse mariners of the low Countries had been condemned. There is one thing
among others worthy to be noted, how that in Captain Saels ship who first
boorded the Gallie called Lucera, the French Pilot saved himself, who was a
very honest man, and had been three years a slave in that Gallie and others,
in great misery and wretchedness, coming with his ship into Spain, which
together with his goods were confiscate, and himself and men put into the
Galleys, and shaven like Turkish slaves. This Pilot had here experience of Gods
vengance for all the misery he had endured, seeing the gallie wherein he had
been a slave, to sink, and Captain Callido who had tirannized over him, to
have both his legs shot off, of which hurt he died in Captain Hartmans ship.
This Pilot was a proper man, tall, and strong, and could not be set at
liberty for any ransom, till the accord made with the Admerall of Arragon, to
exchange prisoners on each side, at which time he was freed in company of
others. D. Frederico Spinola saved the greatest part of his treasure, which was
thought to amount to two hundred thousand Ducats, which he presently caused to
be coined at Antuerp with the Archdukes stamp, and with it, paid the remainder
of his soldiers.

A rehearsal of what passed betwixt Spinolas Galleys and certain of the
States men of war, on the 25 of May 1603.
Don Frederick Spinola, General of the galleys having undertaken to chase away
the States men of war which guarded the mouth of the Sluice, came forth with
eight galleys, on the sixth and twentieth of May in the morning by day break,
anno 1603, the wind being West, and sailed Eastward betwixt the sand shelues,
called Pol Francis and the firm land, and from thence Westward of the said
mouth. Certain of the States men of war did usually keep guard thereabouts,
viz. the vice-Admerall of Zeland Ioost le More, who commanded under the
Admerall the Lord of Holtain, with his ship called the golden Lion, and
Captain Logier Pieterzs, with his his ship named the Sea Dog; there was
likewise the black gallie of Holland commanded by Jacob Machielz, together
with the gallie of Zeland, called the Arrow, commanded by Cornellis Ians of
Gordum. A little further off under the wind, lay an other ship, whose master
was Crijn Henrick of Ziriczee called the old Sea Dog, commanding as
Captain. In the vice-Admeralls ship, and Gallie of Zeland, and in either of
them were 18 English musketeers of Flushing, but in the 2 other ships and black
gallie of Holland were no musketeers, but only their ordinary men. Spinola in
his 8 galleys and other Fregats, besides his ordinary men, had great numbers
of musketeers, sent from the camp before Ostend.

These ships of Zeland with the two Galleys, perceiving that Spinola came
forth, did presently set sail, bearing up against the wind toward the West:
Spinolas men had a Westerlie wind, and the sun for advantage, and passed on to
the Northward athwart the Zelanders, coming to Wieling, where by five a clock
in the morning both sides divide themselves, and so the Galleys in good order,
and with great cries approached the Zealanders: two Galleys, in one of which
Spinola was, boorded the vice-Admerall Ioost le More; four other Galleys did
the like to Captain Logier Peter's, and the Gallie of Holland was set upon by
the rest of the Galleys: Having thus for a while fought with their ordnance,
two of the four Galleys which had boorded Captain Logier did likewise set
upon the Gallie of Zeland; then the other two forsook Legiers ship, and fought
with the Gallie of Holland: one of these two last forsook the black Gallie,
and came to the reskew of the two others, which boorded the vice-Admerall Ioost
le More, percing one an other with canon shot.

The other ship wherein was Crijn Henrick could not come up to fight through
want of wind, but did her best in shoting at the Galleys, which boorded the
Vice-Admerall and the black gallie. This fight of galleys continued a long
time against ships not accustomed to such fight; there being eight galleys and
four fregats of the enemies, against two ships and two galleys of ours. Yet
Spinolas galleys fearing that the Zelanders might be seconded, and themselves
having received much loss in their men, slaves, and oars, disparing of the
victory, did in great disorder retreat to the Sluice mouth: Among their slain
men was general Spinola having received many wounds: he was of the family of
Spinola in Genoa, a man of great reach and means: There were slain in this
fight eight hundred musketeers, soldiers, mariners, and slaves, and many were
wounded: yet the certain number could not be known.

Of the Zelanders thirty six were slain, and 60 hurt, their ships and galleys
being of better proof than the enemies. Among the dead, was Captain Jacob
Michiels of the black Gallie and his Lieutenaunt: of the thirty and six
English musketeers, eight were slain and sixeteene hurt: among the wounded was
the Vice-Admerall Ioost le More having received three dangerous wounds, the
like besell Captain Legier Peter's, but both of them were afterward healed.

During the fight, the report of the Canon was heard to Flushing: the Admerall
of Zeland, the Lord of Haultain, presently mand four men of war and a Fregat,
making all possible have to the Sluice mouth, but the Spanish Galleys, ere they
could arrive, were gotten in: Whereupon, our men gave public thanks to God,
attributing all praise to him: For without all question, this was a valiant
act, with so few vessels and men to beat eight Galleys, and four Fregats so
well manned and provided: The Zelanders in memory hereof, stamped silver and
brass coin, having on the one side two ships and two Galleys, with this
circumspription: Laedunt triremes nauibus 1603: and on the other side, the
Spanish Galleys, with this circumscription, victae perempto Spinola 16 Maij.
Our ships being well mand will no more fear Galleys, although the Sea be
calm, as well appears by this Sea fight.

The taking of Cadsand and Ysendike, with the siege and yielding up of Sluice,
in anno 1604.
AT the beginning of the year 1604, the States of the united Provinces
resolved to seek out the enemy in his own Country, and to enter Flaunders,
hoping to raise the siege of Ostend: Hereupon, they commanded all Captains to
make their companies complete, giving forth new commissions to leuy 1500
Suisses, and 2000 other footmen.

His Excellency of Nassau, espying a fit time and occasion, sent commaundment
to all his forces to meet him at Willem-Stat, on the twentieth of April with
such number of boats as should be needful for such an attempt: Thither came
Count William, Count Ernest Cazimir, and Count Lodwick Gunther, brethren, of
the house of Nassau, together with Count Henry Frederick, general of the horse.

The troops being shipped, departed on the day appointed from Willem-State
toward Zeland, whither, on the four and twentieth of April, his Excellency
likewise went, accompanied by the Prince of Anhalt, Count Adolph of Nassau,
together with the Commissioner of the general States, and Council of State,
who were there present to farther the enterprise.

The five and twentieth of April, in the Morning, the whole fleet, consisting
of infinite numbers of boats, sailed from Zeland to Flaunders, where at the
passage or entry called Het Swartegat, they landed in Cadsand, where, in two
days, they took all the Forts. And if at their first arrival they had entered
the Sluice mouth, they might with little labor have taken the Town, and
peradventure by such speed, raised the siege of Ostend; for at their landing,
those of Bruges had no forces in their Town, but whilst his Excellency
landed his men, and was busied in taking in the small forts of Cadsand, those
of Bruges made such have, as Spinola, from the camp before Ostend, sent one
thousand footmen to a place called Swint, and from Watervliet sent Triuulcio
with five hundred horse, to stop the passage at the Sluice mouth,
notwithstanding that on the six and twentieth and seven and twentieth days,
we used a means to pass on, chasing the galleys toward Sluice. So as his
Excellency being out of hope to pass, and determining only to assure the
Country of Cadsand, a Boore told him, that by fetching a compass toward the
Eastside of the Sluice, he might enter Flaunders, and showed him, the same
night, a fit place to go to Oostburch, but there he met with the enemies horse
and foot troops, which made him think that there was some passage: whereupon,
on the 29 day, he sent certain bands thither, which skirmished with the
enemies, putting them to rout, who in the flight showed our men the way to
pass; and on the thirtieth day, in the Morning, his Excellency went thither,
and crossing the water, took a piece of the causie near to Coxie, where
certain men of Sluice, who meant to have made a fort there, were beaten, and
some 30 of them taken prisoners, and the rest put to flight: those of the fort
of Coxie did likewise yield on composition, opening by this means, contrary to
our expectation, away to enter into Flaunders, putting us in hope of good
success, notwithstanding that the Country round about was much broken. Prince
Maurice, on May day, marched with a great part of his army to Saint Catherins
Fort, and sent for ordnaunce to batter it: but because there was a spring tide
that day, and the waters were very high, it was afternoon ere the Canon was
brought, so as all that day he remained in battle near the fort. In Saint
Catherines fort, beside certain soldiers commanded by Count Trivulcio, were
many burghers and boores surnamed Keurlingen; these are voluntary mercenaries
leuyed about Gaunt: who having no quarter nor promise to be ransomed, if they
were taken, his Excellency (to terrify them) commanded that none of them
should be taken prisoners, but all slain, and though this did daunt many of
them, yet they held out that day: and one of their Ensign bearers did pass
too and fro on the Rampires, erecting his Ensign on the breach, to the great
encouragement of his fellows: who were likewise hartened for that Count
Trivulcio who had been at Watervliet with certain troops of horse, came and
encamped with them below the fort, where he entrenched himself, and planted
two field pieces to play upon his Excellencies troops. But his Excellency
having the same after noone received nine piece of ordnance, he played six
hours long upon the said fort, and on Trivulcio his troops, more to show he
had ordnance, than for any hope he had to win the fort, because the enemy
grew wilful and obstinate, making show of defense: And therefore dispairing to
do any good there, he commanded his Gunners to shoot till the evening, and
then to remove the ordnance, and carry it back again to Cad^and.

By the way, one of the canons by chance sanke into a bogge: whereupon the
mariners and those that had charge of it, did, with great noice and stir, their
best to recover it, unwilling to receive such a disgrace as to loose a piece of
ordnance. Those of S. Catherines fort were amazed, thinking that they went
about to plant their ordnance some where else; and likewise the horse finding
no fitter way to return, than under the forts trenches, made those within it
to believe that his Excellency had received more men, with them to intercept
their way to Philips skonce: whereupon, Trivulcio with his troops and those
Keurlingen or Boores, who were many, did all of them in amazement retire to
Philips skonce, and from thence to Isendike, abandoning S. Catherines fort, and
by the way left some sixty soldiers in Philips fort, who the next day
perceiving the approach of his Excellencies troops, yielded it up on the
second of May.

From thence his Excellency went to Isendike, which he presently enclosed,
whereinto, the enemy on the fourth of May thought to have put forces, but
certain troops of horse and foot being sent to stop their passage, they fled
to the s' Tas, whereby the said place was the better fortified.

The 6 of May, those of Sluice came with forces from the camp before Ostend, and
made a sallie with two thousand men, with certain shallops and Galleys, where
with to enter into the Country of Cadsand, where they landed six hundred men,
ere those that guarded the Island perceived it, who presently gave an alarm,
and with two Scottish companies that lay in guard there, fell upon them, and
drove them in disorder to their boats, some of which, being ouer-loden, sunk,
diverse of them were slain, and forty were taken prisoners, and eight shallops
were taken from them: If this enterprise of theirs had prospered, Prince
Maurice had in an instant lost all his boats and munition, and his attempt
would have been to no purpose.

His Excellency in the mean time caused the fort of Isendike to be summoned,
which is a very commodious place and well seated, but they within it answered
that they would not yield, because they expected supplies: whereupon, his
Excellency caused it to be battered, knowing well enough that they wanted all
provisions, especially, drink and fresh water.

The ninth of May, Prince Maurice sent his Trumpet to summon them the second
time, who was shot into the head by some in the fort: this did so incense his
Excellency, as he did his best to revenge himself on those that had showed
so bad an example: whereupon, they were so daunted, as they presently craved
parlie, which his Excellency would not grant, till an Italian soldier that
had slain his Trumpet was delivered unto him: which done, those of the fort
capitulated; that the Governor and soldiers should depart with their arms,
but without found of Drum or displaied Ensigns, to the s'Tas, with boats to
carry their baggage, on condition not to serve in Flaunders against his
Excellency for the space of four months: and so on the tenth of May six
hundred of them went thence, most of whom were Italians. The Governor was
afterward called in question for delivering it up, but did with honor acquit
himself; and Captain Roll, was made Governor of the fort. After the taking
of Isendike they resolved to pass on toward Ardenbourg, and on the 12 of May,
his Excellency went thither by land and water. In the town were six
companies of Almans, who might easily have defended it, if they could have made
never so little resistance; but being amazed, they fled thence, so as his
Excellency without any stroke at all took it: this town was very desolate,
but excellently well seated to bridle the Sluice. Of the goodly Church that was
in it in former time, nothing was to be seen, but the walls, certain Marble
Pillars, and two Towers. His Excellency did forthwith put Count Ernest and his
men into the town, and commanded one rauelin to be made before every gate,
and then caused the army to march to another open and ruinous town, called
Middelbourg in Flaunders, where there is a Castle from whence those that keep
it fled, because it was not tenable. His Excellency, on the foureteenth, sent
his Cauallerie to make a road toward Eclo, to defeat a foot regiment which was
going from Gaunt to Bruges, but they came a little too late.

The sixteenth of May, his Excellency sent certain horse and foot from
Ardenbourg toward the Soute and Soete, which are two channels, the one of salt
water, the other of fresh, coming from Dam and Bruges, and meet together near
Sluice, they are both nauiga^le. There they found D. Lewis de Velasco, who had
fortified himself near to a little Sluice upon the river which comes down
from Moerkerck and Lapschue^^, near Stampers point, where with advantage he
waited, it being a narrow passage, for horsemen: whereupon, Velasco his
Cauallerie, did on a sudden charge the Captains, Gent and Bacx, and presently
overthrew many horse, diverse were taken prisoners, and Bacx was hurt in the
leg, but they were rescued by the Fanterie, who coming on, and charging in
great, the Spaniards were beaten, and five hundred of them lay dead on the
place, and three hundred prisoners were taken, among whom were eleven Captains,
and in their company one of Spinolas kinsmen.

The seventeenth of May, his Excellencies soldiers went toward the Soute,
where the Spaniards lay with thirteen or fourteen ensigns betwixt that
place and the Soete, where they were intr^nched: his Excellency, caused the
canon to be planted, making show as if he meant to pass there, but having
espied another place somewhat lower, the eighteenth, before day, he passed over
his horse and foot at a low water, and took some of their trenches: whereupon,
the Spaniards forsaking their advantage, fled toward Dam, fearing to be
enclosed: so as Prince Maurice made an other bridge over the Soete, and sent
his horse on the West side of the haven of Sluice, where the Spaniards forsook
all their forts (that of S. George except) seated at the mouth of the Haven,
commanded by a Captain called Cordua of Burges, his Excellency presently
environed it, and so soon as they within it saw the canon, they yielded, and
went thence on the three and twentieth of May being in all one hundred and
thirty men. The fort was well provided, and had in it nine piece of ordnance,
and ten barrels of powder, to which they had tied a burning match, which, after
their departure would have fired it, but this being discovered, no harm
ensued thereof.

Captain Cordua was accused for yielding up the fort so slightly; but he had
favor shown him: Captain Ioost de Brucxsaulx was made governor there, but
within a while after, the fort being found to be unnecessary, was raced.

All these towns and forts thus surrendered, his Excellency encamped before
Sluice: he caused the haven to be taken in, and fortified, and enclosed his
camp with trenches and bridges, joining the quarters to one an other. In the
haven, (...) before the the town, they found no ships but only one French man
laden with wines, which was spoiled by the ordnance.

Those of Sluice did twice receive certain numbers of men, first, some seven
hundred, next eight hundred: they likewise took in certain wagons laden with
meal, ere the town could be wholly enclosed. Prince Maurice encamped on the
West side of the haven: The Lord Vander Noot on the South side, the country
and drowned lands were fur^^shed with boats and shalops strongly mand to shut
up all passages.

His Excellency, on the one and twentieth of May, caused a proclamation to be
made by sound of drum that wednesday, over the whole camp, should be kept as a
day of fasting and prayer, which is a rare matter in an army, prohibiting all
victualers on pain of forfeiting their goods, and banishment from the camp,
from selling any victuals that day that they might be the apter to pray unto
God to give them good success.

The thirtieth of May, those of Sluice attempted again to take victuals and
powder into the town, and in the night sent forth one thousand gallie slaves
over the drowned land, whom they constrained to this piece of service, in
regard they could not use their galleys, and with these slaves a conuoy of five
hundred soldiers, to expect that which was to come from Dam: for Count
Barlaymont with 4 thousand foot, and many wagons laden with meal was come for
this purpose as far as the drowned lands. His Excellency having intelligence
hereof, went with two thousand foot, and store of horse to Stampers point,
where he found four hundred men which Barlaymont had left to guard that
passsage: these did the Prince defeat and put to rout, and understanding by
them that Barlaymont was already past, he caused him to be pursued, but he
having notice thereof, went an other way, by which most of them escaped,
leaving certain wagons laden with corn behind them, which his Excellency
took. Those of the town perceiving that the Conuoy came not, returned home,
many slaves excepted, who hid themselves, and came and yielded to Prince
Maurice. His Excellencies troops in pursuing Barlaymont, did in the night by
mischance take a contrary way, and the next day returned to the Camp with
many prisoners, and among them two Captains, the one an Italian, and the other
a German. By these his Excellency understood that the town was well manned,
but badly victualed, and therefore sought to enclose it on every side, causing
his Camp to be strongly fenced and entrenched both by land and water, sending
his Cauallerie far up into the Country to bring in contribution. The Camp
being thus enclosed, the deputies of the General States, and Council of
State, took their leave on the 29 of May, and returned to the Hague.

This siege continuing for a time, Prince Maurice in the mean space made ready
boats and preparatiues to assault the town athwart the Haven, and to this end
caused a strange bridge to be made, covered over in the midst, and of musket
proof: but understanding daily by those that came to our side, that the Town
was mightily oppressed with hunger, he wholly resolved to famish it, and thereby
gave the Marquis Spinola an occasion to quite Ostend, and come to relieve
Sluice, and his Galleys Famine did daily so increase in the town, as they could
no longer feed the slaves, but enforced them to run up and down the broken
country, to seek an herb called Soutenell, which grows there in abundance,
wherewith for a long time they nourished themselves: so as many of them a long
while ere the town was yielded, knew not what bread meant.

Famine increasing, and Ostend still holding out, those of Sluice manifested
their want by fires in the night, which being known to the Archduke, he
commanded General Spinola to relieve Sluice: who to this purpose, toward the
later end of Iulie, levied forces from all parts, and now perceived their error
in suffering his Excellency to pass over so easily. General Spinola together
with Count Trivulcio departed from before Ostend with a sufficient Army,
leaving the Camp well provided of all things: yet he went very unwillingly,
and with small hope to do any good, as appeared by his letters which were
intercepted. And so came and encamped near to Lapschuer on a cawsey, meaning
with his ordnance to enforce his Excellency to dislodge, who caused
counterbatteries to be made, so as in one night the canon slew many.

Spinola on the sixth of August, with three thousand men, and certain horse
assailed Count William of Nassaus quarter, thinking to surprise it in the
night, carrying with him diverse necessary preparations for that purpose, but all
was in vain, for he was so roughly entertained, as with great loss he was
enforced to retire, leaving his preparations behind him, carrying certain
wagoners horse away with him, which were feeding in the pastures.

Spinola doing no good there, departed speedily on the sixteenth of August in
view of Ardenbourgh to the forts of S. Catherin, and S. Philip, which he
easily took by force, because they were weakly manned. From thence he went
on a cawsey, to Captain Imbyse his quarter, where he made a false alarm,
that he might in the mean time pass his troops over the river of
Oostbourgh: But his Excellency had kept store of men in Cadsand, under conduct
of Count William of Nassau, who did presently set forward to make head against
the enemy, he likewise sent the Lord of Simton thither with store of warlike
munition, and himself remained at the passage of Cadsand, till the troops of
Frizland, the English, French, and others were arrived, with which he marched
on to encounter the enemy.

The Marquis making have with his forces, had caused his Excellencies men to
quit the half moon near the water, betwixt Cadsand and Oostbourg, and made
them give back as far as the cawsey near to the two skonces, where he was
fiercely repulsed, first by the guard, and next by Count William who was come
thither; but at a low water, he striued most of all to pass over, so as Count
William could hardly stop him, till such time as Colonel Dorth came to second
him, who bravely defended himself with a two-hand sword, beating back the
enemy for a pretty while, till himself was wounded in two places.

Spinola in the mean time spared not his men, and was ready to have entered
Cadsand, had not Prince Maurice come to his reskew with certain Frizland
companies, under conduct of Julius D' Essinga their Lieutenaunt general, and
with him the Lord of Terms, and some forty French gentlemen, with diverse
English and French companies under Castillions command, who made such
resistance, as Spinolas men were enforced to retire, some two hundred of them
being slain, and of them, many men of note: among others, were, Count Feltri,
the Marquis of Renty, son to Count Solre his wife, of the house of Lalayn,
son to that renowned Lord, the Lord of Montigni, and the Marquis of Renty
newly come from Italy, D. Alonso Borgia, young Mantenon a French man, beside a
Colonel, and many others slain and wounded, whom they carried away in carts:
this was done on the seventeenth of August, the enemy being reenforced with
the squadron of the mutineers, who were newly reconciled to the Archduke, and
did help to increase the number of the dead.

The eighteenth of August, those of Sluice having intelligence of the defeat of
their supplies, began to talk of an accord, and sent to crave cessation of
arms, till they might know the Archdukes pleasure, which was not granted:
then they craved leave to carry away the galleys, ordnance, and slaves: but
they received this answer, that they should have three days respite, the first
day, to depart with their arms and baggage, the second day, only with heir
swords, and if they tarried till the third day they were then to expect all
rigor: whereupon, the next day, they were content to depart on these conditions
following.

FIrst, That all Ecclesiastical persons might safely depart with the ornaments
of their Church, goods and moueables.

2 That the governor Serrano, all Captains, officers, and soldiers, together
with all Captains of Galleys, and mariners, should with their baggage, arms,
and ensigns, drum heating and match in cock depart to Dam, and in giving
hostages, should have boats and shalops.

3 That the governor and Aurelio Spinola, shall deliver to his Excellencies
commissioners, all the galleys, barks and Fregats, ordnance, powder, and
munition, without any deceit.

4 That all slaves, without exception, shall be set at liberty, and may go
whether they please.

5 That all prisoners, on both sides, shall ransomlesse be set free: the
governor, and Aurelio Spinola, shall use means that Captain Say, and other
mariners in prison at Sertoghenbusk, Captain John de Raet and his men,
prisoners in Would Castle, and likewise three mariners of Breda prisoners at
Gaunt, shall all of them be released in paying a months means; and for
performance hereof, the said Spinola shall oblige his own person, to return
again his prisoner.

6 None shall be molested for debts which the governor or others owe to the
Burghers, but the said governor shall promise to make full payment and
satisfaction to them, at Bruges.

7 That all officers and surueyors may likewise depart with their writings (the
towns Registers excepted.)

8 The Commissaries of victuals, and those of the Admeraltie etc. may do the
like.

9 The governor shall the same night deliver up the Castle, whither his
Excellency will send two hundred men to keep it.

10 That the garrison shall the next day leave the town.

Given in the Camp before Sluice the nineteenth of August, Anno 1604.
The twentieth of August, the Spaniards left Sluice, being in number three or
four thousand men well armed, and one thousand four hundred slaves, most of
them Turks, who were all set at liberty: some of them tarried with the
Spaniards, many went into France and England, but such as returned from thence
into Holland, were for the most part sent home in a Ship of Barbary; many of
them had eaten no bread in Sluice of a long time, but fed on old shoes, boots,
parchment, and on an herb called Soutenell, whereof we have heretofore
spoken; dogs, cats, mise, and rats were good meat.

There were found in the town threescore and ten great piece of ordnance both
of brass and iron, beside those in the forts: also ten or eleven galleys, and
all their furniture, which was no small victory.

The General States and his Excellency made Count Henry of Nassau youngest
son to the Prince of Orange of happy memory, Governor of all their
conquests in Flaunders, and appointed the Lord Vander Noot for his Lieutenant,
who went and remained in Sluice.

The said States did presently give order, for the fortifying of their new
conquests, as well at Sluice, as at other places near adjoining, some were
rased, and other fortified: they resolved to make nine forts near to Coxie, S.
Catherines, Oostbourgh, and Weeld Castle, and before Sluice, an half moon, and
three bulwarks before a channel which comes forth of the Sea. At Isendike they
likewise caused five great bulwarks to be made, and there enclosed a great
quantity of ground, which they meant to make impregnable, and as big as a
town, or an other Ostend.

Count Lodwick Gunther of Nassau, who had married the widow of the Earl of
Valckensteyn and Broeck, fell sick at Sluice and died there, he was son to
old Count John, and brother to the Earls William, and Ernest of Nassau, he
was but a young Lord, and yet had done brave service to the united Provinces;
he was much lamented. His Excellency and diverse others fell sick there
likewise.

The united Provinces having woone Sluice, and thereby gotten means to war in
Flaunders, and to transport it into the enemies Country, thought that the
loss of Ostend would not be so hurtful as before, (and therein they were not
deceived) for all the world knows how greatly the enemies have wronged
themselves, and profited our country, by attempting to win that town by force:
for now in steed of one entrance, the Lords States (thanks be to God) have
gotten three.

The taking of the strong Castle of Would in anno 1605.
HIs Excellency on the three and twentieth of May 1605, went with great
numbers of horse and foot to Berghen-op-Zoom, and appointed Count Ernest of
Nassau to come from Zeland by boat, with fourscore foot companies, and to
sail up the Scheld, that both of them together might make an attempt upon
Antuerp; but the Earl having a continual contrary wind could not land there
where his Excellency had appointed him. If the Earl could have landed his men
at Clapperdijke, he might happily have obtained his desire, but the wind was so
contrary as it was impossible for him to do so: but he was enforced to land
them near to Oosterweel, and so went forward toward his Excellency by land,
who^ lay with his army at Eeckeren, sending back the boats which had brought
the soldiers, which at their return shot at the forts of Ordam and Peerle,
and among others, shot the governor of Ordam. This enterprise having no good
success, his Excellency resolved to go with his army and besiege the Castle
of Would, and thereupon departed on the eight and twentieth of May from
Eeckeren. Would Castle is strongly fortified with Bulwarks and seated within a
mile of Berghen-op-Zoom in a fenny place, and therefore naturally strong. It is
one of the chiefest Castles belonging to the Marquis of Berghen; but at that
time a nest of thieves: for the garrison did continually molest boats that went
from Holland and Zeland, being always upon the water to epsy if any vessel
were wind-bound or be-calmed: They had their shallops hidden in diverse places
on the waters side, with which they assailed such vessels, taking the merchants
and mariners prisoners, enforcing them to ransom themselves and boats, thereby
doing great damage to the Country. His Excellency on the eighteenth of May,
did with wonderful celeritie plant his canon, and battered the Castle; those
within it slew certain of our gunners, but fearing to be surprised, and
doubting that the Archduke would not send forth an army to relieve them, they
yielded the Castle up to his Excellency on the three and twentieth of May,
wherein were eighty five men, among whom were certain raskals of the number
of those that sold the town of Gertrudenberg to the enemy, who according to
the proscription were all condemned to be hanged, but the Marquis of
Brudenbourg interceded for them: Spinola likewise did execute some of those
that had delivered up the Castle: and by this means those of Holland and
Zeland were freed from this mischief.

Marquis Spinola, in the mean time, had assembled all his forces near
Antuerpe, and was quartered at Mercxen and Dam, his horsemen lay at Berchen and
Wilrijcke, by which means Antuerpe was well guarded: He likewise made a bridge
over the Scheld, even from the Key of Antuerpe into Flanders, on which he might
pass over his forces from Brabant and Flanders at one time if need were.

Prince Maurice having won Would Castle, did, on the second of Iulie, imbarke
his army, and crossed the Scheld to go to Isendike in Flanders, leaving the
forts upon the river well provided, especially Lillo: it seemed that he meant
to besiege the s'Tas, or else the town of Bruges, and maintain war in the
enemy country, but his Excellency could not attempt any siege, being still
followed by General Spinola, by means of his bridge before Antuerpe. This did
the Prince before then foresee would come to pass, being of a contrary
opinion to the general States; for it was thought more profitable for them to
have gone toward Rhyne: whereupon, his Excellency, the better to secure the
Town of Sluice, Isendike, Ardenbourg, and other forts, encamped at Watervliet,
because it was reported that the Archduke, together with Spinola, would besiege
Sluice, and with a second army which they expected, the town of Bercke, and
would have besides, a running camp, to bring victuals from all parts, yet all
this was but words.

His Excellency strongly fortified himself at Watervliet: Spinola with his
forces encamped in a wooddie place, so that the two armies could not well come
at one another by reason of banks, but fortified against each other still
seeking some advantage, and yet did no great matter.

A true rehearsal of a fight at Sea, in the road before Gibraltar, betwixt the
king of Spaynes mighty Armada on the one side, and the States men of war, of
the united Netherland Provinces on the other, done on the 25 of April 1607.
THe king of Spain having set forth a mighty fleet, of sundry great gallions
and other warlike ships, well manned and provided, thereby, as much as in them
lay, to annoy the inhabitants of the united Provinces, my Lords the general
States, the better to daunt the Spannish pride, and especially to free their
subjects from their cruel tyranny, did likewise set forth a fleet of 31
ships, viz. seven and twenty men of war, and four victualers. Then they
entreated Master Jacob Heemskerck of Amsterdam, (a man whose experience,
wisdom, courage, love, and loyalty to his Country, was well known to the
world) to be Admerall of the said fleet. In anno 1604, he had been the second
time Admerall of the East Indie fleet, where he had made proof what he was
able to do; for meeting with a great Portugal Carack which came from China
near to the streit of Syncapura, richly laden and well provided, having eight
hundred men in her, though in comparison of her, he was but weak, having in
all but two small ships, and in them no more but two hundred men. Yet by his
wise conduct and invincible courage, he did in a short time take her, and
brought her home to Amsterdam with all her treasure. Moreover, that voyage is
worthy of perpetual remembrance, which was made in anno 1596, and 97. when
the ships of Amsterdam went so far to the Northward, and Noua Semla, as never
any till then had done, seeking a passage through the ice, to the rich
kingdoms of Cathay and China; where he likewise was as Committee general, and
showed no small desire to do good service to his country.

The Lords States having motioned this matter unto him, his answer was, That
if he might do any profitable service to his country, he was very ready
and willing to do it, and so, accepted the charge, not for any hire, but for
love and affection to his country.

The fifteenth of March in anno 1607, he departed from Tassell with sixteen
men of war, very well provided and rigd, of which, ten were of Amsterdam,
videlicet, the Admerall called Eolus with her captain William Verhoof of
Amsterdam: the second, the black Bear, and her captain Adrian Roest of
Amsterdam: the third, the white Bear, whose captain was Cornellis Peter
Madder, otherwise called Den Noyen Boore, or the fair contriman: the next the
golden Lion with her captain Pan of Amsterdam: the Griffon and her captain
Cleynsorgh of Tergou: the golden Star commanded by captain Jacob Iansz of
Edam: Henry Iansz, otherwise called long Henry, was captain of the seventh: of
the eight, Simon Iansz of Edam: the ninth, by captain Copdrayer: the tenth, by
captain Herman: Beside these, there were four others, which carried victuals
for the fleet, together with some soldiers.

From Euchuysen there were three: from Hoorn as many: and from Harling came the
Pinnace of Frizland commanded by captain Theunes Wouters, making up in all
three and twenty ships. The seven and twentieth day, they came to Wight an
Island on the coasts of England, where they found three ships more of Zeland,
and 5 of Rotterdam, with captain Cleuter on an other Brigantine of Amsterdam.

From Zeland came captain Lawrence Jacobs Alteras the vice-Admerall, in a ship
called the red Lion, of Zeland: captain Marinus Hellart of Flushing in a ship
called the Sea Dog, and captain Cornellis Faes in an other. In the fourth ship
of Zeland captain Peter Calis commanded, who as he entered, ran on ground, so
as his men, victuals, and munition, were bestowed on the other ships.

From Rotterdam came captain Lambert Henry the rere Admerall, or night Scowte
in a ship called the Tigre. Harpart Matsy was captain of the Leopard: and in
the other two captain Sieuert, and captain Schreuell commanded: so as in the
whole fleet were twenty and seven men of war, and four victualers.

After that Admeral Heemskerck had taken order for all things necessary for
the fleet, on the nine and twentieth day they departed all together from Wight:
but the Admeral, with five ships, at his going forth, being carried away with
the Tide, ran on ground, so as they were enforced to tarry there one Tide:
the weather being fair, and Sea calm, the Vice-Admerall passed onward with
the rest of the fleet, and told the Admerall that he would tarry for him at
Plimmouth.

At flood the Admerall began to float and come off, being followed by the other
ships, and two days after arrived in the Haven of Plimmouth, where he would
not stay, but shot off a warning piece to cause the rest to follow him, which
was done. The whole fleet being together, they went with a Westerlie wind
toward the coasts of Portugal and Spain, so as on the tenth of April, they
came to the height of nine and thirty degrees, near to the river of Lisbone.
The Admerall assembled his Council of war, and concluded to carry the whole
fleet into the River, to take and destroy all the Caracks and gallions that lay
there.

But the Admerall having true intelligence by certain spies whom he had sent
before, with a small English ship toward Lisbone, that most of the Caracks
were already gone from thence, and those that were there, to the number of
eight or nine, not ready, and all their ordnance on shore: understanding
likewise, by certain French and English which came from S. Lucars and Cales,
that 16 gallions were already gone thence for the West Indies, and that ten of
them were yet in the streit of Gybraltar with certain other men of war,
waiting for the low-countrieships which were to comeforth of the streit (for
they knew that many of them were ready to come:) thereupon, the Admerall
changed his former determination, meaning to seek out the said fleet in the
streit, and to that end bent his course to Seaward, to get the height of Cape
S. Vincent; whither being come, he met with a ship of Flushing, which, on the
22 day, came forth of the streit: the master, told the Admeral, that in the
night he had bin among the Spanish fleet, but was cleared from it in the
Morning, which (as he thought) directed it course toward Cales, for by a
Westerly wind, they were constrained to come forth of the streit.

The Admerall receiving this intelligence, held on his course, and on the 24 of
April, sailed near the river of S. Lucars and bay of Cales, but they could
haere no news of any ships: for the Admerall was resolved to fight with them,
though they had been in the river of S. Lucars or bay of Cales: The evening of
the same day, he received certain news of the Spanish fleet by a French man,
who the same day came from the road of Gibraltar, who certified the Admerall
of the fleets being there, and of their number and order.

The same Evening, because the wind was Easterly, he bent his course to the
the Southward toward the coasts of Barbary, and from thence he turned
toward the coasts of Spain. Coming into the Streit, the Admerall called his
Captains aboard, and acquainted the Council of war with that which the
Frenchman had told him, giving order for all things necessary, and at last,
courageously resolved to assail and destroy the Spanish fleet, and thereupon,
gave this direction, that himself with Captain Moye Lambert would board the
Spanish Admerall: the vice-Admerall Alteras and Captain Bras were appointed to
board the vice-Admerall, and so the other ships, two together, should set upon
the other gallions.

The two Brigantines with the Bark, were commanded to pass up and down
through the fleet, that if any gallions or ships would attempt to escape, they
should stop their passage and fight with them, but the victuallers were to
keep a loofe off, and not to come near the fight.

This done, he exhorted all the Captains to bear themselves valiantly, and
to purchase honor, telling them that himself would be the first should lead
them the way: whereupon, they all promised and swore to follow him, though it
should cost them their lives, and then every man returned to his ship.

About noone, they descried the enemy in the bay before the town of
Gibraltar, lying in the road under covert of the Castle and towns ordnance,
to the number of two and twenty vessels, videlicet, nine great and mighty
gallions, and four men of war, beside a great ship of Lubeck of four
hundred tun, called the spotted Cow that lay in the road tarrying for a
wind, to go to Cales: there were moreover 4 French ships, and three which they
had taken, viz. 2 of Enchuysen, and one of Rotterdam, whose Mr. called Gouert
English, was prisoner aboard the Spanish Admeral. They had manned all these
ships with soldiers against the coming of our fleet: For the Duke of Lucars
having intelligence of our arrival and passage before S. Lucars and Cales, did
presently dispatch a post to Gibraltar, to warn the Spaniards of our approach,
the like he did to those of Calsi: whereupon, they had strengthened their fleet
with three hundred soldiers, among whom were one hundred Cauallieros that came
voluntarily to do service to the Admerall, who had seven hundred men in his
ship, and the Vice-Admerall four hundred and fifty. The other gallions were
well stored with ordnance, and in each of them two hundred and fifty men at
least, beside the mariners: the first great gallion, was called S. Augustine,
and in her was the Admerall of the whole fleet, called D. Iuan Alvares
d'Avilas, borne at Est^rgas, an old and experienced Captain, who had a long
time served the King of Spain at Sea, in the time of D. John of Austria: The
Admerals son was Captain of that gallion. The second gallion wherein the
Vice-Admerall commanded, was called our Lady de la vega. The third, being the
Rere-Admerall, was termed The mother of God. The fourth, S. Anne. The fifth,
o^r Lady of the rule. The sixth, our Lady of the conception. The seventh,
Saint Christopher. The eighth, our Lady of sorrow. The ninth, Saint Nicholas.
The tenth, our Lady of Rosaries. The eleventh, our Lady of O. The twelfth, S.
Peter: In a word, they were well provided of Saints, but they did them small
good. Our Admerall having descried the Spanish fleet, given order for all
matters, and prayed unto God for his aid and assistance, made directly toward
them.

He displayed and made fast his ensign with nails, because no man should take
it down, and promised an hundred Reals to him that would bring him the ensign
of the Spanish Admerall, exhorting his soldiers to do their best, protesting,
that whatsoever they could take from the enemy, should be their own: this
did greatly animate them, but especially the courageous valor of their
Admerall, so as they desired nothing more than to fight.

The Spanish Admerall, descrying our fleet called for the Master of Rotterdam,
whom he kept prisoner, showing him our ships, asking whether he thought they
durst be so bold as to set upon him.

The Master craving his pardon, answered that he thought they durst. But the
Spanish Admerall would not believe him, because he had the advantage of us,
lying under defense of the town and castle, as also because he thought
himself alone sufficient in his ship the S. Augustine to resist the whole
fleet of Hollanders; but the success showed the contrary. Yet perceiving that
our Admerall made directly toward him, he cut his cable, (for he was foremost
before all the ships) and fell down farther into the bay toward the town; so
as then, the vice-Admerall, and three other gallions were before him.

Admerall Heemskerck perceiving this, did not for all that alter his course,
but passed on directly before the vice-Admerall and the other gallions, which
he left on his left hand; he prepared his ankor and gave commandment it
should not be let slip, till he were aboard the Admerall and had stemd him.

So soon as he came near him, the Spaniard first of all discharged one of
his pieces, which flue directly through one of our Admerals port holes, and did
no hurt, but only took away one of the upper cross beams: whereupon,
Admerall Heemskerck presently answered him with two pieces, and then forthwith
boorded him, and let slip his ankor. But the Spaniard making a second shot, the
bullet carried away a young man that was ready to discharge his musket, and
with all, that cursed shot took off Admerall Heemskercks left leg and thigh,
whereupon, that excellent soldier fell down being armed from top to toe, and
the same bullet, likewise carried away an other man's right hand, who was giving
fire to a piece of ordnance.

Admerall Heemskerck perceiving his death grew nigh, encouraged and exhorted
those that were near him, valiantly to pursue that which they had begun, and
to elect another in his place, recommending his soul to God, which were the
last words he spoke, and so like a gallant Captain died in his armor.

In the mean time all the ordnance on our Admerals broad side, played at once
upon the Spanish Admerall, who presently made a volley of small shot upon our
men, and was by them answered with the like: the noice, fire, and smoke was so
great as we could neither hear nor see, so as the loss of our Admerall was
not known in our fleet till we had obtained the victory.

Captain Lambert according to the directions which were given him, followed
his Admerall, saluting the Spaniard with two pieces from his fore Castle, which
bullets passed clean through the Spanish Admerall, and made great slaughter
among the multitude of his men, and with the rest of his ordnance made such
hauock amongst them, as it is impossible to set down with what fury they
fought on both sides: for though our men were not half so many in number as
the enemy, yet were they as courageous as Lions, and used all means to be
revenged on the Spaniards for their tyranny toward diverse of them: this did
so animate us, as we made no doubt of the victory. At what time Admerall
Heemskerck made toward the Spanish admerall, he was followed by the whole
fleet: but Captain Adrian Roest, who came behind the Admerall and Captain
Lambert, perceiving that he was one of the foremost, and that the vice-Admerall
Lawrence Jacobs Alteras (who was appointed to board the vice-Admerall) was ten
or twelve ships behind him, himself alone with a manly courage boorded the
vice-Admerall of Spain.

This being percei^ed by Captain Simon Iansz of Edam, and Captain Cornellis
Madder, surnamed the fair boore, they presently followed him, and all three of
them so plied the Spanish vice-Admerall with great and small shot, as in less
than half an hour, they set her on fire.

Whilst our men fought wtih the vice-Admerall, Captain Pan likewise came up
to them, one of whose men went aboard the vice-Admerall, and brought away her
Flag that hung in her foremast, and in recompense thereof had fifty Rials
given him after the fight.

The Spanish vice-Apmerall being on fire, our men did their best to clear
themselves from her, but not without danger, for fire had already taken hold
on our ships, and in a manner burnt all Captain Roest, Simon Iansz, and
Cornellis Madders sails, but at last with much to do, they quenched the fire.

This could not be done in the Spanish vice-Admerall; where every man sought
means to save himself, so as she was burnt down even with the water, her
soldiers and mariners being some of them burnt, and others leaping into the
Sea, many were drowned, and others slain with musket shot, and with the strokes
of pikes and swords.

Captain Long Henry, peceiuing that these trhee Captains Roest, Madder, and
Simon Iansz fought so bravely with the vice-Admerall, assailed the next gallion
which lay on the vice-Admerals right hand, and with his ordnance played
furiously upon her: Captain Jacob Iansz of Edam, and Captain Gerart Euerts
seconded him, and boorded the said gallion.

After some fight, Captain Long Henry being oppressed with heat, did put off
his helmet to cool himself, and was presently shot into the head whereof he
died. Those that were in this gallion perceiving the vice-Admerall to be on
fire, and her flag to be taken down, did presently hang forth an other on the
top of their mast as vice-Admerall, but it staid not long there, for some of
our men took it down: within a while after, this gallion was likewise fired,
and burnt down even with the water.

The third gallion was boorded by Captain Copdrayer, and the pinnace of
Frizland, who in a short space sanke her.

Whilst we were thus busied with the gallions, the vice-Admerall Alteras came
up likewise, and though he boorded none, yet he played fiercely upon them with
his ordnance, which was not done without some loss to our men.

The other Spanish ships which lay farther up in the bay than did the Admerall,
shot furiously at our men, and they at them: at last, one of those Spanish
ships with often shooting, did fire her powder, and falling foul of one of her
fellows, burnt it likewise, which the other perceiving, did presently cut
their cables, and fell down to land ward where they ran on ground, seeking all
means to escape. Often shooting did likewise fire the other ships, and with
them, that of Lubeck.

Peter William Verhoofe, Captain of our Admerall, together with Captain
Lambert were still fighting with the Spanish Admeral, who at last gave over
shooting, and hung forth a flag of truce, but our men shot still.

In the mean time, that gallion which Captain Cleynsorgh fought with, was
likewise set on fire. The Captains Trumpeter did presently clime up to the top
and fetch down the flag, which had hung out longer than any of the rest, for
which, according to the promise which Admerall Heemskerck had made, he received
100 rials in recompense.

The Spanish Admerall being thus overcome with loss of many of her men, those
which remained perceiving that our men made toward them, did ten, and twenty
at a time leap into the Sea, thinking to escape by swimming, but our men in
their fury slew most of them, so as the whole bay was full of dead carcasses.

The fight began about three of the clock in the afternoon, and in less than
four hours, all was ended, and the victory by Gods goodness fell to us.
This brave exploit was chiefly begun by Admerall Heemskerck, and was for the
most part continued, and ended by ten or twelve ships only.

The next day in the morning, the Spanish Admerall was run on ground, but those
of the town went and cut down her masts, and then fired her, thereby saving our
men a labor, who meant to have done it. It was a fearful thing to behold the
flame and burning of the gallions, especially when fire took the powder, for
it made such a noice as though it had thundered from heaven, covering the land
and sea with a thick smoke, which made an universal darkness for a time.

Beside the Admerals gallion, five more were burnt, together with a great ship
of war, an other ship which the Spaniards had taken, and the above mentioned
vessel of Lubeck. An other of the gallions was sunk, the other two ran on
ground, and were made unserviceable.

A French man likewise ran on ground with two ships, the one of Rotterdam, and
the other of Enchuysen: all the other Spanish men of war did the like, up and
down the coast, and by Gods assistance were destroyed. The prisoners confessed
that there were four thousand men in the fleet, and that half of them had not
escaped, among whom (as letters into Spain do testify) was the Admerall with
many other gentlemen and captains. Among the prisoners, was D. John Aluares
the Admerals son, who was brought into Holland. We only lost the noble
Admerall Heemskerck who was lamented of all men, together with some hundred
men, and threescore that were hurt.

On the six and twentieth day, our fleet came to an ankor in the road of
Gibraltar, the ordnance of the town and castle playing upon them, but did
little or no hurt at all: there did they look to their sick and hurt men, as
well as the time would give them leave; and during their aboade there, they saw
great numbers of horse and foot, upon the shore, going to the town of
Gibraltar, for the Spaniard thought verily that our men would have assailed it,
and there was such amazement and confusion in the town, as every man packt up
all he had, intending to be gone: the like fear possessed those of Cales, who
thought that our fleet would come and visit them.

The seven and twentieth day our ships departed forth of the road of Gibraltar,
those of the castle shooting after them, and because the shot did no hurt, our
men reputed those peales of ordnance to be done in their honor, and so
directed their course toward Barbary, going so near Senta which belongs to
the Spaniards, as those of the town and other places of the Country shot at
them: but our men passed on thorough the Streit toward the coast of Barbary,
and came into the road of Tetuan, which is a strong town within 5 miles of
Senta to the Eastward, belonging to the Turks and Moors, and there trimmed
their ships which had bin spoiled by fire and the enemies canon.

When they came before Tetuan, they were kindly welcomed. The Governors self,
with many Turkish gallants came aboard our fleet, offering us all friendship
and assistance both for our ships and men, bringing us all manner of
refreshments, as oranges and other restoratiue fruits, seeming very joyful
for the victory which God had given us over the proud Spaniards: our men
likewise went ashoare, and had great honor done unto them every where.

The Governor made an offer unto our men, that if they would make any attempt
on the town of Senta, he would aid them both with horse and foot; but we
intending other designs, gave him many thanks for his courteous offer. All
things being repaired, the vice-Admerall Alteras was made Admerall, and Peter
William Verhoof vice-Admerall: there they consulted what was best to be done,
and what course to take, for better annoying the enemy: at last they resolved
to send some toward the Islands of Flaunders to remain there, namely the
vice-Admerall, Captain Jacob Iansz of Edam, Captain Harman, the pinace of
Frizland, and Captain Cleuter, to try if they could meet with any good
adventure there.

The rest, videlicet, Admerall Alteras with the greatest part of the fleet,
should keep along the coasts of Portugal not far from the river of Lisbone,
others along the coasts of Barbary toward the Canaries, and round about the
Cape of Finistere and Bayonne: two of the victuallers were to ^arry with the
fleet, and the other two were appointed to carry home the body of Admerall
Heemskerck, which the Surgeon Major had embalmed, together with the hurt and
sick men, and Harpert Marts Captain of the ba^ke was commanded to conuoy
them; these returned homeward, and on the fifth of June arrived at Amsterdam
with the Admerals body.

The eight day following, his funerals were solemnised according to his
worthiness, and the body was carried to the old church after this manner:
First before the body marched 2 companies of soldiers in mourning habit,
trailing their arms, ensigns and drums covered with black according to the
custom of war; after them, his helmet, armor, and scutcheon of arms were
borne: his arms were a Lion argent in a field azure: Fourteen Captains
carried the body which was on every side hung with scutcheons, and on the top
of the coffin, his guilt sword was laid: After the body, his chief kinsfolk
went, next them followed the commissioners of the Council of the Admeraltie,
and after them, the Scout, Burgomasters, Sherifes, and thirty six of the
Council of Amsterdam: then followed the Colonels, the council of war,
captains, all the officers, nobility, and harquebuziers of the town.

After them, the governors and committees of the East Indie company followed
in order, and after them, great numbers of citizens and merchants amounting in
all to the number of 800 persons, beside soldiers, and infinite multitudes of
people that filled the streets.

The general States did (in memory of this worthy man) command an
honorable monument of a kind of blew stone to be erected over him: toward
the East, his arms were hung, and to the Westward over his head, a black stone
was set up, on which, in golden letters, all his voiages and noble actions were
engraven; this did they for a perpetual remembrance of this worthy person to
after ages.

And thus by the help of God was this mighty Spanish fleet destroyed and
brought to nothing; unto whom we ascribe all honor.

Truce for twelve years, concluded and agreed upon betwixt the the deputies
and commissioners of the high and excellent Princes, the Archdukes of Austria
etc. And the commissioners of the illustrious Lords* the States of the united
Netherland Provinces made in anno 1609.
TO conclude the description of all the above mentioned victories which
almighty God the author of all goodness has granted to these united
Provinces under the valorous conduct of his Excellency of Nassau, I have
likewise thought it fit to add hereunto the articles of truce and cessation of
arms, agreed upon, and concluded at Antuerp on the 9 of April 1609, for the
term of twelve years: for if I should set down at large the beginning and
progression of this treaty, viz. how the Archdukes themselves sued for it, by
means of the Lord Vander Horst, Father Ney, and other deputies and
commissioners, what propositions were made, and reasons alleged, both to my
Lords the States, his Excellency, and others, to move and persuade them
thereunto, and the States answers thereupon; and then afterward what was done
on either part; the articles delivered on both sides, the reasons and
difficulties which ensued, together with all the dependances thereof, it would
be a labor long and tedious: and if any be desirous to see these things at
large, we refer them to the Chronicles of Emanuell Demetrius and other books,
and will only here set down the articles agreed upon and concluded by the
commissioners on either side.

THe illustrious Princes, Archduke Albert, and Isabella Clara Eugenia, having
on the 24 of April in a^no 1607 made truce, and cessation of arms for 8
months with the noble Lords States of the united Netherland Provinces, in
quality, and reputing them for States, Provinces, and free countries, to which
they pretend no claim; this truce was to be ratified with like declaration,
by the Catholic Kings Majesty so far forth as it might concern him, and
the said ratification and declaration, was to be delivered to my Lords the
States within three months after the said Truce, which was done, by letters
patents, of the eighteenth of September, in the same year; and special
procuration was moerouer granted to the said Archdukes the tenth of January
1608, as well in his Majesty's name as theirs, to do whatsoever they should
think fit for procuring a firm peace, or truce for many years. By virtue of
the said procuration, the Archdukes by their letters of Commission bearing date
the seven and twentieth of the said month, had named and appointed deputies
and Commissioners, to treat in name, and quality as abouesaid, consenting and
agreeing that the said Truce should be prolonged and continued at sundry
times; as namely, on the twentieth of May, till the end of the year 1608. And
having often met with the Commissioners of my Lords the States, who had also
Commission and Procuration from them, dated on the fifth of February, the same
year; yet, for sundry great difficulties which arose, they could not agree on
peace. Hereupon, the Ambassadors of the most Christian Kings of France and
great Britain, of the Princes and Palatines of Brandenbourg, Marquis of
Ausbach, and Lands-grave of Hesse, sent into these parts from the said Kings
and Princes, to further so holy a work, perceiving that they were ready to
depart and dissolve the treaty, had, on certain conditions, propounded a
peace for many years, which conditions were set down in writing, and given
from them to either party, requesting and admonishing them to conform
themselves thereunto. And as other difficulties arose hereupon, in that regard,
the Lords, whose names hereafter follow, did, on the 9 of April 1609, meet
together: The Lord Ambrose Spinola, Marquis of Benaffro, knight of the order of
the Golden fleece, Councellor of State and war to his Catholic Majesty,
Campe-Master, and General of his armies etc. The Lord John Richardot, knight,
Lord of Barli, Councellor of State, and first President of his Highnesses
privy Council etc. John Mancicidor, Councellor of war, and Secretary to his
Catholic Majesty: The reverend Father, Friar John Ney, General Commissarie
of the order of Saint Francis in the Netherlands, and the Lord Lodwick
Verreycken knight, Audiencer, and chief Secretary to their Highnesses, by
virtue of Letters Procuratories from the said Lords Archdukes on the one side,
to treat as well in their own names, as in that of his Catholic majesty, with
William Lodwick, Earl of Nassau, Catzenellenboghe, Vianden, Dietz, etc. Lord
of Bilsteyn, governor and captain general of Frizland, of the town of
Groninghen, the Ommelands and Drenth etc. The Lord Walrauen, lord of Brederode,
Vianen, Castellain of V^recht, lord of Ameyde, Cloetinge etc. The lord
Cornellis de Gent, lord of Loenen and Meynerwick, Castellain and Iusticer of
the Empire, and town of Nimmeghen: The lord John Oldenbarneuelt, Knight, lord
of Temple, Rondentijs etc. Advocate and keeper of the great seal, charters,
and registers of Holland and East Frizland: The lord James Maldere, knight,
lord of Heyes etc. the chief man representing the Nobility in the States and
Council of the County of Zeland. The lord Gerard de Renesse, lord Vander Aa,
Streefkerck, Nieuleckerland etc. Gellius Hillama Doctor of the laws, ordinary
Councellor in the council of Frizland: John Sloeth lord of Sallick, Drossart
of the Country of Vallenho, and Castellain of the lordship of Cuynder: and
Abell Coenders of Helpen, lord in Faen and Cantes, in names of the said lords
States, in virtue likewise of their letters of commission, on the other part.
These by the mediation and advice of Peter Ieannin knight, Baron of Chagni, and
Monthe^, Councellor to the most Christian King in his Council of State, and his
extraordinary Ambassador with the said lords States, and the lord Elie de la
Place, knight, lord of Russy, Castellain of Machault, Councellor likewise in
the said Council of State, and ordinary gentleman of the kings chamber,
baylie and captain of Vitrie le Francois, and his ordinary Ambassador,
resident with the said lords States: Sir Richard Spencer knight, ordinary
gentleman of the king of Englands privy chamber, and his extraordinary
Ambassador with the said lords States, and Sir Ralph Winwood knight, the same
kings ordinary Ambassador, and Councellor of State to the said united
Provinces: all these made an agreement in manner and form following.

I FIrst, the said Lords Archdukes do declare, as well in their own names as
in that of the king of Spain, that they are content to treat with the said
Lords general States of the united Provinces in quality, and reputing them
for free Countries, Provinces and States, to which they pretend no claim, and
to make with them, in the names and qualities above said (as by these presents
they do) truce on these conditions hereafter mentioned.

II. Namely, that the said truce shall be of force, firm, and inviolable for
the term of twelve years, during which time there shall be a cessation from
all hostile actions, in what manner soever, betwixt the said Lords King,
Archdukes, and general States, both by Sea and land, and fresh rivers, in all
their kingdoms, countries, territories and dominions, and for all their
subjects of what quality or condition soever, without exception of place or
persons.

III. Each of them shall continue seized of, and s^all effectually enjoy, those
countries, towns, places, territories, and lordships which he now holds and
possesses, without any molestation whatsoever, during the said truce; in which
is to be comprehended, the boroughs, villages, hamlets, and champaine country
which depend thereon.

IIII. The subjects of the said Lords King, Archdukes, and States shall in
friendly sort have good correspondence with one an other during the said
Truce, without resenting forepassed injuries* They may likewise frequent, and
reside in the countries and dominions of each other, and there in all safety
use traffic, and commerce, both by land, sea, and fresh rivers. This
nevertheless, the said Lord King understands to be restrained and limited to
the Realms, countries, territories and lordships, which he possesses in
Europe, and other seas and places, whither the subjects of hi^ ^eighbor Kings
and Princes, do trade upon sufferance: And for those places, towns, ports,
and havens which he possesses forth of the abouesaid limits, the said Lords
States, and their subjects, shall not trade thither without express permission
of the said Catholic king: Yet, if it seem good unto them, they may trade in
the countries of all other Princes, Potentates, and common wealths, which will
permit them so to do, namely, forth of the said limits, without any let,
molestation, or impediment from the said Lord King, or his officers and
subjects.

5 V. And because a longer tim^s required, for giving warning unto those that
are abroad at sea with forces to desist from all hostile actions, it is
concluded that the truce shall not begin till within a year next ensuing:
Always provided, that if advertisement of the said truce may be given sooner,
that then hostility shall cease from that time forward: but if after the said
term of an whole year any hostile actions shall be used, the loss and harm
shall be restored without delay.

VI. The subjects of the said Lords King, Archdukes, and States, trading into
one an others countries, shall not be tied to pay greater duties and
impositions than their own subjects, and those of friends and allies which are
least charged.

VII. And the subjects of the said Lords States, shall likewise have the same
assurance and liberty, in the dominions of the said Lords King, and Archdukes
as has been granted to the King of great Britains subjects, by the last
treaty of peace, and secret articles made with the constable of Castille.

VIII. Neither shall merchants, masters of ships, pilots, mariners, their
ships, wares, and goods, belonging unto them be seized upon and stayed, by
virtue of any general or particular mandate, or for any other cause
whatsoever, nor yet under color to make use of them for the preservation and
defense of the country: yet it is not meant that goods seized upon by
ordinary way of Justice, in regard of debts, bonds, and contracts of theirs,
on whom the said seasure has been made, and wherein it has been proceeded
according to right and reason, shall be herein comprehended.

Ix. And as for the trade and commerce of the low countries, and taxes and
impositions which shall be raised upon merchandise: if it be afterward found
that any excess is used therein, upon first suit made thereupon by either
party, commissioners shall be appointed to order and moderate the matter, and
though the business cannot be agreed upon, yet shall not the truce therefore
be broken.

X. If any sentences or judgments have been given betwixt persons of sundry
sides, either for civil or criminal causes, they shall not be executed upon
the parties condemned, nor on their goods, so long as the said truce lasts.

XI. Letters of marque and reprisall shall not be granted during the said time,
unless upon just cause, and in cases which are permitted by the imperial
laws and constitutions, and according to the order by them established.

XII. None may arrive, enter, nor continue in the Ports, Havens, and Roades of
each others Country, with any number of ships and soldiers, which may give
cause of suspicion, to him unto whom the said Ports, Havens, and Roads do
belong, unless they be cast in by tempest, or enforced to do it upon
necessity, and for avoiding danger at Sea.

XIII. Those whose goods have been seized and confiscate by reason of the
war, or their heirs, shall enjoy the same goods during the truce, and of
their own private authority shall take possession of them, by virtue of this
present treaty, without being enforced to have recourse to justice;
notwithstanding all incorporations fiscal, engagements, gifts, treaties,
agreements and transacts, or whatsoever renouncing has been made in the said
transacts to exclude part of the said goods, from those unto whom they are to
belong: on condition nevertheless not to dispose of, nor diminish them, during
the said time, unless they be permitted so to do, by the said Lords,
Archdukes, or States.

XIIII. This likewise shall take place to the profit and advantage of the
heirs of the late Prince of Orange, concerning their right to the Salt pits in
the County of Burgondie, which shall be restored unto them together with the
woods thereon depending. And concerning the suit of Castelbelin, commenced in
the life time of the late Lord Prince of Orange in the Court of Malines,
against the Catholic Kings Attorney general, the said Lords Archdukes do
sincerely promise, therein to do them justice within a year, without any
delay, according to right and equity.

XV. If the public treasury has sold any part of goods confiscate, those to
whom they are to belong by virtue of this present treaty, shall tie themselves
to be satisfied, with the interest of the price, and to be paid it every
year during the truce, by those that possess the said goods, otherwise, it
shall be lawful for them to resort to the land or inheritance that is sold.

XVI. But of the said Sales have been made by order of law, for good and
lawful debts of theirs unto whom the said goods did belong before the
confiscation, it shall be lawful for them or their heirs, upon cause, to
redeem them, in paying the price within a year, accounting from the day of
this present treaty, after which time they shall be no more received: and the
said repurchase being made by them, they may dispose thereof as they shall
think good without further permission.

XVII. Yet is not this repurchase to be in force, for houses seated in towns,
and sold upon this occasion, in regard of the great discommoditie and notable
loss which the purchasers should sustain, by reason of change and reparations
which may be made in the said houses, the examination whereof would be too long
and difficult.

XVIII. As for reparations and improuements bestowed upon other goods that are
sold, whose repurchase is permitted, if they be sued for, the ordinary Judges
shall therein do justice upon knowledge of the cause, the inheritance
remaining engaged for the sum which has been bestowed on reparations: and
yet, it shall not be lawful for the said buyers to claim the law of retention,
thereby to be paid and satisfied for them.

XIX. If any fortifications and public works have been made on either side,
with leave and authority of superiors, in places which are to be restored by
this present treaty, the owners of them shall be bound to satisfy themselves
with the estimat which the ordinary Judges shall make, residing as well in the
said places, as in the jurisdiction thereof, unless the parties do willingly
agree among themselves.

XX. Concerning goods belonging to Churches, colleges, and other holy places
in the united Provinces, which have been members depending on Churches,
benefices and colleges under the Archdukes obedience; that which has not
been sold before the first of January 1607, shall be restored and surrendered
unto them, and they shall make reentrie into them by their own private
authority without any minister of Justice, and shall enjoy them during the
truce, but shall not dispose of them, as it is heretofore mentioned. And for
those which have been sold before the said time, or given in payment by the
States of any of the Provinces, the reuenew of the price shall be paid unto
them every year, by the Province which has made the said sale, or given and
assigned the said goods. The like shall be done and observed by the said lords
Archdukes.

XXI. Those unto whom their goods confiscate are to be restored, shall not be
tied to pay the arrerages of the rents, for the time they have not enjoyed
them; and if they be sued or molessed for it, they shall be sent away acquitted.

XXII. No man shall likewise sue for goods sold, or granted to have them
ordered according to the debts whereunto the possessors are bound, by treaties
made thereupon, with the interests of moneys for entrance, if any have bin
given.

XXIII. Judgments given for goods confiscate, together with such parties as
have acknowledged the Judges, and have been lawfully defended, shall hold
good, and those that are condemned shall not be suffered to contradict them,
unless by ordinary means.

XXIIII. The said Lords Archdukes and States, shall each of them for their
parts appoint officers and magistrates for administration of Justice and
government, in towns and strong places, which by the present treaty ought to
be restored to the owners, to enjoy them during the truce.

XXV. Moveable goods confiscate before the conclusion of this present treaty,
shall not be subject to restitution.

XXVI. Moveable actions which have been set over by the said Lords Archdukes
or States to the profit of particular debtors before the first of January 1607
shall be of no force on either side.

XXVII. The time which has run on during the war, beginning since the year
1567, till this present, shall not be reckoned to bring in prescription,
betwixt those which be of sundry sides.

XXVIII. Those who during the war are retired into neutrall countries, shall
likewise enjoy the fruit of this truce, and may reside where they shall think
good, and return home to their ancient dwellings, there to remain in all
safety, observing the laws of the country; and not upon occasion of residing
in any place whatsoever, shall they be endamaged in their goods, or themselves
deprived of enjoying them.

XXIX. No new forts shall be built in the Netherlands on either side during
the truce.

xxx.The Lords of the house of Nassan shall not during the said truce, be
pursued or molested in their persons or goods, either for debts owing by the
late Prince of Orange, since the year 1567, till the day of his death, or for
arrerages fallen during the seizure of goods therewith charged.

XXXI. If any particular persons shall do aught against the truce, by
commaundment of the said Lords King, Archdukes, or States, the harm shall be
recompensed in the same place where the breach was made, if they be taken
there, or else, where they dwell, and shall not be pursued elsewhere either in
body or goods, in any sort whatsoever: neither shall it be lawful for them
to take arms and break the truce upon this occasion, yet they may (upon
manifest denial of Justice) use ordinary means, by letters of marque and
reprisall.

XXXII. All disingheritings made by occasion of the late hostility, are
declared void and of none effect.

XXXIII. The subjects and such as dwell in the dominions of the said Lords,
Archdukes, and States of what estate and condition soever they be, are declared
capable of succeeding one an other, as well by the testament, as ab intestato,
according to the custom of the places: And if any successions have heretofore
fallen to any of them, they shall therein be defended and maintained.

XXXIIII. All prisoners taken in war shall be delivered on either side
without ransom.

XXXV. And that this present treaty may be better observed, the said Lords
King, Archdukes, and States do interchangeably promise to employ all their
force^ and means to secure all passages, seas, and nauigable rivers, from the
incursions of Pirates, thieves, and robbers, and if they shall apprehend any
such, then, sharply to chastise them.

XXXVI. They do moreover promise to attempt or do nothing, nor suffer any
thing to be done, to the hurt of this preseut treaty, directly or indirectly,
and if any be done, to amend it without any difficulty or delay: And for
observing of all this above mentioned, they do mutually oblige themselves,
namely, the said Lords King, and Archdukes, their successors, and for
validity of the said obligation, do renounce all laws, customs, and
whatsoever is con^rarie thereunto.

XXXVII. This present treaty shall be ratified, and approved by the said Lords
King, Archdukes, and States, and their Letters of ratification delivered to one
another in due manner and form, within four days. And concerning the
Catholic Kings ratification, the said Lords Archdukes have promised, and shall
be bound, to deliver it within 3 months in due manner and form also, to the
end the said Lords States, their subjects, and people, may effectually and in
all safety reap the fruit of this present treaty.

XXXVIII. The said Treaty shall be published in all places where it shall
concern, presently after the ratification made by the said Lords Archdukes,
and States; and from this time forth, all hostility shall cease.

This made and concluded in the City of Antuerpe, the ninth of April 1609,
and signed by my Lords the Ambassadors of the most Christian Kings of France
and ^^at Britain as mediators, and by the Commissioners of my Lords the
Archdukes and States it was signed underneath by P, Ieannin, Elie de la Pluce,
Ric. Spencer, Rafe Winwood, Ambrose Spinola, the President Richardot, Iu. de
Mancicidor, Friar John Ney, L. Verreyckin, William Lodwick Earl of Nassau, W.
Brodero de Cornellis de Gent, John de Ordenbarnevelt, I. de Malderee, G. de
Renesse, G. de Hillama, John Sloet, Ab. Coenders.

And because within a while after, certain obscure difficulties were found in
the precedent Articles, the Commissioners of the Archdukes, and my Lords the
States, did afterward make this declaration and augmentation following, as it
is here set down word for word.

The general States of the united Netherland Provinces, to all those unto whom
these presents shall come, greeting: We give ye to understand, that having
seen the points and articles, agreed upon on the seventh day of this month of
January, here at the Hague, betwixt the commissioners of the most illustrious
Archdukes of Austria, Albert and Isabella Clara Eugenia, together with ours, by
virtue of procurations mutually given to the said commissioners concerning
certain difficulties and ambiguities, proceeding from the treaty of truce,
concluded on the ninth of April 1609, in the city of Antuerp, betwixt the
said Archdukes and us on the one part, and on the other side propounded by the
officers' and subjects enter changeably, for better consideration of the
increase and more ample declaration of the points and articles, whose contents
do hereafter follow word for word. For as much as in the treaty of truce,
made the 9 of April 1609 in the city of Antuerp, betwixt the commissioners of
my Lords the Archdukes of Austria etc. and them of the general States of the
united Netherland Provinces, certain difficulties and ambiguities have been
propounded on either side, by their officers and subjects; for the more exact
looking to of the increase and more ample declaration of the said articles, it
was in the end thought fit, that the commissioners on either side, should
consider of these difficulties and reconcile them. After that the said
commissioners did often meet to confer together according to their procuration
and commission on both sides, they did at last agree upon these points and
articles following. And for effecting hereof, on the seventh of January 1610
were assembled at the Hague in Holland, Balthazar de Robiano, treasurer
general of the demaines and receipts of the said Lords Archdukes, Lodwick
Verreycken knight, the Lord of Hamme, Councellor of war, audiencer and chief
secretary to their Highnesses, and John Baptist Maes Councellor and aduocat
Fiscall in the council of Brabant, on the part of the said Lords Archdukes:
The Lord Henry of Brieuen the elder, Lord in Sinderen: the Lord John
Oldenbarneuelt knight, lord of Temple, Rodenrijs etc. advocate and keeper of
the great seal, charters and registers of Holland and East Frizland, the Lord
James of Malderee knight, Lord of Heyes etc. chief man representing the
nobility in the Estates and Council of the County of Zealand, the Lord
Iustus of Rysenbourg, chief Burgomaster of the City of Vtrecht, Truco de
Oennama Justice of Shooterland, the Lord Earnest of Ittersum, Drossard of
Twent, and Abel Coenders of Helpen, Lord of Faenand Cantes, on the part of the
said Lords general States.

FIrst, that the inhabitants of the united Netherland Provinces coming into
the territories and Provinces under the Archdukes obedience, shall have and
enjoy (governing themselves according to the above mentioned treaty) the same
liberty as the king of great Britains subjects have; and to this end, the
articles which dispose thereof, shall be sent by their Highnesses to all
governors, magistrates, and officers of therespectiue Provinces, with
commaundment to govern themselves according thereunto: and the said
inhabitants and subjects of the united Netherland Provinces, may in all places
under their Highnesses government, use such advocates, attorneys, notaries, and
solicitors, as shall seem good unto themselves, who likewise shall be
appointed thereunto by ordinary Judges.

2 Their Highnesses shall give order for and appoint fit and honorable places
to bury such as from the States side shall happen to die in places under their
Highne^^ government.

3 The said Lords Archdukes, and States may not receive from either part forth
of their limits, goods passing up and down by land or water.

4 The subjects of the said Lords Archdukes, and States shall in eithers
Countries reciprocally enjoy their ancient franchises and rights of customs,
which they have peaceably enjoyed before the wars.

5 Frequentation, conversation, and commerce, betwixt the subjects mutually,
shall not be hindered, and all impediments to that purpose shall be taken away.

6 All goods which according to the treaty have been or are to be restored
to the ancient owners, their heirs, or others that may lay claim thereunto,
may be sold by the same owners, without any other particular consent,
notwithstanding the thirteenth article of the above mentioned treaty, where it
is otherwise said: the property of rents excepted, which shall be
acknowledged by the public treasury, in steed of the sold goods.

7 All concealed goods, moueables and immovable, rents, actions, debts, and
other things not seized on by the public treasury, before the ninth of
April 1609, the owners, their heirs or those which lay claim thereunto, may
enjoy all the fruits, rents, revenues, and commodities, freely and at their
own dispose, and the concealers, themselves, and heirs shall not upon that
occasion be called in question by the public treasury on either party, but
the owners their heirs or such as lay claim thereunto, shall therein have
right done them against all men, as if it were their own goods.

8 Those trees which have been cut down since the last of January 1609, and
which at the day of the conclusion of the said treaty, are uncut, and those
which have been sold on the very same day, shall be granted to the owners,
notwithstanding the sale thereof, nor shall they be tied to pay any thing for
them.

9 The fruits, farmings, and revenues of lordships, territories, tenths,
fishings, houses, rents, and other revenues of lands, which according to the
treaty have been or are to be restored, fallen since the ninth of April
1609, shall be granted for the whole year, to the owners, their heirs or such
as lay claim to them.

10 For goods sold by the public treasuries on either side, letters shall be
given to the owners, their heirs, or those that lay claim to them, which
shall serve them for a declaratorie proof, conformable to the treaty, with
assignation of yearly payment to a Receiver in the Provinces where they have
been sold or bought, which shall be there appointed after the first public
sale or otherwise, together with the first years rent, which shall arise and
be paid on the 9 of April 1610.

11 The farmings of lands confiscate (though for many years) shall end with
the year 1609, according to the custom of places where the lands lie, and the
said farmings fallen after the ninth of April (as has been said) shall be
paid to the owners: but on this condition, that if he which did enjoy the said
lands, has been at any costs and charge for harvest next ensuing, that the
said expense according to the custom or discretion of the Judge of the place
where the said lands lie, shall be paid by the owner to him who has had the
profit thereof.

12 Sale made of lands or goods confiscate, since the conclusion of the said
treaty, shall be of no validity, and likewise such as have been made
before, contrary to the agreement made with certain towns in particular.

13 The owners shall be satisfied for goods employed in fortifications,
public works, or hospitals, according to the 19 article of the treaty.

14 Houses of particular persons which have been or are to be restored
according to the said treaty, cannot be reciprocally burdened with garrisons
or otherwise more than those of other subjects of like condition.

15 If, in any place, difficulty be made of restoring goods which are to be
restored, the Judge of the said place shall presently see it to be effectually
performed, and shall therein take the shortest course, and the restitution
shall not be delayed under color that the tax has not been paid, or
otherwise, contrary to the contents of the 13 article of the treaty.

16 In those places where it shall be found that all the goods of any one of
either side have bin confiscate, so as he has had no means left to pay the
interest of his debts, owing before the confiscation, he shall not only be
free from all charges and rents according to the said treaty, but likewise
from the general and personal charge of rents and interests befallen in the
said times.

17 It is meant that under disinheritings made by occasion of the war, are
likewise comprehended, exhereditations made in regard of any thing proceeding
from war, and which do depend thereon.

18 None shall be molested on either side, directly or indirectly, for changing
his dwelling, in paying such duties as are to be paid; and all impediments
since the concluding of the treaty, shall be really and in deed removed.

19 It is likewise meant, that under restitution of goods and lands granted by
the treaty, lands lying in the Counties of Burgondie and Charrolois, shall be
likewise comprehended; and that which according to the Treaty has not yet
been restored, shall every where on either side be faithfully and speedily
performed, by the owners, their heirs, or such as lay claim to them.

20 The said Lords Archdukes and States do promise faithfully to accomplish
and cause to be accomplished, all and every of the above mentioned points; to
which they bind themselves according to the obligation contained in the
principal Treaty, and in the manner, as if these points were therein likewise
mentioned.

21 Lastly, it is concluded, that all and every of the points and articles of
the above mentioned Treaty of the ninth of April past, which have not been
expressly altered, nor more amply explained, shall every of them continue in
full force, without being prejudiced, and nothing of that which has been
propounded in this treaty by writing or word of mouth, shall tend or in any
sort be interpreted to the profit or disadvantage of any one, and that either
directly or indirectly: But, as well the said Lords Archdukes, the general and
particular States, as also, all Princes, Earls, Barons, Towns, Colleges,
Lords, Gentlemen, Burghers, and other inhabitants of the Provinces on both
sides, of what quality or condition soever, shall continue in their rights and
privileges, according to the contents of the said Treaty, and the said Lords
Archdukes and States, shall agree together within a month next ensuing this
treaty, and shall deliver up to each other their letters of agreement in due
form.

Thus agreed and concluded at the Hague in Holland, the day, month, and year
above mentioned. In witness whereof, these presents have been confirmed by
the signature of the Commissioners on either side, and was signed by B. de
Robiano, Verreicken, I.B. Masuis, Hen. Van Brienen the elder, John
Oldenbarn^velt, I. de Malderee, Iustus de Rysenbourg, T. v. Oennama, Ernst of
Ittersum, Ab. Coenders.

After mature deliberation, we have accepted, approved, confirmed and ratified,
and by these presents do accept, approve, confirm and ratify, the same
points and articles; promising sincerely to observe, and cause them to be
observed in every point as if our selves had made and promised them, and will
never do, or suffer any thing to be done to the contrary in any sort
whatsoever either directly or indirectly: and for performance hereof, we bind
all our own goods and lands, with those of our successors. In witness whereof,
we have caused these presents to be sealed with our great seal, and signed by
our Register in our assembly at the Hague, the nine and twentieth of January
1610. Paragraphed by I. Magnus Vt. And a little lower, by appointment of my
Lords the general States, signed, C. Aerssens.

FINIS.
A Table of the most memorable exploits contained in this book.
SAint Andrews fort yielded up to the States. 253 The Admerall ship of
Antuerpe and seven other taken by the Black gallie of Holland. 283 Armada of
Spain an. 1588. 50^ Portugal gallions there, 51. Fleet of Biscay 52. Pinaces
52. Fleet of Castile 53. Ships of Andeluzia 54. Fleet of Guipuscoa 55. Fleet of
Leuantiscas 56. Fleet of Vrcas 57. Pinaces and Zabras 58. Galliasses of Naples
59. Galleys of Portugal 59. The general account of the whole fleet 59. The
Colonel Regiments, and number of men under every Regiment 61. Victuals 62.
Axell taken. 26 BErgen-op-Zoom besieged by Parma in vain 81 Bommell beseeged
and the seege raised by his Excellency. 219 The captains du Bois and Bacx
defeat certain bands of the enemies men. 351 The general States army in
Brabant. 334 Breda taken. 111 The town and castle Breuoort besieged and taken.
211 CAdsand taken. 359 Cales-Males in Andeluzia in Spain taken. 185 The
Canaries invaded by the Netherlanders. 233 Coeuoerden taken. 142 Coeuoerden
freed from siege. 157 The Court of Holland described. 12 Cracow castle won.
285 Creuecoeur taken. 122 DElfziel skonce taken. 128 Deuenter besieged and
taken. 126 Deuticum taken. 249 ELshout taken. 123 Enschede besieged and taken.
213 THe army of his Excellency in Flanders, and their exploits there. 260 THe
black Gallie of Holland takes the Admeral ship of Antuerp and seven other
ships. 283 Geertrudenb^rg besieged and taken. 149 Genealogy of the Prince of
Orange. 14 A sea fight in the road of Gibraltar between the King of Spaines
armada and the States men of war. 372 Grave in the Land of Cuyck besieged and
taken. 343 Sundry forts in the land of Groeninguen besieged and taken. 126 The
siege and taking of the town and country of Groeninguen. 161 The ag^ (...)
^on there. 172 Groll and Goor besieged and taken. 209 THe Hague described. 12
Heel and Homert taken. 122 The Court of Holland described. 12 The Admerall of
Holland puts the Galleys of Sluice to flight. 281 The Hollanders vanquish the
Portugals in a sea fight at the East Indies. 294 Hulst besieged and taken. 13^
Huy taken. 182 THe fort of Imitill won. 128 KNodsenbourg besieged by Parma in
vain 130 Earl of Leicest^r leaves the Low countries 27 The town and castle of
Lingen taken. 215 The Netherlanders in Luxembourg with an army. 351 MAnsfelt
beaten from the fort of Nordam. 119 Medenblick yeeded to his Excellency. 27
Meurs, and the Castle there taken. 207 Meurs, again taken. 293 William of
Nassau Prince of Orange his genealogy, death and funerals. 14.15.16 etc.
Prince Maurice of Nassau receives the government of the Netherlands. 25. and
27 Netherlands described. 1 The Netherlands set forth ships toward Noua Zemla
and the East Indies. 174 The enterprises of the Netherlanders on Spain and the
Canaries. 233 The Netherlanders in Luxembourg with an army. 351 The
Netherlanders at truce with the Archduke for 1^ years. 383 The battle of
Niewport won by his Excelle^c^e. 270 Nimmeguen besieged and taken. 134 Nordam
fort battered and assaulted in vain by Mansfelt. 119 OAtmaersen taken. 142 The
same taken again. 213 Oldenbourg burnt and sacked. 122 Oldenzeel besieged and
taken. 213 The fort of Opslach won. 128 The prince of Orange (...) g^^^alogie,
death, and funerals. 14.15. etc. Ostend besieged by the Archduke Albert, to his
great loss. 302 The same fiercely assaulted 7. Ianuar. 1602. 317 The same
again assaulted 13. of April 1603 327 PArma defeated in the Betuwe. 129
RHinberg besieged and taken. 201 Rhinberg a second time besieged and taken. 265
Rosendall taken. 122 A Sea fight between the States men of war and the Spanish
galleys. 353 A Sea fight between the king of Spaines armada, and the States
men of war. 372 General Senoy his articles presented to the council of State.
45 The galleys of Sluice put to flight by the Admerall of Holland. 281 Sluice
besieged and yielded up. 359 Spain invaded by the Netherlanders. 233 Spinolas
galleys fought with by the States men of war. 357 Steenberghen taken. 122
Steenwijke besieged and taken. 137 TErheyden taken. 122 Tilemont taken and
sacked. 110 Turnholt taken. 123 Truce for 12. years between the Archduke of
Austria, and the States. 383 Victory got by his Excellency on Tielsche-Heyde
plain. 197 THe town and castle of Wachtendonck taken. 250 Westerloo taken.
123 The strong castle of Would taken. 370 YSendike taken. 359 ZVtphen besieged
and taken. 123
FINIS.

