THE FLIGHT OF TIME, Discerned By the dim shadow of Jobs Dial, JOB 9.25.

Explaned In certain familiar and profitable meditations well conducing to the
wise numbering of our days in the sad time of this mortality.

As it was delivered to his charge at Bloxham in Oxfordshire by the Pastor
thereof.

R. M.

PSALM. 90.12. Lord, So teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for Edward Langham at Banbery. 1634.

TO THE HONORABLE Mrs. FRANCES FIENNES wife to the Right Worshipful Mr. JAMES
FIENNES Esquire (Son and heir apparent to the Lord Viscount Say and Seal)
and one of the daughters of EDWARD Viscount WIMBLETON. Grace and Peace, etc.
Virtuously Noble,
There Is nothing in this small module presented to your Religious view but what
you know, nor any thing which can be too well learned: the Priests lips are as
well to settle and rivet knowledge in the heart, as to tender it to the ear:
and the most intelligent must be, for knowledge, as the Suppliant in the
Gospel was for Faith, and cry, and say with tears, Lord I know, help thou my
want of knowledge. Both must endeavor the procuring such practical and saving
knowledge, by the power whereof the judgment may be rightly informed, and the
will and affections framed for the well ordering of the life and conversation.
Your known care and study in this holy practice inviteth and emboldneth
toward your Godly acceptance these familiar and ever seasonable meditations:
the rather for that the party whose late death occasioned the present task,
was in her lifetime an afflicted object of your much exercised and voluntary
compassion, many months your chargeable and much tendered patient: too late,
for her body, in respect of the desperatenes of her malady (the care being
yours, but the cure Gods peculiar) but not too soon for her soul, which
received no small confessed physic from your counsel, prayers and example.
She lived a daughter of Job, her days being short and painful: and dying a
daughter of Abraham in faith and patience, left nothing fitter to acknowledge
her debt to you then this part of her funeral solemnity; which therefore I am
bold to present in her name to your noble desert. Christians care and pains in
doing good to all, especially Faiths household, has sufficient reward with God:
who notwithstanding must be glorified by men in the view of his graces shining
in his eminent servants: which who so dare perform with flattery, let him
look unto it: for my part herein sincerity is conduct, as far as my heart and I
be best together acquainted. If you, or any for your sake, reap any price of
labor in reading this publish; I know, God shall not want his praise.

Prosper still, with your noble consort, as your souls prosper, to your
continuing rich in good works (the Kings highway to your kingdom.) Be
blessed with Booz and Ruth their blessing, to do worthily and be famous: and
let your famous worthiness (as it does) shine long through your humility here,
till both your graces be late crowned above in Glory,

Your Honors unworthy neighbor ever well-wishing you in Christ Jesus ROGER
MATTHEW.

THE FLIGHT OF TIME, Discerned by the dim shadow of Jobs Dial, Job 9.25.
JOB 9.25. Now my days are swifter then a Post; they flee away, they see no
good.


THese words are a part of the ruthful complaint of afflicted Job: who, having
taken to consideration Gods justice and power in his afflicting the sons of
men, commending the one to be impeachable and no way to be reproved, especially
verse. 2. the other to be impregnable and no way to be resisted, particularly
verse. 19. draws toward a conclusion well suting with his own present
condition, and his friends partial censure of the same, viz. that the effects
of Gods justice and power in trying men by afflictions are not (simply) sound
arguments of Gods displeasure: since Verse 22.
the Lord brings to destruction both the perfect and the wicked. So that,
whether Verse. 23.
he pluck away the innocent suddenly, or forbear and seem to Verse. 24.
give the earth, by way of long possession, to the wicked; notwithstanding, so
past finding out shall his judgments be to us, (whether for trial or for
terror) that no man shall discover his intentions: yea he covers the faces
of judges, says the Text: the best discerners may as well find out the furrow
of a ship in the Sea, or tracke the flight of an Eagle in the air, as sound
Gods insearchables in this kind; Job desires to know the man's name and place
that dare arrogate the contrary to himself, Verse. 24.
Who, and where is he?

This settled, that misery is no sound argument of Gods anger, the Patriarch
sticks not (in this verse read unto you) to declare the heavy hand of the Lord
upon himself in a threefold degree of that infirmity and wretchedness,
whereunto, as all mortality is subject, so himself was at this present
severely subdued. Now my days are swifter then a post, etc.

Which words note unto us three remarkables of Jobs and all humane frailty:
First, the shortness, Secondly, the swiftness, Thirdly, the sadness of the
same.

1. The shortness appears in the small fragments of it, being but Days.
Large extents are measured by long dimensions, furlongs, miles, leagues: short
by feet, spannes, inches: Days, ye know, are no long durances, and how can
life eeked and pieced out by Days be of any long continuance?

2. The swiftness is discovered two ways. First, by a comparison to a
messenger of state, which, notwithstanding his important have, rides not so
fast to his appointed boundary. Secondly, by a similitude (as all metaphors in
substance, are) in a word borrowed from the Fowler, of quicker dispatch then
any horse or dromedary, they flee: amplified by a term of increasing distance,
away. Swifter then a post, they flee away.

3. The sadness glimmers forth in the absence of comfort and prosperity,
delivered under the term Good; and its partly expressed by the strongest
negative, partly confirmed by the surest witness (that of the eye) they see no
good.

The porch thus opened, lets enter into materials: and first to the first
condition of Jobs frailty, and in him, of all mankind in general, viz.

Days and small pittances of humane life, teaching us this useful
observation, Man's natural life is but short, short days are all the limbs of
man's time, (like a short line consisting but of pricks) the whole body of his
time cannot be long. When Jacob had well near all his years together, he
sums the total into a Genesis 47.9
few days. David could gripe all his days into the compass of a Ps. 39 5.
Span. As nature nurtured the heathen in the cutted state of this mortality by
a bladder and a bubble, both sweld, with a puff, and shrunk with a prick: by
a breath whose being, or vanishing, who can say which is sooner, longer? So
grace advertiseth Christians by most significant comparisons expressing their
short abode in this Ps. 146.^
their dust.

The Apostle James would scarce vouchsafe it any comparison. Iam. 4.1^
What Is your life, says he? twiting us with our false conceit of long life by a
holy flout: if it be, says he, of any subsistence at all, its but like a
vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. What says
David to our days? They are says he, 1 Chronicles. 29, 15.
as a shadow, and there is no abiding. And what is Hezekiahs opinion? A^ Es. 38.12
A shepherds tent, of no long stay. Job 7.6.
A weavers shuttle is of no long race: 2 Cor. 5.1
a pilgrims tabernacle soon flitted. So vain a thing is man. How long is wax
in melting? Ps. 22.14
So is life in the midst of its fortress.

How durable is the state of Es. 40.7.
grass? Ps. 90.5.
We fade away suddenly like the grass. What Is a tales grace? Shortness, Ps.
90.9.
Our years pass away as a tale that is told, a thing gone and past. Yea, as
if these comparisons were yet defective, the Prophet adds a sleighter manner
of similitude, resembling man's life to a Ps. 73.20
dream, and that when its past, when a man awaketh; a thing gone before you
can collect what it was, and when it was, it was but a thing (or rather a just
nothing) of mere imagination. But how is it that man's life is thus scantled?

Ps. 39.5.
Thou have made my days as it were a span in length, says David.

2. The provoking cause is sin. That's a sudden waster. Genesis 2.17.
The same day thou eatest, etc. thou shall surely die: God has sealed it with
an oath, surely.

3. The working cause, the consuming effects of sin, sorrow and misery both
inward and outward: a house of Job 4.19.
clay so strongly beleagured cannot hold out a long siege.

4. The material cause, Ge^. 3.19.
dust; he was appointed no long standing whose Job 4.19.
foundation was laid in dust.

5. The procreating cause of mankind necessitateth a very short stay: Job 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman has hut a short time. If he stand to his
pedigree it cannot be, that she that has no fee simple nor leasse of one
hour, can make over any long entale of time to her posterity.

The truth of our short abode thus confirmed rather by way of meditation upon a
thing much useful, then for proof of a point so plain: what better
application shall we make then Genesis 11.^8.
Harans case and thousands more that die before their parents. Foolish men,
that neither with all their wealth can purchase one minute of time, nor with
all their strength procure an hour of health, nor with all their wit differ
death, much less prevent judgment, yet will never season their thoughts with
any meditation of weakness* death, or judgment. Well, the evil day is never
the more distant for their putting it off: sickness may come at an instant:
weakness will come; death must come: the longer the shadow of life seems to
be, the nearer their sun is to setting; their glass is running: their hour is
at hand when they shall make audit before the impartial judge for all these
flatteries of themselves, and for their intentions wherefore they thus deceived
themselves, for all the duties they have omitted, for all the evils they have
committed, all the instructions they have neglected, all the promises they have
despised, all the threatenings they have slighted, all the talents of youth,
health, strength, wit, etc. they have hidden, and for all the creatures,
means, and times they have presumptuously abused. If any will surfeit upon
hopes of long joy and contentment in licentiousness, and resolve (upon that
ground) still to turn Gods grace of time yet afforded, and means of
conversion yet proffered into wantonness of sinning, let him with his sweet
conceits take this sorrow sop amids, that his delights cannot be long and
certain whose life is but short and uncertain. God will shortly put an end to
his pleasures and person, death groans for him, that sergeant is within one
span of his bosom, his judge begins to laugh as fast at his destruction as he
laughes at his instructions: time is at hand when his dullest sense shall
feel, to his woe, what his faith now will not believe, that the joys of this
first life which he fansied to be eternal are but few and short, but the
miseries of the second death, which he never dreamt of, shall be numberless,
measurelesse, easelesse, remeadilesse, and utterly endless.

rather he lost his honor then they their ease: No, no, benefits be of the
shorter sise though they last months and years; crosses of a day must be long
though life it self be short.

What conceive we of those exquisite tortures which remain the unrepentant
idolater, the impenitent blasphemer, the resolved offenders of all sorts in
eternal and inextricable wreck and misery without any ease or date? And what
intolerable impatience to murmr at the shorter when we deserve both these?
Mend this fault, and do God more honor, the truth more credit, and our selves
more ease by musing upon mercies, by comparing eternals with temporals, by
considering the shortness of thy life, and so confess and praise the Lord for
thy short afflictions, unless thou will in foolish peremptorinesse say, Job 1
5 9
thou wast the first man that was borne, and wast made before the hills,
sufferedst ever since, and resolvest to suffer for ever after thy departure
hence.



First with God, in commending our requests to him in these days of our flesh
after our Saviors example; he alone is the meats-man of our days, Job 7.1.
setting forth an appointed time to man upon the earth. Pray him in David's
words, with David's spirit, to Ps. 85.47
remember how short our time is, and to remove all hindrances of mispending,
and improve all his own offered means and furtherances for the well-spending
our short abode here: and for our selves, let us often season all outward
passages with thoughts of our approaching end, mix them with our marriages,
tradings, purchases, journeyes, all field en and domestic labors, especially
with our recreations and delights: take heed of engrossing and griping after
more time or temporal things then the Lord affords; bethink how frail thy
self art, how short thy time, of what manner thy abode: thy days, as David
told thee, are but of a 1 Cron. 29.15.
pilgrim: thy mansion is not thy home, thy house but an Inn; thy family and
neighbors are but fellow-passengers; if thy corruptions within, or Satan and
the world without bear thee in hand with enough laid up for many years, give
them all the lie with the tongue of this Text: and be sure that though thou
must converse in the world, yet to keep thy self free from the 2 Pet 1.4
corruptions of the world, as Saint Paul styles them, Its hard, Bernard.
but much discourse of temporal things will gnaw the conscience, as the rivers
fret their bancks: but holy circumspection and moderation will ease that
difficulty: the blind want, though versed all in the earth, still preserves
its velvet coat fair from the filth of the earth; thou have thy eyes about
thee, nor needst thou delve so deep: so converse thou in earthly matters that
thy conscience be not defiled, and beware thou suffer not the earth so to bury
thy soul before thy body die, but that thou may use thy eyes to discrie
death peeping over thy shoulder whiles thou look upon thy worldly matters,
or (if farther off) to ken it in its full gallop and flight to overtake thee,
and that's the second part of this task, viz. the swiftness of man's life in
the Post, have or rather flying of the same. My days are swifter then a Post:
they flee away: from whence who cannot spell forth this lesson.

Man's life is swift as well as short. Our days seem wing-footed: Job seems
doubtful whether they run or flee. The swiftest rider is too slow to make
expressure; the fowls wings best Emblems forth life's quick dispatch: and that
when it makes to the prey: and that of the Job 9.26.
Eagle, not only for swiftness but strength, which no humane obstacle of
either youth, wit, wealth, honor, or physic can stay or hinder from its
appointed goal. The proverb drops too short that says Time and Tide stay not:
Tides creep on but slowly and have their interstices, stay somewhat when they
have their stints, challenge their returns: Time is neither so, nor so. The
Prophet speaks more home. Our time, yea the Ps. 90.80.
strength of it, is soon cut off, we flee, yea we flee away, and that without
either 1 Chronicles. 29.15.
abiding says David, Job 7.9.
returning as Job has it.

The Holy Ghost is ample for comparisons, as before: resembling man's sliding
state to things ever upon the rode of have. To a Es 40 7.
flower that fades apace. To Ps. 12.14
water that runs apace. To a Job 9.26
ship that sails apace. To a Post and an Eagle, as ye see, that rides and
flees apace. There Is no keeping pace with time but upon the wings of the Job 7.7.
Wind that whirles apace.

But how comes this to pass, that man in his best estate though in honor, is
thus altogether a flying vanity and abides not?

Es. 40.22.
sits upon the circle of the earth, and meteth out Heaven by the span) to
measure forth these earthly years, Verse. 12.
months, and days, till all time be swallowed up into eternity and these
heavens be no more: How then can our days be slow?

2. Do not sin, and sinners make quick work in the world? How speedily do
men break into it? Even Ps. 58.3.
from the womb; With what eager pursuit do men follow sin? Even (like
Iehues furious march) swiftly: Pro. 6.18
their feet are swift in running to mischief; some faster, some slower, all
too fast. How would wickedness tyrannize might it in this heat have while to
root and spread, and seed according to the lust of sinful men? And who shall
hinder swift sinners from bringing upon themselves swift destruction?

3. Neither is experience so senseless of the reason ( a part post, as they
say) by a touch of after-wit, that perceives every minute of time so flight
that it prevents the quickest catch, gives the heedfullest attention the slip,
and out-strips the speediest chase. The time to come is but only in conceit,
the time is fled in instants: who can say of any time present, now it is, since
it out-runs thy thought?

by this catch if thou could finger some thread of time before the Sun can
spin it? First thou should get but a wild foul, a shadow, a puffed, whose
hasty vanishing would more vex, then its approach did please. Secondly is the
thing, for which thou so over-reachest, good or evil? If thou have such a
greedy worm under thy tongue for that which is evil, that like Ge^. 85.30
Esau for the pottage, or Elies sons for the flesh, thou will needs have it.
1 Samuel 2.16.
Now, or (in a sort) wilt take it by force: hearken what the next verse tells
thee, Verse. 17.
Therefore thy sin is very great before the Lord. But admit the thing be good
for which thou would so feign steal upon the time to come; assure thy self,
it would come so raw (as Jacobs abortive blessing did) that thou would not
relish the bitterness that would accompany the taste of it, for plucking Gods
appointed season (which only ripeneth all) to thy britle lusts: besides, so
weak (generally) do such men prove in the well-ordering of time so
overgrip^e, that, when its come, they are as unable to use it as to hold it.

Ps. 49.1^
inward thought of some that their houses shall continue for ever! Oh, that
they could cause the shadow of their life's dial to stand still two or three
Methuselaes ages, or go back to Adams time and take them along to eternity of
pastime! No, no, time is irrevocable for the past, unstayable for the present:
their shadow is declining, their glass running, their sun setting apace:
Gods pursevant death is more then in poste-hast, even like the Eagle toward
its prey: their pleasures swift as the Sun, and fly apace; Gods wrath swift
and comes apace: swift death, swift damnation treads upon the heels of all
impenitent hastening of evil works, and putting off of the evil day.

1 Pet. 4.3
Apostle says; what shall we better set about then the Ephesians. 5.16
redeeming it being suffered by us (for want of due care and watchfulness) to
be carried captive by Satan to the servitude of sin: labor we by prayer and
repentance and new obedience, to make our evil days good days, and so to
rescue and recover our time into its liberty again: And for our present
allowance of time, if Reu. 12.12.
Satan so much the more bestirs himself for evil by how much shorter time he
knows he has: how much more should we bustle for good, knowing how many
hundred times shorter ours is in these cabbins of clay? O, then be we thriftie
of our time being short and precipitate also: and the faster we discern our
Sun to set, the more have like honest laborers and wise travelers lets make
to dispatch our work and journey: go we along with the day, and let a day
have a days work, a week a weeks, etc. and proceed as fast in service as
our days in passage, spend this special intrustment no faster then it comes
in: its best wisdom to take our days before us, not neglecting if young to
remember our Creator Eccle. 12.^.
in the days of our youth. It cannot be denied but that its possible for an
old sinner to repent and turn: howbeit, he is likeliest to be richest, as in
wealth, so in grace, that begins betimes: besides how unlikely that a man
should be able to catch repentance at pleasure in age and sickness, who has
beaten back the Lords proffered grace in youth and health; the Lord is likely
to be well requited for all his favors, to have all the blade and flower of a
man's age cast to his utter foes, and the refuse and stumps reserved for him:
and its very likely we shall fight a goodly field when for very impotency we
are ready to be turned forth of th'campe.

Oh, then learn better, while we have strength, and memory to number our days
more wisely, and with Vespatian the Heathen prince pluck our selves by the
ear for every lost day, and redeem the next.

What a feast will it be to a man's conscience, when he has spent according to
his exhibition of time; and having a price put into his Pro. 17.16.
hand, has not wanted a heart to use it? Resolve upon it, howsoever thou have
failed in thy former beginnings this way, thy constant proceedings in well
employing thy short time will quit the cost, and bring in comfort in sickness,
distress, temptation, death when world of preferments, profits, and pastimes
shall stand but as vexations before thy conscience.

As that man's state upon his deaths couch is miserable whose conscience (then
most of all) will embolden disputes against him, what he has done with time,
why he melted the fat of it to ennimble the wheels of his lusts for quicker
dispatch of sin: objecteth why done so much evil so little good: and now
after so much sin contracted, so little grace gleaned, what will now become
of him, when his time and he are both at last cast? So, on the contrary, how
happy he, whose walk can show him, and his conscience witness with him,
that ever since he knew what time meant, and perceived how fast it passed, has
been no looser by the use of good opportunities, but as he felt them slipping
away, so he laid on better holt, casting how to employ the smallest mites of
time some about his honest vocation, other some in hearing, reading,
meditating, conferring, and especially praying: some for his own particular,
some for his family, some for others, all for the working and atchieving some
true good for himself and as many as he can: with what courage shall he look
temptation and death in th'face, and, after all his painful days works in
courses of piety, shut up the windows of his life toward a blissful rest in
happy immortality?

The second comfort belongs to all Gods children under any affliction: their
days pass apace, their sorrows cannot stay long; pain shall not long vex,
foes shall persecute but a while: The 2 Cor. 4.17.
Apostle sums up the afflictions of this life into a moment. What speak we
of those nibbling crosses of the body? The kill-cow of all, sin shall make no
long havocke in their souls, not long bane their peace, nor shipwreck their
security: pluck they up their hearts, these storms will over, these sad days
will have a night of joy: the time flies toward us when we shall have no time
nor heart to grieve the Lord, no time to provoke him to grieve us: the 1 Samuel 31
4.
sword that pierced Saul's breast was nothing to the weapon wherewith our Lord
Jesus Christ has wounded Satan's head: his spirits, and sins vitals are
bleeding forth apace: mean time, all that Satan and sin can do to us, is but
to make us more heedfull and watchful in our ways; all that death can do is
but to turn the key and open the door before us to a heavenly mansion. Comfort
one another in these words, that the time hies apace, even swifter then a Post,
that Satan and sin shall have no more to do with us; heaven misseth us as much
as we earne for it, God will shortly call for us, the Angels shall carry us,
Christ Jesus shall intertaine us, his Spirit shall welcome us, his Ps 17.15
image shall satisfy us. Let this mitigate the sadness of humane life,
(especially of the Saints) being the Third and last consideration from the
Text. They see no good.

The word good is of easy explication by noting how the word evil (its
contrary) is in Scripture distinguished. There Is one evil in the root, as it
were, partaking of that 1 Job. 5.18.
Evil one Satan and that's the evil of sin, in relation whereunto its said of
wicked times, Ephesians. 5.16.
the days are evil. There Is another evil in the branches, and that's the
effect and fruit of sin, viz. misery; in which respect days of sorrow are
termed Eccles. 12 1.
Evil days. So (according to the rule of Opposites) the word Good has a
double sense drawn upon it: First as it participateth of the Good God in
holiness and righteousness: so Godly works are styled 1 Timothy 6.18.
good works: Secondly, as it partakes of Gods bounty in the prosperity and
comfort of the creature: in which respect Ps. 34.12
prosperous days are called Good, and this is the proper sense of the word in
this Text; Jobs days saw no Good, that is, much misery: much loss in state,
much fear in his children, much pain in his body, much discouragement from
his friends, much horror in his soul: all which as Job suffered by way of
trial, so all are sufferable by demerit: which takes us out a viz. Our short
swift time is subject to great and sore affliction. Short and sweet were some
mitigation, but our days are as sour as short. Swift and pleasant were some
qualification, but they are knotty and sad as well as swift. All our days are
not fair, long, summer days, but many gloomy, short, winter nippy days
among. Jobs whole story to the last Chapter, what is it but a ruthful
Martyrologie of affliction. Jacobs story well concurred with his confession,
that his days were Genesis 49.7
few and evil: The Patriarch David had his stint this way, being exercised
with Ps. 71.20
great and sore troubles: and if the righteous are recompensed upon earth with
troubles for number Ps. 34.19
many, for measure Job 2.13.
great, Pro. 11.31.
how much more, says Solomon, the wicked and the sinner? Speak experience; of
what condition is the vanishing vapor of our life? When we have made a hard
escape from stifling in the womb, what is infamy, but a brak of discontents?
what is childhood, but a school of restraint from without, a very bridewell of
frowardness within? What Is youth, but a pitched field of passions and
distempers? What Is age, but a mere hospital of infirmities? Our whole life
worse than a tragedy, (for that begins with some mixture of delight) wherein
the first act is crying; the second grieving: groaning is the last Catastrophe.
No marvel then if Job calculate man's time to be not only short, but Job 14.1.
full of misery.

David and Hezekiah upon their sick beds acknowledge. God has laid this
heavy yoke upon all the sons of Adam either for punishment or for trial, and
there is no escaping a thing decreed. Were it any way avoideable, wisdom might
discry some prevention. Were these storms only upon the land or upon the sea
alone, the advantage of ease might be taken by the place; were they only
without doors, one might house himself within: but be he where he can be, he
cannot avoid what he is borne to. Man is borne says Job to trouble, Job 5.7.
as the sparks fly upwards.

Ps. 18.4.
David and Jonah Jonah 2.2
complain of hellish sorrows? whosoever therefore follows sin becomes
afflictions prey, neither have the law; and the Prophets noted any other chase
for afflictions hunting but only the sinner. If no man can say, he has cleansed
his heart from sin, no man shall be able to rid his soul or body from sorrow.
Truth is, sin has no fitter means whereby to execute its own ends then this.
What aims sin at? Death and destruction. What breaks and battereth down more
forcibly then affliction? Man made mortal must down, iniquity is the axe,
miseries the ordinary several strokes that lay the sinner along.

Job 1.14.16.17, 18.
Jobs ill messengers, haunt us; Dream of what ease and comfort thou will after
thy state and condition so and so altered to thy mind, how thou shall live as
merrily as the day is long to (as your proverb runs) after thy yoke fellow
obtained to thy mind, after all thy reversions outlived, all thy purchases
compassed, preferments achieved, children placed; deceive not thy self: even
after all those, thou will flote upon a sea of sin, and therefore no less then
a sea of waves, and rocks and shelves and storms and pirates shall annoy and
continually endanger thee. Art Gods tree? thou must be pruned; art Gods tilth?
thou must be bowelled up with plow and harrow, else thou will be fruitless: art
Gods child, chastised thou must be or graceles. Art Gods enemy? he notes thy
prancks, and is providing sour sauce for thy pleasant morsels: His hand is
taking holt of vengeance, he is furbushing his Deuteronomy. 32 41.
glittering sword, that his arrows may drink the blood, and his sword eat the
flesh of the^ that hate him. Finally, be thou good or bad, set not to thy heart
any descant of pleasant ditty, whiles all the tune of thy life runs upon
discords of iniquity; if any comforts appear, they are but as the gleames of a
March day beaten with storms as fast as they glimmer forth; and therefore as
thou do not unslate thy house when the shower is past, but keep it to
award another: so, put not away faith and patience and watchfulness at the
departure of any cross, but taking a short farewell, reserve thy self to
welcome the same again or worse, since this is not the haven but the Ocean.

2. Neither may we omit one duty in respect of our deceased friend, sorrow
indeed becomes us considering what strange havoc sin and death make of
creatures so excellent: howbeit in respect of the deceased, what strange matter
is befallen them? What more usual, more natural then for a man to die.
Yesterday, says the Philosopher, I saw a pitcher break, and to day I see a man
die: the matter is no more strange that's befallen thy wife, thy child, thy
brother, thy friend: he is but gone the way of all the earth; But what is the
alteration, what has the Ios. 23.14
party let fall to the ground? any more but nerves and sinews, as the verse has
it? ought else but a weak, crasy, putrefying body there to be perfumed against
the resurrection? What Is the loss but a loss of much sin, a loss of many
sorrows, of more dangers: and why should these divisions be such thoughts of
heart? What would we desire more in our friends behalf then the Lord has done
for them in their happy translation if they lived and died in him? Would we
pull them back again and hold tugge 2 Samuel 18 33.
as David for his Absalom against the Lord himself for them? No. What then?
would you have them smart longer, suffer longer? Would you have the moth of
anguish fret the garment of their flesh longer, affliction grind their very
bones longer? Would you have Satan's blows to assail them still, sins poison
to endanger them for ever? Mend this fault of over-grieving at friends
departure: so mourn, as Abraham for deceased Sarah, and to rise from our
friends corpse, as Gen* 23.3
he did from hers. View we our own condition in the glass of their mortality;
there is no long time of division twixt them and us: we must shortly cut over the
same ferry and meet them on the other side of th'shore: deaths boat was not
appointed to carry all at once: the ferry not made to land all at one tide:
stay the return of the water for our turn: and taking but a short leave of
the deceased, joying at their safe arivall, using survivers better, preparing
to part with all, pray for a prosperous gale. In the mean, husband we out
uncertain, short, and swift time well: dispatch our works and wills against
the tides return: and since we have many talents committed to our traffic,
and barks of our own to furnish, lets play the wise merchants, not to load our
little vessels with all ordinary lumber and trumpery which every seller says
is good (more like to shipwreck us by the way then pleasure us at the shore)
but take up that which David preferres before Ps. 19.10.
much fine gold, bart for that which Job 28.18.
coral and pearls are not to be named with; nor Pro. 3.15
Rubies or any other desirables are to be compared unto: buy the Pro 23.23.
Truth: purchase that hid treasure commended by our Luke 13 44.
Master, if the selling of all we have will reach it, and so ballace our small
vessels with the choysest wares, that an ever blessed thirst may welcome our
arivall. There our faith will leave us, not our charity: let that grace work by
this virtue now, for the best improving of al comforts, for what is our wit or
state to procure, continue, use, or miss the least of them? and for the
bearing of all crosses of this life, for what is our strength or natural armor
to prevent, withstand, remove, or award the easiest of them? Lay holt of the
promises by faith in our Redeemers life, Job 19.25
as Job, in his extreamities; wrestle it out by prayer, as Ge^. 32 26
Jacob, in his anxieties: commit our selves to our 1 Pet. 4.18.
faithful Creator, get Romans 15.4
comfort in his word, Romans 14.17.
joy in his spirit, and Dan. 12.1.
Prince Michael to stand up for us amongst the children of his people, and then
although it be true, Ioh. 16.33.
In the world ye shall have tribulation, yet it is as true, Christ has
overcome the world, in him ye shall have peace.

FINIS.

