A REVELATION OF THE REVELATION.

Wherein is contained, a most true, plain, and brief manifestation of the
meaning and scope of all the Revelation, and of every Mystery of the same:

Whereby the Pope is most plainly declared and proved to be Antichrist.

BY THOMAS MASON Preacher of the word of God at Odyham in the County of South.

Printed at London by G. Eld. 1619.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, KING JAMES, by the especial Grace of God, of Great
Britain, France and Ireland King, and in all causes, whether Ecclesiastical
or Civil, next under CHRIST supreme Head, and a most faithful Defender of the
true Catholic and Apostolic Faith, in all his Realms and Dominions; Grace,
Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
Most Excellent Sovereign:
Having attained unto some certainty of the scope and meaning of the
Revelation, and of the Mysteries thereof, by earnest prayer, pervsing of
Expositors, and conference of the Prophesies thereof, with the Ecclesiastical
Histories; and being desirous to inlighten others, I have co^piled, in as
brief and easy manner as I could devise, the true scope and meaning of the
same, and of every Mystery thereof: And being well assured, that as God gave
unto the Kingly Prophet David a rich measure of his Spirit, so he has
bequeathed unto your Highness most abundantly, his holy Ghost: so that none
more knows the mind of Christ then you Majesty does. Which imboldened me to
dedicate this my Work unto your Highness, most humbly craving, that this
little show of my dutiful love unto your Majesty, may obtain pardon for my
too much boldness: so, as it is my bounden duty, I will never cease to offer
up supplications unto God and unto Jesus Christ, for the dew of his Spirit
to be daily distilled into your Royal heart, for your direction, and that God
would always charge his holy Angels for the preservation of your Majesty's
person, and of our most gracious Queen, our most Royal Prince, and all your
Highness Kingly Progeny.

Your Majesty's most faithful and dutiful Subject, THOMAS MASON.

THE EPISTLE to the Reader.
FOr the better understanding of the Revelation (Christian Reader) I would have
thee to observe in the three first Chapters, the then present estate of the
seven Churches: and in the fourth and fifth Chapters, the vision of Saint John
in Heaven, in what manner he received the general Revelation from Christ's
ascension until his coming unto judgment: in the sixth and seventh Chapters,
the estate of the Church under the Idolatrous Emperors, until the Christian
Emperor Constantine his time, and the flourishing of the estate thereof by
him; and in the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters, the estate of the Church
under the Emperors that were after Constantine, and the Popes: how men became
as cold as hayle in true Religion, and as hot as fire to maintain
superstitions to the shedding of blood: and how the Emperors, signified by the
great Mountain, took part with the superstitious, with a burning zeal
persecuting those that would not consent to their superstitions.

The great Star that fell from Heaven as bitter as worme-wood, was the
falling of the Bishop of Rome from Christ and his word, to mainetaine
superstitions, and for that purpose was exalted of the Emperors above all
other Bishops: The second Star is the Popes, which exalted themselves above
all the Emperors and Kings, and filled the world with their mighty Locusts,
that is, Cardinals, Popish Bishops, and their officers, Abbots, Friars, and
such like: and when these were multiplied, as the sands of the sea, the Devil
that was bound for a thousand years, from Constantine his time, is let loose,
and obtains these innumerable company of Locusts to take his part, and
persecuted the Saints, and by these Antichristian Locusts, martyred more then
ever he did by the idolatrous Emperors, yet Christ and his Saints obtain the
victory. And from the beginning of the eleventh Chapter unto the end of the
Book, are prophesied again the very same things of Antichrist: but much more
largely, and with other similitudes.

In the eleventh Chapter, the superstitious are called the Courts, and the
faithful the temple, and Saint John is commanded, not to mete the Courts but
to cast them out, and it is prophesied that they shall tread the holy City,
which is the faithful, under their feet, 1260. years.

In the twelfth Chapter, the Emperors which before are called a great
mountain, are here called a great red Dragon, and are prophesied to be they
which shall be the greatest cause of the treading under foot the Children of
God, all this time of the 1260. years.

In the thirteenth Chapter, the Popes that were called two Stars before, are
called two beasts: the first Beast the Emperors shall set above all other
Bishops, of purpose to maintain superstitions, and to tread the faithful
under their feet all the said time of 1260. years, and for this purpose the
Dragon shall give him his power and authority.

The second Beast which had two horns like the Lamb, is the second Star as
before, which is the Pope, when he took upon him not only to be the whole
ruler in spiritual matters, but to be King of all Kings, as Christ is, and
exalted himself above the Emperors.

All the other Chaptors unto the end, declare the manner of the destruction of
Antichrist, and of Rome, and the flourishing of the Gospel after Rome shall be
destroyed until Christ's coming to judgment.

As Christ foretold the destruction of Ieausalem, and truly at his time
appointed performed it; so surely bath Christ Prophesied, and as truly in his
time will accomplish the destruction of Rome: and as a whole year before the
destruction of Jerusalem, there was seen an extraordinary Blazing Star; so
the Blazing Star that now so strangely appears, seems to manifest Gods
fiery indignation against Rome, which shall shortly destroy it, and to be a
forewarning unto all men that they fly from her false Doctrines, lest they be
pertakers of her punishments, and that all Kings and the Children of God should
have their hearts inflamed like the flaming Star, against that abominable
Strumpet, to gather themselves to battle against her, and burn her with fire.

And because every one of Gods Children must claim by a lively faith as
particular unto himself all the general promises of Christ, so we ought to
apply the general judgments of God, every one unto his own soul. Let us
therefore examine our hearts whether we retain there any Poposh superstition,
or sin against any of Gods commandments unrepented of; for against such that
will not repent, the Lords anger burns like the blazing Star.

But if we fly by true repentance and a lively faith, and catch hold of the
blood of Jesus Christ, to wash away our sins, and of his righteousness to
cover our imperfections; then may we with joy look upon this blazing Star,
and praise God for declaring his fierce wrath against Antichrist and sinners,
and for hastening to revenge the blood of his Saints, and that the time
approaches to enlarge and deck with his graces his Spouse the Church, which
shall be upon the destruction of Rome, that the number of the elect being
fulfilled, Christ may come to judgment, and exalt us unto his eternal glory.

And because the more near the Devil sees his time of eternal torments to
approach, the more he rages against Gods Children: therefore this flaming
star must certify us, that even now the Devil by his privy Counselors the
Jesuits, is most busily plotting and practicing the destruction of all
Protestant Kings and Countries, and it ought to provoke us to earnest prayer
unto our chief Captain Jesus Christ, to confound their enterprises, and to
destroy them in the same suare which they have laid for others.

To the Prince of the Kings of the earth, that loved us and washed us from our
finnes, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, to him be all honor, glory
and power now and for evermore. Amen.

A REVELATION of the Revelation.
CHAP. I.
EVen as GOD so much loved faithful Abraham, that he would not destroy
Zodome, until he had foretold him thereof, and likewise his chosen Children
Israel, that he would do nothing but he would foretell them thereof by his
Prophets: Likewise as Christ so loved his Disciples, that he foretold them
his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and the coming of the holy
Ghost, their troubles that they should suffer for his name, the success of the
Gospel, the destruction of Jerusalem, the glory that they and the faithful
should have with him in Heaven, such immeasurable riches of his love has God
showed unto his faithful ones in these last ages, in showing unto them what
shall happen unto his Church from the blessed Ascension of his Son Jesus
Christ until his glorious coming to Judgment.

And because he has exalted Jesus Christ on his right hand, and given all
power unto him in Heaven and earth, and made him the only salvation of all
that are or shall be saved; he has likewise given unto him this Revelation: and
because Angels be his ministering spirits for our salvation, Christ has sent it
by an Angel: and because the Lord will not use the ministry of Angels
immediately for our instruction, the Angel brought it to John, to convey it to
the seven Churches of Asia, and although it is directed of God, only to the
seven Churches of Asia, it does as properly belong to all Churches and people
of God as unto them.

In that it is said to be of things that shall shortly come to pass, a
thousand years with the Lord is but as one day with us: In that they are
pronounced blessed that read, hear, and keep the things of this Prophecy, it
should stir us up, never to be weary of knocking, asking and seeking, until
the true understanding here of be given us; and this as the only means, S.
John by his example commends unto us, in that he begins with Prayer to the
Father, Son and holy Ghost, for grace and peace for them.

In that he calls the holy Ghost which is one Spirit, seven Spirits; it is
in respect of the seven fold operation thereof in the 7. churches.

And having now seen Jesus Christ in heaven, he cannot pass by him by barely
naming him, but declares what he has seen of known of him; That he is a
faithful witness, the first begotten of the dead, Prince of the Kings of the
earth, that loved us and washed us from our sins with his blood, and made us
Kings and Priests unto God: he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see
him, yea, they that pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wayle
before him, even so Amen.

In that by persecutions he was feign to leave his Churches, and to save
himself in a desolate place, he might think that God had forsaken his
faithful Churches, and him his faithful servant, but we know that all things
work for the best for Gods children; now even now in this desolate place, he
sees more comfort then ever he did, and receives the greatest Revelation that
ever was, and most beneficial to the comfort and direction of the Church to
the end of the world, and fends this unto his Churches far passing the
comfort of his presence.

In that the seven golden Candlestickes, which by Christ is interpreted the
seven Churches, the gold thereof shows the purity of their Religion,
without any dross of humane traditions or Jewish ceremonies.

The office of a Candlestick is to hold up the candle, that it may lighten all
the place where it is, whereby is noted unto us, their care and love of the
Gospel, and the conversion of others unto the same, by holding up and
maintaining their Ministers to edify themselves, and to be a light to them
that be in darkness. And as Christ walked amongst these golden Candlesticks,
so will he never be absent from such golden Candlestickes.

No man as he is flesh and blood can see Christ as he is, therefore he appears
unto S. John by vision, and so no doubt he did unto S. Stephen when he saw the
heavens open, and Christ sitting at the right hand of God. Christ's long garment
and golden girdle was after the manner of Kings and Priests, and declares that
he is the King of kings and Lord of lords, and the only Ruler of all things in
heaven and earth, and our only high Priest. In his hair he resembles ancient
Senators, which shows his wisdom, and that he is the first and the last,
Alpha and Omega, he that was, and that is, and that is to come. His flaming
eyes shows that he is the searcher of all reins and hearts, and that
nothing is hid from his eyes with who^ we have to do.

His brazen feet declare that he shall stamp the devil and all his
instruments, his and our enemies under his feet.

His loud voice manifests that he shall be heard unto the end of the world,
how forcible his Gospel is to convert the elect, how it shall be able to awake
to life all that are dead, and to make the elect to meet him in the air, and
to follow him unto glory, and to cast the devil and all the wicked into hell.

His two-edged Sword out of his mouth, shows his wrath and indignation unto
the enemies of his Church, and their destruction.

His shining face shows his loving favor unto his children, and assures
them of his salvation.

In that the Ministers of the seven Churches are called Stars, they are showed
their office, ever to be inlightning those that are in darkness, with the
bright beams of the Gospel, and to show forth their love unto God and his
children by their good works, that men may glorify their Father in heaven.

In that he holds them in his hand, whereas he is said but to be in the
midst of the Candlestickes, it assures us, if we be such Stars, he will
have a special care over us, he will hold us in his hand, and none shall be
able to hurt us, or take us from him.

S. John at the first sight did think him to be like Christ, but lest he
should be deceived, Christ tells him that He is he that was dead and is
alive, and bade him behold him, and told him that he lived for ever, and had
the keys of hell and of death.

In that John is commanded to write these things, it shows how necessary they
are to be read of his Children: and in that Christ interprets the hardest
things to be understood in these visions, it certifieth us, that we may
attain unto the meaning of all the rest by earnest prayer.

CHAP. 2. and 3.
IN that Jesus Christ commands John to write seven Letters unto the seven
Churches, and indites every Epistle with the words of his own mouth, we are
assured that he is the only head of the Church, and that his care and love
unto the Church is no less then when he was upon earth, and that he sees
whatsoever is done, whether it be good or bad. Therefore let every one of us in
his calling serve the Lord Jesus, as walking always before his face: for such
an high Priest it behooued us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separated from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, and which once has
offered himself a sufficient sacrifice for all the elect, and is consecrated
for evermore.

All Ministers must strive to serve Christ in those things which he commends
in the Ministers, for they concern all Ministers to the end of the world.

The Minister of Ephesus is commended for his works, his labor, his patience,
his zeal, that he cannot forbear the evil, but examines false Apostles and
finds them liars, and for suffering patiently for his name, and not fainting,
for hating the works of Seducers as the Nicholaitans.

He says to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, I know thy works, and thy
labor, and poverty, but thou art rich.

He says unto the Angel of the Church of Pergamus: I know thy works and
where thou dwell, even where Satan's throne is, and thou keep my name,
and have not denied my faith, when Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain
amongst you.

He says to the Angel of Thyatyra I know thy works, thy love, and service,
and faith and patience, and thy works are more at last then at the first.

If we follow these things unto the end, we shall overcome; then shall we eat
of the Tree of life in the midst of Paradise, which is Christ; we shall eat
the Manna that is hid, which is the joy of the holy Ghost, and peace of
conscience, we shall have a white stone and a new name, that we are Christ's
written on it, which none can read but them which have it, that is, the Spirit
shall assure us that we are Gods Children, and none but our selves can know
the assurance of our hope; then shall we have power to rule the Nations with a
rod of Iron, that is, we shall overcome the Devil and sin, and his
instruments, and in the world to come break them in pieces like a Potters
vessel. As Christ received the morning star of his father, so he will give
it us, that is, the spirit of wisdom; we shall be clothed in white, that is,
with his righteousness, and not be put out of the book of life, but Christ
will confess our names before his father and his Angels; we shall be made
pillars in the temple of God, and go out no more, and we shall have the name
of our God, and the City of our God, and Christ's new name written upon us,
Christ will grant us to sit in his throne, as he sits in his fathers throne.

In that the adversaries unto the truth and unto Gods Ministers are in the
letter unto the Smyrnians, and in that to Philadelphia called the synagogue of
Satan, and in the letter to Pergamus their dwelling is called the dwelling of
Satan and the throne of Satan, and in the letter to Thiatyra, their false
doctrine is called the deepenesse of Satan: let all such know of whom they
are, and call to God for his grace in Christ, that they may repent with Saint
Paul, and be translated from the power of Satan into the Kingdom of Christ,
neither needs Gods Ministers and Children be afraid of them, their lies,
subtle practices, or persecutions, for he that is with us is greater then he
that is against us.

Likewise let all Gods Ministers and Children mark what things the Ministers
are blamed for, that they may be wary not to offend in the same.

Christ remembers the Angel of Ephesus that he is fallen from the love he had
at the first, belike because he reaped unthankfulness and ill will for his
labor, this must not discourage us, we must look for our reward of God, and
if we had never so many afflictions, they are not worthy of the great glory
we shall have in Christ.

Christ threatens him to come against him shortly, and remove his Candlestick
out of his place if he amend not; and surely this want of love was it that
removed all these Candlestickes out of their places, and long time these places
have been inhabited of Idolaters.

See what a many of commendable virtues, even of Christ himself, the Minister
of Ephesus had, and lost the reward of them all by loosing his love, if he did
not amend.

Christ finds fault with the Angel of Pergamus for suffering the doctrine of
Balaam, and of the Nicholaitans to be maintained there, and threatens to come
against him for it, this must make us wary not to suffer false doctrines to be
maintained.

The Angel of Thiatyra is found fault with, for suffering Iesabel to intise
Christ's servants to sin, we must take heed of such.

Christ finds fault with the Angel of Sardis: that he had a name that he
lived, but he was dead: let us therefore examine our selves well whether we
live in the spirit, or be dead in any sin, and let us awake and repent, else
Christ will come upon us suddenly and destroy us.

Christ finds fault with the Angel of Laodicea because he was neither hot
nor cold, and threatens to spue him out, and in that he boasted of his riches
and trusted in them, saying that he lacked nothing, and tells him that he
was poor, and councelleth him to buy heavenly treasure, and that he was
blind, and wills him to buy the eye salve of the spirit, that he might see
the riches of Christ; and therefore for the want of Christ's righteousness
imputed unto him, was naked and miserable: Christ tells him that as many as
he has he rebukes and chasteneth; and tells him that he stands at the door
and knocks that is, at the heart, and if any hear and open, he will come in
and suppe with him, and he shall suppe with Christ, that is, Christ will
rejoice to save him, and he will rejoice that he is saved of Christ.

In that Christ from heaven styles the seven Ministers, and in them all other
Minsters, by the name of Angels, it shows, that he uses them the only
means to call the elect to grace, and it teaches Ministers to look to God
and his word only for their Doctrine, and hearers to receive the word preached
as of God and not of man.

CHAP. 4. and 5.
NOw this Vision concerning the present estate of the seven Churches being
ended, S. John is taken up into Heaven in the spirit, to receive a Revelation
from Heaven, touching the whole affairs of the Church unto the end of the
world, but this was likewise directed to the seven Churches, and therefore
here the spirit is said to be seven spirits, and Christ is said to have seven
horns, that is, his power in every Church.

As St. Paul when he was taken up into the third Heaven could not utter that
which he saw and heard there, so no doubt it was with St. John, but this
vision was showed him for our intelligence.

The things in sum which he saw, was the inspeakeable glory of God and
Christ, and all Angels and Saints, praising God for their salvation, and he
saw Gods anger against the damned, by the voices, thunders, lightenings and
earthquakes which he saw in the vision.

God seems to him like a King, sitting in Parliament in his chair of estate,
with a Rainbow compassing him, to glorify him: his face like a Jasper stone,
and a Sardine. But the glory of God is the truth of his promises, which is
signified by the Rainbow, which was given to certify us of the truth of his
promise, that he would never drown the World again; and the face of the Lord
is his loving kindness unto his children in Christ, which is signified in
these most beautiful stones, the Sardine and the Jasper.

The 24. Elders are the books of the law and the Prophets, the four Beasts
are the four Gospells, these set forth his glory, and declare the truth of his
promises more then the Rainbow, and the brightness of his love unto his
Children more then the Jasper and Sardine stones.

The Elders are clothed in white, to show the purity of their doctrine; they
have Crowns, to show how powerful they are to convince sin and error: these
and the beasts are about the throne, because none come to God but by them: they
sit as Judges, because at the end of the world all shall be judged by them.

These comforted Saint John when he wept, so will they all of us if we seek
comfort of them, and if any be ignorant of any thing touching their salvation,
they will certify us thereof.

One of the four Beasts had the face of a Man, this seems to be Saint
Matthew, because the beginning and face of his Gospel declares the generation
of the humanity of Christ from David.

The Beast like the Eagle, signifies Saint John, because he mounts like an
Eagle into Heaven, speaking of the Divinity of Christ; the other two are Mark
and Luke, one like a Lion, because he speaks more largely of the resurrection
of Christ, wherein he rose like a Lion from death, and conquered sin, death,
and hell: the other was like a Calfe, because he spoke more largely of the
offering of Christ, upon the Cross, which was prefigured by the sacrifice of
Calves in the old Law.

Their six wings a piece, shows the speedy flying of the Gospel about the
world.

In that they are full of eyes, it shows that by the new Testament we may
see Christ more plainly then by the old, there we see but the types of him,
here we see Christ himself.

In that Saint John saw thousand thousands of Angels, it shows what an
innumerable number there be; the office of these be to preserve the faithful
in this world, what need we then to fear?

The Angel interprets the waters where the Whore sits, Reu. 17.14. to be
people, so this glassie Sea before the throne signifies the souls of the
faithful; so it does in the beginning of the 14. Chapter: The faithful of the
old Testament are called Heb. 12. so great a Cloud of witnesses, signifying,
that there was as many of them, as drops of rain in a great cloud; so the
souls in Heaven are called a Sea, to signify unto us that there be such a
number as drops of water in a Sea, according to Gods promise unto Abraham,
that his seed, that is, the faithful, should be so many in number, as the
sands on the Sea shore, or the stars in the Element.

In that it is a glassie Sea, though here afflictions may toss our minds as
the winds the waves, yet as no wind can stir a glassie Sea, so all sorrow
is parted from them, nothing can disturb their minds but they always rejoice
in the Lord.

In that this Sea is of glass an entire substance, it shows how the souls
in Heaven be united together in love, rejoicing every one at another salvation
as at their own.

In that the Sea is like Crystal, it shows how holy they are, never
offending their loving God, but are all crowned with Crowns of righteousness.

In that the Angels and they did especially rejoice, when Christ obtained to
open the seals, to show us this Revelation, it declares how dearly they love
the elect upon earth, and how profitable this Revelation is to us.

CHAP. 6.
IN that one of the four Beasts calls Saint John unto the opening of every
seal to see what follows, and his voice was as thunder, it shows that the
way to come to Christ, and to obtain any thing at his hand, is to hearken unto
the Gospel, and that it is as forcible to the heart, as thunder to the ears.

The white Horse signifies the Apostles and Preachers of the Gospel anon
upon the sending of the holy Ghost, the Rider is Christ, his bow whereby he
conquers, the preaching of the Gospel, his Crown shows that the Gospel so
prevailed, that it got him a Kingdom.

In that the Apostles are called Horses, it shows their swiftness in
publishing the Gospel: that white Horse Saint Paul, what a number of Countries
did he plant the Gospel in! Joseph of Arimathia and Philip brought the Gospel
into England, Saint Paul in the tenth to the Romans affirms, that then the
sound of the Gospel had gone through all the earth, and into the ends of the
World.

The red Horse signifies the idolatrous Emperors of Rome, which raised the
ten persecutions against the Christians, the rider was the Devil, provoking
them thereto, for he had permission of God, to take peace from the earth, and
to kill with the sword, and he had a great sword given him, which shows that
the Devil does nothing unto Gods children, but by Gods permission, the causes
why God will suffer the Devil to persecute his children, are best known unto
his wisdom.

Nero Domitius caused the first Persecution: He regarded neither sex,
condition, or age, the streets were spread with dead bodies of Christians, he
endeavored utterly to abolish the name of Christians, and his Successors
followed his steps: for their speed in persecuting they may well be compared
to Horses.

The black Horse are such as went about to darken the light of the Gospel,
and to maintain the blackness of Idolatry; the Devil the Prince of
darkness was their Rider, because he provoked them thereunto: but he had no
power to hurt the oil and the wine, that is, those that had the oil of the
Spirit, and the wine of Christ's blood by a lively faith.

The pale Horse seems to be Dioclesian which moved the tenth Persecution,
he is called Death, because he martyred so many Christians in all Countries,
at one time he slew 6660. of his own soldiers, because they were Christians,
he destroyed all the Christians in England: no tongue can utter the deaths and
torments that this Tyrant used, hanging them by one hand, scourging them, and
broyling them not to death, but every day: Eusebius says he saw the swords
of the Persecutors blunt with often slaughter, themselves for weariness to sit
down and rest, but the Martyrs nothing dismayed were patient for Christ's sake:
so he did likewise in all Countries. Then the souls of the faithful that were
slain in these ten Persecutions being under the altar which is Christ, cried
to God as Abels blood did for vengeance, and they had long white robes, which
is the righteousness of Christ, and they were bid to rest until their
fellow-seruants should be killed as they were, that is, until Antichrist
should be more drunken with the blood of Saints then the Emperors were. But
their cries moved the Lord to vengeance, and he destroyed these idolatrous
persecutors by the hand of Constantine whom the Lord made a most Christian
Emperor.

The Earthquake, the blackness of the Sun, and rednes of the Moon, the falling
of the Stars, the vanishing of heaven, the removing of the mountains, and the
fear of the great ones, desiring the mountains and rocks to cover them from
the wrath of God, describes the fearefulnes of Gods wrath executed upon these
persecuting Idolaters: and although these things shall not truly come to pass
until the coming of Christ, yet these words were used by Christ in prophesying
the destruction of Jerusalem, and in other places of Scripture, when the
execution of some great Judgment is prophesied.

CHAP. 7.
THe four Angels that held the four winds from blowing upon the earth, sea,
or any tree, shows the peace that God had given unto the Church by
Constantine, and how God by his Angels preserved them from persecutions,
signified by the winds.

The sealing of the 12000. of every Tribe, a certain number for an innumerable
number, and a greater number of other Nations, shows the flowrishing of the
Gospel at that time.

This likewise is declared by the wonderful rejoicing of the Angels and Saints
in heaven, ascribing unto God praise, honor glory, and wisdom, and thanks.
What have the Martyrs lost by these persecutions? Though they suffered
tribulations for a small time, now they are in long white garments, which
signifies Christ's righteousness, being in the presence of the throne of God,
and serve him day and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the throne
will ever dwell with them, and they shall have no more hunger nor thirst, nor
be hurt, but God will govern them and lead them to the lively fountains of
waters, and wipe away all tears from their eyes.

CHAP. 8.
IN that this peace is said to continue but half an hour, it shows that it
did not endure long: for the Church began to wax wanton with this great
peace, and endeavored more to get large reuennues and riches of the world, then
to set forth the Gospel.

In their establishing Christianity in Rome, to please the most superstitious
and idolatrous Romans, they translated all their Heathen gods of Rome to be
their gods, only by giving them other names; Pantheon which was the house of
all gods, is Maria rotunda, the house of all Saints: the place of Cibel mother
of gods, is now placed to Mary the mother of God: the temple that was dedicated
unto Pallas and Minerua is now dedicated unto Minerua a virgin; and they
inclined to many other pernicious and idolatrous superstitions both of the
Jews and Gentiles: Therefore Christ is siguratiuely said to stand before the
Altar, with a golden Censor, and much odors was given him to offer, which was
the prayers of Saints; and the smoke of the odors, which is the prayers of
Saints, went up to God out of Christ's hand, and he took the densor and filled
it with coals from the Altar, and cast it into the earth, and there was voices
and thunders, lightnings and earthquakes, all which signifies Gods most heavy
indignation against them.

And there was hayle and sire mingled with blood cast upon the earth, and
burned the third part of Trees and green grass. The earth signifies the
great men, as the earth is higher then the sea and floods; these were first
persuaded to superstition: the hail signifies their coldness in true Religion,
the fire mingled with blood their heat to maintain superstitions, even to the
shedding of the blood of such as would not consent to their superstitions.

The great Mountain that was cast into the sea burning with fire, was the
Emperor, which by the persuasion of the superstitious, cast himself from God
and Christ, and took their part to maintain their superstitions, and with a
burning zeal persecuted the third part of common people, which are signified
by the sea.

As the Stars signified the Ministers of the seven Churches, so this great
Star that fell from heaven is the Bishop of Rome: by falling from heaven is
meant from the Church. This seems to be about the year 666. according to Chap.
13. His bitterness called wormwood, are his wicked Canons and Constitutions:
for in that year Vitillianus Pope sent into England, and into other Countries,
to set up Latin Service and Masses, Ceremonies, Letanies, and other Romish
ware. This Star fell into and made bitter the fountains and springs, these are
the Clergy, for they should minister to all men the water of life, as rivers
feed both sea and land: so likewise in that he darkened the Sun, Moon and
Stars, and the day, this means the Ministers likewise, which ought to make
shine the bright beams of the Gospel unto great and small, and make
themselves and others Children of the day; the meaning is, that the Bishop of
Rome silenced the Bishops and Preachers which were within his Jurisdiction from
preaching the truth, and made them preach superstitions and bitter doctrine, to
the poisoning of their souls. In that there is mention made in all these
judgments but of the third part of men, it is because there was never but the
third part of the world that would consent unto the Supremasie, superstitions,
and false doctrine of the Pope.

CHAP. 9.
IN this Chapter is a Prophecy of another Star, which S. John says was fallen
from heaven, because the Popedom was fallen before. This seems to be
Hilaebrand the Pope, which joined unto the Popedom the temporal Sword, that
is, iutisdiction over all Emperors and Kings, to place them and displace them
at his pleasure. Which appears in that he gave such power to his Locusts, as
hereafter is declared: he is said to have the key of the bottomless pit, which
shows that as the Angel in the 20. Chap. had the key of the bottomless pit
to bind Satan, and to shut him therein for 1000. years, so when the 1000.
years were expired, the Pope had the key of the bottomless pit to let him out
again. The smoke that came out of this pit when it was opened, and darkened
the Sun, was their superstitions and false doctrines, that darkened the Gospel
as smoke darkens the Sun. The Locusts that came out, were the Cardinals and
Bishops. These far differed from the Bishops of the primitive Church: they
were the only planters and maintainers of true Religion, these the only
confounders and destroyers thereof.

The Locusts in Egypt never more devoured the fruits of the land, then these
Locusts did the riches of all Countries, both of their souls and of their
bodies. Their crowns show the power that they had: their faces like men
shows their hypocritical and fair speeches: their hair like women
declares their flattering allurements that they used: their Lions tee^h their
cruelty, and what deuourers of men they were: their iron haubergions shows
the temporal jurisdiction that they had: their wings, and chariots with many
horses, shows their swiftness and power to do mischief: their tails like
Scorpions, with heads and crowns on them, and stings, were their Substitutes
and Officers, to whom they gave great power, as appears by their heads and
crowns; These so much stung and vexed the people, that they were weary of
their lives.

In that these had not power to hurt those that were marked by the Angel for
God in the foreheads, it shows, that yet the devils time was not come, to
be let loose to shed the blood of Saints; and it declares the providence of
God unto the faithful, and that he had ever his Church in the most troublous
times.

In that these Locusts came out of the bottomless pit, it shows that they
were of the devil, and if the Devil himself had been in the shape of man,
he could not be worse then they were.

In that they had power to hurt but for five months, it is common with the
holy Ghost in prophesies, to set a day for a year, and at 30. days to the
month, which was the Jews computation, five months is 150. days, which
shows that their chief regalitie and power was to continue but 150. years.

In that this Star is said to have the key of the bottomless pit, we may
see how much the Pope deceives us, in vaunting that he has the keys of
heaven, when they are but the keys of hell.

The mighty power of the Pope at this time, is declared, in that that he is
called the King over the Locusts: and in that he could confer such great
power upon them: and in that he is said to be the Angel of the bottomless
pit, it shows, that he had all the power that the devil could do to
strengthen him, and it appears what a destroyer the Pope is, in that the holy
Ghost names him Destruction.

This Vision following in the 14. Verse of this Chapter, and the Vision in the
7. Verse of the 20. Chapter, are all one: Now the 1000. years that the devil
should be bound, being expired, the Gospel beginning to revive again, he has
liberty to rage and stir again, that the might of Christ might be seen in
defending his silly Lambs against the devil the roaring Lion, and all the
popish Wolves though they were never so strong.

The infinite number of warriers that S. John saw and told, were the very same
Locusts before mentioned: for the description of these and them are all one in
all points, and their battle was against the Saints, as appears in the 20.
Chapter.

The fire, smoke, and brimstone, that went out of their mouths, were their
Excommunications, in that like smoke they breathed out, that whosoever
disobeyed them should be eternally burnt in Hell with fire and brimstone.

In that the Devil is said to be four Angels, it is because as soon as he
was set at liberty, as is declared in the 20. Chapter, he went into all the
four quarters of the earth, to provoke men against the Children of God: in
that he got such an infinite number, these were the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops,
Abbots, Friars, and their officers, to martyr the Saints.

In that it is said he came from the river Euphrates, it was to signify, that
as the Babilonians came from Euphrates to destroy the material Temple, so
should this spiritual Babylon destroy the spiritual Temple.

If we consider the martyrdom of the Waldences in France, and their
massacres, and the Martyrs that their Inquisitions have devoured there, and
all that have been martyred in England fince Wicklifs time, and those that
have been martyred in Bohemia, Germany, Scotland, and by their Inquisitions in
Spain and other places, we shall see that the Devil by these Locusts since
his letting loose has slain more of Gods children, then ever he did before he
was bound.

CHAP. 10.
NOtwithstanding the mighty host of the devil, and all his Popish train, yet
we see how Christ has prevailed. As Saul's kingdom decreased and David's
increased, so the Lord be praised, we daily see Christ's kingdom increase, and
the Popes more and more ruinated: let the Jesuits the Angels of the
bottomless pit, devise never so many devilish practices to uphold the same,
the vision of Christ in this Chapter declares so much.

His Rainebow about his head, teaches us, that the Devil by the Pope and his
Locusts shall prevail no more over us, even as the Rainbow assures us the
world shall be no more drowned.

His face shines, to show his favor to such as have forsaken all Popish errors
and trust in him only: and his brazen feet certifieth us, that he will tread
the Devil, the Pope, and all his Locusts under his feet.

In that he sets one foot on the sea, and the other foot on the land, it may
hence infallibly be gathered, that after Christ shall destroy the Popedom, the
very Turks and Jews, and all Papists that remain, shall be converted to
believe in Christ only, and his elect among them shall be saved.

In that Christ swears that there shall be no more time, but in the days of
the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall blow the Trumpet, the mystery
of God shall be finished, it may be most certainly concluded, that not long
after the destruction of the Popedom Christ shall come to Judgment.

In that S. John is forbidden to to write the voice of the feauen thunders, we
must learn that there be some things that the Lord will not have revealed unto
us, as is the day of Christ's coming to judgment, and the certain day of the
destruction of Antichrist, and such like: and that whatsoever is written by his
commandment, we may be bold and ought to beg of Christ by prayer, and by all
means seek for the understanding thereof.

Saint John his eating of the book was his certain understanding of the
things contained therein, and the knowledge thereof was sweet to him at the
first, but when he had well considered how the Devil should have such great
power to persecure the Saints, and to spill their blood in such abundant
manner, the knowledge heerof was most bitter unto him, then St. John is
commanded of Christ to prophecy again amongst the people, Nations and
Tongues, and to many Kings, according to which in the next Chapter, Saint John
begins a new Revelation of all things that has been revealed touching
Antichrist, in a more large and ample manner, then in this Revelation already
is declared.

CHAP. 11.
Joseph tells Pharaoh Genesis 41 32. therefore the Dream was do^bled unto
Pharaoh the second time, because the thing is established before God: even so,
because the Prophesies in this Revelation are established and sure to be
performed: and to make them the more certainly and manifestly of us to be
understood and believed, all things that have been revealed touching
Antichrist, are from this Chapter unto the end of the Book revealed again,
but far more amply and plainly delared then in the former: but in this is
nothing prophisied but the things concerning Antichrist.

In the 8. Chapter Christ offers the prayers of the faithful to God, and
then fills the Censor with coals of the Altar, and threw them upon the
earth, and there fell upon the earth hayle, and fire mingled with blood, and it
burnt the third part of Trees and green grass.

Wherein I showed the great peace the Church enjoyed by Constantine; in which
prosperity the Romish Church fell to superstitions and angered God: wherefore
he gave them over to their own lusts, until the Roman Church became the
Synagogue of Satan and Antichrist, and they became as cold as hayle in true
religion and as hot as fire even to the shedding of blood, to maintain their
superstitions.

In this Chapter they that trusted only unto the blood of Christ, by an
allusion unto the temple of Solomon, are said to be the temple of God, and
Saint John is commanded to measure them to God: and the superstitious Romans,
and those that took their parts are said to be the Courts, because they make a
show of Religion, but with superstitions profane the truth, therefore Saint
John is commanded to cast them out, and not to mete them; and these shall tread
the holy City, that is, the Children of God, under their feet 42. months,
this time is likewise set forth in this Chapter to be 1260. days, and also 3.
days and a half, these times are all one, the three days and a half,
signify three years and a half, and in three years and a half there is
just 42. months, and in so many months, at 30. days to the Month, which was
the Jews Computation, there is 1260. days, and it is common with the Holy
ghost in Prophesies to set down a day for a year, so Antichrist must reign
1260. years.

The two witnesses are the old and new Testaments, and all that preach and
teach them all the time of Antichrist, these shall be two olive trees
spiritually to feed the souls of the Elect, and to convey the oil of the
holy Ghost into them, and they shall be two lamps to lighten them in the ways
of salvation, and they shall stand before the Pope the God of the earth, and if
any hurt the Preachers of them, the Lord will send plagues from heaven upon
such.

In that they are said to be clothed in Sackcloth, it shows, that the
Professors of them shall be nothing regarded, and shall have all this time
great cause to mourn for the little regard that the Gospel had, and for the
superstitions and sins of the people.

In the seventh verse, when they have finished their testimony, the Beast out
of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and overcome them, and
kill them; this is after the loosing of Satan.

Their corpse shall be dead and unburied in Rome; that is, as a dead carcass
long unburied, is noisome to be seen or smelt, even so noisome was the word
of God, and the preaching thereof unto them all the time of their
superstitions, yet they could not bury their corpse all this while, that is,
they could not quite pur down the preaching of the word; but the Lord still
stirred up some, (yea though they dyed for it) to tell them of their
idolatries, superstitions, murder, sorcery, fornication and theft.

It shows what great power the Devil has over the unregenerate, that he can
make them rejoice, and bring gifts one to another, for joy that the preaching
of the word is suppressed, and the books of the word it self, as the Papists
have done these many ages, rejoicing that their means of Salvation is taken
from them, and that they are not hindered from going headlong unto eternal
damnation.

Rome is called spiritually Zodome, because they exceed Zodome in the sins
thereof; and it is called Egypt, because they have oppressed the Children of God
more then the Egyptians did the Israelites, and Christ was slain in Rome, in
that Pilate a Roman Judge condemned him, and the Roman officers crucified him.

That after the 1260. years God sent the spirit into the two witnesses, we
see the truth of this Prophecy performed, and we see them stand upon their
feet, and the fear of them is upon the Pope, and all his Clergy, and God has
taken them up into Heaven, and exalted and preserved them in the sight of their
enemies and the Popedom by them has been shaken, as with a mighty
Earthquake, that the tenth part have become Protestants long ago, and daily
his Kingdom has decayed, and the Protestants increased.

In that it is said that 7000. were killed with this earthquake, and the rest
glorified God, it shows that when Rome shall be destroyed all the Papists
(that then remain shall become Protestants.

When the seventh Angel shall blow his trumpet, the Pope shall be quite
destroyed, and the Kingdoms of the world shall be our Lord Christ's, and he
shall reign for evermore; and all in Heaven shall rejoice and say, We give thee
thanks Lord God Almighty, for thou have received thy great power, and obtained
thy Kingdom; the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time that
the dead shall be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
Prophets and Saints and them that fear thy name, and that thou should
destroy them that destroy the earth.

In that it is said, then the temple of God was open, and the Arc of the
Covenant was seen, and that there were lightenings and voices, thunder and
great hayle; it shows Gods anger against the disobedient to his word, that
then there shall be no interruption of the preaching thereof, and that the
Lord will hinder and punish such as offer to hinder, and will not obey it.

CHAP. 12.
AS in the eighth Chapter, is a vision of a great Mountain that fell burning
into the Sea, which there is interpreted to be the Emperor, taking the part
of the superstitious Romans, against the faithful in Christ: Here the
Emperor is called, a great red Dragon which shows the fierceness of his
persecution against Gods Children for resisting superstitions.

The woman that was clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and
upon her head a Crown of twelve stars, shows the flourishing estate of the
Church by Constantine: the Gospel shined from them as the Sun and Moon, and
the testimony of the twelve Apostles was their Crown and rejoicing, and as
twelve stars to direct them: her traveling with child, was the increase of
the faithful, which the Dragon, the Emperor, sought by all means to devour:
they are called a Man child, because Christ the Man-child and they are but all
one; their taking up into Heaven, shows their preservation of God.

In that it is said, they shall rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, it is,
because Christ their head shall do so for them.

The Dragons Tail that drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast
them to the earth, his tail signifies his edicts, and the executioners
thereof; the stars are the faithful Children of God, which shine like stars
in respect of Infidells: the third part signifies all the Popes jurisdiction,
for he never had dominion but in the third part of the World, and the Heaven
here is the Church: I leave the interpretation of his 7. heads and ten horns
unto the 17. Chapter, where the Angel interprets them.

The flying of the woman into the wilderness, shows what fear the faithful
were put in, that they were feign to have private meetings, as if it were in a
wilderness; and this continued, 1260. years: concerning the battle in Heaven,
Michael and his Angels are Christ and his Preachers, against the Devil and
Papists his Soldiers; and Christ and his Children gatte the victory in the end;
and Christ and his shall reign in inspeakeable glory, when as the Devil and
all that took his part in resisting the Gospel, shall inherit eternal pain
and torments.

When this victory was, Saint John heard a loud voice, saying, Now is Salvation
in Heaven, that is, the Church, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and
the power of Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is cast down: there was
never any that so falsely accused the faithful, as the Papists have, and still
do, like unto the Devil their Captain, which accuses us day and night
before God; but they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of
their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto death; this certifieth us
who were Christ's Angels that fought against the Devil.

Rejoice ye Heavens and they that dwell therein, meaning the faithful in the
true Church: woe to the Inhabitants of the earth and and sea: The earth is
often interpreted great men, and the sea the common people; meaning carnal
men, for the Devil is come down unto you having great wrath, knowing he has
but a short time; this is, since the 1000. years that the Devil is let loose.

When the Dragon saw that he was cast into the earth, that is, overcome, he
persecuted the woman, but God preserved her as an Eagle saves her self with
flying aloft, and as one that saves himself by hiding in the wilderness; and
the Dragon cast out water after the woman, like a flood, that he might carry
her away, but the earth helped the woman, that is, God provided men of the
earth ever all this 1260. years to defend and succor his children: by the
Dragon is meant, not only the Emperors, but the Popes; for since the Emperors
power decaid, the Popes were as Emperors.

Then the Dragon made war with the seed of the woman, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, these are the
wars that long have been, and now are betwixt the Papists and the
Protestants.

CHAP. 13.
THe two Beasts in the Prophesies of this Chapter, are the two stars that the
Prophesies are of in the 8. and 9. Chapters, and both set out unto us the Popes.

The first Beast is said to arise out of the Sea, that is, from amongst the
lower sort of men; which is, when Phocas had slain his Master Mauritius the
Emperor and all his Children, and made himself Emperor, he gave Boniface
Bishop of Rome pre-eminence to be highest above all other Bishops, and sole
ruler of them.

In that he is said to have seven heads, and ten horns, with Crowns upon
them, the reason is set down in the second verse; because the Dragon gave him
his virtue, and his throne, and his great power, to enable him to fight against
the Children of God.

In that there was set upon his head the name of blasphemy, is because the
Pope takes to himself that which only belongs to Christ, to have all power
in Heaven and Earth, and whatsoever prerogative the Scripture attributes to
Christ, the Pope most blasphemously takes to himself.

In that he is like the Leopard, no Beast is so beautifully spotted as the
Leopard is; so no Emperor or King was ever so richly or gloriously decked with
gold and precious stones, as the Popes have been.

In that his claws are like the claws of a Bear, which has the strongest
paws of all Beasts to catch and to hold withal; it shows that never any
Emperor, or any else, has been such an exactor of the riches of all Lands, as
the Popes have been, as Ecclesiastical Histories make mention.

In that his mouth was as the mouth of a Lion, it shows his tyranny, cruelty,
and mercilesnes, in devouring Gods children, and well may the holy Ghost style
him a Beast that has these beastly qualities: his head that was wounded to
death was the Emperor, when Mauritius and his Children were slain: But
Hiraclius the Emperor killed Phocas that slew them, and restored the Empire
again.

And the superstitious gloried in the Pope being made so great by the Emperor,
and worshipped the Dragon that gave power unto him; and they worshipped the
Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to war with him? And
the Beast blasphemed God, and his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell
in Heaven, that is, his faithful Children: and he warred against the Saints
and overcame them, and power was given him over every Kingdom, and tongue, and
Nation; therefore all that are in the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the Book of life. But here is the benefit of the patience and
faith of Saints; if any lead into Captivity, he shall be led into Captivity,
and whosoever killed them by the sword, shall be killed by the sword.

This second Beast, is the second star in the ninth Chapter, which is
Hildebrand, which joined the supremacy, unto the Popedom, that is, temporal
jurisdiction over the Emperor and the ten Kings, to place them and displace
them at his pleasure, which is manifested in that he is said to have two
horns like the Lamb Christ, that is, to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
as well as Ruler over souls.

Whereas his Predecessors had the Emperors power and jurisdiction but by
permission and favor, he and his Successors claymed the supremacy of duty
given unto them of God, alleging all those places of Scriptures, which
declares what supremacy God has given unto Christ over all in heaven and
earth, for his proofs thereof, and so made the image of the first Beast, that
is, like as the first beast had the power of the Emperor, but in favor; he
annexed the power and supremacy above all Emperors and Kings, as an
appertinent and duty unto the Popedom for ever, and he spoke as presumptuously
as the Dragon, and did execute his power in the Emperors sight, that is, as not
having his power from him but from God.

This Beast did great signs, so that he made fire to descend upon earth in
the sight of men, but these signs were done by Nigromancy, wherefore after
Pope Hildebrand was condemned by a general Council, and for coniuration and
dealing with the Devil, and many other grievous offenses, he was by the said
Council deprived from being Pope: but his Successors unto this day still
maintain the doctrine of his usurped Supremacy over all Princes. And this
Beast made a law that whosoever would not worship the Image of the Beast should
be slain.

The number of the beasts name is 666. this is to show, that at that time the
first beast began to corrupt the Church with superstitions and false
doctrines, as is declared in Chap. 8. of the first Star.

In that in the fifth verse of this Chapter, there is a mouth given unto the
beast to speak blasphemies 42. months, which is interpreted, Chap. 11. to be
1260. years, so that just this time was appointed unto the People, Emperor,
and Pope, and it shows, that they all this time joined together, to tread
down the holy City, the true Church, all this while.

CHAP. 14.
NOw Antichrist is revealed in such lively colors, that none except the devil
blind his eyes, but may see the Pope to be Antichrist: now in this Chapter
begins to be declared his destruction.

Christ's standing upon mount Sion, signifies his presence with his children:
the 144000. that were with him, which were sealed in the 7. Chapter, a certain
number for an innumerable number, declaring that all the Saints who all this
time of 1260. years were martyred or persecuted by Antichrist, were with him
in glory, and none of them lost.

In that the sound of their voices was like the roaring of many waters, and
like thunder, it declares, what a multitude of them there be.

In that they played upon harps, and sung a new song which none could learn
but themselves, their harping shows how joyfully they praised God, and that
none can sing such new songs, and so much praise God, as those which have
suffered for standing faithfully in the truth, and have been delivered.

In that they are commended for not being defiled with women, it is not only
meant of their bodily chastity, but also of their spiritual chastity, in that
Antichrist had not made them commit spiritual fornication by following his
idolatrous doctrines: but they were virgins, that did only cleave unto their
Spouse Christ and his word. In their mouths was found no guile, they taught
only the truth, they were without spot before the throne of God, that is, in
the righteousness of Christ.

Now the 1260. years of Antichrist appear plainly to be finished, in that
the Gospel does so plentifully flourish: and in that we see Christ upon mount
Sion, that is, defending his Church. And here we have a promise that this
shall be an everlasting Gospel, that is, to endure unto Christ's coming, as
which so great a grace was never showed unto former ages; therefore the Angel
that brings us these glad tidings, exhorts us, to fear God and give glory unto
him, for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven
and earth, and the fountains of water.

Then is prophesied that Rome shall be destroyed, called by the name of great
Babylon; because as the Babylonians destroyed the material Temple, so have
they of Rome the spiritual Temple, the faithful: the cause of her destruction
follows, Because she has made drunken all nations with the wine of the
wrath of her fornications, that is, of her idolatrous and false doctrine.

Therefore there follows a warning that whosoever shall worship the Image of
the Beast, that is, the Pope, and receive the print of his name, that is, make
holiness in crossing himself, and in other superstitions, he shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God, and be tormented in fire and brimstone before
the holy Angels and before the Lamb, and the smoke of their torments shall
ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night.

In that the destruction of Antichrist follows the preaching of the Gospel,
it declares, that by it Antichrist shall be destroyed, and that the
suppression of the preaching of the word was the cause of the growth of it: and
therefore it is, that the devil puts into the heads of Papists, to keep all
people from the reading, hearing, and preaching of Gods word.

The voice from heaven that bad John write, Blessed are the dead that die in
the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, ought
to encourage us to preach the Gospel, to the beating down of Antichrist,
though we suffer never so much for our labor.

After the fall of Antichrist by the preaching of the Gospel, and that the
Lord has fulfilled the number of the elect, then shall Christ come upon a
white cloud wearing a golden crown, and in his hand a sickle, and because the
harvest of the earth is ripe, heeshall thrust in his sickle, and the earth
shall be reaped, that is, by an allusion to husbandmen in harvest, is declared
how Christ shall gather his Saints to him into heaven.

And by the Angel that with a sharp sickle cut up the vineyards of the earth,
because her grapes were ripe, and cast them into the great winepresse of the
wrath of God, and the winepresse was trodden without the City, and the blood,
or wine, of the grapes was unto the horse bridles by the space of 1600.
furlongs. By an allusion to grape-gatherers is declared how Gods Angels shall
cast the reprobate into eternal torments: and in that the winepresse is
without the City, it shows that the place of the damned shall be separated
from the Elect: and in that there was such plenty of grapes, that the wine or
blood of them was up to the horses bridles that trod the presses, for the
space of 1600. furlongs, it shows the multitude of the number of the damned.

CHAP. 15.
IN this Chapter begins the manner of the destruction of Rome and the Popedom,
by the seven last plagues: which vision S. John calls a great and marvelous
sign. The glassie sea in the 4. Chapter is interpreted the souls of the
faithful: there it was like Crystal: but here like fire, showing that the
souls of the faithful burned in zeal for the martyrdomes and persecutions of
Antichrist: and when they saw these 7. plagues go forth they rejoiced,
especially the souls of those whom Antichrist had martyred and persecuted.
Their joy is signified by their harps, and they sung the new song of Moses when
he was delivered from Pharao, and the song of Christ when he was raised from
death, that is, Great and marvelous are thy works Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy ways, King of Saints, who shall not fear thee O Lord, and
glorify thy name? for thou only art holy, and all nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest.

The Tabernacle in heaven that S. John saw open, is the Church of the
faithful, which by preaching opens a door for all, by belief to enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

In that the 7. Angels with the vials of Gods wrath came out of the Tabernacle,
to wit, the Church, it shows, that they were sent at the prayers of the
faithful: their long white roabes is the righteousness of Christ: their golden
girdles signify the gloriousness and pureness of their love to God and his
children, for love is the band of perfection.

In that the Angels pour out the vials of Gods wrath, it shows that God uses
them as instruments to punish the wicked: and though Antichrist is and shall be
destroyed by men, they are but the isntrumental cause of God and his Angels.

CHAP. 16.
THe first, second and third plagues are, that there fell a grievous and
noisome sore upon them who had the mark of the Beast and worshipped the image
of the Beast: in that the sea and waters became blood, it signifies that many
of the^ should be slain. These seem to prophecy the victories that the
Turks, and other the Popes enemies, have had against the Papists, and the
slaughters they have committed upon them, which was the just judgment of God,
as appears ver. 5. in that an Angel says, Lord thou art just, because thou
have judged these things; for they shed the blood of the Saints, and of the
Prophets, therefore have thou given them blood to drink, for they are worthy.
And another Angel said, Even so Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments.

The fourth plague poured upon the Sun, seems to be upon their clergy; this
was the overthrow of the Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and
all their houses and dens in England, Scotland, and other reformed countries:
this plague tormented them with heat of fire, and made them boil in great
heat, and blaspheme the name of God, yet they repented not, to give God glory.

The fist vial fell upon the throne of the Pope, and this was the cutting off
of his reuennues, which were infinite out of all countries, and England was the
most profitable in reuennues unto the Pope of all countries, and therefore was
called the Popes Ass, for bearing all taxes and impositions that the Popes and
Cardinals laid upon it; but now the Pope is feign to allow maintenance for
upholding of Popery in all countries: this has wonderfully darkened the
brightness of his glory and kingdom, and this makes them gnaw their tongues for
sorrow, and to blaspheme the God of heaven for their pains and their sores,
and yet they repent not of their works.

The sixth plague is the drying up of the waters of Euphrates, that the way of
the Kings of the East should be prepared: this is an allusion to the
destruction of the temporal Babylon; the meaning is, that as the Medes and
Persians, turned the River Euphrates out of his course, whereby they went over
and destroyed Babylon; so the Lord will take away all impediments, that the ten
King domes that have hitherto taken part with the Pope, may destroy Rome the
spiritual Babylon, as the Angel interprets it in the next Chapter.

The three unclean spirits that came out of the mouth of the Pope, for now the
Pope is the Dragon in that he is above the Emperor, and as mighty and full of
venom, and as ready to sting and poison Gods children as any Dragon: and he is
the Beast in respect of his beastly conditions, and the false witness in
respect of all his false doctrines.

These unclean spirits are the Jesuits, for they are sworn at the Popes
command to go into any Country and spend their lives for the upholding of the
Popedom; these are the rotten pillars which proppe up the falling tower of
Babell, the Popedom; they are called three, in respect of the triple division
of the Popes Dominions, to wit, into the land, the sea, and Rivers.

They are compared to frogs, to show they do as much hurt all Countries as
the frogs did Egypt, and they are as loathsome in the sight of God and men, as
frogs are in our sights, as frogs turn all things that they eat to poison; so
do they all Scriptures to the poisoning of souls, and their study is nothing
but treasons, poysonings and murders of protestant Kings, Princes, and
Countries, but according to this Prophecy, at the time that God has
appointed, their wicked practices shall open the eyes of all Kings to see the
vildnes and horrible wickedness of Antichrist, and be provoked against that
great day of the Lord to congregate themselves in Arma Geddon, which may be
interpreted, a house or temple falling, meaning Rome, and the Popedom, being
now ready to fall.

The seventh Angel powers out his vial into the air, that is, sets the
air against Antichrist, which is, the breath of Gods Ministers, and their
preachings vexed and tormented him like thunders and lightenings, and shook
the Popedom like the greatest earthquake that ever was, and made the greatest
part of the Popedom to fall, and become Protestants, which the Lord be praised
for it, we see already to be performed: and their preaching was like unto the
greatest hayle that ever was, every haylestone as big and heavy as a talent
weight, by which figurative speeches, is signified the utter destruction of
Rome, as the Angel interprets it saying, It is done, and in that it is said,
The City of the Nations fell, and great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, to give her the cup of the fierceness of his wrath, and that the Isles,
that is, them of the Isles, and the mountains, that is, the great ones, fled
away, that is, departed from the Popes false doctrines.

CHAP. 17.
IN this Chapter an Angel shows St. John Rome in a vision, and interprets
all the hardest things to be understood in this Revelation.

He calls Rome the great whore that sits upon many waters, and shows
that all Kings and Nations of the earth are drunken with the wine of her
fornication.

In the vision, Saint John saw a woman sit upon a skarlet colored beast full
of names of blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten horns, and the woman
was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, precious stones, and
pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand full of abominations and filthiness
of her fornications, and in her forehead was a mystery written, Great Babylon
the Mother of whoredoms and abominations: and the woman was drunken with the
blood of Saints and martyrs of Jesus, and he wondered with great marvel, then
the Angel told Saint John he would show him the mystery thereof.

The Beast which thou have seen was and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and shall be destroyed, and all that are not written in the
book of life shall wonder at it, that he being so mighty could be destroyed:
this Beast is the Emperor, which was before the Revelation, it seems at the
time thereof the Emperor: was dead and no other then chosen, and the Pope
should ascend out of the bottomless pit, and be above the Emperor, and for
all his greatness yet he shall go into perdition.

The Angel declares the seven heads to signify seven mountains whereon the
Whore sits, which plainly shows the City of Rome to be that Whore, for
that is builded upon seven Mountains, and so is no other City.

Again, the Angel interprets the seven heads to be seven Kings, that is,
seven kinds of government in Rome, of which five were fallen, and the
Idolatrous Emperors did then reign: but Constantine should quite alter the
government of Rome from idolatry to Christianity, and he and the Emperors
following him was the seventh King, and the Beast in this vision, which is the
Pope, is one of the seventh government in name, because he professes the name
of Christ, but indeed he is the eighth government; for he has quite changed
the government of Rome, from Christianity to Popery.

The Angel interprets the ten horns, to be ten Kings which at the time of
the Revelation had not received a kingdom, but shall receive power at one
hour with the Pope, and they shall be all of one mind and give their power
and authority to him, and fight with Christ, but he shall overcome them. Then
the Angel interprets the waters where the Whore sits to signify people,
multitudes, Nations and tongues; which plainly declares the City of Rome to
be the Whore; for no City from Christ to this day has so many Countries and
People under her dominion, as that City: and in the eighth verse, the Angel
interprets the woman to be the great City, which at the time of the
Revelation reigned over the Kings of the earth, and then was the Emperors
seat there.

In that the woman sits upon a scarlet colored Beast, it is, because the
ordinary attire of the Pope and Cardinals is scarlet: and his fullness of
names of blasphemy, is, because most blasphemously he attributes unto himself
all Christ's names.

In that Saint John saw the woman so richly arrayed in purple, scarlet, and
gilded with gold and precious stones, and pearls; thus were the Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops, Prelates, Churches and Idols arrayed, and does most
evidently declare that these Prophesies are of Rome.

The golden Cup that she holds in her hand, is, her golden name that she
styles her self withal, calling her self the Catholic Church, but her
doctrines which she teaches, are filthy and abominable blasphemies,
Idolatries, and superstitions, which are the wine of her fornication, wherewith
she made all Nations of the earth drunken, and she is called the great Whore,
in that she is departed her self, and has carried so many from Christ our
Spowse, and from his word, and committed fornication with the Devil and his
wicked doctrines, and for this cause it is, that the mystery, Great Babylon, is
written in her forehead, because she is the mother of whordomes and
abominations of the earth, as Babylon was.

If there were no other note whereby it might be known that these Prophefies
are of Rome, this were sufficient to declare the same, in that she is said to
be drunken with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, for the Roman
Governors crucified Christ, and the Roman Emperors made the ten
persecutions, and the Roman Popes have slain more Martyrs and Saints of
Jesus, then ever were slain in the world before.

The Angel tells us in the 16. verse, that the ten Kings which did with one
consent give their Kingdoms unto the Pope, until the words of God, which he
foretold were fulfilled, are they that shall hate the Whore and make her
desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, and the
performance hereof is contained in the two next Chapters.

CHAP. 18.
AN Angel from Heaven cries mightily with a loud voice; Babylon that great
City, it is fallen, it is fallen, and nothing shall inhabit there but Devils,
wild Beasts, and fowls; because all Nations have drunken of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication.

And there came a voice from Heaven, saying, Go out of her my people that you
be not pertakers of her sins, and that you receive not of her plagues,
reward her as she has rewarded you, give her double according to her works,
because she has glorified her self and lived in pleasure, and says in her
heart, I sit being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning:
therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and
she shall be burned with fire, for strong is the Lord God which will condemn
her.

And the Kings that have committed fornication with her, and the Merchants that
have been made rich by her, and every ship Master, and all that occupy
ships, and ship-men, shall stand a far off for fear of her torments, and cry
when they see the smoke of her burning, saying, What City was like to this
great City? and they shall cast dust on their foreheads, and cry, Alas, alas,
the great City, wherein were made rich all that had ships on the Sea, by her
costlinesse; for in one hour she is made desolate.

O heaven rejoice of her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has given
your judgment on her; and an Angel took a great Millstone and cast it into
the Sea, saying, With such violence shall the great City Babylon be cast, and
be found no more, and there shall be no more Music, nor Tradesmen, nor Mill
heard to grind, nor candle shine, nor Bridegroomes voice be heard there any
more.

CHAP. 19.
IN this Chapter is declared the praising of God in Heaven and Earth for the
final destruction of Antichrist, but I will first make an end of the
destruction thereof.

In the eleventh verse Saint John saw Heaven open, and Christ riding upon a
white horse, and he was called faithful, and he that judges and fights
righteously, his face like a flame of fire, and upon his head many Crowns, he
had a name written that none knew but himself, he was clothed in a garment
dipped in blood, and his name was the word of God, and the warriers in Heaven
followed him upon white hories; these are the Preachers of the Gospel, their
pure white linen is the righteousness of Christ: out of his mouth wen^ a
sharp sword that he might smite the Heathen, for he shall rule them with a
rod of Iron: for he it is that treads the winepresse of the fiercenes of
Gods wrath, and he has a name written, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords:
all these figuratiuespeeches have been sufficiently declared heretofore.

And an Angel cried to the fowls of Heaven, these are the ten Kings and
their armies, to gather themselves unto the supper of the great God, to eat
the flesh of Kings, Captains, and of mighty men, and of horses, and of them
that sit on them, and of freemen, and of bondmen and of small and of great.

And the Pope, and Kings, and Warriors gathered themselves together, to make
Batraile against Christ that sat upon the Horse, and his Soldiers; but the
Pope the false Prophet that deceived them that received his mark, and
worshipped him, these were alive cast into the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone, and the remnant were slain with the sword that came out of Christ's
mouth; and all the fowls were filled with their flesh, that is, the ten
Kings, and their Captains and Soldiers had a most rich and full booty of the
destruction, and sacking of Rome.

When Rome was destroyed, Saint John heard a great voice of a great multitude
in Heaven, saying, Halaluiah, that is, Praise the Lord, salvation and glory and
honor, and power, be to the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his
judgments, for he has condemned the great Whore which did corrupt the earth
with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of the Saints shed by her
hand. And again, they said Halaluiah, and her smoke rose up for evermore, and
the Elders and four Beasts said Amen, Halaluiah: Then came a voice out of the
throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his servants, and a great voice as of
many waters, and as thunder, said, Halaluiah; for our Lord God Almighty has
reigned, let us be glad and rejoice, and give glory to him, for the marriage
of Christ is come, and his wife, that is, the faithful, has made herself
ready. This shows that the Gospel shall flourish more, when Rome and the
Popedom is destroyed, then ever it did: And to Christ's wife was granted that
she should be clothed in pure fine and shining linen, that is, in Christ's
righteousness, and Saint John was bid to write, blessed are they that are
called unto the Lambs supper, saying, These words are true.

Saint John was so ravished with the joy of this vision, that he worshipped
the Angel that showed it; but he forbad him, and bad him worship God, saying,
I am but one of your brethren, which have the spirit of Prophecy which is the
testimony of Jesus.

CHAP. 20.
IN this Chapter is declared the history of Satan, the Author of the first
ten persecutions: but when as Constantine had overcome those persecuting
Idolaters, Saint John sees in a Vision, that God bound the Devil for a
thousand years, that is, from general martyring and deceiving of the elect
and chosen Children of God. Yet in this time Satan brought in all popish
blasphemies, Superstitions and Idolatries, and grievously persecuted those that
stood to the purity of the word against Antichrist.

The Seats that Saint John saw, and them that sat upon them, was Christ and
the faithful, and gave Judgment, and condemned the idolatrous and
superstitious Papists, who these thousand years persecuted the faithful.

And Saint John saw the souls of them that were persecuted for the witness of
JESUS, and the word of GOD, and did not worship the Pope, nor had taken his
mark on their foreheads, or on their hands, and they lived and reigned with
Christ.

To arise from popish errors, sins and superstitions, is the first
resurrection; on such the second death shall have no power, but they shall be
the priests of God and Christ, and reign with him for ever.

After the Devil had bin bound a thousand years, from the time of
Constantine, as an Angel in the first Verse had the key of the bottomless
pit, and bound Satan, then the Pope had the key of the bottomless pit, to
loose the Devil, as appears in the ninth Chapter, and when he was loose,
he went out to deceive the people in the four quarters of the earth. Gogge
and Magogge, that is, the open and the secret enemies of the faithful, which
are in the ninth Chapter showed to be the Locusts, and their tails, that is,
the popish Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Friars, and such like, to gather them
together to battle against the faithful, and the number of them was infinite
as the sands of the Sea: but as they compassed the beloved City, that is, the
faithful, fire came down from heaven and devoured them, that is, the Lord in
his wrath destroyed the popedom; and the Devil that deceived them, and the
Pope the false prophet, were cast into a Lake of fire and brimstone, where they
shall be tormented day and night for evermore.

After all these things it is prophesied that Christ shall come unto judgment,
sitting upon a great white throne, from whose face fled away both the earth and
the Sea, and their place were no more found. And Saint John saw the dead both
great and small before God, the Books were opened, and another Book was
opened, which is the Book of life, and the dead were judged of those things
which were written in the Books: this is a Vision according to our capacity;
for Gods wisdom is his Book, whereby he always sees all things that ever
were, are, or shall be: and Death and Hell, that is, the Devil the cause of
them, were cast into the Lake of fire, which is the second death, and so were
all that were not found written in the Book of life.

CHAP. 21.
IN these two last Chapters is declared how flourishing the Church shall be
after the destruction of the Popedom unto the end of the world. This is
declared in the tenth Chapter and the second Verse. In that Christ is said to
set one foot upon the sea, and the other upon the land, that all Countries
shall confess Christ, and he shall have of his elect in all places. As
Mahomet rose just with Antichrist in the year 666. so no doubt but the example
of the destruction of Rome and the Popedom, shall make the Turks, Jews, and
them of other Nations, to become Christians. This is declared likewise in the
19. Chapter. Let us be glad and rejoice for the destruction of Rome, because
then the Lambs wife shall be made ready, and blessed are they that are called
unto the Lambs Supper.

In that there shall be then a new heaven, meaning the Church; and a new
earth, meaning temporal government, and the old is passed away, it shows,
that things touching the Church and Common wealth shall be wholly ruled
according unto the Word of God, and that all Popish and Jewish laws which are
contrary to the Word of GOD shall be no more.

And there shall be no more sea, that is, ignorant and unconstant men carried
away with every wind of false doctrine, as the waves of the sea are tossed with
the wind.

Then the Church shall be prepared as a fit Bride for Christ her husband, that
is, the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, and GOD shall dwell with them,
and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God, and wipe
away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, sorrow,
crying or pain, for the first things are past, that is, then there shall be
no more martyring, persecuting, mocking, blaspheming and deriding of Gods
Children.

In the tenth Verse an Angel shows Saint John a Vision of the glory that the
Church then shall have. In that it is called a great City, it shows what a
great number shall believe: in that it is called holy Jerusalem, it declares
the holiness of their Faith, Hope and Love, and other graces: the descending
of it from God out of heaven, shows that God from heaven, shall fill her with
the riches of his graces: and she had the glory of God, which made her shine
like precious stones.

The three gates on every side, are the Trinity, without which there is no way
to enter into the Church: the Angels that are at these doors, are the
Preachers: the twelve foundations of this Church, is Jesus Christ, which the
twelve Apostles have taught us to build all our hope upon: in that the three
gates were on every side of the Church, it shows that the doors of grace
shall lie open, and the Gospel be preached unto all nations.

The twelve thousand furlongs, the length, the breadth, and the height of it,
have an allusion unto the twelve thousand of every Tribe that were marked for
God in the seventh Chapter: the walls being, an hundred forty four cubits,
have an allusion unto the hundred forty four thousand, the whole number of
them that were marked of all Tribes.

The stones of the wall signify the faithful: in that they are precious
stones, it is by reason that the precious righteousness of Jesus Christ is
imputed unto them, and of their precious Faith, Hope and Love, and other graces
given them of Christ.

In that they are a wall to the new Jerusalem, that the Devil nor any unclean
thing can come into it, is declared how lovingly they shall join one with
another as stones in a wall, and how strongly they shall support one another,
to expel and to keep out falsehood, and to defend the truth.

In that this City was of pure gold, it shows the purity of their Religion,
without any dross of superstitions.

In that there was no Temple, it shows, that they shall truly serve God in
spirit and truth, and Christ shall be their Temple, in whom all their hearts
shall meet, and in him offer all sacrifices of prayer and praising of God, and
of good works, which the Lord will accept for his Son Jesus Christ his sake.

In that it has no need of the Sun nor of the Moon to shine in it, the
holy Spirit shall so illuminate their understandings more then the light of
natural reason can teach them: and there shall be no night: for where the
spirit of God is, there is no darkness.

In that the gates shall never be shut, it certifieth, that none that come
with a lively faith shall be shut from Grace, and that Grace shall always be
offered.

In that the glory and the honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it, it
shows that the Kings and chiefest of all Countries shall believe in Christ:
and there shall enter into it no unclean thing, that is, wicked men; nor
whomsoever works abomination and lies, such they shall hate and
excommunicate: but only such shall enter as are written in the Lambs Book of
life.

CHAP. 22.
THe pure river of water of life, like Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne,
is the doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; whosoever drinks of him shall
never thirst for any other means of salvation: their thirst shall be so fully
quenched in him, that they shall always rejoice in their salvation. He is the
tree of life, whosoever eats of him with a lively Faith shall have eternal
life, and he shall never hunger, that is, doubt thereof. Christ always is
fruitful, and the leaves of his righteousness shall heal the imperfections and
diseases of the faithful in all nations.

There shall be no curse, but the throne of God and the Lamb shall be amongst
the faithful, and they shall be his servants and serve him, and they shall see
his face, and his name shall be written in their foreheads, that is, they shall
not be ashamed to confess his name, and they shall reign for evermore, that
is, in the world to come.

Then S. John concludes the truth of these Prophesies by the Angels testimony
and his own: and lastly, he brings in Jesus Christ speaking for the
testimony of the truth hereof; I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify these
things in the Churches, I am the root and generation of David, the bright
morning Star. The Spirit and the Bride exhort men to come to me, and let
every one that hears exhort men to come to me; and let all that thirst, and
will take of the water of life freely, come: for I protest that who so shall
add any thing to this Book, God will add to him the plagues written in this
Book: and if any diminish of the words hereof, God will take away his part out
of the Book of life, and the holy City: he that testifies these things
says, Surely I come quickly, Amen, Even so Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord
Jesus be with us all, Amen.

FINIS.

