THE TRIBVNALL OF THE CONSCIENCE: OR, A TREATISE OF EXAMINATION; SHOWING Why
and how a Christian should examine his Conscience, and take an account of his
life.

BY HENRY MASON, Parson of St. Andrews Undershaft, London.

LONDON: Printed by G. P. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop,
under St. Peter's Church in Corne-hill. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr. THOMAS COVENTRY, Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable Lord,
NOt long since I published a small Treatise concerning Fasting: and therein,
the matter giving me occasion for it, I mentioned some holy duties, fit (as I
thought) to be practiced upon a fasting-day; as namely Examination of our
lives, Confession of our sins, and a steadfast purpose of a better life. But
these being there but named only, because the handling of them was not proper
to that place: some have desired a more full direction for the right
performance of those holy duties. And because Examination of the Conscience is
one of them, and such a one, as does lead and direct and carry with it all the
rest; I was upon this occasion persuaded to reuise some Notes, which lay by
me, concerning that argument: and thence I have framed this short Treatise,
which I therefore call the Tribunal of the Conscience, because the work
intended is a kind of judiciary proceeding, wherein a man's conscience does
give sentence upon himself. And this little Treatise concerning the judgment
of the Conscience, I have made bold to offer to your Lordships Patronage and
Protection, who by your Office are IVDGE of the Court of Conscience: hoping
that having your Name in the Front, it may find the more favor abroad; and
nothing doubting, but if it find entertainment, it will return some part of
thankfulness to your Lordship back again, by easing you and your Court of
frivolous, tedious and unrighteous quarrels. For if Plaintifes would examine
their conscience concerning the justness of their cause, and the
reasonableness of their demands, it would make them to relinquish their
cauilling suites before they did commence them. And if Defendants would examine
their conscience concerning the wrongs they have done, and the dues which they
owe, it would make them to give a willing satisfaction, rather than to weary
their neighbor with unjust and shifting delays. And if Lawyers would examine
their conscience concerning such rules as Religion does tie them to, in
pleading for men's rights, it would make them to turn away such Clients, as
brought them unreasonable causes. And if Judges would examine their conscience,
concerning the duties of their place, and the condition of the suites that
every day are debated in the Court, it would make them so to entertain all
sorts of wranglers, as that they would have no great lust to bring frivolous
matters before a righteous Judge. And so at length it might be hoped, that
that might happen in your Lordships time, which they say did happen in the time
of Sir Thomas More, Stapleto^ de tribus Thomis, in vita Tho. Mori, cap. 3.
Who (as mine Author says) having ended a cause then before him, did call for
the next to be brought: but answer was returned him, that there was never
another cause behind. And so the Court was dismissed, because there were no
more causes to be heard. A great honor to the Judge, and a great happiness to
the people. The like honor and happiness I shall ever pray may once happen in
your Lordships days; that so conscience prevailing, wrangling suites may have
an end. And heerewith, continuing my prayers also for your Lordships
prosperity, together with the peace of a good conscience; I humbly take my
leave.

Your Honors devoted in all service, HENRY MASON.

THE TRIBVNALL OF THE CONSCIENCE: OR A Treatise of Examination; Showing why and
how a Christian should examine his conscience, and take an account of his life.
IN the History of the Creation, it is said, that at the days end GOD looked
upon the work that he had made, and he Genesis 1.4, 10, 12, 18, 21, 25.
saw that it was good: and at the end of the week, taking a view of all his
works together, Genesis 1.31
he saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. Which
shows, that after God had done his works, he did reflect upon them, and
considered the quality and the condition of them. In imitation hereof, or in
conformity hereunto, wise men do wish us, that at every days end we should
reflect upon our works, and take a view of what we have done that day; and at
the weeks end, take account of all our doings for that space of time; and so
further, as further occasion shall require. And this Inquiry or account-taking
of our works, they call the Examination of our souls or conscience. And
surely, if we did observe this rule, still to reflect upon our selves after
our works are done, though we could not find them to be like unto Gods
works, good and very good; nay we should rather find the^ naught and very
naught: yet by this viewing and searching into our works, if it be rightly
and diligently performed, we may, without all doubt, make our works much
better than they are. In regard whereof, I have assaied, whether by my poor
labors this way, I may propound something to the Christian Reader, that may
incite him to undertake this work willingly, or that may direct him how to
perform it aright, and to the profit and spiritual good of his soul. And for
this purpose, I have thought these six Points worthy of consideration: 1. What
general Inducements there are, that may animate a Christian to undertake the
search and practice of this work. 2. Wherein the performance of this work
does consist, and what actions or performances it does include and contain. 3.
What the Matter is, about which Examination is to be exercised. 4. In what
Manner and order it may and ought to be performed. 5. What be the Times, in
which it is most fit to be used. 6. What fruit or spiritual good a man may get
by this Exercise, when it is rightly and carefully performed.


CHAP. I. What general inducements there are, that may animate a Christian to
go about and undertake this work.
NO man undertakes any work, but in hope of some good to be gotten by it.
For, Omnis actie est propter finem; All actions, say Philosophers, are for some
end: and, finis et bonum conuertuntur; that which a man propounds to himself
for his end, is the good which he hops to gain. This is generally true in
all actions of any value, but most especially in such as be either difficult or
distasteful to our nature: for men are hardly drawn to undergo such, but upon
good hopes that may recompense their labors; but without some reasonable
inducements, no man would ever yield to take pains in difficult businesses.
And upon this consideration, being about an exercise that is somewhat laborious
in it self, and very tedious to our untoward nature, I have thought it
necessary in the very entrance, and as it were by way of Preface, to consider
what Inducements a reasonable man may have to bestow his pains both in
learning and in practicing of this duty.

And for the inducements, (beside the special uses and benefits that may be
reaped by it, whereof I shall have fitter occasion to speak hereafter, when
the nature and conditions of it be first laid down and declared;) it will be
sufficient, I suppose, for this place, to consider of some general motives:
and they be these two especially, first Precept, and secondly Practice. By
Precept I mean such commands as God has imposed upon us in Scripture, for the
doing of this work: and by Practice I mean the examples of wise men, who have
gone before us in the use of it, together with the exhortations and
encouragements, by which they animate and provoke themselves and others to the
practice of it. By the one of which it is commanded as a necessary duty, and by
the other it is commended as a profitable work, that may stead us in the
wel-ordering of our life: and by both these, any reasonable man, but especially
every wise Christian may be induced to undergo this work, not doubting but
that he is in a good way, in which so many wise and good men have gone before
him, and assuring himself of comfort and success in that business, which God
has enjoined him. To come then to the Point.

I. The first inducement to this work is Gods Precept or Commandment: such as
that is, 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup. And that of the same Apostle; 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. And
that again; Gal. 6.4.
Let every man (says he) prove his own work; or examine his own work: for
the (...)
same word is used in this place and the former. And such also is that rule of
David; Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Upon which words
Saint Chrysostom commenteth to this purpose; What is this, that he says, [
Commune with your own heart, etc?] Why? David (says he) speaks to this
effect; After supper, when ye are going to sleep, -- (...), etc.
set up the judgment seat of the conscience, and of it require an account:
and what evil counsel ye have taken in the day time, either devising deceit,
or circumuenting your neighbor, or entertaining of any corrupt lusts; those,
when ye have produced and broughs them forth, -- and have set your conscience
as the Judge to these wicked thoughts, strike them through, and (...). Chrysostom.
Exp. in Ps. 4. page 26, C.
take revenge upon them.

II. The second inducement, is the practice of good men, mingled with their
exhortations and encouragements to this work. In which kind, and for which
purpose,

1. We first read in Scriptures, of David, that he practiced himself, what he
preached to others. He that said unto others, Commune with your own heart, etc.
says of himself, Psalm. 77.6.
I call to remembrance my song in the night; I commune with mine own heart,
and my spirit made diligent search. And in another place, Psalm. 119.59.
I thought on my ways, (says he) and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
In which words we may by the way note two things: First, the acts that David
did do, and they were, he thought on [or considered] his ways, and he
turned his feet unto Gods Commandments,.i. he did go on in the way of Gods
Commandments, doing what God did command him. Secondly, we may note the order
that David observed in the doing of these acts, and that was, he first thought
on his own ways, and then he walked on in Gods Laws: that is, first he
examined, and then he reformed his life. And herein he has left us a pattern
for our practice, that if we mean to amend our lives, we also must first
begin with the examination of our ways. And the like both practice and pattern
we have in the afflicted Church in the Lamentations of Jeremy. For there the
Church, taught by the Prophet, thus encourages each other, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search (say they) and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord:
implying, that examination is the ready way to conversion and amendment.

2. We read in the writings of the Ancients, that religious people have been
accustomed to keep a day-booke of their actions, and out of that to take an
account of their life. Ad cuius latus quum appensum cingulo breuem libellum
conspicerem, didic^ eum quotidie cogitationes suas in eo notare, basque, omnes
nuntiare Pastori solitum. Climac. Gradu. 4. extat tom. 6. part. 2. Biblioth.
Patr. page 251.
Climacus tells, that in a religious house, whereinto he came, he found one,
who had a little book tied at his girdle, in which he wrote all his thoughts;
that keeping a memorial of them, he might (besides his own care) show them to
his spiritual Father. Non solum autem illum, sed et alios quam plures id
facere ibidem prospexi. Clima, ibid.
Nor was it this man alone that did use this course, but I found (says he)
very many others to do the like. And in the process of the same discourse, he
advises men who are careful of their salvation, to observe the like order,
telling us, Optimus ille Trapczita est, qui quotidie vespere lucrum ac
detrimentum omnino co^putat. Qund scire manifestius non potest, nisi horis
singuli^ in tabulis omnia denotet. Clima. ibid. pa. 255. B.
that he is the best Banker or Tradesman, that every day in the evening taketha
perfect account of his gains and his losses. Which a man can no way know
better, then if every hour he note all things down in his tables. And to like
purpose, Chr. in Ps. 4. pa. 26. and in Mat. Hom. 43. [pag. 397, 398.] prope
finem.
S. Chrysostom, Sermon. Commonitor. de Abdicatione rerum, in fine. page 246. B.
and de Instit. Mon. in fine. pa. 396. C.
S. Basil, Moral. lib. 25. cap. 6.
S. Gregory, De vita solitar. ad fratres de Monte Dei. page 1026, and 1029.
S. Bernard, and others more of those ancient Worthies, do advise and encourage
religious Christians of their time, to a daily examination of their
consciences, that in the morning they should think how they have passed the
night, and in the evening, how they have spent the day. And this daily care,
and continual accounting with their souls, was (as we may well suppose) one
chief reason, why those times did so far outgoe and exceed ours in zeal
and devotion. But certain it is, that the practice of this exercise in those
days, was very frequent and usual with all them that made any profession of
Religion; insomuch as that Debet [ vniuscuiusque, mens] caute penfare, vel quae
ab eo [ Domino] bona perceperit, vel quae mala bonis illius perverse viuendo
responderit. Quod electi quotidie facere non cessant. Et paulo post, Reproborum
esse proprium solei, semper praue agere, et nunquam quae egerint, retractare.
-- At contra electorum est, actas suos quotidie ab ipso cogitationis font
discutere, et om^e quod turbidum profluit, ab intimis exsiccare. Gregor. Moral.
lib. 25. cap. 6.
S. Gregory says, That the Elect do by no means cease every day heedfully to
weigh, either what good things they have received from God, or what evil
things they have returned him for his good, by their naughty living. He adds
further, that it is usually a property of reprobates, always to do evil, and
never to recount what they have done: -- and contrariewise, that it is the
property of the Elect to discuss their deeds every day from the very thought,
which is the spring of all; and whatsoever they find to be myrie or muddy, to
dry that up to the very bottom. And hereby we may see what the practice and
opinion of the ancient Doctors of the Church, and other religious men of those
days was concerning this duty of Examination. I proceed further to consider
what wise and virtuous men among the Heathen have thought and said of it.

Thirdly then, we may read in good Authors among the Heathens, that their best
and wisest men were wont every day to take an account of themselves. Sextius
the Roman Philosopher Faciebat hoc Sextius, vt consummato die quum se ad
nocturnam quietem recepisset, interrogaret animum suum, Quod hodie malum tuum
sanasti? Cui vitio obstitisti? Qua part mel^ores? Senec. de Ira. l. 3. cap 36.
page ^98. Gyrald de Histor. Poetarum, Dialog. 4. page 156.
had this custom, that at the end of the day, when he betook himself to his
nights rest, he would question his soul, What malady of thine have thou this
day cured? What vice have thou stood out against? In what respect art thou
better then thou wast before? And Seneca, who reports this of Sextius, did
practice the like himself. Quotidie apud me causam dico. Quum sublatum e
conspectu lume^ est, et conticuit vxer, moris iam mei conscia, totu^ diem mecum
scrutor, facta acdicta mea remetior. Nihil mihi ipse abscondo, nihil transco.
Quare enim quicquam ex erroribus meis timeam, quum possum dicere; Vide ne istuc
amplius facias, ^unc tibi ignosco. Senec. de Ira, l. 3. c. 36. page 199.
Every day (says he) I plead my cause with my self. When the candle is
removed from mine eyes, and my wife, who is privy to my custom, keeps
silence, I examine the whole day with my self, I go over again, and weigh my
deeds and my words. I hide nothing from my self, I pass nothing over
untouched. For what need I to be afraid of my scapes, seeing I may say to my
self; See thou do it no more hereafter; for this time I forgive thee, etc.
The like was the practice of Pythagoras and his scholars, Fer tur discipules
admonere solitus, vt ista quotidie quum domum ingrederentur, dicerent, (...);
Diogen. Laert, in vita Pythagorae, pa. 581.
who had this rule given them from their Master, that enery day when they came
home, they should demand each man of himself, Wherein have I transgressed?
What good have I done? and what duty have I left undone? And De Curiositate. p.
515. f.
Plutarch commends the same rule to them that would busy themselves in that
which may avail them. Nor was the custom of Plato much different from this
practice, Plato, quoties interfuisset hominibus contra decorum agentibus,
digressus solebat it a seipsu^ alloqui; (...). Plut. de vtilit. capiend. ex
hostib. page 88. D.
who, as often as he was among men that mis-behaued themselves, was accustomed
in private to question with himself, AND AM NOT I SVCH A ONE? or, Have not I
done the like? And in a word, so general and common is this practice among all
men, to examine or take accounts of their state in all businesses of moment,
whether temporal or spiritual, as that our Savior asks of the multitudes
about him; Luke 14.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
Which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first and counts
the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it etc. or what King going to
make war against another King, sits not down first and consulteth whether
he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty
thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an
Embassage, and desires conditions of peace. He means, that there is no man
of any ordinary capacity and wit, but if he be to build, will first take
account of his ability to perfect the work; or if he be to make war, will
first take a view of his strength to go through with the victory, that either
he may provide that which is sufficient for the success, or else he may leave
off his intention. on. And then he applies this practice in matters of the
world, to a like care in matters of a man's soul; So (says he) whosoever he be
of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. The
meaning is as if he should say, So every one of you, that means to be my
Disciple, should first sit you down, and cast with your selves, what it will
cost you to be a Christian; and that is the renouncing of all the world, and
the forsaking of all that you have in the world. And therefore you should
resolve in the beginning, either to leave all, if need be, for Christ's sake,
or else never undertake to be Christians.

And these things laid together, that al wise men, whether Christian or
Heathen, have thought this course of Examination to be necessary, both in
things of the world, and in things of God; yea, and that our blessed Savior,
and the holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, have commended this practice
unto us: these, I say, may be strong inducements to make us well-affected to
the work, before we know in particular what is required in the undertaking of
it, or what may be expected by the performing of it.

CHAP. II. Wherein the performance of this work does consist, and what actions
or performances it does require.
Having hitherto prepared the Readers mind to have a good opinion of this
work, I now go on to consider, wherein it does consilt. And for conceiving
hereof, we must consider, that Examination is a kind of judiciary proceeding,
in which a man keeps private Sessions at home, passing sentence of all his
works and actions, as Gods Law does require. This the Apostle implies, when
having first said, 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. he adds by way of
confirmation, to prove the necessity or profitablenes of this work, verse. 31.
For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged; that is, if we
would censure and pass sentence on our selves, by a diligent performance of
this work of Examination; God would spare us, or he would not censure us the
second time, after we had done it our selves already. To this purpose Exposit.
in Psalm. 4.
S. Chrysostom calls it an erecting of a Tribunal for the conscience; and S.
Gregory, Nec deest in hoc Iudicio mente concepto, omne ministerium, quod
punire reo^ suos before debeat. Nam Conscientia accusat, Ratio iudicat, Tiraor
ligat, Dolor excruciat. Greg. Moral. l. 25. cap. 6.
that in this private judgment there wants no Officer that is usual for
punishing of guilty persons: for the Conscience (says he) is the Accuser;
Reason is the Judge; Feareus the Gaeler, and Sorr^^ is the Executioner. And
therefore look, what the proceeding is, and what actions are usual in public
Judgments, where men are questioned and sentenced according to Law: and the
like course is here to be held, and the same actions are to be performed in
the examination of a man's soul and conscience. For as in those legal
proceedings, there is first an inquiry into the facts, what has been done,
which by the Law deserves censure. Secondly, there is sentence pronounced,
according to the nature of the crimes, and the proof made of them. Thirdly,
there is punishment inflicted, either for the amendment of the offender, or for
example and terror to others, that they offend not in like sort. Or, if the
party accused be cleared by the Jury, he is acquitted and set free by the
Judge. So in this Court of private Sessions, first, there is an inquiry or
search, to find out the transgressions or offenses of the soul. Secondly,
there is sentence to be pronounced, according as the nature of the facts does
require. Thirdly, if the sentence be condemnatory, punishment is to be
inflicted by the offenders conscience upon himself; that by taking a holy
revenge upon his own folly, he may be made more careful of offending
afterward. Or if a man shall be so happy, as after inquiry to find nothing by
himself; he may cheer his soul with an Euge serve bone etc. Mat. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant. And hereby the sincere Christian
may be encouraged in Gods service, and animated to proceed in those holy
courses, in which he has found so much comfort already. And because there is
no man that does faithfully perform this service of examining his soul, but
he shall be sure to find something, wherein he has sinned, and something
wherein he has served God aright; therefore he shall never want matter either
to condemn, or in some part to absolve himself, more or less, according as
his life has been in times past, and according as he has made use of this
and such other exercises of Religion. And consequently in every Examination, if
it be thoroughly performed, a man will lightly gain two helps toward Heaven.
First, by condemning of himself, he will conceive fear of relapsing into
sin: and secondly, by acquitting himself, he will gain more comfort to
proceed in well-doing.

By this it may appear in part, what the nature of this work is, and wherein
it does consist: but for the more distinct knowledge of this point, it may
further be noted, that there be two sorts of acts which are employed in this
word Examination, and in some sort included in it: some are essential, and
contained in the nature of it; and some are accidental, and to be conjoined
with it, and indeed are presupposed to accompany it, when it is rightly
undertaken.

Of the former sort are these three, 1 Discussion, 2 Application, and 3 Censure.

Discussion is a sifting of our life and dealings, by which we pull things out
of the heap where before they lay confused and unseen, and by which we set
every fact of ours in the open view, that they may be scanned and seen by
themselves what they are.

Application is a laying of these acts thus searched and found out, to the rule
of Gods Law, which is the touchstone of all our doings, and according to which
God will judge us at the last day: that so it may appear how and wherein we
have swarned from Gods Law, or have observed it.

Lastly, Censure is the judgment that our minds and consciences do give upon
our deeds according to the rule of the Law; both for the quality of them,
whether they be righteous or sinful; and for the quantity of the offense,
whether it be great or small; whether a sin of ignorance, or a sin against
conscience; and whether of humane frailety, or of obdurate contumacie.

The first act serves to show what we have done: the second, what we should
have done: and the third, what the doom is that we have deserved either by
well or ill doing. And these three laid together, do (as I take it) make up
the nature of this work of Examination; so that we may not unfitly describe it
out of its own principles, in some such manner as this; Examination is a
discussion of a man's life, that his works may be seen and censured according
to the rule of Gods Law.

Secondly, for the second sort of acts, which are employed in this word, and
ought to be joined with this work, they are two especially, the one going
before the proper acts of Examination, and that is a purpose to better a man's
spiritual estate, by correcting what is amiss, and confirming what is sound
and upright. And the other is an act that follows after Examination, and that
is an effectual practice or execution of such rules and orders as may back our
examination, and make it more effectual and useful. For which purpose, these
rules following may perhaps be not impertinent nor unfit: every wise Christian
may, as his experience shall give him further occasion, add, and use more of
his own or other men's observation.

1. Rule. (...). Basil. de Abdicatione rerum in fine. p. 246.
we do then compare our present with our precedent state, and consider whether
we have amended indeed, what we blamed our selves for in our former
examinations; and how we have either increased or decreased in grace and
goodness: that if we have been slothful and unprofitable servants, we may
snubbe and shame our selves for it before God and our own consciences, in some
such manner as our Lord snubbed the evil servant in the Gospel, Matt. 25.26.
Thou wicked and slothful servant, etc. and if we have been diligent, and in
some measure have increased our Lords talents, that then we may cheer our
souls out of the comfort of our well-doing, and praise our God, that has both
given us talents to trade with, and grace to use them to his glory. For this
practice will whett our diligence for time to come.

2. work, we consider what we are going about, what occasions of doing good
either to our selves or others, we may meet with, and what tentations may
assault us in the businesses of that day; that so we may lay hold upon all
occasions of doing good, and prepare our selves to stand out with courage
against all oppositions and tentations that may hinder us in our duties, or
draw us into sin. For by this means, occasions of doing well shall not
ouerslip us vn-espied, nor will tentations surprise us at unawares.

3.

4. of the work, we may remember to make use of our former resolution, and now
practice what before we did purpose. For by this means we shall be sure that
our good purposes shall not be idle and without fruit; as in many men it
falls out, who are like sluggish people, that ouer-night appoint to rise
early, but when the morning comes, cannot abide to leave their warm beds.

These Rules I have thought on, as being in mine opinion fit to back our
examination, and to make it more powerful for an holy life: Others, as I said
before, may in their daily observation add more, and perhaps find out some
better then these. And as in the ordering of our bodily health, Physicians
advise their Patients to follow that whereof they find good, and to avoid that
which does not agree with their temper: so it is good counsel in the ordering
of our souls, to make daily use of that which by experience we find either
to strengthen grace, or to weaken sin in us: and contrariwise to flee from
all such occasions and vsages, as we see or have found to hurt or endanger us.
I only add thus much more; That these later sort of acts, whereof now I have
been speaking, though in themselves simply considered they be but Adjuncts
and Attendants on Examination, without which it may subsist in its bare nature;
and therefore are not necessary ad esse; as the Schools do speak: yet in the
use of the word, and in the intendment of the Scripture they are employed,
included, and presupposed to go with it and attend it, as being necessary ad
been esse, to the well doing of this work: as may appear by these reasons.

1. John faith, Ioh. 2.4.
He that says I know God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him: he means not by the word [know] a bare and simple
knowing and apprehending, which the learned call cognitio apprehensina; but he
means an effectual and working knowledge, which breeds or brings forth
such affections in the heart and such actions in the life, as that knowledge
directs men to: which knowledge they call [cognitio affectiua.] And so in
this case, Examination is properly a work of the understanding, fingling
things out of the confused heap, that they may appear what they are: but by
way of consequent it does imply such affections and actions, as this work of
the understanding is intended for, which is the bettering and a heading of our
spiritual estates, and of ordering every thing for the best advantage of our
souls and sa^^ations.

2. 1 Cor. 11.23.
says; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup. For if by the word [examine] he meant nothing but
discussing and sifting without correcting and amending; he should allow men to
go to the Communion with the conscience of sin, and without reformation of
life. And which is yet worse, should approve of a man as a worthy guest at the
Lords Table, only because he has learned to know his estate, though he no way
mean to amend it; whereas this knowledge of a man's self would increase his
sin, and make him the less welcome unto God; according to that rule of our
Savior, Luke 12.47.
That servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes. And therefore when the Apostle says, Let a man examine, and so let
him eat, etc. he means, that after he has examined, he should amend
whatsoever is amiss, and person ^^e whatsoever upon examination he shall
finds, necessary or fit to be done. And hence it follows, that a purpose to
amend our life, and to do what upon our examining shall appear necessary for
our souls, is a necessary duty, as an antecedent act that should go before
Examination; and that a practice of such things, as by trial shall appear
useful for this purpose, is another necessary duty, as a consequent act that
should follow after it. And so in conclusion it appears that there are three
especial acts required for the right performance of this work: 1, a constant
resolution to amend and better the estate of the soul, (...), a diligent
search, thereby to gain the right knowledge of it: and 3, an effectual
performance of all such things, as are available for this purpose. And out of
all these laid together, we may make a more full description to this purpose;
Examination is a Discussion of a man's life, for finding out the true estate of
a man's soul toward God; accompanied with a purpose and endeavor to do
whatsoever upon trial shall appear requisite for salvation and the good of a
man's soul.

CHAP. III. Of the Object of this work, or the matter about which it is to be
exercised.
HItherto we have spoken of the acts, now we are to consider of the Object, or
matter about which they are to be bestowed and employed. And it may be
considered two ways; either generally and such as it is in the largest extent,
which we may call the adequate object; or specially, and such as is in more
principal manner to be respected and looked to, which may be called the
Principal or special object.

I. And first for the adequate object, including every thing that ought to be
examined, or about which a Christian should examine himself; it is whatsoever
either thought word or deed, which carries any respect either of righteousness
or sinfulness in it, or all both our good and our evil deeds. For
Examination being (as before was noted) a kind of judiciary proceeding with
our own souls, in which we keep Sessions at home, that we may prepare for
the great Judgment: it has for its object the same matter, that shall be
discussed and sentenced at the day of the last Judgment. And that is, (as
Solomon tells us) every work whether good or evil. For Eccles. 11.14.
GOD (says he) shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good or evil: that is, every thing that is morally evil
or morally good, or which is either sinful or righteous. And therefore in
imitation of Gods proceeding in his Judgment, we also should proceed in our
judging of our selves; which is to consider of every thing, which is either
good or evil, sinful or righteous, a breach of Gods Law or a performance of
it.

But for our more distinct understanding, and our better direction herein, it
will not be amiss to consider our good and our evil works, each apart by
themselves.

And first for our evil deeds or our sins, we may note these rules
following.

1. We must consider and examine our schies, as well concerning our omissions
of duties, as commissions of evils. For in the last Judgment, our Lord the
Judge of quick and dead, he will not only give sentence against murders and
oppressions and robberies, and such like, but Matthew. 25.41, 42, 43.
against unmercifulness also, and the not feeding of the hungry, the not
lodging of the stranger, the not clothing of the naked, the not visiting of the
sick, etc. And so when we are to judge our selves, we must censure not only
our hurting of our neighbor, but our not helping of him; nor only our
backbiting of our neighbor, but our not defending of his good name; nor only
our persecuting of Gods Word, but our not profiting by it; nor only our
robbing of the poor, but our not relieuing of them: and so in all other the
like cases, our not doing of that which is good, when duty does require it of
us, is culpable before God, and is part of that matter about which our
Examination ought to be exercised.

2. We must consider not only the substance of our sins, but the
circumstances of them also; such as are the persons, the time, the place, the
facion or manner of doing, etc. for all these may either aggrauate or mitigate
the sin. So we see that the treason of Judas is counted the more grievous,
Psalm. 41.9. and Ioh. 13.18.
because he was one of Christ's familiar friends, which did cate of his bread;
and Ma^asses his idolatry was the more heinous, because he 2 Chronicles. 33.7.
set his idol in the House of God, of which GOD had said to David, and to
Solomon his Son; In this House and in ^erusalem which I have chosen before
all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever. And so, the cruel
dealing of the Jews was the more heinous, because Isa. 58.3, 4.
in the day of their fast, they did exact all their labors, and did smite with
the fist of wickedness. And Solomon's idolatry did anger and offend God the more,
because 1 King. 11.9, 10.
his heart was turned from the Lord, which had appeared unto him twice, and had
commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other Gods.
And so our sins will be the more grievous, if we wrong them who have helped
us, or if in the Church of God, and in the time of his service, our hearts do
meditate revenge, or forecast unjust devices, or take pleasure to think on our
fleshly lusts, etc. And therefore these circumstances are to come into the
account together with the maine sins.

3. Thirdly, not only the sin, but the occasion of it is to be considered:
for this may either increase or diminish the guiltiness of it. As the rich man
that had many sheep of his own, and yet took away the poor man's lamb, 2 Samuel 12.1. etc.
to make his friend welcome with, was the more grievous offender by much,
because having no need, he did rob the poor man. And again^, the
consideration of the occasion or provocation by which we were led into sin,
may teach us wiscome, by shunning such occasions to escape from the sins.

4. Fourthly, we are to reckon among our sins, that must be accounted for, not
only our commissions of evil deeds, and omissions of good duties, but even
our imperfect and defective performances. For of these the Church of God does
accuse themselves; Isa. 64.6.
All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: and in respect of these it was,
that the High Priest was by the Law Exodus 28.38.
to carry the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel should
hallow, in all their holy gifts: For that does imply, that the services of Gods
people had their imperfections and errors, which because they were failings in
duties, were to be borne by Jesus our High Priest, as our other sins were. And
therefore we must reckon with our selves not only for omitting or neglecting
the exercises of Religion, but for our distractions, our wandering thoughts, and
our cold and dull affections, while we did perform them.

Thus our evil deeds or sins may be considered: our good works and holy
duties may not be neglected neither; and that for these reasons.

1. Because we are many times deceived with shows; thinking that to be good
which is evil, and that to be some great good, which is but a poor service
in comparison. Thus Philip. 3.6.
Paul thought he showed much zeal, when be persecuted the Church of Christ:
and Judge. 17.13.
Micah thought he had highly demerited Gods favor, when he kept a Priest for
idolatrous service: and Iehu boasted of his killing of Ahabs children; 2 King.
10.16.
Come with me, (says he) and see my zeal for the Lord: when as God censured
it for unjust shedding of blood; Hos. 1.4.
Yet a little while (says God) and I will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the
house of Iehu. And so we are too apt to ouerweene our selves and our own
works; and think that we are zealous for God, when we are envious against
men, or ambitious for our selves. And for discerning of this corruption,
examination is necessary to be used about those works which we esteem to
be righteous and holy, lest we deceive our selves by ouer-partiall judgment.

2. Because in the very works which are truly good, we do many times
intermingle corruptions of our own: As sometimes there are ill ends in our
good deeds, as 1 King. 21.9.
Iezebel proclaimed a fast to cloak her murder withal, and Mat. 6.2, 5, 16.
the Pharisees fasted and prayed and gave alms, for gaining of vain praises.
And sometimes our good duties are performed in an evil manner; as the Exodus
1.17, 19.
Midwiues saved the childrens lives, by telling of a lie; and Exodus 4.25.
Zipporah circumcised her son, in a pettish humor; and 1 Chronicles. 13.9.
compared with cap. 15.12, 13.
Vzzah stayed the Arc from falling, without sufficient warrant for such a
work. But most times there are distractions, and worldly or perhaps wicked
thoughts in the midst of our best devotions: and always there are defects and
imperfections and failings when we are most fervent and best affected. And for
discerning of these, our best works deserve a strict account, that we may
learn to separate the precious from the vile: and neither be too highly
conceited of our weak performances, nor too little affected with our
corruptions and infirmities.

3. Our good works are to be considered in our Examinatio^s, that by those
things which are able to abide the touchstone, we may gain courage against
oppositions of men, and comfort against the tentations of Satan, and a settled
resolution to proceed and go on in a daily practice of good works; always
praising God for these mercies; because it is he that works in us both the
will and the deed. And in these respects, the consideration of our good works
is not without good use. And this may suffice for the adequate object, or the
matter of Examination in general and in the largeness of it.

II. Secondly for the principal Object, or the special matter which is to
come into Examination, it is every such sin as is likely to breed us some
especial danger. For if a City be besieged, wise Governors will take care of
every posterne door, and of every part of the Walls, to repair what is
decayed, and to keep all safe from the Enemy: but if one Gate be more likely
to be entered than other, or if any part of the Wall be weaker or more easily
to be broken down, men will there set the watch the surest, where the danger
is the greatest. And if a man be distempered with sundry diseases, a wise
Physician will take care of all, to ease the Patient, as much as may be, of
every one of them: but if some special disease be more dangerous to the sick
man, than others are; the Physician will bend his cure that way especially,
where the life of his Patient is most endangered. And so it is, or should be
with us in respect of our souls: We have here a Fort to keep, which is
every day assaulted by our Enemies; and we have a diseased foul of our own,
distempered with many spiritual maladies: but some maladies are worse then
other; and some parts of this Fort are weaker or more in danger then others
are: I mean, there are some sins, by which the Devil may more easily
surprise and captiuate our souls. And therefore, as we should keep diligent
watch against them all; so we should especially bend our forces against those
that do or may more especially breed us harm, and hinder our salvation. And
consequently, Examination being an approved means for grubbing up of sin, we
should apply this exercise against all sins in general; but more especially
against those, from which we may in reason fear the greatest danger. And
these are either such sins as are easily contracted, or such as are hardly
recovered. For into the one sort men fall often, and out of other they do
seldomer recover, if they once fall into them: and so the one sort will
endanger us by the frequencie of our falls, and the other by the difficulty of
our rising after we be down. But for better and more distinct understanding
of this point, we may in a more particular manner consider the several sorts
of sin, which in either of these two respects may breed some especial
danger. And of this kind I take these sins following to be.

1. Those that be great and reigning sins: such as the Apostle says do
exclude a man out of Gods Kingdom. And in this kind he reckons, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Galat. 5.19, 20, 21.
fornication, idolatry, adultery, effeminatenesse, sodomie, theft,
covetousness, drunkenness, reuilings, extortion. Of which sins, and such like,
he says, that they that are guilty of them, shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. And he means, that while they are such, or till by repentance and
forsaking of them, they have obtained pardon, they shall never come into Gods
Kingdom. Against these David prays, Psalm. 19.13.
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion
over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression. And against these we should watch and pray, that we may avoid
them; or if we have fallen into them, we should by examination learn to
conceive the danger, that by repentance we may gain pardon. For whereas lesser
sins, such as David calls Psalm. 19.12.
errors and secret faults,.i. sins, which in regard of their finenesse, and
our frailety, do escape us through ignorance, vnwarines, or common and humane
infirmity; 1 Ioh. 1.8.
whereas, I say, these sins are in the best of Gods children; (for even they
say, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us:) one of these other gross sins, being such as cannot be
committed, but with conscience and purpose of sin in the offender, does
bereave men for the present of grace, and all title and interest to the
Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore we should have an especial care to examine
our souls concerning these grosser sins, that we do not suffer our selves
to live and lie in any of them.

2. Sins of recidi^ation and relapse, when we fall back into the former
sin, after our repentance and vows of a better life. For relapses into
sickness are dangerous for the body; and relapses into sin are no less
dangerous for the soul. And therefore our Savior said to the man whom he had
cured of his lamenesse, Ioh. 5.14.
Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee: and that if the unclean
spirit, which has been cast out of a man, Luke 11.24.
do return and find the house swept and garnished, that is, made fit for the
habitation of such a guest, then he goes and takes with him seven other
spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in and dwell there; and the
last state of that man is worse then the first. By this it appears, that
these kind of sins, into which we have fallen before, if after our recouerio
we relapse into them again, are most dangerous and prejudicial to a man's
soul. And therefore when we call our souls to account, we should more
especially examine them concerning the former sins which we committed before
time; that we may see how well or how ill we have continued the course of our
repentance and amendment.

3. Sins that ^^^e with our own dispositions, such, I mean, as we are
inclined unto, either through temper of nature or custom of life. For these
sins may breed special danger, because we are ready to drop into them, when
no other Tempter drives us, beside our own corruption. Of such David seems
to speak, when he says; I kept my self from mine iniquity. Psalm. 18.23.
And of such we also should beware. And therefore in the daily care of our
souls, we should more especially question and examine them concerning those
sins, to which we are addicted or disposed, either by nature or by custom.

4. The sins of each man's particular calling or trade, may especially
endanger him, because he has by his very course of life, so many and so usual
occasions to be tempted by them. Never a day, nor scarce an hour of a day, but
some business will come in his way, either in dealing with others, or in
deliberating by himself, by which he may be occasioned either to omit some
duty, or to do some wrong, or to follow some nearer way of thriuing than GOD
does allow him. And amidst so many and frequent occasions, it will be hard to
stand upright, without much care and watchfulnes. And therefore as S. Paul
prescribes unto several men, the duties that belong to their several states
and conditions; as to him that has the gift of prophecy, Romans 12.6.
that he prophecy according to the proportion of faith; and to him that has
an office, that he wait upon his office; and so he that teaches, on teaching,
etc: so, if we desire to look into the state of our souls, and to learn from
our own hearts, how well or how ill we have done our duties, we should have an
especial eye to such things as appertain to our particular places and
callings.

5. The sins of the time, place, and company in which we live, have special
danger in them. For first they will draw us by their very example to partake
with them; in so much, as that men who at the beginning do abhor them, yet
by continuance of time, are insensibly carried with them, before themselves can
tell how. And secondly, evil men do desire company in their sin, and do
usually strive by all persuasions to win over to their side those that are
better affected. And therefore Solomon says; Prou. 1.10, etc.
My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come with us,
let us lay wait for blood, etc; we shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil; cast in thy lot among us, let us all have
one purse: My son, walk not thou in the way with them, etc. In which words,
Solomon first supposes that sinners will entice, and use all plausible
allurements to persuade others to their society; and then he advises the
righteous to take heed of them and their sugared baits. And so, if we live
amongst such men, we must expect provocation from them; and therefore should
use all providence for freeing of our selves of them. Thirdly, wicked men, if
they cannot win others to take part with them, yet they will molest them,
because their contrary life is an open shame to these men's dealings. And
therefore the Wise man brings in the wicked, thus deliberating or rather
resolving with themselves; Wisd. 2.12, etc.
Let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not for our turn, and he
is clean contrary to our doings: be vpbraideth us with our offeding the Law,
and obiecteth to our infamy the transgressings of our education. -- He was
made to reprove our thoughts: he is grienous to us, even to behold: for his
life is not like other men's, his ways are of another facion. etc. And this
daily molt station from the wicked, will make good men afraid to do well, for
fear of giving offense, or incurring danger: which made David to say, that
Psalm. 12^.3^.
the rod of the wicked should not rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest the
righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity: implying, that if the wicked
were suffered still to scourge and molest Gods people, it might be a means to
make them forsake their integrity, either by seeking to pacify the wicked, or
to protect themselves. By these considerations it appears, that in the
company of evil men are many prouocations to sin, partly by their bare
example, partly by their evil counsel, and most of all by derision and
reproaches, or by oppression and injuries. In respect whereof we may say, as S.
Hieron. in lib. 2. Commentar. in Amos Proaem. ad Pammach.
Hierom out of Cyprian, [Nullus diu tutus periculo proximus;] No man can be
long safe, that is always in danger. And therefore such sins do require
special care and watchfulness.

These and such like sins as these, because they breed the greatest danger,
are to be sifted and censured with the greatest care. And so we see that wise
men have held the like course in matters of this life, and have found good
success by it. When the King of Syria was to sight with Israel, he commanded
his Captains, 1 King. 22.31.
Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. And
the event shows that the course was good: for when the King was slain, Ver.
36.
a Proclamation then went throughout the Host, Every man to his City, and
every man to his own Country. And in like sort Agesilaus In pugna ad Mantineam
bortatus est Lacedaemonios, vt omissis reliquis, in solum pugnarent
Epaminondam; solos inquiens prudentes esse fortes, et illo necato, facilem fore
de reliquis victoriam: id quod etiam euenit. Plut. Apophth. in Agesil. page
^^4. C.
gave advice to the Lacedaemonians in a certain battle against the Thebans,
that they should omit all others, and fight only against Epaminondas, who was
the Leader of the Field and a man of as great wisdom as courage: and he gave
this reason for it, because he being killed, it would be easy to conquer all
the rest: which (as my Author says) fell out accordingly. And so, when
Goliath was slain, 1 Samuel 17.51.
the Philistines seeing that their Champion was dead, fled before Israel. And
so in like manner in our conflicts with sin, it will be good counsel, that
sometimes omitting all other vices, we bend our selves wholly against that sin
which troubles us most: because, if once we have quelled our master-sinnes,
the Devils great Leaders and Champions, it will be the more easy to chase away
the rest. And for this cause, in the performance of this work of Examination,
a special care must be had against these great Commanders, that they escape
not away in the throng.

CHAP. IIII. Of the manner to be observed in this work, or how a Christian
should proceed in examining of himself.
THe matter being declared, the next thing to be considered, is the manner: for
direction wherein, two things are in the beginning to be noted:

1. That in all works of this kind, the end. For Examination, in what kind
soever it be, being a searching or inquiry after something that we desire to
know, is always to be so performed, as may best serve for the bolting out of
that truth which we search for. And as the matter, whereof the question is, and
the end for which the inquiry is made, and the discovery which is desired in
this work, do differ and disagree; so the manner of proceeding in making the
search, will be different and unlike it self, as the things whereto it is
applied do require. As for example, if the Goldsmith be to try his metal, he
uses the touchstone and the furnace; because these are the proper means which
his art does teach for finding out that which he desires to know. And if the
Carpenter be to try his work that he has framed, whether it be agreeable to
art, and fit for use, he uses his squire and line and compass; because they
being applied to his work, will show how well it is fitted for the purpose.
And so in like manner, if a Physician be to try the state of his Patient, he
looks upon the urine, feels the pulse, and observes the symptoms. And if
a Judge be to examine a suspected person, he questioneth him about
circumstances, and examineth him upon such interrogatories, as may entangle any
man, that means by glozing shifts to obscure the truth. Thus in examinations,
men follow that course which is suitable to the matter, and peculiar for that
end whereto it is referred.

2. That Examination, discussion of a man's life, for discerning his spiritual
state, is a kind of indiciarie proceeding, as has been showed Cap. 2.
already. And therefore look what course Judges do hold in their Sessions,
or at their Assizes, the like course will be fit to be held in this work. Now
in their Sessions, this is the course: They first enquire into the facts of
men, and that inquiry is made by the testimony of witnesses, and other
proofs that may show what their deeds have been: and secondly, when they have
found out the truth of the fact, then they go to the rule of the Law, and that
being laid to the fact, directs the Judge to give sentence according unto
right. And so in these Sessions kept in the conscience, and held for the
ordering of our souls, we have two things to enquire after; the one what our
actions and facts have been, so far forth as they concern our spiritual
life. And for finding out thereof, our best proof is the testimony of our
own conscience: which is as good as a thousand witnesses, if our selves
corrupt it not. And the other is, how well these actions do agree with Gods
Law, (which is the Law that binds the conscience, and concerns the soul;)
that thence we may learn what to judge of our life, how far forth it
agreeeth with Gods Law, or swarueth from it.

These two things being first noted in general; for more particular direction
it must be further considered, that this comparing of our life with Gods Law,
may be done two ways: we may either begin with Gods Law, and first see what
it does requite at our hands, and thence proceed to our selves, and question
with our souls, how and wherein we have observed or transgressed those rules.
Or secondly, we may begin with our selves, and enquire what our doings are;
and then go to Gods Law, that we may learn what to judge of such works.

If we begin with Gods Law, then we must do two things.

First, we must get a competent knowledge of Gods Law, that we may know in
some measure what each precept does require of us, and what the meaning is of
all such Commandments as concern our practice, the sum whereof is contained
in the Decalogue or ten Commandments. For as an unskillful man is never the
nearer for a line or rule, if he have not been taught the Carpenters trade,
nor knows not the use of these things; no more can a Christian be any whit
the better for hearing or having of Gods Law to direct him, unless he know the
meaning of it, and can tell what vices are forbidden, and what virtues are
commanded in every Precept. Whence it follows, that they which have never bin
trained up in the grounds of Religion, nor have not the knowledge of their
Catechism, cannot possibly go about this so necessary a work with any
dexterity or profit to their souls.

Secondly, when a man has learned in some good sort the meaning of the
Commandments, then in the second place he is to go through these Commandments
one by one, and in each of them to consider what sins are there condemned,
and what duties are there enjoined, and hereupon still to question with his
own heart, And have I committed this sin? or, Have I neglected that duty?
or, If I have kept the precept, for the matter, yet have I not broken it in the
manner of performance, or in the intention of my mind? And thus we may
proceed, when we begin with Gods Law.

But if we begin first with our selves, then we may hold this course: first,
(after some competent knowledge of the Law, which is ever presupposed in this
work,) we must take a view of our life, or of so much of it, as then we are
occasioned and purposed to examine, and consider from time to time, and from
one moment to another, how we have been busied, in what sort we behaved our
selves in it, and what have been our deeds, words, and thoughts, that deserve
scanning: and hereupon still to question with our selves, upon every work
that admits such a question, what therein has been done amiss, or how we
have transgressed in the matter, or in the manner, or in the end, or in any
circumstance. In which kind, that we may proceed the more orderly, and
understand our selves and our estate the more distinctly, we must not pass
over things in the gross, and lap up too much of our life in a general and
indistinct consideration; but rather labor to part and divide our time by
smaller parcels, that so we may see every thing apart and by it self. For
which purpose, those who have not better directions already, may be pleased to
make use of these.

1. If we be to take a general account of our whole life, and to examine our
selves from our beginning to the present time; we may divide our life several
ways. As first, by the times of our age, how we were busied, and in what manner
we carried our selves toward God, when we were boys, and when afterward we
were young men, and when men of middle age; and so on to our present time.
Secondly, we may divide our life by the several callings and conditions of
life, in which we have spent our time: as what we did when we were scholars at
the Grammar school; what, when we were servants, or Aprentices, or under
Tutors and Gardians; what, when we became freemen, or householders, or at our
own liberty and disposing; and what in the exercising of our particular trade
or profession or course of life; as Clergy men in their exercise of the
Ministry, Magistrates in their places of government, Merchants in their
trafficking, Craftsmen in their occupations, and every man in that vocation
whereunto he is called, and in that profession which he does exercise and
bestow his life in. Thirdly, we may again part and (as it were) subdiuide the
time of our special Calling, by the special businesses which we have gone
through, while we have lived in it; as a Merchant may consider of his dealing,
how just or unjust it has been in the commodities which he has carried forth
into the Indies, into the Eastern Countries, and into other Kingdoms abroad;
and how he behaved himself in fetching this or that commodity from such and
such parts, and in venting his wares abroad after they were come home, etc. And
so may other men do in the like cases, concerning the principal businesses
and occasions, that occur or happen in their several professions or callings.

2. If we be to consider of some lesser portion of our life, (as religious men
have been accustomed to do, by considering that time which has passed them
since their last either ordinary or more solemn examination,) then we may
part our months by weeks, and our weeks by days, and each day by his
several hours; that our task for the present being the less, our care and
labor about each particular may be the greater.

These directions for the manner of proceeding, I have represented to such as
shall vouchsafe to read this schedule; leaving them notwithstanding to their
own choice, which of these ways they will follow, or whether they will follow
any of them at all. For those who are accustomed to these asceticall exercises
of devotion, may perhaps devise other more fitting courses or ways of
proceeding then these are: and it is reason, yea and a point of wisdom too,
for every man to make use of those rules, which in his own experience he
finds most proper to his own nature, and most powerful for his reformation
and amendme^t. I will only add thus much more for the last clause of this
point; that the more kinds and ways of proceeding that every man uses, the
more knowledge he will gain of hi(...)ne estate, and the more will he be
enabled to resist sin, and to reform his life and behavior: for that which
escapes him in one manner and course of proceeding, may meet him in another;
and what one course leaves imperfect, that the next may supply.

CHAP. V. Of the times of Examination, in which it is to be exercised.
THe next thing to be considered, is, what may be the fittest times for this
exercise. And the times to be considered are two; When and how often it is to
be used. For answer whereto, the Scriptures, for ought that I know or can
observe, have determined no set or precise time, which is necessary always to
be observed in the performance of this work. Notwithstanding some rules there
are, partly pointed at in the Scripture, and partly prescribed by holy men,
which we may make use of for our good. And they, so far as I can gather and
observe, be these and such like.

1. There is no danger of surfeiting upon too much, nor need we fear lest we
do perform it too often. For first, the oftener we reckon with our souls, the
fewer new things we shall have at every time to reckon for; and the fewer the
things be, the more readily will they be called to mind, and they may be
scanned the more exactly: whereas multitude of things, if they come together,
will hide one another, and take time one from another, and hinder the notice
each of other; and still it may be expected, that where many businesses are
tumbled in together, some will escape away in the throng. And secondly, the
oftener we take account, the fresher will our deeds and actions be in
remembrance; because being lately done, they have not had space to slip out of
our minds. And therefore the oftener the better: nor can there lightly be any
danger in being too diligent. The consideration whereof made St. Bernard say of
this work, Bern. in Cantic. Sermon. 58. in fine. page 742.
Si semper hoc quum opus est, facis, semper facis; If ye will do this as often
as there is need of it, you must do it always. And it may be thought, that
in respect hereof, the Prophet, speaking of this work, did double his words,
Lam. 3.40.
Let us (says he) search and try our ways: implying, that as he does double
his words, so we should double the work, and after we have done it once, do it
yet over again.

2. The time that learned and devout men have been accustomed to observe, and
do think most convenient for an ordinary practice of this duty is, that
once every day at least, every man should consider of all such things as have
passed since his last reckoning. So says S. Chrysostom, Hoc siat singulis
diobus: -- Et quod facis in pecunia, nee sinis vt duo dies praetereant, quin
cum famulo rationem incas, ne confusionem inducat obliuie. (...). Chrysostom.
Exp. in psalm. 4. page 27. A.
Hoc fiat singulis diebus; Let this account be kept enerie day: and That which
thou do in a matter of money, which is, that thou suffer not two days to
ouerpasse thee without reckoning with thy servant, lest forgetfulness should
breed confusion in the reckoning; do the same also in matters of thy soul,
and actions of thy life, every day. And the same Father, preaching upon that
Text, Psalm. 51.3.
My sin is ever before me, notes, that the Saints in old time Virtutum
suarum obliti, peccata sola memoria retinebant: non, vt huius te^pestatis
homines, qui peccatorum suorum memoriam exuunt, Chr. hom. 2. in psalm. 50. page
1003. D.
were used to forget their virtues, and remember their sins; not as men now a
days (says he) do use to do, who put their sins out of their remembrance.
And hereupon he advises us not long after, in the same Sermon; Annon codice^
domi habes, in quo quotidianas rations scribas? Habe item codicem in
conscientia, et quotidiana peccata scribe. etc. Chrysostom. ibid p. 1004. D.
Have thou not a Book in thine house, (says he) wherein thou writest thy
daily accounts? Have also a like book in thy conscience, and write therein thy
daily transgressions. I mean, (says he) when thou layest thee down upon thy
bed, -- bring forth thy book, and take an account of thy sins. And to like
purpose speak many others, as may further be seen in the next rule following.

3. The time which learned and wise men have allotted for this work, is
especially in the evening, or at night: because that time is a time of vacation
and leisure. For in the day time we have our trades to follow, and our markets
to make, and our Law-suites to attend on, and our friends to talk with, and
our families to provide for; and one business or other will ever be coming in
the way, and interrupt us: but the night is a time of priuatenes and
retiredness, when occasions of the world being ouerpassed, we have the more
freedom to confer with our souls. To this purpose it is, that David took
the night time to meditate in; Psalm. 119.55.
I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy Law. And
that time he took to lament his sins; Psalm. 6.6.
Every night (says he) I make my bed to swim, and water my couch with my
tears. And that time he took also to examine his soul in; Psalm. 77.6.
I call to remembrance my song in the night; I comune with mine own heart. etc.
And that time he bids us also take for the like purpose; Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Upon which words of
the Prophet, we have this note given us by St. Chrysostom: Post coenom inquit,
quande ilis dormilum, quande estis decubituri, et nullo praesonte, multae quies
et silentiu^, et nen ine interturbante profunda tranquillitas; excita iudicium
conscientiae. -- Quande neque amicus interturbat, nec famulus irritat, nec
turba negotiorum vrget tunc vitae interdiu astae ratione^ exigite. Chryso.
Expos. in Psalm. 4.4. page 26. C, D.
What means this (says he) that he says, Commune with your bearts upon
your beds? etc. And he answers, It is this; After supper time, when ye are
going to sleep, and are ready to lie down on bed, and have great quietness
and silence, without the presence or disturbance of any, then erect a Tribunal
for the conscience. And a little after; When neither friend does disturb thee,
nor servants provoke thee, nor multitude of businesses does press thee, then
take account of thy life, what thou have done in the day time before. And the
same Father in another place, Quu^ in lecte tuo iaces, nec quisquam est, qua^
tibi negotium facessas, antequam somnus irrepat, libellum in medium produc, et
peccatae tua teeum reputa, dicens apud teipsum, Numquid hodier no die, vel
sermon vel opere peecaui? Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Psalm. 50. page 1004, 1005.
When thou laiest thee down upon thy bed, and no man is by to disturb thee,
before sleep come on, bring forth the book of thy conscience, and recount thy
sins with thy self, saying to thy self, HAVE I THIS DAY OFFENDED IN WORD OR
DEED? He adds; Viurne tempore id faciend^ spacium non habes; verum et
Praesectorum metus, et sodalium collequia, at negatiorum eura, et alendae
prolis fludium, et vxoris procuratio, as parandae mensae sollicitucle, (...).
etc. Idem Ibid. page 1005.
In the day thou have not time for this work; but fear of Superiors, and
conference with friends, and care of businesses, and forecasting for education
of children, and provision for wife, and preparation for diet, and a thousand
things beside do distract thee. And to like purpose S. Basil, Complete iam
die, ommique opere cum corporis, tum spiritus etiam absoluto, (...), Basil. to.
2. de Instit. Monarc. in fine, page 396. C.
When the day (says he) is ended, and businesses are past, before rest or
sleep, it is expedient that every man's conscience should be judged of his own
heart. etc. And Dorotheus says, Docuerunt nos saepe patres nostri, que pacto
purgemus nosipsos per fingulos dies, vt scilicet in vesperam perscrutemur
nobiscum, quomedo transactam diem exegerimus, et rursum mane quomodo nocte^,
etc. Doroth. to. 1. Biblio. Patru^, edit. Graecol. Doctrina 11. page 814.
that it was a rule from their forefathers, how men ought to cleanse
themselves, that in the evening they should question themselves, how they had
passed the day, and again in the morning, how they had passed the night. And
Bernard; Sedeat iudicaus iustitia, stet rea et seipsum accusans conscientia.
Neme te plus deligit; neme te fidelius iudicabit. Mane praeteritae noctis fac a
teipso exactionem, et venturae diei tu tibi indicito cautionem. Vespere diei
praeteritae rationemexige, et superuenientis noctis fac indictionem. Bernard.
de vita solitar. ad fratres de Monte Dei. page 1029. D.
Let justice sit and judge, let the conscience stand impleaded and accusing it
self. No man loves thee more, nor no man will judge thee better. In the
morning exact an account of the night past, and impose upon thy self
watchfulness for the day to come. In the evening require a reckoning of the
day past, and lay an iniunction for the night coming. And in like manner
speak other spiritual Masters, who undertake to prescribe rules of a
religious life: whereby it may be seen, how they do generally agree upon it,
as a received Principle, that every night men should take accounts and examine
themselves for the day past: but in the two last authorities we may further
note, that besides the accounting at night for the day past, they require also
a reckoning each morning for the former night. And surely that is not to no
purpose: for even in the night reserved for rest, there do many times pass
thoughts, affections, purposes, yea and some actions also, which as they do
well deserve censure, so may easily be forgotten, if they be deferred till
multitude of businesses the day following have bred a confusion in the memory.

4. It is a very fit time for this work, when we have been about some
important business, in which there may be occasion either of doing good, or
of offending in some special manner. Thus Job, Job. 1.4, 5.
when his sons had been feasting, because great cheer and much merriment
are most times occasions of some sin; therefore at their return home, he
called them together, and sanctified them, and offered burnt offerings
according to the number of them all. For Job said, It may be my sons have
sinned, and cursed God in their heart. Thus did Job continually. And thus
Christians should do, when they return from making purchases, or striking of
bargains, or following of Law-suites, or feasting with their friends, or
debating of controversies, or any other the like works and employments of
moment, they should call together their thoughts, and examine their hearts
concerning all the former passages, and sanctify their souls by lamenting
their sin, and purposing a better life.

5. It is a fit time also to examine our consciences, when we have some
special occasion to prepare our selves for God, or to entreat his favor in
some special sort. Thus the Church of Israel, when thy were in distress, and
sighed to God for relief, Lam. 3.40.
they encourage each other, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
to the Lord. And S. Paul, when the Lords Supper was to be administered, because
it was a matter of great weight, and might breed much harm to the unworthy
Receiver, therefore prescribes this rule of preparation to all that mind to
partake of that Sacrament; 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself: and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup. And so in like manner, if we be in any distress or danger by reason
of our sins, that is a fit time to examine our selves, that by serious
repentance we may go to beg pardon. And if we be to receive the blessed
Supper of our Lord, then we should examine also; lest being unprepared for so
holy a work, we prove unworthy partakers of Christ's body. And if we keep a
fasting day, for the humiliation of our souls, that is a fit time; that by
taking a view of our sins, we may be the more dejected with sorrow. And if
we keep a Sabbath day, or some great day of festiuity unto the Lord, that also
is a fit time; that our souls having by examination been purged from our
sins, we may be prepared to hear and pray and praise God with attention
and zeal. But especially if we be cast upon our sick beds, in danger of
death, and in expectation of our dissolution, then is a most urgent time to
take accounts of our souls, that our reckonings may be made even before we be
called to account at Gods Tribunal seat. For as the tree falls, so it lies:
and if we dye unprepared, we shall be unable to answer him who is the Judge of
quick and dead. In these therefore, and all other cases of like moment and
consequence, there is great cause to use this work.

Lastly, besides those daily and casual times, it is a convenient time also,
after some good space passed in this manner, to examine our selves over again;
as for example, after a month or after a year to consider our selves for the
month or year last passed, that thereby we may see, how we have profited, or
how we have decayed for that space of time. For Sicut non sentimus quo modo
crescunt membra, proficit corpus, mutatur species, nigredo capillorum albescit
in canis; Haec quippe omnia, nobis nescie^tibus, aguntur in nobis: ita men's
nostra per momenta viuendi ipso curara^ vsu a semetipsa permutatur. etc. Greg.
Moral. lib. 25. cap. 6.
as our members grow, and our shape every day changes, and our black hairs
turn gray, while we perceive it not, nor can tell when and how these changes
come; yet after some space of time we may casily discern, that so we are
changed: so it is in the state of our souls; besides the manifest changes of
it, which do appear while they are in doing, there are certain insensible
alterations, which are not to be discerned, but after some continuance of time.
And for the rectifying of these, it is necessary to take a more general view
of our souls, then in every days examination we can do; that we may see
wherein we are better or worse, or how our zeal is increased or decayed, over
that which it was a month, or half a year, or a year, or longer time
before. For by this means we shall not only see our grosser and more apparent
faults, but even our decay of feruor and religion, which creeps upon us
unawares, and so learn to blow the coals of zeal, and to stir up the grace
of God that is in us, that we may Apoc. 3.2.
strengthen the things which remain, and are ready to dye. For which purpose
the Ancients have been accustomed to use the time of Lent, as I have showed in
an Treatise of Fasting, chap. 10. page 129, and 131.
other place more fully.

CHAP. VI. Of the benefits of this work, or what good use it may serve a
Christian for.
Having hitherto in some measure declared the nature of Examination, with the
adjuncts appertaining thereto, I come now in the last place to consider the
benefits that we may reap by it: the consideration whereof may animate us to
abound in this work of the Lord, when we shall know that our labor is not in
vain in the Lord. And for that purpose I have gathered and observed these uses
following.

I. Examination is a good means for Repentance. 1. Reason.
It will be a good means to fit and lead us to repentance and amendment: and
that in two respects.

1. Because it will serve to discover unto us our sins, and make us see our
wretched and miserable condition. For we (such is our frailety and corruption)
do daily, yea hourly commit many sins, which through heedlessenes or
unskillfulness, or strength of passion, or because we are intent upon some other
business which then takes up all our thoughts; we observe not, or discern
not for the present. But businesses ended, and the occasions and tentations
passed, when we are more free both from distraction and passion; if then we
take a time to bethink our selves, and to recall all that is past; then our
thoughts will be our own, and we shall in cold blood be able to see many
things, which before went unespied. Then, for example, we shall be able to
tell our own souls, Such a time I met with a bon-companion, and ouer-shot my
self with excess of drink; and such a time I met with a wanton Minion, who
inueigled me with her looks, and I was ensnared with her love; and such a
time I met with a crosse-neighbour, and my heart did rise against him at the
very sight of him; and at such a time I met with some merry mates, and in our
idle chatt I disgraced my neighbor behind his back; and such a time, when I
was in praying to my God, my heart was wandering about the vanities of the
world, or my self fell asleep while God was admonishing me of things
belonging to my soul: and many times in one day I have sinned against God by
unjust dealing with my neighbor. One I deceived by a lie, and another by
unsound commodities, and a third by counterfeit and base money, and a fourth by
fair promises and protestations which I never meant to perform. And an
hundred other such sins as these, we might discover in our selves within a
short time, if we did take accounts of our selves at convenient times. And if
our sins were once in this sort set before our face, they would make us
tremble for fear, and blush for shame, and give no rest to our heads, nor
slumber to our eyes, till by sorrow and repentance, we had made our peace with
our God.

2. Examination rightly performed, repentance, because it will show us with
what patience and long-suffering God has borne with us, and in what desperate
case our souls stood, but that God in mercy spared us beyond our deserving.
For it will appear, that he might have stricken us dead many a time, while we
were provoking him by our sins. For example, while we were drunk, and could
not speak a ready word; or while we were satisfying our unclean lusts in the
Harlots bed; or while we were abusing Gods name by profane oaths and
execrations; or while we were taking a bribe to pervert Justice; or while we
were telling a lie to undermine our neighbors; then and at such an instant God
might have cut us off, and have drawn us to the Judgment with a harlot in our
arms, or a blasphemous oath in our mouths, or a bribe of oppression in our
hands, or a murderous and malicious thought in our hearts: and if then God had
taken us away, as he took away 1 King. 16.9
Elah in his drunkenness, and Dan. 5.2, 3, etc. with ver. 30.
Belshazzar in his profaneness, and Act. 12.21, 22, 23.
Herod in his haughtiness, and Number. 25.6, 7, 8.
Zimri and Cosbi in their uncleanness. etc. Lord, what might have become of
my poor soul? Or, what could I have expected, but to have dyed in sin
without repentance, and to have lived ever after in torment without hope? But
he has spared me, and it is his mercy, thus by his patience to bring me to
repentance, that I might be saved. Now what Christian heart would not tremble
to think what great danger he has escaped; and would not melt into tears to
remember what great merey he has received? And what soul would not be moved
hereby to hasten his repentance, either that he might prevent all such danger
hereafter to himself, or that he might show a thankful heart to God, that
has spared him in such manner?

And in this sort will Examination lead us to repentance and amendment, if we
use it diligently and in due order. And that is the first use for which this
work does serve.

II. Secondly, Examination a means to prevent sin. 1. Reason.
it will be a good means to prevent future sins; and that in two respects
also.

1. once we see how we were misled, and what it was that deceived or overcame
us; we shall hereby learn how to discover the danger, and how to arm our
selves against the assault, and how to handle our weapons when occasion shall
require: and every former error will make us more wise and more wary against
the next onset. For as among men, he that finds himself to have been
deceived with fair words, will never trust that party any more; and as he
that has been coozened by counterfeit wares, will learn by that error to
judge better of the like commodities for afterward: so in the case of our
souls, a wise Christian, by every error that he has committed and
discovered, will learn more wisdom to prevent the like danger.

2. Examination will be a means to prevent sin, child that has been once
burned in the flame, will fear to come near the fire any more: and so when by
discussing our conscience, we have learned to condemn our selves, as wrete
head. caitifes unworthy of any mercy, the sma^^ of that which is past will make
us afraid to come (...) the like danger for ener after. Nor will any men be so
prone to offend, if he know that once within 24 hours he most come to
correction, and be censured by the just sentence of his own conscience. So St.
Chrysostem, Anima hesternum verita ^udicium, ne candem rursus subeat
sententiam, et torqueatur et flagelletur, reddetur ad peccatum tardior.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 4. page 27. C.
The soul, (says he) being afraid of the sentence that passed on him the day
before, will be more slow to offend, lest he do again incur the same
censure, and be lashed and beaten as before he was. And S. Ambrose, Dum dolemus
admissa, admittenda excludimus; et fit quaedam de condemnatione culpae,
disciplina innocentiae. Ambros. tom. 4. de. Poenit. lib. 2. cap. 10. page 413.
While we bewail sins past, we exclude sins to come: and the censuring of
our evil doings, is a disciplinating of us to innocence of life. And Seneca,
bending himself against the vice of immoderate anger, for the moderating or
rather abolishing of it, thinks this work of Examination, in which we pass
censure upon our selves, will be most effectual. For, Desinet ira, et erit
moderatior, quae seiet sibi qu^tidie ad Iudicem esse veniondum. Seneca de Ira,
lib. 3. cap. 36. p. 599.
Anger (says he) will cease, and become more cool, when it knows it must
come every day before a Judge that will not spare it. But surely, no man will
either shame himself every day before God and his own conscience, nor judge
and condemn himself for his misdoings, unless he both mean to amend them,
and find some sweetness and comfort in the practice of this ungrateful
work: in regard whereof, I may truly say, (and that shall be the clause of
this point,) Either examining will make a man leave his sinning, or sinning
will make him leave off examining.

III. Thirdly, Examination makes us indifferent Judges between others and our
selves.
the due performance of this work, will make us more indifferent and more
equal in judging of our neighbors and brethren: For if a man do not sift his
soul, and distouer his own corruption; self love and pride, br^^ in man's
nature ever since Adams fall, will make him to ouer-weene himself, and
undervalue others. And this is the chief reason why men are so favorable in
their own causes, and so peremptory in other men's. But if men by sifting their
souls, have discovered their sins, the sense of their own wants, will make
them more pitiful toward others: as St. Paul implies, when he exhorts
men to meekenes toward other men from this consideration, because Tit. 3.2, 3.
themselves were sometimes unwise, disobedient, etc. And from this, Gal. 6.1.
Lest themselves also be tempted. And where St. Paul says of himself, 1 Timothy
1.15.
that he was chief of sinners, S. Bernard notes, Neque buc dicebat Paulus
me^tiendi praecipitatia^e, sed aestimandi affectione. Qui enim persecte
exammando seipsu^ intelligit, suo peccato nullius peccatum par esse existima^,
quod non sicut suum intelligit. Bern. de vita solitar. ad fratres de Monte Dei.
page 1020. I.
that he spoke this not falsely, out of rashness and temerity, but feelingly,
and out of the sense and esteem that he had of his sins. For he that by
examining himself, does thoroughly understand himself, thinks no man's sin
to be equal to his own, which he knows not so well as his own. And
therefore, if men would carefully perform this work in examining themselves,
they would not rashly condemn others without cause.

IIII. Examination comfort against despair.
This daily reckoning with our selves, will be a means to strengthen us
against despair, and to comfort us in a time of tentation and fear. For if
the Devil shall present our sins before our face, and aggrauate them, that
he may drive us to despair; then our former practice of this duty will be a
help to support us two ways.

1. Because by often reckoning with our souls, we have gotten the true
knowledge of our states; we have found out our sins, both which they be, and of
what quality they are: and therefore we shall not so easily be deceived by
Satan, if he press them beyond their pitch, and aggrauate them beyond their
condition, as in times of distress he usually does.

2. Because by this daily reckoning and iudgeing of our selves, we have made
all even between God and our souls. For having confessed our sins, and
censured our selves, and fled to God for forgiveness, we have his promise of
remission and pardon. And then whatsoever our sins be, (as certainly they
are both the fewer and the lesser for the performance of this work, but
whatsoever they be) we know they cannot hurt us, because God has forgiven
them. And these things will be unto us matter of great comfort in a time of
conflict and distress; at which time a little peace of conscience will be
worth all the world. For whereas men that have lived securely, without casting
up of their accounts, are in times of tentation overwhelmed with horror, being
neither able to give comfort to themselves, nor to receive it from others: he
that has used a daily reckoning with his soul, will be moved at the sight of
his sins, rather to bless God for his mercy, because he has pardoned them,
than to despair of his mercy, for fear that he will not pardon them.

V. Fifthly and lastly, Examination is a means to prevent Gods Judgment.
our judging of our selves in this sort, will be a means to prevent Gods
heavier Judgment afterward. For God will have our sins to be discovered one
way or other, and will have us to be convicted and judged for them: and if our
selves do Prou. 28.13. Psalm. 32.5. 1 Cor. 11.31. 1 Ioh. 1.9.
bolte them out, and produce them, he will cover them; and if we accuse and
condemn our selves, he will absolve and acquit us; and if we punish our
offenses, he will forgive them. Whereupon St. Chrysostom concludes, that
Lectum atque quietem petiturus, hoc iudiciu^ ineas: idoneum enim ad hanc re^
hoc te^pus est, etc. Id si quotidie diligenter facies, terribili futuri Iuditis
Tribunali laetus assistes. Chysost. Hom. 43. in Matthew. page 398. B.
if a man do diligently every day perfor me this work of examination, he may
stand with comfort before the dreadful Bar of the great Judge. But if we
neglect this duty, or slubber it over without care, he will take it into his
own hands, and will perform it to the purpose: he Zeph. 1.12.
will search Jerusalem with candles; and he Psalm. 50.21.
will reprove the ungodly, and set his sins in order before his eyes: and he
will Eccles. 12. vlt.
bring every work into Judgment, whether it be good or evil: and nothing
shall go for naught, that has been done against his Law. For, [ aut homine
puniente, aut Deo iudicante plectentur;] they must be punished either by our
own censure, or by the sentence of God, who is the great Judge of all the
world. And in this sort, our reckoning with our selves will prevent Gods
judging of us at the last day.

These and such like be the benefits which we may reap by this exercise.

Out of the consideration of all which, I think I may justly apply to this
work of Examination, that which Moses spoke of Gods Word delivered to the
Israelites; Deuteronomy. 32.47.
It is no vain thing concerning us; because it is our life, and through this
thing we may prolong our days, in a blessed and happy state for evermore. And
this bare consideration is argument enough, both to commend the necessity of
the work, and to command our diligence and care for the practice of it. But
yet to set a little more edge upon our affections, we may hence deduce three
considerations, applicable to our practice and state of life.

1. We may hereeby see what the cause is, why most of us, notwithstanding our
hearing and reading and praying and communicating, yet do rather decay than
thrive in grace. For though I will not deny, but this defect may be ascribed to
some other causes also; yet seeing Examination is so useful for repentance,
and so powerful for amendment and reformation, the neglect of this must needs
breed a great defect of grace: even as the absence of the sun, which is the
fountain of heat, makes way for frost and snow in the world. Nor is it any
marvel that negligence in accounting produces such decay in our souls; for
even the like negligence in taking of accounts in our Trades, does breed an
evident decay in our worldly estates. For if we should pass days and weeks
and months, without accounting our receipts and expenses, every cunning
Chapman abroad would ouer-reach us, and every false servant at home might rob
us, while we thought on no harm, nor perceived how or wherein we were
wronged. Now there is no chapman so crafty to deceive, as the Devil is; nor
any servant so false to his master, as our own hearts are to us: and therefore
if we pass days and weeks and months, yea and years too, without
examining our consciences, and calling our hearts to account, as most of us
do; it is no marvel if we decay in goodness every day, till at length we
prove Banckrupts: nay rather it were a wonder if we should long subsist,
without being utterly undone. Cease then to marvel that there is so little
conscience in the world, so long as we know that there is no more examining of
the conscience among men.

2. We may observe here a reason, why God does many times lay crosses upon us;
and though we pray and fast and call for mercy, yet find not that ease nor
that deliverance which we expect. For if Examination be so effectual for
removing of GODS Judgments, as has been shown; then certainly if Gods
anger do continue upon us, and his hand be stretched out still; it is an
evident sign, that we have not judged our selves, nor erected a Tribunal for
the conscience within us, as in duty and in wisdom we should have done. Thus
the Prophet threateneth the Jews with Judgments, because no man repented him
of his wickedness, Ierem. 8.6.
saying What have I done? implying, that as pardon cannot be expected without
repentance, so repentance cannot be hoped for without examination and
questioning with our souls. And therefore we need not marvel that Gods
Judgments are continued upon us, seeing we never take care to pass judgment
upon our selves.

3. We may hereby see, how it comes to pass that many men have gross and
conspicuous faults, which themselves discern not, though every child abroad
can point at them and display them. For if Examination be so good a means to
represent our sins, as in a glass, unto us; then they which see not their
open sins, are not accustomed to make use of this means. And therefore, as
when we see a man come abroad with some notable deformity about his face, we
may conelude that that man has not lately looked himself in his glass: so if
we see a man blind in judging of his own sins, which are to others as
conspicuous as the spots in a man's face, we may build upon it, that man does
not use to look himself in the glass of his conscience, and by Examination
to take a view what his deformities are.

4. We may hence gather matter of encouragement, to break through all
difficulties, and to shake off our wonted drowsinesse, that we may with
alacrity and perseverance go through with this work. For if Examination be so
necessary for repentance and reformation: and so effectual to breed us
comfort in our greatest agony, and to avert Gods Judgments for our sins:
then every wise man will conclude, that this is a work as necessary as his
daily food. For say that a man cared not for grace and amendment, (which were
a most desperate and graceless resolution, yet say a man cared not for these:)
is there any man living, that would not be glad of some comfort when he lies
a dying, or would not labor to be freed from the plagues that God powers upon
unrepentant sinners? Let us then but serilously mind these gracious effects of
a strict accounting with our souls, and I hope we shall not prove so
graceless, as to refuse our own mercy, and wilfully to cast away those
precious souls, which Christ has purchased at so dear a rate. I beseech then
every Christian, that either desires heaven, or fears hell, that if he have
been negligent in this duty heretofore, he now at length begin a due and
serious performance of it; and even double his future care, that he may redeem
his former negligence: remembering withal, if still he go on notwithstanding
all admonitions, that Sextius and Seneca and Plato and Pythagoras, heathen men,
that were wont to examine themselves every day, will rise up in judgment
against slothful Christians, that pass on day by day, without ever taking
account of their doings. Yea we may consider further, that even our selves
shall rise up against our selves at the last Judgment; and by our care for our
states in the world, condemn our carelessenes for the states of our souls.
For if we know it to be so needful for our worldly states, to keep an account
of our expenses and receipts; what excuse can we have for our selves, that we
have for many days and weeks, never taken any account of our lives and
consciences? Methinketh, every such thought should pierce the heart of any
Christian: and therefore have I touched them, that we may be at last inwardly
touched with a feeling of our own want; and desire of God that he will open
our eyes, that we may see what is behoofefull for us; and inflame our hearts,
that we may follow after it.

FINIS.

