The dysclosyng of the Canon of y^ popysh Mass, with a sermon annexed unto it
of ye famous Clerk of worthy memory. D Marten Luther.

Apocal, xviii. Come away from her my people that ye be not partakers in her
sins, yt ye receive not of her plages

All honor, praise, and glory, be given only to god



To the Reader
From the begi^nyg Genes. i,
or at ye first entrance after the ceeacio^ good chryste^ reader God in hi^
self Johan, ii,
for seeing the way wardenes of man's heart, and how prone and ready it was,
unto wyckednes, and how, ablyuyous of the benefytes that he received of his
lord Gods han* de Esal, i,
became not thankful unto his mighty God, But vanys, Roman, ii,
shed in the Imagynacyons of Jeremy, iii*
his froward stomach, and worshipped the workman ship of the hands of a
caranous carcas subdued to all vanyte and forgot his creator, the which Exodus,
xxiii,
vngentelnes has been of all other vices, most earnestlye reprehended by
the, mouth of God even from the beginni^ge, and not only reprehended but
also with sharp threats and co^mynacyons, of his most sacred word
appointed to eternal Roman, i.
dampnacion Besides that he gave them up to their hearts Deut^^^^ ^^ ^iii
lust and plaged them with swearde, famyne and pestilence Therefore good
christen reder, lift up thine eyes and behold ^^. Johan, ii,
the abhomynacion of Idolatri ^ Thessalonians ii,
so shamefullye used in these days of our time and not only used but with
force and main Psalm, ii
fortefyed and vpholden with fire and faggot crudelytye and strength, and that
sosore vpholden Math. xv,
that the eternal word of God is clearly banysshed exiled and put too bed
How sayste you to this detestable and among al other the most shameful mase
S^pie^, xii^^
and gasyng stock the wyckede mass the vpsprynge of Satan the inuencyon of
the devil the fair fruit of the Romish rauenyng, D^^^el. ix.
Antechryste and the lader house of al his shaven posterity Hier^my, xv
Behold it and abhorte it or else take it for a warnyng. God will abhorte the
and cast the in to y^ lak that burns with fire and brimstone wherefore I heart
Apocal. xx.
lie beseech the; with all brotherly affection, mark in this little phyli. i^,
volume or few lines the tail of the Dragon, of Gog and magog. the wasters of
y^ ^ore flock Ezechiel xx^. viii
of Christ the maynteyners of myschefe the studyers of super sticyon the
fortefyers of of the malignaunt Church the Psalm, xxvi
gylders of the tryple, Crown / and thou shalt plainly parceiue Coloss. ii
in an hondreth words. the shameful legerdemayne and crafty Iuggli^g that
cost them Math. xiii,
ye study not of a few hondreth years, and the sweat of many brows, for the
which both their pot and spytte, walk the merielier, unto this hour, It
Exodus, xvi
is cal^ed the Canon of the myscheff a (of the Mass I would say) that is to
say the rule and order that they have taken to fynysh their slain sacryfyce,
and too bring it to an end. But what turmoylyng, strugglynge w^astlynge quid
pro quo. with Cor, xi.
my ways is best hold thy hand fro my throat there was till they had brought
it to the mysshapen for me, that it is now in Polidorus Virgilius does Lib,
v, ca, x,
plainlye manifest. Whereunto also y^ have a sermon a^nexed, of the famous
Clerk and discloser of the Popes Iuggling box and of worthi memory D. Martin
Luther. Read it I pray ye with a sober Judgment and conferte ye Idolatries of
the old time with the obhominable Idolatry, in our time after the coming of
Christ the pure and true light and you shall se it far pass. Oh Math, vi
most mighty father for y^ tender love that thou barest to ye whole John, iii.
world in that thou delyueredest thine only and sweet son Jesus Hebr, x,
Christ that holy and sufficient Math, xxi,
sacryfice, for the life of the whole world Have mercy upon us and deliver us
from y^ snares of Satan, and from the dyuelysh yock of this detestable
Idolatrye and open the eyes of Psalm. xlv,
our. Magystrates that they may prosperously fortefye they (...), iiii,
blessed word, as they have be gonne graciously and to deface the bloudye
kyndume of Antechrist Apocal, xviii
and send the communalte obedye^t stomachs and hearts Roma, xiii
to fortefi their Princes quarrel in all godlynes and right And that all
christen reames, may accord in peace and unity and so to be incorporate in
the misty ^imoth, ii,
call body of God all might, (...), x^^
whose head is christ Jesus to whom I commyt the with the increase of his
knowledge. Amen.

Read and then Judge
The dys^losyng.
WE humblye pray and beseech the most gracyous father, yt thou accept. he^ the
^^ est kysseth Altar, an then make^ iii, crosses
. and bless these gifts these rewards the se holy untasted sacryfyces.
cheyfly which we offer unto the for thy holy catholyke church y^ thou might
vouchafe to pacifi keep set to gither and govern yt through the whole world with
thy servant our pope and name him and our bisshope named and our king named and
with all faith full men and lovers of ye catholic and apostolic faith here he
ayeth fol^ living ^th no w^ but ^h^ them the prays
Remenbre lord thy servants menn and women, he names whom he will and all
that stand here about, whose says and devotion is known to the for whom we
offer or themselves offer this sacrifice of praise for them and theyrs for
redempcyon of cheyr souls, for hope of their own health and prosperitye, and
pay their vows to the eternal living and true God, taking part, and
worshyppynge the remembrance specially, of the glorious and perpetual vyrgin
Mary, mother, of our God and lord Jesus, Christ, yea and of thy blessed
Apostles and Martyrs, also, as Peter, Paul, Andrew, James, John Thomas. James
Phylip Bartholome. Mathye Simon and Jude Line. Clete. Clement, Syxt. Cornele.
Cipran. Lautens. Grysogon. John and Pauil Cousmas and damia^ and of althy
Saints, through, whose merytes and prayers, graune, thou that we may in all
things be defended by the help of thy protection by the same Christ our
lord Amen

We beseech the therfore-O lord, to be pacyfyed, and to acceptthys oblacyon.
here he looks on the host with great deuoon
. of our bounden duty, yea and of thy household also and to dyspose our days
in thy peace and grant that we may be delivered from eternal dampnacion and
be nombred in y^ flock of thin elect, through Christ our lord* Amen

Which oblacion. here ^ must look it again
vouchsafe thou God almighty. to make thoroughly we beseech y^ blessed here he
^keth, v, tr^ses
. the appointed ratefyede and acceptable yt it may be made to us yt body and
blood of thy de resonne Jesus Christ Here stands v^ Ioy^eth ^ hands to
^ther wyn^ his ^yng^ lyfteth v^ his sacri^ and sayt^
who ye day before he suffered take bread in his holy and worshipful hands and
lifted up his eyes in to heaven. he casts by his eyse
, to the God his father almyghtie, he gave thanks to y^ and blessed it brake
it and gave it to his dysciples saying take and eat of this all for this is my
body.

he makes ^b^esaunce, and even lyf^eth it up over his head
. In like manner after supper was done, he took this noble cup in his holy
and worshipful hands and gave thanks to the he makes ^eses^e,
and blessed he croseth ^^s
and gave his dyscyples saying take ye. and drink of it all he lyfteth ^^,
chalyce, ^y a lytl^
for this is the cup of my blood of the new Testament the mystery of faith
which shall be shed for you and for many for the remissyon of sins. he lyfteth
^p ye chalyce ^uer his head
As often as ever ye do this ye shall do it in the remembrance of me whereby
both we thy seruances remember Lord, and so do^ thy holy people remember the
same Christ thy son our lord God, as well his blessed passion as his
resurrection yea and also his glorious ascencion into heaven and offer to thy
noble Matessie of thy presents and gifts a pure he crosses his great, (...)
sacrefyce a holy sacrifyce and unspotted, sactifise the holy bread of.
eternal life and the Cup of euerlassyng salvation. Over which vouchsafe
thou toloke with a mexcyfull and clear countenance. and accept it, even as
thou dydest vouchsafe too accept^ the presents of thy servant just Abell,
and the sacrefyce of our high father Abraham and that which thy high preess
Melchisededh of: fred a holy sacrifice, an unspotted host. We humblye desire
ye almighti God command these things to be borne by the hands of thy holy
Angel into thy Altar above, in ye sight of thy Godly Majesty, yt as many of
us as have taken part of this Altar, and have received the holy hallowed body
and blood of thy son may be replenysshed he crosses his face,
with all heavenly blessing and grace thorugh the same Christ our lord Amen

Remebre also lord thy servants men N and women N wbich are gone before us he
prays for the dead and speaks never a word but remembers whom he list,
with these sign of faith and sleep in the sleep of peace we besethe ye lord to
pardonne them and all that rest in Christ. and give them a place of
refresshing light and rest through the same. Chryst^ our lord Amen

To us thy servants also he knocks him self o^ the breast
hopyng to the multitude of the mercies vouchsafe to give sum part and feel
ship with thy holy Apostles and Martyr^ with Johan. Stephen. Mathya^ Barnabas.
Ignacyus. Alexander Mar^elline. Peter. Felycytas. Perpetua. Agatha. Lucye.
Agnes. Cecylye, Anastalicus. and with all thy seints among whose company we
beseech y^ admyt us not estemi^g our deseruyng but by y^ grant of thy pardon
through Christ our lord. heaven i^, not spoken here
By whom O lord all these good things ^ all wayse createst sanctyfyeste
quicknest blesseste and Gyuyst ^he^ to us. he blesses the Chalyc^ with, ^^,
crosses,
By him and with ^ym and in him be to the God the father almighty in the
unity of the holy ghost al honor and glory. ii. for ever woorlde without he
speaks alowd
end. x. Amen We being warnede by wholesome precepts and infourmede by the
institucion of God dare bodily say. the clerk ^nswereth,
. Our father shhyche art he holds up, his hands.
in heaven holowed be they name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth,
as hy^ is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread And forgive us our
trespasses as we fo^gyue the^ that trespass agynst us, And let us not be led
in to temp^acyon. ^, the preeste says secretlye
x: But deliver us from evil. the clerk says
Amen. Deliver us, Lord, we beseech the, freme al euylles past present and for
to, come and by the intercessyon of the blessed and glorious perpetual virgin
Marye the mother of god and thy blssed Apostles Peter and Paul and Andrew with
all thy Saints He kisseth the pate^^ the^ puts it to his right eye then he
cro^seth his cron and lays it down again
be me^^ifull and give peace in our days that we being helped by the help of
thy mercy may be alwaes both fre from syne and safe from He breketh the H^ste
in to, in, parts first in, ^^, saying Amen
al trouble and by the same our lord Jesus christ thy son Here he makes it
in iii, pieces
which with the lives and reingneth in the unity of the holy ghooste He
speaks allowde,
for ever and ever The clerk says
Ame^ The peace of He crosses the chalice, iii, times with on pec^ of the Host
the lord be ever with you O lamb of god which take a way the sin of the
world have mercy on us O la^be of god which take away ye sin of the world
have mercy on us. O lamb of God which take away the sin of he world gave
us peace ^, he crosses thee chali^^ with one pec^ of y^ host ^^ ^^en butteth
it into ye chaly^^


This holy menglyng to gether of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
be to me and to all that receive it, salvation of mind and body and a health
full preparacyon to deserve* and receive everlasting life, trough ye same
Christ our lord Amen

O holy lord father almighty eternal, God, grant me to receive this holy body
and blood of thy soon our Lord Jesus* Christ so worthily that. I may deserve
by hit to receue remyssyon of all my sins and to be replenished with thy holy
spirit and to have thy peace for y^ act god alone and there is none other but
y^ whose kingdom and impe^^ laste^ glorious, with out end forever and ever Ame^.
he M^^^th the pa^^
Peace be to y^ and to ye Church of God, The cler^ says
and to thy spyryte

O God the father fountayn and beginning of al gooons which by mercy werest
led, and would that thine only begotten Son, should comme down too,
the loweste parts of the woorlde and take flesh which I unworthy hold here
in my hands ^e ^^^^eth down to the Host
I worshipe the I gloryfy y^, yea wtall thinte^t of my heart I praise the and
beseech the that thou forsake not us thy servants but forgyuethe our sins,
so that we May be able too, serve the, the only living and true GOD,
with apure heart and a chas^e boddye Thorouhe the same Jesus Christ our lord,
Amen Let the obseruaunce of my service After this colet he makes a cross on
the Altar, kysseth it and puttethe of his upper vestu^^
please the O holy trynyty and grant that this sacryfyce which I unworthy have
offered to the eyes of thy^ Maiste may be acceptable to the and propycyatorye
to me and to al them yt I have offered it for through the mercy which live and
reignest god world with out end amen


A sermon made by the famous Clerk of worthy memory, Doctor Marte^ Luther of
the great blasphemy against God which the Papystes daily do use reading this
Antechristian canon in their Mass
BEfore we take on ^o view or suruei y^ horible abhominacion, Danil. i^,
of ye most fyl^ thy I dolatti against i, Ihon, ii,
God, of the most cursed Canon which the sluggishe papystes call the mass in
which they with cruel mouth daily beslauer the high Majesty of God. we
think it best, that we lay the fundacyon of the truth and in few words to
comprehe^d what the entrance, and state of our faith is and of the Gospel
also That is it conde^pneth^ us and promysyth salvation by none other thing but
by Christ no though all the works in the world were got into one heap for he
is out salvation which ^^c. ^.
also gave him self for ye sins of the world and so reconsylyd us to his
father whom is well Math ^^^.
pleased in this Christ alone, and forgeueth y^ sins of the^ yt are grafted
in y^ body of Christ and y^ by faith alone to such only I say the father
i^puteth no sin for Christ's sake. Now he that will obtain forgiveness of
si^nes committed by any other mean as by hoo^es, shaven crowns pylgrymages,
bulls praers, John. ^
fastings, foundacyons etc. he is a thief and a robber yea he puts Christ
to epproby and shame as though he wear an unmeet and vnsufficie^t redemer and
of none effect. and was in vain. hanged on y^ cross, and slain with so
shameful punyshme^t, But yet whatsoever he be, ye trusts to his own worckes
be it never so little he tredeth the precious blood of our redemer Jesus Christ
under foot, and openly denies God as though Christ were nothing in favor with
the father It must be known therefore ye no sacryfyce is now acceptable in y^
sight of the father but Christ only which offered him self to him for us ones
for all and ever, and by that deed, he swalowed up the sins of the holy
world and made us safe from death hell and y^ deuell so that after that there
neded no sacryfyce at all to be offered too him. For like as he was sense that
time no more bond to death so like wise is it impossyble for him to be offered
annye more For not^ing can be made a sacryfyce except it be slain. The^ when
the miserable papystes make them selves ready to offer Christ they begin
too strangle Christ and hang him again as far as in them ly, eth How foul
an abhomina,+cyon it is we shall show by their Canon. True it is in deed that y^
Appostles and Prophets exhort us too offer sacryfyce too God but not to offer
christ but ye mortifing of thold Ada^ i, Petri, ^
and commit our selves wholly to god This is y^ sacrifice which Ose. iiii
god requires of us and also yt we praise and confess hi^ without fear Seeing
the^ it is thus it must needs follow yt what sacryfyce soever be found out
other then this, it is false and blasphemous We shall therefore try out their
canon which will make you to be amassed at y^ abhominacions that light hidden in
it wi^h, yet they make to be of more, value then the Gospel. Thus begins
the canon.

The beginning of the canon,
We humbly pray and be seche the most gracious father that thou accept ad
bless these gifts these rewards these holy untasted sacryfices

See ye what blasphemy here is even in the beginning of it Here stands a
wretched brayn lease man at an Altar, and (like a fool) prays y^ he may
make an acceptable a holy and untouched sacryfyce, where he has nothing but a
morsel of bread and a syp of wine. Try yt well for gods sake how these words
stynke of a lie even at the first If it be holy) mark well the words (with
whatte mouth, then prays he, that he may now obtain to make yt holy?
Dare thou, O manne sinful and worms meat stand fourth in the sight of Gods
Maies,+tie, and before him play the fool thus with a piece of bread / a little
wine it follows again

The canon
Chefely which we offer unto y^ for thy holy. Catholyk church that thou
myghtest / vouchsaf^ to pacefye, keep, settogyther and govern it, through the
whol^ word, with thy servant our Pope. N and our Bishop. N, and our King N
and so fourth

Oh thou varlette worse then naught: Dareste / thou take upon the, yea with
what face dareste thou so much as ones think to offer that Little mor sell of
bread, and a Cup wy:+th al little wine for y^ catholyke Church Oh good god
how thou art defied here. It were no Wonder to see a man's heart ryue a
sonder too see the Deuell Alas the time how he reigns in the world. In this
place trewlye christ is utterly denied when one shall say here is ready
bread and win, and with this we shall help all the whole world as he might
say Thush father thou art a fool and thy son also we papystes shall now
make a laufull sacrifyce which thou can not be against And as for thy sone,
he may goo play him as one of noe force nor effect Alas it would make a man
too weep that ye blood should braste out at his eyes

I thyncke verelye that the very ry Deuell him self made this Canone. For how
could, there else be made any greter thing to dishonor God. again, this
goodlye why pster b^ingeth people with him to make an oblacyon too God. yea and
his bread being yet unblessed prays for theme

He says also that they be faith full how then be they in danger? If Christ
have redeemed them, what nedest thou then now to pray for their redempcyon /
Now after this he be, gynneth to call upon a great company of. Saynctes.
bearing hyme self in hand, that his morsel of bread is as much too be
estemede, as the precious blood of christ where yet he speaks nothing at all
of the Church, living on earth, specially seeing there is not so much as one
little of the scryptur yt has showed us any thing of the Saints departed this
life Now it follows.

which oblacion vouchsafe thou O God, father almyghtye. we be seche the to make
blessed, appointed ratefyed reasonable and acceptable, that it may be made to us
the body* and blood of thy derely beloved soon our lord Jesus Christ.

Here at y^ fourth time the foles head makes ablacyon and uses such word as
can not do hit Consider ye here the contrary^ Christ prays for me to the
father, that. I wretched sinner. may be acceptable to him And this, shameless
butcher, labors now to reconsyle the ^onne to the father which loves him
most specially and above all. Alas (I say) is not this I pray you extreme
abhomynacyon, blasphemy and denying of God yes truly is it. even as though the
blood of Christ were unclean also, and must now be purified by them and
committed to the father. Alas this is to much mockage I can in no wise suffer
yt any longer the hour is come that touchethe my conscience Let all men
therefore apply them herto that this abhomynacion may be taken away^ Now, here
follow the words of all things most noble and excellent, which also they
have all bespotted with their own fylthynes. See ye, here, how these
tryflers have driven in this word / FOR, and left out the pryncypall part,
that is, WHICH IS, GEVEN FOR YOU. Again, they need not the body of Christ ye
was delivered ones tor all when they make their sacryfyce. They patch to yet
also, of their own, the mysterye of faith. where it is nothing less then
the mysterye of faith that they go about, Now, when they have blessed the
bread and the wine. etc. yet they offer Christ up again and say

The canon
we offer unto thy Majesty of thy presents and gyfts a pure sacryfyce a holy
sacryfice, and vnsported sacryfice the holy bread of eternal life and y^ Cup
of everlasting salvation On which vouchafe thou to look with a merciful
countenance and accept it as thou did vouch safe to accept the presets of
thy servant just Abell ye sacryfyce of our high father Abraham and that which
thy high Pressed melchisedech offered a holy sacrifice an unspotted hofte


What abhominacion is this, is not this to tred the blood of Christ under fete
when we will desire God to have this as acceptable as Abels sacryfice was is
the blood of Christ of no more value than to be compared with Abels oblation
what offered Abels then a young lamb if Abel by the oblacion was made ryghtuous,
then Christ dyed not for him at all. And after this manner, shall a vile and
natural sheep, be of more estimacyon, price and worthyenes then the most
precious blood, of our only redemer Christ. O good Lord what a horrible
blasphemy is this what Chrystyen heart is. able to abyd these things so
miserable and all to gyther full of deceyte and dampnatyon. Now I appeal you
lords and Rulers I beseech you at the last yet turn hither your eyes. The
fathers of the old Testament. wear as well saved by the passion of Christ, as
we be as wit nesset Paul. Therefore they be false lies which these men bear in
their Checkes. For in the other place here before they say it is a pure
oblation and unspotted and here now they pray to God to take it as acceptable
as he did Abels sacryfyce. even as thought Christ were iuferyour to Abell,
where as he ought to believe that, Christ re consiled to the father, both Abel
and all Gods elect.

With what face then O fylthy wormsacke wilt you purify Christ to the father, I
think that if God should rain down abundance of fire, all should be to
little too punysh and purge this abominable blasphe^y of these wredched
Papystes, by whom Christ is crucified in these days. M. sodry and diverse
ways and is put to death again Oh this most detestable Idolatry of thease
wicked Popysh masses, ca^ne be purged by no kind of purgacyon. but by ye
eternal fire of Hell. Oh let him sape yt may. For sense the world was first
cerated were there never greater blasshemies among all Heathen, then is in this
Canon, For both i^ breadth and length they exced Hieroboa^s Calnes, which
though the king had the^ i^ honor yet put they away all other Idolatrye, But
the Calves, represented an outewarde show of Godly service, as do in our
days Idolaters and the cursed proapystes. It follows

The cannon.
O almighty God command these things to be borne up by the hands of thy
Angel unto thy Altar above in the sight of thy holy mayesty.

Se here for Gods sake how the Ass plays the fool here. Now he goes
about to offer Christ to the father by an Angel which is utterly against
the word of God, as yt Psamograph says. For the ^ather has made, him many
hondreth years a gone, to sit at his right hand. But this braynles fellow. I
magyneth that God has soche an Altar in heaven, as he says mass upon and so
breketh upon Chris^es office, which is the only true Priest yea, he bears
him self so importunely, and goes about too offer Christ, as though he had
not offered him self al ready. If the heathen should thus of rashness. Use their
sacryfyce too Hilarious, or Anchus ye abhominatione of it would seem
abhomynable enough, too be punyshed with the everlasting fire. Out upon this
blyndenes out upon it, And now he goes down to them that be dead and like a
hare brain enters to the Judgment of God and takes charge over the dead
which thing the holy ghost has forbidden by the holy scripture, and would
that we should inquite nothing of them And yet here the Ass is more frantike
then ever he was Here he says that they rest with God. and yet he desires
God, to give them part of the seat of rest and peace. It follows.

The canon.
And give also to us thy servants some part and fellowshype with thy holy
Apostes and Matris

Now behold how he is here rauyeshed with blind devotion, and knocks his
Popish heart and calls upon a great nombre of Saints, and in the mean wyle
he turns both god and Christ to pasture in the feld of forgetfulness / and
has no need at al of Christ neither yet believes that Christ has already
purchased heaven for him. And in this he vetterlye deneith despises and
forsakes Christ / as though he had not given heaven freely And because those
dulheaded and madbrayned papystes be nothing mouede at this therefore they
often times lay furthe the works, merits and desetes of Saints, as though
they were of more value then the precious death of our only Sauyoure Jesus
Christ. And here may ye se and behold the madness of these Masmongers. The
Grayfrers gave a great some of money, to the pisshop of Rome y^ they might put
in their Idol saint Fraunces among these that be here nombred, O the
ambycious couettyng of honor desirous to many. For here should sooner Deuelles
be regrested, then any Saints, Furthermore, when the bread is consecrated /
then eats he up all him self alone and gives no man part of yt. but puts
a piece of it into the Chalyce as hought the blood of Christ must then be
puryfyed by yt piece or else the blood must puryfy the bread / by minglyng
them to gether, All this is but tryfflynge, and has nogrund of the scripture.
It follows in the Canon

The canon.
Lord have no regard to my sins but to the faith of the congregation,

Of this the blind mass moungers took their blodenes to insure them selves,
and wallow at thaulter as do the swyne at the trough* and goo about to desire
a private faith to them selves in their hearts, and at ye last thus he
concludes.

The Canon
Let the obseruaunce of my service please the. O holy trynyte and grant that
this sacrifyce etc.

Se I pray you how mad this sacryfyce monger is become He goes on still to
comme^d Christ to the father. Now I besyche you al and charge you in gods
behalf to try this abbominacio^, and look naroulye on ii, and sprede it
abroad, if it be possible through all the woorld, that the shame of that
fylthy whore of Babylon, may be all uncovered. And pray ye to God, that he
vouchsafe too set his almighty word at liberty, which / Alas the while / is
wholly and all together hydden and kept back from us and has also been
hyddred from our forefathers, these mannye hondreth years and al by ye most
detestable abhominacyo^ of these sacryfyce mongers and christ murtheres which
thus cruelly murder and crucify Christ. Furthermore I say, that al houses of
Stews which God has most earnestly forbydde with robberoes, murders thefts.
etc. are not so hurtful. as is this abhominacyon of Popysh masses. To
conclude, I beseech al Princes, Rulers, Officers and Judges, depely to try with
themselves, and examine this horrible blasphemy against God. and if God suffer
you to punyshe any sediciouse rybauld. that openly takes a way the honor of
the Maygestye of God why should ye not as well, and much sooner root out and
purge this so abhomynable and Antichrystian blasphemye against God from among
you. Lest the horrible wrath of GOD. as of a fitye kyl shuldo be provoked
against your negligence. and be aduenged as well upon you as upon these
Idolatrious Prestes love your god and set you forth his glory for to ye
purpose ye bear the sword, and have authority If ye this do, he shall be
your Prince and Captain and shall defend you thought al ye deuels in hell were
against you yea he shall be your mighty Champio^ against death it self. And
shall deliver you from the Pharao, and shall at last bring you in to y^ eternal
conntrey which has promised you The grace of God ever strengthen you in faith
Amen.


Imprynted have at al Papists By me Hans hitprycke.


