A True Relation of the famous and renowned Victory lately achieved by the
Count Maurice of Nassau, near to Newport in Flaunders against the Archduke
ALBERTVS: with the names of such noblemen and others of account, as have bin
either slain or taken Prisoners in this service late-done and y performed*

Truly translated out of the Duch copy.



LONDON, Printed by Ralph Blower, for C. B.

A TRVE RELATION of the late proceadings of the States Army in Flaunders, and
of the late service done and performed by them against the Spanniardes, the two
and twentieth of June last past. 1600.
THe Tweluth of June last past, (after the computation of England) the States
of the low Cuntries landed in Flaunders, near to a place called Burfleete,
and in Nine days march, they came from thence to Ostende: where after the
taking of certain Sconces, the Count Maurice laid siege, to the Town of
Newport, purposing to fortify him self in such sort, as not to be easily
removed: howbeit* such was the great care and diligence of the Enemy to
prevent them, as the Archduke came himself in person to give them Battle.
But the sudden and speadie coming of the Enemy caused the States Army (not
being well settled in the siege) to remove thence, and to encounter the Enemy,
who then marched toward them with great fury, they being the rather
encouraged thereto, by reason of an euerthrow given to two Thowsande Scots
(being the States men of war) the same morning, which Scotts were under the
Conducte or leading of the Count ERNESTVS, who was sent before to prevent the
passage of the Enemy by the way.

After this, both the Armies being ordered and placed in Battle array, and
each of them within sight of other: they paused a while who should begin the
fight, or give the first onset: at length the Enemy impatient of delays, and
encouraged with the former victory obtained against the Scots, advaunced
themselves forwards, displaide their Ensigns, and gave the Charge: which was
entertained with such resollution on the Sates side, as they were forced to a
retreat, and were pursued till they had gained some places of advantage. Their
Horses chardging the States men in flancke, whose secondes failing them, they
were enforced to retire: But making presently a stand, they forced the Enemy
to a second Retreat, which was then so hottely followed by the States men, and
with such great courage and resollution, that they had the advantage in
slaughtering and killing of the Enemy, from the Haven of Newport, to the
walls of Ostende.

In this Battle, the Englishmen had the Van-guarde, commanded by Sir
Fraunces Vere and his Brother.

The Honor of the Victory that day, was wholly ascrybed to the Englishmen.

In this fight were slain, five English Captains, besides other Captains and
Officers that were hurt, Sir Fraunces Vere himself was hurt in the Leg and
Thighs, and my Lord Gray was hurt in the face with a Sword.

Of the States men (of all sorts) there were slain, more then two Thousand,
and as many more sore hurt and grievously wounded.

Of the Enemies part, it is credibly reported, that there was above four
thousand slain, and above a thousand taken prisoners, besides many that were
hurt and wounded.

The Enemies Army consisted as it was reported in seven or Eight Thousand
footmen, and Seauenteene Cornets of Horsemen, and were divided into three
squadrons, whereof the first being Spaniardes, and were conducted by Danlois de
Villeers, Don Jasper de Sapena, and Ieronimo denauroy.

The first two were taken Prisoners, and the third of them is not as yet
heard of.

The second squadron were Wallons, and were conducted by one La Berlotte Don
Alfonso and Bostock, Nephew to sir William Stanley, whereof La Berlot and
Bostock were both slain.

The Third Squadron were Flemminges, and were under the command of one
Backwrie, who was also slain at that time.

The Admiral of Aragon is taken Prisoner, and it is verily thought that Sir
William Stanley is slain.

The Spanniardes lost their Ordinances, (being some Eight great pieces in the
whole) and the Archduke himself lost all his own Plate and Baggage.

The fight continued from one of the Clock in the morning, till five in the
after Noone of the same day.

The Spaniardes lost in this service, above an hundred Ensigns, as is most
certainly known.

The Archduke himself fled into Bridges, and so escaped away very bardely, he
being somewhat hurt as it is supposed.

The States Army is now before Newport, and the place as it is thought,
rendered up to the States before this time.

The Names of the five English Captains that then were slain, were these.
Captain Yaxley. Captain Hunnywoode. Captain Parden. Captain Terret.
Captain Paxroy.
The names of such Noblemen and Commanders of the Enemy, as then were either
taken or slain by the Count Maurice and his forces.

Prisoners of account taken.
Don Francisco de Mendosa, Marquis of Quadelles, and great Admiral of ARRAGON.
The Count of Salins. The Count de la Fiere. Don Lewis de Valasco. Don Charles
de Sapina.
The Names of such as were slain in the Conflict.
The Count of Bauquoy. The Count Frederick Vanden Bergh. Don Ambrosio de
Adrians. Don John de Rymans, Commander of ye Flemmish Regiment. ^a Parlotte
commander of the Wallons. Mounsieur Fresyne. The Governor of Dunkerke. The
Traitor William Stanley.
Of the Archduke ALBERTVS. and of the Duke of Au^na^e, there is no certainty
as yet, whether they be dead or alive.

Moreover, all the Ensigns and Banners that were taken from the Enemy in this
service were brought into the Tent of his Excellency, and his Soldiers were
mightily enriched by the Spoil.

The Arch-Duchesse her self travailed with the Camp, until she came to the
City of Bridges in Flaunders, where she then left them.

It is since reported by some, that the Archduke is yet living, and that there
are come unto him to the number of six Thousand fresh Soldiers, (taken up in
Artois, and Henault) and are under the conduct of the Duke of Arschot.

Also it is reported for certainetie, that there are 3000 fresh men taken out
of the land of Luick, and that they are with all speade marching to the Camp
of his Excellency, the Prince Maurice.

FINIS.

