THE ANATOMY OF SORCERIE. WHEREIN THE WICKED Impiety of Charmers,
Inchanters, and such like, is discovered and confuted.

BY JAMES MASON, Master of Arts.

Printed at London by JOHN LEGATTE, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1612.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

To the Reader.
THou may marvel (gentle reader) what has moooued me (after so many
zealous and learned Divines) to take in hand this treatise against sorcery.
Wherefore I have thought it good to certify thee (in some measure) of my
meaning herein. It was my chance to fall into communication with a notable
supporter of those wicked vanities, which are spoken against in this book: who
not contented to practice the same himself, went about to persuade others
thereunto: and to that end had framed reasons and arguments to uphold his
assertion. Which when I heard, and understood, considering that he was a man of
place, and some learning, and therefore might prevail the more in this
mischievous devise: I determined to search out what authors had written
concerning that matter. But finding them all that I could hit upon to be more
occupied in making inuectiues against sorcerie in general; then in particular
setting down what it was, or wherein it consisted: thereby leaving a dare open
to these vain and wicked men to creep out at: by reason the chief grounds
were not taken away, whereon they stand. Therefore I resolved to make some
treatise of mine own. And because I thought I should have thereby fit occasion,
both to answer his arguments, and also to speak of other matters very meet
and necessary in this case: I made choice of this text in the Acts of the
Apostles: and so much the rather, for that it was a place alleged by the
aforesaid party himself: that so I might (as it were,) vna fidelia duos
parietes dealbare. That is (as we say) stop two gappes with one bush; both
answering to the adversaries reasons, and likewise opening the meaning of the
said place, to all such simple and true meaning Christians, as should hear or
read the same. Howbeit at the first I had no such purpose, as to make it
common to all; but only to such of my friends and acquaintance, to whom I
meant to commit it, and my self should think good. Notwithstanding, afterward
at my aforesaid friends request, who did bear me in hand, that it would be
profitable to the Church of God (if it should come abroad into the open view of
the world,) at the last* I yielded, as thou see. God grant that it may work
that effect which I wish for: the which if I shall perceive, it shall encourage
me to employ my studies hereafter, for thy further benefit. In the mean while
I commit thee to the tuition of him, who is able to do more then we can wish,
or desire. And so I bid thee heartily farewell.

James Mason.
Act. cap. 19. the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16. verses. 11. And God wrought no
small miracles by the hand of Paul. 12. So that from his body were brought
unto the sick, napkins or hand-kerchefes, and the diseases departed from them,
and the evil spirits went out of them. 13. Then certain of the vagabond
Jews, exorcists, took in hand to name over them which had evil spirits, the
name of the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.
14. (And there were certain sons of Sceua; a chief priest of the Jews,
about seven, which did this.) 15. And the evil spirit answered, and said,
Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know: but who are ye? 16. And the man in whom
the evil spirit was ran on them, and over came them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out of that house, naked, and wounded.
WHen our Savior Christ Jesus was to depart out of this world (as pertaining
to his bodily presence) and to ascend up into heaven, he commanded his
Apostles to preach the Gospel, promising that he would ratify the same with
signs and wonders, as appears cap. 16. of Mark. The fulfilling of which
promise, as in many other places, so in this chapter it is most notably set
down. For whereas before, the spirit of God had showed the preaching of Saint
Paul, as also his confutation of the adversaries of the Gospel in disputation;
in these words he declares how God confirmed the same by miracles, especially
in the 11. and 12. verses. Then follows the perverse emulation thereof by the
wicked coniurers, in the 13. and 14. verses. And lastly, the effect or
punishment of this their practice in the 15. and 16. verses.

For the first. The miracles which Saint Paul is here said to work, are set
down first generally, in the 11. verse, and afterward in the 12. verse, the
same is amplified by particulars.

In the general we must observe two things, viz. The chief efficient cause of
miracles, which is God. And the isntrumental cause, which in this place is the
Apostle Saint Paul.

But before we enter into the particular discourse of these points, we must
consider the coherence of these words, with those which went before: and that
is insinuated by this word ( and) in greek ( (...)) which is a copulative
conjunction, and joins these words with the former: as if he should have
said, that not only the Gospel was preached by the Apostle Saint Paul, but also
the same was ratified, and confirmed of God by miracles. And truly if we look
throughout the whole book of God, we shall find the working of miracles
always annexed unto the word, to give credit and authority thereunto; and to
confirm the vocation of those that are setters forth of the same. So the Lord
furnished Moses with a most excellent gift of working miracles; but he first
appointed him to deliver his will unto Pharaoh, for the bringing of the
children of Israel out of Egypt. The like may be said of Iehosuah, and Samuel,
and also of all the rest of the Prophets in the old Testament, which for
breuity sake I omit to name, leaving them to your own consideration, to
examine the truth in this case. As for the Apostles, and Disciples of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, I think no man will deny, but that they were endued
with the gift of working miracles, to this end, that thereby their calling
might the better be confirmed, and the Gospel of Christ magnified. Neither can
the contrary be proved in any of the holy men of God, which have wrought
miracles. And Saint Paul in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, cap. 12. verse
7. says, that this gift of working miracles is given to profit and edify the
Church, and not for any man's private use, as it may be necessarily gathered out
of the circumstance of that place. The which if it be so, the^ most abominable
are the dealings of those most cursed blessers, commonly called wise and
cunning men, and women, who having no public calling, either ordinary, or
extraordinary, whereby to set forth (in any special manner) the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, do take upon them the working of miracles: nay rather they
dishonor God, and discredit his word, arrogating unto themselves, that which
is proper unto God, asking oftentimes when any comes unto them, whether they
do believe, that these wizzards can do that for them, which they come for: when
as we cannot read in the whole Scripture, of any of the Prophets, or Apostles,
or any other holy men, which ever required the like at any man's hand. Indeed
our Savior Jesus Christ did so, but he was the eternal God, in whom we ought
to believe, and to put our whole trust and confidence only; and not in any
child of man, whose breath is in his nosthrels, as says the Prophet Esaias,
cap. 2. verse. 22. for vain is the help of man, when as he cannot think a
good thought of himself. 2. Cor. cap. 3. verse. 5. much less perform any good
action. Wherefore Saint James in the 4. chapter of his Epistle, inueigheth
mightily against those, which do presume to affirm peremptorily, that they
will do any thing, when as they know not whether they shall live till the
morrow. Wherefore we ought to say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will
do this or that. But now (says he) ye rejoice in your boastings: all such
rejoicing is evil; and therefore the Lord, by the Prophet Jeremy says,
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, Ierem. cap. 17. verse. 5. Then cursed
are these wizzards, which would have others to believe, and trust in them: for
in God we live, move, and have our being, Act. cap. 17. v. 28. and he is the
only worker of miracles, as it follows in the next words.

God wrought] It is not said that (Paul wrought) but that ( God wrought.) This
thing Nichodemus seems very well to have understood, when he says. Ioh. c.
3. v. 2. that he knew that Christ Jesus was a teacher come from God, because
that no man could do such miracles, except God were with him; as though no man
of himself, or by any other means, but only by the power of God alone working
in him, could effect such miraculous works. And our Savior Christ does
insinuate as much in the 10. chapter of Saint John's Gospel, verse 38. saying: If
ye believe not me, yet believe the works, that ye may know and believe that
the father is in me, and I in him. As if he should have said: If I do not such
works, as are far above the reach of any mortal man to do, then believe me
not: but if I do, then think that God, which is the only worker of all such
miracles, is the Author of those which ye see done by me. Wherefore the Apostle
Saint Peter (after that he with S. John, had healed the creeple which was
borne lame) lest the people should attribute the said work of healing to their
power, or godliness, tells them, that it was done only in the name, and by
the power of Jesus Christ, Act. cap. 3. So he tells Aneas, who had kept his
bed (by reason of a palsy) the space of eight years, that Jesus Christ had
made him whole; and not he: and therefore bids him to arise and make his
bed, Act. cap. 3. verse. 33, 34. There are many other places of scripture,
which enforce the truth of this matter, but the case is so clear, that I will
stand no longer upon it, but will pass over to that which follows.

No small miracles] That is great miracles: and it is an usual kind of speech
in many languages. The words in greek do signify no common or ordinary
powers, because that thereby the power of God is showed, after an unwonted
sort: which power (being supernatural) albeit it belongs, and is proper to
God alone, yet he does otherwhiles exercise the same by his creatures: as it is
said hear.

By the hands of Paul] that is by the ministry of Paul, for so the words do
signify in this place. And it is an usual phrase in the scripture, as Act.
cap. 5. verse. 12. it is said, that by the hands of the Apostles, were many
signs and wonders showed among the people. So Act. cap. 14. verse. 3. also. And
it seems to be a metaphor borrowed from the common course, and accustomed
dealings of masters with their scholars, especially of those which begin to
learn to write, whose hands (the master ruling) although the scholar holds
the pen in his hand, yet the master makes the letter. The like case is
theirs, which do work miracles: for God is the only worker of them, howsoever
it pleases him to use those men as instruments in effecting of the same, for
his greater glory, both in himself, as the chief efficient cause, and also
in his instruments, to the further confirmation of their calling, and of the
truth of his word. And to that end, in the 4. chap. verse. 29, and 30. of the
Acts, the Apostles Saint Peter, and Saint John, do pray unto God, that he
would stretch forth his hand, to work miracles by them, in these words:
Grant unto thy servants with all boldness, to speak thy word, so that thou
stretch forth thine hand, that healing, and signs, and wonders may be done, by
the name of thy holy son Jesus. By which prayer it appears, that God does
not bestow the gift of working miracles, for any man whatsoever, to use at his
own pleasure, or after what manner he thinks good: but so as that God may
have always one end of the staff (as they say) in his own hand, to use, or
not to use, as he knows most convenient; both for his own glory, and for
the good of those, for whose sake secondarily, those miracles are wrought. For
we use rather to give thanks, then to pray for that which we have already
received: except it be for the continuance of it. And that this is true, it is
manifest by 1. Cor. 12. where S. Paul reciting the spiritual gifts of the H.
G. bestowed upon the Church at that time, for the edification of the same:
reckoning the gift of working miracles for one: in the end he concludes, that
al these things works even the self same spirit, distributing to every man
severally, even as he will. If as God will, then not as man will: neither in
regard of the circumstance of time, and place, nor yet in manner of working. And
to speak generally of the time, it is more then probable, that miracles are
now ceased: so says S. Chrysostom about 1200 years since, upon the 17.
chapter of Matthew, verse. 20. in these words: Cum hodie ista (viz. miracula) in
ecclesia non fiant, an propterea dicemus Christianos destitui fide? auertat
deus, vt de populo deitam male sentiamus. Adest fides iustificans, sed ea quae
miraculorum dicitur, iam desijt: which is thus much in english: Because that
now at this day these things (to wit miracles) are not wrought in the Church;
shall we therefore say, that Christians are altogether without faith? God
forbid, that we should think so badly of God his people. For they have
justifying faith, but that which they call the faith of miracles, is already
ceased. For seeing that the end of working miracles was to confirm the word,
as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. cap. 14. verse. 22. of the miraculous gift of
languages; that it was a token to them that believe not, and not to them that
believe, to prepare and move their minds to the embracing of the Gospel:
which Gospel, being now a great while since sufficiently proved, and the
truth thereof established by miracles, what needs the continuance of the said
gift amongst us? And that the gift of working miracles, was but for a certain
time, at the beginning only, bestowed upon his Church, as diverse other
spiritual gifts were, which are rehearsed in the 12. chap. of the 1. Epist.
Cor. it is very manifest: because that all the rest of miraculous gifts there
recited are ceased, and out of use at this present. Wherefore the wizzards of
these our days, howsoever they color their legerdemaine in this behalf; yet
they are far from the true practice of working miracles, given and accepted
of God: by reason that the use thereof is ceased with the end, for which it was
given, and ordained. Neither are we to think that the hand of the Lord is
shortened thereby, no more then it was, when Manna ceased among the Israelites.
But the Lord knows, and does always, that which is most convenient, and
profitable, both for his own glory, and for our eternal comfort. Yea, by his
providence he so moderateth the particular actions of all those, upon whom he
bestows this grace of working miracles; that they do nothing in this
behalf, but only as he does direct, and assign them. So Moses did his
miracles always at God his appointment: and the disciples of our Savior Jesus
Christ, could not heal the lunaticke child, in the 17. chap. of Saint
Matthew. Howbeit at other times they did greater wonders. And the Prophet
Nathan in the second book of Samuel, cap. 7. because he was not first directed
by God, failed in giving counsel unto David, to build the temple. Neither may
we think, that it has been otherwise in this case with any other of the
servants of God. For albeit it be not expressed always in the scripture; yet
it is out of doubt, that were inwardly led by the spirit of God, to do every
particular miracle, that they wrought: even as the disciples of our Savior
Christ were, what they should speak in the 10. chapter of Matthew. where our
Savior Christ says unto them: Take no thought how or what ye shall speak:
for it shall be given you in that hour, what ye shall say: for it is not ye
that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks in you. Wherefore our
Savior Christ in the 9. chapter of the Gospel after Saint Luke, finds fault
with his disciples, because they would have had fire to come down from heaven
upon the Samaritans, as Elias did procure to fall upon the two fifties of men,
and their leaders, in the 2. book of the Kings, cap. 1. saying, that they knew
not of what spirit they were: as though he should have said: If that ye did
know, and consider (as the truth is) that Elias was moved by the spirit of
God, to execute his judgment upon those men: and that ye are only led by
your desire of revenge, ye would never have motioned this matter; for now ye
ask ye wot not what. But those that are counted cunning men amongst us, do at
no time look for God his direction: but for the opposition, and conjunction of
the planets, with a sort of other vain and wicked observations, fitter for
heathen men, the^ for those that bear the names of Christians: which God has
flatly forbidden in the 18. chapter of Deuteronomy: and Leuiticus, cap. 19.
verse. 26. and by the Prophet Jeremy he says, cap. 10. Learn not the way of
the heathen, and be not afraid for the signs of heaven, though the heathen
be afraid of such, for the customs of the people are vain. For the right use
of the stars, and the motions thereof, is set down by God himself, in the
1. cap. of Genesis verse. 14, and 15. in these words. And God said, let there be
lights in the firmament of heaven, to separate the day from the might, and let
them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years, and let them be
for lights in the firmament of heaven, to give light upon the earth. The like
impiety is to be found in these men; when they appoint, and set down unto
themselves, and their disciples in what place, such and such wonders are to be
wrought. As though the power of God were tied to one place more then unto
another. Wherein they are like the Aramites in the 20. cap. of the 1. book of
the King. when they say, that the God of Israel is God of the mountains, and
not of the valleies: and therefore the Lord slew them with the edge of the
sword.

Furthermore for every particular miracle God directs (if it be done as it
should be) the means, and manner how it should be wrought: either outwardly,
by his word: or inwardly by his spirit. Thus the Lord when he did send Moses to
work miracles before Pharaoh. Exodus the 7, 8, and 9 chapters. He instructs,
and tells him, after what manner he should do them: So when he led the
children of Israel over Jorden, by the hand of Iehosuah: cap. 3. he bids him
to command the priests, that did bear the Arc of the covenant, that when they
came to the brinke of the waters of Jorden they should stand still in Jorden:
whereby the people went over that river dry. In like manner in the 6. cap. of
the book of Iehosuah the Lord declares unto Iehosuah what he will have done,
that the walls of the city of Jericho might fall down before the children of
Israel: the which being once done, the wall sell flat down; so the people went
up into the city, every man straight before him: And they took the city. So
in the 1. book of the Kings. cap. 13. as soon as the man of God had uttered
the word of the Lord against the altar, it claue asunder, and the ashes fell
out. But in the 2. book of the King. cap. 4. because that Elisha did presume
of himself, without the Lord his direction, to devise a course to raise the
woman's child being dead to life again, by laying the staff upon the childs
face, by the hand of Gehazi his servant: therefore it took no effect. Neither
ought we to imagine by this, that God is tied to these, or any other means of
like sort. For he does the self same, sometimes by one means, sometimes by
another, as in the 4. cap. of Exodus verse. 9. he bids Moses to power the
water of the river upon the dry ground only, and it should be turned into
blood, and in the 7. cap. of Exodus verse. 17. he commands him to stretch out
his hand with the rod in it, over the waters, and they should be blood, yea
God does bring to pass contrary things, by one and the self same means, as
in the 14. cap. of Exodus the sea is both made dry for the Israelites to go
over: and the waters return again to cover the Egyptians, when Moses
stretches forth his hand over the same as before. Nay seeing the Lord is
omnipotent, he can do what he will, as well without, as with means: but that
it pleases him to exercise his children, to attend upon his ordinances: and
not to feine unto themselves devises of their own brain, which the Lord
allows not: as do the cunning men, and women in these our days: thinking
thereby to work those wonders which they desire. The which, although the Lord
permits the devil to bring to pass for them, yet is it not therefore a
necessary consequent, that God is the author or allower of this their work;
for God does it other-whiles to try them, as he says in the 13. cap. of
Deuteronomy. So the sorcerers of Egypt in the 7. cap. of Exodus did bring to
pass some things by their enchantments; as did Moses and Aaron, by the finger
of God, whereby the heart of Pharaoh was hardened.

And if it be so (will some say) how shall we discern the servants of God,
from the servants of the devil in this behalf?

To these I answer; that albeit it be not very easy, (especially to the
children of disobedience) as the spirit of God by Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
speaking of Antichrist, the man of sin says: that his coming is by the
working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish, because they did
not receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies that all they
might be damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. And our Savior Christ in the 24. cap. of the Gospel after
Saint Matthew says: that there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets,
and shall show great signs, and wonders, so that (if it were possible) they
should deceive the very elect. Yet they may be discerned by three especial
means, and notes. viz. First by their vocation and calling. Secondly by their
manner of working: And thirdly, by the end and intent of their working. As for
the first it is evident, that in the primitive Church the gift and grace of
miracles working, was annexed unto the Ecclesiastical function: as it
appears in the 12. cap. of the 1. epist. Cor. verse. 28. where Saint Paul
says, that God has ordained in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly teachers, then doers of miracles, after that the gifts of healing,
helpers* governors, diverse tongues. And therefore the Papists, least they
should seem any thing to be inferior unto the primitive Church, have (like
apes) appointed ( Exorcistae) (as they term them) for one of their
ecclesiastical orders, albeit in vain, they having not their inward calling
from God: Who at the first planting of his Gospel, did bestow this grace upon
his Church, that whereas the only preaching of the word took little or none
effect, yet by those miracles, which they see done in the Church, they might be
converted and acknowledge the truth. Thus the Lord, when he sent Moses unto the
children of Israel to tell them, that by his hand God would deliver them out of
their bondage in Egypt, because that Moses seemed to doubt least they would not
believe: Therefore the Lord appointed him to work miracles before them: at the
sight whereof they believed. Exodus cap. 4. And Sergius Paulus in the 13. cap.
of the Acts of the Apostles, when he did see the miraculous striking of Elimas
the sorcerer blind, is said to believe, and to be astonished at the doctrine of
the Lord. So also the Iaylour in the 16. cap. of the Acts. was converted to
the faith, when he saw the miracle wrought in the prison: where whilst Paul
and Silas prayed, and sung psalms in the night, suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundation of the prison was shaken: and by and by all
the prison doors opened, and every man's bonds were loosed. And the ruler in the
4. cap. of the Gospel after Saint John, with all his household believed in our
Savior Jesus Christ, when he had seen the miracle which he had done in
healing of his son. To these I may add that which Saint Paul says in the
14. cap. of the 1. epist. Cor. verse. 22. where affirming the miraculous gift of
languages to be a sign unto those that believe not, seems to insinuate the
like end and effect of other miracles. And experience does approve the same:
For since the time of Constantine the great, that the Christian religion has
bin publicly professed, and by godly Emperors maintained, the gift of
miracles has ceased. Many more proofs might be alleged to this purpose: but
because this matter has been handled before in a fitter (as I take it) and a
more convenient place, I will therefore pass it over, and return to the point
which I had in hand, against the which it may be objected, that Tertullian in
his books, de Idololatria, and de Corona militis. seems to affirm: that
merchants and soldiers did miracles in his time: and therefore this gift is
not always annexed to the Ecclesiastical function. To this it may be
answered: That although their outward vocation seemed to be mere laick (as
they term it) yet were they inwardly and extraordinarily called of God, to
the working of miracles: to the which no doubt was joined the preachin; of the
Gospel, either by themselves, or else some other of the clergy. So Saint Paul
albeit a most excellent. Apostle, and preacher of the Gospel in the Church of
God, is said to be a Tent-maker, and wrought of the same trade for his living,
as it is set down in the 18. cap. of the Acts. verse. 3. so that a mechanical
trade, or any other honest and lawful profession of traffic in merchandise,
or warrefare, does not exclude them altogether from being of the clergy. But as
for our cunning men (as we term them) what ecclesiastical function have
they? or how does their profession belong thereunto? Seeing that for ordinary
callings, we have none such in our Churches: except (as I said) it be among the
Papists, wherein how ridiculous they are, who sees not, which is not wilfully
blinded. And that they have no such like extraordinary calling, it appears
plainly, both by reason, and experience. For as our Savior Christ in the 4.
chapter of S. Mark, verse. 21. and Saint Luke the 8. cap. verse. 16. says, that
a candle is not lighted to be put under a bushel, or under the table: but on a
candle-stick that they that enter in may see the light: so these men, if they
had an effectual calling from God, they could not but in some measure exercise
the same, to the glory of God, and the good of his Church. As the prophet
Jeremy, when as he saw little or no profit of his labors, in so much that he
was even smitten, and cast into prison for preaching of the word: yet he could
not forbear, but says, that the word of God was in his heart as a burning
fire, shut up in his bones: So that he was weary with forbearing, and could not
stay. Jeremy the 20. cap. verse. the 9. But these men, of whom I speak, are
much unlike to the prophet Jeremy. For they are either so ignorant in the word
of God, and Christian religion, that they know not the truth thereof, and
therefore how should they give testimony unto the same by the working of
miracles: Or else their life is so lewd and vain, that their witness would
rather give offense, then any wise confirm the truth of the word preached. But
to leave this, and come to the next note or mark, whereby we may discry the
working of miracles whether it be of God or not. Let us first consider the
nature and difference of miracles. A miracle may be defined a rare and
unwonted thing, or work, which either is, or seems impossible to be wrought
by any natural force, or means, and thereby moves admiration. Hence we may
gather two kinds of miracles: Namely, right and true miracles: and false or
feined miracles. The true miracles are those, which cannot possibly be done by
any natural means, or creature, but only by divine virtue, and power, and
these are of two sorts. For some are so, of, and by themselves: as was the
feeding of the children of Israel with Manna in the wilderness in the 16. cap.
of Exodus, verse. 36. The staying of the sun in the time of Iehosuah, cap. 10.
verse. 12. The raising of the dead: Yea and the healing of diseases, that by no
natural means of any creature can be cured, and a great many more, such like
set down in the scripture: the which cannot be wrought but only by the finger
of God: and therefore not by any diuilish means or sorcery: Albeit the devil
may sometimes counterfeit the same. Yet his legerdemaine is here sooner
espied, then in any other kind of miracles, by reason that he wants the
ground of natural causes to support it. The second sort of right and true
miracles, are those which are so only in regard of their manner of working,
being not effected by, nor proceeding from any natural cause, but from the
power of God. As the curing of diseases, with the only shadow of Peter, Act.
cap. 5. (if the said diseases were otherwise curable) although hardly by
natural means. And in this chap. ver. 12. with the napkins and partletes of
Saint Paul. As also the rain and clouds of Elias in the first book of the
King. cap. 18. And the thunder of Samuel, 1. Sam. cap. 12. In this sort of
miracles the devil does often intermeddle; his ministers the sorcerers using
otherwhiles the same outward means, which the servants of God have used in
such like cases: and the devil under this veil works the effect intended, by
natural means: as many sorcerers in these our days do send clothes unto
their patients, the which being done, the devil does secretly infuse some
natural remedy, whereby the malady, wherewith they are greieued, is cured. And
when things are thus wrought, they are not true, but false miracles, for right
and true miracles (as I said before) are those which are effected by the divine
power of God only: of which sort were all those which were done by the
Prophets, Apostles, and our Savior Christ himself, and his disciples. For the
grace of working miracles is a spiritual gift and not a natural, as it is set
down in the 12. cap. of the 1. epist. Cor. And therefore the means of the
said working, must needs be supernatural, being wrought by the same spirit who
is the author, and distributer of the said gift. For even as the Lord God has
created heaven and earth, so has he given to every thing therein, in the
creation a several nature, virtue, and property, to be wrought, or to work
this or that effect (if it be rightly used and applied) the which it is not
possible for any creature in the world to alter, or change, but only for the
creator, who made al things of naught at the first, as the Psalmist says. He
set the earth upon her foundations, that it never should move. Psalm. 104.
Wherefore neither man, angel, nor devil can do any thing, but only by
natural means; for they cannot create any thing of nothing, for that is
proper to God alone: and therefore they of themselves can do no true and right
miracles; but as God himself by his divine power, does supernaturally work
the said miracles by them. But they may work false and counterfeit miracles.
Which are those, which either are not the thing that they seem to be; or else
if they be so, yet are they wrought by natural means, albeit to us unknown.
For the devil does often times deceive and delude the senses, so that things
do show to be other, and otherwise, then they are indeed; as it comes to
pass in night spells (as they term them) when as it seems that a wall, or
some great water, is objected and set against the party that is within the
circle of the said spell, that he cannot pass forth. Which is nothing else but
a mere delusion of Satan: For let them go backward and they may pass the
circle without any such let: with many other such like. Howbeit sometimes he
exhibiteth the thing it self, which in show appears, as was the fire which
consumed Jobs sheep, and his servants, Job. 1. cap. And this he does by
diverse and sundry ways, and means: but especially by three. The first is by
applying the efficient, or working cause unto the matter whereof they know any
thing (which they intend) may be effected. And so it is thought, that Pharaohs
sorcerers made the frogs before him, Exodus 8. The like whereof we may see by
daily experience amongst us: when as by the blowing of flies upon flesh, there
arise worms, or maggotes. And by this means partly they both bring diseases
upon men, and likewise sometimes cure them by applying, or infusing secretly,
either inwardly or outwardly to the body, things that may hurt or heal the
same. Secondly, by the stirring and moving of things: as in the air, when he
raises winds and lightnings: as Job. cap. 1. verse. 19. and when he makes any
to be carried aloft in the same. In the waters when he causes inundations. In
the body of man, or beast, when he moves the spirits or humors, whereby
diverse and sundry diseases are engendered, the which it were long here to
recite. Thirdly, whereas the devil of himself is an invisible spirit, he
takes often upon him the shape of other creatures: whereby and wherein he
appears unto men after diverse sorts: sometimes in insensible things: as he
gave his oracles in old times, otherwhiles out of images set in the temples of
the heathen gods: as also it is reported, that he did out of an oak in a wood
near to the city Dodona. Sometimes in sensible creatures, as he did deceive
our Grandmother Eve by, and in the serpent. Sometime in reasonable creatures,
as in man; whereof there are many examples in the new testament, of those whose
bodies he had possessed: and in our time also the like has been seen and
observed: as Fernelius in the 16. chapter of his second book de abditis rerum
causis, records a history, whereof himself was (as it seems) an
eye-witnes: Of one which was possessed with a devil, who being a young man of
good place and calling, and being grievously pained (as it is there set down)
did send for diverse Physicians: who having used their best skill to cure the
said malady, did notwithstanding all their labor, and cunning, nothing
prevail. In the end (about some three months after) it was found out, that
he was possessed with a spirit; as well by other things, as also, and that
especially by speaking of greek and latin: whereas the party diseased was
utterly ignorant of the greek tongue; wherefore after that the fit was
somewhat slaked, he confessed that he had uttered those speeches against his
will: and to conclude, after these ways, and means, and such like; the devil
does work counterfeit miracles (as I have said,) to the which he is apt and
able rather then man, both in regard of his nature in his first creation: and
also in regard of his long experience since. For being a spirit, he easily
does pierce into that which a solid substance cannot: and also being void of
that burden of the flesh, wherewith man is clogged, and pressed down, he is
able to move himself as well upward, as downward, or sidewaies; and that
with such speed as it passes man's capacity to conceive of it. Thus he
sometimes stirs up winds, and lightnings in the air, as Job. cap. 1. from
whence also he espyeth what is done, or to be done upon the earth beneath:
sometimes raising earthquakes, and fire, and vapors out of the earth:
sometimes passing from place to place, as occasion serves, to mark, to see,
or to do, that which is most fitting for his own turn, as the Apostle Saint
Peter says, 1. Epist. cap. 5. verse. 8 that he goes about like a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour. And further, at the first being made an angel
of God, even by nature he surpasses man far, as well in understanding and
knowledge, as also in power and dexterity, to put their knowledge in practice.
All which are much confirmed and augmented by his daily experience, the which
he has had from the creation of the world, the which is granted to no
mortal man; and therefore he is rightly called the old serpent in the Apocal.
cap. 12. verse. 9. And albeit he be fallen from his former integrity, by
reason of his transgression, yet his natural powers and faculties are not
utterly taken away, but only corrupted: being now prone to all kind of
mischief, and naughtines. For whereas God almighty at the first, framed him a
most excellent creature, furnished with most admirable gifts as the other
angels, to the obedience of his will: now he is become an enemy both to God,
and man: turning his wit and knowledge, into cunning, and deceit: and his
strength and such like qualities, to the working of sin and iniquity: even to
the overthrow of all virtue and goodness: but that the Lord has put a bridle in
his mouth: so that he can go no further then God will permit him, no not in
natural causes, as it is manifest in the book of Job, c. 1. and 2. where it
is set down, that he could not touch Jobs goods without especial license: and
when he had done that, he could proceed no further without a new commission to
touch his body: yet he opposes himself (as much as in him lies) against
God, erecting to himself by tyranny a kingdom of his own, withdrawing by all
means possible, mankind from the obedience of the almighty, to serve him.
And to bring this matter the easier to pass (as near as he can) he will
notwithstanding imitate God in these actions, thereby to set a better gloss
upon his bad dealings. In so much that as the Lord has given a law unto his
subjects, namely his word, wherein is set down, both how himself will be
worshipped, and also they should deal amongst themselves. Even so the devil
gives rules of instruction to his liege people, which have given as it were
their names unto him to serve him; I mean the magitians, witches, sorcerers,
inchanters, and such like; how they should use themselves toward him, both in
regard of his own person, and also how they should do mischief, and work
counterfeit miracles, and vain tricks of legerdemaine amongst themselves, and
other men. Howbeit nothing is brought to pass indeed by these means: but the
devil himself, under the color thereof, to wit of certain set forms of
words, or characters, of what form or fashion soever they be, whether
circular, angular, crossewise, or in the figure of man, beast, or any other
thing which is used in magic. The devil (I say) under the color of these,
and such like, does work those effects, which by his ministers are intended.
For what can words of themselves do, but only signify: neither can
characters do or effect any thing, but only represent. For if they do any
thing, it must be either of their own nature; or else by God his institution
above, and beyond nature. But not of their own nature, seeing that the means
and matter only of words at the beginning were made, when as God created al
things, and gave unto them their natural properties: and words were devised by
man afterward; for otherwise they would be the self same among all nations;
which we see is false: and this seems true, and approved by the second
chapter of Genesis, the 19. and 20. verses, where it is said, that the Lord God
formed of the earth, every beast of the field, and every foul of the heaven:
and brought them unto the man, to see how he world call them: for howsoever
the man named the living creature, so was the name thereof: the man therefore
gave names, unto all cattle, and to the foul of heaven, and to every beast of
the field. And as for characters, they (as every man may see) are not things
natural, but artificially made, and formed (as we say) according as it
pleases the painter. And as for this prerogative of words by God his
institution: besides that there can no warrant out of the scripture be brought
to approve it: so it seems confutable by the 13. v. of this present chap.
where the Exorcists are said to use the same words in effect, which the
Apostles had used in the like cases, and brought nothing to pass; which could
not have bin, if the Lord had appointed and given such virtue to the words
alone, to work such supernatural effects. But to leave this, and to return
to our former purpose. In the 18. cap. of Deuteronomy, verse. 20. it is thus set
down: The Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have
not commanded him to speak; or that speaks in the name of other Gods, even
the same Prophet shall die. The which place, although it may seem by the
words, to be understood of the Prophets, or preachers of the word only; yet
it may also be understood of workers of miracles: in as much as they (for the
most part) were the workers of miracles: and therefore in the 13. cap. verse. 1.
and 2. of this book, they are mentioned together, in these words: If there
arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and give thee asigne, or a
wonder, etc. Yea even prophesying it self is a supernatural work, and a
miracle: and further, the circumstance of this 18. chapter of Deuteronomy, from
the 9. verse, does insinuate the same sense. For after that the Lord by the
hand of Moses, had given the Israelites in charge, that when they came into the
promised land of Canaan, they should not seek to sorcerers, witches,
inchanters, necromancers, and such like; he tells them that he would raise
them up Prophets, which should supply all those wants, whereof they sought to
be relieved by the aforesaid devilish practisers (so farrre forth as God
should see it needful) and therefore there should be no reason, why they
should use to go unto such: but rather to use God his ordinary means, which
he has allowed in his word, and sanctified. And lest any of the aforesaid
magitians, or any other being not lawfully called, should intrude himself
into this function, therefore he threatens them, that they should be slain,
whether they pretended the name of the true God for this their practice, or
used the name of any other false god, to bring their purposes about. In which
place we may note two especial means in general to be set down, whereby
the Prophets did prophecy, and work wonders among the people. The one is in
the name of ( other) that is (strange) or (false) gods: which is, when they do
it in the name, and as it were, by the means of any thing, or creature, but
only of God almighty. For seeing there is but one God alone, which is the
true God, and creator of al things, and from whom every good gift proceeds,
and every miracle is wrought (as I have proved before) it follows of
necessity, that whosoever works any wonder in the name, or by the means of
any thing in the world, but only of him, and by the means that himself has
appointed, and allowed, makes thereof a god, and in the room of the true
Jehovah, places the creature. And of this sort are all they which work by the
name of any, either angel, devil, saints, or men deceased, or any other
creature, or by any other words devised by man, or Satan, whether it be in
regard of the words themselves alone, or in regard of the manner: as whether
they be pronounced, or written, or how often this is to be done: or in respect
of the order, or any other circumstance of time, or place, or such like. The
which also may be said of figures, or characters, of what form, or fashion
soever they be. All these means are simply evil, and against the first
commandment ( Thou shall have no other gods but me) and therefore abominable,
and by no means to be used. The other means of working miracles, is in the
name of the only true God. That is, when they use any, or all the names of the
holy Trinity: or the means set down in the word, and exercised by the
Prophets and Apostles: as is prayer, and fasting and such like. They which do
use the name of God, as it consists of letters and syllables in these cases,
whether pronounced with the mouth, or written, do exceedingly abuse, and
blaspheme the name of God against the third commandment. Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain, using it unto another end, then he has
ordained it. For God has not appointed his name for men to work wonders by
it, but that thereby he might be known, and glorified. For whereas God in
himself is incomprehensible by the wisdom of man, it has pleased him to
manifest himself by certain names, which do in some measure express his
nature unto us, so far forth as the weakness of our capacity can bear: and as
God thinks it to be most meet, and convenient both for his own glory, and
the good of his people, as he says unto the Israelites in Exodus 6. 2. that the
appeared unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by the name of God almighty: but
(says he) by my name Jehovah, was I not known unto them. As for those which
do use certain set forms of prayers, and other means used by the holy men
of God in working miracles: albeit at the first it may seem to be very
lawful, and good, yet if they have not an especial gift, and calling from God
to work the same, their practice is to be suspected. Nay it is most unlawful
and wicked, and a sin against the third commandment. In that the means
aforesaid are vainly used, when as God has given no such virtue unto those
words alone: neither have they any commission from him, to work miracles by
his authority or power: for although our Savior Christ in the 17. cap. of
Matthew. verse. 21. and Mark. cap. 9 verse. 29. seems to insinuate, that some
miracles are not wrought without prayer and fasting; (speaking of the casting
out of devils) yet it follows not, that God has granted such force and
virtue unto the words in prayer, or to the action of fasting, of themselves to
work miracles, howsoever they be used; for our Savior Christ does there
speak unto his disciples, upon whom he had bestowed the grace of working
miracles before: and yet nevertheless, he will have them to use hearty prayer in
this business, that thereby they may acknowledge God almighty, to be as well the
continuer, as the first author and giver of all such graces: and that they
might altogether depend upon him, for his continual assistance with the same.
Wherefore here we must have regard unto the first note of difference, between
the servants of God, and the servants of Satan before set down: namely, their
calling.

But because that wolves do often times enter into the sheepefold in sheep
clothing, neither has every one of the Church of God the gift of working
miracles (albeit an Ecclesiastical person) as it is plain by the 12. cap. of
the 1. epist. Cor. verse. 29. and 30. therefore we must mark and consider the
third note of difference. Which is to what end and intent, they do work
miracles. And this note or mark may be gathered out of the 13. cap. of Deuteronomy.
where the Lord says thus; if there arise up among you a prophet, or a dreamer
of dreams, and give thee a sign, or a wonder, and that sign, or wonder which
he has foretold, come to pass, saying, let us go after other gods, which
thou have not known, and worship them hearken not thou to the words of that
prophet, or dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God, tries you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart* and with all your
soul, follow the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments,
and give ear unto his voice, and worship him, and cleave unto him. By which
words it appears, that whosoever he be, that works miracles, and does not
thereby seek the glory of the only true God, but rather his own gain,
praise, or commendation: Or does it for any other sinister respect: we are not
to go, nor to hearken unto him: for he does not the Lords message, but his
own: Neither is he sent of God, but usurps the authority of himself, or is
Satan's minister herein. The which the Lord sometime does suffer to be done, to
try what is in the heart of his people: whether in love they will cleave unto
him, and keep his commandments which he has set down in his word, for
confirmation whereof he has wrought so many, and so wonderful miracles. And
indeed the gift of working miracles, as also other such like graces, wherewith
the Lord does indue, and adorn his Church, and the ministers of the same: is
in a manner bestowed upon it to this end, that his elect children being in
mind, and conscience assured, settled, and grounded in the truth of Gods word;
may grow, and increase together, more and more, in the faithful and zealous
practice thereof, in all godly and honest conversation, to the glory of God and
their own salvation. This is proved to be true by the 12. cap. 1. epist. Cor.
where Saint Paul recounting the spiritual gifts of God bestowed upon his
Church in these words saying, that to one is given by the spirit the utterance
of wisdom, to another is given, the utterance of knowledge by the same
spirit: to another faith by the same spirit: to another the gift of healing by
the same spirit: to another power to do miracles: to another prophesying: to
another judgment to discern spirits: to another diverse tongues: to another
the interpretation of tongues: saying in the seventh verse going before in the
same chapter, that all and every one of these gifts is given to profit withal.
But whom, not him self alone, to whom any of the aforesaid spiritual graces
is given: but the Church of God: and therefore the Apostle making a comparison
afterward in this same chapter betwixt the natural body of man, and the
Church, which is the mystical body of Christ, seems thus to reason viz. Even
as there are many members in man's body, yet none of them is for himself alone,
but each of them is careful to procure the health, and welfare of the whole
body: so in the Church of God, every member thereof, ought to use those gifts,
and graces aforesaid, and such like; not to their own gain, commodity, or
glory: but to the good of their fellow members, and of the whole Church. And
that in spiritual matters, pertaining to the true knowledge, and service of
God, and eternal salvation in Christ Jesus: and not in temporal and wordly
things; but so far forth, and to that end, that thereby they may the better
be enabled to go forward in their spiritual course until they come to the
end thereof, which is the salvation of their souls. For as the gift of working
miracles, and the other gifts aforesaid are spiritual: so the object, and end
of the same is spiritual: namely, the edification, and building up of the
Church, as it is the mystical body of Christ Jesus, whereof himself is the
head; as it is plain* by the 4. cap. of the epist. of Saint Paul to the
Ephesians, where the Apostle speaking of the aforesaid spiritual gifts
(although he rehearses not all) says that they were given, for the gathering
together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification
of the body of Christ (until we all meet together in the unity of faith and
knowledge of the some of God) unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age
of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no more children, wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men and with
craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive: but let us follow the truth
in love, and in all things grow up into him, which is our head, even Christ.
And therefore Saint Paul continuing his speech concerning the spiritual gifts
begun, and set down 1. Cor. 12. has these words unto them in the 14. c. of
the same Epistle. Seeing that ye covet spiritual gifts, seek that ye may
excel to the edifying of the Church. As if he should have said. If so be that
ye be so desirous to excel others, in the extraordinary gifts of the spirit:
see that ye may go beyond others in the right use of the same, which is the
edificatio^ of gods church. Wherefore they which make not this use of the
aforesaid spiritual gifts, and namely of working of miracles (which is the
chief thing which we stand upon at this time) do most mightily abuse the
same: Nay rather (which is more probable) they have not this gift given and
inspired into them by the spirit of God, but they are the devils servants, and
ministers herein: by whose means and aid, they may be thought to effect those
wonders. For even Judas Iscariot, albeit otherwise a most wicked person, and
one that afterward betrayed his master: Yet when he had received of our Savior
Christ the gift of working miracles, he preached the Gospel of the kingdom,
as did the other Apostles. For whomsoever the Lord does furnish with such
extraordinary spiritual gifts, he will have them (will they nill they) to use
them to that end which he has appointed. And as Saint Paul says in the 1.
epist. Cor. cap. 9. verse. 16. and 17. If I preach the Gospel, I have not
wherein to boast, for necessity is laid upon me. Woe be to me therefore, if I
preach not the Gospel: for if I do it willingly, I have a reward, but if I
do it against my will, the dispensation is committed unto me. So when the Lord
had made Jonas his prophet to go unto Niniue, to tell them what he had
determined concerning their destruction, although Jonas was very unwilling to
do it, in so much that he fled another way, only that he might eschew the
performance of that message: Yet God drew him back again, as it were through
the midst of the sea, and constrained him to fulfill his commandment herein.
And Balaam howsoever before, and at other times he may seem to have been a
sorcerer, and to work by enchantment, for his own estimation and profit:
Nevertheless when it pleased God to make him his minister, and had inspired him
with the gift of prophecy, to pronounce his blessing concerning the children of
Israel, albeit he labored by all means possible to the contrary, being
thereunto moved with the desire of wealth, and preferment promised to him by
king Balack, as it is in the 22. cap. and 23. cap. of the book of Numbers.
Notwithstanding at the last he was forced to yield to gods determination in
blessing the Israelites, whom before he endeavored to curse. Numbers, cap. 24.
Now they which are only Satan's instruments in working wonders, have no purpose
at al, to glorify god in obeiing of his precepts, and in preaching of his word
to the edifying of his Church. For as Satan the adversary both to God, and man,
is the author of these miracles, so will he have his ministers, to direct their
actions accordingly. Neither does the Lord enforce them, to make that use of
their faculty of working miracles, which he appoints to all those that are
wrought by his spirit: because they have neither received the gift from him,
nor yet any commandment to do any such thing. But they are led of themselves,
and of their master whom they serve, to aim in all their practices at other
ends, and work for other worldly, and deuilish respects. As the sorcerers of
Egypt wrought miracles, only that thereby they might disgrace Moses the
servant of God, and discredit his office, and authority. So Bariesu the
sorcerer in the 13. cap. of the Act. of the Apostles endeavored what he could
to turn away Sergius Paulus from the faith of Christ which Paul preached. And
what was the end of Simons practices, which in the 8. cap. Act. is said to have
used witchcraft? but only his own gain, and worldly honor, and credit, as
it appears by the circumstances of that place. And although the magitians,
sorcerers, and such like people, sometime do use good and godly words, in
outward appearance, and that (as it may seem) to a good end: yet at other
times, and that for the most part, you shall find them to have other badde,
worldly, and wicked intents: and to do this but only in hypocrisy, to cover
and color their own wicked dealings, and that they may work the greater
mischief afterward: as it may be gathered out of the sixteenth chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles, by the history of the damsel, which being possessed
with a spirit of divination (which seems to be such an one as they use
amongst us to go unto, to know of them their fortunes, or what is become of
things lost, stolen, or such like) whereby she enriched her master with whom
she dwelt, she (I say) this damsel seeing Paul, with the rest of his company
passing by, cried out saying. These men are the servants of the most high God,
which preach unto us the way of salnation. But to what end (think ye) did she
this? to confirm the Gospel which Paul preached? No: for that is far from
Satan, and all his ministers. But rather because that she, or Satan by her,
and in her, thought it the best course to bring to pass their purpose: that
whereas they neither could, nor durst openly, and manifestly contrary the
preaching of the Gospel: yet by this means they might think secretly by crafty
policy to weaken, and diminish the authority of the same, by bearing men in
hand (as it were) that they were endued, and led by one and the self same
spirit, that the Apostles were, and that there was no difference in their
doctrine. So that hereby the doctrine of the gospel might be brought into
suspicion. The which when Paul perceived, and foreseeing the inconuenie^ce
that might arise thereby, to take away al occasion of misdeeming, he commanded
the spirit to depart out of the said Damsel; making thereby (as it were) an open
profession of the enmity betwixt Satan and him, and so of the contrariety of
both their doctrines, and of the ends of the same. So in like manner our
Savior Christ commanded the foul spirit to hold his peace, when he said he
was the holy one of God, Mark. 1. cap. and Luke cap. 4. Now to conclude: If
these three notes before set down, be duly weighed, and considered, with a
single eye, and an upright heart, they will not a little help to discern the
true servants of God, from the instruments of the devil in the working of
miracles. But alas; now a days people are more prone and ready to lay a
stumbling block before their own steps, and to hang a veil before their
own eyes, that they may not see the truth in this behalf: feigning and
framing unto themselves reasons and arguments against the same, to uphold and
maintain magic and sorcery in deed, and in truth (albeit they like not
altogether of these names.) To the which arguments I mean (God willing) to
answer when I come to the handling of the 13. verse of this chapter. In the
mean time I will proceed unto the next, which is the 12. verse.

So that] In the which (as I told you before) the particular amplification of
the miracles, which God wrought by Saint Paul, is set down: where we are to
observe two things. viz. The matter of these miracles, or the miracles
themselves; and the means by which they were wrought. But for the better
explaining thereof (although it be placed last in the text) yet we will speak
first of the miracles themselves; whereof two especial and principal are here
rehearsed, (to wit) the healing of the diseases of the body; and the
dispossessing of Satan the enemy of the soul, in these words:

And the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them]
These two sorts of miracles our Savior Christ in the 10. chap. of the Gospel
after Saint Matthew, and Mark cap. 6. and Luke cap. 9. when he sent them forth
to preach the Gospel, gave power and authority unto his twelve Apostles to
work. And so likewise having made, and appointed Saint Paul in the 9. chapter
of the Acts to be an Apostle to preach his Gospel unto the Gentiles, endued
him with gifts of the holy Ghost, and as we see here, adorned him with the
same grace of working miracles, which he had bestowed upon the other Apostles
aforesaid; thereby ratifying and confirming his function, and ministry, as he
did of the rest. Where we may also note, that these miracles were no vain, and
iugling tricks, to move laughter amongst pleasant heads: nor yet framed, or
devised for those of grauer wits to wonder at: but they were wrought for the
profit, and commodity of mankind in this mortal life; albeit that be not the
chief end, wherefore God gave them this power to work the same. But his own
glory (as I said) and the edification of his Church: and therefore when the
Apostles at any time saw, that the aforesaid kind of miracles served not so
fitly for that purpose: they took a contrary course, as appears in the
Acts 5. chapter, where it is said, that Ananias and Saphira his wife, fell
down dead at the speech of S. Peter, when he told them of their wicked
dissimulation, and hypocrisy before God, in selling of a certain possession,
and bringing part of the price unto the Apostles, to the use of the Church;
pretending that they had brought the whole. By which example the people were
moved to glorify God for his just judgment upon these hypocrites; and also
were put in fear lest at any time the like offense should lay hold upon them.
Whereas if he had not done thus, it might have bin a means to make them go on
still in their wickedness, and to have encouraged others to have done the
like. In like manner, in the Acts, 13. chapt. when Saint Paul caused Bariesu
to be stricken blind, for resisting the preaching of the Gospel by Saint Paul;
we see what effect it wrought in the conversion of Sergius Paulus. For truly
all the spiritual gifts of God, given and granted unto his Apostles, and
ministers, in regard of their said calling and function, is for the edification
of the Church, and not for the destruction thereof, as Saint Paul says in the
2. Epist. Cor. cap. 10. verse. 8. in these words: If I should boast of my self
somewhat more of our authority or power, which the Lord has given us to
edify, and not to destroy, it should not be to my shame. Howsoever sometimes
they seem to do otherwise, yet it is but as the Physician or Surgeon, who
do not always apply mild and mollifying medicines, but sometimes biting
corrosiues, according to the nature and condition of the disease: yea sometimes
they cut off a member, for fear of infecting the rest: as the Poet sings.
Omnia tentanda* sed immedicabile vulnus
Enserescindendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.


So Paul in the 3. chap. of the 1. Epist. Cor. verse 5. delivered the man that
had committed incest, unto Satan (as he says) to the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. But of this I have
spoken somewhat before: wherefore I will go forward to the particular discussing
of the aforesaid two sorts of miracles. And first of the miraculous gift of
healing, because that is first placed in the text.

And the diseases departed from them] It is not here particularly set down,
what kind of diseases were healed by the Apostle: but it is certain by the
circumstance of the place, that he cured all whatsoever, for curing whereof he
sent napkins and partlets: and it agrees very well to the commission which our
Savior Christ gave to his Apostles in the 10. chapter of the Gospel after
Saint Matthew, verse 1. where it is said, that he gave power unto his disciples
to heal every disease, and every infirmity, that is, all manner of diseases,
which the spirit of God did move them to take in hand: and this is confirmed
by their continual practice throughout the whole new Testament, wherein we
cannot find (especially after the ascension of our Savior Christ) that they
ever failed in healing any disease whatsoever, which they took upon them to
cure. For this extraordinary power of healing, is not a natural faculty, but
a divine gift of God, supernaturally inspired by his holy spirit: to whom
nothing is impossible, and all, and every thing is of like easines* yea that
which to us seems, nay and is indeed most hard, and difficult, is soonest
brought to pass, when as God will have his glory showed (in a special
manner) thereby, as in this kind of healing. Wherefore they which pretend this
miraculous gift of healing, and cannot, or do not cure all, but some certain
of those diseases, which they take in hand, are greatly to be suspected: of
which sort are those, which amongst us are called wise, and cunning folks;
whereof some can cure but some one, or a few particular diseases: as for
example, they which have a charm for the toothach: a prayer or a blessing for
a Fistula, and such like. Others do profess the curing of all diseases; and
yet neither of them both does always, and at all times perform that which
they pretend in this behalf: no not in those diseases, in curing whereof they
would seem to be most expert. The reason is this: when diseases cannot be
cured by natural means, then are they past the devils reach to heal: and
therefore his instruments must needs fail therein. To make this more plain,
we must note, that amongst all the diseases set down by the Physicians in
their treatises, some are curable, and some are incurable, I call those
curable, which nature either of her self alone, or by the help of medicines
is able to work out, and expel. Of this sort we see many examples by daily
experience, which nature cures, if she be strong, and the cause of the
disease light; or if she be weak, or the cause of the disease stubborn, by
the means of physic. Now these kinds of griefs the forcerers can, and do
heal: and for as much as some diseases are more difficult then other: yea some
are so hardly cured, as that few, even of the best sort of Physicians (except
God his especial assistance) can heal them, whose cure notwithstanding is
wrought by these forcerers. Here therefore Satan in these his ministers is
greatly honored, who in regard of the subtilty of his nature, and his long
experience (as I have said before) does more readily find out the disease,
with all the circumstances thereunto belonging, as also a fit remedy thereof,
then most men can do: and yet for all that the disease by man (if he could
hitte upon the right method) and that by natural means, not incurable: for
that disease is incurable from which the party grieved by no natural means,
or medicines, can be recovered: of which kind the Physicians do account all
deep wounds in the brain, heart, or liver: also the dividing of the sinews
asunder, which are derived from the brain or spiritual marrow to any limme,
or member of the body, to give sense, and moving thereunto, (whether it be by
a wound, rupture, or any such like) causes a palsy, which is incurable. So is
deafenes, if it have continued from the birth: as also blindness, according to
that which the blind man says to the Pharisees in the Gospel after Saint
John, cap. 9. verse. 32. Since the world began was it not heard, that any man
opened the eyes of one that was borne blind. The like may be said of them
that could never smell. An ulcer or sore that is deep in the liver, is counted
incurable: and so is an absolute, and exquisite hardness without sense or
feeling in the same: as also in the mylt. An ulcer in the bladder likewise is
thought incurable, especially if it be deep. In like manner no member which is
altogether mortified, can be recovered. Now these aforesaid and such like
diseases, are judged simply incurable; by reason that at no time, nor in any
person, they are seen to be healed. But there are diverse and sundry other
maladies, which are not simply, and altogether so, but only in regard of some
circumstances: as the consuming fever, which is called febris hectica, at the
first is easily cured; but after that it is confirmed, it is past remedy: as
also that kind of leprosy, called Elephantiasis. The gout likewise, when as
it has continued so long, that hard knobs or knots are of gross humors
engendered in the joints, is esteemed incurable, according to the saying of the
Poet. Tollere nodosam nescit medicina podagram.

So there are many diseases, which in young folks are healed; but in old
persons they are incurable: and diverse kinds of fevers are cured in many
persons, but in some they admit no remedy, as we see by daily experience: and
it is manifest by the 20. chap. of the second book of the Kings, that Ezechias
was irrecouerably sick, and that (as it is thought) of a pestilent fever, from
which oftentimes other are recovered by the help of medicines. And albeit he
was restored to health again, and a medicine applied unto his disease; yet was
his sickness deadly, as it is in the first verse of the said chapter. Neither
was it cured by any natural means, but supernaturally: as appears in the 5.
verse, where God says, that himself had healed him, before that any natural
remedy at all was applied unto his sore. There are many other incurable
diseases of both sorts, the which it were too long and tedious here to recite:
none of all which (being past remedy by natural means) can be healed by any
charmer, or sorcerer, nor by the help of Satan, or any other creature what
soever, but only by the supernatural power and finger of God: by the which
all the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Saints of God from time to time, have
wrought all their miracles: and therefore the miracle of healing. As for the
outward means and manner which they have used (which is the second thing which
I observed in these miracles:) it makes nothing at all to the curing of any
disease: but whereas the eyes of our understanding are so obscured and blinded,
that they cannot see into the inward power, and working of the spirit of God,
which is the only author of this gift and grace of healing: it pleases God
otherwhiles to put into the minds of his servants in these cases, to use some
outward sensible means, by the view whereof, as by certain signs and tokens,
men might be admonished, and further induced to a deeper consideration of Gods
hidden working herein. Not that any thing is effected by these means, for then
would the holy men of God have used always one, and the self same outward
means in producing of the same effects: Or else all the same means are
effectual always, and in all persons: But the first is false, for our Savior
Christ cured by his word only, and Peter in the 5. cap. Act. verse. 15. is said
to heal diseases, even with his shadow.

And here Saint Paul is reported to have cured them with napkins and
partletes. And as for the second we see it cannot be true by common experience:
for who cures now by his shadow only as Peter did. Indeed many of our
sorcerers will seem like apes, to imitate Saint Paul in this place, sending
napkins or clothes unto those that are sick: but their working is (as I have
said before) by natural means. For it seems very certain in all reason:
That by the same means generally, that the devil inflicteth diseases upon
man, or beast, he does expel and drive away the same. Now it is evident by
many examples, that he inflicteth diseases by natural means: for Johannes
Langius in his 38. medicinal epistle recites an history of one Vlricke
Neucesser, who being extremely pained in one of his sides, upon a time laid
hold of a nail, that lay under the skin there: which nail when the surgeon
had cut out, and the pain nothing allaied, the man despairing of any recovery
cut his own throat, and afterward being opened before his burial, (in the
presence of many) by two chirurgions, whom he there names: there were found in
his belly a long round piece of wood, four knives of steel, partly sharp,
and partly nickt like a saw, and two sharp instruments of iron, that were more
then a spanne long, and hair rolled together in form like a ball. So
Anthonius Beneuenius, de admirandis morborum causis: tells of a certain
woman of Florence, who being pained with an exceeding great torment in her
stomach suddenly cast up by vomit crooked nails, needles of brass, with
wax and lumpes of hair; and lastly a piece of flesh so big, that it was
thought impossible to be avoided. In like manner Benedictus Veronensis in his 7
book, and 25. chapter says, that he saw two women dwelling in the same town,
and very familiar friends: which being both extremely vexed, and tormented
with vomiting: one of them (with much ado) cast up a great needle, or pin
wherewith women use to trim their hair, being crooked after the manner of a
hook, and wrapped together with the hair of a woman's head, wherein were
infolded the pairings of nails: the which being voided* she notwithstanding
lay as it were strangled, and so dyed the next night. The other cast up the
hair of a woman's head, with pieces of glass, and three pieces of a dogs
tail dried with the hair upon it, which if they had been set together
again, would have made the length or quantity of the whole tail. There are
many other such like examples of diseases laid upon mortal men, which might be
brought to this purpose: None of all which could possibly be done, but by
enchantment: and yet we see that they were done or inflicted, but only by
natural means. Neither can any man prove the contrary (as I think) in any
other. The which if it be so, then may we conclude that all these, and such
like, which are done by enchantment, are done by natural means. But some man
may object and say: That as one swallow makes not summer, so a few particular
examples cannot infer a general conclusion. To this I answer: That many
particular examples recited, with the rest all are in general implied, so that
there can no instance be brought to the contrary is a sufficient argument.
Besides this the very name given by men of former age in latin, to magitians,
charmers, sorcerers, inchanters, necromancers, and such like: calling them
venehicos, does decipher the manner of their working: as though they made and
infused such matter, or medicines, as alters the nature and temper of those
things into which they are infused, and wherewith they are mixed: and the
greek word (...), betokens the same thing. Neither do I see wherefore Satan
should use natural means, in the parties before specified, and such like:
rather then supernatural, if it had not past his reach: seeing that he does
for the most part endeavor to cover his dealing (as much as he can) that it
may not be espied. As he did when he laid his hand upon Job, as it apeareth in
the first chapter of his book. And therefore it is to be thought, that he made
use (in the aforesaid persons) of those natural means which came first into
his mind, and were nearest at hand for that present time. And as concerning
the second kind of miracle, which S. Paul is here said to work by napkins,
and partlets sent unto the parties grieved: To wit the casting out of devils:
the same is to be judged and said, which has been spoken of the miracle of
healing: both in regard of the outward, and also of the inward means of the
same. For as for the inward, which is the only means: It is the power and
spirit of God alone: and as for the outward manner, it makes (as I said
before) nothing to the working of the miracle. Wherefore they are all in a
mighty error, which think that Satan can be cast out, by certain set and
conceited words, or characters, as they use in magic: For we must not think
that the devil is either so simple, or so weak (if God permit him to use his
strength) as to be (as it were) blown out with the wind, or sound of words:
or so timorous, that he may be fraied away with the sight of figures, or
characters, when as he durst tempt our first parents in their state of
innocence. Genesis cap. 3. Nay he was not afraid to set upon our Savior Christ,
as it is in the 4. cap. of Saint Luke although he was God, albeit in the form
of man, Phil. cap. 2. verse. 6. And S. Peter likeneth him to a roaring lion in
his first epist. and cap. 5. And our Savior Christ in the 12. cap. of S.
Mathewes Gospel, seems to compare him to a strong man, which will not yield,
till a stronger then he compels him. Indeed sometime he will feign as
though he were forcibly dispossessed by the vain tricks of magitians, and
coniurers: but it is only to this end, that he may thereby the more strengthen
and enlarge his own kingdom, by bringing into, and detaining men in this
wicked error, to think that such things are brought to pass by magical
conceits: when as the devil goes out of himself: even as when we see two men
pulling at a thing, one of them contrary to the other: and the stronger will
seem to be forced to yield, and so lets go his hold, but it is when he
sees his most advantage to give his adversary the greater fall. Even so Satan
albeit he may sometime seem to be forced, yet indeed, and in truth it is but
policy, thereby to work the more harm. For he is not constrained to go out by
any such vain follies, or by any other howsoever used, but only by the mere
power and finger of God, as it will appear by that which follows in the text.

Then certain of the vagabond Jews [exorcistae.] Here in this verse we see
the effect of those miracles, which Paul is said to work in this place in the
wicked sorcerers: who (when the Apostle had preached the Gospel of our Savior
Christ: and by his power, and in his name had done these said miracles, for the
confirmation of the same) went about most wickedly to abuse his sacred name, to
the establishing of their magic, and sorcery. For although the name which
they are called by, may seem to have no badde, but an indifferent
signification, being used in the primitive Church for those, which having
received the gift of working miracles from God, did use his name in casting out
of devils, and the very etymology of the word in the original tongue does
show the same: Yet it is most evident by the circumstance of this place, that
these men were nothing but mere wicked magitians, and namely, of that sort
which we call coniurers: who although there be no difference in respect of the
substance of their wicked serving of Satan in this behalf: Notwithstanding the
fashion, and manner of their service, seems somewhat to differ. For those
which we call witches, or sorcerers, seem to be in a more vile, and slavish
condition, being always at the devils commandment: but these which we term
coniurers, will make as though they commanded the devil, howbeit they profit
nothing thereby, saving that they serve his turn herein, and sometime their
own: so far forth as their practice may stand with the furtherance of Satan's
purpose in the same, which is the enlargement of his own kingdom. Otherwise
they may command (as they say) and go without: he will do what himself
lists, and not what they would have him to do. The which peradventure, when
these Exorcistes saw, having eftsoons used their accustomed manner, and
ceremonies of coniuration, and nevertheless many times missing of their
purposes: And likewise seeing, and considering the Apostle Saint Paul, how he
never failed in the working of his miracles by the name of the Lord Jesus: They
thought that they would make trial, what they could bring to pass thereby:
and so as they traueliled about the country, as fortune-rellers, charmers,
inchanters, and such like do with us, they took in hand to cast out devils,
out of those which were possessed with the same, by naming over them which had
the said evil spirits the name of the [Lord Iesus] Mark I pray you the
incredible boldness of these wicked coniurers: who not considering, neither the
occasion, end, nor authority whereby S. Paul did work: Nor their own danger,
which might ensue unto them thereby: rashly take upon them to do such miracles
by the name of our Lord Jesus, without any further direction. But such is all
kind of magic and sorcery being founded neither upon reason, nor yet upon
common sense: albeit they will seem to make an art of it. For whosoever shall
examine the truth of the grounds, and principles thereof in their books, shall
find no pith, nor any sound matter worth the noting: but only foolish and
vain tricks, as are circles, characters, and such like: or words
notvnderstood: or vainly, or wickedly applied: as in abusing the name of God,
or his word, and such like: when they use them not to that end, for the which
they were appointed: as do here the aforesaid forcerers, the exorcists: and
therefore for the most part they are frustrate of their purposes, except it be
sometime (by God his permission) that the devil of his own mind (for causes
before rehearsed) does work the effect for them. The which when the Emperor,
Nero saw (as it is recorded in the thirtieth book, and first chapter of
Plinies natural history) who was one that favored this wicked craft, no man
more, having sufficient store of wealth and power: and magitians sent for from
all parts of the world to confer with: and yet for all that, in the end, left
it as vain and frivolous. And common experience does teach us even the very
same. For whosoever shall look into the dealings of those persons, which are
accounted the only cunning men in the world amongst us, he shall see that they
use no other outward means, but a sort of charms: the most of them so
ridiculous and foolish, that a wise man must needs laugh at them, and every
one that has but a spark of religion, to loath and detest them: Which are
either newly devised by the devil and his ministers: or else received before by
tradition from one to another. And if so be they use good words and sensible,
which is very seldom in all points: yet are they uttered with an evil intent,
thinking by them alone to work such wonders: as the exorcists do here.
Seeing that the words of themselves can do nothing, how glorious soever they
appear, without further authority and power from God. And yet we see that this
vain and wicked craft, and the practices of the same, have many favorers in
the world, especially of those that are profane, and want knowledge in
religion. The which also have devised many reasons to uphold the said craft:
whereof some of the chiefest I will here recite.

And first they say, that these cunning men do use no evil means, and
especially the devil is not the author of this their working. For (fay they.)
The devil neither can, nor will do any good: but these cunning folks do
good, and therefore they do it not by the devil, or by any evil means. To
answer unto this argument, we must more deeply weigh and consider of the
matter, then it seems, that those which framed this argument did. For I
think they understood not what they meant themselves by this word (good.) If
they understand thereby that which is absolutely, altogether, always, and in
all respects (good) then we deny their assumption: for in this manner there is
none good but God alone: as our Savior Christ says in the 19. cap. of the
Gospel after Saint Matthew. verse. 17. As for all other creatures they are good,
so far forth as it pleases God the chiefest goodness to esteem, and accept
of them. For whereas it is said in the first chapter of Genesis verse. 31. And God
saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good. We must understand by
(goodness) the perfect estate of all things both generally, and particularly,
whereby they were conformable to the will and mind of God the creator, who
approved them when they were made. For no creature is good of it self first,
and for that cause approved: but because God approoueth it, therefore it is
good. Now the Lord seems to have approved these his creatures, in three
especial respects. First in regard of the beauty, comelines, and glory of
all, and every creature in their kind. Secondly in regard of the excellent
virtue which God gave to every thing. For as he has made nothing in vain,
but every thing to some especial end: so has he furnished the same with
sufficient power and virtue, for the accomplishment of the same end. Thirdly,
in respect of the exceeding benefit, and profit, which came by them unto man.
As for the two first, no man will say that in those respects these cunning
folk can, or do any good by reason that they concern the creatures
themselves alone, without any reference unto man: and we know that no man can
make, no not one hair of his head white, or black, as it is in the 5 chapter
of Saint Matthewes Gospel verse. 36. Therefore it must needs be in the third
respect, which is in regard of the profitte that redoundeth thereby unto men:
so that their meaning is, that whatsoever does exhibit, do, or procure any
benefit, or profit unto any man, is by their reason said to do him good. But
let them consider this: that albeit at the first the Lord created every thing
very good, yet since the fall of Adam this goodness of the creature is partly
corrupted, and partly diminished: not only in the two first respects, but also,
and that especially in the last. For whereas the creatures were in some measure
made for man's use, so when man had transgressed the commandment of God, both
man himself fell from that integrity of nature, wherein he was first created;
being now corrupted and depraved, as well in all the powers and faculties of
the body, as of the mind: as it is manifest by the punishment laid upon the
man, and likewise upon the woman in the 3. chapter of Genesis: in so much as
Saint Paul in the 7. chapter to the Romans, verse. 18. in the name or person of
al men confesses, that in him, that is, in his flesh (whereby is meant the
whole man, as he is now by nature, consisting both of body and soul) is no
good. Yea that we cannot think a good thought of our selves, as it is in the
2. Epist. Cor. cap. 3. verse. 5. and also the Lord cursed the earth for man's
sake: as it is in the aforesaid 3. chapter of Genesis. The whole creature
being now subject unto vanity, as Saint Paul speaks to the Romans cap. 8.
So that the creatures are not now so profitable unto him, as he is a natural
man, as Saint Paul says in the 1. chapter to Titus, verse. 15. That to those
that are defiled, and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but their minds and
consciences are defiled. Whereby it appears, that before God has purified
the heart by says, nothing can do him good, nothing is pure unto him. But
even as an impure vessel defiles whatsoever is put into it: so whatsoever
happens unto the wicked, it is for there further damnation: and what does it
profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, as our
Savior Christ says in the 16. chapter of S. Matthewes Gospel. And for as much
as no man is altogether regenerate in this life, but has always the flesh
striving and lusting against the spirit. Gal. c. 5. v. 17. therefore it pleased
God (to the end that they might see the haynousnes of sin, and the
grieuousnes of the fall of our first parents) to suffer those things which
were in their first creation ordained for their good, to be even unto his dear
children, an occasion of their fall, albeit not eternally. So David being a
man after God his own heart, abused that goodly, strong, and healthful state
and temper of his body, which is set down in the 16. chapter of the first
book of Samuel, to the horrible committing of adultery with the wife of
Vrias: as it is the 11. cap. of the second book of Samuel: the which no doubt
he would never have done, if he had been a weakeling, and crased with
sickness. The which thing was very well understood by Alurede king of the most
part of this Realm of England, who being a fair, comely, and a goodly
personage, was therewithal given to the vice of the flesh: wherefore he
desired God to chastise him with some continual sickness, whereby he might
serve God the better, and yet not be made unapt to worldly business: wherefore
by the ordinance of God he was taken with the disease called Ficus, and was
thereof sick a long time. And the good king Ezechias, so long as the Lord
exercised him under the cross of troubles and sickness, walked before him in
all dutiful humility: but after that he was delivered from them, and restored
to health again, he began (as it were) to be lifted up in the pride of
heart, and in the vanity of his mind, he showed the Ambassadors of the king
of Babylon all his treasure, and provision: as it is in the second book of the
Kings chap. 20. and the 32. chap. of the second book of the Chronicles. And
what was it that made David so grievously to offend God, in numbering of the
children of Israel? as it is in the second book of Samuel, cap 24. but only
prosperity, health, and ease. The which when he had more deeply considered;
and had seen that the Lord had always called him home again into the right
way by adversity and troubles: he says in the 119. psalm, verse. 71. that It
was good for him that he was in trouble. And again, in the 67. verse of the
same psalm he says, that before he was troubled, he went wrong, but then did
he keep Gods words, or commandments. So that oftentimes, nay for the most
part affliction, whether it be in body, or mind, or goods, is more expedient
and profitable for the children of God, then worldly pleasure, health, or
prosperity. For God is said to chasten his dearest children, in the 12. chapter
to the Hebrews, verse. 6, 7, and 8. in these words: Whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he receives. If ye endure
chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: for what son is
it that the father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without correction,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and no sons. And Saint Paul
says in the 9. chapter of the 1. Epist. Cor. verse. 27. that he beat down his
body, and brought it into subjection: lest by any means, after he had preached
unto other, himself should be reproved. The which if it be so, then no
marvel though the ministers of the devil, the sorcerers, are willing to
procure sometimes temporal benefits of health, and riches unto men, seeing (as
I have said before) that oftentimes they are more hurtful, then profitable
unto them. And it is the soul altogether that Satan hunteth for: the which
that he may obtain, he cares not so much if they enjoy wordly prosperity, and
felicity for a time. For as for worldly, and temporal commodities, they are as
well common to the wicked, as to the godly: nay the ungodly do most flourish
in this life, as we see it daily by experience before our eyes. And it is
plainly proved by diverse places of the scripture: as in the 73. psalm, their
prosperity is described, whereat the Psalmist fretted himself, as he says,
when he did see the prosperity of the wicked: for there are no bands in their
death, but they are lusty and strong, they are not in trouble like other men:
And again, their eyes stand out with fatnes, they have more then heart can
wish. Here we see that they have not riches alone, but also they are lusty and
strong without diseases of the body: neither are they grieved in mind, as
other men; but all things whatsoever, yea more then heart can wish, they have
and enjoy, as well for their pleasure, as for their profit: as Job says in the
21. cap. Wherefore do the wicked live and wax old, and grow in wealth?
their seed is established in their sight with them, and their generation
before their eyes. Their houses are peaceable without fear, and the rod of
God is not upon them. Their bullock gendreth and fails not, their cow
calueth, and casts not her calfe. They send forth their children like sheep,
and their sons dance. They take the tabret and harp, and rejoice in the
sound of the organes. They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go
down to the grave. As it were without any long, or languishing sickness. And
this happens not only to themselves, but even unto their children, to whom
they leave plenty also of goods: as it is in the 17. psalm, where the Prophet
says, that God filled their bellies with his hid treasure, and their
children had enough, and left the rest of their substance for their children.
The which prosperity of the wicked, when he had set down, he concludes the
said 17. psalm with these words saying: But I will behold thy face in
righteousness; and when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thine image. As
though he should have said: Let the wicked triumph as much as they will, for
they have their portion in this life: but as for me, howsoever I be troubled
and afflicted, I will (as near as I can with Gods assistance) so live in
godliness, and holiness of life, now in this world, as I may attain unto
eternal joy and felicity in the world to come. For truly all earthly things
are but mere vanities, as the spirit of God says by Solomon, in the book of
the preacher: but godliness is profitable to all things, as that which has the
promise of this life, and of the life to come, 1. Tim. cap. 4. verse. 8.
Wherefore we need not to doubt, but that this will be good and profitable unto
all them which have it rightly, and soundly wrought in their heart by the
spirit of God, whereby they are renewed and regenerated unto newnes of life, by
putting off the old man with the deeds thereof, and putting on the new man,
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that made him. But Satan
being an adversary both to God, and to all the children of men, has never
any intent, or meaning, (except it be in hypocrisy) that either himself, or
any of his instruments, the sorcerers should move, persuade, or minister any
occasion unto godliness of life, whereby the souls of men might be saved in the
day of the Lord: but only that they should feed and ford them on with
temporary benefits, the which by God his permission both the devil, and his
servants the sorcerers by his help, both can, and sometime will do. As the
Damsel in the 16. chap. Act. verse. 16. is said to bring her master great
gains by means of the devilish spirit of divination, wherewith she was
possessed. And Simon the sorcerer, in the 8. cap. Act. is reported to have
purchased such honor by his witcherwft, and magic, that the people of
Samaria extolled him above the common condition of men calling him, and saying,
that he was the great power of God. But it will be objected and said: that
riches and honors, and such like, are things without a man, and therefore may
the rather be procured by Satan. But health is not so easily to be wrought;
by reason it is within, even in the body of man. Besides that, it is so near,
and dear unto man, that the devil will not do it for him, if he could. So
that he neither can, nor will procure health unto mankind by this reason,
howsoever he deals in other temporal benefits with him. To answer to this
objection, we must consider that (albeit he may seem to envy even worldly
commodities, which are bestowed upon men) yet Satan's chiefest drift and maine
point that he aims at, is the enlargement of his own kingdom, by the
eternal destruction of man in the life to come. The which that he may bring to
pass, he leaves (as they say) no stone unturned: even as the great
politicians of the world, who to win a horse, will lose the saddle. So the
devil is content to bestow sometimes temporary benefits upon men in this
world, that their souls may be damned in the world to come: yea and such is
his crafty policy, that he feeds them with those commodities, wherein they
take most delight, and whereof they are most desirous; that so he may the
easier draw them unto his lure, whether it be riches, honors pleasure,
health, or whatsoever else. But for as much as this will not serve his purpose
in some men, as it appears by Job: therefore he uses (if he may) in them a
contrary means, namely, vexations and troubles, as he did in Job: seeking
thereby to make them desperate. For riches, and honors, procuring unto them
poverty: and for health, extremity of pain, both in body, and mind. Neither
can I see any reason (if he be willing) wherefore Satan should not be able, as
well to cure diseases in man, as he is to inflict them upon man; seeing that
the one requires as inward a working in the body, as the other: and it is
manifest by diverse places of the scripture, that he does insinuate himself
into the very thoughts of men, and namely, in the 18 chapter of the second
book of the Chronicles, verse. 22. where it is said, that he will be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all Achabs Prophets; and therefore much more into their
bodies; the which also otherwhiles he does possess; as it is plain by sundry
places of the new testament. Furthermore, seeing that God does bestow all kind
of temporary, and worldly blessings, whether they pertain to the body, or to
the mind: as are all arts, sciences, and worldly wisdom and learning, as
well upon the wicked, as upon the godly; as we see by experience: and it is
said by our Savior Christ Jesus, in the 5. chapter of the Gospel after Saint
Matthew, verse. 45. that God makes his son to shine, as well upon the badde,
as upon the good: and his rain to fall as well upon the wicked, as upon the
godly. By these two blessings (to wit) the sun and rain meaning al other
earthly benefits whatsoever, by the figure synechdoche. And if he deal thus
bountifully with wicked men, whose end is destruction with the devil and his
angels: why may he not bestow such like gifts even upon the devil? albeit he
abuse the same. We know, that although our Savior Christ calls (as it were)
Judas Iscariote for his wickedness, and treachery a devil, in the 6. chapter of
Saint John's Gospel, verse. 70. yet in the 10. chapter after Saint Matthew, he
had given him the grace of healing diseases, as well as the other Apostles. But
to come more nearly to the point which we have in handling, we must
remember, that the scripture in diverse and sundry places, as in Leuit. 177. and
Deuteronomy. 32. 17. and Ps. 106. 37. and 1. Cor. 10. 20. says, that they which doi
worship, and dosacrifice unto Idols, do it unto duels. The which although it
be expounded to be spoken, in regard that therein they served the devil, and
not God: yet it is certain by diverse ancient histories, that the devil
himself did work by, and in some of those Idols: as Apollo Dodonaeus did
speak out of an oak: and Hermes Trismegistus, as he is alleged by Apuleius
and others, has these words: Homo statuas ad similitudinem suam facit: in quas
art magica spiritus inuitat, aut ipsi ad eas vltro accedunt: and hi humano
generi futura praedicunt, which may be thus englished: Man makes Idols or
Images like unto himself: into the which he inuiteth or procures spirits, or
else they come into them of themselves: and these do foretell unto men things to
come. And a little after he says, AEsculapius Asclepii avus, et Mercurius avus
meus, qui apud Hermopolen AEgypti adorabantur, homines erant, quorum corpora
seu cadavera sepulta sunt, illius quide^ in Libya, at huius in Aegipto, in vrbe
quae inde Hermopolis vocatur: sed sub his nominibus coluntur daemones, quos ego
in eorum statuas pellexi. That is Aesculapius grandfather to Asclepius, and
Mercurius my grandfather, which were worshipped as gods at Hermopolis a city in
Egypt, were men, whose bodies or dead corpse are buried, the one of them in
Libya and the other in Egypt, in the city which thereof is called Hermopolis,
but under these or their names, spirits or devils are worshipped, the which I
have provoked or brought into their Images. And truly if the devil did not
work in, and by them, they could say or do no more then a stock or a stone,
as the prophet David says, Psalm, 115. that they have mouths and speak not,
eyes and see not, ears and hear not, noses, and smell not, hands and handle
not, feet and walk not. The which being so, it follows of necessity, that
whosoever is cured of any disease by any Idol, or Image, is cured by the
devil. Now it is more then probable, that some have been cured by Idols. For
we read in the first chapter of the second book of the Kings, that Ahaziah
king of Israel being sick, sent unto Baalzebub, which was an Idol (which they
of Ekron worshipped for God) concerning the recovery of his health. And albeit
it is there set down, only that he sent to know whether he should recover of
his health or not: Yet it is very likely, that wicked men used to go to those
Idols, as well to be cured of their diseases, as to know whether they were
curable or not. For as in all other things (as near as he can) the devil as
an ape will imitate God, to set thereby a better color upon his wicked
dealings: Even so in this matter of healing, it is most certain, that Satan by
his servants, and ministers, did the same which God did by his prophets: But it
is manifest, that the prophets of God did as well cure diseases, as foretell
the event thereof: For the damsel which waited upon the wife of Naaman the
Syrian, told her mistress, that if her master Naaman were with the prophet
Elisha in Samaria, he would soon deliver him of his leprosy: The which no
doubt she would never have done, if she had not known, or heard that he had
done the like before. Nay if it had not been well known, that they which went
to the Idol Baalzebub, had sometimes obtained their purpose in those cases,
Ahaziah being a man of that power and authority would not have sent unto him.

But to leave this, and come to their next argument, which is. That oftentimes
they use good and godly words and characters: and therefore their doings are
not evil, nor wrought by Satan. But herein they do mightily bewray their
ignorance in the crafty policies of the devil: who ever (as near as it is
possible for him) will cover his wicked entents and dealings with the cloak of
holiness and honesty, turning himself, as the Apostle Saint Paul says, 2.
Cor. cap. 11. verse. 14. into an angel of light. For even as the holy angels in
heaven do indeed perform all duties, and use al good and godly means
according to God his commandments, to the honor of God, and the good of his
elect: even so Satan and his ministers, the sorcerers, will seem to do the
same: albeit they have always another, yea a contrary intent and meaning. So
the devil in the beginning would not seem to do it himself, but when there
was no humane creature upon the earth to suborne in that behalf, he entered
into the serpent, using him to persuade the woman to disobey the commandment
of God, in eating of the forbidden fruit: because he was the wiliest beast of
all that God had made: and therefore Eve might the rather be drawn thereby, to
follow his counsel: which he would seem to give unto her for her good, as one
that wished her well, and sought her commodity: when as he went about her
eternal destruction, and of all her posterity. And in the 22. cap. of the
first book of the King. he did not take a direct course, to show himself
according unto his intention in that action: but he used the tongue of the
prophets to tell lies: that thereby Achab might be persuaded to go and fall in
battle. And albeit they were all of them false prophets, yet they were not so
reputed or esteemed of the king, who asked counsel at their hands. And it is
manifest in that place, that they pretended the authority and commandment of
God by the suggestion of the devil, as it is in the aforesaid chapter, v. 11.
where it is said that Zidkiiah made horns of iron saying, thus says the Lord
with these shall thou push the Aramites, until thou have consumed them. We see
also in the 4. cap. of Saint Mathewes Gospel and likewise in Saint Luke. That
Satan himself in his own person used the words of the scripture to cover his
mischievous intent, when he tempted our Savior Christ. The which if it be so,
then why may not his servants and instruments the sorcerers use the like means
to color their wicked practices? Nay whosoever shall look into their books
and writings (albeit for the most part they be badly, and without any sense or
reason applied) yet he shall find often times very good words and sentences,
partly out of the scripture, and partly of their own devising) the which a man
would not think to be greatly to be found fault withal, if their intent were
good, and their authority from God lawful and allowed. As it is manifest by
histories. That the Egyptian sorcerers used in their sorceries these words. To
wit: The god of Israel: The god of the Hebrews: The god which drowned the
Egyptians, and their king in the red sea. And is it not most manifest by the
plain words of this text, which I have in hand, that the Exorcistes used the
same words in effect which Saint Paul, and the other holy Apostles of our
Savior Christ did? making (as it were) a charm of the scripture of God? For
what is a Charm else? but a certain, or set form of words, either by
themselves alone, or joined with characters, without any commission, or
especial authority from God, used to the intent, that by them some
extraordinary work, or wonder might be wrought: So that how glorious soever,
or how goldy soever the words may seem to be in outward show, yet if they be
used without gods especial direction, or commandment to the aforesaid end,
they are but mere charms. Albeit my self have heard some being patrones of
these kinds of wicked practices, who have said: That then it is a charm only,
when as such words are used, which are not understood of him which uses them.
The which is confuted in the 58. Psalm. in these words: They are as venomous as
the poison of a serpent: even like the deaf adder, that stops her ears:
which refuses to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never sowisely. In
which words, the prophet David describes the obstinate wickedness of his
adversaries, in the court of king Saul, who having been often reproved, and
told their duty out of the word of truth; did notwithstanding wilfully persist
in their sins: giving no ear to that wholesome counsel, whereby they might
be bettered: much like unto the adder which will not hear when she should with
enchantment be bound, and restrained from hurting with her poison: but stops
her ears, least she should hear the voice of the charmer charming. Now if a
charm cannot be understood, what it signifies, what needs the adder to
stop her ears at it? or what wisdom or cunning can be discerned therein?
if so be the meaning thereof is not to be known what is said or sung? or
finally how serves this comparison to the purpose of the Psalmist, if no
difference may be perceived betwixt one charm, and another, whether of them is
the better, or morewise or cunning. Nay the very etymology of the word does
insinuate unto us, that it may be understood. For it is certain, that the word
(charm) is derived of the Latin word (carmen) the letter (h) being put in, as
we see in the word (Enchantment) when as in the Latin word (incantamentum)
whereof it is derived, the said letter is not found: but in the french tongue
it is put in. Wherefore both these words. viz. (charm) and (enchantment) seem
to come from the Latins unto the French men first, and from them to us by the
coming in of William the Conqueror: as it appears by ancient records that
(charms) and enchantments) in old time were called (Spells,) which seems to
have the same signification that (carmen) has in Latin, as it may be gathered
out of Chaucer, where he says. Listen to my spell, which is as much to say, as
Listen to my words, or work in verse. For a (spell) as also (carmen) among the
Latins, is when a set form, order or number of words in matters are (as it
were) so religiously to be kept, that it is not lawful to alter, or change
the same. Now because that in poetical works in verse, this is chiefly to be
observed: therefore they are most commonly called by the aforesaid names.
Howbeit, all charms and enchantments, by reason that they are also tied to a
certain form, order or number of words, are also termed (Spelles) as
(night-spells) and (wood-spells) and such like. As also in Latin (Carmina) as
it is manifest by diverse Latin authors: and namely, in Virgil in his eight
eglogue by these words. Ducite ab vrbe domum mea carmina ducite Daphnim, etc.
And for as much as the same were sometimes pronounced in a singing manner,
therefore they were also called otherwhiles (Incantamenta) that is (as we
translate it) Enchantments of the Latin word (canto) which does betoken (to
sing) and also (to charm or inchaunt) as it is in the aforesaid eglogue: where
it is said Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis. So that here we see,
that one and the self same thing in effect is signified by diverse words,
although in diverse respects. Yea and the original word in the aforesaid 58.
Psalm. which is there translated a charmer, and in some translations an
inchaunter, does naturally betoken one that whispereth, muttereth, or mumbleth,
speaking softly as it were betwixt the teeth. And because the charmers, and
inchaunters do so, as it is manifest by experience, and likewise by the 8. cap.
of Esa. verse. 19. in these words. And when they shall say unto you, inquire at
them that have a spirit of divination, and at the south-sayers which whisper
and murmur, etc. and Esa. the 29. cap. verse. 4. Thy voice shall be also out of
the ground, like him that has a spirit of divination, and thy talking shall
whisper out of the dust. Wherefore that we may not strive or contend about
words alone, let us return to the very point, and pith of the matter, which we
have in handling: which is, what is lawful in this case, and what is unlawful.
The which may easily and briefly be determined, if we call to mind, what I
have said before, concerning the difference betwixt the servants of God, and
the servants of the devil in this behalf. For seeing that there be three
especial things required in him that is a lawful worker of miracles. First
that he have an especial calling from God: secondly, that the means and manner
which he uses be lawful, good, and godly: and thirdly, that he does it to the
glory of God, and the edification of his Church: whosoever wants any one of
these three things in his working, what words or characters, or what means
soever he uses, he is but a charmer, or inchanter: and the means, or manner
which he uses, are but mere charms, and enchantments; and therefore utterly
unlawful, and abominable before God. Albeit some do hold that the sign of
the cross is very effectual in these cases, as it is much used in charms,
and enchantments. And to approve their assertion, they allege the figure
which appeared unto Constantine the great, wherein it was said, that he should
overcome, as it is in Latin: in hoc signo vinces. But this may be easily
answered: That it was not the sign of the cross, but of Christ's name: for the
said figure was made of two greek letters conjoined together. viz. (...) as it
is manifest in Eusebius in the life of Constantine. l. 1. cap. 22. 25. So that
it is not signum crucis, that did this, but fides crucifixi, or rather Christ
himself. And although it pleased God at that time to show this sign of the
cross to that Emperor to confirm his faith: yet it follows not, that that
figure was to be used afterward to work wonders by: or that there was any such
virtue therein. Nay otherwhiles it comes to pass, that the same which God
has commanded to be used for a time, upon especial occasion known to
himself alone; and has given virtue and power to it, to work some especial
good unto his children: does after lose the same virtue, and is an occasion of
falling to them that use it: as the brazen serpent, which the Lord appointed to
be set up upon a pole, and whosoever then being bitten of the fiery serpents,
which are there spoken of, did look upon it, recovered health, as it is in the
book of Numbers, the 21. chapter, verse. 8. besides that it was a type of our
Savior Christ's passion: as it is in the 3. chapter of Saint John's Gospel,
verse. 14. Yet we cannot read, that ever afterward it wrought the like effect.
Yea Hezekiah seems to be commended in the second book of the Kings, cap. 18.
ver. 4. for breaking the same in pieces. But let this suffice concerning their
second reason.

The third argument which they use to defend these sorcerers, which they call
cunning folks, is: That they work these things by the says of miracles: and
therefore by no evil, or devilish means. To this I answer: That if their
antecedent were true, I could easily grant their consequent. But that by no
possible means can be proved by them. For albeit our Savior Christ in the
17. chapter of the Gospel after S. Matthew, verse. 20. says unto his disciples.
Verily I say unto you, if ye had faith, as much as is a grain of
mustard-seede, ye shall say to this mountain, remove thy self hence to
yonder place: and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you.
Yet it follows not, that these cunning folk (as they are termed) do work
by the said kind of faith. For our Savior Christ speaks in that place unto
his disciples, upon whom he had bestowed the gift of working miracles before
as it is in the 10 chapter of the Gospel by Saint Matthew: and yet
notwithstanding their faith wauered, so that they could not cast out the devil
out of that child, as it is in the said 17. chapter of the Gospel after Saint
Matthew. Even as we see also in Peter: who although our Savior Christ in the
14. chapter of the said Gospel, did bid him come unto him walking upon the
sea: yet through infidelity he had been drowned, if Christ had not taken him
by the hand, and (as it were) again renewing his former faith, and
strengthening it. For it is most certain, that no man living has the faith of
miracles, except the Lord has first given him the grace and gift of working
miracles. For seeing that faith is a belief: and how can a man believe that
which he knows not? and how can he know without some especial promise. For
to build his faith of miracles simply upon the word of God alone, as it is
generally set down in the scripture, is not sufficient, unless he have
further an especial promise, or revelation from God. For otherwise every one
that believes, might be a worker of miracles by the same faith, which is
false. For Simon the sorcerer in the 8. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles is
said to believe, and yet had not the gift of working miracles; but would have
bought it for money afterward of Peter. Nay it is manifest by the 12. chap. of
the 1. Epist. Cor. that even the elect children of God, and those that are
workmen, and builders in his Church, being of the clergy, have not all this
gift. But will some say: This makes nor so much to the purpose: for why may
not our cunning men and women be of the number of those, upon whom God has
bestowed that gift? To this I answer: That besides that I have showed before:
that the said grace of working miracles is already ceased: it is requisite,
that they show some especial promise, or revelation from God, by the which
they do work. Or else they do but only presume thereof, taking the authority
unto themselves before the same be given the^; which is most abominable
sacrilege. Even as the Exorcistes do in this place. For it is not enough to
prove, that they are endued with the grace of working miracles from God: And
that they do that which they do in this behalf, by the faith of miracles,
because that otherwhiles they bring to pass such unwonted, and extraordinary
things as they take in hand. For so it may as well follow: That the sorcerers
of Egypt spoken of in the 7. and 8. chapters of Exodus did work by the
aforesaid means. Which cannot possibly be. For they themselves do in a manner
confess the contrary: when as in the 19. verse. of the said. 8. cap. of Exodus
they are said to affirm, that the finger of God was there. That is the lies
spoken of in the verse. going before were made, and brought forth only by the
almighty power of God. As if they should have said. Heretofore whatsoever we
have done in turning our rods into serpents: the water into blood: or
procuring of frogs: It was by natural means: and such as was ministered unto
us by Satan our master: But now this causing of lice after such a manner does
pass our cunning, or any means that can be used by man: but only by the
divine, and supernatural power of God, and authority from him. The which we
want: and therefore we cannot effect this thing. But as for Moses and Aaron,
they have their commission from the almighty: and therefore whatsoever they
have done in this action of causing these lice, it is by no other means save
only by the finger, and mighty power of God, working by them, and in them:
Wherefore it is no marvel, though they go beyond us herein. And it is most
apparent by the circumstance of the 8. cap. of the Act. That Simon the sorcerer
did many wonderful things in the eyes of the people, and yet it is as clear
as the sun, that he did them not by any godly and lawful means, but only
by magic: and therefore not by any authority or gift from God, or by the
faith of miracles. And truly if so be extraordinary, and wonderful things
were not sometimes wrought by evil means, God would never have inueighed so
much against the same in the holy scriptures, as it appears that he does in
diverse places thereof. But to go further with them in this case. If so be
that the gift of healing, and other miracles working, be the mere grace and
gift of God, being given only to some especial body, upon special occasion
(as the truth is) why can these cunning folks do nothing without their
ordinary set form of prayers, or characters, and such like? or so many times
repeated? When as our Savior Christ finds fault with such things in the 6.
cap. of S. Math. Gospel, where he says to his disciples these words. viz.
When ye pray, make no vain repetitions as the heathen do: which think to be
heard for their much babbling, be ye not therefore like unto them. And why does
one of these sorcerers give unto another certain set forms of prayers, or
blessings (as they call them) to cure such or such a disease? or to work these
or those wonders, if God alone be the onley author of their working? what (I
pray you, is this else? but to tie the power and will of God in this behalf
unto words, and characters, that is, unto his creatures, then which there can
be no greater Idolatry or sacrilege.

The fourth and last reason which they bring; is not so much to confirm the
lawfulness of the action of going to these wizzards, as to induce or
insinuate, a tolerablenesse in regard of the necessity (as it should seem)
thereof. For say they, there are diverse and sundry kinds of Maladies, which
though a man do go to all the physicians that can be heard of, yet he shall
find no remedy: whereas sometimes they are cured by those which are called
cunning folks: and therefore in all likelihood (admit it be not altogether so
allowable by the word as the common and ordinary manner of curing by medicines)
yet because that there seems to be no other means left (as it were) to cure
the said diseases, we hold it to be tolerable, and in such cases to be used
without any great offense unto God: unless we should neglect, and make no
account of our health: nay not of life it self, which is a most especial
benefit, and gift of the almighty. To this I answer: That indeed otherwhiles
the sorcerers by the means of Satan do heale-diseases, which many physicians
cannot. The which he is more apt and able naturally to bring to pass then man
is, both (as I have said before) in regard of his nature in his creation: and
also his long experience, especially if the diseases be inflicted by him self,
as many times they be. Yea after such a sort, and by such means, that no
mortal man can find out the causes or reason of the same as you may perceive
before fol. 41, 42, and 43. And in these cases as our common proverb has, he
that hides can best find, and he that made the wound, and he that wrought the
grief best knows the cause thereof? and therefore can best cure it, being
(as he is) so skillful in such matters. And as the devil does at the first
cause certain diseases, so it is very likely that he continues, and vpholdeth
the same so that by no ordinary means they can be cured, and that to this end,
that men may seek to him, or to his instruments for help, contrary to the
word and commandments of God. The which ought not to be done. For Saint Paul
in the 3. cap. of the epist. Romans verse. 8. shows, that we ought not to do
evil that good may come thereof. And he insinuates as much in the 6. cap. of
the same epist. verse. 1, and 2. Besides this: What good is it (I pray you) that
they look for at these wizzards hands? but only health, and riches, and such
like temporal benefits, which soon pass away; and oftentimes (as I have
proved before) are cause of the utter ruin of him that has them. What madness
is it then for us, in regard of such momentany and transitory things, in going
to such kind of men to procure gods just judgment to fall upon own heads,
unto our eternal destruction. Yea and sometimes even in this life, God lays
his punishment upon such offenders (as I have said before) and as it is
manifest by the first chapter of the second book of the King. where the Lord
affirms by the mouth of Elias: that because that Abaziah had sent unto
Baalzebub the God of Ekron concerning the recovery of his health: Therefore he
should not come off from his bed where he did lie, but should most certainly
die. And we have a most fearful example of king Saul, of the judgment of God
against this sin. The which if it be duly weighed and considered according to
all the circumstances thereof, it will be sufficient to overthrow all excuses
of going unto sorcerers: as it will appear by the history thereof set down in
the scripture. For whereas in the 28. cap. of the first book of Samuel verse.
3. It is said that Saul, had put away the sorcerers, and the south-sayers out
of the land: It follows in the next two verse. That the Philistims assembled
themselves and came and pitched in Shunem. And Saul assembled all Israel, and
they pitched in Giboa. And when Saul saw the host of the Philistims he was
afraid, and his heart was sore astonished. Now Saul being in this miserable
extremity, at the first used gods ordinary means: and as it is in the 6. verse.
he asked counsel of the Lord. And because the Lord did not answer him, neither
by dreams: nor by Vrim: nor yet by prophets. The which were means whereby
often times it pleased God to reveal his will unto men in those days.
Therefore Saul being thus beset with his enemies, and seeing that God did not
vouchsafe, albeit he had sought unto him in some measure (as he thought) to
instruct him any ways, what he was to do in this case: whether to yield, or
to join battle with the Philistims: neither what success he should have in
this business. Therefore (I say) as one that would not, or peradventure (as he
thought) that could not stay the Lords leisure, he resolved to leave off
seeking any more unto him, but to the devil: and thereupon he went to Endor to
ask counsel of asorceresse which dwelt there, as it follows in the same
chapter. But what was the end of this act of his? Truly a most miserable
destruction both of himself, as also of many of the Israelites, his subjects,
as appears most notably, both in the 31. chapter of this book, and likewise
in the 10. chapter of the first book of the Chronicles, where it is said, that
the Philistims compelled the Israelites to fly, slew his three sons,
Jonathan, Abinadab, and Melchisna: and drove Saul into such a straight, that he
killed himself for fear, with his own sword: and the Philistims finding his
body dead amongst the rest of the slain, hung it up reprochfully upon the wall
of their city Bethsan. And least any should think, that this punishment did
not happen for seeking unto such wicked, and abominable sorcerers, it is said
in the 13. and 14. verses of the aforesaid 10. chapt. of the first book of the
Chroni. that Saul dyed for his transgression, that he committed against the
Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept not: And in that he
sought and asked Counsel of a familiar spirit, and asked not of the Lord:
therefore the Lord slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of
Ishay. Here in this history we may plainly perceive, that no cause, or
occasion can free from punishment, or make the going unto sorcerers tolerable.
For then might Saul have had some excuse: who sought not for help of them,
until he was in such distress and danger, both of his own life, and of his
peoples, that he saw (as it seemed to him) no other way or means of escape:
neither did he go unto them, until he had first asked counsel of the
Lord: and that he had (as it were) refused to hear or answer him in this his
extremity, by any means allowable, as it is here said. Neither by dreams,
nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets. And yet notwithstanding it is said in this 10.
chapter of the first book of Chronicles, that because he sought, and asked
counsel of a familiar spirit, and asked not of the Lord: therefore the Lord
slew him, etc. Where we see that verified, which is spoken in the 18. cap. of
Ezechiel, verse. 24. viz. If the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and
commit iniquity, and do according to all the abominations, that the wicked
man does, shall he live? all the righteousness that he has done, shall not be
mentioned; but in his transgression that he has committed, and in the sins
that he has sinned, in them shall he die. For albeit Saul is said in the 28.
chap. of the first book of Samuel, verse. 6. That Saul asked counsel of the
Lord: and the Lord answered him not. Yet because he left off that good course
which he had begun, and afterward went unto a sorcerer; it was all one, as
if he had not asked counsel of the Lord at all. He ought rather to have
repented him of his sins, and to have turned unto the Lord by faithful, and
hearty prayer, and amendment of life: and then no doubt the Lord would have
hearkened unto him, and have granted his petition, so soon, and so far
forth, as he had thought it meetest, and best for him at least wise in the
world to come. This knew king David very well, and that was the cause that
moved him in the 2. book of Sam. cap. 15. (when as Absolon his son pursued
him with an host of men, and brought him unto such a distress, that he was
compelled to fly for the safeguard of his life) to yield himself in all
humanity unto the mere mercy, and goodness of God: and to wait the Lords
leisure, as it appears in the 25. and 26. verse. of the same chapter, by the
words which he spoke unto Zadok the high priest: who had brought the Ark of God out of the city in that flight, saying unto him the said Zadok, Carry the
Ark of God again into the city: If I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and the tabernacle thereof.
But if he thus say: I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do
to me as seems good in his eyes. So that this was his resolution: to depend
upon the merciful providence of God, whatsoever it should please God to do
with him. He did not as king Saul had done before him: who sought for help and
comfort of sorcerers: but as the holy man Job says, in the 17. cap. and 15.
verse. That albeit the Lord did slay him, yet he would put his trust in him: And
this has been the course that the Saints of God have taken from time to time.
And this ought to be our course, if we will arrive at the happy haven of
salvation in the world to come. For it is not a thing indifferent, but a matter
of exceeding great moment. In so much that whosoever does not observe the same,
he shall not (without repentance) enter into the kingdom of heaven.

These four are the chief of their reasons which I have heard. The rest are
either of small weight or moment, or else they may be referred to the four
aforesaid: wherefore I will have to the next words, which the exorcists are
here said to use in their coniuration: which are these following.

We adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches. This speech seems to be
borrowed of the common course of judges in their sessions, and such like: who
when they would have anything done exactly and diligently, do use to swear
them unto it. Even so in this place, the Exorcists are said to use the greek
word (...) of (...) which is derived of the noune (...) which signifies an
oath: and so does the Latin word adiuro come of iusiurandum which betokens
the same thing. As for English term we have none (that I know) that can in all
points express the greek, or latin word, wherefore we are constrained to
make an English word of the Latin, saying (we adjure) for the common usual
word of coniuring in our language, cannot well stand with the sense of this
place: Neither do I know how it has crept into our tongue in these matters,
seeing that it signifies rather (conspiring) when diverse have conspired, and
as it were sworn together to do any act. How heit according as they are used
now amongst us, there us little, or no difference in the meaning: and may be
used (for the most part) the one word for the other. But notwithstanding in the
auncientest translations they use this word (charge) which because it carries
not that (emphasis) with it, which the greek and latin words do, therefore
it in altered here, and (adjure) put in for it. But howsoever it be, it is
most certain, that these exorcists did mightily offend the majesty of God in
so profaning of the most holy name of Christ Jesus, by making thereof a charm
or enchantment: and abusing it to their own private fame, and commodity,
without any such commission, or authority from God. For even as all authority
and power is appointed by him, in civil causes and matters of the common
wealth, as it is in the 13. cap. Romans verse. 1. All power is of God, and the
powers that be, are ordained of God. So it is in gods Church wherein every man
has his place, every man has his especial gift, according as it pleases God
to appoint, and give him, as it is manifest by the 12. cap. of the 1. epist.
Cor. And whosoever is not content with that measure which God by his spirit
has bestowed upon him, but presumes of greater gifts in this behalf then he
has, is a usurper, of which sort were Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, in the 16.
cap. of the book of Numbers, with their adherents, whose most fearful
punishment is set down in that place. Nay even Vzza in the second book of
Samuel, cap. 6. was stricken with present death, because he touched the Ark of God to stay it, least it should have fallen, or have been hurt: which he
seemed to do of a good intent. The which if it be so, then no doubt the sin
of these exorcists cannot be but most horrible, in abusing thus the name of
Christ Jesus: for God will not hold him guiltles that takes his name in vain:
as it is in the third commandment. And truly it is very much to be marvelled
at, that men of such place, and knowledge, as it may seem that these were:
should fall into such gross errors and impiety.

For they were the sons of Scena a chief priest of the Jews which did
this.] Now we know that the priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the
law should be required at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts, Malachy. cap. 2. ver. 7. Wherefore if it were the duty of all the
Israelites, to teach their children the precepts, and commandementes of the
Lord, as it is in the 6. cap. of Deuteronomy. ver. 7. and. 8. and cap. 11. ver.
19. then much more were the priests bound to do it, unto whom all the rest
were to resort to light their candle of knowledge. But that seems to be most
truly verified of the people in that age, which the prophet Esaias in the first
chapter verse 5. and. 6. says, viz. The whole head is sick of one and the
same disease: the whole heart is heavy: even from the soale of the foot, unto
the crown of the head there is no whole part, but wounds, and swellings, and
filthy sores. For Josephus a Jew, one of their own country men, living not
long after this time, a most excellent historiographer in his book, De
antiquitate Iudaeorum cap. 6. and in other places, does say that this most
wicked art of magic was never more used, then it was in his time. In so much
that some do report in their writings, and those of their own nation and
country: that their 70. Senators, and as they term them in their language the
Sanhedrin, which were the chief counsailours of state amongst them: and were
wont to sit with the king for the government of that common wealth were
infected with the poison of this art, and had great skill and cunning in the
same. Wherefore the aforesaid Josephus in the place before alleged has these
words. Erat tunc temporis Iudaea latronum, praestigiatorum, and planorum,
asylum and spelunca: and certe quia deus extrema Iudaeorum impietate
offendebatur: vrbemque ideo, and templum abominabatur, Romanorum exercitum
induxit, vt tanquam per ignem expurgaret. Quin (ait) si Romani vel tantillum
eius excidium distulissent, proculdubio aut terrae hiatu absorpti, aut nouo
diluvio mersi, aut incendio consumpti fuissent. Haec enim generatio Sodomitica
ipsa long sceleratior and flagitiosior erat. Which may be englished thus: At
that time was Judea a receptacle and den of thieves, iuglers, and notable
deceivers. And truly because God was offended with their exceeding great
impiety: therefore he detested also the city and the temple, he brought in
the army of the Romans, that thereby he might purge them as it were by fire.
Yea (and that more is) if the Romans had deferred the destruction thereof
never so little a while, without doubt either the earth had swallowed them up,
or they had been drowned with some strange and unwonted deluge, or
ouerflowing of waters, or else the fire had consumed them. For this generation
was far more sinful, and wicked then those that dwelt in Sodom. Here we
see, that this Josephus (who was an eye-witnes and partaker of that misery and
calamity, which he wrote of) does reckon magic and iugling, or charming, for
one of the chief capital sins, for the which the city of Jerusalem was
destroyed. And doubtless, when men are come to this pass, that they
maintain, and practice magic, and sorcery, it is a sign that they are come
(in a manner) unto the highest degree of wickedness. For here they seem to make
(as it were) a public profession of the religion, and service of the devil:
whereas they do not so altogether in other sins, except it be in open
blasphemy: wherefore when this is generally practiced without controlement in
any city, or country: it cannot possibly be, but that the Lord must needs
bring a universal destrustruction upon the same. The which I beseech God to
keep far from us: for I am persuaded, that this kind of wickedness (albeit
the good and wholesome laws which are made against it) was never more
practiced amongst us, especially for the recovery of health. For many, I might
say, most men now a days (if God do not restore them to health, when, and how
they think good, they will leave Gods ordinary means by physic, and will
go to sorcerers: that is, to the ministers of Satan, which is all one, as to
go to Satan himself. And although it may be, that they will answer me, and
say: that they whom they go unto for remedy, do use good means, and godly
words in these cases. Yet it follows not (as I have said before) that they
are therefore no sorcerers. For no doubt, those which Josephus speaks of,
used as good means in outward appearance: and so do the sons of Sceua in
this place. But because this pertains not so directly to the verse, which I
have in handling, I will pass to the next words, where I shall have fitter
occasion to speak of this matter, when I come to the 15. and 16. verses. In
the which (as I have said before) is set down the issue, or event of the
practice of these lewd sorcerers, and that in two respects. First, in regard of
that which was said unto them in the 15. verse. And secondly, what was done
unto them in the 16. verse.

The words which were spoken unto them are these, Jesus I know, and Paul I
know, but who are ye?] The which is an answer of the foul spirit unto the
aforenamed sorcerers: being as much in effect, as if he should have said in
this manner. Whereas you sorcerers the sons of Sceua, do charge and command
me so straightly by the name of Jesus, to go out of this man: I see no reason
why ye should do so. Indeed I know Jesus to be the son of the eternal God:
yea God himself, equal to the Father as touching his godhead: and therefore
of sufficient might and power, even of himself to drive me out of possession
where I am. And likewise I know Paul to be sent, and to have lawful power and
authority from him, to cast me out: But as for you, and such as you are: I
acknowledge you for none such, neither by your selves, nor by any commission
from God, to command me to go out: but ye are only usurpers, and presume to
do that which ye are not able to perform. For although God does bestow this
grace of casting such as I am out of those men, whom we have possessed, upon
some men whom it pleases him, upon special occasion; yet ye are none of the
number of them to whom he has granted this gift. Therefore in vain do ye
take in hand to dispossess me, with your goodly and glorious words: for it is
not the words which is able to work such wonders, but it is only the working
power of God, which brings such mighty things to pass, as ye shall well see:
and so he caused the man which he had possessed, to run upon the said
sorcerers, and all to beat them, and wounded them, as it follows in the next
verse. Thus we may perceive that God does not tie his power of working
miracles unto words, or characters whatsoever, or howsoever used: for then
might every one be a worker of miracles, which could use those means: But God
bestows that grace upon the person: and that not upon every one, nor upon the
most part: but only upon some particular, and that upon especial occasion (as
I have said before) and this place does most evidently prove: especially in
the next verse. where it is said. The man in whom the evil spirit was, etc.]
We must not think that it was this man alone here spoken of, which dealt thus
with these sorcerers. For could one poor silly man be able to overcome so
many, being young, (no doubt) and lusty men? who (as it appears plainly by
the words of the text) did not stand still, and suffer themselves to be thus
shamefully entreated and handled, but resisted what they could. For it is here
said, that he overcame them (as it were) in the combat: and so prevailing
against them did drive them out of the house, both naked and wounded: wherefore
it was the devil which was the chief actor in this fray: and used the man
possessed as an instrument, to bring this matter to pass. Where we see that
the Lord does oftentimes especially punish that sin, wherein men do take
most delight, and think that it should be most for their honor, commodity or
pleasure: even that does God turn to their greatest shame and confusion: and
to his greater glory. So our first parents when they had thought to have gained
pleasure, profit, and wisdom by eating of the forbidden fruit, they lost
themselves and their posterity, with all good things else: had not the Lord to
the great glory of his mercy saved some of them by the promised seed of the
woman. And those men in the old world Genesis. cap. 11. which imagined to keep
themselves from being dispersed by building of that huge tower, and city of
Babylon: were by the same occasion scattered into all parts of the world. So
the faction of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, dreamed of honor, and preferment, by
resisting of Moses: in the 16. cap. of the book of Numbers, but it was the
cause of their everlasting shame, and overthrow, as it is there set down.
There are infinite examples in the scriptures, which do infer the truth of
this point: but I will let them pass, and come to the text it self, where we
may behold these sorcerers most extremely and shamefully beaten of him, even
of the devil: by whose service in this action they had thought to have
obtained greatest credit. Neither are we hereby to gather that Satan was
grieved with this profaning of the name of Christ Jesus, or with this sorcery
of theirs. But because God brings (as it were) light out of darkness, and
therefore foreseeing that God would turn this their wicked act into his own
glory, and the furtherance of the Gospel: therefore Satan being as it were in
a rage for this their unseasonable using of the name of the Lord Jesus in their
charms: at such a time, and in such a place as they did deal thus with them:
Whereas at other times, when it might have served his own turn better, no
doubt he would have been so far from hurting them for such an act, that he
would have seemed to yield unto them therein: that thereby he might the better
have confirmed his wicked craft of magic and sorcery. Nay it is to be
doubted, that even at this time, he would have given place, at the aforesaid
words uttered by the sorcerers, if the wonderful providence of God had not
ouer-ruled him: who by this act had determined to glorify the Gospel of his
son Christ Jesus: as it may appear by the 17, 18, and 19 verses following:
where it is set down. That after this was known, both Jews and Gentiles,
which dwelt at Ephesus, magnified the name of the Lord Jesus, confessing their
sins. And among the rest, those that had used vain and curious arts; that
is, charms, enchantments, coniuring, and other magical devises, came
moreover, and brought their vain books, and burned them in the sight of the
people. The worth of them being counted, came (at the least rate) to about
eight hundred pounds. For hereby they were driven to consider more deeply of
the infinite power of the Godhead of Christ Jesus, to tame the unbridled rage,
and malice of Satan: and also the wicked vanity of magical conceits, whereby
these sorcerers could bring nothing to pass: and finally the punishment of the
same which albeit it may seem not to be so great to be beaten and wounded: yet
whosoever shall weigh the circumstances of the text, shall find that it was no
ordinary kind of combat, that did drive the beholders into such a maze. But
it was such an one (no doubt) as the like had not bin seen in their time. And
it is very likely, that they did further conceive by this example, of the just
judgment of God threatened against such in the scriptures: wherein the spirit of
God does mightily inueigh against this kind of wickedness: as in the 10.
chapter of Leuiticus, verse. 27. he commands, that they should be put to
death in these words. If a man or a woman, have a spirit of divination, or
sooth-saying in them, they shall die the death, their blood shall be upon them.
And likewise in the 22 cap. of Exodus, verse. 18. he says: Thou shall not
suffer a witch to live. And the Lord himself says in the 3. cap. of the
prophet Malachy. verse. 5. that he will come in judgment, and that he will be a
swift witness against the south-sayers. Wherefore the good king Josiah in the
fear of the Lord, took away all that had familiar spirits: and the
soothsayers, as it is in the second book of the King. cap. 23. verse. 24. But
it may be, that some men will object and say, that these places seem to be
understood of those only which have made (as it were) a real contract, or have
private conference with the devil, the which is a thing that themselves will
confess to be abominable: But as for all those which use any other kind of
conceit or devise: whether by word, character or otherwise, so it be not
manifestly wicked and blasphemous: they will defend their doings therein to be
good, or at least wise not hurtful. To these I answer, that let them look
into the book of God, and they shall find the one, as well as the other to be
condemned: as namely in the 18. cap. of Deuteronomy. the spirit of God has these
words. viz. Let none be found among you that makes his son or his daughter
to go through the fire, or that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a
marker of the flying of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that
counsels with spirits, or a sooth-sayer, or that asks counsel of the
dead. For all that do such things are abomination unto the Lord: and because
of those abominations, the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee, etc.
Where we may evidently see, and perceive a difference to be made between the
one and the oother, and that not only contracts, counselling, and conference
with spirits is forbidden: but also all other kinds of vain, frivolous and
superstitious arts are counted abominable unto the Lord: as namely,
witchcraft.] the original words do signify him which uses divining, of which
sort are those which will tell of things lost, stolen, or conveyed away, and
other such like hidden and secret things. Secondly regarders of times, as they
are which will have one time more lucky then another: To be borne at one hour
more unfortunate then at another. To take a journey, or any other enterprise in
hand, to be more dangerous, or prosperous at one time, then at another. As
likewise if such a festival day fall upon such a day of the week, or such
like, we shall have such a year following: and many other such like vain
speculations, set down by our astrologians, having neither footing in gods
word: nor yet natural reason to support them: But being grounded only upon the
superstitious imagination of man's brain: Wherefore this kind is much spoken
against, in the book of God, as I have somewhat touched before. The next are
the markers of the flying, or noise of fowls: as they which prognosticate
death by the croaking of ravens: or the hideous crying of owls in the night Or
some misfortune, if a hare do cross a man: with many other such like vain and
wicked toys. By (sorcerers) in this place seems to be understood, those
wicked persons, which take in hand to hurt any man, in his body, or goods:
wherefore the old translation terms them maleficos, as it were harme-doers,
or workers of mischief. And because these kind of people do oftentimes use
crafty and cunning sleights to bring their matters to pass, therefore they are
by Tremellius called Praestigiatores, of their iugling tricks of ledger
demaine, whereby the senses of men being deluded they would seem to do one
thing, when as they do another, and that by another means then in show they
pretend. And of this sort seem our witches to be among us, whose doings in
this behalf it would belong, and needles to recount: seeing that they be so
well known by common speech, and experience. As for Inchanters and Charmers,
for they are both one, I have spoken somewhat before, although not all that
might be said to that purpose. These are they, which by using of certain
conceited words, characters, circles, amulets, and such like vain and wicked
trumpery (by gods permission) do work great maruailes: as namely in causing
of sickness, as also in curing diseases in men's bodies. And likewise binding
some, that they cannot use their natural powers and faculties: as we see in
night-spels. In so much as some of the^ do take in hand to bind the devil
himself by their Enchantments. Wherefore those, which we term co^iurers, are
not unfitly to be referred to this kind: and by the same reason the Exorcists
spoken of in this text. And to speak generally, whosoever works any
extraordinary wonder, by any of the last aforesaid means of words, characters,
amulets, and the like: does work by charming, and enchantment: albeit he
makes no contract, nor has any conference with Satan, as they have which are
spoken of in the next place, which take counsel of spirits in those matters
wherein they would have them to serve their turn, as the damsel in the Acts,
16, 16. which had a spirit of diuinatio^ whereby she procured much profit unto
her master. And the woman in the first book of Sam. 28. 7. to whom king Saul
went for counsel, when the Philistims came against him. And of these sorts are
all those which have a familiar spirit, or by any means do use conference
with Satan, upon any occasion, or in any matter wherein they would use him.
These that are here called (soothsayers) seem to be those which do
foretell, and prognosticate things to come: as are alterations of kingdoms,
and common wealths, dearth, or plenty of victual, and such like: as the
prophets of God were wont to do by the special motion of Gods spirit so these
would seem to imitate them in this behalf, having no warrant for the same out
of the word, nor any private revelation from God: but are led thereunto by
some imaginary conceit, or superstition, or else by the instinct of Satan: as
were the false prophets in the book of God: who seem then especially to be
called by that name, when as they falsely used the name of God to confirm
their predictions. The next and last kind of magic set down in this place is
of those which ask counsel of the dead, not that the dead do or can resolve
them in any such doubtful case, or that they are able by these or any other
means, to raise them up again, being once departed: as it may be proved both
by reason, and diverse places of the scripture. But because it was so thought
and believed of the people, both in regard that oftentimes it was used about
the tombs of men deceased: and also by reason that the devil did appear unto
them in the form of those which were dead when they gave answer to those
things which they were demanded, as it is plain by the 28. chap. of the first
book of Samuel, where the holy servant of God Samuel is said to be raised up
by the woman to certify king Saul, what success he should have in the
battle against the Philistimes. Neither ought any man to marvel at this:
That I have cited this last example before, when I spoke of those which ask
counsel of spirits. For we must not think that all the aforesaid kinds of
magic, are so strictly to be distinguished, but that they do communicate
otherwhiles in some points, one with the other: yet so, as then they are rather
to be termed compound, then simple; and may in diverse respects be referred to
diverse kinds of magic; as in the last alleged example. In regard that the
woman did counsel with a spirit, she may be referred to the number of that
kind of magitians. But because he appeared unto her in the likeness of a dead
man, she may be called a necromancer, that is, one that asks counsel of
the dead. And if she used any set form of words, or characters in this
action; then might she have been called a charmer, or inchanter. Finally, if
she had done it to have hurted, or harmed any body, we might have placed her
among the sorcerers before spoken of. And so in like manner may we judge of
all the rest, according to the circumstances to be observed in each kind of
magic. Howbeit it is manifest by the aforesaid 18. chapter of Deuteronomy,
whereas the counselors with spirits are reckoned for an especial and
several kind of magitians, that the same does differ from the other kinds,
or at least wise from some of them, even in this behalf. So that in all of
them, there is not always a contract, or personal conference with Satan, as it
appears by this present text: where it is probable, that these Exorcists had
not the personal consent of the devil, at least wise in this action: but
being vain and irreligious persons, and having a desire to surpass other
men, took upon them to practice magic; and because they did see Saint Paul,
and the other Apostles to bring to pass such great miracles, by the name of
Jesus: therefore they of their own head, took upon them to do the like: and
to draw the same into their magical arts (had not the Lord confounded them in
their said enterprise) according unto the common custom of many men in these
our days, who to win themselves a name in the world, will by all means
possible procure what magical books they can hear of: and likewise if they
know any man to use any manner, or form of words, or characters in curing of
any disease, or working of any other wonder; they will presently (after they
have obtained the knowledge thereof) put the same in practice also, especially
if it carry any color, or show of holiness in it; as that of the Exorcists
did, thinking it no sin so to do. Nay and because they see not an express
covenant made with Satan herein; therefore they will defend them to be good:
whereas the spirit of God does condemn this kind of magic (for it is no
better then magic) as well as all the rest. The which the Ephesians in this 19.
chapter of the Acts, did very well understand: wherefore upon the view and
sight of the judgment of God upon the Exorcists, they are said to burn their
books of curious arts: whereby is meant, not only the grossest kind of
magic, wherein is a manifest compact, or conference with the devil; but also
al vain, and superstitious devices of divining, soothsaying, charming, and
such like, which have no warrant out of the word of God, nor any reason out of
the whole course of nature to confirm them: such as they used, which in the
before said 18. chapter of Deuteronomy, are said to be regarders of times,
markers of the flying of fowls, soothsayers, and charmers: as also they which
diuined by looking into beasts intralls, as many did among the heathen, as it
may be partly gathered out of the 21. cap. of Ezechiel, v. 26. And it is
manifest by histories, that the Ephesians were given to such like superstition;
for it is recorded in diverse authors: That in the Image Diana, which was
worshipped at Ephesus, there were certain obscure words, or sentences not
agreeing together, nor depending one upon another; much like unto riddles
written upon the feet, girdle, and crown of the said Diana: the which if a
man did use, having written them out, and carrying them about him, he should
have good luck in all his businesses: and hereof sprung the proverb, Ephesiae
literae: where one uses any thing which brings good success. And it is very
likely, that a great part of those books, which are said to be burned in this
19, chapter of the Acts, were filled with such like vain and frivolous
devices. Of which sort we have an infinite number also used amongst us, as
namely in Palmestry, where men's fortunes are told by looking on the palms of
the hands: and also by foredeeming of evil luck, by pulling on the shoe
awry, or by the falling of salt toward one: and likewise of good luck, if
drink be spilled upon a man: or if he find old iron. And furthermore, by
erecting of a figure, to tell of stolen goods. By the turning of a sieue, to
show who has bewitched one. By curing diseases with certain words or
characters, or such like: with many more foolish and superstitious vanities,
needles here to recite, seeing that by these few we may easily judge of the
rest. All which are an abomination unto the Lord, in so much as he
overthrows, and rooteth out whole countries because of the same, as he did
the Chananites before the children of Israel, according as it is set down in
the aforesaid 18. cap. of Deuteronomy, verse. 13. and 14. And afterward, when
the Israelites had committed the like offense, the Lord laid the like
punishment upon them: as it is manifest in the second book of the Kings, cap.
17, verse. 17. where it is said, that they made their sons and their daughters
to pass through the fire, and used witchcraft and inchauntment: yea sold
themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to anger him: wherefore the
Lord was exceeding wroth with Israel, and put them out of his sight. And if he
deal so with whole nations, yea with his own peculiar people; among whom (no
doubt) some were godly and religious, and abhorred the aforesaid sins: what
shall those particular men look for, which do practice the same? and take
pleasure therein? truly nothing else, but the heavy and just judgment and
vengeance of God, to be laid upon them for this their wickedness: yea sometimes
even in this world, either upon themselves, or upon their posterity: but
especially eternal damnation in the world to come, with the devil whom they
serve; as it appears in the 21. chapter of the Apoc. verse. 8. where it is
said, that the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars: shall have their
part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Neither let those which go, and seek to such vain wizzards, and
superstitious sorcerers for counsel and help, think to escape the like
punishment. For the Lord in the 19. chapter of Leuiticus, verse. 31. forbids
the going unto such in these words: You shall not regard them that work with
spirits, neither soothsayers: ye shall not seek to them to be defiled by them:
I am the Lord your God. As if he should have said, see that ye make no account
of magitians, inchaunters, soothsayers, or any such like vain persons: and
much less go and seek unto them for help, or counsel, lest ye be defiled
therewith: for it is no better then spiritual fornication: for I am the Lord
your God, which do abhor all such uncleanness: who also am able, and will
surely punish the same. And therefore he says in the 20. chapter of
Leuiticus, verse. 6. If any turn after such as work with spirits, and after
soothsayers, to go a whoring after them: then will I set my face against that
person, and will cut him off from among his people. The which place albeit it
seems to be meant of earthly punishment only, when as God does root them so
out, that there remains no memorial of them (as it were) in this world, that
may sound to the good and credit of them or theirs. Yet it may be understood
also of their eternal destruction. For even as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are
said, Genesis, cap. 25. verse. 8. and cap. 35. verse. 29. and cap. 49. verse. 33.
to be gathered unto their people, when they departed this life: that is, to be
received into the fellowship of the Saints of God, which were gone before them
into heaven. So those which seek unto sorcerers, inchanters, and such like:
when they are said to be cut off from among their people, may thereby be
understood to be for ever separated from the company of the faithful, and to
be cast out into hell, with the devil and his angels. And no marvel though this
heavy judgment be laid upon them: for there seems to be no more difference
in effect betwixt them that seek to the aforesaid sorcerers, and other such
like superstitious practisers, then is betwixt a thief, and him that is
accessarie unto his felony: or a traitor, and him that consents thereunto.
For although they be not chief and principal actours in this wicked business;
yet by seeking unto such persons, they show their love, and liking of those
means which the aforesaid persons dovse, and that they do give their consent
thereunto, and do allow of the same. But what of that will some say? Indeed
if so be that we knew those whom we seek unto, to be such as you would bear
us in hand they were, then your comparison might well hold. But seeing that we
are ignorant thereof: nay we do rather take them to be contrary, and their
means, which they use to be good and lawful: and therefore we are of this
opinion, that we may go unto them without offense to God: albeit unto others,
which are not so persuaded of them, we think that they do amiss, if they
go unto such: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. To these I answer.
That herein their knowledge and judgment is very shallow: for the principle
and ground which they would seem to stand upon in this point, is taken out of
the 14. chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and is to be understood of
things indifferent only: as the circumstance of that whole chapter does set
down unto us: of which sort are meats and drinks, and the observation of
festival days. The which things, albeit of themselves they be neither good
nor bad; yet in regard of the person, and the mind, or intent of him that
uses them, they may sometimes be otherwise. For he that in using them, is not
fully settled in conscience, but is in doubt whether the use thereof be lawful
or not, does greatly offend: and the reason is alleged in the 23. verse of
the same chapter, where it is said: that Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
Now it is certain by the 10. chapter of this Epistle, that true faith is
grounded upon the word of God. Wherefore whatsoever action it be (let men
pretend what they will) if it have no warrant out of the scripture, it is but a
mere imagination of their own brain, springing either of their own corrupt
nature, or else of the suggestion of the devil: and therefore is wicked and
sinful. The which thing, if it be so, it follows of necessity, that the
seeking unto sorcerers, charmers, inchaunters, and all such like wizzards,
albeit men believe never so much, that they may lawfully do so; yet because
that it is not only not allowed, but also condemned in the word of God:
therefore this their belief is no true faith, but a vain and devilish
presumption, and most abominable in the sight of God. Neither will ignorance
which they pretend serve their turn, to cover their offense herein; albeit it
may sometimes extenuate and lessen the fault: as our Savior Christ says in
the 12. chapter of the Gospel after S. Luke, verse. 47. and 48. That servant
which knew his masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did according
to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. And he that knew not his masters
will, and committed things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes. So that here we see, that there is no defense for ignorance: but
whosoever he be that sins, whether it be of ignorance, or of knowledge, must
needs be punished for it. For, Cursed are all they, which do not continue in
all the commandments of God, as it is in Deuteronomy, cap. 27. verse. 26. And
the Apostle Saint Paul says, in the 2. chap. to the Romans, verse. 12. that as
many as have sinned without law, shall be punished without law: and as many as
have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law. Wherefore as dutiful
servants, in those things which we know, we ought to be diligent to put the
same in practice; and if we be ignorant of any thing, we ought to seek and
inquire what the will of God is out of his word, and not to rush forth into
those actions, which we know not whether the Lord does allow or not. But if we
seek for knowledge in those matters, no doubt, but God will instruct us therein
by his holy spirit, and by his word, as our Savior Christ says, Matthew, cap.
7. verse. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. And truly if we would use zealous prayer, and
godly meditation coming unto them with faith, and humility, and such like, we
shall find the scriptures, not to be so hard and obscure, to be known and
understood, as we take them to be; but most plain and evident, for our comfort
and instruction, both in this point concerning those vain, and frivolous arts,
whereof I have so much spoken: and also in all other matters of faith, and good
works, what we should follow, and what we should eschew: as God in the 30.
chapter of Deuteronomy, verses 11, 12, and 14. says, This commandment which
I command this day, is not hid from thee, neither is it far off: it is not
in heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and
bring us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it! but the word is very
near unto to thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, for to do it. So that
it is our own pride, negligence, contempt, or such like sinister affections,
which is cause of this our ignorance; and that in some more, and in some less,
according to the outward means of knowledge, and as they are inwardly moved
in this behalf. In so much that we may hereof gather two kinds of ignorance
to be in men. One is, that which although it be not without the before said
evil affections: yet they do little appear in their actions, (no not to the
parties offending themselves, and much less unto others) thinking that to be
good, which is evil; and that to be evil, which is good. And such was the
ignorance of Saint Paul, before he was illuminated by the spirit of god, as he
says in the first Epistle to Timothy, cap. 1. v. 13. that he was before-time
a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an oppressor: but he was received to mercy,
because he did it ignorantly through unbelief. And yet notwithstanding for
all this, he accounts himself the chief of all sinners for the same: and
most worthily does attribute his conversion to the wonderful and exceeding
great mercy of God alone, who had not only forgiven him this his sin, but
also had made him a fit vessel, to carry his name abroad, and to preach the
Gospel among the Gentiles: whereas he had rejected other of his countrymen,
which offended of ignorance as well as he: as it is in the 10. cap. of the
Epistle to the Romans, verse. 2. where speaking of the Jews, or Israelites, he
has these words. I bear them witness, that they have a zeal but not according
to knowledge. The other kind of ignorance is that, wherein malice, and hatred
does prevail, as it did in the chief of the Jews, which crucified our
Savior Christ, as it is in the 15. cap. of Ioh. ver. 22. in these words. If I
had not done those things among them, which no other man did, they should have
had no sin, but now have they seen, and hated both me and my father. And to
say the truth, not only this latter kind, but also all of us, before we are
regenerate, are by nature so corrupt, that we cannot but bring forth most vile
fruits of wickedness: and therefore we do covet naturally rather to be
ignorant of gods laws, and commandments: thereby thinking to cover the
heinousness of our sins: wherefore our Savior Christ in the Gospel after
Saint John, cap. 3. verse. 19. says, this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world: and men loved darkness more then light, because their
deeds were evil. Whereupon the Lord in his just judgment in times past,
seeing they regarded not to know him: even so he delivered them up into a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient: being full of
all unrighteousness: and so forth, as it is in the 10. cap. of the Epistle to
the Romans verse. 28, 29, and 30. Even as he says also of the Scribes, and
Pharisees, Math. cap. 15. verse. 14. and in them to all other such like: in these
words. Let them alone, they are blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. As if he should have said:
These men are void of the right knowledge of religion, and true service of God:
and yet they will be instructers of others: so that by this means they are not
only wilfully ignorant themselves, but endenour to bring those that will
follow their doctrine into the same condition. Wherefore let them alone, let
them go on still therein: and in the end you shall see: nay, it is most
certain (if they be not renewed by faith and repentance) they shall fall both
the sorts of them, into the pit of everlasting destruction. By all this it is
plain, that if we transgress the commandments of God, in committing of any
sin, it is not ignorance that shall excuse. For then would not the Lord have
commanded sacrifice to be offered for the same, as he does in the 4. cap. of
Leuit. ver. 2, and 3. in these words: Speak unto the children of Israel:
saying if any shall sin through ignorance, in any of the commandments of the
Lord, (which ought not to be done) but shall do contrary to any of them. If
the priest that is anointed do sin (according to the sin of the people)
then shall he offer, for his sin which he has sinned, a young bullock
without blemish unto the Lord for a sin offering. The which law is repeated
also in the Epistle to the Heb. cap. 9. verse. 7. And the prophet Abacuck,
makes a solemn prayer for ignorances in the 3. cap. of his prophecy.
Furthermore the same is manifest in the whole course of the scriptures, by the
punishment that has been laid upon such like offenders: as we may perceive by
the 17. cap. of the second book of the King. where when the Lord had cast out
the ten tribes of Israel with their king, out of their own country, for their
wicked abominations, and that Shalmaneser had carried them away captive with
him: he sent other of his own native people to supply their room in ludea: who
because they were Gentiles, and had not been brought up in true religion,
therefore it is said in the 25, and 26. verses of the same chapter: That at the
beginning of their dwelling there, they feared not the Lord: therefore the Lord
sent lions among them, which slew them, wherefore they came to the king of
Ashur saying, the nations which thou have removed, and placed in the cities of
Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the land: whereupon the king
commanded, to send unto them a priest of the Israelites to instruct them: as
it follows in the next verse. of the same chapter. And in the prophet Esa.
cap. 5. verse. 13. the Lord has these words. Therefore my people goes into
captivity, because they have no knowledge. Out of which two places we may note,
that the Lord does not only, not hold guiltles those offenders, which have
the greatest means of knowledge in religion, as were the Israelites in times
past: as it appears by the 13. cap. of the Epistle to the Romans where it is
said by Saint Paul, that to them were committed the oracles of God, even as the
Gospel of Christ Jesus is now unto us Gentiles: but also does punish those, to
whom it is not granted to have such opportunity to learn. And truly no
marvel. For if we account it lawful for an earthly prince, to punish those
whosoever, which do dwell within his dominion, if they offend against his
laws being once set forth, though they do it of ignorance, why should not the
king of kings, and Lord of Lords, exact the like obedience unto his laws set
down in his holy word, of all those whom it pleases him to place in his
visible church and kingdom here upon earth. For the Lord has given us his
word as a law, wherein he has set down whatsoever he would have done learned,
or believed: and likewise what he would have us to eschew: as the Apostle Saint
Paul does say in the 1. epistle to Tim. cap. 3. verse. 16. and 17. that the
whole scripture is given by inspiration of God: and is profitable to teach, to
improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness: that the man of God
may be perfect, and prepared unto all good works. So that whatsoever God would
have us to know, or do, it is contained in the same. Howbeit we must, as our
Savior Christ says, Job. 5. cap. v. 39. search the scriptures. It is not
enough for us negligently, and carelessly, and (as it were superficially, to
read them: but we must with all diligence, reverence, and humility, study them:
and as the prophet David did: meditating therein day and night: conferring of
one place with another: and considering the drift of the holy Ghost in every of
them: and above all things using humble and hearty prayer unto God, that he
would grant us his holy spirit, which may so enlighten us, that we may see
those wonderful things which are contained in his laws: that we may conceive
aright of the truth in his sacred word. For as Saint Peter, 2. epist. cap. 1.
verse. 20. says: no prophecy in the scripture is of any private
interpretation: that a man may expound it according to his own mind and
imagination, but holy men of God did speak as they were directed, and led by
the holy Ghost, as it follows there in the next verse. who as he is the only
author, and inditer of the Scripture, so he is the only interpreter of the
same, as being alone, privy to his own meaning. And therefore the Evangelist
Saint John, in his first epistle cap. 4. verse. 1. does bid us not to believe
every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God or not as if he
should have said. There are many which will make a great show of religion, and
godliness, and will seem as though they had warrant from God for all their
dealings, when as it is nothing so. Wherefore believe note uery one until you
have first madetriall, and examined their actions, by the touchstone of the
scriptures, whether God be the author of them or not. The which precept if the
prophet spoken of in the 13. cap. of the first book of the King. had observed,
he had done well, but because he did not so, but believed the false tale of the
old Prophet, and came back again contrary to the commandment of God: and did
eat and drink in Bethel by his procureme^t: when as the Lord had said unto
him, that he should neither eat bread nor drink water there. Therefore the
Lord said, that his body should not come into the sepulcher of his fathers:
which came to pass presently: for he was slain of a lion in the way as he
returned home, and so was brought again to Bethel, and there buried. Whereas
if he had first examined the truth of the old Prophets speech, he had no
doubt never fallen into that danger. For he had a sufficient warrant from God
before, for that which he did: upon the which he might safely have relied, if
he would have gone forward according unto the same, and not have hearkened to
the deceitful words of the said old Prophet: unless the Lord himself had
given him another contrary commandment, as otherwhiles he does in particular
cases: as it may appear by Genesis, chap. 22. where after that God had given
Abraham in charge, to sacrifice his son Isaacke in the 2. verse of the same
chapter: afterward it is said, that the angel of the Lord did bid him not to
do it, when he had proved his faith, and obedience therein: till which time,
he could by no means be drawn from executing the former commandment of God.
Even so we, seeing that we are forbidden by the word of God to go, or seek
unto any witches, inchaunters, charmers, or any such like vain, and
superstitious practisers: and seeing that ignorance will not excuse us, as has
been before declared: it behooves us to try, and examine the dealings of
every one in this case, whether they be of God or not, by their calling in this
behalf, by their means they use, and by the end whereat they aim, and by
all other ways and means, which it shall please God to minister by his holy
spirit, out of his word; before we give credit unto them, whatsoever show
they make of religion, and godliness in this point: lest the Lord in his wrath
lay upon us, all those plagues and punishments threatened in his word (as has
been said before) against such persons. There are many other things, which
might be fitly, and profitably gathered and noted out of this text, which I
have willingly omitted, both because they have been sufficiently handled at
large by other men; and also because it was my only purpose at the beginning to
utter that, which I thought meetest concerning sorcery, and such other like
wicked, vain, and devilish abominations before spoken of. It remains
therefore now, to exhort every good Christian to consider diligently, and to
make use of it: and to desire almighty God, that he would make it profitable,
which has been said, both to his own glory, and to our eternal comfort in
Christ Jesus: to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor,
praise, and thanksgiving, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

